

OTHER BOOKS BY MARK BITTMAN
How to Cook Everything
How to Cook Everything Vegetarian
How to Cook Everything The Basics
VB6: Eat Vegan Before 6:00
The VB6 Cookbook
Food Matters
The Food Matters Cookbook
The Best Recipes in the World
Fish: The Complete Guide to Buying and Cooking
Leafy Greens
Mark Bittman’s Kitchen Express
Mark Bittman’s Quick and Easy Recipes from The New York Times
The Mini Minimalist
Jean-Georges: Cooking at Home with a Four-Star Chef
Simple to Spectacular

Copyright © 2014 by Double B Publishing, Inc.
Design by MGMT. design
Illustrations copyright © 2014 by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Illustrations by Olivia de Salve Villedieu.
All rights reserved.
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to
Permissions, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company, 215 Park Avenue
South, New York, New York 10003.
www.hmhco.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
ISBN 978-0-470-93630-6 (cloth); ISBN 978-0-544-33340-6 (ebk)
v1.1014

To my fabulous women-children, Kate and Emma, who have always
been there for me.

Acknowledgments
How to Cook Everything Fast—let’s just call it Fast—has been, like all the
books in this series, a massive undertaking (do you feel how heavy it is?), a
huge and (for those of us involved in it) hugely important project, many
years in conception and quite a few in the making. It’s not just a big book,
and it’s not just a good recipe collection: It’s a collection of recipes in a
style we’ve devised to teach you how to cook in the way people who really
know how do all the time.
It wasn’t easy, and I didn’t do it by myself. In fact, like all the How to
Cook Everything books, this was a team effort. Kerri Conan and I have now
worked on something like ten books together, and none of them would’ve
happened without her. On this one, our efforts were eased by those of
Daniel Meyer, who bore the lion’s share of recipe conception, writing, and
testing; and Jennifer Griffin, who was the editor of the original How to
Cook Everything (1997!) and has joined us in getting things ready for our
current editors at HMH, chief among them the stellar Adam Kowit.
Others who deserve credit on “our” side include my agent of 25-plus
years, Angela Miller; the great Chris Benton; and Megan Gourley, Eve
Turow, Elena Goldblatt, Maria Fantaci, and David Bowers. At HMH, we
are lucky enough to have been working under the steady hands of Bruce
Nichols and Natalie Chapman, and we owe gratitude to the amazing
Rebecca Liss, the steadfast Linda Ingroia, and to Molly Aronica, Brad
Parsons, Jessica Gilo, Marina Padakis Lowry, Jamie Selzer, David Futato,
Tom Hyland, Kevin Watt, Michaela Sullivan, Melissa Lotfy, and of course
the wonderful Laurie Brown.
We talk a lot about text and recipes, because we—most of the people
mentioned above—work in words. But designing Fast took about 30,000
iterations (okay, an exaggeration; 20,000) until it reached what we believe
is the gorgeous, accessible, well-organized book you’re holding. That
design is thanks to MGMT. Design: Alicia Cheng, Pilar Torcal, and Olivia

de Salve Villedieu, who also did the helpful illustrations scattered
throughout.
Some people’s roles cannot be easily defined but were critical
nevertheless. These folks include Sean Santoro, Wendy and Kim Marcus,
John Willoughby, and Trish Hall. Other friends and family will presumably
forgive me for not singling them out—you know who you are.
Finally, the amount contributed here by Kelly Doe can’t be
overestimated. The imprints of her index finger are everywhere.
 
Mark Bittman
New York City, Summer 2014

Contents
FAST NAVIGATION
VEGETARIAN MAIN DISHES
KITCHEN NOTES
TIME TO COOK
THE FAST KITCHEN
MAIN DISHES
Salads
Sandwiches
Soups and Stews
Pasta and Noodles
Rice and Grains
Vegetables
Beans and Tofu
Seafood
Chicken
Meat
Breakfast
ACCOMPANIMENTS
Appetizers
Sides
Dessert
INDEX

Fast Navigation
Helpful ways to search for recipes.

Recipes Within Recipes
Go-to components, built into other recipes

DRESSINGS
Bacon Vinaigrette
Gorgonzola Dressing
Lemon-Dill Yogurt Dressing
Caper and Mustard Dressing
Caesar Dressing
Tahini Dressing
Peanut-Lime Dressing
Hoisin Vinaigrette
Basil Vinaigrette
Parmesan Dressing
Rosemary-Mayo Dressing
Peanut Vinaigrette
Warm Bacon-Dijon Dressing
Russian Dressing
Cumin Vinaigrette

SAUCES AND SEASONINGS
Warm Cumin Oil
Herb Butter
Hummus
Salmorejo
Fast Tomato Meat Sauce
Mango Chutney
Parsley Pesto
Chile-Sesame-Drizzle Sauce
Basil Pesto
Fresh Tomato Sauce
Fast Skillet Tomato Sauce
Brown Butter
Peanut Sauce
Chile Oil
Cilantro-Scallion Pesto
Fresh Tomato-Garlic Sauce
Fresh Apple Sauce
Soy Dipping Sauce
Tartar Sauce
Saffron Aïoli
Olive Tapenade
Lemon Aïoli
Jerk Rub
Yogurt-Harissa Sauce
Chimichurri
Spicy Peanut Sauce
Spicy Enchilada Sauce
BBQ Rub

Toasted Almond Butter
Honey-Yogurt Sauce
Bacon Maple Syrup
Romesco
Warm Garlic Oil
Onion Dip
Orange Syrup
Whipped Cream

SALSAS
Fresh Salsa
Skillet Tomatillo Salsa
Avocado Salsa
Skillet Pineapple Salsa
Salsa Roja
Pico de Gallo

OTHER COMPONENTS
Fast Caramelized Onions
Crisp, Crumbled Tofu
Poached Eggs
Pickled Red Onions
Quick Pickled Daikon, Carrot, and Cucumber
Charred Onions
Fast Caramelized Onions
Toasted Breadcrumbs
Fried Onions
Fast Sticky Rice
Masa Cake
Grits
Parmesan Toast
Fried Tofu
Glazed Carrots
Caper-Herb Zucchini Ribbons
Quick-Chilled Cucumber Pickles
Dal
Roasted Corn
Sautéed Spinach with Mustard
Skillet Kimchi
Butternut Squash Purée
Greek Salad
Maple-Caramelized Pecans
Hard-Boiled Eggs
Cream Cheese Frosting
Meringue
Lemon Curd

Skillet Crumble Topping

Flavor Blasts
Recipes that pack a punch quickly
Endive and Radicchio with Bacon Vinaigrette
Green Bean Salad with Caramelized Onions and Toasted Almonds
Hot and Sour Bok Choy with Mussels
Korean-Style Beef Soup with Rice
Creamy Chinese Rice with Clams
Curried Lentils and Rice with Fried Onions
Glazed Brussels Sprouts with Vietnamese Flavors
Hot and Sour Black Beans with Bok Choy
BBQ Lima Beans with Collards
Malaysian-Style BBQ Fish with Cool Cucumbers
Za’atar Wings and Eggplant with Yogurt-Harissa Sauce
Stir-Fried Beef with Skillet Kimchi
Caramel Stir-Fried Beef and Green Beans
Seared Miso Lamb Chops with Carrots
Apricot-Cinnamon Couscous
Maple-Orange Oatmeal with Caramelized Pecans
Honey-Cheddar Grits with Sage
Fried Eggs with Chimichurri
Banana-Coconut Pancakes
Cheddar Waffles with Bacon Maple Syrup
Spiced Cashews with Bacon

Deconstructed Recipes
Familiar ingredients and flavors, streamlined to their bare essentials
Veggie Fajita Salad
BLT Salad with Rosemary-Mayo Dressing
Open-Face Lyonnaise Sandwich
Big T’s Meat Sauce Sub
Broken Wonton Soup
Masa and Rajas
Unstuffed Cabbage
Shrimp and Cauliflower with Rustic Romesco
Fastest Chicken Parm
Charred Chicken and Pita with Gyro Fixings
Fast Florentine
Hard-Boiled Eggs with Dijon Mayo

Reinvented Recipes
Classics, updated so now they’re both faster and better
Steakhouse Salad
Crab and Celery Root Remoulade
Asparagus and Kale Caesar Salad
Curried Tofu Salad with Pecans and Golden Raisins
Warm Three-Bean Potato Salad
Broccoli Tabbouleh with Charred Tomato and Lemon
Broiled Cheese
Spanish Dip
Bacon and Egg Drop Soup
Homemade Chicken Ramen
American Onion Soup
Rice Bowl with Sausage
Rice and Wings
Quinoa Puttanesca with Fresh Mozzarella
Couscous Helper
Skillet Shepherd’s Pie with Quinoa Crust
Bubbling Caprese
Cauliflower “Polenta” with Mushrooms
Stuffed Poblanos with Black Beans and Cheese
Tortilla Lasagna
Eggs Sukiyaki
Olive Oil-Poached Halibut (or Other Thick Fillets) with Endive
Crisp Baked Chicken Tenders
Oven-Fried Chicken with Roasted Corn
Roast Turkey Breast with Sage Sausage Stuffing

Skillet Meat Loaf
Pork and Onion Carnitas
Breakfast Bruschetta
Endive Spears with Olives
Tortillas Rojas

Twofers
Recipes that combine two favorite dishes into one main course
Greek Salad with Orzo and Shrimp
Miso Soup with Scallops, Soba, and Spinach
Chipotle Rice and Corn with Seared Beef
Fast Thai Sticky Rice with Meaty Vegetable Sauce
Warm Tabbouleh with Mussels
Bok Choy Pancake with Soy Dipping Sauce
Vegetable Flatbread with Kale and White Bean Stew
Braised Lentils with Salmon
Manchurian Tofu and Cauliflower
Sole (or Other Thin Fillets) with Glazed Carrots
Olive Oil-Poached Halibut (or Other Thick Fillets) with Endive
Blackened Catfish (or Other Thick Fillets) with Green Beans
Shrimp Simmered in Dal
Chicken Marsala with Lots of Mushrooms
Sesame Chicken and Snow Peas
Chicken and Chile Fundido
Korean-Style Chicken and Vegetable Pancakes
Chicken, Vegetables, and Noodles in Soy Broth
Chicken and Sweet Potato Adobo
Pork Souvlaki with Zucchini
Five-Spice Pork Meatballs with Bok Choy
Pork Tenderloin with Butternut Purée
Lamb Chops with Balsamic Couscous
Fried Eggs with Mushrooms and Leeks

Slow Food, Done Fast
Celebration food to enjoy every day
Broiled Cheese
Eggplant Parmesan Sub
Bánh Mì
Reuben with All the Trimmings
Big T’s Meat Sauce Sub
Steak Sandwich with Charred Onions
BBQ Chopped Pork and Slaw Sandwich
Creamy Parsnip Soup with Parsley Pesto
Butternut Squash Soup with Apples and Bacon
Fast Pho
Bone-In Chicken Noodle Soup
American Onion Soup
Shrimp Gumbo
Beef and Butter Bean Chili
Mac and Cheese
Broiled Ziti
Spaghetti with Nearly Instant Bolognese
Spaghetti and Drop Meatballs with Tomato Sauce
Three-Cheese Lasagna with Fresh Noodles
Fast Jook with Chicken and Snow Peas
Three-Stir Mushroom Risotto
Fast Thai Sticky Rice with Meaty Vegetable Sauce
Pozole and Pork Chops
Unstuffed Cabbage
Stuffed Poblanos with Black Beans and Cheese

Skillet Spanakopita
Fast Feijoada
Fish and Chips with Tartar Sauce
Scallop and Corn Pan Broil
Chicken with Creamy Spinach-Cashew Sauce
Fastest Chicken Parm
Poached Chicken and Asparagus with Lemon Aïoli
Chicken and Peppers with Black Bean “Mole”
Chicken, Vegetables, and Noodles in Soy Broth
Split Whole Chicken and Vegetables
Chicken and Dumplings with Lots of Peas
Roast Turkey with Sage Sausage Stuffing
Skillet Meat Loaf
Beef Stew
BBQ Baby Back Ribs
Porchetta-Style Pork Loin with Parsnips
Pork Stew and Dumplings
Pork and Onion Carnitas
Herb-Rubbed Leg of Lamb with Chopped Greek Salad
Roasting-Pan French Toast
Broiled Eggs
Fast Florentine
Spiced Cashews with Bacon
Crab Toast
Skewerless Chicken Satay
Warm-Pickled Cucumber Spears

Five Ingredients or Less
Not counting salt, pepper, oil, or butter.
Watercress with Peaches, Pecans, and Blue Cheese
Tomato Salad with Strawberries, Feta, and Balsamic
Arugula with Fried Eggs and Shaved Parmesan
Pressed Tofu and Cucumber Salad with Hoisin Vinaigrette
Bulgur, Apple, and Fennel Salad
Raw Butternut Squash Salad with Warm Edamame
Tomato and Chicken Salad with Basil Vinaigrette
BLT Salad with Rosemary-Mayo Dressing
Kimchi and Snow Pea Salad with Grilled or Broiled Beef
Charred Brussels Sprout Salad with Walnuts and Gorgonzola
Radish and Herb Butter Baguette
Broiled Cheese
Peanut Butter and Banana Sandwich with Honey and Raisins
Tofu Sandwich with Cucumber and Hoisin Mayo
Tuna Sandwich with Pickles and Mustard
Crab Salad Sandwich
Broiled Ham and Gruyère with Apples
Sausage and Pepper Sub
Steak Tacos with Lots of Options
Steak Sandwich with Charred Onions
Bacon and Egg Drop Soup
Frozen Vegetable Soup
Cacio e Pepe (Cheese and Pepper)
Mac and Cheese
Pasta with Broccoli Rabe and Ricotta

Pasta with Fennel, White Beans, and Stock
Pasta with Greens and Eggs
Pasta with Tuna and Dried Tomatoes
Ricotta Dumplings with Spinach and Brown Butter
Rice Bowl with Sausage
Couscous Gratin with Leeks and Gruyère
Couscous Paella with Chicken and Zucchini
Bubbling Caprese
Sweet Pepper Queso Fundido
Eggplant Steaks with Fresh Tomato-Garlic Sauce
Potato Rösti with Fresh Apple Sauce
Squash au Gratin with Toasted Nuts
Scrambled Broccoli with Parmesan and Lemon
Pan-Seared Corn and Pork
Roasted Spaghetti Squash with Brown Butter and Walnuts
Spanish Tortilla
Cauliflower Tikka with Boiled Eggs
Red Beans and Cabbage in Buttery Tomato Sauce
Manchurian Tofu and Cauliflower
Roasted Tofu with Sesame Drizzle
Salmon and Asparagus with Toasted Bread Crumbs
Smoky Shrimp Scampi
Buffalo Shrimp
Salmon with Gingery Greens
Roasted Salmon with Potato Crust
Roasted Trout (or Other Whole Fish) with Fennel and Orange
Prosciutto-Crusted Chicken with Endive
Chicken and Chard Gratin
Braised and Glazed Chicken and Leeks
Seared Duck Breast with Fruit Sauce

Cornmeal Fried Chicken
Crisp Baked Chicken Tenders
Chicken and Tomato Packages
Seared Steak with Mustard Spinach
The Better Burger
Braised Veal with Peas
Pan-Roasted Beef Tenderloin with Potatoes
Seared Pork Chops with Apples and Onions
Browned and Braised Sausage and Endive
Bangers and Mash
Pork Tenderloin with Butternut Purée
Fruit, Yogurt, and Graham Cracker Parfait
Piña Colada Smoothie
Broiled Grapefruit with Almond-Brown Sugar Crunch
Toast with Toasted Almond Butter and Strawberries
Breakfast Bruschetta
Apricot-Cinnamon Couscous
No-Bake Fruit and Cereal Bars
Maple-Orange Oatmeal with Caramelized Pecans
Honey-Cheddar Grits with Sage
Omelet for Two
Scrambled Eggs with Smoked Salmon and Dill
Goat Cheese and Spinach Scrambled Eggs
Broiled Eggs
Pork ’n’ Greens Breakfast Patties
Prosciutto and Drop Biscuits
Rosemary Popcorn
Spiced Cashews with Bacon
No-Cook Spanish Skewers
Panfried Olives

Broiled Radishes with Soy
Edamame with Chili Salt
Endive Spears with Olives
Pinzimonio
Goat Cheese Truffles
Prosciutto-Wrapped Pears
Greek Pita Pizzas
Bagel Chips with Smoked Salmon
Peel-and-Eat Shrimp
Roasted Nuts with Ginger, Soy, and Honey
Warm-Pickled Cucumber Spears
Green Beans with Onion Dip
Hard-Boiled Eggs with Dijon Mayo
Parmesan Crisps
Pizza Wedges
Caramelized Honey-Orange Bananas
Fruity Shaved Ice
Broiled Peaches with Brown Sugar
Watermelon Soup with Fresh Herbs
Fruit Sorbet
Black and White Milkshakes
Orange Cream Sundaes
Salted Chocolate Peanut Butter Balls
Chocolate-Covered Pretzels
Molten Chocolate Cake
Chocolate-Orange Pudding
Chocolate Custard Soup
Berry Fool
Sautéed Apple Crunch
Chocolate Peanut Brittle

Key Lime Crumble

Recipe-Free
Salads
Soups
Pasta
Pilaf
Casseroles
Steamed Fish
Stir-Fry
Braised Meat
Scrambles

Master Recipes
Vinaigrette and Croutons
Make Your Own Condiments
Cheat-a-Little Pizza
Fast Stocks
Tomato Sauce
Rice and Other Grains, Fast and Slow
Roasted Vegetables
Beans, Soaked and Unsoaked
Roast Chicken
Spice Blends
Homemade Cold Cuts
Cocktail Meatballs
Cakes Without a Mix
Dessert Sauces

Vegetarian Main Dishes
Meatless meals are everywhere in this book.

SALADS
Watercress with Peaches, Pecans, and Blue Cheese
Tomato Salad with Strawberries, Feta, and Balsamic
Arugula with Fried Eggs and Shaved Parmesan
Grated Beet and Carrot Salad with Toasted Cashews
Puffed Rice Salad with Dates and Almonds
White Bean and Cucumber Salad with Yogurt and Dill
Chickpea and Carrot Salad with Warm Cumin Oil
Asparagus and Kale Caesar Salad
Warm Kale Salad with Pine Nuts and Balsamic Currants
Warm Pickled Cauliflower Salad with Roasted Red Peppers
Green Bean Salad with Caramelized Onions and Toasted Almonds
Broiled Eggplant and Zucchini Salad with Tahini Dressing
Cabbage with Crisp Tofu and Peanut-Lime Dressing
Pressed Tofu and Cucumber Salad with Hoisin Vinaigrette
Curried Tofu Salad with Pecans and Golden Raisins
Bulgur, Apple, and Fennel Salad
Veggie Fajita Salad
Warm Escarole and White Bean Salad with Poached Eggs
Raw Butternut Squash Salad with Warm Edamame
Warm Three-Bean Potato Salad
Broccoli Tabbouleh with Charred Tomato and Lemon
Charred Brussels Sprout Salad with Walnuts and Gorgonzola

SANDWICHES
Radish and Herb Butter Baguette
Broiled Cheese
Peanut Butter and Banana Sandwich with Honey and Raisins
Hummus and Vegetable Pita Pockets
Tofu Sandwich with Cucumber and Hoisin Mayo
Smoky Black Bean and Carrot Burgers
Egg Salad Sandwich with Lots of Vegetables
Eggplant Parmesan Sub

SOUPS AND STEWS
Green Gazpacho
Spicy Black Bean Soup
Frozen Vegetable Soup
Provençal Tomato Soup with Fennel
Creamy Parsnip Soup with Parsley Pesto
Tomato and Bread Soup with White Beans
Pasta e Fagioli
Chickpea and Couscous Stew with Moroccan Spices
Fast Pho

PASTA AND NOODLES
Cacio e Pepe (Cheese and Pepper)
Pasta with Broccoli Rabe and Ricotta
Pasta with Pesto and Cherry Tomatoes
Pasta with Artichokes, Toasted Bread Crumbs, and Lemon
Pasta with Fennel, White Beans, and Stock
Spaghetti with Garlicky Fresh Tomato Sauce
Pasta with Spicy Eggplant and Tomato Sauce
Broiled Ziti
Pasta with Greens and Eggs
Orzo Risotto with Asparagus and “Poached” Eggs
Three-Cheese Lasagna with Fresh Noodles
Ricotta Dumplings with Spinach and Brown Butter
Noodles with Snow Peas and Chile Oil
Udon with Teriyaki Tofu
Noodles, Shrimp, and Sweet Potatoes in Curry Broth

RICE AND GRAINS
Rice, Beans, and Broccoli
Rice with Cabbage, Scrambled Eggs, and Scallions
Three-Stir Mushroom Risotto
Curried Lentils and Rice with Fried Onions
Quinoa Pilaf with Chickpeas and Dried Fruit
Smoky Bulgur with Eggplant, Dried Tomatoes, and Feta
Couscous Gratin with Leeks and Gruyère
Masa and Rajas

VEGETABLES
Bubbling Caprese
Sweet Pepper Queso Fundido
Eggplant Steaks with Fresh Tomato-Garlic Sauce
Glazed Brussels Sprouts with Vietnamese Flavors
Unstuffed Cabbage
Potato Rösti with Fresh Apple Sauce
Squash au Gratin with Toasted Nuts
Cauliflower “Polenta” with Mushrooms
Stuffed Poblanos with Black Beans and Cheese
Sweet Potato Flautas
Potato and Spinach Saag
Zucchini Fattoush
Scrambled Broccoli with Parmesan and Lemon
Bok Choy Pancake with Soy Dipping Sauce
Fried Fennel and Arugula
Roasted Spaghetti Squash with Brown Butter and Walnuts
Spanish Tortilla
Vegetable Flatbread with Kale and White Bean Stew
Cherry Tomato Cobbler
Tortilla Lasagna
Skillet Spanakopita
Cauliflower Tikka with Boiled Eggs

BEANS AND TOFU
Beans on Toast
Hot and Sour Black Beans with Bok Choy
Stewed White Beans and Tomatoes with Parmesan Toast
Stir-Fried Curried Chickpeas with Potatoes and Carrots
Lemony Limas with Broccoli
Red Beans and Cabbage in Buttery Tomato Sauce
Lima Bean and Cabbage Gratin with Rye Crumbs
White Bean and Spinach Frittata
Lentil and Mushroom Stew
Red Lentils with Toasted Cauliflower
Tomato-Braised Lentils and Potatoes
Stir-Fried Tofu and Green Beans
Deep-Fried Tofu with Peanut Sauce and Scallions
Manchurian Tofu and Cauliflower
Eggs Sukiyaki
Smoky Tofu and Black Bean Chili
Roasted Tofu with Sesame Drizzle
Braised Tofu with Tomatoes and Broccoli

BREAKFAST
Loaded Muesli
Fruit, Yogurt, and Graham Cracker Parfait
Piña Colada Smoothie
Broiled Grapefruit with Almond-Brown Sugar Crunch
Toast with Toasted Almond Butter and Strawberries
Breakfast Bruschetta
Sautéed Apples and Bananas with Honey-Yogurt Sauce
Apricot-Cinnamon Couscous
No-Bake Fruit and Cereal Bars
Maple-Orange Oatmeal with Caramelized Pecans
Honey-Cheddar Grits with Sage
Roasting-Pan French Toast
Tortilla French Toast
Fried Eggs with Chimichurri
Goat Cheese and Spinach Scrambled Eggs
Tortilla Scramble
Chipotle Black Beans with Fried Eggs
Broiled Eggs
Fast Florentine
Fried Eggs with Mushrooms and Leeks
Jalapeño-Scallion Johnnycakes
Banana-Coconut Pancakes
Orange-Ricotta Pancakes

Kitchen Notes
Tips, tricks, ingredients, and other invaluable
information.

SEASONINGS
Dressing Salad on the Fly
Shaving Parmesan
More Uses for Warm Vinaigrette
DIY Nut Butter
“Blooming” Ground Spices
Miso
Plenty of Pestos
Storing Pesto
Making Chile Oil
Soy Sauce
Smoked Paprika
Chipotles in Adobo

FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
Raw Root Vegetables
Versatile Dill
The Citrus Cycle
Snapping Asparagus
Grilling Greens
Using Jarred Roasted Peppers
Salting Vegetables
Types of Apples
Two Vegetables, One Pot
Types of Radishes
Pitting Olives
Toasted Bread Salad
Kimchi
Broiled Bits
Shucking Corn
Peeling Butternut Squash
Canned Tomato Tricks
Frozen, Jarred, and Canned Artichokes
Savoy Cabbage
Stripping Rosemary
Creamy Green Sauces
Vegetable Pan Sauce

PASTA, GRAINS, AND BEANS
Finding Ramen
Masa Harina
From Rice Comes Broth
The Fastest Legumes
Pasta Cooking Times
Pasta with Olive Oil and Other Stuff
Egg Roll Wrappers and Wonton Skins
Fresh Pasta Options
Asian Noodle Dishes with Pasta
One-Pot Noodles
Substituting Brown Rice for White
Fermented Black Beans
Rice Cakes
Paella Rice
Crisp Grains
Impromptu Lasagnas and Gratins
Braising with Beans
Timing Bulgur
Big Batch Muesli or Granola
Topping Grits
A Few Tips for Cooking Pancakes
Leaving Lumps

MEAT, FISH, POULTRY, AND DAIRY
Tofu for Chicken
Poaching Eggs
Chopping Chicken
Chicken as Bruschetta
Bacon in the Microwave
Turning Eggs into Flower Petals
Seasoning with Smoked Pork
Steam-Poached Eggs
Sustainable Canned Tuna
Saving Shellfish Liquid
Eggs to the Rescue
Cooking with Ham
Salmon Temperature
Making the Sushi Grade
Shrimp, Squid, and Scallop Doneness
Swapping Mussels for Clams
Fish Roasts
Oily Fish
Serving Whole Fish
Deveining Shrimp
Prying Open Mussels and Clams
Mexican Cheeses
Butterflying a Chicken
Shaping Meat Loaf
Turkey Parts
A Word on Veal
Give It a Rest
Boneless vs. Bone-In Pork Chops

Smoked Pork Steaks
Sausage Doneness
A Fast Roast
Lamb Chops
Yogurt
Cooking Fried Eggs Evenly
Scrambling Eggs
Scrambled Eggs for a Crowd

COOKING TECHNIQUES
Cooking, Once Removed
One Sandwich is Faster than Four
Brushing vs. Spreading Butter
Wrap It Up
Open Your Mind to Opening Your Sandwich
Anything Tacos
The Time-Texture Continuum
Thickening with Beans
Chop-and-Drop Soups
Thickening with Cornstarch
Salting Pasta Water
Filling the Pot
Stock for Water
Braising and Glazing
Eating Around the Stove
Cooking with Beer
Oil Poaching Meets Steaming
Blackened Anything
Two Skewers, One Kebab
Cooking Seafood
Broiling and Bubbling
Parchment Packages
Rigging a Fast Steamer
Broiling and Grilling
Wok the Other Way
Flavor Before Cooking
Dried Fruit in the Food Processor
Seasoning Sides

INGREDIENT PROFILES
Salad Greens
Good Bread
Tomatoes
Asian Noodles
Rice and Grains
Peppers
Beans
Tofu
Fish Groups
The Best Fast Cuts of Meat
Eggs in a Nutshell
Dessert Staples


INTRODUCTION

Time to Cook
Cooking is an essential human activity. It can relax us
after long, stressful days, bring us closer to our
families, and put a lifetime of nourishment and
endless eating possibilities right at our fingertips.
Then why do we avoid it? Many of us claim we just
don’t have time to cook, and given the abundance of
restaurants and food companies jockeying to feed us,
that has become a perfectly acceptable position.
In the last 50 years, the way we feed ourselves
has changed, and with reason. More women are in
the workforce than ever before; kids rush between
activities and sports and often arrive home as late as
their parents. Even people without children have less
time to spend planning, shopping, and cooking, as we
work more hours than we used to.
Yet as eaters we’ve become more sophisticated;
we understand and experience and appreciate flavors
that were once foreign, and we care more than ever
about the quality of the ingredients we buy. We know

what eating well is but often don’t have the time to
do it, so we settle for eating fast.
Over the years, I’ve found easy ways to put real
meals on the table. Life may have become more
complicated, but cooking can become simpler.
The fact is that you do have time to cook: You
just need better recipes. Imagine a road map that
captures the rhythm of the kitchen, where preparation
and cooking happen seamlessly. Soup begins to
simmer while you prepare more vegetables for the
pot; oil shimmers in a skillet as you chop an onion;
broiled meat rests while rice steams. This is naturally
fast cooking, the kind experienced cooks do
intuitively.
Fast cooking involves strategy, not compromise.
Here I take seemingly complicated dishes like
wonton soup and spanakopita and reduce them to
their essentials, taking them apart and reconstructing
them with all the flavors and textures you love about
the originals. Smart, easy techniques, like cutting
meat into smaller pieces for lightning-quick braises

and harnessing the power of the broiler, give you all
the pleasure of eating homemade meals with minimal
work and—perhaps more important—time.
The result is delicious food prepared from real
ingredients—and quickly. There are plenty of
shortcuts here, and for the most part they don’t
compromise flavor or texture. (When they do, they’re
worth it.) As a practical purist, I open cans and boxes
like everyone else, provided what’s inside is
nutritious and minimally processed. (See Shortcut
Cheat Sheet for a checklist of what qualifies as
convenience food in this book; if you’re already a
How to Cook Everything fan, there won’t be any
surprises.)
In short, How to Cook Everything Fast is both a
series of strategies and a collection of all-new recipes
that do the thinking for you. Whether you’re a
beginner hoping to learn how to weave homemade
meals into your regular routine or an experienced
cook looking to become more efficient, I can help

you get where you want to be, while giving you all
the time you need.

The Fast Kitchen
FASTER IS BETTER
Real-Time Cooking
Helping Hands
Rethinking the Meal
Make Room for Dessert
The Myth of Mise en Place

FAST INGREDIENTS
Shopping for Speed
Pantry Staples
Fridge Staples
Freezer Staples
Shortcut Cheat Sheet
Interchangeable Ingredients

FAST EQUIPMENT
Key Tools

SETUP FOR SPEED
FAST STRATEGIES
Rinse, Don’t Repeat
Consolidate Mincing
Thinner (and Smaller) = Faster
Grate for Puréeing
Start with Heat
Adjust the Heat
Don’t Wait for the Oven
Heat Oil in the Oven
Embrace the Broiler
Take Advantage of Steam
Use Less Liquid for Braising
Clean as You Go

PREP SHORTCUTS
A NEW KIND OF RECIPE
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
Gathering Ingredients
“Do the Blue”
Make-Ahead Master Recipes
Recipe-Free Cooking
Ingredients at a Glance
New Techniques
A Word About Food Safety

Faster Is Better
Fast doesn’t mean frantic. In fact, if you use your
head, fast cooking can be pleasurable. As with many
skills, learning to be efficient, comfortable, and
confident in the kitchen comes with practice. Here the
lessons are built into the recipes, so you can just dive
in, and, without realizing it, you’ll hone your skills
and become naturally more efficient whenever you
cook.
Real-Time Cooking
The process of getting a home-cooked meal on the table involves four tasks:
shopping, preparation, cooking, and cleaning up. Common “wisdom” would
have you complete these steps linearly, finishing one before beginning the
next. Shop. Unpack the groceries. Wash, trim, chop, slice, dice. Stand at the
stove. Serve. Eat. Tackle the dishes.
But that approach ignores the natural rhythm of experienced cooks. In
reality, the action ebbs and flows within a span of time rather than to the beat
of a ticking clock. While something simmers, roasts, or sautés, you have the
flexibility to make a loop between counter, fridge, and stove, pause at the
sink to wash some dishes, or work on making a salad. Efficiency comes
when you put time on your side and maximize every minute.

This is real-time cooking, where gathering, preparing, and combining
ingredients become one seamless endeavor. It’s both faster and easier than
the more common step-by-step process and embodies concepts that are not
only fundamental to these recipes but applicable to all others. Embrace real-
time cooking and you’ll be looking at the components of cooking—food,
tools, and techniques—from a completely different perspective.
Helping Hands
Actually, too many cooks don’t spoil the broth; some of the best moments in
the kitchen involve sharing a countertop with family and friends. Even one
extra set of hands can be a huge help. (If there’s a youngster around who’s
willing and able, you’ll be spreading the joy into the next generation.) In fact
these recipes are perfect for divvying up tasks among all your helpers; see
“Do the Blue”.
Rethinking the Meal
It’s not a new concept, but you can cook one dish and call it dinner; it helps,
of course, if you serve it with a couple of very simply executed appetizers,
sides, and desserts. So the bulk of the recipes in Fast are for main courses
that eat like meals, dishes that bring several components (like meat,
vegetables, and starches) together on one plate in ways that both retain their
distinction and integrity and create a whole that’s more than the sum of its
parts. Of course if you have the inclination, you can make a starter or try a
salad, vegetable, noodle, rice, or grain dish from Sides, which are easy to
prepare while you’re cooking the mains (you’ll find specific suggestions
after each recipe). These strategies provide plenty of options in this book for
assembling all kinds of fast meals, from everyday kitchen-table lunches and
dinners to breakfasts, parties, and celebrations. (For a tutorial on other recipe
features, see A New Kind of Recipe.)

Make Room for Dessert
For many of us, finishing the meal with a little something sweet isn’t a
luxury but a necessity. I’ve always favored simpler desserts so it seems
natural to include a chapter of mostly familiar favorites, now streamlined to
the point where they become easy enough for typical weeknights. Most, in
fact, can be pulled together in the few minutes before you get started on the
main dish and sides; you can prepare many of them up to several hours in
advance. And some are so fast you can whip them up while someone else
gets a head start on cleanup.
 
The Myth of Mise en Place
Although many terrific ideas have moved from restaurants to home kitchens,
mise en place—prepping all the ingredients ahead of time—isn’t one of
them. The term—it means, roughly, “put in place”—is great if you have an
assistant who can work through the recipe’s ingredient list and get each item
ready to cook. At that point, you just cook. It’s undeniably handy to have
food chopped, measured, neatly arranged in cups on a tray, and put within
arm’s reach of the stove before turning it on, but it’s also completely
impractical when you’re working alone or even have a little help. Doing all
the prep ahead of time often leaves you twiddling your thumbs, waiting for
food to cook. (Unless, of course, you’re in a restaurant, cooking ten things at
once.)

Fast Ingredients
A well-stocked kitchen is the backbone of fast
cooking; this section lists the staples to keep in your
pantry, fridge, and freezer and provides a quick
rundown of which time-saving ingredients are worth
buying. I’ve also included two charts to inspire
improvisation: a substitution chart for those times
when you don’t have (or don’t fancy) a particular
ingredient; and a flavor profile chart that groups the
seasonings and key ingredients of various cuisines so
you can see how to vary recipes easily. But before you
can cook, you’ve got to shop.
Every kitchen should have the ingredients in the
charts that follow. Some are no-brainers, like salt and
pepper, while others are the kinds of instant flavor
boosters that are essential for fast cooking, like soy
sauce and real Parmesan cheese. Other flavor-packed
ingredients (not absolute essentials, but nice to have
around) include olives, capers, anchovies, sun-dried
tomatoes, tahini, miso, and (of course) bacon.

Shopping for Speed
The faster you shop, the sooner you get into the kitchen. Making a shopping
list is an obvious advantage and worth reminding you about here; it’s easier
to keep one perpetually going on your smart phone or an old-fashioned
notepad than to try to create one from scratch. Then try to strike a balance
between spontaneous, impromptu shopping—like stopping after work for
fresh vegetables and meat—and weekly or even biweekly stocking up. Since
the most efficient scenario is to cook from what you already have at home as
often as possible, the goal is to get in the habit of using short-storing foods
first. The lists here will help you do that.

Pantry Staples
Consider these the essentials. (Some actually keep better in the fridge but are
considered pantry items.) As you explore the recipes you’ll customize this
list.
EXTRA VIRGIN OLIVE OIL
What I mean when I write olive oil. It doesn’t have to be expensive (and
don’t let anyone tell you it doesn’t work for frying).
Storage: Keep a small bottle on the counter, to be refilled from a big
bottle or can you keep in the fridge.
VEGETABLE OILS
Use oil pressed from a particular seed, not the generic stuff labeled
vegetable oil. Best are grapeseed, safflower, sunflower, canola, and peanut
oils. Use them when you want a more neutral flavor than olive oil
(although peanut oil is pretty distinctive). Sesame oil—use the dark,
toasted kind—is a special case and used more as a flavorful condiment
and less for cooking.
Storage: Best refrigerated; keep a small jar on the counter or in a cabinet
for immediate use.

VINEGARS
Sherry vinegar is my favorite; other wine vinegars are also good; balsamic
and rice vinegars are lower in acidity and useful.
Storage: Vinegar keeps for at least a year at room temperature. A cloudy
sediment might settle at the bottom of the bottle; don’t worry about it.
SALT & BLACK PEPPER
I use coarse kosher or sea salt for almost everything. Good quality
preground pepper is fine, but grinding your own is preferable and easy.
Storage: Keep a small bowl or jar of salt and a pepper mill (or preground
pepper in a small jar) on the counter.
SPICES AND DRIED HERBS
The essentials: chili and curry powders, cayenne, smoked paprika, cumin,
ground ginger, and coriander. Dried oregano, sage, rosemary, tarragon,
dill, and thyme are acceptable substitutes for fresh and are options given
in most recipes.
Storage: Keep in a cool, dark (and handy) place. Replace what you don’t
use within a year. (Scrawl the date on the label when it goes in and you’ll
know when the time’s up.)

GARLIC, ONIONS, AND GINGER
Loads of recipes in this book, and everywhere else, start with garlic,
onions, or both, while ginger is essential to Asian cooking.
Storage: Keep garlic and onions in a basket or bowl on the counter;
they’ll last for weeks. (Refrigerate for longer storage.) Once you slice into
a knob of ginger, store it loosely wrapped in the fridge until it starts to
look funky—usually a couple of weeks.
RICE AND OTHER GRAINS
The quickest-cooking, and therefore most used here, are white rice (short
or long grain), couscous, bulgur, and quinoa. There are other options if
you can work ahead or have a little more time; see Rice and Grains.
Storage: A cabinet is fine, but if you have room, they’ll keep better and
longer in the freezer. (Cooked grains freeze well for several months too.
See the recipe for Easy Cooked Grains.)
DRIED PASTA AND NOODLES
There are plenty of different shapes to choose from in both white and
whole wheat varieties. Italian pastas are usually best, and the shapes are
mostly interchangeable. See the Pasta chapter for a rundown of Asian
noodles.
Storage: These will keep indefinitely.

DRIED BEANS
Cheap, delicious, and easy to cook (see the Beans chapter for an all-
purpose recipe) but time-consuming. Except for lentils, the recipes in this
book call for canned or frozen beans (or your own precooked beans—
whenever you have some handy).
Storage: The longer you keep these, the longer they’ll take to cook. So
don’t buy more than you’ll use within a few months.
CANNED TOMATOES AND TOMATO PASTE
I use whole peeled, diced, and crushed tomatoes (see Tomatoes). Tomato
paste in a tube (like toothpaste) is more convenient than canned.
Storage: Canned, jarred, and boxed tomatoes are all dated, as is paste. If
you don’t use all of the can, put leftovers in an airtight bag, squeeze the
air out, and freeze. Next time, just defrost or cut off a chunk.
PEANUT BUTTER
Should contain peanuts and salt, nothing else.
Storage: Keep in the fridge after opening.
COCONUT MILK
You’ll use it more than you think. In cans; full- and reduced-fat coconut
milk will both work fine in the recipes here.
Storage: It keeps in the fridge for several days after opening, or freezes
well for months.

SOY SAUCE (AND FISH SAUCE)
Soy sauce is essential; fish sauce (nam pla) is less so but great to have
around.
Storage: Both last a long time, but fish sauce stays fresher longer when
stored in the fridge.
SUGAR, HONEY, AND MAPLE SYRUP
Sugar is sugar. Honey and maple syrup should be real, meaning free of
additives or additional sweeteners.
Storage: Honey never goes bad; maple syrup is best refrigerated after
opening.
FLOUR, CORNMEAL, BAKING POWDER, AND BAKING
SODA
Unbleached flour, please (I like having both white and whole wheat), and
stone-ground cornmeal.
Storage: Baking powder and soda have expiration dates; flour and
cornmeal keep for a year or so, longer if you freeze them.

CONDIMENTS
Ketchup, mayonnaise, Dijon mustard, hot sauce, and whatever else you
crave. To make your own mayonnaise, barbecue sauce, and salsa, see
Make Your Own Condiments.
Storage: Put mayonnaise, mustard, and ketchup in the fridge after
opening. Hot sauce can go in the pantry (it will taste better but won’t keep
indefinitely).
NUTS AND SEEDS
As big a variety as you think you’ll use. Walnuts, almonds, and peanuts
are most essential, though they’re virtually interchangeable.
Storage: Use within a few months or store in the freezer.

Fridge Staples
For the most part, these are the least perishable of the perishables.
BUTTER, MILK, AND YOGURT
Butter should be unsalted; milk and yogurt, preferably full fat.
Storage: Keep a little butter in the fridge and the rest in the freezer.
Yogurt and milk are dated.
EGGS
From real free-ranging birds if possible. For lots more info, see Eggs in a
Nutshell.
Storage: Supermarket eggs are dated but generally keep much longer.
Recently laid eggs (like those you find at a farmers’ market) are best when
still fresh but will also last for weeks or months.
PARMESAN CHEESE
Real Parmesan from Italy (get it in a chunk) is worth the price; Grana
Padano is nearly as good. Everything else is an imitation.
Storage: Wrap a chunk in wax paper and it will keep for months. (It is
virtually indestructible; if it gets a spot of mold, just cut it off.)

FRESH HERBS
Parsley, cilantro, basil, rosemary, sage, thyme, tarragon, and oregano
should all be in the rotation. The flavor boost that fresh herbs give is
unmatched.
Storage: Thyme, rosemary, oregano, and sage can simply be wrapped in
plastic. Others will live longer if you trim the bottoms and set in a jar of
water with a plastic bag on top. Easier just to use quickly, within a couple
of days.
LEMONS, LIMES, AND ORANGES
You’ll want both juice and zest, so get real fruit, not bottles of juice.
Storage: These will keep for a few weeks in the fridge; use before they
get moldy or shrivel and dry.
FRESH CHILES
Jalapeños strike a good balance of availability and moderate but real heat;
all are useful (see Peppers for more info).
Storage: Most will last for several weeks in the fridge.
APPLES, PEARS, CABBAGE, SQUASHES, POTATOES, AND
OTHER ROOT VEGETABLES
Long keeping and always useful.
Storage: These all tend to keep best in the fridge—often up to several
weeks. Store on the counter if there’s no room.

Freezer Staples
I treat the freezer like the pantry on ice. Lucky you if you’ve got space for a
big one.
HOMEMADE STOCK
When I don’t have homemade stock, I use water; the canned stuff just
doesn’t taste right. See Fast Stocks for all the stock recipes you’ll need.
Storage: Refrigerate for several days or freeze in airtight containers, ice
cube trays, or resealable plastic bags.
FROZEN VEGETABLES
Convenient and often better tasting and more nutritious than out-of-season
“fresh” produce. Corn, peas, spinach and other greens, and edamame and
other beans are best; others can be valuable.
Storage: Don’t overbuy, but these will last for months, although sooner is
better.
FROZEN FRUIT
Essential for making fast smoothies and sorbets. I always try to keep at
least one or two from this list in the freezer: strawberries, raspberries,
peaches, and mangoes.
Storage: Best within weeks; will last for months.

COOKED BEANS
The perfect setup for fast—and excellent—cooking. See Beans, Soaked
and Unsoaked for a big-batch beans recipe.
Storage: Freeze beans (in containers covered with their cooking liquid)
for up to a few months. Thaw in the fridge, microwave, or during cooking.
COOKED GRAINS
Just like beans; indispensible for fast, spontaneous meals. See the master
recipe for Easy Cooked Grains.
Storage: Store grains in resealable bags with all air squeezed out. Thaw in
the fridge, microwave, or during cooking.
HOMEMADE TOMATO SAUCE
Infinitely better than store-bought.
Storage: Refrigerate for days or cook a big batch, divide it among freezer
containers in sizes you’ll use, and freeze for months—or longer. Thaw in
the microwave.
 
Shortcut Cheat Sheet
Many will tell you that the key to fast cooking is to stock your kitchen with
foods that have been prepared so that you’re left with very little work to do
once you get home. While some of these foods are useful, others sacrifice
too much in the way of quality and are better skipped in lieu of versions you
make yourself (see the page references for recipes and information). Here’s
the breakdown:

Worth It
Canned tomatoes
Canned beans
Canned tuna (preferably packed in olive oil but water-packed is fine
too)
Frozen fruits and vegetables
Panko bread crumbs (sort of; see Bread Crumbs)
Deli meat (or see Homemade Cold Cuts)
Many condiments (for others, see Make Your Own Condiments)
Not Worth It
Canned or packaged stock (see Fast Stocks)
Jarred tomato sauce (see Tomato Sauce) and salsa (see Fresh
Tomato Salsa)
Packaged hummus (see Hummus)
Rotisserie chicken (see Roast Chicken)
Prechopped vegetables
Pregrated Parmesan
Prewashed salad greens
Just about any other shortcut ingredient

Interchangeable Ingredients
Whenever a recipe calls for something you don’t have, use this chart for Plan
B. The ingredients in the right column can be substituted for those in the left
and vice versa. (Cooking times may vary a bit.)
STOCK
Water, wine, beer, apple cider (to taste, of
course)
FRESH TOMATOES
Canned tomatoes (drained diced canned
tomatoes can even work in some salads).
NUTS AND DRIED
FRUIT
Any nut or dried fruit can be substituted
for another.
VINEGAR
Any type will work; lemon and lime juice
too.
FISH SAUCE
Soy sauce
DRIED OR FRESH RED
CHILES
Red chile flakes or cayenne
COOKED/CANNED
BEANS
Totally interchangeable
CILANTRO
Parsley, basil
TARRAGON
Dill, mint, chives, chervil
ROSEMARY
Thyme, sage, oregano

SHALLOTS
Onions, leeks
LEMONGRASS
Lemon zest
SALAD GREENS
Totally interchangeable
KALE
Collards, chard, spinach, escarole, bok
choy
CAULIFLOWER
Broccoli
FENNEL
Celery
ASPARAGUS
Green beans or snap peas
FRESH PEAS, SNAP
PEAS, OR SNOW PEAS
Frozen shelled peas
JÍCAMA
Radishes, kohlrabi
PARSNIPS (COOKED)
Carrots (cooked)
PEARS
Apples
SWEET POTATOES
Carrots, parsnips, or winter squash
SOUR CREAM
Yogurt
HEAVY CREAM
(CALLED “CREAM”)
Half-and-half (unless you’re whipping it)
SCALLOPS
Shrimp, squid

MUSSELS
Clams
FISH FILLETS
More interchangeable than you think (see
Fish Groups)
BONELESS, SKINLESS
CHICKEN BREASTS
Boneless, skinless chicken thighs

Fast Equipment
A cluttered kitchen is a slow kitchen. Here’s a list of
all you need.
Key Tools
I’ve grouped all the equipment you’ll need to cook from this book according
to how it will be used, loosely in order of importance and frequency.
Remember: Less can be more, especially when it comes to speed.
STOVEWARE
What You Need: Large skillets; large pot (1 gallon); medium skillet (8 to
10 inches); stockpot (2 gallons); 1- to 2-quart saucepans. All of these
should have lids.
Kitchen Notes: I use large skillets (often several at the same time) for
everything. So get two: maybe one cast iron and one nonstick or stainless.
12 inches is fine; 13 or 14 inches is even better. (The more food you can
comfortably fit in a skillet without crowding, the better it will brown—in
fewer batches.)

OVENWARE
What You Need: 18 × 13-inch rimmed baking sheets; metal roasting pan;
9 × 13-inch baking pan or dish; 9-inch square baking pan; wire racks;
muffin tin; 9-inch pie plate; 9-inch round cake pan (springform is ideal).
Kitchen Notes: You can never have enough rimmed baking sheets; some
recipes here use two at the same time, so stock up (they’re cheap, and you
can stack them). Baking dishes should be metal, glass, ceramic, or
enameled cast iron. Muffin tins, pie plates, and cake pans don’t get much
action in this book but have some uses beyond baking.
SMALL APPLIANCES
What You Need: Food processor; blender; microwave oven; electric
mixer. (Maybe an immersion blender.)
Kitchen Notes: If you don’t have a food processor, buy one; it will
change your life. (Used ones are really inexpensive.) An electric mixer is
less critical but will make desserts easier; the handhelds are great. You can
live without a microwave, but there are recipes in this book that use one.
And a blender makes smoother purées than anything else; not critical, but
nice—consider at least an immersion blender.
KNIVES
What You Need: Chef’s knife; long serrated knife; paring knife.
Kitchen Notes: You’ll rely on a chef’s knife (8 to 10 inches is best for
most people) to make quick work of prep; it should feel as comfortable in
your hand as possible. You’ll use the serrated knife for bread and fine
slicing. I keep a half dozen cheap paring knives on hand all the time.

UTENSILS
What You Need: Large spoons; spatulas; tongs; peeler; box grater (and/or
fine grater); kitchen scissors; can opener; liquid and dry measuring cups
and spoons; quick-read thermometer; whisk; ladle; brushes; potato
masher; rolling pin; mandoline (nice, and there are cheap but good ones
out there).
Kitchen Notes: You should have a few wooden spoons and two metal:
one slotted, one not. You’ll need one flexible metal spatula for flipping
and a rubber or silicone version for scraping. A rolling pin is handy but
used sparingly in this book; a wine bottle does the trick in a pinch
(especially if you’ve already consumed its contents). And truth be told, I
probably use a fork for “whisking” much more often than I use an actual
whisk; it’s just as fast, although you’ve got to work a little harder.
ACCESSORIES
What You Need: Cutting boards (wood and plastic if you’d like); kitchen
towels; pot holders; kitchen timer; pepper mill; parchment paper.
Kitchen Notes: I like a big, sturdy wooden cutting board that lives on the
counter and a smaller plastic one that I stash somewhere else. A clean
kitchen is a fast kitchen, so keep lots of kitchen towels on hand. A kitchen
timer is a bit of a relic in a smart phone world, but it’s at the very least a
hilarious way to show off how fast you’re cooking.

BOWLS/STORAGE
What You Need: Mixing bowls; large colander; mesh strainers; salad
spinner; glass jars; plastic storage containers; resealable plastic bags, foil,
wax, or parchment paper and plastic wrap.
Kitchen Notes: A salad spinner is by far the most efficient way to clean,
dry, and store greens. I store vinaigrettes and homemade condiments in
glass jars in the fridge and always keep plenty of plastic containers and
freezer bags for storing big batches of cooked beans, grains, and leftovers.
(I can’t say it enough: There’s no faster way to cook than eating
something that’s already been made.)

Setup for Speed
There’s no “right” way to organize a kitchen. But this
diagram illustrates a few features that can make yours
as efficient as possible.

Fast Strategies
The practice of prepping and cooking simultaneously
is by far the biggest key to fast cooking that I have to
offer here; it can be applied to boiling, steaming, pan-
cooking, roasting, baking, broiling, grilling, and even
braising and frying. But I’m always thinking about
ways to be more efficient in the kitchen, so here is a
preview of the other time-saving tips that are
incorporated into recipes throughout the book.
Rinse, Don’t Repeat
Washing fruits and vegetables isn’t included in recipe Prep directions
because I assume you will do it how and when you see fit (or not). But here
are a few efficient ways to work it into the flow: If you have a bunch of
produce, consider putting it all in a colander together and rinsing under cold
running water all at once. If you run out of room in the colander, do them in
batches and put what’s done on towels. If vegetables are going to be used
toward the end of a recipe, wash while you have downtime while other
things cook. Sometimes it’s easiest to run water over foods like carrots or
cabbage after they’ve been trimmed or peeled. (For more about food safety,
see A Word About Food Safety.)
Consolidate Mincing

If a recipe uses minced garlic, minced ginger, and/or minced chiles at the
same time, don’t mince those things one at a time. Instead, peel the garlic
and ginger, trim the chiles, put them all in a pile, then start chopping and
mince them all together using a rocking motion.
Thinner (and Smaller) = Faster
This is obvious but worth remembering: Big, thick pieces take longer to
cook through than foods cut small or sliced thin. That’s as true of vegetables
as it is of meat, and with a knife in your hand you have quite a bit of control
over the size and shape of the ingredients before they hit the pan. (And
grated vegetables cook the fastest of all; see the next one.)
Grate for Puréeing
If you’re making a puréed vegetable soup, grate the vegetables so that they
become tender as quickly as possible. After all, it makes no difference what
they look like at the beginning.
Start with Heat
Appliances, pots, pans, water, and fat take time to get hot. So before doing
anything else, turn on the oven, heat the broiler, and/or set water to boil. And
since many of the recipes start with sautéing (or pan-cooking), you can
preheat skillets too.
Adjust the Heat
While I’ve tried my best to balance the simultaneous flows of cooking and
prepping, there may be times when you get slightly out of sync. Don’t
worry! You can always raise, lower, or turn off the heat on the stove to
accommodate the speed of your prep work. So, if the oil in a skillet is hot but

you haven’t finished chopping the onion that’s supposed to go in it, lower or
turn off the heat until you’re ready.
Don’t Wait for the Oven
Unless you’re baking—or roasting something that requires an initial blast of
very high heat—you don’t have to wait for the oven to reach its final
temperature before adding food. Vegetables are the best examples, but slow-
roasted or braised meat and chicken can work too. Remember that if you do
this, cooking times will differ from those in the recipes.
Heat Oil in the Oven
Put a baking sheet or roasting pan with a little oil in the oven as it heats.
When you add whatever you’re roasting to the pan, you’ll immediately get
the sizzle and sear that you’re looking for on the bottom.
Embrace the Broiler
Many of the recipes take advantage of broiling as a useful way to provide
quick blasts of heat and a means of diverting food from the often crowded
stovetop. With the rack farther away from the heat, the broiler can also be
used for thicker cuts of meat or firmer vegetables that need a little more time
to cook through. (See Broiling and Grilling for the details.)
Take Advantage of Steam
More efficient than using a real steamer is employing the steam that occurs
naturally when you sauté or simmer something with moisture in it—usually
vegetables or starches—to cook something else, especially proteins like fish,
chicken, or eggs. A skillet of beans simmering with a splash of stock gives
off steam, as does bubbling tomato sauce or zucchini cooking with olive oil.

Put a lid on any of those pans and you’ve got yourself a steamer for
whatever you might lay on top of the cooking food. (For more details about
this process, see the recipe for Collard-Wrapped Chicken. Or see the sidebar
for how to rig a steamer.)
Use Less Liquid for Braising
The amount of liquid that we normally use for braising can take a while to
come to an initial boil and a long time at the end to reduce into a sauce. Start
with submerging your braising ingredients in about 1 inch of liquid, cover
the pot, and cook, turning occasionally, adding a little more liquid as
necessary.
Clean as You Go
A delicious meal is less enjoyable when there’s a messy kitchen waiting for
you. Just like you use some natural breaks in the cooking process to prep,
use other bits of downtime to clean dishes you’re done using, wipe down
counters and cutting boards—that sort of thing.

Prep Shortcuts
The prep steps in the recipes tell when—and, in most
cases, how—to get food ready for cooking. This
visual guide demonstrates the most efficient ways to
slice, chop, snip, and grate.
Vegetables and Fruits





Techniques


A New Kind of Recipe

How to Use This Book
The diagram on the previous page is designed to be a
handy reference for what’s included in the recipes.
Some of the book’s unique features are worth further
explanation.
Gathering Ingredients
To save valuable prep time I always focus on streamlining ingredients to
what’s absolutely necessary. And since these ingredients lists are essentially
shopping lists, all you need to do before you start cooking is to put the
required items on the kitchen counter, or at least make sure that you have
everything you need handy. You should use the ingredients list to give you
an accurate idea of how much you need of each item; the recipe directions
tell you how to prepare and cook them.
“Do the Blue”
All recipe directions are coded in blue and black numbered steps that reflect
the most efficient order and timing of tasks. They might look longer than
traditional recipes, but all activity—preparation and cooking—is included in
the detail. Believe me, they’re faster.
And the recipes can accommodate those who feel more comfortable
prepping ingredients ahead of time, as well as those who are lucky enough to
have a helper in the kitchen. Since prep steps are highlighted in blue, you
can easily identify them when you first look at a recipe and do all the
necessary chopping and slicing before you start cooking. Or you can simply

say to your helper, “You do the blue steps while I do the black” (or vice
versa). This, I think, is really cool.
Make-Ahead Master Recipes
How much faster could you cook if some of the work was already done
when you started? A lot. So in addition to the hundreds of recipes and
variations in this book, I’ve included a handful of Master Recipe features:
basic homemade staples that I like to keep stocked in my fridge, freezer, or
pantry at all times—things like vinaigrette, cooked beans, stock, tomato
sauce, or spice blends. You can buy these, of course, but they’re significantly
better if you make them yourself.
The Make Your Own section that follows many recipe directions points
you to these homemade versions whenever you can use them.
Recipe-Free Cooking
The fastest way to cook is to improvise—or at least be flexible. That’s why
many chapters include Recipe-Free features. Each illustrates a cooking
technique (like stir-frying) or kind of dish (like soup) boiled down to its
essential process.
Think of these as a bird’s-eye road map rather than turn-by-turn
directions: They show you how to get from point A to point B, but what you
do in between is up to you. So building a soup outlines how you add
different kinds of ingredients in consecutive stages. Once you become
comfortable with the basic framework of a technique or dish, you can plug in
all sorts of ingredients of your choosing, endlessly varying the flavors of the
dish. Teach a cook a recipe and he’ll cook for a night; teach a cook a
technique and she’ll improvise for a lifetime.
Ingredients at a Glance

All How to Cook Everything books include detailed information about
buying and preparing key ingredients, and this latest addition to the family
works the same way. The difference here is that these features focus on
precisely what you need to know in order to cook fast from scratch—without
compromising texture or flavor. A list of all of these—arranged by chapter—
starts here so you can find them easily.
New Techniques
In addition to the Recipe-Free illustrated guides for fast preparation and
cooking methods described earlier, I’ve tucked two-page features and other
shortcut techniques among the recipes. From general topics like maximizing
your grill and broiler, to ingredient-specific topics like pressing tofu or
shaving hard cheese, these tips will help you cook both better and faster—
and eat while you learn.
A Word About Food Safety
I know . . . fussing over kitchen hygiene while you’re trying to cook isn’t
particularly fast. But neither is getting sidelined with a food-borne illness, so
it’s well worth your time to practice the most basic food safety habits. This
means washing your hands before, during, and after handling food,
especially when going from raw meats to anything else. Keep all of your
work surfaces, sinks, and utensils clean the same way. (Soap and hot water
will do the trick; antimicrobial concoctions can promote germ resistance.
Use a weak bleach solution once in a while for deep cleaning.) Your
refrigerator should always be between 35°F and 40°F and your freezer
around 0°F (this temperature also helps minimize freezer burn).
Washing fruits and vegetables is really a matter of personal choice. At
one end of the spectrum are people who use soapy water, especially on
produce that’s visibly dirty or has been known to have problems—like

melons, greens, and squash; other folks wash virtually nothing. I usually
come down somewhere in the middle and decide case by case based on what
it looks like and whether I’m going to eat it raw or cooked; I tend to be quite
blasé about food that I’m cooking, for better or worse.
All of those rules are easy enough to follow. But things do get a little
more complicated when we talk about bacteria and cooking temperatures.
Sometimes meat, poultry, fish, or eggs contain disease-causing bacteria.
There are two ways to minimize the risk. The first is to cook thoroughly,
which can result in dry food that isn’t ideal from your palate’s perspective; I
don’t do that myself, and my recipes don’t recommend doing it either, but
it’s a judgment call. The second way to minimize the risk of harmful bacteria
is to buy the best-quality products you can, from sources you trust the most.
This I do recommend. It’s not a failsafe, but it’s much less of a sacrifice than
a life of eating well-done steak.

Salads
Watercress with Peaches, Pecans, and Blue Cheese
Tomato Salad with Strawberries, Feta, and Balsamic
Arugula with Fried Eggs and Shaved Parmesan
Endive and Radicchio with Bacon Vinaigrette
Steakhouse Salad
Grated Beet and Carrot Salad with Toasted Cashews
Puffed Rice Salad with Dates and Almonds
White Bean and Cucumber Salad with Yogurt and Dill
Chickpea and Carrot Salad with Warm Cumin Oil
Crab and Celery Root Rémoulade
Poached Shrimp Salad with Herby Tartar Sauce
Cucumber and Salmon Salad with Caper and Mustard
Dressing
Fresh Tuna, Avocado, and Green Bean Salad
Asparagus and Kale Caesar Salad
Seared Scallops with Grilled or Broiled Romaine
Warm Kale Salad with Pine Nuts and Balsamic Currants

Warm Pickled Cauliflower Salad with Roasted Red Peppers
Green Bean Salad with Caramelized Onions and Toasted
Almonds
Broiled Eggplant and Zucchini Salad with Tahini Dressing
Cabbage with Crisp Tofu and Peanut-Lime Dressing
Pressed Tofu and Cucumber Salad with Hoisin Vinaigrette
Curried Tofu Salad with Pecans and Golden Raisins
Bulgur, Apple, and Fennel Salad
Veggie Fajita Salad
Warm Escarole and White Bean Salad with Poached Eggs
Raw Butternut Squash Salad with Warm Edamame
Warm Three-Bean Potato Salad
Tuna and Egg Salad with Radishes and Dill
Zucchini Slaw with Chopped Spicy Chicken
Corn and Black Bean Salad with Garlic Chicken
Greek Salad with Orzo and Shrimp
Hot and Sour Bok Choy with Mussels
Tomato and Chicken Salad with Basil Vinaigrette
Warm Spinach and Chicken Salad with Parmesan Dressing

Middle Eastern Chicken and Bread Salad
BLT Salad with Rosemary-Mayo Dressing
Kimchi and Snow Pea Salad with Grilled or Broiled Beef
Broccoli Tabbouleh with Charred Tomato and Lemon
Charred Brussels Sprout Salad with Walnuts and
Gorgonzola

Salads
For a long time our salads were small piles of raw
vegetables—iceberg lettuce and tomatoes, primarily
—that you ate before dinner. Or, worse, something
whose main function was to make your steak look
that much better. These were absolute afterthoughts,
something that you ate reluctantly but never with
relish.
Salad has come a long way in both variety and
reputation. It is now totally acceptable—and even
increasingly popular—to eat a salad and piece of
bread and call it a meal. (Many people skip the
bread.) The key is having a broad enough repertoire
to keep you interested and enough ingredients to keep
you satisfied. (After all, how useful is a salad if all it
does is make you want a steak?)
Fortunately for us, salads are among the easiest,
most versatile, and fastest dishes to make: Many of
the components can be left raw and prepared in

advance, while leftovers can readily become part of
the routine. At their simplest, of course, salads are
greens and raw vegetables tossed with vinaigrette.
But they can be expanded, and are limited only
by your imagination: Adding cooked vegetables,
beans, noodles, grains, and breads, or tofu, fish,
chicken, or meat to the bowl increases the
possibilities exponentially, and guarantees that you
won’t be left hungry. And, of course, you’ll find all
different types of dressing throughout this chapter.

Chapter Highlights
One Bowl, Endless Salads  Make dressing, add stuff, and toss: a blueprint
for easy, one-bowl salad. Recipe-Free Salads.
Warm Vinaigrettes  Warm dressings add intense flavor and a cozy vibe.
Endive and Radicchio with Bacon Vinaigrette
Cooking, Once Removed  Sometimes the magic is in the mingling of raw
ingredients with hot cooked ones. Warm Spinach and Chicken Salad with
Parmesan Dressing
Root Vegetables, Raw  Root vegetables take the longest to cook. The
fastest solution? Don’t cook them at all. Grated Beet and Carrot Salad with
Toasted Cashews); Raw Butternut Squash Salad with Warm Edamame
Salt and Let Sit  Sprinkle raw vegetables with salt, then leave them alone
while you prepare something else. Pressed Tofu and Cucumber Salad with
Hoisin Vinaigrette
Loving Tofu  If you’re still skeptical about tofu, these will make you a
believer. Cabbage with Crisp Tofu and Peanut-Lime Dressing, Pressed Tofu
and Cucumber Salad with Hoisin Vinaigrette, Curried Tofu Salad with
Pecans and Golden Raisins
Egg Salad  It’s no longer mayonnaise and white bread. Arugula with Fried
Eggs and Shaved Parmesan, Warm Escarole and White Bean Salad with
Poached Eggs, Tuna and Egg Salad with Radishes and Dill

Broiled Bits  Why you want to pulse vegetables in the food processor and
then stick them in the broiler. Charred Brussels Sprout Salad with Walnuts
and Gorgonzola
Two Vegetables, One Pot  One pot doesn’t mean one vegetable. Warm
Three-Bean Potato Salad
Bread Salad  Where croutons started. Middle Eastern Chicken and Bread
Salad
Kimchi  Kimchi makes a surprising and sensational salad base. Kimchi
and Snow Pea Salad with Grilled or Broiled Beef

SPEED  

  SERVES 4

Watercress with Peaches, Pecans, and
Blue Cheese
Perfect during summer with the juiciest peaches you can find, this
salad also lets you experiment with other fruit, nut, cheese, and
greens combinations based on whatever looks good or what you
have on hand—even in winter.

Ingredients
1 cup pecans
2 bunches watercress (1 pound)
3 large peaches (about 1 pound)
⅓ cup olive oil
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
Salt and pepper
4 ounces blue cheese (1 cup crumbled)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 cup pecans in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cook,
shaking the pan occasionally and adjusting the heat so they don’t burn,
until the pecans are lightly browned and fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim the watercress, cutting off any thick stems, and put it in a large
bowl.
Pit and slice the peaches. Add them to the bowl.
2. Drizzle the watercress and peaches with ⅓ cup olive oil and 2
tablespoons balsamic vinegar and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Toss,
lifting gently from the bottom to coat with the dressing.
3. Add the pecans. Crumble 1 cup blue cheese and add. Toss again, taste
and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Arugula with Apricots, Marcona Almonds, and Manchego
Substitute Marcona almonds (no need to toast them) for the pecans, fresh
apricots for the peaches, arugula for the watercress, sherry vinegar for
balsamic, and shaved manchego cheese for the blue cheese. If you like, add
a pinch of smoked paprika when you mix in the dressing.
Spinach with Apples, Walnuts, and Goat Cheese
Instead of pecans, peaches, watercress, and blue cheese, use walnuts,
apples, spinach, and goat cheese.
Kale with Tomatoes, Pine Nuts, and Parmesan
Substitute ½ cup pine nuts for the pecans, halved cherry tomatoes for the
peaches, kale for the watercress, and shaved Parmesan for the blue cheese. I

love lacinato kale for raw salads, but you can use any kale. Whichever you
choose, chop the leaves into bite-sized pieces.
NOTES
DRESSING SALAD ON THE FLY
If you are making a big batch of vinaigrette, I highly recommend combining
all the ingredients in a jar and shaking it until they all come together. But if
you’re shooting for speed, or just want enough vinaigrette for one batch of
salad, by all means simply pour oil and vinegar and sprinkle salt and pepper
right onto the salad; as you toss they will mix together perfectly. No
shaking required.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Warm Buttery Bread
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tomato Salad with Strawberries,
Feta, and Balsamic
There’s a reason pairing tomatoes with fruits like strawberries and
watermelon has become more common: The combination of sweet
fruit and sweet-tart tomatoes is unbelievable, especially when you
add the salty kick of feta.

Ingredients
5 or 6 medium ripe tomatoes (2 pounds)
3 cups strawberries
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar
Salt and pepper
4 ounces feta cheese (1 cup crumbled)

Prep | Cook
Core the tomatoes and cut into wedges or large chunks; put them in a
large bowl.
Hull the strawberries and cut them into halves or quarters; add them to
the bowl.
1. Add 1 tablespoon olive oil, 1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl; toss.
2. Crumble 1 cup feta over the top and serve.
VARIATIONS
Tomato Salad with Watermelon, Feta, and Balsamic
Instead of the strawberries, use 3 cups of watermelon cut into 1-inch
chunks.
Tomato and Strawberry Panzanella
Substitute chunks of fresh mozzarella for the feta. Add a handful of bread
cubes lightly toasted in olive oil and some torn fresh basil leaves.
Tomato Salad with Tomatillos and Queso Fresco
Use 8 ounces of tomatillos instead of the strawberries and queso fresco and
lime juice instead of the feta and balsamic.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the tomatoes and strawberries marinate in the oil, vinegar, salt, and
pepper for 15 to 20 minutes before adding the feta.

SIDES
Garlic Bread
Bruschetta
Crisp Seasoned Pita

INGREDIENT

Salad Greens
The following chart includes both head lettuce, which
grows from a core that needs to be removed along
with the outermost leaves, and loose-leaf greens,
which are grown in small, loose bunches whose
stems often need to be trimmed.
Greens
Description
ROMAINE
Long crunchy leaves, slightly bitter and
still moist. Essential for Caesar salad, and
because the tight inner leaves are
protected by the ones on the outside,
romaine will keep in the refrigerator
literally for weeks.
ICEBERG
The familiar tightly packed heads that are
incredibly crisp and, some might say,
watery. Iceberg doesn’t have a lot of
flavor, so it’s best to mix it with other
greens, cut it into wedges and use it as a
canvas for very flavorful dressings, or
shred to use as a crunchy, refreshing
garnish. Like romaine, it will keep in the
fridge for weeks.

BOSTON (OR BUTTER)
Small, loose heads with a trace of
bitterness and a soft, buttery texture. Dress
the tender leaves at the very last moment
and will keep in the fridge for only a few
days.
BELGIAN ENDIVE
Long and slender with firm, crunchy, and
very bitter leaves. The concave leaves are
perfect for stuffing and firm enough for
dipping. Cooking endive mellows its
bitterness and brings out its sweetness,
which can be profound.
RADICCHIO
Small, tight heads, with beautiful white
and purple leaves. It looks and acts like a
cabbage but has the same striking
bitterness as endive.
GREEN- AND RED-
LEAF LETTUCE
Easy to find in supermarkets and farmers’
markets everywhere. Not loaded with
flavor but a good choice for a basic green
salad.
SPINACH
Baby spinach in packages is certainly
easier to deal with, but opt for the big
leaves when you can; they have more
flavor. Whichever kind you use, remember
that spinach shrinks down tremendously
when cooked. The sooner you use it after
buying, the better.

ARUGULA
Like spinach, the larger bunches have
more flavor than the packaged baby
variety. And that flavor, spicy like
mustard, is remarkable. Use ASAP.
WATERCRESS
Intensely peppery and often unjustly used
as a garnish rather than as a main
component. Use as you would arugula,
keeping in mind that it has an even more
aggressive flavor.
DANDELION GREENS
These vitamin-packed greens are mild
when young and bracingly bitter (and
tougher) when mature. You always can
buy them at farmers’ markets in the
spring, although they’re popping up more
in supermarkets now too.
ESCAROLE
Curly leaves that go from white at the
center to dark green at the edges. Raw,
they’re distinctly bitter. Cooked, they’re
wonderfully mild.
FRISÉE
These wispy, crinkly leaves are white and
light green, crisp, and very bitter. They
can handle a rich dressing—they’re classic
with bacon and poached eggs—as long as
you don’t drench them and make them
soggy.

MESCLUN
Describes a “mixture” (that’s what the
word means) of different types of greens,
herbs, and sometimes even edible flowers.
It’s sold premixed in all supermarkets, but
the best kind of mesclun is the one you
mix yourself, especially if you’re a
gardener or have access to an interesting
assortment of greens.
 
Preparing Salad Greens
If you have a salad spinner, put the torn leaves or loose-leaf greens in the
insert, fill the bowl with water, swirl the leaves around, discard the water,
and repeat until you don’t see dirt in the water. If you don’t have a spinner,
set a colander inside a stockpot. To dry the leaves either give them a spin or
gently shake and toss them with a clean kitchen towel. Do a big batch and
store what you don’t use: Put the dried greens in the fridge in the covered
salad spinner or loosely wrap them in paper towels, set them inside a plastic
bag, and seal it loosely. They’ll keep for 2 to 4 days.
Washing Prewashed Greens
To cut down on prep time, you may be inclined to buy greens that come
ready to go in plastic tubs or bags; after all, they eliminate the need for
trimming and chopping. But even though these greens are theoretically
prewashed, I wash them again just to be safe.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Arugula with Fried Eggs and Shaved
Parmesan
Sharp, peppery arugula dressed with tart lemon juice and olive oil
is an ideal bed for an oozing fried egg. Not only does the egg white
add some heft to the salad, but as you eat, the yolk mixes with the
olive oil, lemon, and Parmesan to form an irresistibly creamy and
rich dressing.

Ingredients
1 tablespoon butter
4 eggs
1 large bunch arugula (12 ounces)
Salt and pepper
1 lemon
3 tablespoons olive oil
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup shaved)

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium heat. After about 1 minute, add 1
tablespoon butter and swirl it around. Once the butter foam subsides,
crack the eggs into the skillet and cook until the whites are no longer
translucent, 2 or 3 minutes.
Trim the arugula and put it in a large bowl.
2. When the egg whites are no longer translucent, turn the heat to low
and sprinkle the eggs with salt and pepper. Cook, undisturbed, until the
whites are firm and the yolks are as runny as you like, just a few more
minutes. If the eggs are ready before you’ve finished the dressing,
move the skillet to a cool surface.
3. Halve the lemon and squeeze the juice into the bowl. Add 3
tablespoons oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Shave about 1 cup of
Parmesan with a vegetable peeler, add to the bowl, and toss. Taste and
adjust the seasoning and divide the salad among 4 plates.
4. When the eggs are done as you like, remove them from the skillet and
put one on top of each salad. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Spinach with Fried Eggs and Feta
Substitute spinach for the arugula and 1 cup crumbled feta for the
Parmesan.
Endive with Fried Eggs and Blue Cheese
A little more intense, and crunchier too. Use about 8 cups chopped endive
(or frisée) instead of the arugula and substitute 1 cup crumbled blue cheese
for the Parmesan.

NOTES
SHAVING PARMESAN
Parmesan has fantastic texture: firm, but not opposed to melting on your
tongue. While 90 percent of the time I grate Parmesan in cooking,
sometimes it’s more appealing to make thin shavings or shreds to preserve
some of that texture. Just take a chunk, find a side that’s fairly smooth, and
start shaving it with a vegetable peeler. (It’s easiest to work toward you,
controlling the blade with short strokes and anchoring the cheese with your
thumb.) If you prefer smaller shreds, grate the cheese over the biggest holes
of a box grater.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Warm Buttery Bread
Garlic Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Endive and Radicchio with Bacon
Vinaigrette
Bacon vinaigrette? That got your attention! Many salads have
pieces of bacon sprinkled over them, and that’s fine. This one
features the bacon cooking fat as well, which becomes the basis of
a warm dressing. Its smoky, salty flavor takes the edge off the bitter
endive and radicchio. There’s no subtlety here; this salad is a
knockout.

Ingredients
8 slices bacon
6 heads endive (1½ to 2 pounds)
1 small head radicchio
1 large shallot
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
¼ cup olive oil
3 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Chop 8 slices bacon. Line a plate with paper towels.
2. Add the bacon to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until crisp,
5 to 10 minutes.
Trim and chop the endive and radicchio and put them in a large bowl.
Trim, peel, and mince the shallot.
3. When the bacon is crisp, transfer it to the paper towels with a slotted
spoon. Pour off all but 2 tablespoons of the fat and turn off the heat.
4. Add the shallot to the skillet, then whisk in 1 teaspoon Dijon, ¼ cup
olive oil, 3 tablespoons balsamic vinegar, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper.
5. Pour the dressing over the endive and radicchio, add the cooked bacon,
and toss. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
7 Other Bases for Warm Vinaigrette
Sauté any of the following in about ¼ cup olive oil instead of using the
bacon. No need to add more oil when you add the remaining vinaigrette
ingredients:
1. 4 to 6 ounces prosciutto
2. 4 to 6 ounces smoked Spanish chorizo or fresh Italian sausage
3. ⅓ cup chopped nuts

4. ¼ cup chopped olives, dried tomatoes, whole capers, or a few chopped
anchovies
5. 1 tablespoon minced or slivered garlic
6. 1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger or chile
7. 2 teaspoons cumin or coriander seeds
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Endive and Radicchio with Creamy Bacon Vinaigrette
The blender is an incomparable tool for making thick, smooth vinaigrettes.
Pour the 2 tablespoons bacon fat, mustard, olive oil, vinegar, and a sprinkle
of salt and pepper into a blender and turn it on. Once a creamy emulsion
forms, turn off the blender and stir in the shallots. (Or just blend the shallots
with the other ingredients.) Proceed with the recipe.
MORE USES FOR WARM VINAIGRETTE
It may not be as versatile as regular vinaigrette, but the warm version can be
used in all sorts of dishes. As a salad dressing, its residual heat will gently
wilt greens, and takes a bit of the raw edge off other vegetables. I love
tossing it with bean or grain salads, and you can even consider it among the
simplest possible sauces for pasta, rice, cooked vegetables, meat, or fish.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Bruschetta
Garlic Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Steakhouse Salad
The “wedge” salad is a steakhouse classic made with iceberg
lettuce, tomatoes, crisp bacon, and blue cheese dressing. This
Italian-style version uses romaine instead of iceberg, cherry
tomatoes, sliced radicchio, Gorgonzola dressing, and crisp salami.
It’s more flavorful than the original and can be prepared in little
more time than it takes to crisp the salami.

Ingredients
1 tablespoon olive oil
4 ounces salami
1 large head romaine lettuce
1 small head radicchio
1 lemon
½ cup sour cream
½ cup yogurt
Salt and pepper
4 ounces Gorgonzola cheese (1 cup crumbled)
1 pint cherry tomatoes

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Chop the salami.
2. When the oil is hot, add the salami to the skillet and cook, stirring
occasionally until crisp, 5 to 10 minutes.
Carefully trim the lettuce, leaving the leaves attached at the stem end.
Cut the head lengthwise into quarters.
Trim and thinly slice the radicchio.
Halve the lemon; refrigerate 1 half for another use.
Put ½ cup sour cream, ½ cup yogurt, the juice of ½ lemon, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper in a small bowl. Crumble 1 cup
Gorgonzola, add it to the bowl, and stir to combine. Taste and adjust
the seasoning.
Halve the cherry tomatoes.
3. Put each romaine quarter cut side up on a plate and top with the
radicchio, cherry tomatoes, and Gorgonzola dressing. Sprinkle the
salami over the top and serve.
VARIATIONS
Spanish Steakhouse Salad
Use 4 ounces chopped smoked Spanish chorizo instead of the salami. Use
any blue cheese (use Cabrales if you want to be particularly Spanish about
it) and stir a little smoked paprika into the dressing.
Bacon Steakhouse Salad

Substitute bacon for the salami and lower the heat to medium in Step 1. It
will take 10 to 15 minutes to cook. Use a good American blue cheese
instead of the Gorgonzola.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Don’t bother cutting the cherry tomatoes in half.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Warm Buttery Bread
Garlic Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Grated Beet and Carrot Salad with
Toasted Cashews
Beets take a long time to cook, but that doesn’t mean they need to
be excluded from your fast repertoire: Just grate them and serve
them raw; they’re so earthy and delicious you may never cook
them again. With carrots and scallions, the colors in this dish are
stunning.

Ingredients
1 cup cashews
2 large or 3 small beets (1 pound)
5 medium carrots (1 pound)
Salt
3 scallions
2 limes
2 tablespoons sesame oil

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 cup cashews in a medium skillet over medium heat. Cook,
shaking the skillet occasionally and adjusting the heat so they don’t
burn, until the cashews are lightly browned and fragrant, 3 to 5
minutes.
Trim and peel the beets and carrots. If you’re using a food processor
for grating, cut the beets into chunks that will fit through the feed
tube.
2. When the cashews are toasted, turn off the heat. Shred the beets and
carrots in a food processor with a grating disk or by hand with a box
grater. Put them in a large bowl and sprinkle with salt.
Trim and slice the scallions.
Halve the limes.
3. Add the scallions and cashews to the bowl. Squeeze in the lime juice
and add 2 tablespoons sesame oil. Toss, taste and adjust the seasoning,
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Grated Beet and Carrot Salad with Olives, Mint, and Lemon
Use 1 cup chopped pitted olives instead of cashews (no need to cook them).
Replace the scallions with ¼ cup chopped fresh mint, the limes with 1
lemon, and the sesame oil with olive oil.
Grated Beet and Cabbage Salad with Rye Croutons, Yogurt, and Dill
Substitute 1 cup rye bread cubes for the cashews; sauté them in 1
tablespoon butter until golden and crisp. Substitute 1 pound red cabbage for

the carrots, ¼ cup chopped fresh dill for the scallions, 1 lemon for the
limes, and ½ cup Greek yogurt or sour cream for the sesame oil.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
To intensify the flavor of the beets and carrots and soften them up a bit, toss
the grated vegetables with the lime juice and sesame oil and let sit for at
least 15 minutes.
RAW ROOT VEGETABLES
We usually think of root vegetables—squash, parsnips, beets, celery root,
and so on—as wintry foods meant for roasting, braising, or other long-
cooking methods. They are wonderful for that, indeed, but you can also eat
almost all of them raw. Eating roots raw gives you a satisfying crunch and a
sense of the freshness of spring, even if it’s still the dead of winter outside.
Since root vegetables are sturdy, it’s best to grate them, as done here. You
can also shave or julienne them, which takes longer.
If the grated vegetable still seems too crispy for comfort, let it marinate
for a half an hour or longer in a vinaigrette (or, better yet, a warm
vinaigrette; see Endive and Radicchio with Bacon Vinaigrette). It will
“cook” them a bit similar to the way a ceviche “cooks” raw seafood. Note
that not all roots should be eaten raw. Stick to low-starch choices like the
ones mentioned and avoid things like potato and taro root.
SIDES
Warm Flour Tortillas
White Rice
Scallion Pancakes

RECIPE-FREE

Salads
1
Start cooking (or don’t).
If you’re making a salad in which something needs to be cooked or
heated—think roasted vegetables or cooked bacon—start there. Heat
a pan or turn on the oven, broiler, or grill. Get those ingredients
cooking and turn your attention to the dressing.
2
Choose your oil.
Ninety percent of the time it will be olive oil. For dressings with soy
sauce I’ll sometimes use a combination of sesame oil and a vegetable
oil. Pour about ⅓ cup into a large, wide bowl big enough to hold the
salad—and ideally with a little room to spare for tossing.
3
Choose your acid.
Add about 2 tablespoons vinegar or lemon or lime juice to the bowl.
For any salads inspired by Asian cuisines, rice vinegar is a good
option too.

4
Choose your seasonings.
Some ideas beyond salt and pepper: chopped fresh herbs; dried herbs
or spices; minced garlic, ginger, or chiles; chopped olives; honey; soy
sauce; citrus zest; chopped nuts; or crumbled cooked bacon.

5
Make it creamy (if you like).
A tablespoon or 2 of ingredients like mayonnaise, yogurt, crème
fraîche, mustard, ketchup, hoisin, miso, peanut butter, hummus, pesto,
or Parmesan to add creaminess and thicken the dressing a bit.
6
Whisk, but don’t go crazy.
Whisk until well combined (if you want a super-emulsion, use a
blender). Taste and adjust the seasoning; you’ll have a final chance to
make adjustments once you add the rest of the ingredients.

7
Chop and drop.
Prep and pile the salad ingredients in the bowl as you go. The ones
that you add first sit in the dressing the longest, so start with harder
vegetables like carrots and onions. Save things like tomatoes and
especially tender salad greens for the end.

8
Toss, taste, and serve.
Gently toss everything together using tongs, 2 spoons, or a clean pair
of hands: Scoop under the greens along the inside of the bowl, then
up through the center; repeat until everything is coated evenly. Taste
again. Add more salt or pepper, or any of the individual components
of the dressing.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Puffed Rice Salad with Dates and
Almonds
Puffed rice makes for a quick, unusual, and wonderfully crunchy
salad. Here it’s softened ever so slightly by chopped dates
marinated in orange juice, olive oil, ginger, and herbs. I like puffed
basmati rice, which you can find at some supermarkets and most
Indian markets, but you can also use regular puffed rice cereal if
that’s all you can find.

Ingredients
2 cups dried dates
1 bunch fresh mint
1 bunch fresh cilantro
½ inch fresh ginger
1 orange
½ cup almonds
¼ cup olive oil
Salt and pepper
6 cups puffed basmati rice or puffed rice cereal

Prep | Cook
Pit 2 cups dried dates if necessary and chop them; put in a large bowl.
Chop ½ cup each of mint leaves and cilantro and add them to the bowl.
Peel and mince ½ inch fresh ginger; add it to the bowl.
Zest the orange right into the bowl, then cut it in half.
1. Add ½ cup almonds to the bowl. Squeeze in the orange juice, add ¼
cup olive oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and toss; let sit for about
10 minutes.
2. Add 6 cups puffed rice and toss. Taste and adjust the seasoning and
serve.
VARIATIONS
Puffed Rice Salad with Dried Tomatoes and Olives
Use dried tomatoes instead of the dates, basil and parsley instead of the
mint and cilantro, 1 garlic clove in place of the ginger, and ½ cup chopped
pitted olives instead of the almonds.
Red Beans and Puffed Rice
Skip the almonds. Substitute 2 cups cooked or drained canned red beans for
the dates, 1 cup chopped parsley for the mint and cilantro, 1 small red
onion, chopped, for the ginger, and a lime for the orange.
Puffed Wheat Salad with Dried Apricots and Pistachios
Use dried apricots instead of the dates and pistachios instead of almonds.
Substitute puffed wheat cereal for the rice.

NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Don’t wait for the dates to marinate; just add the puffed rice right away and
serve.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
To soften up the dates and almonds, marinate for another 10 to 15 minutes
in the dressing before adding the puffed rice.
SIDES
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Green Salad
Cucumber Raita

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

White Bean and Cucumber Salad
with Yogurt and Dill
Dressing white beans in a light yogurt sauce enhances their natural
creaminess and adds a refreshing tang. Lemon and dill brighten
things even further, while cucumbers and red onion provide the
necessary crunch.

Ingredients
¾ cup Greek yogurt
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 lemon
1 bunch fresh dill
Salt and pepper
4 cups cooked or canned white beans (two 15-ounce cans)
3 medium cucumbers
1 small red onion

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¾ cup yogurt and 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large bowl and whisk
to combine.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
Strip ¼ cup dill leaves from the stems and chop; add them to the bowl.
2. Add a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the yogurt sauce and whisk until
smooth, adding a splash of water if necessary to make it the
consistency of a thick dressing.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them; add the beans to
the bowl.
Trim and peel the cucumbers; cut them in half lengthwise and scoop
out the seeds with a spoon. Chop them and add them to the bowl.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the red onion; add it to the bowl.
3. Toss the beans and vegetables with the dressing until coated. Taste and
adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Black Bean and Cabbage Salad with Sour Cream and Cilantro
Use ½ cup sour cream instead of ½ cup of the yogurt, 2 limes instead of the
lemon, cilantro in place of dill, black beans instead of white, and 4 cups
shredded red or green cabbage in place of the cucumbers.
Chickpea and Cucumber Salad with Tahini and Parsley
Replace ¼ cup of the yogurt with ¼ cup tahini, the dill with parsley, and the
white beans with chickpeas. If you like, add 1 teaspoon cumin to the
dressing.

NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
VERSATILE DILL
Dill is an underrated herb; its uniquely grassy flavor lends itself to all sorts
of uses, from brightening rich stews to freshening up sauces and giving run-
of-the-mill salad greens an unexpected kick. As an added bonus, dill is less
fragile than cilantro and basil, which means it keeps longer in the fridge.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Green Salad
Fennel Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chickpea and Carrot Salad with
Warm Cumin Oil
Slowly infusing olive oil with seasonings is a wonderful way to
make a complex dressing without paying much attention to it.
Whole cumin seeds, lemon zest, and garlic flavor the olive oil,
which graces chickpeas and sliced carrots. Cumin seeds add
crunch, but if you like things smooth, just pour the oil through a
strainer into the bowl.

Ingredients
½ cup olive oil
1 garlic clove
1 lemon
2 tablespoons cumin seeds
5 to 7 medium carrots (1 pound)
4 cups cooked or canned chickpeas (two 15-ounce cans)
1 bunch fresh mint
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put ½ cup olive oil in a small saucepan over low heat.
Smash and peel 1 garlic clove; add it to the oil.
Zest the lemon directly into the oil. Refrigerate the fruit for another
use.
2. Stir 2 tablespoons cumin seeds into the oil. Let the oil warm up slowly,
undisturbed, until it starts to bubble steadily, about 10 minutes.
Trim and peel the carrots; slice them into thin coins or half-moons. Put
them in a large bowl.
If you’re using canned chickpeas, rinse and drain them; add the beans
to the bowl.
Chop ½ cup mint leaves and add to the bowl.
3. When the olive oil is warm and slightly bubbly, discard the garlic
clove and pour the oil over the chickpeas and carrots; stir to coat well.
4. Sprinkle the mixture with salt and pepper and toss. Taste and adjust the
seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Chickpea and Roasted Red Pepper Salad with Warm Paprika Dressing
Substitute 1 tablespoon smoked paprika for the cumin seeds. Instead of
carrots, use 12 ounces sliced roasted red peppers. Use parsley instead of
mint.
Edamame and Cucumber Salad with Warm Ginger Dressing

Use edamame instead of chickpeas. (Defrost if frozen.) Substitute half
sesame oil/half vegetable oil for the olive oil, lime zest for lemon, 1
tablespoon minced fresh ginger for the cumin seeds, 2 cucumbers for the
carrots, and scallions for the mint. Garnish with sesame seeds if you like.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
EVEN FASTER
Don’t warm the oil. Instead, just whisk together the oil, lemon zest, garlic
(mince it), and cumin seeds, and toss the cold dressing with the chickpeas
and carrots.
SIDES
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Cucumber Salad
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower
Couscous

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Crab and Celery Root Rémoulade
Easier and better than classic celery root rémoulade. In fact, I like
this better than classic crab cakes too. And the variations open the
door to all sorts of ingredient combinations.

Ingredients
1 cup mayonnaise
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
1 garlic clove
2 tablespoons capers
2 anchovy fillets
1 bunch fresh parsley
¼ teaspoon cayenne
Salt and pepper
1 pound cooked lump crabmeat
1 large or 2 medium celery roots (1½ pounds)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 cup mayonnaise and 1 tablespoon Dijon mustard in a large bowl.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove; add to the bowl.
Chop 2 tablespoons capers and 2 anchovy fillets; add them to the bowl.
Chop ¼ cup parsley and add it to the bowl.
2. Add ¼ teaspoon cayenne and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl
and stir.
Pick through the crabmeat, discarding pieces of shell or cartilage. Add
the meat to the bowl.
Trim and peel the celery root. If you’re using a food processor for
grating, cut them into chunks that will fit through the feed tube.
Shred the celery root in a food processor with a grating disk or by hand
with a box grater.
3. Add the celery root to the bowl and toss to combine. Taste and adjust
the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Celery Root Rémoulade with Hard-Boiled Eggs
Trade 8 hard-boiled eggs, chopped, for the crabmeat.
Shrimp and Celery Root Rémoulade
Use 1 pound chopped cooked shrimp in place of the crabmeat.
Tuna and Celery Root Rémoulade
Substitute 12 ounces canned tuna, drained, for the crabmeat.

Chicken and Celery Root Rémoulade
Instead of crabmeat, use 1 pound shredded or chopped cooked chicken.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you really want to practice your knife skills, after trimming and peeling
the celery root, cut it into matchsticks ¼ inch thick by 1½ inches long.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Chopped Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Poached Shrimp Salad with Herby
Tartar Sauce
Poaching shrimp is effortless and frees you up to do so many
things. Here the shrimp steep in just-boiled water off the heat,
which gives time to put together a tartar sauce. This technique also
works for scallops and small chunks of fish.

Ingredients
Salt
1 medium head Boston lettuce
½ cup mayonnaise
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
1½ pounds medium peeled shrimp
1 bunch fresh dill
3 sprigs fresh tarragon
2 sweet pickles or ¼ cup capers
1 lemon
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil and salt it.
Trim the lettuce and tear off the leaves whole.
2. Put the lettuce leaves overlapping on a platter.
3. Put ½ cup mayonnaise and 2 teaspoons Dijon mustard in a medium
bowl.
4. When the water comes to a boil, add the shrimp, cover, and turn off the
heat. Let it sit for 10 minutes.
Strip ¼ cup dill leaves from the stems and chop; add them to the bowl.
Strip the leaves from 3 sprigs tarragon, chop, and add them to the
bowl.
Chop 2 sweet pickles or ¼ cup capers; add to the bowl.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice of 1 half into the bowl. Refrigerate
the remaining half for another use.
5. Add a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl, stir to combine, taste,
and adjust the seasoning.
6. When the shrimp are cooked through, drain them and run them under
cold water to cool.
7. Add the shrimp to the bowl with the tartar sauce and toss to coat.
Spoon the shrimp over the lettuce leaves and serve.
VARIATIONS
Poached Shrimp Salad with Curried Tartar Sauce

Skip the tarragon. Substitute 2 teaspoons curry powder for the mustard,
cilantro for the dill, ¼ cup chopped cucumber for the pickles, and lime for
the lemon.
Poached Scallop Salad with Herby Tartar Sauce
Use large sea scallops, cut into quarters, or smaller bay scallops instead of
the shrimp.
Poached Salmon Salad with Herby Tartar Sauce
Use salmon fillet instead of the shrimp; cut it into 1-inch chunks.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
THE CITRUS CYCLE
If you were to open my refrigerator at any given time you’d be likely to find
halves of lemons and limes scattered all over the place and the occasional
fruit with some or all of its zest scraped off. That’s because you don’t
always use entire lemons or limes at once.
Sometimes you’ll just want the zest, in which case you can refrigerate
the rest of the fruit easily for another week without having to wrap it up. To
store citrus halves, put the whole piece in a sealed plastic bag, wrap the cut
side in aluminum foil or plastic wrap, or lay a paper towel in the fridge and
put the fruit cut side down on the towel.
To get the most out of citrus I make it a point to use the zest first, since
once you cut the fruit and squeeze out the juice it’s a lot harder to get the
zest.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread

Bruschetta
Celery Salad
Avocado with Lemon and Salt

MASTER RECIPE

Vinaigrette and Croutons
Since vinaigrette is the most useful sauce in
existence, there are versions all over this book. Most
are whisked together in a salad bowl before the main
ingredients are added, others involve pouring oil and
vinegar over vegetables before serving, and a few are
even concocted right in a hot skillet to make a warm
dressing that gently wilts greens.
But if I’m making a bigger batch of vinaigrette
that I want to use over a few days, I use the blender.
It obviously adds a big piece of equipment to clean,
but it makes the creamiest vinaigrette. The recipe
here makes a bit more than a cup, and there are
plenty of variations to follow.
Then there are croutons, the crisp hunks of bread
that make salads—and other things—so much better.
And bread crumbs, which are shockingly good on
salads and also used throughout the book.
Vinaigrette
1
Combine and Blend

Put 1 cup olive oil, 6 tablespoons wine vinegar (sherry, red wine, white
wine, or balsamic), 2 teaspoons Dijon mustard, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper in a blender. Turn the machine on and wait until a creamy
emulsion forms, about 30 seconds.
2
Adjust the Flavor Balance
Taste the vinaigrette and see what it needs. You may want to add more
vinegar, a teaspoon at a time, until the balance tastes right or a bit of
honey or sugar to balance out the sharpness of the mustard.
3
Add the Shallot
Add 1 large shallot, cut into chunks, and turn the blender on and off a
few times to mince it. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Use immediately
or store in the refrigerator for a few days; bring it back to room
temperature and whisk it before using.
VARIATIONS
15 Additions to Vinaigrette
1. Any dried herb or spice: The specific quantities will vary, but start
with as little as a pinch—⅛ teaspoon or so.
2. Minced fresh garlic: Start with a very small clove or a piece of a big
one. For a milder flavor, let a crushed clove sit in the vinaigrette for a
few minutes, then fish it out. Or wipe your salad bowl with a crushed
clove and discard.
3. Minced red onion, scallion, shallot, mild white onion, leek, etc.: Start
with a tablespoon or so.
4. Honey, maple syrup, or other sweeteners, within reason: no more than
a tablespoon or so.

5. Freshly grated Parmesan or crumbled blue cheese, feta, or goat cheese:
from a tablespoon to ¼ cup.
6. Minced pickles, preferably cornichons: from a tablespoon to ¼ cup.
7. An egg or a couple of tablespoons fresh or sour cream or yogurt or
puréed soft tofu, any of which will add incredible creaminess to your
vinaigrette.
8. Prepared or freshly grated horseradish: at least 1 teaspoon.
9. Minced tomato, seeded and, preferably, peeled, or bits of reconstituted
dried tomato.
10. A tablespoon or two of any stock, juice, wine, beer, or booze.
11. A small handful of seeds, like sesame, poppy, sunflower, or minced
pumpkin seeds.
12. Canned chipotle: 1 pepper is plenty, with just a tiny bit of its adobo.
13. 1 small slice of day-old bread (crust removed).
14. 1 small peach, pear, or apple, peeled, pitted or cored, and cut into
chunks.
15. ¼ cup salsa or chutney.

Croutons
1
Heat the Oil and Cut the Bread
Put about ¼ cup olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. You want
the skillet to be big enough to accommodate the bread in one layer. Cut
4 large or 12 small slices of bread into ½- to 1-inch cubes.
2
Brown the Bread
Add the bread to the skillet and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Toss the
bread to coat with the oil and cook, tossing occasionally and adding
more oil if the pan dries out (it likely will), until the bread is lightly
browned all over. Use immediately or cool and store in a tin or wax
paper for a few days.
VARIATIONS
Garlic Croutons
Add a smashed garlic clove to the skillet along with the oil.
Herbed Croutons
As the bread cubes brown, stir in about ¼ cup minced fresh parsley, dill, or
basil or 1 or 2 tablespoons minced fresh rosemary, sage, thyme, or oregano.
Spiced Croutons
Add about 1 teaspoon chili powder or curry powder (see Spice Blends) or
other spice blends that you like.
Bread Crumbs
Skip the oil and toasting. Cut or tear the bread into 2-inch pieces and put
them in a food processor. Pulse a few times to break up the bread, then

continue pulsing until they reach the consistency you want: coarse (pea-
sized), fine (like coarse grain), or somewhere in between. Use right away or
store in an airtight container in the pantry for up to 1 month or in the freezer
for up to 3 months.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cucumber and Salmon Salad with
Caper and Mustard Dressing
Poached salmon with mustard sauce is a classic. Add chopped
cucumbers, capers, and fresh dill—all good friends of salmon—and
it becomes a fantastic salad.

Ingredients
1 pound salmon fillet
Salt
1 lemon
1 bunch fresh dill
½ cup mayonnaise
2 tablespoons Dijon mustard
¼ cup capers
Pepper
4 medium cucumbers
1 small red onion

Prep | Cook
1. Put the salmon in a skillet big enough to hold it (cut it into pieces if
you need to) and cover with cold water. Add a pinch of salt, put over
high heat, and cover.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into a large bowl.
Strip ¼ cup dill leaves from the stems and chop; add to the bowl.
Add ½ cup mayonnaise, 2 tablespoons Dijon mustard, ¼ cup capers,
and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl. Stir to combine, taste,
and adjust the seasoning.
2. When the water comes to a boil, turn off the heat and let the salmon
sit, covered, for 3 or 4 minutes for rare, 6 or 7 minutes for medium.
Trim and peel the cucumbers; cut them in half lengthwise and scoop
out the seeds with a spoon.
Thinly slice the cucumbers; add them to the bowl.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the onion; add it to the bowl.
3. When the salmon is cooked to your liking, remove it from the water,
pull off and discard the skin, and cut the fish into chunks or break it
into large flakes.
4. Add the salmon to the bowl and toss gently. Taste and adjust the
seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Cucumber and Salmon Salad with Ginger-Peanut Dressing
Substitute a lime for the lemon; mint for the dill; ¼ cup sesame oil, ¼ cup
vegetable oil, and 2 tablespoons soy sauce for the mayonnaise; peanut

butter for the mustard; and 1 teaspoon minced fresh ginger for the capers.
Fish and White Bean Salad with Tomato Vinaigrette
An even heartier dish. Use a thick white fish fillet instead of the salmon and
cook through; unlike salmon, you don’t want to leave it rare in the middle.
Swap 1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary for the dill, ⅓ cup olive oil for
the mayonnaise, 1 ripe tomato, finely chopped, for the mustard, and ¼ cup
chopped pitted olives for the capers. Use 4 cups cooked or canned white
beans instead of the cucumbers.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
EVEN FASTER
If you can find super-fresh wild salmon and like to eat it raw, skip the
poaching, remove the skin, cut the salmon into cubes, and toss it with the
cucumbers, capers, and dressing.
If you have a mandoline, use it to the slice the cucumbers and onion.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Tomatoes with Fried Bread Crumbs

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fresh Tuna, Avocado, and Green
Bean Salad
Searing tuna delivers a browned crust and a rare interior. The soft
flesh of the tuna and the creaminess of avocado play nicely against
crisp-tender green beans and crunchy red onions. If you prefer your
tuna more well done, cook it for a few extra minutes on each side,
lowering the heat if necessary to prevent burning.

Ingredients
Salt
1 pound green beans
1 lime
⅓ cup olive oil, plus more as needed
1 tablespoon soy sauce
1 small red onion
Ice cubes
1 pound fresh tuna
1 teaspoon vegetable oil
2 avocados

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a medium pot of water to a boil and salt it.
Trim the green beans; cut them into 2-inch pieces.
Halve the lime; squeeze the juice into a large bowl.
2. Add ⅓ cup olive oil and 1 tablespoon soy sauce to the bowl and whisk.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the onion; add it to the bowl.
3. When the water comes to a boil, add the green beans and cook until
they’re just tender, 2 or 3 minutes. Put a large skillet over high heat.
Prepare a bowl of ice water for the green beans.
4. When the green beans are just tender, drain and transfer them to the ice
bath.
5. When the skillet is very hot, rub the tuna all over with 1 teaspoon
vegetable oil, sprinkle with salt, and put it in the skillet. Cook, turning
once, until it’s browned on both sides but still raw in the center, 3 or 4
minutes per side.
6. Pit the avocados, scoop out the flesh, and cut into small chunks; add
them to the bowl with the dressing.
7. Drain the green beans well, and add them to the bowl.
8. Cut the tuna into 1-inch chunks and add it to the bowl. Toss gently,
adding more olive oil if the salad looks too dry. Taste and adjust the
seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Fresh Tuna Salad, Niçoise Style

Substitute 2 tablespoons red wine vinegar for the lime juice, 1 teaspoon
Dijon mustard for the soy sauce, and 2 cups cherry tomatoes for the
avocados. Add ½ cup pitted olives (preferably Niçoise) to the bowl before
tossing.
Tofu, Avocado, and Green Bean Salad
Replace the olive oil with half sesame oil and half vegetable oil. Use 1 brick
firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces) instead of the tuna. Cut the tofu into cubes and
gently toss it with the rest of the salad (no need to cook it).
Fresh Tuna, Mango, and Green Bean Salad with Thai Vinaigrette
Use fish sauce instead of soy sauce and 2 cups chopped fresh mango in
place of the avocados.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
If you can find perfectly fresh tuna and like to eat it completely raw, cut the
uncooked tuna into cubes and toss it into the salad.
SIDES
White Rice
Warm Flour Tortillas
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy
Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Asparagus and Kale Caesar Salad
Caesar salad is ubiquitous because everybody loves it—that garlic
bite, the snap of fresh romaine, and the unctuous dressing. But even
old favorites can use makeovers; this exciting riff uses the star
ingredients of Caesar dressing with asparagus. Swap the traditional
romaine for sturdy kale and an old friend becomes a new flame.

Ingredients
1 large bunch asparagus (1 pound)
¾ cup olive oil
Salt and pepper
4 thick slices any rustic bread (a little stale is fine)
1 bunch kale, preferably lacinato (1 pound)
1 garlic clove
1 lemon
4 anchovy fillets or 2 teaspoons anchovy paste
1 egg
Worcestershire sauce
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Trim the asparagus.
2. Put the asparagus on a rimmed baking sheet. Drizzle with 2
tablespoons olive oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and toss. Put them
on 1 side of the sheet and broil, turning as necessary, until tender and
slightly charred, 5 to 10 minutes.
Cut 4 thick slices bread into cubes. Toss with 2 tablespoons olive oil
and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
3. When the asparagus has cooked for a few minutes, add the bread to the
pan and broil, shaking the pan once or twice so the bread browns all
over, 2 to 5 minutes.
Trim and slice the kale into thin ribbons.
4. Check on the asparagus and bread. If the bread is done before the
asparagus (or vice versa), transfer it to a plate and return the pan to the
broiler until everything is done.
Peel and halve 1 garlic clove. Rub the cut sides all over the inside of a
large bowl, then mince it and add it to the bowl.
Halve the lemon. Chop 4 anchovy fillets or measure 2 teaspoons
anchovy paste and add to the bowl.
5. Lightly mash together the anchovies and garlic in the bottom of the
bowl with a fork. Separate the egg; add the yolk to the bowl and
discard the white or refrigerate it for another use. Squeeze in the lemon
juice; add a dash of Worcestershire and plenty of pepper.

6. Whisk, streaming in ½ cup olive oil as you go, until it forms a creamy
dressing. Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese, add, and whisk again. Taste
and adjust the seasoning.
7. Cut the asparagus into 2-inch pieces and add to the bowl along with
the kale and croutons. Toss to coat with the dressing and serve.
VARIATIONS
Classic Caesar Salad
Use 2 heads romaine lettuce, chopped and raw, instead of the asparagus and
kale.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
If you find pencil-thin asparagus—easy enough in the spring—you can eat
them raw. Just cut them into 2-inch pieces and proceed directly to toasting
the croutons and making the dressing.
SNAPPING ASPARAGUS
Before cooking asparagus you’ll want to trim off the thick, tough bottoms.
To do this, take 1 stalk and snap off the bottom with your fingers; this will
naturally happen in the right place. Now that you know how much of the
bottom to take off, trim the remaining stalks with a knife. If the asparagus
are especially thick, you can also peel the lower part of the stalks with a
vegetable peeler.
SIDES
Fennel Salad
Tomato Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Seared Scallops with Grilled or
Broiled Romaine
Seared scallops are pretty perfect on their own, but the pan sauce
built from their juices makes a wonderful dressing for grilled or
broiled romaine. The sweetness of the scallops and acidity in the
sauce are a great match for the smoky lettuce. If you can’t find
hearts of romaine, you can make them yourself. Buy big heads of
romaine lettuce and remove the outer leaves until you get to the
tidy, smaller leaves in the center. Reserve the outer leaves for
another salad.

Ingredients
4 hearts romaine lettuce
6 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
1 garlic clove
1 lemon
2 tablespoons butter
1 pound sea scallops
1 small red bell pepper
½ cup white wine

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Halve the hearts of romaine lengthwise, leaving them attached at the
stem end.
2. Drizzle the romaine with 4 tablespoons olive oil and sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Grill or broil (cut side toward the heat), until the cut side is
lightly charred, 2 to 5 minutes.
3. When the romaine is lightly charred, put 2 pieces cut sides up on 4
plates.
4. Put a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove.
Halve the lemon.
5. Add 2 tablespoons butter, 2 tablespoons oil, and the garlic to the
skillet; 30 seconds later, add the scallops and sprinkle with salt and
pepper.
6. Cook, turning once, until the scallops are nicely browned on both
sides, about 2 minutes per side; transfer to a plate.
Core, seed, and chop the bell pepper.
7. Squeeze the lemon juice into the skillet; add ½ cup white wine and the
bell pepper. Cook until the liquid reduces slightly, a minute or 2.
8. Add the scallops (and any juices) back to the skillet and stir to coat
with the sauce. Spoon the scallops and the sauce over the romaine and
serve immediately.

VARIATIONS
Seared Scallops with Grilled or Broiled Bok Choy and Ginger Dressing
Use 4 or more heads baby bok choy (depending on their size) instead of the
romaine. Substitute 1 fresh hot green chile for the bell pepper, 2 limes for
the lemon, 1 inch fresh ginger, minced, for the garlic, and sake or a bit of
mirin for the white wine.
Seared Scallops with Arugula and Orange Dressing
Replace the romaine with 1 large bunch (12 ounces) arugula; divide it (raw)
among 4 plates and drizzle with a few tablespoons olive oil. Use 1 large
shallot, minced, instead of the red bell pepper and an orange in place of the
lemon.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Leave the lettuce raw (less flavor, but less work).
GRILLING GREENS
In recent years, cooks have discovered that a quick blast of heat adds some
color and smoky flavor to the outside of lettuce and other greens without
cooking the inside. That gives us the best of both worlds: the flavor of the
fire mixed with the crisp freshness of the greens.
Just make sure to choose greens that can stand up to the heat. Romaine,
iceberg, cabbage, and bok choy all do wonderfully; very tender greens like
arugula, Boston lettuce, and Bibb lettuce will wilt too quickly. For greens
that come in bunches it can be nice to keep them all together, tied with
string, so that they’re easy to turn, and the outside leaves char while the
inside leaves are protected.

SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Bruschetta
Tomato Salad
Quinoa

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Warm Kale Salad with Pine Nuts and
Balsamic Currants
I love the taste and the sturdy texture of kale—it holds up to almost
any treatment—and it’s so good for you I feel virtuous every time I
eat it. This salad is every bit as good raw as it is cooked, so use the
Even Faster variation at the end of the recipe some night when you
just can’t be bothered to turn on the stove.

Ingredients
1 large or 2 medium bunches kale, preferably lacinato (1½ pounds)
2 tablespoons olive oil
¼ cup balsamic vinegar
¼ cup dried currants or raisins
2 garlic cloves
¼ cup pine nuts
Salt and pepper
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup shaved)

Prep | Cook
Trim and chop the kale.
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over high heat.
Put ¼ cup balsamic vinegar and ¼ cup currants or raisins in a large
bowl; toss to coat.
2. When the oil is hot, add the kale and cook, stirring occasionally until it
begins to wilt, 2 or 3 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
3. When the kale is mostly wilted, add the garlic, ¼ cup pine nuts, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the liquid
evaporates and the kale begins to brown, another 2 or 3 minutes.
Shave ½ cup Parmesan with a vegetable peeler.
4. When the kale is done, add it to the bowl with the currants. Add the
Parmesan and toss. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve hot or
warm.
VARIATIONS
Warm Kale with Cashews, Scallions, and Soy Currants or Raisins
Replace the olive oil with vegetable, the balsamic with soy sauce, the pine
nuts with ½ cup cashews, and the Parmesan with ½ cup chopped scallions.
Since you’re using soy sauce, go easy on the salt.
Warm Collards with Peaches and Ham
Use collards greens, sliced into wide ribbons, instead of the kale. They will
take an additional 5 minutes to cook. Instead of currants and balsamic, soak
about 1 cup chopped fresh peaches in ¼ cup cider vinegar. Use ½ cup

chopped pecans instead of pine nuts and a little chopped cooked ham in
place of the Parmesan.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Raw Kale Salad with Pine Nuts and Balsamic Currants
Chop the kale into smaller pieces than you might if you were cooking it.
Instead of mincing the garlic, just take 1 peeled clove, rub it around the
inside of the bowl, and discard it or save for another use. Let the currants
soak in the balsamic until they plump up slightly, a few minutes, then add
the raw kale along with the rest of the ingredients. Toss and serve.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Toast the pine nuts in a skillet over medium heat for 3 to 5 minutes.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Creamy Polenta
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Warm Pickled Cauliflower Salad with
Roasted Red Peppers
Boiling cauliflower in a vinegar-based brine infuses a ton of pickly
flavor into the vegetable as it cooks. It’ll be just tender, but still
with plenty of crunch. This is a wonderful excuse to serve pickled
vegetables warm, which is a rare and underrated treat. To make the
salad even more substantial, serve it with a side of thinly sliced
prosciutto.

Ingredients
½ cup red wine vinegar
1 bay leaf
2 teaspoons salt
1 teaspoon dried oregano
1 large or 2 small heads cauliflower (about 2 pounds)
4 celery stalks
8 roasted red peppers
⅔ cup green olives
¼ cup olive oil
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. In a large pot, combine ½ cup red wine vinegar, 4 cups water, 1 bay
leaf, 2 teaspoons salt, and 1 teaspoon dried oregano; turn the heat to
high.
Break or chop the cauliflower into florets.
2. When the liquid comes to a boil, add the cauliflower, cover the pot,
and cook until the cauliflower is just tender, 8 to 10 minutes.
Trim and chop the celery; put in a large bowl.
Slice 8 roasted red peppers; add them to the bowl.
Pit ⅔ cup green olives if necessary and chop them up a bit; add them
to the bowl.
3. When the cauliflower is just tender, drain it, reserving about ½ cup of
the brine.
4. Add the cauliflower to the bowl along with ¼ cup olive oil, a splash of
the brine, and a sprinkle of pepper. Toss, taste, and adjust the
seasoning, adding more brine if it needs it; serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Warm Pickled Cauliflower Salad with Prosciutto
If you don’t like your prosciutto on the side, add it to the dish: Use 4 ounces
chopped prosciutto instead of, or in addition to, the celery.
Warm Pickled Broccoli Salad
Balsamic vinegar makes the brine darker and sweeter. Substitute balsamic
vinegar for half of the red wine vinegar, broccoli for the cauliflower, and ¼
cup pine nuts and ¼ cup raisins for the celery. Use black olives (oil-cured

are my favorite here) instead of green and add up to a cup of grated
Parmesan before tossing. Broccoli cooks faster than cauliflower, so start
checking on it after 5 minutes.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Roasted Red (or Other Large) Peppers
EVEN FASTER
Using Jarred Roasted Peppers
While it’s hard to beat the smoky flavor of homemade roasted red peppers,
jarred peppers are undeniably convenient. Most of those available at the
supermarket are packed in an acidic brine, which detracts from the charred
flavor of the peppers themselves. Rinse these off in a bowl of water to
remove the brine, then carefully pat them dry with paper towels (they’re
delicate); leaving them wet will water down whatever you add them to,
especially salads. If you can find peppers packed in olive oil, use them right
out of the jar. And be sure to put that pepper-flavored oil to use in dressings
and sauces.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Bruschetta
Quinoa
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Green Bean Salad with Caramelized
Onions and Toasted Almonds
Caramelized onions are one of those miracle preparations that seem
to go with everything and improve whatever they’re with. But they
take about an hour to cook, and when I don’t have that time I use
this shortcut. For the more traditional—and time-consuming—way
to caramelize onions, see If You Have More Time. Note that this
recipe calls for thin green beans—also called haricots verts. If you
only have access to thick green beans, blanch them in boiling water
for a few minutes before adding to the salad.

Ingredients
3 medium onions
1 pound thin green beans
1 bunch spinach (1 pound)
1 lemon
½ cup slivered almonds
¼ cup olive oil, or more as needed
1 teaspoon sugar
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the onions.
1. Put the onions in a large skillet over medium heat. Cover and cook,
stirring infrequently until the onions are dry and almost sticking to the
pan, 15 to 20 minutes. If they look like they are burning at any point,
add a couple tablespoons water or oil.
Trim the green beans and cut into 2-inch pieces; put them in a large
bowl.
Trim the thick stems from the spinach and chop the leaves; add to the
bowl.
Cut the lemon in half.
2. Put ½ cup slivered almonds in a small skillet over medium heat. Cook,
shaking the skillet occasionally and adjusting the heat so they don’t
burn, until the almonds are lightly browned and fragrant, 3 to 5
minutes. Add them to the bowl with the green beans and spinach.
3. When the onions are dry and almost sticking to the pan, stir in ¼ cup
olive oil, 1 teaspoon sugar, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper and
reduce the heat to medium-low.
4. Cook, stirring occasionally, for another 5 minutes or so. Squeeze in the
lemon juice, scrape any browned bits off the bottom of the skillet, and
turn off the heat.
5. Pour the onions and all the oil and juices over the green beans and
spinach and toss. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS

Snow Pea Salad with Soy-Caramelized Onions and Toasted Peanuts
Substitute snow peas for the green beans, a lime for the lemon, half sesame
oil/half vegetable oil for the olive oil, and peanuts for the almonds. Instead
of adding salt to the onions in Step 3, add 1 tablespoon soy sauce.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
After adding the olive oil, salt, and pepper (omit the sugar), cook the onions
for another 30 to 40 minutes over medium-low heat. When they are almost
jamlike, stir in the lemon juice and a little extra oil or warm water if needed
to create a dressing.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Quinoa
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Broiled Eggplant and Zucchini Salad
with Tahini Dressing
Broiled vegetables cook quickly and acquire a nice smoky char.
You can dress broiled eggplant and zucchini with just olive oil and
parsley if you like, but here a rich, tangy dressing of tahini, yogurt,
and lemon juice is especially nice. Sprinkle some crumbled feta on
top if you have it.

Ingredients
1 large or 2 medium eggplants (about 2 pounds)
2 medium zucchini (about 1 pound)
½ cup olive oil, or more as needed
Salt and pepper
1 garlic clove
1 lemon
¼ cup tahini
¼ cup Greek yogurt
¼ teaspoon cumin
1 small red onion
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Trim and cut the eggplant on the diagonal into 1-inch-thick slices.
Trim and slice the zucchini in half lengthwise.
2. Put the eggplant slices and zucchini halves (cut side up) on a rimmed
baking sheet, brush both sides with a little olive oil, brushing a bit
extra on the eggplant, and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3. Broil, turning the eggplant slices once and leaving the zucchini cut
side up, until they’re tender and nicely browned all over, 8 to 15
minutes.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove.
Cut a lemon in half; refrigerate 1 half for another use.
Stir ¼ cup tahini, ¼ cup Greek yogurt, ¼ teaspoon cumin, the garlic,
the juice of ½ lemon, 2 tablespoons olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper together in a large bowl.
Trim, peel, and halve the onion; chop 1 half and refrigerate the other
for another use.
4. When the eggplant and zucchini are tender and browned, transfer them
to a platter and spread with the dressing. Sprinkle with chopped onion.
Chop several sprigs parsley and sprinkle on top of the eggplant and
zucchini.
5. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS

Broiled Eggplant and Zucchini Salad with Mustard Dressing
Substitute 1 tablespoon red wine vinegar for the lemon juice, ¼ cup Dijon
for the tahini, and 1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon for the cumin.
Broiled Eggplant and Tomato Salad with Peanut-Soy Dressing
Instead of zucchini, use 3 large tomatoes; you can cut them into chunks and
broil them if you like, but I prefer them raw here. Use 1 whole lime instead
of lemon, ½ cup peanut butter in place of tahini, 2 tablespoons soy sauce
instead of yogurt, 1 minced fresh hot chile instead of cumin, and cilantro in
place of parsley. No need for any additional salt in the dressing.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Salting the eggplant before cooking helps draw out some moisture and
tenderize the flesh. Sprinkle the eggplant slices liberally with salt and let it
rest in a colander in the sink for up to an hour; then rinse and pat dry.
Proceed with the recipe, omitting any additional salt.
SIDES
Rice Pilaf
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Couscous

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cabbage with Crisp Tofu and Peanut-
Lime Dressing
This salad is a dream if you like a lot of crunch: There’s shredded
cabbage, thinly sliced red onion, peanuts, and crisp crumbled tofu.
Broiling the tofu away from the flame allows it to crisp quickly
without burning; tossed with some salt and red chile flakes, the
crumbles make an irresistible stir-in or garnish. Try them on other
salads, cooked vegetables, grains, or noodles and see the variations
for more ways to season them.

Ingredients
2 bricks firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces each)
⅓ cup plus 1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 teaspoon red chile flakes
Salt
1 lime
3 tablespoons peanut butter
Hot sauce (optional)
1 small head Savoy or green cabbage (1 pound)
1 small red onion
½ cup peanuts

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
2. Squeeze as much water as you can out of the tofu. Crumble the tofu
onto a rimmed baking sheet and toss with 1 tablespoon vegetable oil, 1
teaspoon red chile flakes, and a sprinkle of salt. Broil, checking and
stirring occasionally until the tofu crumbles are brown and crisp, 20 to
25 minutes.
Halve the lime.
3. In a large bowl, whisk together ⅓ cup vegetable oil, the juice of the
lime, 3 tablespoons peanut butter, 3 tablespoons hot water, some salt,
and a dash of hot sauce if you’re using it.
Trim, core, and quarter the cabbage. Cut each quarter crosswise into
thin ribbons; add to the bowl.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the red onion; add to the bowl.
Chop ½ cup peanuts; add them to the bowl.
4. When the tofu is crisp, add it to the bowl. Toss, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Shredded Cabbage with Crisp Curried Tofu and Coconut-Lime
Dressing
Use ¼ cup coconut milk instead of the peanut butter; no need to thin it with
the hot water. Swap curry powder for the red chile flakes.
Shredded Cabbage with Crisp Pork and Tahini-Lemon Dressing

Use 12 ounces ground pork in place of the tofu and olive oil instead of
vegetable. Broil the pork, stirring occasionally and breaking it up as you go,
until it’s crisp, 15 to 20 minutes. Drain off most of the fat when it’s done.
Omit the water from the dressing. Substitute a lemon for the lime, tahini for
the peanut butter, cumin for the red chile flakes, and 1 tablespoon sesame
seeds (no need to chop them, of course) for the peanuts.
7 Ways to Season Crumbled Tofu
Toss any of the following with the tofu instead of the red chile flakes:
1. 1 teaspoon chili powder or smoked paprika
2. 1 tablespoon minced garlic or fresh ginger (stir into the tofu a few
minutes before it’s done)
3. 2 teaspoons chopped fresh rosemary, sage, thyme, or oregano
4. ¼ cup chopped fresh cilantro or parsley
5. ½ cup grated Parmesan cheese
6. 1 tablespoon grated citrus zest
7. ¼ cup shredded unsweetened coconut or chopped nuts (stir into the
tofu a few minutes before it’s done)
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
For a thicker, creamier dressing, make it in the blender.
SIDES
White Rice
Quick Brown Rice
Scallion Pancakes

Sesame Noodles

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pressed Tofu and Cucumber Salad
with Hoisin Vinaigrette
Pressing a brick of tofu rids it of excess moisture and firms up the
texture; salting cucumbers also pulls out moisture but makes them
softer. Both techniques are nice hands-off ways to improve
ingredients while you work on something else.

Ingredients
2 bricks firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces each)
2 medium cucumbers
Salt
¼ cup vegetable oil
2 tablespoons hoisin
1 tablespoon rice vinegar
3 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Cut each brick of tofu in half through its equator and put the pieces on
4 layers of paper towel. Cover with 4 more paper towels and put
something heavy (like a baking sheet with a few cans of beans on it)
on top so the tofu bulges slightly at the sides but doesn’t crack.
Trim the cucumbers and peel if necessary; cut them in half lengthwise,
scoop out the seeds with a spoon, and chop.
Put the cucumbers in a colander, sprinkle lightly with salt, and toss.
Let them sit for about 10 minutes.
2. Whisk together ¼ cup vegetable oil, 2 tablespoons hoisin, and 1
tablespoon rice vinegar in a large bowl.
Chop the scallions.
3. After the cucumbers have been in the colander for about 10 minutes,
add them and the scallions to the bowl with the dressing.
4. Cut the tofu into cubes and add it to the bowl. Toss, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pressed Tofu and Tomato Salad with Soy Vinaigrette
Replace the cucumbers with 2 pints cherry tomatoes, halved, and the hoisin
with soy sauce. Since the soy sauce is salty, you might want to salt the
tomatoes a little less or rinse off the salt before adding them to the bowl.
Pressed Tofu and Celery Salad with Sesame-Chile Vinaigrette
Use 12 celery stalks, sliced or cut into matchsticks, instead of the
cucumbers. Substitute 2 tablespoons sesame oil for half of the vegetable oil

and 1 tablespoon sesame seeds plus 1 teaspoon red chile flakes for the
hoisin.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
If you skip pressing the tofu and salting the cucumbers (just cut them both
into chunks at the beginning), this salad comes together in fewer than 10
minutes.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Press the tofu in the refrigerator for a few hours or even overnight. It will
become firmer and develop a chewy, almost meaty texture.
SALTING VEGETABLES
Sprinkling raw vegetables with salt and letting them sit for a while
intensifies their flavor and tenderizes them a bit; you’re essentially making
the simplest possible pickle. Remember, one of the major advantages of this
process is that the vegetable takes care of itself while you cook—or do—
something else.
SIDES
White Rice
Quick Brown Rice
Sesame Noodles

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Curried Tofu Salad with Pecans and
Golden Raisins
Sometimes chicken is an irreplaceable ingredient in a dish; other
times it’s not. In curried “chicken” salad, for instance, all I want is
something with a firm texture and a mild flavor to soak up the
dressing, and extra-firm tofu fits the bill perfectly, without cooking.
The best parts of the classic remain in place: crunchy chopped nuts,
celery, onions, soft-sweet raisins, and the rich curry dressing.

Ingredients
1 small head romaine or red leaf lettuce
½ cup mayonnaise
½ cup Greek yogurt
1 tablespoon curry powder
Salt and pepper
1 brick extra-firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces)
2 large apples
3 celery stalks
1 small red onion
1 bunch fresh cilantro
½ cup pecans
½ cup golden raisins

Prep | Cook
Trim the lettuce and tear the leaves off whole.
1. Put the lettuce leaves, overlapping, on a platter.
2. Put ½ cup mayonnaise, ½ cup Greek yogurt, 1 tablespoon curry
powder, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper in a large bowl. Stir until
smooth and evenly colored.
3. Drain the tofu well and crumble it into the bowl.
Core and chop the apples; trim and chop the celery, including any
leaves. Add both to the bowl.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add to the bowl.
Chop ½ cup cilantro and add it to the bowl.
Chop ½ cup pecans; add to the bowl.
4. Add ½ cup golden raisins to the bowl. Stir to combine, taste, and
adjust the seasoning. Spoon the salad over the lettuce leaves and serve.
VARIATIONS
Chipotle Tofu Salad with Pepitas and Raisins
Substitute 1 tablespoon chopped chipotle in adobo for the curry powder, 1
small jícama, peeled and chopped, for the apples, and shelled pumpkin
seeds (no need to chop them) for the pecans.
Curried Crab Salad with Coconut and Cherry Tomatoes
Use 1 pound cooked lump crabmeat instead of the tofu. Substitute 3 cups
halved cherry tomatoes for the apples, ¼ cup shredded unsweetened

coconut for the pecans, and ½ cup halved red or green grapes for the golden
raisins. Keep the curry powder; it goes great with crab.
Curried Chicken Salad
Put 1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken breasts in a pot over high heat
with water to cover. Bring to a boil, reduce the heat so the water bubbles
gently, cover, and cook until the chicken is just cooked through, 10 to 15
minutes. To check for doneness, cut the breast in half; the chicken should be
white and opaque all the way through. Chop or shred the chicken and use it
instead of the tofu.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
Curry Powder
TOFU FOR CHICKEN
As I said, there are times when it’s reasonable to use tofu in place of
chicken and get similar flavor and texture. Obviously, you’d never try to
replace a roast chicken with roast tofu, but in recipes where you end up
cutting or shredding cooked chicken into small pieces and coating it in
flavorful sauces, extra-firm tofu, which has a comparable chewiness and
neutral flavor, stands in quite well.
In addition to salads with rich, creamy dressings, you might consider
replacing chicken with tofu in enchiladas, tacos, or burritos; stir-fries; and
any chilies, soups, or sauces that call for ground chicken or turkey.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Crisp Seasoned Pita

Warm Flour Tortillas

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Bulgur, Apple, and Fennel Salad
Chewy, hearty bulgur is a great match for crisp slices of apple and
fennel. If you have a mandoline, good knife skills, or you just don’t
mind eating the core, you can thinly slice the fennel, core and all.
For more details about preparing fennel, see Fried Fennel and
Arugula.

Ingredients
3 medium apples
2 medium fennel bulbs
1 lemon
½ cup shelled pistachios
¼ cup olive oil
Salt and pepper
1 cup bulgur

Prep | Cook
1. Bring 2½ cups water to a boil in a small saucepan.
Core and slice the apples; put in a large bowl.
Trim the fennel and thinly slice crosswise to get a pile of crescent-
shaped pieces (pull apart any that are stuck together). Discard any
hard center pieces. Add to the bowl.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
2. Add ½ cup pistachios to the bowl with the apples and fennel. Add ¼
cup olive oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and toss.
3. Put 1 cup bulgur in another large bowl with a large pinch of salt. Pour
the boiling water over all and cover with a plate. Finely ground bulgur
will take 10 to 15 minutes to become tender, medium 15 to 20, and
coarse 20 to 25.
4. When the bulgur is tender, drain off any excess water through a
strainer and add the bulgur to the bowl with the apples and fennel.
Toss, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Couscous, Fennel, and Orange Salad with Olives
Instead of the apples, peel 3 oranges, separate them into segments, and chop
them. Make couscous instead of bulgur, following the package directions,
substitute ½ cup chopped pitted olives for the pistachios, and leave out the
lemon.
Bulgur, Apple, and Fennel Salad with Crisp Ham

Instead of, or in addition to, the pistachios, cook 4 ounces sliced ham,
chopped, in olive oil in a skillet over medium-high heat until browned and
slightly crisp, 5 or 6 minutes. Toss the ham and any rendered fat with the
rest of the ingredients.
NOTES
TYPES OF APPLES
There are literally thousands of apple varieties, often divided—including by
me—into three categories: eating, cooking, and all-purpose. Any apple that
tastes delicious to you will work in salads, but for cooking, the division
isn’t arbitrary. So if you want a little more to go on, here’s a quick list: For
eating raw try Macoun or Gala. Ida Red and Rome are good choices for
cooking. And to keep handy as all-purpose apples, you can’t go wrong with
Cortland, Jonagold, Golden Delicious, Granny Smith, or McIntosh.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Carrot Salad with Raisins
Hummus

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Veggie Fajita Salad
Here’s a salad with most of the components of a traditional fajita,
minus the steak. Mushrooms and zucchini get a run under the
broiler, while peppers and onions sizzle away in a skillet. All are
tossed with a salsa of sorts—fresh corn, tomatoes, cilantro, lime—
and sour cream. Serve with flour tortillas if you like.

Ingredients
3 portobello mushrooms
2 medium zucchini
¼ cup vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
2 bell peppers (any color)
1 medium onion
2 ears corn
1 large ripe tomato
1 bunch fresh cilantro
1 lime
Sour cream for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Trim the mushrooms and zucchini. Halve the zucchini lengthwise.
2. Put the mushrooms and zucchini, cut side up, on a rimmed baking
sheet, rub with 2 tablespoons vegetable oil, and sprinkle with salt and
pepper.
3. Broil, turning the mushrooms once and leaving the zucchini cut side
up, until they’re tender and nicely browned all over, 10 to 15 minutes.
4. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Core, seed, and slice the bell peppers.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
5. When the oil is hot, add the peppers and onion and sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, until they’re tender and
browned, 8 to 12 minutes.
Husk the corn, trim, and strip the kernels off the cob; put them in a
large bowl.
Core and chop the tomato; add it to the bowl.
Chop ½ cup cilantro and add it to the bowl.
Halve the lime; squeeze the juice into the bowl. Sprinkle with salt and
pepper.
6. When the mushrooms and zucchini are tender and browned, slice or
chop them as you like and add them to the bowl.

7. When the peppers and onions are tender and browned, add them to the
bowl.
8. Toss, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve with sour cream.
VARIATIONS
Steak Fajita Salad
Substitute 1 pound skirt steak for the peppers and onions. To cook the steak,
put a large skillet over high heat, pat the steak dry with a paper towel, and
sprinkle both sides with salt and pepper. Cut the steak in half if needed to fit
it into the skillet. When the skillet is very hot, add the steak and cook,
turning once, until browned on both sides but still a bit pinker inside than
you like it, 3 to 5 minutes per side. Let the steak rest on a cutting board
covered loosely with aluminum foil until the mushrooms and zucchini are
done. Slice the steak thinly across the grain and toss it with the vegetables
and salsa.
Veggie and Black Bean Fajita Salad
Add a cup of cooked or drained canned black beans to the corn, tomato, and
cilantro mixture.
Broiled Vegetable Salad with White Bean Dressing
Skip the cilantro, lime, and sour cream. In a food processor, combine 1 cup
cooked or canned white beans, 1 small garlic clove, the juice of a lemon, ⅓
cup olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Process until the mixture is
smooth and thin enough to pour; add a splash of water to thin the dressing if
necessary. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Toss half of the dressing with the
corn and tomato mixture and save the other half to drizzle over the broiled
vegetables. Garnish with chopped fresh parsley.
NOTES

EVEN FASTER
Instead of cooking the mushrooms, zucchini, peppers, and onion, use
Roasted Vegetables that you already have.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Make Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt and serve it on top of the salad.
SIDES
Warm Flour Tortillas
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Refried Beans

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Warm Escarole and White Bean
Salad with Poached Eggs
This cousin to the classic frisée au lardons—with its luscious
poached egg on top—substitutes white beans and Parmesan for
bacon, and, believe me, it’s a fair trade.

Ingredients
¼ cup olive oil, plus more for garnish
2 garlic cloves
½ teaspoon red chile flakes (optional)
1 large bunch escarole (1 to 1½ pounds)
4 cups cooked or canned white beans (two 15-ounce cans)
Salt and pepper
2 teaspoons white vinegar
4 eggs
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large skillet over medium-low heat.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
2. Add the garlic to the skillet, along with a pinch of red chile flakes if
you’re using them. Cook so that the garlic flavors the oil but doesn’t
brown.
Trim and chop the escarole.
3. Add the escarole to the skillet and raise the heat to medium. Cook,
tossing occasionally until it’s wilted, 4 or 5 minutes.
4. Put about an inch of water in a medium skillet over high heat.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
5. When the escarole is mostly wilted, stir in the beans, sprinkle with salt
and pepper, cover the skillet, and turn the heat to low to warm the
beans through.
6. When the water in the skillet comes to a boil, add 2 teaspoons white
vinegar and a sprinkle of salt and lower the heat so the water barely
bubbles.
7. One at a time, crack the eggs into a shallow bowl and slide them into
the water. Cook just until the whites are set and the yolks have filmed
over, 3 to 5 minutes.
Divide the escarole and bean mixture among 4 bowls.
8. When the eggs are done, remove them one at a time with a slotted
spoon, allow the water to drain off for a few seconds, then put them on

top of the escarole and beans. Grate ¼ cup Parmesan over the top of
each, garnish with a drizzle of olive oil, and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Warm Escarole and White Bean Salad with Squid
Skip the eggs. Once the escarole and white bean mixture is warm, divide it
among 4 bowls and wipe out the skillet. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in the
skillet and turn the heat to high. When the oil is hot, add 8 to 12 ounces
sliced squid and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally
until the squid is tender and lightly browned, 1 to 2 minutes. Serve it on top
of the escarole and beans, with or without the Parmesan.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
POACHING EGGS
Poached eggs have a reputation as being tricky; they’re not. They take a
little practice, maybe, but the same is true of pancakes. For breakfast,
they’re a welcome change from fried and scrambled eggs (try the Fast
Florentine), but I eat them more often for lunch on a salad, a plate of beans,
or a serving of roasted vegetables. You puncture the yolk and it oozes all
over the dish, contributing to an irresistible sauce.
A few simple tricks will really put you ahead of the game: Add a splash
of vinegar to the poaching water to help the egg white gather around the
yolk instead of flying off in every direction. Another headache saver is to
crack the eggs into small shallow bowls before sliding them into the water;
if you crack an egg right into the water, even from close above, the chances
are that the yolk will break up.

Poached eggs don’t benefit from being poked and prodded during
cooking; once they’re in the water, don’t hover. They’ll invariably have
ragged edges when they come out of the water; I like that look, but if you
want something neater, trim away the edges with a knife or scissors.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Warm Buttery Bread
Garlic Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Raw Butternut Squash Salad with
Warm Edamame
I sometimes eat butternut squash raw. People are shocked by this,
but once you’ve tried it, it’s hard to go back to roasting. This
method is so easy, quick, and unexpected. And then there’s the
taste: Raw butternut has an earthy flavor and a wonderful crunch
that comes alive when you toss it with something warm. Here,
edamame are warmed up in a mixture of olive oil and sherry
vinegar flavored with leeks and sage.

Ingredients
½ cup olive oil
1 medium leek
3 sprigs fresh sage
4 cups frozen edamame
2 tablespoons sherry vinegar
Salt and pepper
1 small butternut squash (1½ pounds)

Prep | Cook
1. Put ½ cup olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Trim the leek and slice the white and light green parts only.
2. When the oil is warm, add the leek. Cook, stirring occasionally until
soft, 3 to 5 minutes.
Strip the sage leaves from 3 sprigs and chop.
3. When the leek is soft, add the sage, 4 cups edamame, 2 tablespoons
sherry vinegar, a sprinkle of salt and pepper, and ½ cup water. Reduce
the heat to medium-low and cook, stirring occasionally until the
edamame are warmed through, 6 to 8 minutes.
Cut the squash in half crosswise; peel and trim it, and scoop out the
seeds. Cut the squash into chunks that will fit through the feed tube
of a food processor. Shred the squash in a food processor with a
grating disk; put it in a large bowl.
4. Pour the edamame and leek mixture over the squash and toss. Taste
and adjust the seasoning and serve warm.
VARIATIONS
Raw Butternut Squash Salad with Warm Red Beans
Use 1 small red onion, sliced, instead of the leek, fresh oregano instead of
the sage, cooked or canned red beans (two 15-ounce cans) for the edamame,
and the juice of 1 lime in place of the vinegar.
Raw Zucchini Salad with Warm Lima Beans
Substitute ¼ cup fresh dill leaves for the sage, frozen lima beans for the
edamame, and the juice of 1 lemon for the vinegar. Instead of squash, use 1

pound zucchini (grated the same way).
Sautéed Butternut Squash with Warm Edamame
If I can’t convince you to try raw butternut squash, cook the grated squash
with some olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper in a skillet over
medium-high heat until soft and lightly browned, 6 to 10 minutes. Toss with
the edamame and warm dressing and serve.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
To soften the squash a bit more, let it sit in the warm dressing for 10 or 15
minutes before serving.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Whole Wheat Couscous

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Warm Three-Bean Potato Salad
Typical three-bean salads feature a sickly sweet vinegar dressing. I
use just a touch of honey for sweetness and add potatoes for extra
body. Boiling the green beans and potatoes in the same pot as the
potatoes saves time and extra dishes.

Ingredients
Salt
2 or 3 medium russet or Yukon Gold potatoes (1 pound)
½ cup olive oil
3 tablespoons red wine vinegar
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
1 teaspoon honey
Pepper
1 small red onion
8 ounces green beans
2 cups cooked or canned kidney beans (one 15-ounce can)
2 cups cooked or canned chickpeas (one 15-ounce can)
1 bunch fresh parsley

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1½ inches of water and a large pinch of salt in a medium pot; turn
the heat to high.
Peel the potatoes if you like. Cut them into ½-inch chunks and add
them to the pot.
Whisk ½ cup olive oil, 3 tablespoons red wine vinegar, 2 teaspoons
Dijon mustard, 1 teaspoon honey, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper
together in a large bowl.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the onion; add it to the bowl with the
dressing.
Trim and chop 8 ounces green beans.
2. When the water comes to a boil, cover the pot and continue to boil
until the potatoes are a little short of tender, 4 to 6 minutes.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them; add the kidney
beans and chickpeas to the bowl.
3. When the potatoes are nearly tender, add the green beans to the pot.
Cook until the potatoes and green beans are tender, 2 to 5 minutes.
Chop ½ cup parsley and add it to the bowl.
4. When the potatoes and green beans are tender, drain and add them to
the bowl. Toss, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Warm Three-Bean and Sweet Potato Salad
Use sweet potatoes instead of russet or Yukon Gold. Substitute cider
vinegar for the red wine vinegar, 1 teaspoon cumin for the Dijon mustard,

pinto beans and black beans for the kidney beans and chickpeas, and
cilantro for the parsley.
Warm Greens and Chickpea Potato Salad
Instead of the green beans, use 1 pound chopped escarole. Substitute more
chickpeas for the kidney beans. Serve with a sprinkling of grated Parmesan,
if you’d like.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
TWO VEGETABLES, ONE POT
Sometimes it just doesn’t make sense to boil different vegetables in separate
pots of water, so once I’ve got my water boiling I use it for everything.
Often, as in this recipe, I boil multiple vegetables at the same time, letting
firmer ones cook on their own for a bit, then adding tender ones for the last
few minutes so they finish together. It’s a great way to save time and space,
and, as long as one ingredient doesn’t ruin the water for the other—beets,
for example, would turn the whole thing pink—it’s just as good as using 2
pots.
SIDES
Green Salad
Celery Salad
Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tuna and Egg Salad with Radishes
and Dill
Sometimes it’s hard to decide between two lunch-box classics: tuna
salad and egg salad. That’s why I mix them together, adding
chopped radishes and pickles for crunch.

Ingredients
4 large eggs
Ice cubes
1 small head Boston or Bibb lettuce
4 large radishes
1 bunch fresh dill
2 pickles, any kind you like
Two 6-ounce cans tuna, preferably packed in olive oil
½ cup mayonnaise
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Fill a medium saucepan about two-thirds with water and gently
submerge the eggs. Bring to a boil, turn off the heat, and cover. Set a
timer: Large to extra-large eggs will cook in 9 minutes.
Fill a large bowl with ice water.
Trim the lettuce, tear the leaves off whole, and put them, overlapping,
on a platter.
Trim and chop 4 large radishes; put in a large bowl.
Strip 2 tablespoons dill leaves from the stems and chop; add to the
bowl.
Chop the pickles; add to the bowl.
Drain the tuna; add to the bowl.
2. Add ½ cup mayonnaise and 2 teaspoons mustard to the bowl.
3. When the eggs are done, transfer them to the ice water with a slotted
spoon. Leave them submerged for at least 1 minute.
4. Crack, peel, and chop the eggs.
5. Add the eggs to the bowl along with a sprinkle of salt and pepper and
stir to combine. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Spoon the salad over
the lettuce leaves and serve.
VARIATIONS
Shrimp or Lobster and Egg Salad with Cucumber and Tarragon
Swap 1 cup chopped peeled and seeded cucumbers for the radishes and
tarragon for the dill. Instead of tuna, use 12 ounces chopped cooked shrimp

or lobster.
Smoked Salmon and Egg Salad with Celery Hearts and Leaves
Use 1 cup chopped celery hearts and leaves instead of radishes and 12
ounces chopped smoked salmon in place of the tuna.
Spicy Crab and Egg Salad with Bell Pepper
Substitute crab for the tuna, 1 cup chopped red bell pepper for the radishes,
and parsley for the dill. Add 1 teaspoon cayenne to the mix and a pinch of
Old Bay seasoning if you have it.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
TYPES OF RADISHES
Radishes don’t get much love, perhaps because they’re ubiquitous year-
round in every supermarket across the country, or maybe because they’re
“too spicy,” though that’s a plus when you’re looking for flavor in a hurry. I
love radishes and in recipes they’re interchangeable, though some are hotter
than others: Common red varieties are sharp without being too hot, and in
peak season you’ll find other similar radishes in an array of colors—pink,
crimson, purple, and white. Harder to find are super-spicy black radishes
(the flesh is white) and ultra-mild, gorgeous watermelon radishes, green
outside and pink inside.
Daikon radishes—common in Japanese and Korean cuisines—are
white, quite mild, and sometimes as big as your arm. Jícama aren’t
technically radishes but make a fine substitute. All keep in the fridge for at
least a week and can be prepared in advance and chilled for up to a day in a
bowl of cold water.

SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Cucumber Salad
Fennel Salad
Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Zucchini Slaw with Chopped Spicy
Chicken
Grating and salting zucchini softens it up but doesn’t take away its
wonderful crunch.

Ingredients
3 or 4 large zucchini (1½ pounds)
Salt
1 small red onion
1 bunch fresh parsley
6 tablespoons olive oil
2 garlic cloves
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken breasts or thighs
Pepper
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
Trim the zucchini. If you’re using a food processor for grating, cut them
into chunks that will fit through the feed tube.
1. Shred the zucchini in a food processor with a grating disk or by hand
with a box grater.
2. Put the zucchini in a colander, sprinkle lightly with salt, and toss. Let it
sit for 10 to 15 minutes.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the onion; put it in a large bowl.
Chop ½ cup parsley and add it to the bowl.
3. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a medium skillet over low heat.
Peel 2 garlic cloves; trim the chile. Mince them both together.
4. Put the garlic and chile in the skillet.
Chop the chicken into small pieces.
5. Add the chicken to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and raise
the heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the chicken
loses its pink color and is cooked through, 5 to 10 minutes.
Halve the lemon.
6. While the chicken cooks, squeeze the water out of the zucchini and
transfer the zucchini to the bowl. Squeeze in the lemon juice and add 4
tablespoons oil.
7. When the chicken is cooked, add the mixture to the bowl and toss.
Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.

VARIATIONS
Zucchini Slaw with Chopped Spicy Shrimp
Instead of the chicken, use 1½ pounds peeled shrimp. You’ll need to cook
them for only 3 to 5 minutes.
Jícama Slaw with Chopped Spicy Chicken
Use peeled jícama instead of the zucchini. Substitute cilantro for the parsley
and 2 limes for the lemon. If you like, add 1 teaspoon chili powder to the
chicken as you cook it in the skillet.
Zucchini Slaw with Crisp Ground Lamb
Substitute 12 ounces ground lamb for the chicken and 1 tablespoon cumin
for the green chile. Cook the lamb in the skillet by itself until it browns,
then add the garlic and cumin; cook until the lamb is slightly crisp.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Leave the salted zucchini in the colander for about 30 minutes for a more
tender slaw.
CHOPPING CHICKEN
Chopping boneless, skinless chicken breasts or thighs into small bits helps
chicken cook quickly and adds texture throughout a dish. You can always
use the food processor to pulse the chicken into small pieces, but when you
factor in the time it takes to clean the food processor, chopping by hand is
probably just as fast. I like to cut the chicken into long, thin strips, then rock
the knife back and forth crosswise to cut the strips into little pieces. It
doesn’t matter if the pieces aren’t exactly the same size, so you can chop
quickly, almost as if you’re mincing garlic.

SIDES
Warm Flour Tortillas
Bruschetta
Quinoa

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Corn and Black Bean Salad with
Garlic Chicken
Charred corn kernels add a smoky dimension to black bean salad.
Broiled chicken cutlets, sprinkled with spices and rubbed with
garlic, make it a meal. (For the best way to strip corn kernels from
the cob, see Prep Shortcuts.)

Ingredients
4 ears fresh corn
Salt
2 garlic cloves
4 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 12 ounces)
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
¼ teaspoon cayenne
1 teaspoon cumin
Pepper
4 large or 8 small radishes
4 cups cooked or canned black beans (two 15-ounce cans)
1 bunch fresh cilantro
2 limes
Sour cream for garnish (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium-high heat. Turn the broiler to high; put
the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Husk the corn, trim, and cut the kernels off the cob.
2. Put the corn in the skillet and sprinkle with salt. Cook, stirring
occasionally, until the corn chars lightly, 5 to 10 minutes.
Peel and halve 2 garlic cloves.
3. Put the chicken on a rimmed baking sheet; rub with 2 tablespoons
vegetable oil and sprinkle with ¼ teaspoon cayenne, 1 teaspoon cumin,
salt, and pepper.
4. Broil, turning once, until lightly browned on both sides and just
cooked through, 2 to 5 minutes per side.
5. When the corn is lightly charred, put it in a large bowl.
Trim and chop 4 large or 8 small radishes; add them to the bowl.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them; add the beans to
the bowl.
Chop ½ cup cilantro and add it to the bowl.
Halve the limes; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
6. When the chicken is done, remove it from the broiler and rub all over
with the raw garlic.
7. Toss the corn and black bean mixture together, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and divide among 4 plates or bowls.
8. Slice the chicken, lay the slices over the top of the corn and black
beans, garnish with a dollop of sour cream if you like, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Corn and Edamame Salad with Ginger Chicken
Skip the cayenne and cumin. Instead of the rubbing the chicken cutlets with
garlic cloves, rub them with a piece of peeled fresh ginger. Substitute
sesame oil for vegetable, 1 cup chopped daikon radish for the red radishes,
and edamame for the black beans.
Corn and White Bean Salad with Garlic Chicken
Omit the cumin. Use olive oil instead of vegetable, red chile flakes instead
of cayenne, 1 cup halved cherry tomatoes in place of radishes, white beans
instead of black, basil instead of cilantro, and 1 lemon in place of the limes.
Corn and Black Bean Salad with Shrimp
Use 1 pound peeled shrimp in place of the chicken. Rather than rubbing all
those shrimp with garlic cloves, mince the garlic and toss it with the shrimp
before broiling for 2 or 3 minutes per side.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
CHICKEN AS BRUSCHETTA
The way you make bruschetta is by rubbing grilled or broiled toast with a
cut clove of raw garlic, which cooks very gently on the surface of the hot
bread. The same technique works wonderfully for chicken and even steak.
Plus, it eliminates the possibility of minced garlic burning during cooking.
SIDES
White Rice
Warm Corn Tortillas

Mango Chutney

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Greek Salad with Orzo and Shrimp
Add warm orzo and shrimp to a classic Greek salad and you turn it
into, well, an even better Greek salad, as well as a satisfying main
course. If you wanted to make this vegetarian, you could just as
easily leave out the shrimp, and the salad would still be plenty
substantial.

Ingredients
Salt
2 medium cucumbers
4 medium ripe tomatoes (1½ pounds)
1 cup orzo
1 small red onion
1 bunch fresh mint
½ cup kalamata olives
1 lemon
1 pound peeled shrimp
Pepper
4 ounces feta cheese (1 cup cubed)
⅓ cup olive oil

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a small saucepan of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Trim the cucumbers and peel if necessary; cut them in half lengthwise
and scoop out the seeds with a spoon. Chop them and put them in a
large bowl.
Core and chop the tomatoes; add to the bowl.
3. When the water comes to a boil, add 1 cup orzo; start tasting after 5
minutes.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the red onion; add to the bowl.
Chop ¼ cup mint leaves and add to the bowl.
Pit ½ cup olives if necessary; add them to the bowl.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
4. When the orzo is tender but not mushy, drain; add to the bowl.
5. When the grill or broiler is hot, sprinkle the shrimp with salt and
pepper, and cook, turning once, until they’re lightly browned on the
outside and just cooked through, 2 to 3 minutes per side.
Cut 4 ounces feta into small chunks; add them to the bowl.
6. When the shrimp are done, add to the bowl. Add ⅓ cup olive oil and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Toss, taste and adjust the seasoning, and
serve immediately.

VARIATIONS
Green Salad with Orzo and Steak
Instead of shrimp, use 1 pound skirt or flank steak. Grill or broil until it’s a
bit pinker in the middle than you might like, 3 to 5 minutes per side for
medium rare. Let the steak rest for 5 minutes, slice thinly, and lay over the
top of the salad.
Greek Salad with Orzo and Squid
Substitute 1 pound whole cleaned squid for the shrimp. Grill or broil until
lightly charred all over, just a minute or 2 per side. If you’re not getting
much browning on the squid in the broiler, just take it out after a few
minutes. It’s way better to have tender, uncharred squid than nicely
browned rubber bands, which is what the squid will feel like if you cook it
for too long.
NOTES
PITTING OLIVES
Pitting olives is one of those laborious kitchen tasks that sometimes (if you
can’t find good pitted olives) you just have to put up with. If you don’t have
a pitter (I don’t), the fastest way is to crush the olive with the side of a
chef’s knife and pick out the pit. If that doesn’t work (some olives refuse to
crush), slice down the length of the flesh with a paring knife and pick the
pit out with your fingers.
SIDES
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Cucumber Salad
Fennel Salad
Hummus

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Hot and Sour Bok Choy with Mussels
The mixture of steamed greens and mussels is hardly a
conventional salad, but it’s a good one. The juice from the mussels
mixes into the hot and sour steaming liquid to create an intense and
intoxicating dressing. Plus, cooking the shellfish directly on top of
the bok choy at the same time saves time and dishes.

Ingredients
2 pounds mussels
1 head bok choy (about 1½ pounds)
1 inch fresh ginger
1 fresh hot green chile (like Thai)
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
1 tablespoon sesame oil
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 tablespoon rice vinegar
2 tablespoons soy sauce

Prep | Cook
Scrub and debeard the mussels; discard any that don’t close when you
press the shell together.
Trim the bok choy and cut (or pull) the leaves from the ribs. Slice the
stems and cut the leaves into thin ribbons.
1. Put a medium pot over medium-high heat.
Peel 1 inch fresh ginger; trim the chile. Mince them together.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
2. Put 1 tablespoon sesame oil and 1 tablespoon vegetable oil in the pot.
Put the bok choy stems on the bottom, then add the leaves, followed by
the mussels.
3. Add the ginger and chile, 1 tablespoon rice vinegar, 2 tablespoons soy
sauce, and about ¼ cup water. Cover the pot.
4. Cook until all the mussels open, 5 to 10 minutes.
5. Sprinkle with the cilantro, toss, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Hot and Sour Cabbage with Salmon
Instead of the mussels, use 1½ pounds salmon fillets. Use 1½ pounds
chopped Napa cabbage instead of the bok choy. Cut the salmon into 4
pieces before or after steaming. Instead of tossing it with the cabbage,
divide the cabbage among 4 plates or bowls and serve the salmon on top.
Steamed Broccoli Rabe with Shrimp

Use 1 pound peeled shrimp instead of the mussels and chopped broccoli
rabe instead of the bok choy. Substitute 2 garlic cloves for the ginger, ¼
teaspoon red chile flakes for the green chile, parsley for the cilantro, butter
and olive oil for the sesame and vegetable oils, and the juice of 1 lemon for
the rice vinegar. Skip the soy sauce and steam until the shrimp are pink all
over and just cooked through, 3 to 5 minutes.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tomato and Chicken Salad with Basil
Vinaigrette
Ripe tomatoes and fresh basil are one of those summer
combinations that are nearly impossible to beat. Add some simply
cooked chicken and you’ve got a salad that’s refreshing, satisfying,
and ready in only a little more time than it takes to pull together a
tomato salad.

Ingredients
5 or 6 medium ripe tomatoes (2 pounds)
Salt and pepper
4 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 12 ounces)
⅓ cup plus 2 tablespoons olive oil
1 lemon
1 bunch fresh basil

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Core and slice the tomatoes; spread them out on a platter and sprinkle
with salt and pepper.
2. Put the chicken on a rimmed baking sheet, drizzle with 2 tablespoons
olive oil, and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3. When the grill or broiler is hot, cook the chicken, turning once, until
lightly browned on both sides and just cooked through, 2 to 5 minutes
per side.
Cut the lemon in half and squeeze the juice into a medium bowl.
Strip ½ cup basil leaves from the stems and chop; add to the bowl.
4. Add ⅓ cup olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl and
whisk the vinaigrette.
5. When the chicken is just cooked through, transfer it to a cutting board
and cut it on the diagonal into wide slices. Nestle them in with the
tomatoes, drizzle the vinaigrette over the top, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Peach and Chicken Salad with Tarragon Vinaigrette
Substitute 8 ripe peaches, cut into wedges, for the tomatoes and 2
tablespoons chopped fresh tarragon for the basil.
Pear and Chicken Salad with Mustard Vinaigrette
Substitute 6 pears for the tomatoes and 2 teaspoons Dijon mustard for the
basil.

Cucumber and Chicken Salad with Dill Vinaigrette
Use 3 medium cucumbers in place of the tomatoes and 2 tablespoons
chopped fresh dill instead of the basil.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
You can use chicken breasts instead of thighs. Set the rack 6 inches away
from the heat and cook for closer to 6 to 8 minutes per side.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Bruschetta
Pasta, Plain and Simple

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Warm Spinach and Chicken Salad
with Parmesan Dressing
Walnuts and a Parmesan dressing make this chicken salad nutty and
rich, while barely wilted spinach adds earthiness and freshness.

Ingredients
3 or 4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 1½ pounds)
1 cup white wine or water
1 bay leaf
3 sprigs fresh thyme
⅓ cup olive oil
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
Salt and pepper
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
8 ounces baby spinach
½ cup walnuts

Prep | Cook
1. Put the chicken, 1 cup white wine or water, 1 bay leaf, and 3 sprigs
fresh thyme in a medium skillet over high heat.
2. When the liquid boils, lower the heat so it bubbles gently. Cover and
cook until the chicken is opaque and just cooked through, 10 to 15
minutes.
3. Combine ⅓ cup olive oil, 2 tablespoons red wine vinegar, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper in a large bowl.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan, add to the bowl, and whisk to combine.
Add 8 ounces baby spinach to the bowl.
Add ½ cup walnuts to the bowl.
4. When the chicken is just cooked through, transfer it to a cutting board
and chop it while it’s still hot.
5. Add the warm chicken to the bowl and toss well so that it begins to
wilt the spinach. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Warm Tomato and Chicken Salad with Parmesan Dressing
Use 5 or 6 medium ripe tomatoes, chopped, instead of the spinach. They
won’t wilt, of course, but the heat from the chicken will warm them a bit
and pull out some of their juice.
Warm Spinach and Chicken Salad with Curry Dressing
Substitute coconut milk for the white wine or water, cilantro for the thyme,
and 1 teaspoon curry powder for the Parmesan.

NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Use boneless chicken thighs instead of chicken breasts; start checking them
after 5 minutes.
COOKING, ONCE REMOVED
One of my favorite fast techniques—if you can really even call it a
technique—is gently wilting greens by tossing them with something that
has just been cooked. The residual warmth—here, from poached chicken—
softens the greens ever so slightly and boosts their flavor without
eliminating their crunch. Some of the greens that take well to this treatment
are spinach, arugula, watercress, kale, escarole, endive, radicchio (not
green, I know), and cabbage.
Pretty much any warm food is fair game to toss them with, including
sautéed or roasted vegetables, warm sauces or dressings, toasted croutons,
and crisp bacon.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Bruschetta
Tomato Salad
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Middle Eastern Chicken and Bread
Salad
This is essentially a classic Middle Eastern bread salad (fattoush)
with grilled or broiled chicken added in. The pita—also grilled or
broiled—soaks up the flavor like a sponge.

Ingredients
3 or 4 medium ripe tomatoes (1 pound)
1 medium cucumber
1 small red onion
4 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 12 ounces)
⅓ cup plus 3 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
2 pitas
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Core the tomatoes, cut them into chunks, and put them in a large bowl.
Trim the cucumber and peel if necessary; cut it in half lengthwise and
scoop out the seeds with a spoon. Chop and add to the bowl.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the onion; add it to the bowl.
2. Drizzle the chicken with 2 tablespoons olive oil and sprinkle with salt
and pepper.
3. When the grill or broiler is hot, cook the chicken, turning once, until
browned on both sides and just cooked through, 6 to 8 minutes per
side.
Brush the pita with 1 tablespoon olive oil and sprinkle with salt and
pepper.
Chop ½ cup parsley and add it to the bowl.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
4. When the chicken is just cooked through, transfer it to a cutting board.
5. Grill or broil the pita, turning once, until lightly charred, a minute or 2
per side.
6. When the pita is lightly charred, transfer it to the cutting board. Chop
the pita and the chicken; add them to the bowl.
7. Add ⅓ cup olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Toss, taste and
adjust the seasoning, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Chicken and Tortilla Salad
Substitute 1½ cups sliced radishes for the cucumber, cilantro for the parsley,
and 2 limes for the lemon. Instead of pitas, use 2 large flour tortillas. Add a
few dashes of hot sauce and some crumbled queso fresco—or even feta—if
you like.
Shrimp Panzanella
Use 12 ounces peeled shrimp instead of the chicken; grill or broil until
they’re pink all over and cooked through, 2 or 3 minutes per side. Swap 4
slices of crusty bread for the pita and 2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar for the
lemon juice. Add a handful of chopped pitted olives and some shaved
Parmesan to the salad as well.
NOTES
TOASTED BREAD SALAD
It’s nothing new to adorn salads with croutons, but the peasant trick of
making toasted bread the foundation of the salad is a bit underused, I think.
Grilled, broiled, or simply toasted pieces of bread instantly add crunch,
chewiness, and heft to a salad; they soak up dressings perfectly, and they’re
a convenient way to use up any leftover bread.
Any bread will work, from rustic loaves to baguettes, pita, corn and
flour tortillas, even regular sandwich bread, or hamburger or hot dog buns.
Just brush the bread with a little oil or butter, cut it into chunks (leave
flatbreads whole until after cooking), and cook until crisp on the outside but
still a bit chewy in the middle.
SIDES
Rice Pilaf

Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Hummus

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

BLT Salad with Rosemary-Mayo
Dressing
This salad is exactly what it sounds like: the makings of a classic
BLT chopped up in a bowl. Cutting the bacon into pieces lets you
cook a lot of it at once without paying too much attention to it,
especially if you cook it in the microwave as described on the
opposite page. I’ve omitted the bread here, so if you want the full-
on BLT experience, make some Warm Buttery Bread on the side or
toss pieces of toast in with the other ingredients.

Ingredients
8 slices bacon
3 or 4 sprigs fresh rosemary
½ cup mayonnaise
Salt and pepper
5 or 6 medium ripe tomatoes (2 pounds)
1 head Boston lettuce

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium heat.
Chop 8 slices bacon into 1-inch pieces. Line a plate with paper towels.
2. Add the bacon to the skillet. Cook, stirring occasionally until crisp, 5
to 10 minutes.
Strip the rosemary leaves from 3 or 4 sprigs and chop. Put them in a
large bowl.
3. Add ½ cup mayonnaise and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl;
stir, adding a tablespoon or 2 of water, until smooth and slightly
thinned.
Core the tomatoes; cut them into wedges and add them to the bowl.
4. When the bacon is crisp, transfer it to the paper towels with a slotted
spoon.
Trim the lettuce; tear the leaves a bit and add them to the bowl.
5. Toss the lettuce and tomatoes with the dressing and divide the salad
among 4 plates or bowls. Sprinkle the bacon on top and serve.
VARIATIONS
Sausage and Pepper Salad with Mustard Dressing
Another classic sandwich turned salad. Instead of bacon, cook 8 to 12
ounces crumbled Italian sausage in 2 tablespoons olive oil until browned
and slightly crisp, 5 to 10 minutes. Use 4 large bell peppers—a combination
of red and yellow is nice—and 1 small onion instead of the tomatoes. Slice
both thinly, since you’re eating them raw. Use 1 teaspoon dried oregano

instead of rosemary and ⅓ cup olive oil, 1 tablespoon brown mustard, and 2
tablespoons red wine vinegar instead of the mayonnaise.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
BACON IN THE MICROWAVE
Fast, easy, and effective, as long as you don’t need much. Here’s how: Line
a microwave-safe dish with 3 or 4 layers of paper towels to absorb the
grease. Put the slices on top; close together is fine, but ideally not touching.
Cover with more paper towels; if you want, add another layer of bacon on
top, and cover with more paper towels. Microwave on high for about 1
minute per slice of bacon up to 5, cooking for additional time as necessary.
Remove the bacon just before it’s done to your liking (it will continue to
crisp for a few seconds), and immediately transfer it to another new plate,
or it may stick to the towels.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
French Fries
Cucumber Salad
Fennel Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Kimchi and Snow Pea Salad with
Grilled or Broiled Beef
Sliced raw snow peas and kimchi make a wonderfully crunchy and
bright foil for tender grilled or broiled beef. (For more about
kimchi, see the Notes.)

Ingredients
1 pound snow peas
3 cups kimchi
1 pound boneless beef sirloin or rib-eye steak
Salt and pepper
Several sprigs fresh mint
1 tablespoon sesame oil

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Slice the snow peas on a diagonal and put them in a large bowl.
2. Add 3 cups kimchi to the bowl along with some of its juice. Toss to
combine.
3. When the grill or broiler is hot, sprinkle the steak all over with salt and
pepper. Cook, turning once, until charred on both sides but still one
shade pinker inside than you like. Figure 2 to 5 minutes per side,
depending on your grill or broiler; use a knife to nick and peek.
4. Transfer the meat to a cutting board to let it rest.
Strip the mint leaves from several sprigs, chop, and add them to the
bowl.
5. Slice the steak thinly against the grain; add it to the bowl. Add 1
tablespoon sesame oil to the bowl and toss. Taste and adjust the
seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Sauerkraut and Apple Salad with Grilled or Broiled Pork
Use 3 apples, sliced, instead of the snow peas and sauerkraut instead of the
kimchi. Instead of beef, use a pork tenderloin; grill or broil it until browned
on both sides and just slightly pink in the middle, 10 to 15 minutes, and
chop into pieces. Swap 4 fresh sage leaves for the mint.
NOTES

EVEN FASTER
If you don’t mind, just leave the snow peas whole.
KIMCHI
Kimchi, the spicy fermented cabbage from Korea, packs a huge punch of
flavor and texture. It’s both tangy and hot, and even though it’s fermented
for a long time, it retains a vibrant crunch.
Like sauerkraut, kimchi is something that you can make on your own—
by combining cabbage, salt, vinegar, and Korean chile paste—but it isn’t
fast. Luckily, high-quality kimchi is easy to find, certainly at Asian grocery
stores and increasingly at mainstream supermarkets. Don’t hesitate to buy a
big jar if you find one; it will keep for a few months in your fridge, and
there are a number of ways to use it, from mixing it with plain rice or Asian
noodles to stirring it into soup to stir-frying it. Or eat it straight.
For a quick, impromptu kimchi, see Stir-Fried Beef with Skillet
“Kimchi”.
SIDES
White Rice
Scallion Pancakes
Sesame Noodles
Fire and Ice Noodles

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Broccoli Tabbouleh with Charred
Tomato and Lemon
Tabbouleh is a classic Middle Eastern salad of bulgur, tomatoes,
herbs, lemon, and olive oil. If you pulse raw broccoli in the food
processor, you wind up with crunchy bits that make a fine addition.
Charring the tomatoes and lemon is gilding the lily, but you do it
while the bulgur cooks, and it only takes a little extra work.

Ingredients
1 lemon
1 pint cherry tomatoes
1 cup bulgur
Salt
4 tablespoons olive oil
Pepper
1 small head broccoli (about 1 pound)
1 bunch fresh mint
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 garlic clove

Prep | Cook
1. Bring 2½ cups water to a boil in a small saucepan.
2. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Halve the lemon crosswise and trim off a small piece from each end so
it can stand cut side up.
Put the cherry tomatoes on a rimmed baking sheet along with the
lemon halves, facing up.
3. Put 1 cup bulgur in a large bowl with a large pinch of salt. Pour the
boiling water over the grains and cover with a plate. Finely ground
bulgur will take 10 to 15 minutes to become tender, medium 15 to 20,
and coarse 20 to 25.
4. Drizzle the lemon halves and cherry tomatoes with 2 tablespoons olive
oil and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
5. Broil, stirring the tomatoes every few minutes, until the tomato skins
brown, blister, and crack and the lemon halves are slightly charred, 4
to 10 minutes, depending on your broiler.
Break or chop the broccoli into florets (include the floret stems), and
put everything in a food processor.
Chop ½ cup each mint and parsley leaves and add them to the food
processor.
Peel 1 garlic clove; add it to the food processor.
6. When the tomatoes and lemons are done, put the tomatoes in a large
bowl. Set the lemon aside.

7. Pulse the broccoli mixture in the food processor until it’s chopped into
little bits, bigger than bulgur but smaller than peas. Add the mixture to
the bowl with the tomatoes.
8. When the bulgur is tender, drain off any excess water through a
strainer and add the bulgur to the bowl.
9. Add 2 tablespoons olive oil, squeeze in the juice from the charred
lemon, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Toss, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Cauliflower Tabbouleh with Charred Tomato and Lemon
Use 1 small head cauliflower, trimmed, instead of broccoli.
Fennel and Radish Tabbouleh with Charred Tomato and Lime
A little spicy from the radishes. Use 1 medium fennel bulb and 2 cups
chopped radishes instead of the broccoli. Substitute 3 limes for the lemon
and cilantro for the parsley.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Forget about charring the tomatoes and lemons. Just halve the cherry
tomatoes and use both the tomatoes and lemons raw.
TIMING BULGUR
Remember: Steep finely ground bulgur for 10 to 15 minutes, medium for 15
to 20, and coarse for 20 to 25. (See Rice and Grains for more about grains.)
SIDES
Crisp Seasoned Pita

Fennel Salad with Olives
Hummus
Roasted Red Pepper Hummus

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Charred Brussels Sprout Salad with
Walnuts and Gorgonzola
Crunchy charred Brussels sprouts and walnuts with creamy
Gorgonzola is a decadent combination. Chopping the Brussels
sprouts and tossing them with olive oil, salt, and pepper is all
reduced to one quick step in the food processor.

Ingredients
2 pounds Brussels sprouts
1 garlic clove
3 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
1 cup walnuts
4 ounces Gorgonzola cheese (1 cup crumbled)
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Trim the Brussels sprouts.
Peel 1 garlic clove.
2. Put the Brussels sprouts, garlic, 3 tablespoons olive oil, and a sprinkle
of salt and pepper in a food processor.
3. Pulse until the Brussels sprouts are roughly chopped. They will be a bit
uneven, but that’s okay.
4. Put the Brussels sprouts on a rimmed baking sheet and broil, stirring
and checking occasionally until they’re browned and just tender, 10 to
15 minutes.
5. Put 1 cup walnuts in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook, shaking
the pan occasionally until the nuts darken and are fragrant, 3 to 5
minutes. Transfer the walnuts to a large bowl.
6. When the Brussels sprouts are browned and just tender, add them to
the bowl. Crumble 1 cup Gorgonzola, add to the bowl, and drizzle with
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar.
7. Toss, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Charred Brussels Sprout and Fig Salad with Walnuts
Instead of the Gorgonzola—or in addition to it—add a handful of chopped
fresh or dried figs.
Charred Brussels Sprouts and Apple or Pear Salad

Substitute pecans for the walnuts and use chopped apples or pears instead
of, or in addition to, the Gorgonzola.
Charred Broccoli Salad with Almonds and Ricotta Salata
Use broccoli instead of Brussels sprouts. Since it won’t take as long to
cook, put the broiler rack closer to the heat (about 4 inches) and cook for 5
to 10 minutes. Replace the walnuts with almonds and the Gorgonzola with
grated ricotta salata.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you prefer larger pieces of Brussels sprouts, heat the oven to 425ºF; halve
or quarter the Brussels sprouts; toss them with the olive oil, minced garlic,
salt, and pepper; and roast, stirring occasionally until they are tender and
well browned, 30 to 45 minutes.
BROILED BITS
It may seem strange to buzz Brussels sprouts in the food processor and then
broil them. But once you try it you’ll be loath to go back to the laborious
task of halving them by hand and then waiting for the large pieces to roast
thoroughly. This way is much faster: The machine does the chopping in a
couple of pulses, and the small pieces broil in about half the time. The best
thing of all could be the flavor: Because there’s so much surface area on
small pieces, you get more of the delicious crispy bits than you would
otherwise.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Warm Buttery Bread
Creamy Polenta

Sandwiches
Radish and Herb Butter Baguette
Broiled Cheese
Peanut Butter and Banana Sandwich with Honey and
Raisins
Hummus and Vegetable Pita Pockets
Tofu Sandwich with Cucumber and Hoisin Mayo
Tuna Sandwich with Pickles and Mustard
Crab Salad Sandwich
Broiled Ham and Gruyère with Apples
Smoky Black Bean and Carrot Burgers
Egg Salad Sandwich with Lots of Vegetables
Eggplant Parmesan Sub
Salmon Sandwich with Peanut Vinaigrette
Sriracha Shrimp Salad Roll
Seared Tuna Sandwich with Wilted Bok Choy and Soy
Mayo
Chicken Salad Sandwich with Grapes and Rosemary

Chicken, Bacon, Avocado, and Tomato Wrap
Blackened Chicken Sandwich with Pickled Red Onions
Chicken and Black Bean Burrito
Turkey and Broccoli Rabe Hero
Open-Face Lyonnaise Sandwich
Spanish Dip
Sausage and Pepper Sub
Bánh Mì
Steak Tacos with Lots of Options
Crisp Pork and Watermelon Tacos
Reuben with All the Trimmings
Big T’s Meat Sauce Sub
Steak Sandwich with Charred Onions
Curried Chicken Sandwich with Mango Chutney
BBQ Chopped Pork and Slaw Sandwich

Sandwiches
You already know how to make a sandwich. But do
you venture beyond grilled cheese and sliced turkey
or ham?
Like most staples of the American diet,
sandwiches have progressed a long way since PB & J
and bologna on Wonder Bread were the gold
standard. The varieties and options continue to
increase exponentially, and the expectations for
creativity and execution have grown with them. All
of that is to the good.
A few of the sandwiches in this chapter—
especially those toward the beginning—are light
enough to be considered snacks; to make them a meal
you might want to include a similarly easy soup or
side. Others are slightly more substantial, although
no more effort than making grilled cheese or tuna on
toast. The bulk are what I think of as main-course

sandwiches and will take a few more minutes to pull
off but are worth the extra effort.
Like all the recipes in this book, these sandwiches
require—and benefit from—a certain degree of
multitasking. Though never complicated or arduous,
the process usually goes beyond taking the butter out
of the fridge while you’re making toast.
This chapter will give you a feel for what should
happen when—it’s often the same from one sandwich
to the next—and open up a new world of possibilities
for satisfying sandwich-based meals that you can
make quickly and easily.

Chapter Highlights
One Sandwich Is Faster than Four  The fastest way to make a sandwich
is on a baguette. Radish and Herb Butter Baguette.
All Things Bread  How I choose, store, and toast bread. Good Bread.
Where Your Bread Is Buttered  Why brushing melted butter onto soft
bread solves problems. Brushing vs. Spreading Butter.
Make Your Own Condiments  Recipes (and variations) for mayonnaise,
salsa, and barbecue sauce.
What About Fruit Condiments?  Yes, there’s time to make savory fruit
condiments for sandwiches from scratch. Curried Chicken Sandwich with
Mango Chutney.
Is Vinaigrette the New Mayo?  Not quite, but it’s a wonderful way to
moisten and flavor a sandwich. Salmon Sandwich with Peanut Vinaigrette.
Wide Open  Why open-face sandwiches are so great. Open Your Mind to
Opening Your Sandwich.
Better than Deli Turkey  Do away with deli turkey for good. Turkey and
Broccoli Rabe Hero.
Taco Time  When a taco isn’t Mexican. Anything Tacos.
Fast Pizza (Sort Of)  With premade pizza dough, homemade pizza is
quick and delicious. Cheat-a-Little Pizza.

If You’re Looking for a Meatball Sub  A terrific deconstructed version.
Big T’s Meat Sauce Sub.
The Reuben Miracle  A fantastic spin on a corned beef or pastrami
Reuben. Reuben with All the Trimmings.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Radish and Herb Butter Baguette
Radish, butter, and salt on a baguette is a rite of spring in France
and elsewhere. The combination gets even better with a little
tarragon and mint added to the butter and a handful of arugula
complementing the peppery bite of the radish.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
3 sprigs fresh mint
2 sprigs fresh tarragon
4 to 6 radishes
1 baguette
Salt and pepper
2 cups arugula

Prep | Cook
Put 4 tablespoons butter in a medium bowl.
Strip the mint leaves from 3 sprigs and the tarragon leaves from 2 sprigs
and chop; add to the bowl.
Trim and thinly slice the radishes.
Halve the baguette lengthwise.
1. Add a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the butter and herb mixture and
mash to combine; you want it to be spreadable.
2. Spread the butter onto one side of the baguette and lay the radish slices
on top.
Trim 2 cups arugula.
3. Put the arugula on top of the radishes and top with the other half of the
baguette. Cut the baguette into 4 sections and serve.
VARIATIONS
Jícama and Chile Mayo Baguette
Substitute ½ cup mayonnaise for the butter, 2 fresh hot green chiles (like
jalapeño), minced, for the mint, and cilantro for the tarragon. Add some
grated lime zest to the mayo if you like. Instead of the radishes, use 8
ounces jícama, thinly sliced.
Apple and Honey-Mustard Baguette
Use ⅓ cup Dijon mustard instead of the butter, 2 tablespoons honey instead
of the mint, and fresh rosemary in place of the tarragon. Instead of the
radishes, use 1 or 2 apples, thinly sliced.

Fennel and Garlic Butter Baguette
Substitute 2 tablespoons olive oil for 2 tablespoons of the butter, 1 minced
garlic clove for the mint, and parsley for the tarragon. Add some red chile
flakes and 1 teaspoon grated lemon zest as well. Instead of the radishes, use
1 large fennel bulb, thinly sliced.
Ricotta and Olive Baguette
Instead of butter, use ¾ cup good ricotta cheese and a drizzle of olive oil.
Swap 1 teaspoon grated lemon zest for the parsley and mint. Instead of
radishes, use 1 cup chopped pitted olives; a mix is nice.
Goat Cheese, Peach, and Pecan Baguette
Instead of butter, use 8 ounces goat cheese. Keep the mint, but skip the
tarragon. Instead of radishes, use 1 or 2 thinly sliced peaches. Before adding
the peaches, chop ½ cup pecans and toast them in a dry skillet over medium
heat for 3 to 5 minutes. Press them gently on top of the goat cheese so they
stick, then lay the peach slices on top.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Toast the baguette.
ONE SANDWICH IS FASTER THAN FOUR
This probably sounds obvious, but I’ve seen enough people do the opposite
that it seems worth mentioning: If you’re making a sandwich on a baguette
or any other long loaf of bread, instead of cutting the bread into sections
and assembling individual sandwiches, cut it in half the long way, assemble
one giant sandwich, then cut it into as many pieces as you like.
SIDES
Green Salad

Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower
Succotash
Tender Vegetables

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Broiled Cheese
Have you made grilled cheese in the broiler? Faster, better, more
efficient.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
8 ounces cheddar cheese (2 cups grated)
8 slices sandwich bread

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Melt 4 tablespoons butter in the microwave or in a small pot over
medium-low heat.
Slice 8 ounces cheddar cheese or grate 2 cups.
2. Brush the melted butter on 1 side of each of 8 slices bread. Assemble 4
cheese sandwiches so that the buttered sides are facing out.
3. Put the sandwiches on a rimmed baking sheet and broil, turning once,
until the bread is toasted on both sides and the cheese is melted, 2 or 3
minutes per side. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
8 Other Cheeses to Use
1. Mozzarella
2. Provolone
3. Jack cheese
4. American
5. Gruyère
6. Brie
7. Goat cheese
8. Manchego
10 Additions to Broiled Cheese

Add any of the following, alone or in combination, when you assemble the
sandwiches:
1. Sliced tomato
2. Sliced onion or fennel
3. Sliced apple or pear
4. Cooked bacon or sausage
5. Prosciutto, ham, or salami
6. Sliced green chiles
7. Mustard
8. Chipotles in adobo
9. Maple syrup or honey
10. Jelly
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Thin-sliced sandwich bread is the most traditional and fastest for grilled
cheese, but try experimenting with loaves of bread that you cut yourself,
which are generally more interesting, more substantial, and tastier than
presliced sandwich bread. Since the slices you cut are likely to be a little
thicker than the ones cut by a machine, it takes another minute or two for
the heat to penetrate the bread and melt the cheese.
SIDES
Green Salad
Tomato Salad

French Fries
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Coleslaw

INGREDIENT

Good Bread
Good (or at least acceptable) bread has become
common enough in grocery stores that there’s no
reason to settle for a lousy loaf. Skip the bagged
bread aisle and head straight for the bakery section
or, even better, go to an actual bakery. Look for
loaves with a real crust—it should be quite hard and
make a bit of a crackling sound when squeezed. If
you you’re planning to make sandwiches, you might
ask the baker for the loaf to be sliced, saving yourself
some time.
Type of Bread
Why I Like It
BAGUETTE
You can find real baguettes at many
supermarkets these days. They’re crisp on
the outside, tender in the middle, and great
for sandwiches where you want the bread
to star. Typical baguettes are around 2 feet
long.
CIABATTA AND
FOCACCIA
Ciabatta and often focaccia are sold as
individual pieces that are perfect for
sandwiches, with a large surface area for
laying out ingredients.

CHALLAH AND
BRIOCHE
Soft, golden egg breads with glossy crusts;
flavorful, rich, and wonderful toasted.
They’re also ideal for French toast, so
you’ll never waste leftovers.
WHOLE WHEAT,
MULTIGRAIN, AND
RYE
Often available as whole loaves at
bakeries (ask the baker to slice them for
you), but there are good bagged versions
as well. Hearty enough to be eaten as is
and even to stand up to grilling.
PITA
The ones with pockets are ideal for
stuffing, while the pocketless version
makes a great wrap. Toast them or at least
warm them up.
HAMBURGER BUNS
Sometimes a soft bun is exactly what you
want, and these are available in white,
whole wheat, and potato or egg dough
(both of which are superior).
SANDWICH BREAD
While there are certainly some decent
sandwich breads that come presliced in
plastic bags, in general bread that you can
buy in whole loaves is better. (There is,
however, charm in self-sliced bread.)
Toasting Bread, Toasting Sandwiches
Toast is often a better choice than plain bread; it’s different in texture and
taste. It can deepen the flavor of a sandwich and turn a snack into a meal.
Throughout this chapter I suggest my preferences, but almost any sandwich
can be made with toasted bread, and it’s up to you to choose. Generally,

toasting is best for sandwiches that are going to be eaten right away; packed
toasted sandwiches quickly become soggy. If you must, let the toasted bread
cool completely before you assemble and pack the sandwiches.
How to make toast? For a crowd, the best tool is the broiler. Just lay the
slices of bread on a baking sheet and broil about 6 inches from the heat,
turning once until they’re as dark on both sides as you like. You can toast a
lot of bread this way very easily. And you’ll get some nicely charred bits,
especially if the bread you use is rough, like baguette. If you’re making just
a sandwich or two, revert to the toaster.
Sometimes it’s best to toast the sandwich as a whole: The outsides
become crisp and golden and the insides nice and hot or possibly melted, as
in the case of Broiled Cheese. Again, if you’re cooking for more than two,
use the broiler: set the sandwiches on a rack away from the heat (again
about 6 inches). If the bread is toasting faster than the inside is getting hot,
either turn off the broiler and continue cooking the sandwiches in a 400°F
oven until the insides heat through or lay a couple of sheets of aluminum
foil over the tops of the sandwiches so the bread isn’t directly exposed to
the heat. If you’re making only one or two sandwiches, stick with the
traditional buttered or oiled skillet. Use either method with the sandwiches
in this chapter and you’ll end up with a crisp golden brown outside and a
hot, melty interior.
Storing Bread
Presliced sandwich bread and buns sold at supermarkets are easy to store,
because they contain preservatives that make them last. Store in their bags,
in a bread box, or on the counter for at least a few days, in the refrigerator
for a week or two, or in the freezer, wrapped as tightly as possible, for a
month or two.
Freshly baked bread without the preservatives doesn’t keep nearly as
long. Wrap it in wax paper—plastic makes the crust soggy—and store it in
a bread box or on the counter for one to several days, depending on the

bread. Otherwise, the best option is the freezer; wrap the bread tightly in
aluminum foil or heavy plastic bags and keep in the freezer for up to a
month or two. You’ll need to recrisp it once it thaws. If your fresh bread is
getting stale, just toast it before making your sandwich. You won’t notice
much, if at all.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Peanut Butter and Banana Sandwich
with Honey and Raisins
One of the few dishes that is equally appropriate for breakfast,
lunch, or a snack. Okay, maybe dinner too. The raisins add a
chewiness, along with flavor that’s as intense as any jelly.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons butter
¾ cup peanut butter
8 slices sandwich bread
4 teaspoons honey
4 tablespoons raisins
2 bananas
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Melt 3 tablespoons butter in the microwave or in a small pot over
medium-low heat.
2. Spread ¾ cup peanut butter on 4 slices bread; drizzle about a teaspoon
of honey over each. Sprinkle 1 tablespoon raisins over each, pressing
them down a bit so they stick in the peanut butter.
Peel and slice the bananas.
3. Lay the banana slices on top of the raisins, sprinkle with salt, and close
the sandwiches.
4. Brush both sides of each sandwich with melted butter and put them on
a rimmed baking sheet.
5. Broil, turning once, until the bread is toasted on both sides, 2 or 3
minutes per side. Serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Peanut Butter and Tomato Sandwich with Soy Sauce
This may sound weird, but it’s common to use peanut sauce on tomatoes in
many parts of the world. Substitute soy sauce and a drizzle of Sriracha for
the honey and sliced tomatoes for the bananas. Skip the raisins and the salt
(the soy sauce has plenty) and add a sprinkle of chopped fresh cilantro if
you like.
Peanut Butter and Pickle Sandwich
There’s no explanation for why this is so good: Use sliced pickles instead of
the bananas and skip the honey and raisins.

Almond Butter and Apple Sandwich
Replace the peanut butter with almond butter and the bananas with sliced
apples.
NOTES
DIY NUT BUTTER
All you need to make your own nut butter are nuts, salt, water, and a food
processor. Toast the nuts if you like, then put them in the processor’s work
bowl with a sprinkle of salt; pulse to grind into a coarse paste. Add 2
tablespoons water for every 1 cup nuts, and let the machine run until the
mixture is creamy, 1 or 2 minutes, adding more water a tablespoon at a time
if necessary. You can also add spices (like cinnamon, or even cayenne) or a
little fresh fruit. Either way it keeps in the fridge for weeks. Some good
combos:
1. Peanut, grape, vanilla
2. Walnut, apple, cinnamon
3. Pecan, peach, cayenne
4. Hazelnut, strawberry, black pepper
5. Cashew, mango, nutmeg
6. Almond, apricot, cardamom
7. Pistachio, pear, clove
SIDES
Pick-a-Fruit Salad
French Fries
Sweet Potato Fries

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Hummus and Vegetable Pita Pockets
This sandwich is one of the best reasons to make hummus. Spread
it thickly inside the crisp, toasted pita pocket and fill with
cucumbers, tomatoes, and feta. The hummus you’ll make in this
recipe amounts to about 2 cups, so ½ cup for each pita. To make
the sandwiches lighter, halve the amount of hummus and double
the vegetables.

Ingredients
Four 8-inch pitas with pockets
¼ cup olive oil, plus more for drizzling
Salt and pepper
1 lemon
2 garlic cloves
2 cups cooked or canned chickpeas (one 15-ounce can)
½ cup tahini
1 tablespoon cumin or paprika
2 or 3 medium tomatoes (1 pound)
1 large cucumber
4 ounces feta cheese (1 cup crumbled)

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Drizzle the pitas with olive oil (about ½ teaspoon per side) and rub
them all over with your fingers. Sprinkle salt and pepper over all
and spread them out on a baking sheet.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into a food processor or blender.
Peel and chop 2 garlic cloves.
If you’re using canned chickpeas, rinse and drain them.
2. Add the garlic, chickpeas, ½ cup tahini, ¼ cup olive oil, 1 tablespoon
cumin or paprika, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the food
processor or blender.
3. Let the machine run, adding water, chickpea-cooking liquid, or olive
oil as necessary, until the purée is as smooth as you like. Taste and
adjust the seasoning.
Core the tomatoes and cut them into chunks; put them in a medium
bowl.
Peel the cucumber if necessary, cut it in half lengthwise, and scoop out
the seeds with a spoon. Chop and add to the bowl.
4. Grill or broil the pitas, turning once, until browned (even slightly
charred) on both sides, 2 to 5 minutes total.
Crumble 1 cup feta and add to the bowl; sprinkle with salt and pepper,
drizzle with a little olive oil, and toss.

5. When the pitas are browned, cut each one in half, spreading them apart
a bit to widen the pocket.
6. Spoon some hummus into each pocket, spreading it along the inner
walls. Then spoon in the vegetable and feta mixture, top with a little
more hummus if you like, and serve.
VARIATIONS
7 Additions to Hummus and Vegetable Pita Pockets
Add any of the following, alone or in combination, to the tomato,
cucumber, and feta mixture:
1. Sliced red onions
2. Sliced roasted red peppers
3. Chopped pitted olives
4. Chopped fresh parsley, dill, or mint
5. Cooked bulgur
6. Browned ground lamb
7. Avocado slices
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Don’t toast the pita.
Instead of making the hummus as described in Steps 1 through 3, use
hummus you’ve already made.
SIDES

Green Salad
Chopped Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tofu Sandwich with Cucumber and
Hoisin Mayo
I’m crazy about cucumber sandwiches. Not the dainty English
teatime fare, although those are good too, but big-flavored ones,
like those with goat cheese, hummus, and, yes, tofu.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more for brushing the bread
1 brick firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces)
4 hamburger buns
⅓ cup mayonnaise
1 tablespoon hoisin
1 medium cucumber

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Put 3
tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet (preferably nonstick) over
medium-high heat.
Cut the tofu into 8 slices and pat them dry with a paper towel.
2. Add the tofu to the skillet and cook, turning once, until it’s golden and
crisp on both sides, 3 or 4 minutes per side.
3. Split the buns in half, brush the insides with a little oil, and broil until
lightly toasted, 2 to 5 minutes.
Put ⅓ cup mayonnaise and 1 tablespoon hoisin in a small bowl; stir to
combine.
Peel the cucumber if necessary and cut into thin slices.
4. When the tofu and buns are done, remove both from the heat. Spread
the hoisin mayonnaise on the buns and top with the cucumber slices.
Lay 2 slices tofu on top of each, close the sandwiches, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Buffalo Tofu Sandwich
Use half mayonnaise, half sour cream, and substitute ¼ cup crumbled blue
cheese for the hoisin. Instead of the cucumber, slice 2 celery stalks into
matchsticks. After you lay the tofu on top of the sandwiches, drizzle with
hot sauce.
Tofu Sandwich with Pickles and Dijon Mayo
Replace the hoisin with Dijon mustard and the cucumber with 2 dill pickles.
Tofu Sandwich with Red Onions and Chipotle Mayo

Substitute 1 tablespoon chopped chipotles in adobo for the hoisin and 1
small red onion, thinly sliced, for the cucumber.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
For crunchier tofu, dredge the slices in flour, then beaten eggs, then panko
bread crumbs before cooking. Panfry over medium heat until the panko
coating is golden and crisp, 3 or 4 minutes per side.
SIDES
Green Salad with Sesame-Soy Dressing
Avocado with Lemon and Salt
Carrot Salad with Soy Sauce and Scallions

MASTER RECIPE

Make Your Own Condiments
Needless to say, condiments are an integral part of
fast cooking. Given how often we reach for them, it
pays to use quality products and even make some
yourself. Three of the most common and beloved—
mayonnaise, salsa, and barbecue sauce—are fast and
simple to prepare, and the taste is in a different
league from the processed stuff typically found in
stores. Here’s how to make them.
Mayonnaise
Takes 10 minutes and makes 1 cup.
1
Combine an Egg Yolk and Mustard
Put 1 egg yolk and 2 teaspoons Dijon in a food processor or blender.
Turn the machine on.
2
Stream in Oil
With the machine running, add 1 cup vegetable oil in a slow, steady
stream. Once an emulsion forms you can start to add the oil a little
faster, until it’s all incorporated and the mayonnaise is thick and
creamy.
3
Season and Store
Sprinkle with salt and pepper, add 1 tablespoon sherry vinegar or
lemon juice, and blend or process once more to combine. Use right

away or store in the refrigerator for about 1 week.
VARIATIONS
7 Ways to Flavor Mayonnaise
Add any of the following, alone or in combination, in Step 3:
1. 1 tablespoon minced garlic, ginger, or chile
2. ¼ cup chopped fresh basil, cilantro, parsley, or chives
3. 1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary, oregano, or thyme
4. 2 tablespoons soy sauce
5. 1 or 2 teaspoons grated citrus zest
6. 1 teaspoon prepared horseradish, hot sauce, or Worcestershire
7. 1 or 2 tablespoons any dried spice blend, like curry powder or chili
powder

Fresh Tomato Salsa
Takes 15 minutes and makes 2 cups.
1
Combine the Ingredients
In a large bowl, combine 2 large ripe tomatoes, chopped, 1 medium
white onion, chopped, 1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano), minced, 1
garlic clove, minced, ½ cup chopped fresh cilantro, the juice of 1 or
2 limes, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
2
Let the Flavors Develop
If possible, let the salsa sit for about 15 minutes before serving so the
flavors have a chance to develop. Use right away or store in the
refrigerator for 3 or 4 days.
VARIATIONS
Puréed Tomato Salsa
For a smoother version, pulse the salsa in the food processor or blend it in
the blender until it reaches the consistency you like.
Black Bean Salsa
Add 1 cup cooked black beans and 1 teaspoon cumin in Step 1. Let the
salsa sit for 30 minutes if you have time.
8 Ingredients to Use in Salsa Instead of Tomatoes
1. Tomatillos
2. Any melon
3. Peaches, plums, or nectarines

4. Corn kernels
5. Radishes
6. Pineapple
7. Mango
8. Black beans

Barbecue Sauce
Takes 20 minutes and makes 2 cups.
1
Combine the Ingredients
In a small saucepan over medium-low heat, combine 2  cups ketchup;
¼ cup red wine, rice, or apple cider vinegar; ½ cup dry red wine or
water; 1 tablespoon Worcestershire or soy sauce; 1 tablespoon minced
onion; 1 garlic clove, minced; and 1 tablespoon chili powder.
2
Simmer
Cook the sauce, stirring occasionally until the flavors blend together,
about 10 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning, adding salt and
pepper if necessary. Use right away or let cool, then cover and store in
the refrigerator for about 1 week.
VARIATIONS
Dijon Barbecue Sauce
Reduce the vinegar to 2 tablespoons and add ¼ cup Dijon mustard in Step
1.
Chipotle Barbecue Sauce
Add 1 or 2 mashed chipotles with some of their adobo sauce in Step 1.
Chinese-Style Barbecue Sauce
Substitute 1 cup hoisin for 1 cup of the ketchup. Use rice vinegar and soy
sauce and add 1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger in Step 1.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tuna Sandwich with Pickles and
Mustard
Everybody has a favorite spin on a tuna salad sandwich. (Some
people make it with peanut butter.) This one uses olive oil and
Dijon instead of mayonnaise and spikes the tuna with chopped
pickles to add tanginess and crunch and parsley to lighten it up. It’s
super and different, especially when you try the variations.

Ingredients
Two 6-ounce cans tuna, preferably packed in olive oil
2 dill pickles
1 bunch fresh parsley
8 slices sandwich bread
¼ cup olive oil
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Drain the tuna; put it in a medium bowl.
Chop 2 pickles; add them to the bowl.
Chop ¼ cup parsley and add it to the bowl.
Put 8 slices bread on a rimmed baking sheet.
2. Broil the bread, turning once, until lightly browned on both sides, 2 to
5 minutes total.
3. Add ¼ cup olive oil, 2 teaspoons Dijon, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper to the bowl. Stir to combine, taste, and adjust the seasoning.
4. When the bread is lightly toasted, remove it from the broiler; assemble
the sandwiches and serve.
VARIATIONS
Tuna Sandwich with Olives
Substitute ½ cup chopped pitted olives for the pickles and ¼ cup
mayonnaise for the olive oil. Keep the Dijon if you like.
Tuna Pita with Cucumbers and Feta
Substitute 1 medium cucumber, peeled, seeded, and chopped, for the
pickles. Instead of sandwich bread, use pita pockets. Substitute at least ¼
cup crumbled feta for the Dijon and add the juice of a lemon along with the
olive oil.
Tuna Sandwich with Fennel, Capers, and Lemon

I particularly like this version on a baguette, but use whatever bread you
like. Replace the pickles with 1 small fennel bulb, chopped, and the Dijon
with 2 tablespoons capers. Add the juice of a lemon along with the olive oil.
Tuna Sandwich with Avocado and Cilantro
Extra creamy. Use 1 avocado, chopped, instead of the pickles, cilantro
instead of the parsley, and 1 small red onion, chopped, instead of the Dijon.
Stir the tuna a little more so that the avocado mashes up and turns the
mixture creamy and light green.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Tuna Melt with Pickles and Mustard
After you flip the bread, put a slice or 2 of cheese on top of 4 pieces.
Continue broiling until the cheese melts.
SIDES
Green Salad
Fennel Salad
Cucumber Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Crab Salad Sandwich
This is no-frills, old-school crab salad on toast. Some lettuce and
tomato on top and a cold beer on the side and you’re good to go.
For some newfangled crab salads, see the Variations.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons butter
1 pound cooked lump crabmeat
½ cup mayonnaise
Salt and pepper
8 slices sandwich bread
1 large ripe tomato
1 small head Boston or Bibb lettuce

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Melt 2 tablespoons butter in the microwave or in a small pot over
medium-low heat.
Pick through the crabmeat, discarding any pieces of shell or cartilage.
Put the meat in a large bowl.
2. Add ½ cup mayonnaise and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl;
stir to combine, taste, and adjust the seasoning.
3. Put 8 slices bread on a rimmed baking sheet and brush both sides with
the butter. Broil the bread, turning once, until lightly browned on both
sides, 2 to 5 minutes total.
Core and slice the tomato.
Tear off 4 to 8 whole lettuce leaves. (Refrigerate the remaining lettuce
for another use.)
4. When the bread is lightly toasted, remove it from the broiler. Spoon
some crab salad onto the bread, top with the lettuce and tomatoes,
close the sandwiches, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Creole Crab Salad Sandwich
Add 2 teaspoons Dijon mustard, 1 cup corn kernels, 1 chopped red bell
pepper, and 2 teaspoons Old Bay seasoning to the crab mixture.
Buttery Crab Salad Sandwich
Use 4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted, instead of mayonnaise. Add ½
cup chopped radishes and 1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon to the crab

mixture.
Soy-Spiked Crab Salad Sandwich
Reduce the mayonnaise to ¼ cup. Add 1 tablespoon soy sauce, 2 teaspoons
sesame oil, ½ cup chopped scallions, and ¼ cup toasted sesame seeds to the
crab mixture.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
BRUSHING VS. SPREADING BUTTER
We’ve all had the experience of trying to spread hard-from-the-fridge butter
onto slices of soft bread: The butter stays in a clump, and sometimes your
knife rips right through the bread. If you don’t think ahead and soften butter
on the counter, just melt it in the microwave or in a small pot on the stove
while you do something else; then use a brush to apply it to the bread. Even
if you have softened butter, brushing will get you a thinner, more even
coating than spreading could.
SIDES
Cucumber Salad
French Fries
Sweet Potato Fries
Avocado with Lemon and Salt
No-Mayo Slaw

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Broiled Ham and Gruyère with
Apples
A variation on the Parisian classic Croque Monsieur. Croque means
“crunch,” and, thanks to the apple, this sandwich crunches even
more than usual.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
8 ounces Gruyère cheese (2 cups grated)
1 large apple
8 slices sandwich bread
2 tablespoons Dijon mustard
4 slices ham

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Melt 4 tablespoons butter in the microwave or in a small pot over
medium-low heat.
Slice 8 ounces Gruyère or grate 2 cups.
Core and slice the apple.
2. Brush the melted butter on 1 side of 8 slices bread and 2 tablespoons
Dijon on the other side. Assemble 4 ham, cheese, and apple
sandwiches so that the buttered sides are facing out.
3. Put the sandwiches on a rimmed baking sheet and broil, turning once,
until the bread is toasted on both sides and the cheese is melted, 2 or 3
minutes per side. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Broiled Turkey and Brie with Tomatoes
Substitute Brie for the Gruyère, turkey for the ham, and 1 or 2 tomatoes for
the apple. Keep the Dijon if you like. Alternatively, pesto is fantastic here.
Broiled Salami and Provolone with Roasted Red Peppers
Substitute provolone for the Gruyère, salami for the ham (you might want a
few extra slices if they’re small), and sliced roasted red peppers for the
apple.
Broiled Prosciutto and Mozzarella with Melon
Use fresh mozzarella instead of the Gruyère, prosciutto instead of the ham,
and some thin slices of cantaloupe in place of the apples.

NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Cook the sandwiches 2 at a time in a large skillet, flipping each once the
bread becomes crisp and golden. Keep them warm in a 200ºF oven while
you cook the second batch.
SIDES
Green Salad
Tomato Salad
French Fries
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Frozen Vegetable Soup
Coleslaw

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Smoky Black Bean and Carrot
Burgers
Patties made out of black beans and oats not only look
astonishingly like a real hamburger; the taste and texture are better
than in any vegetarian burger you’ve ever tried. Here I add a carrot
for a little crunch and chipotles and cumin for smokiness.

Ingredients
1 large carrot
1 garlic clove
2 cups canned black beans (one 15-ounce can)
¾ cup rolled oats, plus more if needed
2 chipotles in adobo
2 teaspoons cumin
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for brushing the buns
4 hamburger buns
1 small red onion
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
⅓ cup mayonnaise

Prep | Cook
Trim, peel, and cut the carrot into small chunks; put it in a food
processor and pulse it into small bits.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove; add it to the food processor.
Rinse the beans in a colander and drain them; add them to the food
processor.
1. Add ¾ cup oats, 2 chipotles in adobo, 2 teaspoons cumin, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper to the food processor.
2. Process until the mixture is combined but not puréed, about 30
seconds. If the mixture is too thin, pulse in a few more oats; if it’s too
thick (unlikely), pulse in a splash of water.
3. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Turn
the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
4. Shape the bean mixture into 4 patties (about ½ inch thick). When the
oil is hot, cook the burgers, turning once, until crisp on both sides, 4 or
5 minutes per side, adding more oil if the pan is dry.
5. Split the buns in half, brush with a little oil, and broil until lightly
toasted, 2 or 3 minutes.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the onion.
Strip the cilantro leaves from several sprigs.
6. When the buns are toasted, remove them from the broiler; spread ⅓
cup mayonnaise on the buns. Add the onion, cilantro leaves, and
burgers. Close the sandwiches and serve.

VARIATIONS
White Bean and Zucchini Burgers
Substitute 1 small zucchini for the carrot, white beans for black, 1
tablespoon grated lemon zest for the chipotles, 2 teaspoons chopped fresh
rosemary for the cumin, and basil for the cilantro.
BBQ Black-Eyed Pea and Sweet Potato Burgers
Replace the carrot with ½ small sweet potato, the black beans with black-
eyed peas, and the chipotles with barbecue sauce.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans (cooked until they fall apart)
Mayonnaise
SIDES
French Fries
Green Salad
Avocado with Lemon and Salt

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Egg Salad Sandwich with Lots of
Vegetables
Loaded with fresh cucumbers and tomatoes and dressed with olive
oil and lemon, this sandwich puts the “salad” back in egg salad.

Ingredients
4 eggs
1 medium cucumber
2 medium ripe tomatoes
1 small red onion
1 bunch fresh parsley
8 slices sandwich bread
1 lemon
¼ cup olive oil
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
2. Fill a medium saucepan about two-thirds with water and gently
submerge the eggs. Bring to a boil, turn off the heat, and cover. Set a
timer for 9 minutes.
Fill a large bowl with ice water.
Peel the cucumber if necessary, cut it in half lengthwise, scoop out the
seeds with a spoon, and chop. Put it in a large bowl.
Core and chop the tomatoes; add to the bowl.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add to the bowl.
Chop ¼ cup parsley and add to the bowl.
Put 8 slices bread on a rimmed baking sheet.
3. Broil the bread, turning once, until lightly browned on both sides, 2 to
5 minutes total.
Grate the lemon zest into the bowl; refrigerate the remaining fruit for
another use.
4. When the eggs are done, transfer them to the ice water with a slotted
spoon. Leave them submerged for at least 1 minute.
5. Crack and peel the eggs, transfer them to a cutting board, and chop.
Add them to the bowl.
6. Add ¼ cup olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl; toss,
taste, and adjust the seasoning. Assemble the sandwiches and serve.

VARIATIONS
Curried Egg Salad Sandwich with Lots of Vegetables
Use cilantro instead of parsley and lime zest instead of lemon. Add 1
teaspoon curry powder along with the olive oil.
Egg and Arugula Salad Sandwich
Instead of the cucumber, use 2 cups arugula. If you chop the leaves up
slightly, the sandwiches will be easier to assemble and eat.
“Classic” Egg Salad Sandwich with Lots of Vegetables
Substitute ¼ cup mayonnaise and 2 teaspoons Dijon mustard for the olive
oil.
SIDES
Green Salad
Celery Salad
No-Mayo Slaw

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Eggplant Parmesan Sub
Easy to cook, easy to assemble. Traditionally slices of eggplant for
“parm” are dredged in flour and fried, but you don’t need to bother
with that; just brown chunks of eggplant and combine them with
the tomato sauce. If you crave the fried taste of the classic coating,
see If You Have More Time for instructions.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 medium eggplant (1 to 1½ pounds)
Salt and pepper
4 sub rolls
4 ounces mozzarella cheese (1 cup grated)
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
One 14-ounce can crushed tomatoes
Several sprigs fresh basil

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Put 3
tablespoons oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Trim the eggplant and cut it into ½-inch cubes.
2. Add the eggplant to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and raise
the heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring occasionally until lightly
browned all over, 6 to 8 minutes.
3. Put the sub rolls on a rimmed baking sheet and broil until lightly
toasted, 1 to 3 minutes.
Grate 1 cup each mozzarella and Parmesan.
4. Remove the toasted rolls from the broiler; leave the broiler on.
5. When the eggplant is lightly browned, add the crushed tomatoes, stir to
combine, and cook until the eggplant is tender, another 2 or 3 minutes.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs.
6. When the eggplant is tender, spoon the eggplant and tomato mixture
into each roll; top with the basil leaves and then cheese.
7. Return the sandwiches to the broiler and cook until the cheese is
bubbly and brown. Top the sandwiches with the other side of the roll.
Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Chicken Parm Sub
Instead of the eggplant, use 1½ pounds boneless chicken breast, cut into 1-
inch chunks. Sauté them in the oil until lightly browned, 5 or 6 minutes,

then add the tomatoes and cook until the chicken is just cooked through, 2
or 3 minutes more.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of the crushed tomatoes, use about 2 cups Tomato Sauce.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Classic Eggplant Parm Sub
Slice the eggplant into ¼-inch rounds. Dredge them in flour, then beaten
egg, then bread crumbs, stacking them between paper towels as you go.
Working in batches, fry the slices in ¼ inch of olive oil over medium-high
heat, turning once, until golden and crisp on both sides and tender in the
middle, 4 to 6 minutes total. Drain on paper towels. When you’re done,
assemble the subs, eggplant on the bottom, then tomato sauce and basil,
then the cheese. Broil, or bake at 450ºF, until the cheese is bubbly and
brown.
SIDES
Green Salad
Caprese Salad
Fennel Salad with Olives
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Salmon Sandwich with Peanut
Vinaigrette
If you want a fast salmon sandwich that really tastes like salmon,
try this. It’s a light treatment that lets the salmon stand on its own.

Ingredients
1½ pounds salmon fillet
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
¼ cup peanuts
1 lime
1 tablespoon soy sauce
1 tablespoon sesame oil
3 scallions
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
4 hamburger buns

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn on the broiler; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Put the salmon on a rimmed baking sheet, rub with 1 tablespoon
vegetable oil, and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Chop ¼ cup peanuts; put them in a small bowl.
Halve the lime and squeeze the juice into the bowl.
2. Add 1 tablespoon soy sauce and 1 tablespoon sesame oil to the bowl.
Stir to combine.
3. When the grill or broiler is hot, cook the salmon, turning once, until
browned on both sides and cooked as you like, 3 or 4 minutes per side
if you like it a little soft in the middle, another minute or 2 if you like it
firmer.
Trim and slice the scallions.
Strip the cilantro leaves from several sprigs.
4. When the salmon is done, remove it from the grill or broiler.
5. Split the buns in half and grill or broil until lightly toasted, a minute or
2.
6. Using a knife or metal spatula, cut the salmon into 4 equal pieces and
put them in the buns. Drizzle the peanut vinaigrette onto the salmon
and top with the scallions and cilantro. Close the sandwiches and
serve.
VARIATIONS

Salmon Sandwich with Tarragon Mayo
Rub the salmon with olive oil instead of vegetable. Instead of the
vinaigrette, combine ⅓ cup mayonnaise, the juice of a lemon, 1 tablespoon
chopped fresh tarragon, salt, and pepper. Spread the mixture on the toasted
buns before adding the salmon. Top with sliced tomatoes instead of the
scallions and cilantro.
Salmon Sandwich with Chipotle-Avocado Spread
Instead of the vinaigrette, put 1 ripe avocado in a bowl and mash it with a
chopped chipotle in adobo, the juice of a lime, salt, and pepper; you want to
mash it up enough so the mixture is smooth and spreadable. Spread it on the
toasted buns before adding the salmon. Top with cilantro and sliced red
onions.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
If you have room, grill or broil the salmon and the buns at the same time.
SIDES
Green Salad
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin
Ginger-Orange Bean Sprouts
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sriracha Shrimp Salad Roll
Grilling or broiling puts a nice smoky edge on normally tame
shrimp salad, while a Sriracha-spiked riff on tartar sauce adds heat.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons butter
1 lime
1 small cucumber
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
⅓ cup mayonnaise
2 teaspoons Sriracha (or more to taste)
1 pound peeled shrimp
Salt and pepper
4 hot dog buns

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Melt 2 tablespoons butter in the microwave or in a small pot over
medium-low heat.
Halve the lime and squeeze the juice into a large bowl.
Peel the cucumber if necessary; cut it in half lengthwise and scoop out
the seeds with a spoon. Finely chop and add it to the bowl.
Chop several sprigs cilantro and add to the bowl.
2. Add ⅓ cup mayonnaise and 2 teaspoons Sriracha to the bowl; stir to
combine.
3. When the grill or broiler is hot, place the shrimp on a baking sheet or
grill pan and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook, turning once, until
they’re lightly browned on the outside and just cooked through, 2 or 3
minutes per side.
Brush the insides of the buns with the melted butter.
4. When the shrimp are done, remove them from the grill or broiler. Grill
or broil the buns, turning as necessary, until lightly toasted inside and
out, 2 to 5 minutes total.
5. While the buns toast, chop the shrimp and add them to the bowl; toss,
taste, and adjust the seasoning, adding more Sriracha if you like it
hotter.
6. Spoon the shrimp into the toasted buns and serve.

VARIATIONS
Shrimp Salad Roll with Tomato-Paprika Mayo
Replace the lime with lemon, the cucumber with 1 medium tomato, the
cilantro with parsley, and the Sriracha with 1 teaspoon smoked paprika.
Curried Shrimp Salad Roll
Use 1 teaspoon curry powder instead of the Sriracha.
Scallop Roll with Lemon-Tarragon Aïoli
Substitute a lemon for the lime, 1 tablespoon chopped tarragon for the
cilantro, and 1 teaspoon minced garlic for the Sriracha. Skip the cucumber.
Use sea scallops instead of shrimp: Grill or broil them, turning once, until
they’re browned on both sides and opaque all the way through, about 5
minutes total.
Fish Sandwich
Substitute a lemon for the lime, 2 pickles for the cucumber, parsley for the
cilantro, and 2 tablespoons chopped capers for the Sriracha. Use 1½ pounds
thick white fish fillets instead of the shrimp. Grill or broil, turning once,
until browned on both sides and just cooked through in the middle, 5 or 6
minutes per side. Divide the fish among 4 toasted hamburger buns or
sandwich bread; top with tartar sauce and a little lettuce.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
EVEN FASTER
If you have room, grill or broil the shrimp and the buns at the same time.

SIDES
Green Salad
Soy Slaw
Carrot Salad with Soy Sauce and Scallions

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Seared Tuna Sandwich with Wilted
Bok Choy and Soy Mayo
The combination of soy sauce and mayo is unusual and fantastic;
add seared tuna, crisp on the outside and rare in the middle, and
you have a keeper. I skip the bok choy stems in this recipe and just
quickly wilt the leaves.

Ingredients
1½ pounds fresh tuna
2 teaspoons vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
1 head bok choy
8 slices sandwich bread
½ inch fresh ginger
⅓ cup mayonnaise
1 tablespoon soy sauce
2 tablespoons sesame seeds

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Put a large
skillet over high heat.
Rub the tuna all over with 1 teaspoon vegetable oil; sprinkle with salt
and pepper.
2. When the skillet is very hot, add the tuna and cook, turning once, until
it’s browned on both sides but still raw in the center, 3 or 4 minutes per
side.
Slice off 2 cups bok choy leaves; refrigerate the rest of the head for
another use.
Put 8 slices bread on a rimmed baking sheet.
3. Broil the bread, turning once, until lightly toasted on both sides, 2 to 5
minutes total.
Peel and mince ½ inch ginger; put it in a small bowl.
4. When the tuna is done, remove it from the skillet. Add 1 teaspoon oil
to the skillet, followed immediately by the bok choy and a sprinkle of
salt and pepper.
5. Cook the bok choy, stirring occasionally, until just wilted, no more
than a minute, then remove from the heat.
6. When the bread is toasted, remove it from the broiler.
Add ⅓ cup mayonnaise and 1 tablespoon soy sauce to the ginger; stir
to combine.
7. Spread the mayonnaise mixture on 4 slices of the bread, sprinkle with
2 tablespoons sesame seeds, and top with the bok choy.

8. Cut the tuna into slices and lay them on top of the bok choy. Close the
sandwiches and serve.
VARIATIONS
Seared Tuna Niçoise Sandwich
Instead of the bok choy leaves, use 8 ounces green beans: Stir-fry them until
lightly browned and just tender (but still with some crunch), 3 to 5 minutes.
Substitute ¼ cup chopped pitted Niçoise olives for the ginger and ¼ cup
chopped cornichons for the soy sauce. Top the sandwiches with sliced
tomatoes.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
EVEN FASTER
If you like to eat tuna raw, just cut the fresh tuna into slices and don’t bother
searing it.
SIDES
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin
Soy Slaw
Edamame Succotash

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken Salad Sandwich with Grapes
and Rosemary
Chicken salad with grapes has been around since I was a kid. Some
mothers in the sixties made it with powdered Italian dressing and
Sweet’N Low. I’ve replaced that junk with real ingredients and
kept the tangy-sweet spirit of the sandwich.

Ingredients
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken breasts
1 cup white wine or water
1 bay leaf
3 sprigs fresh rosemary
⅓ cup mayonnaise
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
Salt and pepper
1 bunch red or green grapes
1 baguette

Prep | Cook
1. Put the chicken, 1 cup wine or water, and 1 bay leaf in a medium
skillet over high heat.
2. When the liquid boils, lower the heat so it bubbles gently. Cover and
cook until the chicken is opaque and just cooked through, 10 to 15
minutes.
Strip the leaves from 3 rosemary sprigs, chop, and put them in a large
bowl.
Add ⅓ cup mayonnaise, 2 teaspoons Dijon, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper to the bowl; stir to combine.
Pick off 1 cup grapes from the bunch, slice each grape in half, and add
them to the bowl.
Have the baguette lengthwise.
3. When the chicken is cooked, transfer it to a cutting board. Chop or
shred it and add it to the bowl. Stir to coat the chicken and grapes in
the dressing. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
4. Spoon the chicken salad onto 1 half of the baguette, top with the other
half, cut the sandwich into 4 sections, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Chicken Salad Sandwich with Grapes and Curry
Substitute 2 teaspoons curry powder for the rosemary. For extra crunch, add
some chopped celery, red onion, and/or walnuts.
Chicken Salad Sandwich with Olives and Thyme

Replace the rosemary with thyme and the grapes with pitted olives.
Substitute olive oil for the mayonnaise, keep the Dijon, and add the juice of
a lemon.
Turkey Salad Sandwich with Apples and Sage
Substitute 2 turkey tenderloins or turkey breast cutlets for the chicken. Up
the poaching water to 2 cups and cook the turkey for closer to 20 to 25
minutes. Substitute sage for the rosemary and 1 cup chopped apples for the
grapes.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
EVEN FASTER
Use chicken tenders instead of chicken breasts; they’ll take 5 to 10 minutes.
Instead of cooking chicken breasts as described in Steps 1 and 2, use a
Whole Roast Chicken.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Toast the baguette.
Chill the chicken salad in the refrigerator before assembling the sandwich.
SIDES
Green Salad
Tomato Salad
Fennel Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken, Bacon, Avocado, and
Tomato Wrap
Smoky chicken, crisp bacon, creamy avocado, juicy tomatoes,
wrapped in a perfect package.

Ingredients
4 slices bacon
2 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 1 pound)
1 tablespoon olive oil
Salt and pepper
2 medium ripe tomatoes
1 small red onion
1 avocado
1 lime
4 sandwich wraps

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
2. Put the bacon in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook, turning as
necessary until crisp, 5 to 10 minutes.
Line a plate with paper towels.
Cut the chicken breasts in half horizontally so you end up with 2 flat
cutlets for each breast. Press down on each cutlet a bit to flatten,
then rub the chicken with 1 tablespoon oil and sprinkle with salt and
pepper.
3. When the grill or broiler is hot, cook the chicken, turning once, until
lightly browned on both sides and just cooked through, 2 to 5 minutes
per side.
Core the tomatoes; halve them and then slice.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
4. When the bacon is crisp, transfer it to the paper towels (save the
rendered fat in case you want to drizzle it into your wrap).
Halve and pit the avocado; scoop out the flesh and slice it.
Halve the lime.
Lay the wraps out on the counter.
5. When the chicken is done, transfer it to a cutting board and slice it.
6. Lay the chicken in the wraps, followed by the bacon, tomatoes,
avocado, and red onion. Squeeze some lime juice over the top, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and drizzle on bacon fat if you like.

7. Wrap them all up like a burrito and serve.
VARIATIONS
Chicken, Bacon, Tomato, and Blue Cheese Wrap
Skip the lime juice. Instead of (or in addition to) the avocado, crumble some
blue cheese into the wrap.
Greek Chicken Wrap
For saltiness I like to use a handful of chopped kalamata olives instead of
the bacon. Substitute 1 small cucumber, sliced, for the avocado, and lemon
for the lime. Sprinkle on some feta, and, since there’s no bacon fat, drizzle
on olive oil instead.
Chipotle BLT Wrap
Skip the chicken and double the bacon. Stuff the wrap with some chopped
romaine lettuce in addition to the tomato, red onion, and avocado. Stir
together rendered bacon fat, 2 chopped chipotles in adobo, and the lime
juice. Drizzle it over the top before wrapping.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Stir-fry the chicken and the bacon together: Cut the bacon into 1-inch pieces
and start cooking them in the skillet over medium heat. Slice the raw
chicken cutlets and add them to the skillet. Cook, stirring occasionally until
the bacon is crisp and the chicken is cooked through, 5 to 10 minutes.
Spoon the mixture into the wraps and proceed as directed.
Instead of cooking chicken breasts as described in Step 3, use a Whole
Roast Chicken.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME

After turning the chicken cutlets, lay a slice or 2 of cheddar cheese on top
of each one. Cook until the cheese is melted. Slice the chicken as directed.
WRAP IT UP
While “wraps” are marketed as their own distinct product in supermarkets,
it’s good to remember that any thin, flexible piece of bread can be used as a
wrap. Of course, flour tortillas—plain, whole wheat, or any number of
flavors that they now come in—are the most common, but lavash, naan, and
the pocketless pitas used for gyros are equally appealing. You can even use
corn tortillas if you’d rather have a few smaller wraps than one big one.
SIDES
Green Salad
Tomato Salad with Olive Oil and Yogurt
Chile-Cumin Black Beans

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Blackened Chicken Sandwich with
Pickled Red Onions
Chicken breasts layered with a powerful spice mixture and
blackened in a skillet make a terrific sandwich. And since the
onions need nothing more than to be left alone as they pickle, you
have the time to make this classic condiment.

Ingredients
½ cup red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon sugar
Salt
1 medium red onion
2 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more if needed
1 teaspoon chili powder
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon coriander
2 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 1 pound)
1 avocado
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
4 soft sandwich rolls
2 ounces queso fresco (½ cup crumbled; optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put ½ cup vinegar, ½ cup water, 1 tablespoon sugar, and a sprinkle of
salt in a small saucepan over high heat.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
2. When the liquid comes to a boil, add the onion slices, submerge them
as much as you can in the liquid, cover, and turn off the heat. Just
leave them there until you’re ready to make the sandwiches.
3. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-low
heat.
Combine 1 teaspoon each chili powder, cumin, coriander, and salt in a
small bowl.
Cut the chicken breasts in half horizontally so you end up with 2 flat
cutlets for each breast. Press down on each cutlet a bit to flatten,
then sprinkle the spice rub all over the chicken, pressing it in.
4. Raise the heat under the skillet to medium and add the chicken,
working in 2 batches if necessary to avoid crowding the pan. Cook,
turning once, until the spice rub is well browned (or even blackened)
and the chicken is cooked through, 3 or 4 minutes per side.
Halve and pit the avocado; scoop out the flesh and slice it.
Strip the cilantro leaves from several sprigs.
Slice the sandwich rolls in half.
Crumble ½ cup queso fresco if you’re using it.
5. When the chicken is done, put 1 cutlet on each bun. Lay the avocado
slices on top, then use tongs to add the pickled onions (it’s more than

okay if some of the pickling liquid splashes onto the sandwich).
6. Top with the cilantro leaves and queso fresco if you’re using it. Close
the sandwiches and serve.
VARIATIONS
BBQ Blackened Chicken Sandwich with Pickled Cucumbers
Use 1 small cucumber, very thinly sliced, instead of the red onion. For the
spice rub, use 1 teaspoon each paprika, chili powder, brown sugar, and salt.
Skip the avocado, cilantro, and queso fresco and go for a squirt of your
favorite barbecue sauce instead.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Toast the rolls.
Let the onions pickle for at least 30 minutes or up to a few hours. They’ll
get softer and more acidic as you go.
SIDES
Jícama and Radish Salad
Cucumber Salad with Hot Sauce and Lime Juice
Mexican Street Corn

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken and Black Bean Burrito
If you have a great burrito spot, I envy you, because most store-
bought burritos are mushy and flavorless.

Ingredients
1 cup long-grain rice
Salt
3 medium ripe tomatoes (about 1 pound)
1 small onion
1 fresh hot green chile (like jalapeño)
1 bunch fresh cilantro
2 limes
Pepper
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
6 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 1 pound)
2 cups cooked or canned black beans (one 15-ounce can)
2 garlic cloves
1 teaspoon chili powder
1 teaspoon cumin
4 large flour tortillas
Sour cream

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 cup rice in a medium saucepan; add a big pinch of salt and 2
cups water to cover. Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so the mixture
bubbles steadily but not vigorously; cover. Cook, undisturbed, until
small craters appear on the surface, 10 to 15 minutes.
Core and chop the tomatoes; put them in a medium bowl.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the bowl.
Trim and mince the chile; add it to the bowl.
Chop ½ cup cilantro and add it to the bowl.
Halve the limes; squeeze the juice into the bowl. Sprinkle with salt and
pepper and stir.
2. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Chop the chicken into ½-inch chunks.
3. When the oil is hot, add the chicken to the skillet, sprinkle with salt
and pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until it loses its pink color,
3 or 4 minutes.
4. When craters appear on the surface of the rice, tip the pot to see if any
liquid remains. If so, cover and keep cooking until the rice is dry,
checking every minute or 2 until the liquid is gone. Turn off the heat
and cover.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.

5. When the chicken is no longer pink, add the beans and garlic, along
with 1 teaspoon chili powder, 1 teaspoon cumin, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the beans are hot and the
chicken is cooked through, 3 to 5 minutes.
6. Put the tortillas in the microwave for 15 seconds or so to warm them
up. Lay them out and top them with the rice.
7. When the chicken and beans are done, spoon the mixture over the rice.
Top with the salsa and a few dollops of sour cream if you like. Wrap
the burritos tightly and serve.
VARIATIONS
Steak and Black Bean Burrito with Fresh Salsa
Use 1 pound sliced skirt steak instead of the chicken; you can get away with
cooking it a little less.
Shrimp and White Bean Burrito with Corn Salsa
Substitute 2 cups fresh or thawed frozen corn kernels for the tomatoes and 1
pound peeled shrimp for the chicken. Replace the black beans with white
and add them at the same time as the shrimp; by the time the beans are hot,
the shrimp will be cooked.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chili Powder
EVEN FASTER
Skip the salsa; just top with your favorite hot sauce instead. Or, instead of
making the salsa as described in the Prep after Step 1, use Fresh Tomato

Salsa.
Instead of cooking chicken thighs as described in Step 3, use a Whole Roast
Chicken.
SIDES
Mexican Street Corn
Ripe Plantains

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Turkey and Broccoli Rabe Hero
The combination of sautéed broccoli rabe, melted mozzarella, and
lemon zest is so good that you can skip the meat and not miss it a
bit. But tucking some quickly braised sliced turkey into the bottom
of the sandwich is a treat.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons olive oil
2 turkey tenderloins or turkey breast cutlets (1 to 1½ pounds total)
Salt and pepper
12 ounces broccoli rabe
2 garlic cloves
8 ounces fresh mozzarella cheese
4 sub rolls
½ cup chicken stock or water
½ teaspoon red chile flakes
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Put 2
tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Sprinkle the turkey with salt and pepper.
2. When the oil is hot, put the turkey in the skillet and cook, turning once,
until browned on both sides, 5 or 6 minutes per side.
Trim and chop the broccoli rabe, separating any thick stems if
necessary.
Peel 2 garlic cloves; cut them into slivers.
Slice 8 ounces mozzarella.
3. Put the sub rolls on a rimmed baking sheet and broil until lightly
toasted, 2 to 5 minutes.
4. When the turkey is browned, add ½ cup stock or water to the skillet
and partially cover the pan. Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles
gently but steadily and cook until the turkey is cooked through, 5 to 10
minutes.
5. Add 2 tablespoons olive oil to the skillet. Add any thick broccoli rabe
stems and cook until they begin to soften, 3 or 4 minutes.
6. When the rolls are toasted, remove them from the broiler. Leave the
broiler on.
7. When the stems begin to soften, add the broccoli rabe leaves, a handful
at a time if necessary, the garlic slivers, ½ teaspoon red chile flakes,
and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook until the leaves are just wilted,
3 or 4 minutes.

8. When the turkey is cooked through, thinly slice it; divide it among the
sub rolls.
9. When the broccoli rabe is just wilted, lay it on top of the turkey. Lay
the slices of mozzarella on top.
10. Return the sandwiches to the broiler and cook until the cheese is
bubbly and brown. Grate some lemon zest over the top (refrigerate the
remaining fruit for another use) and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Turkey and Spinach Hero with Fontina and Lemon Zest
Substitute spinach leaves for the broccoli rabe and fontina cheese for the
mozzarella. Cook the spinach for a just a couple minutes.
Turkey and Kale Hero with Gruyère
Substitute kale for the broccoli rabe and Gruyère for the mozzarella. Skip
the lemon. Cook the kale for a minute or 2 longer than the broccoli rabe.
Tomato and Broccoli Rabe Hero with Mozzarella and Lemon Zest
Skip the turkey and start by sautéing the broccoli rabe. Cut 2 large ripe
tomatoes into thick slices and lay them in the bottom of the toasted sub rolls
instead of the turkey.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
Use deli turkey instead of homemade.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME

Ladle some tomato sauce over the turkey and broccoli rabe before topping
with the mozzarella and broiling.
SIDES
Tomato Salad
Carrot Salad with Raisins
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Open-Face Lyonnaise Sandwich
How do you make one of the world’s great sandwiches? Take one
of the world’s great salads and put it on a piece of toast. Salade
Lyonnaise—a sublime mixture of frisée, bacon, soft-cooked egg,
and Dijon vinaigrette—needs no embellishment.

Ingredients
8 slices bacon
1 head frisée
1 shallot
4 thick slices any rustic bread
1 tablespoon red wine vinegar
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons butter
4 eggs

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
2. Put 8 slices bacon in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook, turning as
necessary until crisp, 5 to 10 minutes.
Line a plate with paper towels.
Trim the frisée and separate the leaves; put them in a bowl.
Trim, peel, and mince the shallot.
3. Broil 4 slices bread, turning once, until lightly toasted on both sides, 2
to 5 minutes total.
4. When the bacon is crisp, transfer it to the paper towels; leave the fat in
the skillet. Add the shallot, 1 tablespoon red wine vinegar, and 2
teaspoons Dijon to the skillet. Stir to combine and pour the dressing
over the frisée. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and toss.
5. Return the skillet to medium heat and add 2 tablespoons butter. When
the foam subsides, crack the eggs into the skillet and cook until the
whites are no longer translucent, 2 or 3 minutes.
6. When the egg whites are no longer translucent, turn the heat to low
and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Put 2 slices bacon on each piece of bread and pile the frisée on top.
7. When the egg whites are completely firm and the yolks are as runny as
you like, remove the eggs from the skillet and put 1 on top of each
sandwich. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS

Open-Face Cobb Sandwich
Use romaine, Boston, or Bibb lettuce instead of the frisée; add some halved
cherry tomatoes and crumbled blue cheese to the mix as well. Hard-boiled
eggs are classic in Cobb salad; if you have any, chop a few and toss them
with the salad. Or just stick with the sunny-side-up eggs.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of using the shallot, vinegar, and Dijon as described in Step 4, add a
couple tablespoons Vinaigrette to the pan.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you prefer, poach the eggs instead of frying them. See Poaching Eggs.
OPEN YOUR MIND TO OPENING YOUR SANDWICH
Most of the sandwiches sold in delis and restaurants in this country (and
maybe the world) have too much bread. It throws the entire balance of a
sandwich out of whack and leaves you feeling much fuller than you’d like
to be. Of course, in your own kitchen you are in total control of the bread
situation, but one foolproof way to ensure that your sandwiches aren’t too
bready is to take away an entire slice. Open-face sandwiches are just as
enjoyable as regular sandwiches, but a whole slice of carbs lighter. They are
great vehicles for salady mixtures, like the one here, cold cuts, and tuna
melts. And honestly, anything you can put between 2 slices of bread you
can probably figure out how to put on top of just one.
SIDES
Tomato Salad
Fennel Salad
French Fries

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Spanish Dip
This sandwich is a riff on the classic French dip in concept but not
ingredients. It’s a chorizo and manchego grilled cheese with a
tomato dipping sauce called salmorejo—kind of like a thick
gazpacho. Traditional? Maybe not. Delicious? ¡Sí!

Ingredients
2 medium ripe tomatoes
1 garlic clove
9 slices rustic white bread
¾ cup olive oil
¼ cup sherry vinegar
Salt and pepper
8 ounces manchego cheese (2 cups grated)
8 ounces smoked Spanish chorizo

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Core and cut the tomatoes into chunks; put them in a blender.
Peel 1 garlic clove; add it to the blender.
Tear 1 slice bread into pieces and add them to the blender.
2. Add ½ cup olive oil, ¼ cup sherry vinegar, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper to the blender. Turn the machine on and purée until the mixture
is smooth and thick, adding a splash of water if necessary. Taste and
adjust the seasoning.
3. Pour the mixture into 4 individual bowls for dipping.
Slice 8 ounces manchego or grate 2 cups.
Thinly slice the chorizo.
4. Drizzle ¼ cup oil on 8 slices bread. Assemble 4 chorizo and manchego
sandwiches so that the oiled sides of the bread are facing out.
5. Put the sandwiches on a rimmed baking sheet and broil, turning once,
until the bread is toasted on both sides and the cheese is melted, 2 or 3
minutes per side. Serve immediately, with the tomato dip on the side.
VARIATIONS
Italian Dip
Instead of making the salmorejo, use pesto. Substitute mozzarella for the
manchego and sliced tomatoes for the chorizo.
NOTES

EVEN FASTER
Skip the salmorejo. When assembling the sandwiches, top each one with
sliced tomatoes, a drizzle of sherry vinegar, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Cook the sandwiches 2 at a time in a large skillet. Keep them warm in a
200ºF oven.
SIDES
Green Salad
Chopped Salad
Fennel Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Plum, Manchego, and Parsley Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sausage and Pepper Sub
Cooking the sausages and vegetables together not only makes both
taste better but also saves time and dishes. Besides, this is how my
mother did it, so enough said.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for drizzling
4 Italian sausages (1 pound)
2 medium red or yellow bell peppers
1 large onion
Salt and pepper
4 hard sub rolls

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Split the sausages in half lengthwise, but don’t cut all the way through;
they should open flat like a book.
2. When the oil is hot, add the sausages face down and cook, turning
once, until lightly browned on both sides, about 5 minutes.
Core, seed, and slice the peppers; add them to the skillet.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion; add it to the skillet.
3. Sprinkle everything with salt and pepper and cook, stirring
occasionally until the vegetables are very tender, 15 to 20 minutes.
4. Drizzle the sub rolls with olive oil and lay a sausage in each one. Pile
the vegetables on top and serve.
VARIATIONS
Bratwurst and Onion Sub
Substitute bratwurst for the Italian sausage, skip the peppers, and use 2
large onions. Cook them in butter instead of olive oil and, if you like, add a
splash of beer (about ½ cup) to the skillet during cooking. Make sure the
beer is evaporated before you assemble the sandwiches; its flavor will
infuse the brats and onions as everything cooks down.
Sausage and Broccoli Rabe Sub
Use 1 small head broccoli rabe, chopped, and 3 garlic cloves, slivered,
instead of the peppers and onions. The rabe will be tender in 10 to 15
minutes.
Sausage and Pepper Sub with Melted Mozzarella

After you’ve assembled the subs, put them on a rimmed baking sheet and
lay some sliced mozzarella over the top. Broil until the cheese is bubbly and
brown.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
To speed up the cooking process slightly, cook the sausage and vegetables
over medium-high heat. The sausage and peppers might end up a bit less
tender but not much.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Toast the sub rolls under the broiler if you like. Doesn’t take more time,
only slightly more effort.
SIDES
Chopped Salad
Caprese Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Bánh Mì
Bánh mì—a Vietnamese-style hoagie—is often a complicated affair
with a number of different components. Here it’s pared down to the
absolute essentials: pork and pickled vegetables. Pretty cool for 30
minutes.

Ingredients
1 small daikon radish or 4 small regular red radishes
1 large carrot
1 small cucumber
Salt
3 tablespoons sugar
1 inch fresh ginger
1 garlic clove
1 tablespoon peanut oil
1 pound ground pork
½ cup mayonnaise
2 teaspoons Sriracha, or more to taste
1 tablespoon fish sauce
1 tablespoon soy sauce
4 hard sub rolls
Several sprigs fresh cilantro

Prep | Cook
Trim and peel the daikon or 4 small radishes, carrot, and cucumber. Cut
the cucumber in half lengthwise and scoop out the seeds with a spoon.
If you’re using a food processor for grating, cut the vegetables into
chunks that will fit through the feed tube. Shred them by machine or
by hand on a box grater.
Put the vegetables in a colander in the sink; sprinkle with 1 tablespoon
salt and 3 tablespoons sugar and toss. Let sit.
1. Put a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Peel and mince 1 inch ginger and 1 garlic clove.
2. Add 1 tablespoon peanut oil to the skillet along with the ginger and
garlic. After a quick stir, add the ground pork; let it brown in the pan, 2
or 3 minutes.
3. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Stir together ½ cup mayonnaise and 2 teaspoons Sriracha in a small
bowl.
4. Add 1 tablespoon each fish sauce and soy sauce to the pork. Stir and
cook until most of the liquid has evaporated, 3 to 5 minutes.
5. Split the sub rolls open and broil them until lightly toasted, 1 to 3
minutes.
6. When the pork is fully cooked, remove the pan from the heat.
7. When the sub rolls are toasted, remove them from the broiler; spread
with Sriracha mayonnaise.

8. By now the shredded vegetables will have released some water;
squeeze out the water through the colander. Divide the vegetables
among the sub rolls.
9. Lay the pork on top of the shredded vegetables. Top with several
cilantro sprigs (stems and all) and serve.
VARIATIONS
Shrimp Bánh Mì
Use 1 pound peeled shrimp instead of the pork. Add it to the skillet in Step
4 along with the fish sauce.
Beef Bánh Mì
Substitute 1 pound ground beef for the pork.
3 Additions to Bánh Mì
Add any of the following, alone, to the sandwiches:
1. 1 tomato, cut into 8 to 10 wedges
2. 1 fried egg per sandwich
3. Pâté, spread on the bread before adding toppings
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the shredded vegetables sit in the colander for up to an hour.
SIDES
Ginger-Orange Bean Sprouts

Avocado with Rice Vinegar and Peanuts
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Steak Tacos with Lots of Options
Grill or broil skirt steak and warm a pile of corn tortillas; from
there you’re limited only by your imagination. We start with the
traditional route—radishes, cilantro, and lime—but see the list for
all sorts of other fillings.

Ingredients
4 large radishes
2 limes
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
1 pound skirt steak
Salt and pepper
8 corn tortillas

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Trim and chop 4 large radishes.
Halve the limes.
Strip the cilantro leaves from several sprigs.
2. When the grill or broiler is hot, sprinkle the steak all over with salt and
pepper. Cook, turning once, until charred on both sides but still one
shade pinker inside than you like it. Figure 2 to 5 minutes per side,
depending on your grill or broiler; use a knife to nick and peek.
3. Transfer the meat to a cutting board to let it rest.
4. Wrap 8 tortillas in a damp paper towel and microwave for 15 seconds.
5. Slice the steak thinly against the grain. Assemble the tacos: steak first,
then radishes and cilantro, then a squeeze of lime. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
14 Other Taco Fillings from Elsewhere in the Book
1. Broiled shrimp
2. Broiled chicken
3. Broiled fish
4. Stir-fried tofu
5. Fajita Peppers and Onions
6. Jícama and Radish Salad

7. Chile-Cumin Black Beans
8. Avocado with Lemon and Salt
9. Caprese Salad
10. Sautéed Greens with Garlic
11. Succotash
12. Charred Brussels Sprout Salad with Walnuts and Gorgonzola
13. Kimchi and Snow Pea Salad with Grilled or Broiled Beef
14. Tortilla Scramble
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Instead of microwaving the tortillas, put them, one at a time, directly on the
gas burners on your stove. Cook until lightly charred on both sides, about
30 seconds total. Or, since you already have the grill or broiler going for the
steak, char the tortillas on the grill or under the broiler.
ANYTHING TACOS
As you can see from the list—which could have been 10 times longer than
it is—there are really no rules to what you can put in a taco. We think tacos
should have Mexican flavors, because that’s where they come from and
that’s what we’re used to, but a tortilla is a blank canvas, one that
accommodates any ingredients.
You might keep a stack of corn tortillas in your fridge all the time,
because they’re the perfect vehicle for all kinds of leftovers: cooked meat
and fish, cooked vegetables and greens, raw salads, and bean dishes too.
You’ve already put all of the work into the leftovers, so all you need to do is
warm the tortillas and the filling, assemble the tacos, and maybe freshen

them up a bit with some herbs or a drizzle of your favorite condiment on
top. This way, tacos are never more than 5 minutes away.
SIDES
Ripe Plantains
White Rice
Jícama and Radish Salad
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Crisp Pork and Watermelon Tacos
The combination of crisp fatty pork and cool juicy watermelon
needs nothing beyond a squeeze of lime for a garnish and a tortilla
to wrap it all up. Crumbled queso fresco is a nice addition if you
have it, as is a cold beer.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 pound boneless pork shoulder
Salt and pepper
1 small seedless watermelon (you’ll need only 2 cups)
1 garlic clove
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon chili powder
2 limes
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
8 corn tortillas
2 ounces queso fresco (½ cup crumbled; optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Cut the pork into thin strips about 2 inches long.
2. Add the pork to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until it begins to crisp, 6 to 8 minutes.
Halve and peel the watermelon; chop the flesh into ½-inch chunks.
Save 2 cups for the tacos and refrigerate the rest for another use.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove.
3. When the pork begins to crisp, stir in the garlic, 1 teaspoon cumin, and
1 teaspoon chili powder. Continue cooking, stirring occasionally until
the spices are fragrant and the pork is crisp, 2 or 3 minutes.
Halve the limes.
Strip the cilantro leaves from several sprigs.
Wrap 8 tortillas in a damp paper towel and microwave for 15 seconds.
Crumble ½ cup queso fresco if you’re using it.
4. When the pork is crisp all over, assemble the tacos: Put the pork in a
tortilla, top with the watermelon and cilantro, and squeeze the lime
juice over the top. Add queso fresco if you’re using it and serve.
VARIATIONS
Crisp Pork and Peach Tacos
Substitute 2 cups chopped peaches (about 3) for the watermelon, smoked
paprika for the cumin, and basil for the cilantro.

Crisp Pork and Apple Tacos
Use 2 cups chopped apples instead of the watermelon, 1 teaspoon chopped
fresh sage instead of the cumin, and 1 teaspoon Dijon mustard instead of
the chili powder. Use 1 lemon in place of the limes; skip the cilantro and
queso fresco.
Crisp Chicken and Watermelon Tacos
Substitute 1 pound boneless, skinless chicken thighs for the pork.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
EVEN FASTER
Use 8 slices bacon, chopped into 1-inch pieces, instead of the pork shoulder.
It will begin to crisp a bit faster than the pork shoulder; when it does, add
the garlic and just ½ teaspoon each of cumin and chili powder and continue
until done. Drain the bacon on paper towels before assembling the tacos.
The flavor will be different, smoky and unmistakably bacony, which is
never a bad thing.
SIDES
White Rice
Mexican Street Corn
Chile-Cumin Black Beans

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Reuben with All the Trimmings
To make a Reuben from scratch without buying corned beef or
pastrami at the deli or curing meat for days, you have to cheat.
Cook some cabbage with vinegar for a kind of instant sauerkraut,
then crisp thinly sliced beef in a skillet with lots of black pepper
and coriander—the pastrami spices. Homemade Russian dressing
makes it all work.

Ingredients
1 pound beef sirloin or rib-eye
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 small head green cabbage (you’ll need only 2 cups shredded)
¼ cup cider vinegar
1 teaspoon sugar
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons olive oil
8 ounces Swiss cheese (2 cups grated)
8 slices rye bread
1 teaspoon coriander
1 dill pickle
⅓ cup mayonnaise
2 tablespoons ketchup

Prep | Cook
Put the beef in the freezer. Take 4 tablespoons butter out of the
refrigerator.
1. Put a large skillet over medium heat.
Cut the cabbage in half; trim and core 1 half; cut into shreds. You
should end up with about 2 cups of shredded cabbage. Refrigerate
the rest of the cabbage for another use.
2. Put the cabbage in the skillet with ¼ cup cider vinegar, ¼ cup water, 1
teaspoon sugar, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
3. Raise the heat to medium-high, cover, and cook, stirring once or twice
until the cabbage is tender and the liquid is evaporated, 4 or 5 minutes.
Remove the beef from the freezer; slice it as thinly as you can.
4. When the cabbage is tender, transfer it to a bowl; wipe out the skillet
and return it to medium-high heat.
5. Add 2 tablespoons olive oil and the beef to the skillet; sprinkle with
salt and lots of pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until it begins to
brown, 4 or 5 minutes.
6. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Slice 8 ounces Swiss cheese or grate 2 cups.
Spread the butter on 8 slices rye bread.
7. When the beef begins to brown, stir in 1 teaspoon coriander and cook
until it’s fragrant, another minute or 2.
8. Assemble the sandwiches—first the cheese, then the beef, then the
cabbage—so the buttered sides of the bread are facing out.

9. Put the sandwiches on a rimmed baking sheet and broil, turning once,
until the bread is toasted on both sides and the cheese is melted, 2 or 3
minutes per side.
Chop the pickle and put it in a small bowl. Add ⅓ cup mayonnaise, 2
tablespoons ketchup, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Stir to
combine, taste, and adjust the seasoning.
10. When the sandwiches are toasted, remove them from the broiler and
either open them up and spread the Russian dressing inside or serve it
on the side for dipping.
VARIATIONS
Fast Rachel
With coleslaw instead of “sauerkraut.” Instead of cooking the cabbage,
combine it in a bowl with the vinegar, sugar, and Russian dressing
ingredients. Toss to coat and let it sit while you do the rest of the cooking.
You can broil it in the sandwiches if you like or put it on at the end.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
EVEN FASTER
With deli corned beef or pastrami and store-bought sauerkraut, this
sandwich is a breeze.
SIDES
French Fries
Cucumber Salad

Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Big T’s Meat Sauce Sub
The long-gone much-missed Big T’s sub shop in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, sold this sub, which contained only the sauce used
to bathe its meatballs, for a dollar back in the 1990s. It was brilliant
and beloved and, strangely, better than Big T’s sub with meatballs.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
6 ounces ground beef
6 ounces ground pork
Salt and pepper
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 ounce Parmesan cheese (¼ cup grated)
8 ounces provolone cheese (2 cups grated)
One 14-ounce can crushed tomatoes
4 sub rolls

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a medium skillet over medium heat. Turn
the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
2. Put the ground beef and pork in the skillet and sprinkle with salt and
pepper.
Chop ¼ cup parsley and add it to the skillet.
Grate ¼ cup Parmesan and add to the skillet.
3. Stir the meat to break it up a bit and combine all the ingredients. Cook,
stirring once or twice, until the meat loses its pink color, 3 or 4
minutes.
Slice 8 ounces provolone or grate 2 cups.
4. When the meat loses its pink color, add the crushed tomatoes and stir
to combine. Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles gently but steadily
and simmer for 5 minutes, adding a splash of water if the mixture gets
too thick.
5. Put the sub rolls on a rimmed baking sheet and broil until lightly
toasted, 1 to 3 minutes.
Remove them; leave the broiler on.
6. Once the sauce has simmered for 5 minutes, spoon it into the rolls. Top
with the provolone, return the sandwiches to the broiler, and broil until
the cheese is bubbly and brown. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Vegetarian Sauce Sub

Substitute 1 medium onion and 1 large bell pepper, both chopped, for the
beef and pork. Sauté the vegetables until they begin to soften, then add the
tomatoes, parsley, and Parmesan and simmer until the vegetables are tender.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Skip browning the meat; add the crushed tomatoes to the skillet at the
beginning, bring the sauce to a bubble, and let it simmer for 5 minutes.
Instead of using crushed tomatoes as described in Step 4, add about 2 cups
Tomato Sauce.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the sauce simmer for 20 to 30 minutes; it will pick up a richer, meatier
flavor in that time.
SIDES
Caprese Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower
Tender Vegetables

MASTER RECIPE

Cheat-a-Little Pizza
We associate pizza with being “fast” because it’s
most often delivered to our houses 30 minutes after
we call to order it. Of course, making your own pizza
dough from scratch is another story. It’s not a
particularly arduous process, but the dough does need
time to rise.
I’m obviously a big proponent of making
everything that you can at home, but the truth is that
pizza dough is one of those things that you can buy at
the store without sacrificing much quality. Look for
dough that appears as if it’s been made by a person.
It’s often sold in clear plastic bags or containers,
already shaped into a ball, or frozen. Avoid the kind
that comes in metal canisters. Or just ask your
favorite pizza place if it will sell you some dough. I
figure that 36 ounces serves 4 people generously.
And leftovers are always welcome with homemade
pizza.
Once you’ve got dough in hand, making pizza is
fast; the slowest part is waiting for your oven to heat

as high as it will go. While that’s happening you
shape the dough and prepare the toppings (see the list
below for lots of ideas). As tempting as it may be,
don’t overload the pizza; if there’s too much on top,
the crust will not get crisp.
Since most people don’t have pizza peels and
pizza stones, the recipe here uses a rimmed baking
sheet, but if you’ve got those things, use them.
Pizza
1
Heat the Oven.
Heat the oven as high as it will go (at least 500ºF is ideal). Grease a
rimmed baking sheet with a little olive oil.
2
Roll and Top the Crust.
Roll out 1 ball of premade pizza dough on a lightly floured surface and
transfer it to the oiled baking sheet. Pizza dough is very springy. If it
won’t roll out, you can press it out with your fingers. Drizzle the top
with a little olive oil (not too much) and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Spread about 2 cups tomato sauce almost all the way out to the edges.
The crust can be as big as you want it to be, and don’t worry if it’s blob
shaped; home cooks rarely get a pure rectangle or circle. Sprinkle 2
cups grated mozzarella over the top.
3
Bake the Pizza.

Put the baking sheet in the oven and cook until the crust is crisp and the
cheese is bubbly and brown, 8 to 12 minutes, depending on the heat of
your oven. Let the pizza rest for a minute or 2 before slicing, so you
can cut through the cheese without its oozing off the pizza. Serve hot.
VARIATIONS
13 Pizza Toppings
Use any of the following, alone or in combination, in Step 2:
1. Torn basil leaves or any chopped fresh herbs
2. Minced garlic or chiles
3. Sliced raw onions, mushrooms, or peppers
4. Roasted red peppers
5. Chopped pitted olives
6. Cooked bacon, sausage, ham, prosciutto, or salami
7. Pesto
8. Caramelized onions
9. Anchovies, capers, or dried tomatoes
10. Rinsed and dried tender greens, like arugula or spinach
11. Grated cheddar, provolone, Jack, or Parmesan cheese
12. Dollops of goat cheese or ricotta
13. Crumbled blue cheese or feta

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Steak Sandwich with Charred Onions
Charring onions doesn’t require nearly as much time or finesse as
caramelizing them, and with their smokiness and crunch they’re
actually preferable on a steak sandwich. Both the steak and onions
cook over high heat, so now’s the time to turn on your hood or
open the windows, because it’ll get a bit smoky.

Ingredients
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 pound beef sirloin or rib-eye
Salt and pepper
1 large onion
4 ciabatta rolls
⅓ cup mayonnaise
2 cups arugula

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Put 1
tablespoon vegetable oil in a large skillet over high heat.
Sprinkle the steak with salt and pepper.
2. When the oil is hot (nearly smoking), add the steak. Cook, turning
once until charred on both sides but still a bit pinker inside than you
like it. Figure 2 to 5 minutes per side; use a knife to nick and peek.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
3. When the steak is done, transfer it to a cutting board to rest.
4. Add the onion to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until it is
soft and starting to blacken around the edges, 6 to 10 minutes.
5. Split the ciabatta rolls in half and broil until lightly toasted, 1 to 3
minutes.
6. When the rolls are toasted, remove them from the broiler. Spread ⅓
cup mayonnaise on the rolls; lay the arugula on top.
7. When the onions are starting to blacken around the edges, pile them
onto the sandwiches.
8. Slice the steak across the grain and lay the slices on top of the onions.
Sprinkle the steak with a little more salt and pepper if you like, close
the sandwiches, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Steak Sandwich with Charred Scallions and Soy Mayo
Substitute 1 bunch scallions, cut into 2-inch pieces, for the onion. Mix 1
tablespoon soy sauce into the mayonnaise before spreading it on the bread.

Steak Sandwich with Warm Horseradish Mayo
Skip the charred onions. Combine the mayonnaise with 2 tablespoons
prepared horseradish and spread it on the ciabatta before you toast it. Broil
until the mayo starts to bubble and brown. Top with the arugula, steak,
thinly sliced raw red onions, and sliced tomatoes.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
EVEN FASTER
Use a thin, quick-cooking cut of beef like skirt steak.
Use deli roast beef instead of steak.
SIDES
Green Salad
Creamed Spinach
French Fries
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Curried Chicken Sandwich with
Mango Chutney
Some chutneys take forever, but here you need only cook a little of
the water out of the chopped mango to make it soft and luscious.
While that’s happening, boneless chicken thighs take a ride under
the broiler.

Ingredients
¼ cup red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon honey
Salt
1 mango
1 small red onion
6 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 1 pound)
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 tablespoon curry powder
Pepper
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
Several sprigs fresh mint
½ cup Greek yogurt
Two 8-inch pitas with pockets
Olive oil for drizzling

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
2. Put ¼ cup red wine vinegar, ¼ cup water, 1 tablespoon honey, and a
sprinkle of salt in a small saucepan over medium-low heat.
Cut the mango away from the pit; crosshatch through the flesh; turn
each piece inside out; cut the pieces away from the skin.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
3. Add the mango and onion to the liquid and adjust the heat so that it
bubbles steadily but not rapidly. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the
mango breaks down and the mixture turns into a thick sauce, 10 to 15
minutes.
4. Put the chicken thighs on a rimmed baking sheet; rub with 1
tablespoon vegetable oil and sprinkle all over with 1 tablespoon curry
powder, salt, and pepper.
5. Broil the chicken, turning once, until lightly browned on both sides
and just cooked through, 6 to 8 minutes per side.
6. Check on the chutney; if the mango hasn’t broken down yet and the
mixture looks too dry, add a splash of water.
Chop several sprigs cilantro; strip the mint leaves from several stems
and chop; put them all in a small bowl.
Add ½ cup yogurt and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl; stir to
combine, taste, and adjust the seasoning.
7. When the chicken is done, transfer it to a cutting board. Leave the
broiler on.

8. Drizzle the pitas with olive oil (about ½ teaspoon per side) and rub
them all over with your fingers. Sprinkle salt and pepper over all.
9. Broil the pitas, turning once, until browned (even slightly charred) on
both sides, 2 to 5 minutes total.
Cut the chicken into thick slices.
10. When the pitas are toasted, remove them from the broiler and spread
the yogurt sauce inside the pockets. Lay the chicken slices on top,
spoon the chutney over the chicken, and serve.
VARIATIONS
BBQ Chicken Sandwich with Peach Chutney
Substitute cider vinegar for the red wine vinegar and 2 peaches for the
mango. Use paprika instead of the curry powder and your favorite barbecue
sauce instead of the yogurt sauce.
Miso Chicken Sandwich with Pineapple Chutney
Swap 2 tablespoons fish sauce and the juice of 1 lime for the vinegar and
1½ cups chopped pineapple for the mango. Rub the chicken with miso paste
instead of curry powder. Use ⅓ cup mayonnaise instead of the yogurt. Skip
the mint and add a teaspoon or 2 of soy sauce (no need for salt).
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder
EVEN FASTER
If you have room, broil the chicken and the pitas at the same time.
Instead of the chutney, just top the sandwich with thin slices of raw mango
and red onion.

SIDES
Green Salad
Grape Salad with Mint
Peas with Ginger

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

BBQ Chopped Pork and Slaw
Sandwich
The process of making real pulled pork is “low and slow,” where
the meat is cooked at a very low temperature for a very long time.
Consider this approach—chopped, spiced, seared, and quick-
simmered—“high and fast.” And here is one case where squishy
white hamburger buns are really what you want.

Ingredients
1 small head green cabbage (you’ll need 2 cups shredded)
2 tablespoons mayonnaise
3 tablespoons cider vinegar
1 teaspoon sugar
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
12 ounces pork shoulder
2 teaspoons chili powder
1 teaspoon paprika
1 teaspoon brown sugar
⅓ cup ketchup
2 teaspoons yellow mustard
1 tablespoon honey
4 hamburger buns

Prep | Cook
Cut the cabbage in half; trim and core 1 half; cut into shreds. You should
end up with about 2 cups of shredded cabbage. Refrigerate the rest of
the cabbage for another use.
1. Put the shredded cabbage in a medium bowl with 2 tablespoons
mayonnaise, 2 tablespoons cider vinegar, 1 teaspoon sugar, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Toss and set aside.
2. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Cut the pork into roughly ¼-inch pieces.
3. Add the pork to the skillet and turn the heat to medium-high. Add 2
teaspoons chili powder, 1 teaspoon each paprika, brown sugar, and
salt, and ½ teaspoon pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until nicely
browned, 6 to 10 minutes.
4. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
5. When the pork is nicely browned, stir in ⅓ cup ketchup, 2 teaspoons
mustard, 1 tablespoon honey, 1 tablespoon cider vinegar, and ½ cup
water. Adjust the heat so the mixture simmers gently.
6. Cook, stirring occasionally until the pork is tender and the sauce
reduces and just coats the meat (you don’t want it too wet), about 10
minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning, adding more salt or spices as
you like.
7. While the pork cooks, split the buns in half and broil until lightly
toasted, 1 to 3 minutes.
8. Pile the pork onto the toasted buns, top with the cabbage slaw, close
the sandwiches, and serve.

NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
Chili Powder
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the sauce as described in Step 5, add about ¾ cup
Barbecue Sauce.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the pork simmer slowly in the sauce until it’s very tender, up to an hour.
Let the cabbage marinate in the dressing in the refrigerator until it loses
some of its crunch, up to a few hours.
SIDES
Mexican Street Corn
French Fries
Chile-Cumin Black Beans

Soups and Stews
Melon Gazpacho with Crisp Prosciutto
Green Gazpacho
Avocado Soup with Crab and Corn
Spicy Black Bean Soup
Bacon and Egg Drop Soup
Frozen Vegetable Soup
Provençal Tomato Soup with Fennel
Creamy Parsnip Soup with Parsley Pesto
Butternut Squash Soup with Apples and Bacon
Sweet Pea Soup with Crisp Ham
Tomato and Bread Soup with White Beans
Pasta e Fagioli
Chickpea and Couscous Stew with Moroccan Spices
Seafood Chowder
Miso Soup with Scallops, Soba, and Spinach
Fast Pho
Homemade Chicken Ramen

Chicken Tamale Soup
Spicy Peanut Soup with Chicken and Collards
Cabbage Soup with Smoked Sausage
Sausage, Cannellini, and Kale Soup
Broken Wonton Soup
Korean-Style Beef Soup with Rice
Thai Coconut Soup with Carrots and Beef
Lamb Stew with Green Beans and Tomatoes
Bone-In Chicken Noodle Soup
American Onion Soup
Shrimp Gumbo
Curried Chicken and Vegetable Soup with Rice
Mushroom and Chicken Stew with Dill and Paprika
Lentil Soup, with or Without Ham
Collard Greens Stewed with Smoked Pork
Hot and Sour Soup with Bok Choy and Pork
Beef and Butter Bean Chili

Soups and Stews
Soups and stews are fast and foolproof, the most
basic of foods: You chop up some ingredients, maybe
get them going in oil, chop up more stuff, add that,
pour liquid over everything, crank the heat, and
suddenly you have a pot of soup going. Really.
In fact the concept of cooking and prepping
simultaneously is best illustrated with soups and
stews. Whenever you have downtime you can turn
your attention to prepping more food to drop into the
pot. Or you can do something else: start a side dish,
assemble a salad, make dessert.
Soups and stews give you plenty of leeway and
put you in complete control of pacing. If you need
more time to get other food ready, simmer slowly or
even stop the cooking. If you’re in a hurry, cook
steadily. Your soup or stew will wait for you, and
unlike cooking a perfect steak, there are few
moments along the way in which the fate of the dish

hangs in the balance of a few seconds or even a few
minutes.
It gets even better: Want to vary textures and
flavors? Wait until the last minute to stir in some
vegetables, herbs, or seasonings. You added too
much salt? Add more liquid. You overcooked the
vegetables? Oh well: The soup is thicker. It’s hard to
make a “bad” soup or stew, but this chapter will show
you that even great ones are easy to come by.

Chapter Highlights
Egg-Enriched Soup  Cooking eggs in broth is one of the best ways to turn
soup into a hearty meal. Bacon and Egg Drop Soup.
Cold Vegetables, Hot Soup  Frozen vegetables are tailor-made for fast
soups. Frozen Vegetable Soup.
Stocking Up  Store-bought stocks are expensive and not always good. To
make your own, see Fast Stocks.
Nuts to Soup  Adding ground nuts gives soup instant richness and body.
Green Gazpacho.
Easy Puréeing  Turn all sorts of vegetables into silky purées. Creamy
Parsnip Soup with Parsley Pesto and Butternut Squash Soup with Apples
and Bacon.
Chopping Canned Tomatoes  Don’t pour canned tomatoes on your
cutting board to chop them; there’s a better way. Canned Tomato Tricks.
One Method, Infinite Soups  A single formula of browning, boiling, and
bubbling is a soup recipe for the rest of your life. Recipe-Free Soups.
Simmer Down Now  The pros and cons of long and short simmering and
why your soup is done when you say it’s done. The Time-Texture
Continuum.
Mastering Miso  Learn about one of the world’s most wonderful and
underused ingredients. Miso Soup with Scallops, Soba, and Spinach.

Noodling with Soup  Save time (and pots) by cooking the noodles right in
the broth. Homemade Chicken Ramen, Bone-In Chicken Noodle Soup,
Broken Wonton Soup.
The Mushroom Myth  The “rule” that you can’t rinse mushrooms is
nonsense; don’t let it slow you down: Mushroom and Chicken Stew with
Dill and Paprika.
Caramelizing, Fast  Think it’s impossible to caramelize onions quickly?
Think again. American Onion Soup.
Cooling Down Quick  The fridge isn’t the coldest appliance in your
kitchen, so why use it to chill cold soups? Use the freezer. Melon Gazpacho
with Crisp Prosciutto and Green Gazpacho.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Melon Gazpacho with Crisp
Prosciutto
Tomatoes are a fruit, so it’s natural to play with other juicy
summertime favorites in this classic cold soup. Prosciutto adds a
pleasant saltiness and crisp texture and turns this colorful dish into
a light meal. And the trick to quick chilling: ice cubes.

Ingredients
5 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for garnish
4 ounces sliced prosciutto
1 garlic clove
Any large melon or small seedless watermelon (2 pounds)
3 large ripe tomatoes (1½ pounds)
1 bunch fresh basil for garnish
2 tablespoons sherry vinegar, or to taste
Salt and pepper
Ice cubes

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil in a medium skillet over medium-low heat.
Chop the prosciutto into small pieces.
2. When the oil is warm, add the prosciutto to the skillet and cook,
stirring occasionally, until crisp, 5 to 10 minutes.
Line a plate with paper towels.
Peel 1 garlic clove and put it in a food processor or blender. Pulse once
or twice to chop.
Halve the melon, remove any seeds, and scoop the flesh into the food
processor or blender.
Core and quarter the tomatoes.
Strip ½ cup basil leaves from the stems and chop.
3. When the prosciutto is crisp, transfer it to the paper towels with a
slotted spoon.
4. Add the tomatoes to the melon mixture, along with 2 tablespoons
sherry vinegar, 4 tablespoons olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper.
5. Let the machine run if you want a smooth gazpacho or pulse if you
want it chunky, adding ice cubes one at a time until you get the
consistency you like and scraping down the sides if necessary. Taste
and adjust the seasoning and divide among 4 bowls. Garnish with the
prosciutto, basil, and a drizzle of olive oil and serve.
VARIATIONS

Cucumber Gazpacho with Crisp Prosciutto
Closer to classic: Instead of the melon, peel and seed 2 medium cucumbers;
cut 1 red bell pepper and 1 small red onion into chunks. Tear 2 slices crusty
white bread into pieces. Add the vegetables and bread with the tomatoes in
Step 4.
Tomato and Peach Gazpacho with Crisp Bacon
Use bacon instead of prosciutto, peaches instead of the melon, and balsamic
instead of sherry vinegar.
Gazpacho with Goat Cheese
Works for any of the recipes here: Skip the prosciutto if you like. Crumble 1
cup (about 8 ounces) goat cheese over the top just before serving.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Chill the gazpacho in the freezer for a few minutes or in the fridge for 2 to 6
hours before serving.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Warm Flour or Corn Tortillas
Fennel Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Green Gazpacho
This vibrant green gazpacho is way more interesting than its better-
known cousin. Tangy with grapes and rich with avocados and nuts,
it’s a refreshing soup with just the right amount of heft. And though
it’s best in late summer, you can vary it for winter.

Ingredients
1 garlic clove
1 medium cucumber
3 medium avocados (1½ pounds)
1 bunch fresh cilantro
1 pound seedless green grapes
2 slices rustic white bread
4 ounces manchego or feta cheese (optional)
½ cup almonds
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for garnish
2 tablespoons sherry vinegar
Salt and pepper
Ice cubes

Prep | Cook
As you work, put everything into a blender:
Peel and chop 1 garlic clove.
Trim the cucumber and peel if necessary; cut it in half lengthwise and
scoop out the seeds with a spoon; cut into large chunks.
Halve and pit the avocados; scoop out the flesh.
Pull ½ cup cilantro sprigs from the bunch.
Pluck the grapes from the stems.
1. Turn the machine on, adding a little cold water to get it going, and
blend until there is enough room to add more ingredients.
Tear 2 slices bread into a few pieces and add.
Shave the manchego into thin ribbons with a vegetable peeler or
crumble the feta if you’re using cheese (but don’t add it yet).
2. Add ½ cup almonds, 2 tablespoons olive oil, 2 tablespoons sherry
vinegar, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the ingredients in the
blender.
3. Pulse the machine to combine the ingredients, then blend, adding ice
cubes one at a time (or small amounts of cold water) until the soup is
smooth and thin enough to pour. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
4. Divide the soup among 4 bowls. Scatter the cheese over the top, if
you’re using it, along with a drizzle of olive oil, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Spicy Green Gazpacho with Chile and Lime

Use lime juice instead of the sherry vinegar and skip the cheese. Remove
the stem (and seeds if you’d like) from a jalapeño or serrano chile and add it
to the blender in Step 1.
Grapefruit Gazpacho
Use mint instead of cilantro. Substitute 3 grapefruits for the grapes; peel
and chop them and remove the seeds before adding them to the blender.
Sweeten the gazpacho with a little honey if you’d like.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Chill the gazpacho in the freezer for a few minutes or in the fridge for 2 to 6
hours before serving.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Jícama and Radish Salad
Ripe Plantains with Smoked Paprika

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Avocado Soup with Crab and Corn
One of the all-time best combinations—avocados, crab, and corn—
makes a soup that’s creamy, crunchy, rich, briny, and beautifully
colored. If you substitute good store-bought chips (see Notes) you
don’t even have to turn on the stove.

Ingredients
3 medium avocados (1½ pounds)
1 lime
3 cups milk
½ teaspoon chili powder, or more to taste
Salt
2 ears fresh corn
Vegetable oil for frying
8 small (4-inch) corn tortillas
2 cups lump crabmeat (about 1 pound)
4 scallions
Hot sauce
Pepper

Prep | Cook
Halve the avocados and the lime.
Pit the avocados and scoop the flesh into a blender.
1. Add 3 cups milk, ½ teaspoon chili powder, and a sprinkle of salt to the
blender. Squeeze in the juice of half of the lime; reserve the rest.
2. Purée until smooth, then put the blender in the freezer. If the blender
won’t fit, transfer the soup to a container that will.
Husk the corn and cut the kernels off the cobs.
3. Put ½ inch vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Cut the tortillas in half, stack the halves, and cut into thin strips.
Line a plate with paper towels.
4. When the oil is hot (try a tortilla strip; it will sizzle), add the tortilla
strips. Cook, stirring constantly, until they are golden brown and crisp,
1 to 2 minutes. Transfer the strips to the paper towels with a slotted
spoon and sprinkle with salt.
Pick through the crabmeat, discarding any pieces of shell or cartilage.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. Put the crab, corn, and scallions in a medium mixing bowl. Squeeze in
the juice of the remaining ½ lime, add a dash of hot sauce, sprinkle
with salt, and toss to combine.
6. Retrieve the avocado soup from the freezer, taste, and adjust the
seasoning. Divide the soup among 4 large bowls. Top each with the
crab mixture and tortilla strips, sprinkle with pepper, and serve
immediately.

VARIATIONS
Avocado Soup with Crab and Daikon
Substitute 1 tablespoon soy sauce for the chili powder (go easy on the salt).
Slice and fry 4 egg roll wrappers instead of the tortillas and substitute 1
small daikon radish, peeled and shredded, for the corn.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
EVEN FASTER
You can use frozen corn kernels here, although it will taste like cooked, not
raw, corn and lack the crunch and sweetness of the fresh stuff in season. A
better way to save time is to crumble store-bought tortilla chips over the
soup instead of frying your own.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Halve 1 pint cherry tomatoes and scatter them on top of the crab before
serving.
SHUCKING CORN
Don’t mess around: Yank down on the husks and tear them off quickly, then
rub the cob under running water to rinse and pull the silk free. To strip corn
kernels from the cob, hold the cob firmly from the top, with the bottom
resting in a stable position. Cut downward with a paring or chef’s knife to
scrape off kernels; turn the corn and repeat all the way around. (See the
illustrations in Prep Shortcuts.)
SIDES
Chopped Salad

Jícama and Radish Salad
Chile-Cumin Black Beans

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Spicy Black Bean Soup
With canned or precooked beans, you can make an authentic, bold-
flavored black bean soup in 15 minutes. If you use canned beans,
rinse them thoroughly before adding.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 large onion
2 garlic cloves
1 chipotle chile (or more) in adobo
1 tablespoon cumin
4 cups cooked or canned black beans (two 15-ounce cans)
4 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
Salt and pepper
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish
1 lime
Sour cream for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. Add the onion to the oil and cook, stirring occasionally until softened,
3 to 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; add them to the pot and stir.
Chop 1 (or more) chipotle and add it to the pot with a little of its adobo
sauce and 1 tablespoon cumin and stir.
If you’re using canned beans, drain and rinse them.
3. Add the beans, 4 cups stock or water, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper
to the pot. Raise the heat to high and bring the soup to a boil, then turn
the heat down to medium-low, cover, and simmer until the beans begin
to break down, 5 to 10 minutes.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
Halve the lime.
4. When the beans are beginning to break down, run a potato masher or
immersion blender through the pot, just enough to mash or purée about
half of the beans.
5. Squeeze in the lime juice. Taste and adjust the seasoning, divide
among 4 bowls, garnish with the cilantro and a dollop of the sour
cream, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Smoky Black Bean Soup

Instead of the chipotle, add 2 teaspoons smoked paprika along with the
cumin in Step 2.
White Bean Soup with Rosemary and Lemon
Omit the cumin. Substitute a lemon for the lime. Instead of the chipotle, add
1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary leaves with the garlic in Step 2. Use
parsley or basil instead of cilantro and a drizzle of olive oil instead of lime.
Minty Fava Bean Soup
Skip the chipotle and cumin. Substitute frozen green fava beans for the
black beans, lemon for the lime, and mint for the cilantro. Garnish with
crème fraîche or a drizzle of olive oil instead of sour cream.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
If you’ve got precooked beans in the fridge or freezer—black or any kind
really—this soup is a little faster and way better. No need to drain them;
you can (and should) include some of the cooking liquid; reduce the amount
of stock to compensate.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
The longer you let the soup simmer, the more the flavors will develop. Up
to an hour is fine; just add more liquid if the soup starts to look dry.
SIDES
Warm Tortillas

Cucumber Salad with Hot Sauce and Lime Juice
Coleslaw

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Bacon and Egg Drop Soup
Eggs are naturally fast cooking. Use this technique from the
Chinese dish and you magically get gorgeous flowerlike petals in
every bite. And it works with nontraditional flavors too.

Ingredients
8 slices bacon
6 cups any stock
Salt and pepper
4 eggs
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large pot over medium heat.
Chop the bacon into 1-inch pieces.
2. Add the bacon to the pot. Cook, stirring occasionally until crisp, 5 to
10 minutes.
Line a plate with paper towels.
3. Transfer the bacon to the paper towels with a slotted spoon and pour
off all but 1 tablespoon of the fat.
4. Put 6 cups stock in the pot and raise the heat to high. Add a sprinkle of
salt (if the stock needs it) and pepper.
Crack the eggs into a liquid measuring cup (or medium pitcher) and
beat them lightly.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
5. When the stock is bubbling gently, slowly pour in the eggs, stirring
constantly, so that they cook softly and appear as silky flowerlike
strands; don’t let them overheat and curdle. Remove from the heat;
taste and adjust the seasoning.
6. Divide the soup among 4 bowls. Sprinkle each with Parmesan and
bacon, garnish with the parsley, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Classic Egg Drop Soup

Better than takeout: Go easy on the salt; omit the bacon and parsley and
substitute 4 chopped scallions for the cheese. Stir in 2 tablespoons soy
sauce and 1 tablespoon sesame oil after the eggs in Step 5 and garnish with
the scallions. Add tofu cubes or cooked chicken or pork to make the soup
more substantial.
Bacon and Egg Drop Soup with Greens
Skip the parsley. Before adding the eggs in Step 5, stir in 4 cups chopped or
baby spinach leaves; let them cook while the stock returns to a gentle
bubble, then stir in the eggs and finish the soup.
Toast, Bacon, and Egg Drop Soup
While the bacon cooks in Step 2, toast 4 thick slices of any bread. Put the
toast in each bowl before adding the soup and garnishing.
Carbonara Soup
Two or 3 cups leftover plain or lightly sauced pasta is perfect here; add it to
the stock after the eggs cook—but before you take the soup off the heat—in
Step 5. If you don’t have any handy, boil 12 ounces any pasta in salted
water until tender but not mushy, 8 to 12 minutes; start the recipe while it
cooks. Use pancetta instead of bacon. Drain the pasta and divide it among
the bowls before serving and garnishing the soup.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
TURNING EGGS INTO FLOWER PETALS
To get eggs to this ideal texture, the temperature of the stock needs to
remain consistent even as you add the cool eggs. So adjust the heat to

maintain a steady but gentle bubble and then add the eggs in a slow, steady
stream, using a container with a pour spout. Too fast and they will drop the
temperature of the stock and simply thicken the soup without forming
strands; too hot and they’ll curdle like scrambled eggs. Either way, the soup
will still be delicious, just not as beautiful.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Tomato Salad

MASTER RECIPE

Fast Stocks
Here are recipes for five different fast-but-good
stocks. The vegetable and chicken stock recipes yield
about 12 cups; beef about 14 cups; fish 4 cups; and
dashi 8. You can always cook larger quantities and
store some for later. Either keep the stock in the
refrigerator and use it within a few days or freeze it
in convenient-sized containers (like pints or quarts)
or in ice cube trays, which lets you use a few
tablespoons at a time. Frozen stock will keep for
months.
Vegetable Stock
_1
Prepare the Vegetables
Slice or chop the following ingredients and put them in a stockpot as
they’re ready: 4 large carrots, 2 large onions (leave the skin on), 1 large
potato, 2 celery stalks, 5 or 6 garlic cloves (leave the skin on), 15
button mushrooms, 2 medium tomatoes, and 15 parsley stems.
_2
Simmer
Add some black pepper and 14 cups water. Bring to a boil, then adjust
the heat so the mixture bubbles gently but steadily. Cook until the
vegetables are tender, 30 to 60 minutes. The longer it goes, the deeper
the flavor.

_3
Strain
Cool the mixture slightly, then strain it, pressing on the vegetables to
extract as much liquid as possible.
Beef Stock
_1
Combine the Ingredients
Rinse 3 to 4 pounds meaty beef bones like shin or oxtail under cold
water; combine them in a stockpot with 2  medium onions, roughly
chopped (leave the skin on), 2 medium carrots, cut into chunks, 2
celery stalks, cut into chunks, 1 bay leaf, 1 teaspoon salt, and 10
peppercorns. Add 16 cups water (or enough to cover by a couple
inches).
_2
Simmer
Bring almost to a boil, then partially cover and adjust the heat so the
mixture sends up a few bubbles at a time. Cook, skimming off the foam
that accumulates on top, for 2 to 3 hours.
3
Strain
Cool the mixture slightly, then strain it, pressing on the bones and
vegetables to extract as much liquid as possible. Discard the solids and
season the stock to taste.
Chicken Stock
1
Prepare the Chicken
Cut a 3- to 4-pound chicken into parts (or buy it precut if you like).
Don’t forget the back and neck (and feet if you can get ’em.) You can
also leave the chicken whole, but it will take a little longer to cook; or

you can use specific parts: wings and/or legs are the best common
ones.
2
Combine and Simmer
Put the chicken in a stockpot along with 1 halved large onion (leave the
skin on), 1 large carrot (cut into chunks), 1 celery stalk (cut into
chunks), 1 bay leaf, salt, and pepper. Add 14 cups water and bring to a
boil, then lower the heat so the mixture sends up just a few bubbles at a
time. Cook, skimming any foam that accumulates on the surface, until
the chicken is done, 30 to 60 minutes (depending on how big it is and
whether it’s cut up).
3
Strain
Cool the mixture slightly, then strain it, pressing on the chicken and
vegetables to extract as much liquid as possible. Remove the chicken
and save the meat for chicken salad or the like; discard the remaining
solids and season the stock to taste.
Fish Stock
1
Combine the Ingredients
In a stockpot, combine 1 medium onion, roughly chopped (leave the
skin on), 1  carrot, cut into chunks, 1  celery stalk, cut into chunks, ½
cup white wine, 1  pound bones and/or cleaned head from a white fish,
and 1  bay leaf.
2
Simmer
Add 4 cups water and bring nearly to a boil, then adjust the heat so the
mixture sends up just a few bubbles at a time. Cook for about 30
minutes.

3
Strain
Cool the mixture slightly, then strain it, pressing on the fish and
vegetables to extract as much liquid as possible.
Dashi
1
Simmer Kelp
Combine one 4- to 6-inch piece dried kelp (kombu) and 8 cups water in
a medium saucepan over medium heat. Don’t let the mixture come to a
boil; as soon as it’s about to, turn off the heat and remove the kelp (you
can slice it up for salads or stir-fries if you like).
2
Add Bonito Flakes
Add ½ to 1 cup dried bonito flakes and stir; let the mixture sit for a few
minutes, then strain.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Frozen Vegetable Soup
Minimally processed and flash-frozen right after harvest, frozen
vegetables are a real anomaly in the frozen-food aisle (see Freezer
Staples). They’re a true gift to hurried cooks, and this recipe coaxes
out every bit of flavor from any vegetable.

Ingredients
¼ cup olive oil, plus more for drizzling
1 large onion
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
8 cups any chopped frozen vegetables
6 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the pot, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and stir.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; add them to the pot and stir.
2. Cook, stirring occasionally until the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Organize the packages of vegetables on your counter from the firmest,
longest cooking—like squash or shell beans—to the most tender,
quickest cooking, like spinach and other greens.
3. When the onion mixture is soft, start adding the vegetables, firmest
first, stirring occasionally until they thaw and begin to get tender.
(Timing will depend on the vegetable; keep an eye on the pot and test
frequently.)
4. Continue adding and stirring, adjusting the heat to prevent burning,
until the vegetables in the pot begin to brown in places and become
almost as soft as you like.
5. Add 6 cups stock or water, raise the heat to high, and cook, stirring
once or twice, until the soup just comes to a boil. Taste and adjust the
seasoning, divide among 4 bowls, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Creamy Frozen Vegetable Soup
When the soup is ready, turn off the heat and purée, using an immersion or
upright blender. Add 1 cup cream if you’d like. Reheat before serving.
Hearty Frozen Vegetable Soup

More substantial, and won’t take more time if you have any of these
ingredients handy: Add cooked chicken, beans, White Rice, or Buttered
Egg Noodles just before serving.
6 Ways to Flavor Frozen Vegetable Soup
1. 1 tablespoon chili powder (with the onion and garlic)
2. The zest of 1 lemon or lime (with the onion and garlic)
3. One 28-ounce can whole peeled or diced tomatoes (with the first
vegetables; reduce the stock to 4 cups)
4. 1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary, sage, thyme, or oregano (with
the last vegetables)
5. 1 cup any grated or crumbled cheese (for garnish)
6. ½ cup chopped fresh parsley, basil, cilantro, or dill (for garnish)
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you’ve got time to prepare fresh vegetables, go for it. The same technique
will work perfectly. Trim and chop whatever vegetables you’d like, then
organize and cook them as described.
THE TIME-TEXTURE CONTINUUM
You decide how long your soup cooks based on how much of a hurry
you’re in and how tender (or not) you like your vegetables. Remember that
vegetables release starch and break down as they cook, which thickens

soups. Sometimes it’s worth an extra 10, 20, 30 minutes for a richer texture
and deeper flavor.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad
Bruschetta
Warm Buttery Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Provençal Tomato Soup with Fennel
Fennel, olives, rosemary, and orange zest are four ingredients with
punch. If you don’t have all four of these or you want to make the
soup even more substantial, see the list that follows.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for garnish
1 large onion
2 garlic cloves
Salt and pepper
2 medium fennel bulbs
⅔ cup any olives
2 sprigs fresh rosemary
1 orange
1 tablespoon tomato paste
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
4 cups vegetable or chicken stock or water

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over low heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the pot.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; add them to the pot. Sprinkle with salt
and pepper.
2. When the onion and garlic start to sizzle, raise the heat to medium and
cook, stirring occasionally until they begin to soften and color, 5 to 10
minutes.
Trim and chop the fennel bulbs, saving a few of the fronds for garnish.
3. Add the fennel to the pot and cook, stirring occasionally until the
fennel begins to soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
Pit ⅔ cup olives if necessary and chop them up a bit.
Strip the rosemary leaves from 2 sprigs and chop.
Grate 1 tablespoon zest from the orange; refrigerate the remaining fruit
for another use.
4. Add 1 tablespoon tomato paste to the fennel and cook, stirring
constantly until it darkens slightly, a minute or 2.
5. Add the olives, rosemary, and zest and cook, stirring until fragrant, less
than a minute.
6. Add the tomatoes and their juice and scrape any browned bits off the
bottom of the pot. Add 4 cups stock or water and raise the heat to high.
7. When the soup comes to a boil, adjust the heat so it bubbles gently but
steadily and cook, stirring once in a while until the tomatoes break
down, 5 to 10 minutes.

Chop the reserved fennel fronds.
8. Taste and adjust the seasoning and divide the soup among 4 bowls.
Garnish with the fennel fronds, drizzle with more olive oil, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Provençal Tomato Soup with Fennel and Shrimp
In Step 7, after the tomatoes break down, add 1 pound peeled shrimp to the
pot, raise the heat a bit, and cook, stirring constantly until the shrimp turn
pink and are cooked through, 2 or 3 minutes; garnish and serve.
Provençal Tomato Soup with Fennel and Fish
One pound of any 1-inch-thick sturdy white fish fillets—like bass, catfish,
or halibut—will work. In Step 7, after about 5 minutes of cooking, lay the
fish on top of the soup and cover the pot. Cook undisturbed until it flakes
easily with a fork, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir the fish into the soup; garnish and
serve.
Provençal Tomato Soup with Fennel and Squid
While the soup is cooking in Step 7, rinse 1 pound squid, cut crosswise into
rings, and cut the tentacles free. When the soup is ready, add the squid to
the pot, raise the heat a bit, and cook, stirring constantly until the rings and
tentacles turn white and are just cooked through, 2 or 3 minutes; garnish
and serve.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Vegetable Stock
Chicken Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME

The longer you let this soup simmer, the more the flavors will develop. Any
time up to an hour is fine; just add more liquid if the soup starts to look dry.
SIDES
Crisp Roasted Potatoes
Boiled Potatoes
Warm Buttery Bread
Bruschetta
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Creamy Parsnip Soup with Parsley
Pesto
Vegetables that will be puréed need to be cooked until very soft. If
you cut them into chunks, getting there can take 20 minutes, even
longer. But grated, they’re ready in a flash.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons butter
1 medium onion
4 or 5 large parsnips (1½ pounds)
Salt and pepper
6 cups vegetable or chicken stock or water
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 garlic clove
⅓ cup pine nuts
3 tablespoons olive oil

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a large pot over medium-low heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the butter starts to foam, add the onion and cook, stirring
occasionally until it softens, 10 to 15 minutes.
Trim and peel the parsnips. If you’re using a food processor, cut them
into chunks that will fit through the feed tube.
Grate the parsnips in a food processor with a grating disk or by hand
with a box grater.
3. Raise the heat to high. Add the parsnips, a sprinkle of salt and pepper,
and 6 cups stock or water. Bring to a boil, then reduce the heat so that
it bubbles gently but steadily and cook until the parsnips are tender, 5
to 10 minutes.
Chop 1 cup parsley.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove.
Roughly chop ⅓ cup pine nuts.
4. Combine the parsley, garlic, pine nuts, 3 tablespoons olive oil, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper in a small mixing bowl. Mash and stir with
a fork against the sides of the bowl until the pesto becomes a loose
paste.
5. Turn off the heat under the soup and run an immersion blender through
the pot or, working in batches, transfer it to an upright blender and
carefully purée.

6. Reheat the soup for 1 or 2 minutes if necessary. Taste and adjust the
seasoning. Divide the soup among 4 bowls, spoon the pesto over the
top, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Creamy Asparagus Soup with Rustic Mint Pesto
Perfect for spring. Use asparagus, cut into 1-inch pieces, instead of the
parsnips (they might take half the time to cook) and mint instead of parsley.
Creamy Potato Soup with Rustic Chive Pesto
Substitute potatoes for the parsnips and chives for the parsley. Double the
cooking time in Step 3.
Creamy Celery Root Soup with Rustic Cilantro Pesto
Substitute celery root for the parsnips, one 14-ounce can coconut milk for
1½ cups of the stock, and cilantro for the parsley. Use 1 inch fresh ginger
instead of garlic and cashews in place of the pine nuts. Instead of olive oil,
use 2 tablespoons sesame oil and 1 tablespoon vegetable oil.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Vegetable Stock
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
Don’t purée. Or if you don’t have a blender but want the soup a little
smoother, run a potato masher through the pot a few times.
If you have traditional basil pesto already made, bring it to room
temperature, skip Step 4, and use it to top the finished soup. (See Pasta with
Pesto and Cherry Tomatoes for a recipe.)

IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Toast the pine nuts in a dry skillet over medium heat, shaking the pan
frequently until they’re fragrant and lightly browned, 3 or 4 minutes. Pine
nuts burn easily, so keep an eye on them.
SIDES
Green Salad
Warm Buttery Bread
Asparagus Gratin

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Butternut Squash Soup with Apples
and Bacon
This soup has it all: It’s sweet, colorful, and creamy and even
features the smoky crunch of bacon on top. The most time-
consuming thing about preparing squash is peeling and seeding it
(see the Notes for the speediest options).

Ingredients
8 slices bacon
1 medium butternut squash (1½ pounds)
2 large apples
1 small onion
1 teaspoon allspice
¼ teaspoon cayenne
Salt and pepper
5 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
1 cup cream

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large pot over medium heat.
Chop 8 slices bacon into 1-inch pieces.
2. Add the bacon to the pot. Cook, stirring occasionally, until crisp, 5 to
10 minutes.
Line a plate with paper towels.
Cut the squash in half crosswise; peel and trim it, and scoop out the
seeds. Cut it into chunks that will fit through the feed tube of a food
processor.
Peel, quarter, and core the apples.
Trim, peel, and quarter the onion.
3. When the bacon is crisp, transfer it to the paper towels with a slotted
spoon. Turn the heat to low.
Shred the vegetables and fruit in a food processor with a grating disk;
empty the work bowl into the pot as it fills.
4. Raise the heat to medium-high. Add 1 teaspoon allspice, ¼ teaspoon
cayenne, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring, until the
spices are fragrant, about a minute.
5. Add 5 cups stock or water and 1 cup cream. Bring to a boil, reduce the
heat so that it bubbles gently but steadily, and cook until the squash is
fully tender, 10 to 15 minutes.
6. Turn off the heat under the soup and run an immersion blender through
the pot or, working in batches, transfer it to an upright blender and
carefully purée.

7. Reheat the soup for 1 or 2 minutes if necessary. Taste and adjust the
seasoning. Divide the soup among 4 bowls, garnish with the bacon,
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Sweet Potato Soup with Pears and Bacon
Substitute sweet potatoes for the squash and pears for the apples.
Pumpkin Soup with Apples and Pumpkin Seeds
A lovely Thanksgiving starter: Substitute pumpkin for the squash. In Step 2,
instead of the bacon, cook ½ cup hulled pumpkin seeds in 3 tablespoons
olive oil until golden and popping, 3 to 5 minutes. Remove them from the
pot and remove the pot from the heat until you grate the vegetables and
fruit, then proceed with Step 4.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Once the squash is soft, leave the texture as is. Or if you don’t have a
blender and want the soup a little smoother, run a potato masher through the
pot a few times.
PEELING BUTTERNUT SQUASH
Butternut and other winter squash have very tough skins. There are two
ways to prepare them: Cut the squash in half around the equator, stabilize
the flat side on a cutting board, and work downward with a chef’s or paring
knife to slice the skin from the flesh, turning the piece as you work, then
trim off the ends. (See the illustrations in Prep Shortcuts for more details.)

Or if you’ve got a sharp and sturdy vegetable peeler, remove the skin from
the whole squash, working from top to bottom. The top half of the squash
should be pure meat; scoop out the seeds from the bottom half and you’re
done.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Fennel Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sweet Pea Soup with Crisp Ham
This soup is brighter and faster than its split pea counterpart, and
since the ham isn’t cooked in the liquid, it provides contrasting
textures. It takes a fair amount of fat to get ham crisp, so if your
ham is lean, double the amount of olive oil in Step 3.

Ingredients
2 medium leeks
2 tablespoons butter
Several sprigs fresh tarragon
5 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
1 tablespoon olive oil
8 ounces sliced ham
Two 10-ounce bags frozen peas
1 cup cream
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Trim the leeks; slice the white and light green parts only.
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a large pot over medium heat. When it
foams, add the leeks and cook, stirring occasionally until they’re soft,
3 to 5 minutes. Do not brown.
Strip the leaves from several sprigs tarragon and chop.
2. When the leeks are soft, add 5 cups stock or water and raise the heat to
high.
3. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil in a medium skillet over medium-high heat.
Cut the ham into thin strips.
4. When the oil is hot, add the ham and cook, stirring occasionally until
crisp, 3 to 5 minutes.
Line a plate with paper towels.
5. When the stock comes to a boil, add the peas and cook, stirring
occasionally until tender, 3 to 5 minutes.
6. When the ham is crisp, transfer it to the paper towels.
7. Add the tarragon and 1 cup cream to the pot along with a sprinkle of
salt and pepper; turn off the heat. Run an immersion blender through
the pot or, working in batches, transfer the soup to an upright blender
and carefully purée. Reheat the soup for 1 or 2 minutes if necessary.
8. Taste and adjust the seasoning and divide the soup among 4 bowls.
Garnish with the ham and serve.
VARIATIONS

Minty Pea Soup with Crisp Ham
Super fresh tasting. Use ½ cup fresh mint leaves instead of tarragon.
Tangy Pea Soup with Crisp Ham
Use crème fraîche instead of cream.
Ginger Carrot Soup with Crisp Ham
Omit the tarragon. Use frozen carrots instead of the peas (or fresh carrots,
peeled and chopped, and double the cooking time). Peel and chop 2 inches
fresh ginger. When you cook the ham in Step 4, add the ginger to the pot.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
And access to fresh peas in the pod: Start with 4 pounds, shell them, and
use them instead of the frozen peas. They might take a little longer to cook,
but check them frequently so they don’t get too mushy.
SIDES
Crisp Roasted Potatoes
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tomato and Bread Soup with White
Beans
When a crusty slice of bread breaks up in hot broth, it can turn even
garlic-flavored water into soup. Add olive oil and tomatoes and
you’ve got something truly delicious, with a comforting texture.
Beans add smoothness, and their starch makes the broth rich.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for drizzling
1 large onion
Salt and pepper
1 large carrot
4 or 5 medium ripe tomatoes (1½ pounds)
2 tablespoons tomato paste
4 sprigs fresh thyme or 1 teaspoon dried
4 thick slices any rustic bread
1 garlic clove
2 cups cooked or canned white beans (one 15-ounce can)
3 cups vegetable or beef stock or water
Several sprigs fresh basil for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the oil is hot, add the onion and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the carrot; add it to the pot and stir.
Core and chop the tomatoes.
3. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
4. When the onion and carrot are soft, add 2 tablespoons tomato paste
and cook, stirring until it darkens a bit, 1 or 2 minutes.
5. Add the tomatoes and cook, stirring occasionally until they break
apart, 10 to 15 minutes.
If you’re using fresh thyme, strip the leaves from 4 sprigs and chop
them.
Put 4 thick slices bread on a baking sheet and drizzle each with a little
olive oil.
6. Broil the bread, turning once, until browned on both sides, 2 to 5
minutes total.
7. Add the fresh thyme (or 1 teaspoon dried) to the pot and stir.
Peel and halve 1 garlic clove. If you’re using canned beans, rinse and
drain them.
When the bread is toasted, rub the tops with the cut side of the garlic;
slice or tear the bread into bite-sized pieces and put in the bottom of
4 soup bowls.

8. Add 3 cups stock or water to the pot along with the beans. Adjust the
heat so the soup bubbles gently but steadily; cook, stirring occasionally
and adding a little liquid if necessary, until it heats through, another 3
minutes.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop them.
9. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Pour the soup over the bread. Garnish
with the basil, drizzle with olive oil, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Tomato and Bread Soup with Eggplant
In Step 1, add another tablespoon olive oil to the pot. Cut 1 large or 3 small
eggplant into 1-inch chunks. Add them with the onion in Step 2.
Tomato and Bread Soup with Zucchini
Cut 2 medium zucchini into 1-inch chunks. Add them with the tomatoes in
Step 5.
Tomato and Bread Soup with Hearty Greens
Roughly chop 1½ pounds kale, escarole, or other hearty green. Add them
with the tomatoes in Step 5.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Vegetable Stock
Beef Stock
EVEN FASTER
This soup is lovely with canned tomatoes; figure one 28-ounce can of the
whole peeled kind. Break them up as they cook in Step 5.

SIDES
Green Salad
Caprese Salad
Fennel Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pasta e Fagioli
This Italian classic is thick and satisfying with vegetables, beans,
and pasta in every bite. You can skip the parsley, but don’t skimp
on the Parmesan or olive oil: They add key richness.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for drizzling
1 medium onion
2 medium carrots
2 celery stalks
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
2 cups cooked or canned cannellini or pinto beans (one 15-ounce can)
2 sprigs fresh rosemary
One 14-ounce can whole tomatoes
6 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
1 cup tiny cut pasta (like ditalini or orzo)
1 bunch fresh parsley for garnish
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over low heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the pot.
Trim and peel the carrots. Trim the celery. Chop the vegetables, add
them to the pot, and stir.
2. Raise the heat to medium-high. When the vegetables start sizzling,
sprinkle with salt and pepper and cook, stirring occasionally until they
soften and begin to brown, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel and chop 2 garlic cloves; add to the pot and stir.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
3. When the vegetables are ready, add 2 sprigs rosemary to the pot. Stir
until fragrant, less than 1 minute.
4. Add the tomatoes and their juice, breaking them up with a spoon and
scraping any browned bits off the bottom of the pot. Add 6 cups stock
or water and raise the heat to high.
5. When the soup comes to a boil, stir in the beans and 1 cup pasta.
Return the mixture to a boil; adjust the heat so it bubbles steadily.
6. Start tasting the pasta after 5 minutes; it should be tender but not
mushy. If the pot starts to look dry, add water a little at a time.
Chop ½ cup parsley.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
7. When the pasta is tender, turn off the heat. Fish out the rosemary sprigs
and discard. Taste and adjust the seasoning and divide the soup among

4 bowls. Garnish each with the parsley, ¼ cup Parmesan, and a drizzle
of olive oil; serve.
VARIATIONS
Greek-Style Pasta e Fagioli
An unusual change. Instead of the rosemary, use several sprigs fresh
oregano. Use frozen green favas for the beans and pearl couscous for the
pasta; substitute crumbled feta for the Parmesan.
Spanish-Style Pasta e Fagioli
Substitute 2 teaspoons smoked paprika for the rosemary, chickpeas for the
beans, and 6 ounces spaghetti for the tiny pasta. Break the noodles into 1-
inch pieces before adding them in Step 5.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Use 3 cups already cooked pasta (see Recipe-Free: Pasta) and stir it into the
soup right before serving. If you’ve got lightly sauced leftovers handy, use
them; they’ll add even more flavor to the soup.
CANNED TOMATO TRICKS
It’s easy enough to break canned tomatoes into smaller pieces with a spoon
once they’re in the pot, but often, if you have 30 seconds to spare before
adding the tomatoes, you can roughly chop them right in the can. Just run a
paring knife through the tomatoes. Or transfer them to a bowl and squeeze

them with your hand until they’re broken up a bit. Of course you can
always buy canned diced tomatoes.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad
Fennel Salad
Bruschetta
Sautéed Greens with Garlic

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chickpea and Couscous Stew with
Moroccan Spices
When you cook pasta or grains in a thick soup, the result is more
like a stew. Once you get things going, there’s plenty of time to set
the table or get a jump on the dishes.

Ingredients
¼ cup olive oil
1 large onion
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon coriander
1 teaspoon cinnamon
2 large carrots
Salt and pepper
2 cups cooked or canned chickpeas (one 15-ounce can)
2 garlic cloves
1 tablespoon tomato paste
One 28-ounce can whole peeled tomatoes
4 cups vegetable or chicken stock or water
1 lemon
1 bunch fresh mint for garnish
½ cup couscous

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large pot over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. Add 1 teaspoon cumin, 1 teaspoon coriander, and 1 teaspoon cinnamon
to the pot; cook, stirring until dark and fragrant, about 1 minute.
3. Add the onion to the pot and cook, stirring occasionally until it begins
to soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the carrots; add them to the pot and stir.
4. Raise the heat to medium-high. When the vegetables start sizzling,
sprinkle with salt and pepper and cook, stirring occasionally until they
soften and begin to brown, 5 to 10 minutes.
If you’re using canned chickpeas, rinse and drain them.
Peel and chop 2 garlic cloves; add them to the pot and stir.
5. Add 1 tablespoon tomato paste and cook, stirring until it darkens
slightly, a minute or 2. Stir in the chickpeas.
6. Add the tomatoes and their juice, breaking them up with a spoon and
scraping any browned bits off the bottom of the pot. Add 4 cups stock
or water and raise the heat to high.
Grate the zest of the lemon; refrigerate the fruit for another use.
Chop 1 cup mint leaves.
7. When the stew begins to boil, lower the heat so it bubbles gently. Stir
in ½ cup couscous; cover and turn off the heat. After 5 minutes, stir in
the lemon zest and mint. Taste, adjust the seasoning, divide the soup
among 4 bowls, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Chickpea and Couscous Stew with Cauliflower
Add 1 medium head chopped cauliflower to the stew with the tomatoes and
stock in Step 6. After reducing the heat in Step 7, cook, stirring
occasionally until the cauliflower is almost as tender as you like it, 5 to 10
minutes. Then add the couscous and proceed with the recipe.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Vegetable Stock
Chicken Stock
“BLOOMING” GROUND SPICES
It’s tempting to skip this if you’re in a hurry, but it takes no more than a
minute and makes the dish taste like it’s been simmering for hours. Spices
are said to “bloom” when you toast them in a little butter or oil just long
enough to activate their fragrant oils. Here, a classic Moroccan spice blend
intensifies a simple broth of canned tomatoes and stock and infuses the
chickpeas and couscous with long-cooked flavor.
SIDES
Tahini-Lemon Potato Salad
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Carrot Salad with Raisins
Jícama and Radish Salad with Dried Cranberries and Cinnamon
Tahini Slaw
Cucumber Raita

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Seafood Chowder
Since seafood brings the briny character of the ocean to the pot,
you can get by with little more than a handful of vegetables and
water. Use stock and you’ll add even more flavor.

Ingredients
5 cups fish or chicken stock or water
2 tablespoons butter
4 sprigs fresh thyme or 1 teaspoon dried
Salt
Pinch of saffron (optional)
2 or 3 medium russet or Yukon Gold potatoes (1 pound)
2 medium leeks
2 medium carrots
2 celery stalks
2 garlic cloves
1 pound thick white fish fillets
2 pounds littleneck or other hard-shell clams or 1 pound mussels
Pepper
1 cup cream or milk
Fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 5 cups stock or water and 2 tablespoons butter in a large pot over
medium-high heat. Add 4 sprigs fresh thyme or 1 teaspoon dried, a
sprinkle of salt, and a pinch of saffron if you’re using it.
Scrub the potatoes and peel them if you like. Cut them into small
chunks and add them to the pot.
Trim the leeks and slice the white and light green parts only.
Trim and peel the carrots and trim the celery. Cut them into small
chunks and add them to the pot along with the leeks.
Peel and slice 2 garlic cloves and add to the pot.
2. When the stock comes to a boil, adjust the heat so it bubbles gently but
steadily. Cook, stirring occasionally until the potatoes are fork-tender
but not yet breaking apart, 10 to 15 minutes.
Cut the fish fillets into large chunks; scrub the clams or scrub and
debeard the mussels (discard any that don’t close when you press
the shell together).
3. When the potatoes are tender, add the clams or mussels to the chowder
and put the pieces of fish on top. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and
pour 1 cup cream or milk over all.
4. Adjust the heat so the liquid bubbles gently but steadily. Cover and
cook just until the clams or mussels open and the fish is cooked
through, 5 to 10 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
5. When the fish and shellfish are cooked, stir the pot gently to combine
everything. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Fish out fresh thyme sprigs

and discard. Divide among 4 bowls and serve, shells and all, garnished
with sprigs of parsley.
VARIATIONS
All-Clam or -Mussel Chowder
Omit the fish and increase the quantity of clams to 4 pounds and mussels to
2 pounds.
Smoked Salmon Chowder
Easy and distinctive. Omit the white fish and clams and use 12 ounces
smoked salmon. Garnish with chives instead of parsley.
Manhattan Seafood or Clam Chowder
Substitute one 28-ounce can diced tomatoes with their juice for 1 cup of the
stock or water and the cream. If you like, omit the fish and use 3 pounds
clams.
Shrimp and Corn Chowder
Summer special. Instead of the carrots and celery, use 2 cups corn kernels
(frozen is fine). Substitute 1½ pounds peeled shrimp for the fish and clams
or mussels.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Fish Stock
Chicken Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Seafood Chowder with Bacon
Most chowders taste better with bacon. Omit the butter. Start by cutting 8
thick slices bacon into 1-inch pieces. Put them in a large pot over medium

heat. Cook, stirring occasionally, until nearly cooked, 5 to 10 minutes.
Remove the bacon with a slotted spoon and start the soup using the
rendered bacon fat with Step 1. Add the bacon back to the pot just before
serving.
For a more elegant presentation, fish the clams or mussels out of the pot,
remove shells, and return the seafood to the chowder.
SIDES
Rice Pilaf
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Fennel Salad

RECIPE-FREE

Soups
1
Heat the fat.
Browning isn’t mandatory (see Chop-and-Drop Soups, but some of
the most flavorful soups and stews start with cooking meat in oil or
butter. So put a few tablespoons of either in a large pot or deep skillet
over medium-high heat.
2
Brown the meat.
Add some meat—ground meat; chopped bacon, ham, or sausage; or
chunks of beef, pork, lamb, or poultry. Cook undisturbed, adjusting
the heat so it doesn’t burn, until it releases easily from the bottom;
then stir or turn and cook some more. The less you fuss, the better the
browning, plus it gives you time to focus on chopping vegetables.

3
Add seasonings and vegetables.
Remove the meat and add aromatics like onions or garlic. Once
they’ve cooked a bit, add seasonings like spices, herbs, or tomato
paste. Stir for a minute, then add the vegetables as you finish
chopping them. Cook until they begin to get tender, usually 5 to 10
minutes.

4
Add the liquid.
Add about 6 cups liquid to the pot. This could be stock, water, beer,
wine, or canned tomatoes—or a combination. Then stir to scrape up
any browned bits from the bottom. You’re no longer in danger of
burning anything; crank the heat to high so the liquid will come to a
boil.
5
Build substance.
Return the meat to the pot now. If you have any other ingredients to
add that need time to cook, like grains, pasta, or more vegetables,
prep and add them to the pot as you work. Once the soup comes to a
boil, lower the heat so it bubbles gently but steadily.

6
Simmer.
Cook, stirring only once in a while and adding more water or stock as
needed to keep everything submerged. Prepare garnishes, then add
quick-cooking seafood or any precooked ingredients—leftover
vegetables, meat, poultry, noodles, grains, or beans—to heat them
through.

7
Taste and serve.
When the texture and color look right, taste. Adjust the seasoning,
adding salt, pepper, or more of the original flavorings. Finishing
touches might include soy, hot sauce, or vinegar; a pat of butter or
drizzle of olive oil; citrus zest; or fresh herbs.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Miso Soup with Scallops, Soba, and
Spinach
Japanese stock—dashi—is a real change from chicken or vegetable
broth, and since the main ingredients are sea greens and fish flakes,
it’s as simple as steeping tea.

Ingredients
1 large piece dried kelp (kombu), 4 to 6 inches long
Salt
1 bunch spinach (1 pound)
8 ounces sea scallops
½ cup dried bonito flakes
8 ounces soba noodles
4 scallions
⅓ cup any miso

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 piece dried kelp and 8 cups water in a large pot over medium
heat. Bring another large pot of water to boil and salt it.
Trim off any thick stems from the spinach and chop the leaves.
Cut each scallop crosswise into 2 or 3 thin rounds.
2. When the water with the kelp just starts to bubble, turn off the heat,
remove the kelp (you can save it for stir-fries if you want), and stir in
½ cup bonito flakes.
3. When the pot of salted water comes to a boil, add 8 ounces soba
noodles. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the noodles are barely
tender, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim and slice the scallions.
4. When the noodles are ready, drain and rinse them under warm water,
then return them to the pot. Add the spinach and put the raw scallop
slices on top.
5. Strain all but 1 cup of the dashi into the pot with the noodles and
cover. Return the pot to high heat. Cook, undisturbed, until it just starts
to bubble and the spinach is wilted, 3 to 5 minutes.
Strain the remaining dashi into a small bowl. Add ⅓ cup miso and
whisk until smooth.
6. When the soup is ready, turn off the heat and stir the miso mixture into
the pot.
7. Taste and add more salt if necessary. Ladle the soup into 4 bowls and
garnish with the scallions.

VARIATIONS
Miso Soup with Shrimp, Soba, and Spinach
Substitute peeled shrimp for the scallops. Chop them into bite-sized pieces
or—slightly fancier—slice them in half lengthwise.
Miso Soup with Tofu, Soba, and Bok Choy
Substitute one 12-ounce box silken tofu for the scallops and sliced bok choy
for the spinach. When you stir in the miso mixture, break the tofu into big,
irregular pieces with a large spoon.
Miso Soup with Chicken, Udon, and Snow Peas
Quite substantial: Use thinly sliced chicken breast instead of the scallops
and whole snow peas instead of spinach. Substitute udon for the soba; they
will take a minute or 2 longer to become tender in Step 3.
NOTES
MISO
Miso paste isn’t in every American refrigerator, but it should be. This
fermented soybean paste adds tremendous flavor to soups, sauces, rubs, and
marinades. You can find miso at many supermarkets these days, and always
at Japanese or other Asian markets. It lasts for about a year in the fridge, so
there’s no excuse not to keep some handy.
In general, the darker the miso, the more assertive the taste. White and
yellow varieties are mild with a touch of sweetness (that’s what I usually
use for miso soup); red, brown, and black misos all taste a bit stronger,
more fermented, and are better for sauces and seasoning; nontraditionalists
can use them all interchangeably.
SIDES

Scallion Pancakes
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Ginger and Soy
Edamame with Chili Salt
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fast Pho
Pho (pronounced fuh) is a classic Vietnamese soup that often
contains as many raw ingredients as cooked. While the seductive
broth simmers, you prep a few things to stir in near the end or to
put on the table for individual sprinkling.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons peanut or sunflower oil
4 garlic cloves
2 inches fresh ginger
1 teaspoon star anise or coriander
1 teaspoon cloves
½ teaspoon cinnamon
⅓ cup fish sauce, or more to taste
1 brick firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces)
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
Several sprigs fresh Thai or regular basil
Several sprigs fresh mint
2 cups bean sprouts
4 scallions
2 fresh hot green chiles
2 limes
2 cups frozen edamame
4 ounces dried rice vermicelli noodles
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons peanut or sunflower oil in a large pot over medium-
low heat.
Peel 4 garlic cloves and 2 inches of fresh ginger; mince them together.
2. Add the garlic and ginger to the pot and raise the heat to medium-high.
Cook, stirring frequently until soft, about 1 minute.
3. Add 1 teaspoon star anise or coriander, 1 teaspoon cloves, and ½
teaspoon cinnamon and cook, stirring until fragrant, another minute.
4. Add 10 cups water and ⅓ cup fish sauce, raise the heat to high, and
bring to a boil. Reduce the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily.
Cut the brick of tofu into ½- or ¼-inch cubes.
Trim several sprigs each cilantro, basil, and mint and put the sprigs on
a platter (the leaves can be plucked at the table).
Pick over the bean sprouts to remove any bad bits and put them on the
platter.
Trim and chop the scallions; trim, seed, and thinly slice the chiles. Add
both to the platter. Cut the limes into wedges and add them to the
platter.
5. When the broth is simmering, add 2 cups edamame. Cook for 2
minutes, then add the cubed tofu and 4 ounces rice noodles. Cook,
stirring once or twice, until the noodles are almost tender, 2 or 3
minutes.
6. Taste the soup and sprinkle with salt and pepper or add more fish sauce
if necessary. Divide among 4 big bowls, passing the platter of
garnishes at the table.

VARIATIONS
7 Easy Vegetable Additions
Stir in 4 cups of the following vegetables, thinly sliced, 2 minutes before
you add the noodles:
1. Bok choy
2. Napa cabbage
3. Mustard greens
4. Broccoli rabe
5. Carrots
6. Green beans or snow peas
7. Summer squash
5 Easy Meat and Seafood Additions
Stir in 8 ounces of the following meat or seafood, thinly sliced, 2 minutes
before you add the noodles:
1. Boneless beef sirloin or rib-eye
2. Boneless pork loin
3. Boneless chicken breast or thighs
4. Shrimp, peeled and butterflied
5. Scallops
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Slow Pho with Meat
Add up to 3 pounds meaty beef or pork bones to the pot along with the
water. Once the broth comes to a boil, reduce the heat so that it simmers;

after 2 or 3 hours, which is ideal, you’ll be able to pull the meat from the
bones (otherwise you’ll have to cut the meat from the bones with a knife).
Add the reserved meat along with the noodles in Step 5.
SIDES
Scallion Pancakes
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Homemade Chicken Ramen
Packaged ramen can be jazzed up with little more than egg,
scallions, and soy sauce. Dump the packet of fake seasoning in the
trash and make a quick broth, then add the noodles and some sliced
chicken to the same pot.

Ingredients
3 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 8 ounces)
1 inch fresh ginger
1 teaspoon sesame oil
¼ teaspoon red chile flakes
3 tablespoons soy sauce
6 cups chicken or vegetable stock
3 garlic cloves
6 scallions
8 ounces ramen or somen noodles or 4 packages ramen soup
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
4 eggs

Prep | Cook
Thinly slice the chicken thighs.
Peel and mince 1 inch fresh ginger.
1. Combine the chicken, ginger, 1 teaspoon sesame oil, ¼ teaspoon red
chile flakes, and 1 tablespoon soy sauce in a bowl.
2. Put 6 cups stock and 2 tablespoons soy sauce in a large pot over high
heat.
Peel and thinly slice 3 garlic cloves.
Trim and chop the scallions, keeping the white and green parts
separate.
3. When the stock comes to a boil, add the garlic, the white parts of the
scallions, and the chicken along with its marinade. Adjust the heat so
the broth bubbles steadily and cook, stirring once or twice, until the
chicken is cooked through, 3 to 5 minutes.
4. Put a large skillet over medium-high heat for 1 minute.
5. Add the noodles to the pot (discard the seasoning packets if there are
any); break them apart with a fork if necessary and adjust the heat so
the broth keeps bubbling gently. Cook, stirring occasionally, until just
tender, 3 to 5 minutes.
6. Add 1 tablespoon vegetable oil to the skillet and swirl it to coat the
bottom. Crack the eggs into the pan and turn the heat to low.
7. Cover the pan and cook, undisturbed, until the whites are just set and
the yolks are still runny, 3 or 4 minutes. Turn off the heat.

8. When the noodles and chicken are done, taste the broth and adjust the
seasoning. Divide the soup among 4 bowls, top each with a fried egg
and the green parts of the scallions, and serve.
VARIATIONS
6 No-Cook Ramen Toppers
1. Canned mackerel
2. Thinly sliced smoked sausage
3. Tomato wedges
4. Sliced avocado
5. Chopped fresh pineapple
6. Cubed mango
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Instead of frying the eggs, beat them in a bowl and slowly pour them into
the pot at the end of Step 5, stirring the whole time. (See Bacon and Egg
Drop Soup.
Or you can crack the eggs into a saucer and slide them into the bubbling
broth during Step 5. Let them poach until they’re as soft or firm as you like,
2 to 4 minutes, then carefully serve 1 in each bowl of soup.
FINDING RAMEN

One of the fastest and most popular meals of all time is ramen—the name
for both a curly Japanese-style wheat noodle and the packaged instant soup
that includes them. Since the noodles can be hard to find outside their
iconic single-serve packages, just buy those and ditch the seasoning. If you
can find big, seasoning-free packages, so much the better; ordinary somen
noodles work fine in this recipe too.
SIDES
Edamame with Chili Salt
Scallion-Miso Bean Sprouts
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken Tamale Soup
If you like the flavor of corn tortillas and the pleasantly gritty
texture of tamales, this is your soup. And you get it all without
patting, filling, or wrapping sticky dough. Just assemble similar
ingredients in a pot and let it bubble for a few minutes.

Ingredients
8 cups chicken or vegetable stock
1 small onion
1 bunch fresh cilantro
8 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 1½ pounds)
2 chipotle chiles in adobo, with their sauce to taste
¼ cup masa harina or finely ground cornmeal
Salt and pepper
2 avocados
4 ounces melting cheese, like Oaxaca or Jack (1 cup grated)
1 lime

Prep | Cook
1. Put 8 cups stock in a large pot over high heat.
Trim, peel, and halve the onion. Chop 1 half for garnish and leave the
other half intact.
Chop 1 cup cilantro; put ½ cup in a blender and reserve the rest.
Cut the chicken into small chunks or thin slices.
2. Add the onion half to the blender, along with 2 chipotles and some of
their sauce, ¼ cup masa harina or finely ground cornmeal, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper.
3. When the stock comes to a boil, turn off the heat and carefully ladle
about 2 cups into the blender. Purée until smooth.
4. Add the purée and the chicken to the remaining stock in the pot and
adjust the heat so it bubbles gently. Cook, stirring occasionally, until
the chicken just cooks through and the soup has thickened slightly, 5 to
10 minutes.
Halve and pit the avocados, cut the flesh into cubes, and scoop it out of
the skin.
Grate 1 cup cheese.
Cut the lime into wedges.
5. When the soup is ready, taste and adjust the seasoning and divide
among 4 bowls. Garnish with the avocados, cheese, and chopped onion
and cilantro. Serve with the lime wedges.
VARIATIONS

Pork Tamale Soup
Substitute 4 thin boneless pork chops for the chicken.
Chicken Tortilla Soup
Omit the salt. Substitute 2 cups broken tortilla chips for the masa. Serve
garnished with more chips if you like.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
The longer you let the soup simmer—up to an hour or so—the more the
flavors will develop. But you don’t want to overcook the chicken, so don’t
add it until about 10 minutes before you’re ready to serve.
MASA HARINA
Masa harina is a fine, flourlike meal made from corn that has been
processed with lime. It’s a staple in Mexico, and in the kitchens of
Mexicans-Americans, and since it’s the main ingredient in corn tortillas and
tamales, everyone else knows the flavor as well. And masa is useful for its
ability to quickly add flavor and texture to soups and stews. Like cornmeal,
it will clump in liquids, so either make a slurry with a small amount of hot
liquid, as in this recipe, or add it slowly, in a steady stream, whisking
constantly.
SIDES
Warm Flour or Corn Tortillas
Coleslaw

Mexican Street Corn
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Ripe Plantains

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Spicy Peanut Soup with Chicken and
Collards
Peanuts and collards have a natural affinity. This African-inspired
soup demonstrates how delicious these greens can be when cooked
quickly.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
6 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (1 pound)
1 large red onion
2 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
1 fresh hot green chile (like jalapeño)
1 cup peanut butter
1 tablespoon tomato paste
6 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
Salt and pepper
1 large or 2 small bunches collard greens (1 pound)
¼ cup roasted peanuts for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
Cut the chicken into ½-inch chunks.
2. When the oil is hot, add the chicken to pot and cook, undisturbed, until
the pieces brown and release easily, 2 or 3 minutes. Then cook, stirring
occasionally, until the meat is no longer pink, 2 or 3 more minutes.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves and 1 inch fresh ginger.
Trim the chile, remove the seeds if you’d like, and mince it.
3. Add the onion to the pot and cook, stirring occasionally until softened,
2 or 3 minutes.
Whisk together 1 cup peanut butter and ½ cup water in a small bowl
until smooth.
4. Add the garlic, ginger, chile, and 1 tablespoon tomato paste to the pot.
Cook, stirring until the mixture darkens and becomes fragrant, 1 or 2
minutes.
5. Add 6 cups stock or water, scraping up any browned bits from the
bottom of the pot. Stir in the peanut butter mixture and sprinkle with
salt and pepper. Raise the heat to high and bring to a boil.
Trim the collards; slice the leaves in half along the stem, then
crosswise into thin ribbons.
6. When the liquid boils, stir the collards into the pot and lower the heat
so the soup bubbles gently. Cover and cook, undisturbed, until the
greens soften and the chicken cooks through, 5 to 10 minutes.

Chop ¼ cup peanuts (or crush them with the flat side of a knife).
7. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Divide the soup among 4 bowls,
garnish with the peanuts, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Spicy Curried Peanut Soup with Chicken and Spinach
Substitute a yellow onion for the red, roughly chopped spinach for the
collards, curry powder for the tomato paste, and one 14-ounce can coconut
milk for 2 cups of the stock. The spinach will take only 3 to 5 minutes to
soften.
Chinese-Style Peanut Soup with Tofu and Bok Choy
I like this a lot. Use 1 bunch scallions instead of the red onion, 2 cups cubed
firm tofu in place of the chicken, bok choy instead of collards, and 2
tablespoons soy sauce rather than tomato paste. Add the soy sauce when
you add the stock.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
SIDES
White Rice
Quinoa
Warm Flour or Corn Tortillas

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cabbage Soup with Smoked Sausage
Thanks to the crisp-tender texture of the cabbage, this soup is
surprisingly light even though its flavors are hearty and warming.
Using whole spices and browning everything creates intense flavor
in a short time.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 pound bratwurst, kielbasa, or other smoked sausage
1 large onion
1 small head Savoy or green cabbage (1 pound)
Salt and pepper
1 tablespoon caraway seeds
6 cups chicken or beef stock
1 cinnamon stick
8 sprigs fresh thyme

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium heat.
Cut the sausage into bite-sized pieces.
2. When the oil is hot, add the sausage and cook, stirring occasionally,
until browned on most sides, 5 to 10 minutes.
Trim, peel, and halve the onion. Slice each half crosswise ½ inch thick.
Trim, core, and quarter the cabbage. Cut each quarter crosswise into
½-inch ribbons.
3. Remove the browned sausage from the pot with a slotted spoon. Raise
the heat to medium-high and add the onion and cabbage. Sprinkle with
salt and pepper and cook, stirring occasionally until they begin to
soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
4. Add 1 tablespoon caraway seeds and cook, stirring until fragrant,
about 1 minute.
5. Add 6 cups stock, 1 cinnamon stick, and 8 sprigs fresh thyme. Return
the sausage to the pot. Bring the mixture to a boil, then adjust the heat
so that it bubbles gently but steadily.
6. Cook, stirring once or twice, until the vegetables become tender and
the soup thickens, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove the cinnamon stick and
thyme if you like. Taste, adjust the seasoning, divide among 4 bowls,
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Red Cabbage and Beef Soup

Substitute cumin seeds for the caraway and ground beef for the smoked
sausage and add red chile flakes to taste. Use red cabbage and red onion.
Escarole and Italian Sausage Soup
A classic. Omit the caraway and cinnamon. Use fresh hot or sweet Italian
sausage and substitute escarole for the cabbage.
Spinach and Chorizo Soup
Use smoked chorizo for the sausage and spinach in place of cabbage; don’t
add the spinach until the stock bubbles in Step 5 and then cook only until
it’s just tender, 3 to 5 minutes.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Beef Stock
SIDES
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Quinoa
White Rice
Buttered Egg Noodles
Boiled Potatoes
Warm Buttery Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sausage, Cannellini, and Kale Soup
Beans and greens are a ubiquitous combination, and they mix and
match brilliantly. The combination of cannellini and hearty kale,
with the addition of sausage and Parmesan cheese, is one of my all-
time favorites.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for garnish
1 pound sweet or hot Italian sausage
3 garlic cloves
1 bunch kale, preferably lacinato (1 pound)
2 cups cooked or canned cannellini beans (one 15-ounce can)
¼ teaspoon red chile flakes, or more to taste
Salt and pepper
6 cups stock or water
1 bay leaf
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium heat.
Cut the sausage into small chunks.
2. When the oil is hot, add the sausage and cook, stirring occasionally,
until browned on most sides, 5 to 10 minutes.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
Trim and chop the kale.
If you’re using canned cannellini beans, rinse and drain them. Put the
beans in a small bowl and mash them with a fork until the pieces are
the size of peas.
3. When the sausage is browned, stir in the garlic and ¼ teaspoon red
chile flakes (or to taste). Cook, stirring until fragrant, 30 seconds or so.
4. Add the kale, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring until it’s
coated with oil and just starting to wilt, a minute or 2.
5. Add the beans, 6 cups stock or water, and 1 bay leaf. Bring the mixture
to a boil, then adjust the heat so that it bubbles gently but steadily.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the broth thickens and the greens are
fully tender, 10 to 20 minutes.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
6. Remove and discard the bay leaf. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
Divide the soup among 4 bowls, sprinkle each with ¼ cup grated
Parmesan, drizzle with olive oil, and serve.
VARIATIONS

Merguez, Chickpea, and Chard Soup
Substitute Merguez or other lamb and/or beef links for the Italian sausage.
Substitute chard for the kale and chickpeas for the cannellini beans.
Andouille, Black-Eyed Pea, and Southern Greens Soup
Spicy and smoky. Use andouille sausage. Substitute mustard, collard, or
turnip greens for the kale and black-eyed peas for the cannellini beans.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
Beef Stock
THICKENING WITH BEANS
Even just a little mashing of beans in soup makes the bowlful thick and
creamy. The starch released by the beans is water soluble, so it dissolves
quickly, creating a viscosity otherwise achieved only by adding fatty foods
like butter and cream.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Crisp Roasted Potatoes
Bruschetta
Green Salad
Caprese Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Broken Wonton Soup
Even with the convenience of packaged wonton skins, no one is
going to fill and seal wontons while hurrying to get dinner on the
table. But if you deconstruct the whole thing, you can pull together
homemade wonton soup in minutes.

Ingredients
8 cups chicken or vegetable stock
4 ounces shiitake mushrooms
2 garlic cloves
½ inch fresh ginger
4 scallions
1 pound ground pork
1 egg
1 tablespoon soy sauce, plus more for serving
2 teaspoons sesame oil, plus more for serving
¼ teaspoon five-spice powder (optional)
Salt
24 wonton skins

Prep | Cook
1. Put 8 cups stock in a large pot over medium heat.
Twist off the mushroom stems and discard. Thinly slice the caps and
add them to the pot.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves and ½ inch fresh ginger.
Trim and chop the scallions; separate the green and white parts.
2. Combine the ground pork, egg, 1 tablespoon soy sauce, 2 teaspoons
sesame oil, ¼ teaspoon five-spice powder if you’re using it, the garlic,
ginger, white parts of the scallions, and a sprinkle of salt in a medium
bowl. Mix gently with a rubber spatula or your hands until just
combined.
3. When the stock boils, adjust the heat so it bubbles steadily.
4. Pinch off and shape a walnut-sized piece of the pork mixture; drop it
into the stock. Repeat until all the mixture is used. Cook, adjusting the
heat so the stock bubbles steadily but not vigorously, until the
meatballs firm up a bit, 1 or 2 minutes.
5. Separate 24 wonton skins (refrigerate what remains for another use).
Drop them into the pot, stirring carefully after every few to prevent
them from sticking together. Cook until the meatballs are cooked
through and the wonton skins are just tender, another minute or 2.
6. Taste and adjust the seasoning, adding more soy sauce if necessary.
Divide among 4 bowls and serve, garnished with the green parts of the
scallions and passing soy sauce and sesame oil at the table.
VARIATIONS

Broken Wonton Soup with Spicy Shrimp
Use peeled shrimp instead of the pork. Pulse it in a food processor with the
egg and seasonings from Step 2, adding a bit of chopped fresh green chile,
like Thai, and continue with the recipe.
Broken Wonton Soup with Gingered Chicken
Substitute ground chicken for the pork (to grind your own, follow the
previous variation) and an additional 2 inches of ginger instead of the
garlic.
Broken Ravioli Soup
Omit the ginger, sesame oil, scallions, soy sauce, and five-spice powder.
Use cremini instead of shiitake mushrooms and olive instead of sesame oil.
Substitute hot or sweet Italian sausage for the ground pork; if you can’t find
it loose, squeeze it from the casings. When you add the wonton skins to the
pot in Step 5, stir in a handful of chopped dried tomatoes if you like.
Garnish with grated Parmesan.
Chinese Egg Noodle Soup
Omit the wonton skins. Follow the main recipe or any of the variations,
adding 12 ounces dried Chinese egg noodles to the pot with the mushrooms
in Step 1, or fresh noodles in Step 5.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
Five-Spice Powder
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME

Make wontons: You don’t have to fold and seal the skins around the filling
to get your wontons to hold their shape. Just take the pinch of meat, put it at
one pointed end of the wrapper, and roll the skin around it like a cigar. Drop
these wontons into the soup in Step 4. Give them 2 to 4 minutes to firm up
and cook through.
Make a fried noodle garnish: Cut a few extra wonton skins into thin strips
and fry them in ¼ inch vegetable oil in a skillet over high heat until golden
and crisp, just a minute or 2. Drain on paper towels and sprinkle with salt.
Use for garnish along with the scallions.
SIDES
White Rice
Scallion Pancakes
Broiled Radishes with Soy
Edamame with Chili Salt

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Korean-Style Beef Soup with Rice
Sometimes all you need to flavor a soup is to add a seasoned oil
just before serving—the reverse of building a soup on a base of
cooked aromatics and spices. In this Korean-style soup, the starchy,
meaty broth provides the perfect backdrop for the last-minute
intensity of a chile-and-sesame–spiked drizzling sauce.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 pound boneless beef chuck
Salt
3 garlic cloves
8 cups beef or chicken stock or water
1 cup long-grain rice
2 tablespoons sesame seeds
1 teaspoon red chile flakes, plus more for serving
4 scallions
6 celery stalks, plus any leaves
1 tablespoon sesame oil, plus more for serving
3 tablespoons soy sauce, plus more for serving
1 tablespoon rice vinegar

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 tablespoon vegetable oil in a large pot over high heat.
Cut the beef into ½-inch chunks.
2. When the oil is nearly smoking, add the beef, sprinkle with salt, and
cook, stirring once or twice, until it browns in places, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
3. When the beef is browned, stir in the garlic and cook for 30 seconds.
Add 8 cups stock or water, 1 cup rice, and another pinch of salt. Bring
to a boil and cook (still boiling) until the rice is just shy of tender, 10
to 15 minutes.
4. Put 2 tablespoons sesame seeds and 1 teaspoon red chile flakes (more
or less) in a medium skillet over medium-low heat. Cook, shaking the
pan occasionally, until lightly toasted and fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions, separating the white and green parts.
Chop the celery stalks and any leaves.
5. When the sesame seeds and red chile flakes are lightly toasted and
fragrant, remove the skillet from the heat and stir in 1 tablespoon
sesame oil, 2 tablespoons vegetable oil, 3 tablespoons soy sauce, and 1
tablespoon rice vinegar.
6. When the rice is just tender, stir in the celery and celery leaves and the
white parts of the scallions. Cook until the rice is fully cooked (it’s
okay if it’s soft) and the celery is crisp-tender, 2 or 3 minutes.
7. Divide the soup among 4 bowls; drizzle with the sesame-chile oil,
garnish with the green scallion parts, and serve, passing more soy
sauce, sesame oil, and red chile flakes at the table if you like.

VARIATIONS
Beef and Kimchi Soup with Rice
With one little substitution, a huge flavor shift. Use 1 cup kimchi instead of
the celery. Chop it before stirring it into the rice.
Korean-Style Pork Soup with Rice
Use boneless pork shoulder instead of beef.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Beef Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
If you have cooked meat (Roast Chicken or Steak) or vegetables (Roasted
Vegetables or Tender Vegetables) in the fridge, chop up as many of them as
you like and stir into the rice in Step 6. Omit the beef and celery and add
the garlic to the rice along with the meat and vegetables.
FROM RICE COMES BROTH
Cooked in soup along with other ingredients, rice releases its starch into the
liquid, thickening the broth and making it creamy. But be careful: Rice
bulks up considerably, so make sure you have ample liquid or don’t use
much rice.
SIDES
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy
Cucumber Salad with Hot Sauce and Lime Juice
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

Scallion-Miso Bean Sprouts

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Thai Coconut Soup with Carrots and
Beef
This quintessential chop-and-drop soup (see Note) is inspired by
the street food of Bangkok; it’s sweet, hot, salty, and delicious.

Ingredients
1 pound boneless beef sirloin or rib-eye steak
4 cups beef or chicken stock or water
2 inches fresh ginger
1 fresh hot green chile (like Thai), or to taste
2 stalks lemongrass (optional)
1 bunch fresh basil (preferably Thai)
2 cups coconut milk (one and a half 15-ounce cans)
5 medium carrots (1 pound)
1 lime
3 tablespoons fish sauce
1 teaspoon sugar
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Put the beef in the freezer.
1. Put 4 cups stock or water in a large pot over high heat and bring to a
boil.
Peel and mince 2 inches fresh ginger; seed the chile and slice it
crosswise into thin rounds.
Trim 2 lemongrass stalks if you’re using them, smash them with the
flat side of a knife blade, and cut each into 3-inch lengths.
Strip 1 cup basil leaves from the stems. Save the stems.
Add the ginger, chiles, lemongrass, and basil stems to the pot.
2. When the liquid comes to a boil, adjust the heat so that it bubbles
steadily but not vigorously. Add 2 cups coconut milk; return the
mixture to a steady bubble.
Trim and peel the carrots; slice them crosswise into thin rounds.
Halve the lime.
Remove the beef from the freezer and slice it against the grain as
thinly as you can.
3. Remove the lemongrass and basil stems from the pot with a slotted
spoon and discard.
4. Add the carrots to the pot. Cook, undisturbed, until they’re just starting
to get tender, 2 or 3 minutes.
5. Add the beef to the pot and cook, stirring once and adjusting the heat
so the liquid bubbles steadily, until just cooked through and the carrots
are crisp-tender, 2 or 3 minutes.

6. Add 3 tablespoons fish sauce, 1 teaspoon sugar, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper. Squeeze the lime juice into the pot.
7. Stir in the basil leaves, taste and adjust the seasoning, divide the soup
among 4 bowls, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Coconut Soup with Carrots and Squid
Use cleaned squid instead of the beef. There’s no need to freeze it; just slice
it crosswise into rings and separate the tentacles from the body. Add it to
the soup during the last minute of cooking; it’s ready when it turns white
and puffs up a bit.
Coconut Soup with Chicken, Bean Sprouts, and Snow Peas
Use boneless, skinless chicken breast. Freeze and slice as directed for the
beef. Substitute 8 ounces each snow peas and bean sprouts for the carrots.
Add the sprouts in Step 4, and the peas in Step 5.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Beef Stock
Chicken Stock
CHOP-AND-DROP SOUPS
This is a fantastic way to cook on the fly—and clean out your fridge while
you’re at it. You get liquid heating in a big pot, then prep and add the
ingredients—longest cooking first—while you keep chopping and dropping
and the soup simmers.
First the aromatics go in, then the longer-cooking firm vegetables,
followed by foods that take less time, like thinly sliced meats, fish, and
shellfish and short-cooking greens or sprouts. Just before serving, stir in the

top notes: fresh herbs or other seasonings, tomato wedges, soy or fish sauce,
maybe a few drops of sesame oil—whatever. Since the soup is bubbling
gently, you really don’t even need to stir much, and in the end it takes only
as long to cook as the sturdiest vegetable in the pot.
SIDES
White Rice
Cucumbers with Peanut Vinaigrette
Avocado with Hot Sauce and Cilantro

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Lamb Stew with Green Beans and
Tomatoes
The smoky backbone to this tomato-based stew comes from toasted
ground cumin, which is balanced by the brightness of lemon zest. If
you don’t like (or can’t find) lamb, use ground beef, pork, or even
chicken or turkey instead.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for garnish
1 medium red onion
1 pound ground lamb
Salt and pepper
4 garlic cloves
1 tablespoon cumin
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
3 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
1½ pounds green beans
1 lemon
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the oil is hot, add the lamb and the onion, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until the lamb is browned and
the onion is golden, 5 to 10 minutes.
Peel and mince 4 garlic cloves.
3. Add 1 tablespoon cumin to the browned lamb and onion and cook,
stirring until fragrant, 30 seconds or so. Add the garlic, cooking and
stirring for another 30 seconds.
4. Add the tomatoes and their juice, scraping any browned bits off the
bottom of the pot.
5. Add 3 cups stock or water. Bring the stew to a boil, then lower the heat
so it bubbles steadily and cook, stirring once in a while until the
tomatoes break up and the liquid thickens, 10 to 15 minutes.
Trim the green beans; chop into 1-inch pieces.
6. When the stew has thickened, stir in the green beans and adjust the
heat so that the soup bubbles gently but steadily. Cover and cook
undisturbed until the green beans are just tender, 3 to 5 minutes.
Zest the lemon.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
7. When the green beans are just tender, taste and adjust the seasoning.
Divide the stew among 4 bowls. Sprinkle with the lemon zest, drizzle
with more olive oil, garnish with the parsley, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Green Bean Stew with Tomatoes, Olives, and Almonds
Substitute 1 cup each pitted black olives and whole almonds for the lamb
and cook them with the onion in Step 2.
Curried Chickpea Stew with Tomatoes and Lamb
Use 2 cups cooked or canned chickpeas (one 15-ounce can) instead of the
green beans and 2 tablespoons curry powder in place of the cumin.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Add the green beans to the pot along with the lamb and onions.
SIDES
Couscous
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Hummus
Cucumber Salad
Carrot Salad with Raisins

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Bone-In Chicken Noodle Soup
It doesn’t take long for bone-in chicken to turn water into a
flavorful broth. Start with whole pieces, don’t overcook the meat or
fuss with the bones, and you’ll have real chicken noodle soup on
the table in 30 minutes.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
4 bone-in chicken thighs
4 chicken drumsticks
Salt
1 large onion
2 large carrots
3 celery stalks, plus any leaves
4 garlic cloves
5 bay leaves
Pepper
8 ounces egg noodles or any cut pasta

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
Pat the chicken dry with a paper towel.
2. Put the chicken in the pot, skin side down, sprinkle with salt, and cook,
undisturbed, until browned, 5 or 6 minutes.
Trim and peel the onion. Trim and peel the carrots. Trim the celery
stalks, reserving any leaves.
Cut the onion, carrots, and celery stalks into ½-inch chunks.
Peel 4 garlic cloves and smash them with the flat side of a knife.
3. Add the vegetables and garlic to the pot with the chicken. Add 8 cups
water, stirring to scrape the chicken and any browned bits from the
bottom of the pot. Add 5 bay leaves and a pinch each of salt and
pepper.
4. When the broth comes to a boil, adjust the heat so that it bubbles
steadily. Cook, undisturbed, until the meat begins to loosen from the
bones and is cooked through, 15 to 20 minutes.
Chop the celery leaves.
5. When the chicken is beginning to fall off the bone, bring the broth to a
rolling boil and add 8 ounces egg noodles. Start tasting after 5 minutes;
when the noodles are tender but not mushy, turn off the heat.
6. Fish out the bay leaves. Taste and adjust the seasoning, divide the soup
among 4 bowls, garnish with the celery leaves, and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS

Herbed Bone-In Chicken Noodle Soup
In Step 2, add 4 sprigs fresh sage or oregano or 2 sprigs rosemary to the pot
with the chicken. Remove them when you take out the bay leaves.
Dilly Bone-In Chicken Noodle Soup
Tie 1 bunch fresh dill together with twine. In Step 2, add it to the pot with
the chicken. Remove the dill when you take out the bay leaves.
Chinese-Style Bone-In Chicken Noodle Soup
With a few changes, this becomes a completely different soup. In Step 2,
add a few pieces of whole or broken star anise, 2 tablespoons soy sauce,
and several thinly sliced coins of fresh ginger to the pot with the chicken.
Omit the bay leaf. Use fresh or dried Chinese egg noodles (fresh will cook
in about 1 minute).
Mexican-Style Bone-In Chicken Noodle Soup
Ditto, really. In Step 2, add 1 or 2 whole fresh or dried chiles to the pot with
the chicken, along with a few cilantro sprigs, 1 tablespoon tomato paste,
and 1 lime, cut into quarters. When you take out the bay leaves before
serving, remove the lime; you can also remove the chiles and herbs if you
prefer.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Bruschetta
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

American Onion Soup
You can’t make real French onion soup for four people in 45
minutes, so why try to fudge it? Introducing American Onion Soup,
a faster version that takes its cues from the classic but is distinctly
un-French. Beer and cheddar replace cognac and Gruyère. See If
You Have More Time for the French original.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
4 large onions
Salt and pepper
½ loaf baguette (a little stale is fine)
8 ounces cheddar cheese (2 cups grated)
1 teaspoon sugar
2 or 3 sprigs fresh thyme or ½ teaspoon dried
½ cup beer or water
5 cups beef or chicken stock
¼ cup cream

Prep | Cook
1. Put 4 tablespoons butter in a large pot over medium heat.
Trim, peel, halve, and shave the onions in a food processor using the
thinnest slicing attachment or slice them as thinly as you can by
hand. Add them to the skillet as you go.
2. When you’ve added all the onions, sprinkle with salt and pepper,
cover, and raise the heat to high.
3. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the onions soften, reduce in volume,
and start to brown, 10 to 12 minutes. Reduce the heat a little if they
start to burn.
4. Heat the broiler as high as it goes and put the rack about 4 inches from
the heat.
Cut 8 slices of bread on the bias. Put them on a baking sheet.
Grate 2 cups cheddar in the food processor fitted with the grating disk
(no need to rinse it out) or by hand with a box grater. Top each slice
of bread with a mound of cheese.
5. When the onions are soft, uncover the pot, sprinkle with 1 teaspoon
sugar, and cook, stirring occasionally and adding a splash of liquid if
the bottom of the pot starts to burn, until the onions are very soft and
golden brown, 10 to 12 minutes.
If you’re using fresh thyme, strip the leaves from 2 or 3 sprigs and
chop them.
6. When the onions are golden, stir in ½ cup beer or water. Scrape up any
brown bits from the bottom and sides of the pot.

7. Add 5 cups stock and the thyme. When the soup comes to a boil, lower
the heat so it bubbles steadily and cook, stirring once in a while until
the soup thickens a bit and becomes fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes.
8. Broil the bread until the cheese bubbles and browns, 2 or 3 minutes.
9. Stir ¼ cup cream into the soup, taste and adjust the seasoning, and
divide the soup among 4 bowls. Top each serving with 2 slices of
bread and cheese and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Leek Soup with Blue Cheese
Stronger. Use 6 large leeks instead of the onions. Trim away the darkest
green parts and slice the leeks crosswise. Be careful not to overcook them;
once they start to brown, they’ll burn if you don’t watch them. Instead of
cheddar, use 4 ounces crumbled blue cheese and substitute white wine for
the beer.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Beef Stock
Chicken Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Classic French Onion Soup
After uncovering the pot in Step 5, cook the onions over medium-low heat,
stirring frequently until they are very dark and jammy, up to an hour; splash
with a tablespoon or 2 of cognac, then simmer with the beef stock (no beer,
please) for at least another 30 minutes before adding the broiled bread and
cheese. Gruyère is traditional.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Shrimp Gumbo
When you cook fat and flour together, you’re making a roux, useful
in thickening soups and stews. The darker the color, the more
complex, less “floury” the flavor. But rushing the process can cause
burning. I compromise by cooking the flour just enough to take the
rawness off, making a so-called blonde roux, like the one in this
New Orleans classic.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 medium onion
¼ cup flour
Salt and pepper
1 pound okra
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
2 garlic cloves
4 cups vegetable or chicken stock or water
3 sprigs fresh oregano or 1 teaspoon dried
1 pound peeled shrimp

Prep | Cook
1. Put 4 tablespoons butter in a large pot over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the butter starts to sizzle, add the onion and ¼ cup flour, stirring
well to combine and break up any lumps.
3. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and cook, stirring occasionally and
adjusting the heat to prevent scorching until the mixture turns golden,
4 to 7 minutes.
Trim the okra and cut it crosswise into ¼-inch slices.
4. If the roux starts to scorch and you’re not finished slicing the okra, stir
in the tomatoes and their juice, scraping any browned bits off the
bottom of the pot.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves and add them to the pot.
5. When the roux and onion turn golden brown, stir in the okra and (if
you haven’t added them already) the tomatoes and their juice. Scrape
any browned bits off the bottom of the pot. Add the 4 cups stock or
water and bring to a boil, then lower the heat so the soup bubbles
steadily.
6. Cover the pot and cook, stirring occasionally until the okra completely
softens and the broth is thickened, 10 to 15 minutes.
If you’re using fresh oregano, strip the leaves from 3 sprigs and chop.
Chop the shrimp into bite-sized pieces.
7. Add the shrimp and fresh oregano leaves or 1 teaspoon dried to the pot
and cook, stirring once or twice until the shrimp turns pink and cooks

through, 2 or 3 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Crab Gumbo
Easier and more luxurious. Use lump crabmeat instead of the shrimp. It will
take only a minute or so to heat through.
Chicken Gumbo
Substitute 1 pound boneless, skinless chicken thighs for the shrimp. Cut
them into strips and add them after the butter sizzles in Step 2. Let them
brown a bit on both sides, then transfer to a plate while you make the roux.
Put the seared chicken strips in the pot along with the stock in Step 5.
Sausage Gumbo
Instead of shrimp, use 1 pound andouille or Italian sausage cut into bite-
sized bits and add them to the foaming butter in Step 2. Let them brown a
little bit on both sides, then transfer to a plate while you make the roux. Add
them back with the stock in Step 5.
Tofu Gumbo
Use 1½ pounds cubed firm tofu instead of the shrimp. It will take only a
minute or so to heat through.
No-Okra Gumbo
Use green beans or zucchini instead of the okra in the main recipe or any of
the variations.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Vegetable Stock
Chicken Stock

IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Make a fast shrimp stock: Use 1½ pounds peel-on shrimp; remove the
shells and put them in a medium pot. Add 4½ cups water and 2 bay leaves,
bring to a boil, then lower the heat so the stock bubbles steadily. Cook,
stirring once in a while until fragrant and cloudy, 15 to 20 minutes. Strain
and use the shrimp stock as the liquid in Step 5.
For a richer, thicker soup: In Step 2, cook the butter, flour, and onion
together until the roux is a deeper, darker brown, 20 to 30 minutes. Skip the
okra.
SIDES
White Rice
Quinoa
Green Salad
Succotash

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 

Curried Chicken and Vegetable Soup
with Rice
Bright and spicy. Irresistible.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
6 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (1 pound)
Salt and pepper
1 medium onion
2 large carrots
2 celery stalks
2 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
2 tablespoons curry powder
1 cinnamon stick
¾ cup white basmati rice
1 bunch fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
Cut the chicken into ½-inch chunks.
2. When the oil is hot, add the chicken, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
cook, stirring occasionally, until browned on all sides, 5 to 10 minutes.
Trim and peel the onion and carrots. Trim the celery.
Cut everything into ½-inch chunks.
3. When the chicken is browned, add the vegetables to the pot and cook,
stirring occasionally and lowering the heat if the vegetables start to
burn.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves and 1 inch fresh ginger.
Trim the chile, seed it if you like, then mince it.
4. Add the garlic, ginger, and chile to the pot, along with 2 tablespoons
curry powder and the cinnamon stick. Cook until the spices are
fragrant, about 1 minute.
5. Add ¾ cup white basmati rice and raise the heat to high; stir for 30
seconds to toast the rice a bit. Add 8 cups water.
6. When the liquid comes to a boil, adjust the heat so that it simmers and
cover the pot. Cook until the rice is tender, 15 to 20 minutes.
Chop ¼ cup cilantro.
7. When the rice is tender, fish out the cinnamon stick and discard. Taste
and adjust the seasoning, divide among 4 bowls, garnish with the
cilantro, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Chicken Soup with Rice and Peas
Use olive oil in place of vegetable. Omit the curry and cinnamon and use
chicken stock instead of water for best flavor. Use 1½ cups fresh or frozen
peas instead of the celery. Substitute mint leaves for the cilantro and add 1
cup grated Parmesan to the bowls just before serving.
Chicken Soup with Rice and Broccoli
Use olive oil instead of vegetable and substitute 1½ pounds broccoli for the
celery and carrots. Skip the curry powder, cinnamon, and cilantro; add ½
teaspoon (or more) red chile flakes to the vegetables in Step 3. I like the
broccoli to get quite tender and fall apart, but if you like it crisper, wait to
add it until the last 5 minutes of cooking in Step 6. Drizzle each bowl with
more olive oil just before serving.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder
EVEN FASTER
Put everything but the cilantro—oil, chicken, onion, vegetables, rice, and
seasoning—into the pot with the water. Bring to a boil, then lower the heat
to a steady bubble, cover the pot, and cook undisturbed until the rice is
tender, 15 to 20 minutes.
SIDES
Crunchy Okra
Avocado with Hot Sauce and Cilantro
Cucumber Raita

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Mushroom and Chicken Stew with
Dill and Paprika
This creamy, satisfying stew is based on the Hungarian dish
chicken paprikash. The mushrooms add so much flavor that you
barely have to sear the chicken. It’s delicious served over buttered
noodles or rice.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons butter
6 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 1 pound)
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
1 medium onion
2 teaspoons paprika
1 tablespoon all-purpose flour
3 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
1 bunch fresh dill
½ cup cream, sour cream, or yogurt

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons butter in a large pot over low heat.
Cut the chicken into bite-sized pieces.
2. When the butter starts to foam, raise the heat to medium-high, add the
chicken to the pot, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring
occasionally until it is not pink on any side, 5 to 10 minutes.
Trim and quarter the mushrooms. (If you’re using shiitakes, discard the
stems.)
Trim and peel the onion; cut it into small chunks.
3. Transfer the browned chicken to a bowl with a slotted spoon.
4. Add the mushrooms and onion to the pot and cook, stirring
occasionally until they soften, 5 to 10 minutes.
5. Add 2 teaspoons paprika and a sprinkle of salt and pepper and cook,
stirring until fragrant, less than 1 minute.
6. Add 1 tablespoon flour and cook, stirring occasionally until it toasts it
a bit, 3 to 5 minutes.
7. Return the chicken to the pot along with 3 cups stock or water. Cook,
stirring occasionally, until the broth is thick and the chicken is fully
cooked, 3 to 5 minutes.
Strip ¼ cup dill leaves from the stems and chop.
8. Adjust the heat to medium-low, and add the dill and ½ cup cream, sour
cream, or yogurt. Stir until well combined. Taste and adjust the
seasoning and serve right away.

VARIATIONS
Zucchini and Chicken Stew with Paprika and Dill
Substitute zucchini for the mushrooms; cut it in half lengthwise and then
into chunks. If you like, let the zucchini cook long enough to break down
and thicken the soup, an additional 5 minutes in Step 4.
Cabbage and Chicken Stew with Caraway and Dill
Substitute 1 tablespoon caraway seeds for the paprika. Instead of the
mushrooms, shred a small head of red or green cabbage.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
SIDES
White Rice
Quinoa
Buttered Egg Noodles
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Boiled Potatoes
Warm Buttery Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Lentil Soup, with or Without Ham
Ham obviously adds flavor, but it’s optional, and lentils have an
earthy taste all their own. Load the pot up with vegetables and
you’ve got a balanced bowl, whichever way you go.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for garnish
8 ounces smoked ham in one piece (optional)
1 large onion
2 large carrots
2 celery stalks
4 garlic cloves
1½ cups lentils
2 bay leaves
6 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water, or more as needed
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium-low heat.
If you’re using it, cut the ham into cubes.
Trim and peel the onion.
2. When the oil is hot, add the ham and the onions. Raise the heat to
medium-high and cook, stirring occasionally, until the meat and onions
brown in places, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim and peel the carrots. Trim the celery stalks. Chop both and add
them to the pot.
Peel and mince 4 garlic cloves; add them to the pot.
3. Add 1½ cups lentils, 2 bay leaves, and 6 cups stock or water. If you’re
not using ham, sprinkle with salt and pepper.
4. Bring the soup to a boil, then adjust the heat so that it bubbles gently
but steadily. Simmer until the lentils are tender, anywhere from 20 to
40 minutes. If the soup is too thick, stir in more stock or water, ¼ cup
at a time.
5. When the soup is ready, fish out the bay leaves and discard, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and divide among 4 bowls. Garnish with a drizzle
of olive oil and serve.
VARIATIONS
Lentil Soup with Lemon and Fresh Herbs
When the soup is ready in Step 5, add the zest and juice of 1 lemon and ½
cup chopped fresh dill or parsley or 2 tablespoons chopped fresh tarragon or
mint. Stir and serve.

Mustardy Lentil Soup
Lots of flavor with no work: When the soup is ready in Step 5, add 2
tablespoons (or more) coarsely ground mustard. Stir and serve.
Split Pea Soup, with or without Ham
Instead of lentils, use split peas.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Put all the ingredients in the pot at the same time. Bring to a boil, then
adjust the heat so that it simmers gently but steadily and cook, stirring
occasionally until the lentils are tender.
THE FASTEST LEGUMES
Lentils—and split peas for that matter; see the variation—are staples of the
fast kitchen (see Lentils). They’re the only legumes that reliably cook in 20
to 40 minutes. And, like all their cousins, they’re hearty and satisfying. I
usually use common brown or semifancy dark green lentils for this soup,
but if you see other kinds and colors, or any small beans like mung beans
(which are a lovely green), or pigeon peas for that matter, grab them. This
recipe works well with any and all.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
White Rice

Crisp Seasoned Pita
Pinzimonio

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Collard Greens Stewed with Smoked
Pork
Vegetables take a lot less time to become tender than meat, so when
you let them simmer for almost 45 minutes while the ham hocks
soften, you’re left with a pot of luxurious greens.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons butter
1 large red onion
4 garlic cloves
1 smoked ham hock or 2 smoked pork chops (about 1 pound)
2 bunches collard greens (2 pounds)
Pepper
6 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
2 bay leaves
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a large pot over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the pot and stir.
Peel and mince 4 garlic cloves. Add them to the pot and stir.
2. Add the pork to the pot and cook, stirring occasionally and turning the
meat until the onion softens and starts to smell smoky, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim the collards. Slice the leaves in half along the stem and cut them
crosswise into thick ribbons. Add them to the pot as you work,
stirring after each addition.
3. Sprinkle with lots of pepper. Add 6 cups stock or water and 2 bay
leaves and raise the heat to high. When the stew comes to a boil, adjust
the heat so that it bubbles gently but steadily.
4. Cook, stirring occasionally until the collards become tender, 10 to 15
minutes.
Fish the pork out of the pot and put it on a cutting board until it’s cool
enough to handle. (Let the stew keep simmering.)
Trim and pick the meat and fat from the bone, cutting big chunks of
pork into smaller pieces. Put the meat and the bone back into the
pot; discard the fat.
5. Cook, stirring once in a while, until the collards are quite tender and
the meat is juicy, another 10 to 15 minutes. Remove the bay leaves and
discard. Taste and adjust the seasoning, adding salt if necessary, and
serve, leaving the bones behind in the pot.
VARIATIONS

Broccoli Rabe Stewed with Tons of Garlic
Yes, you can use less, but trust me: Skip the pork. Use ¼ cup olive oil
instead of the butter. Substitute 20 garlic cloves for the onion; add them to
the pot as you peel them in Step 1. Use broccoli rabe instead of collards.
Cauliflower Stewed with Anchovies
Skip the pork and substitute olive oil for the butter. Use cauliflower florets
instead of the collards. Add 8 anchovy fillets to the onion in Step 1. Serve
with lemon wedges.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Skip the smoked pork and increase the butter to 4 tablespoons (½ stick). Put
everything in the pot at the same time; the vegetables will be ready about 10
minutes earlier.
SEASONING WITH SMOKED PORK
Even a small piece of smoked meat yields loads of flavor in little time,
especially if there’s a bone involved. What has the potential to take a long
time is melting the fat. But this technique—where you yank the meat out
partway through cooking, chop it up a bit, and return it to the pot—solves
that problem.
Some supermarkets or butchers carry smoked ham hocks or trotters
(feet), which add not only smokiness but also a bit of collagen to thicken
the broth. If you can’t find those, not to worry; a smoked pork chop or even
a thick ham steak or a chunk of slab bacon will do the trick too.

SIDES
Warm Flour or Corn Tortillas
Creamy Polenta
Watermelon, Feta, and Mint Salad
Panfried Corn and Onions
Ripe Plantains

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Hot and Sour Soup with Bok Choy
and Pork
Duplicating the flavor of this restaurant staple isn’t the hard part.
Preparing all the ingredients is what slows you down. By
streamlining the components to a piquant broth, a little meat, and
one main vegetable, you’ll be spooning this out in no time.

Ingredients
12 ounces pork shoulder
2 garlic cloves
2 inches fresh ginger
1 head bok choy (about 1½ pounds)
4 scallions
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
Pinch red chile flakes, or more to taste
6 cups chicken or vegetable stock
3 tablespoons rice vinegar, or more to taste
2 tablespoons soy sauce, or more to taste

Prep | Cook
Put the pork in the freezer.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves and 2 inches fresh ginger.
Trim the bok choy; cut (or pull) the leaves from the ribs. Slice the stems
and cut the leaves into thin ribbons.
Trim and chop the scallions.
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large pot over low heat.
Slice the pork thinly against the grain, then stack a few slices and cut
them into strips about ½ inch wide.
2. Raise the heat under the pot to high. When the oil is hot but not quite
smoking, add the pork, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
undisturbed, until the pieces release from the pan, about 1 minute.
Then cook, stirring occasionally until browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
3. Add the garlic, ginger, and a pinch of red chile flakes or to taste. (The
soup should not derive its heat from this, so take it easy.) Cook,
stirring until fragrant, about 30 seconds.
4. Add the bok choy ribs and cook, stirring occasionally until they begin
to soften, 2 or 3 minutes.
5. Add 6 cups stock and bring to a boil.
6. Add the bok choy leaves, stir, and adjust the heat so the liquid bubbles
gently but steadily. Cook, stirring once or twice until the bok choy
leaves are tender, 3 to 5 minutes.
7. Add 3 tablespoons rice vinegar and 2 tablespoons soy sauce and at
least a teaspoon of pepper, then taste and adjust the seasoning, adding

more soy sauce and rice vinegar if you like. Divide among 4 bowls and
serve, garnished with the scallions.
VARIATIONS
Hot and Sour Soup with Bean Sprouts and Beef
Substitute beef chuck roast for the pork and bean sprouts for the bok choy.
Add the sprouts to the pot in Step 6.
Hot and Sour Soup with Napa Cabbage and Chicken
Light and bright tasting. Substitute boneless chicken thighs for the pork and
Napa cabbage for the bok choy. There’s no need to separate the cabbage
ribs from the leaves; just cut the leaves crosswise into ribbons and add them
to the pot in Step 6.
Hot and Sour Soup with Asian Greens and Tofu
Instead of the bok choy, use whatever interesting greens you can find:
tatsoi, gai lan, pea shoots, or Chinese broccoli. Substitute 1 pound extra-
firm tofu for the pork and cut it into ½-inch cubes before cooking in Step 2.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
THICKENING WITH CORNSTARCH
Most soups don’t need thickening; there’s nothing wrong with a brothy
soup. This one benefits from some body, especially if you are looking for
the texture you get in Chinese restaurants. As a rule, to thicken with
cornstarch, combine 1 part cornstarch with 2 parts liquid. In this case you
can mix 3 tablespoons cornstarch with the rice vinegar, soy sauce, and 1
tablespoon water. Add it to the pot after everything else. Cook at a gentle

bubble, stirring, until the soup thickens, which will take just a minute or
two.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Scallion Pancakes
Sesame-Soy Black Beans

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Beef and Butter Bean Chili
Pulse your own meat in a food processor and you’ll end up with a
less uniform and more pleasing texture and better flavor and
quality than any store-bought ground beef.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 large onion
1 pound boneless beef chuck
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
2 dried hot red chiles (like chile de árbol)
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon chili powder
1 teaspoon dried oregano
One 28-ounce can whole peeled tomatoes
1 pound frozen butter beans or lima beans
4 cups beef or chicken stock or water
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish
1 lime
Sour cream for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the oil is hot, add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally until
soft and golden, 5 to 10 minutes.
Cut the beef into chunks and put them in a food processor. Pulse until
the meat is coarsely chopped (about the size of peas).
3. Remove the onions from the pot and raise the heat to medium-high.
Add the beef, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring
frequently until it’s browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves. Trim 2 dried hot red chiles; seed them
if you like and mince.
4. Add the garlic and chiles to the pot, along with 1 teaspoon cumin, 1
teaspoon chili powder, and 1 teaspoon dried oregano. Cook, stirring
until fragrant, 30 seconds or so.
5. Add the tomatoes and their juice and return the onions to the mixture.
Break up the tomatoes with a spoon and scrape any browned bits off
the bottom of the pot.
6. Add the beans and 4 cups stock or water. Bring to a boil, then reduce
the heat so it bubbles gently. Cover and cook, stirring occasionally
until the chili thickens and darkens, 15 to 20 minutes.
Chop several sprigs cilantro. Cut the lime into wedges.
7. Check the chili. If it’s too watery, uncover, raise the heat a bit, and
cook, stirring occasionally until it’s as thick as you like, just another
minute or 2.

8. Taste and adjust the seasoning, divide among 4 bowls, and serve with
the lime wedges, garnished with the cilantro and a dollop of sour
cream.
VARIATIONS
White Chili
Like chicken-and-bean soup. Substitute boneless, skinless chicken thighs
for the beef and use chicken stock or water. Instead of the tomatoes, add 2
cups more liquid.
Lamb and Black Bean Chili
Substitute boneless lamb shoulder for the beef, chicken stock for the beef
stock, cinnamon for the oregano, and 4 cups canned or cooked black beans
for the butter beans.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
Beef Stock
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
Use preground beef instead of grinding your own.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you let the chili simmer for another 30 minutes, even deeper flavors will
develop, and the beans will break apart and thicken it more.
SIDES
Warm Flour Tortillas

White Rice
Coleslaw
Mexican Street Corn
Ripe Plantains with Cinnamon and Cumin

Pasta and Noodles
PASTA
Cacio e Pepe (Cheese and Pepper)
Mac and Cheese
Pasta with Broccoli Rabe and Ricotta
Pasta with Pesto and Cherry Tomatoes
Pasta with Artichokes, Toasted Bread Crumbs, and Lemon
Pasta with Fennel, White Beans, and Stock
Spaghetti with Garlicky Fresh Tomato Sauce
Pasta with Spicy Eggplant and Tomato Sauce
Broiled Ziti
Pasta with Greens and Eggs
Linguine with Clams
Pasta with Tuna and Dried Tomatoes
Pasta with Scallops and Potatoes
Fideos with Shrimp, Tomatoes, and Peas
Pasta with Squid and Tomatoes
Three Bs Pasta

Pasta with Chicken, Mushrooms, and Wine
Spaghetti with Nearly Instant Bolognese
Spaghetti and Drop Meatballs with Tomato Sauce
Pasta with Squash and Ham, Risotto Style
Orzo Risotto with Asparagus and “Poached” Eggs
Three-Cheese Lasagna with Fresh Noodles
Ricotta Dumplings with Spinach and Brown Butter

NOODLES
Cold Peanut Noodles with Whatever You Have
Noodles with Snow Peas and Chile Oil
Udon with Teriyaki Tofu
Noodles, Shrimp, and Sweet Potatoes in Curry Broth
Cool Noodles with Chicken and Cilantro-Scallion Pesto
Singapore-Style Noodles with Chicken, Peppers, and Basil
Stir-Fried Noodles with Beef and Celery

Pasta and Noodles
My go-to comfort food, especially when I’m in a
hurry, is a bowl of noodles. It may well be yours too:
Pasta is satisfying, comforting, and easy. It’s also
fast.
Its speed, however, is limited by the time it takes
to bring a large pot of water to a boil. So cooking
pasta is not a process you can easily rush.
This is a good thing. The time it takes for the
water to boil gives us the chance to make sauces and
side dishes without feeling frantic. Or to say hello to
the family without worrying that we haven’t even
started dinner yet. Consider this scenario: As soon as
you get home from work, start the water and walk
away. Say hi to your kids and change out of your
work clothes. By the time you get back to the kitchen
you’ll still have plenty of time to whip up a sauce.
You’ve probably made your fair share of pasta,
and there’s no shame in relying on a few tried and

true recipes to get through the month. But even
though noodles may be familiar, they don’t have to
be routine; I continue to be amazed at the variety of
sauces that can be built from a few quick processes
and how often I discover new ones.
So here are twists on old favorites, new flavors
you can create with common pantry staples, and
cunning tricks for making homemade pasta dishes in
the simplest possible ways. And if you haven’t yet
discovered how easy it is to make the noodle dishes
of Asia at home, you’ll be surprised at the sheer
speed with which they come together.

Chapter Highlights
What to Do While the Water Boils  You have 19 minutes. Use them
wisely: Make a sauce, chop some garnishes, grate some cheese. Possibilities
abound. Recipe-Free Pasta.
More Water, Less Hassle  Don’t try to cook pasta in a small amount of
water. Filling the Pot.
Salt It Like You Mean It  Don’t skimp: Salting Pasta Water.
The Simplest Sauces  Sometimes one ingredient is pretty much all you
need to make a beautiful sauce. Pasta with Olive Oil and Other Stuff.
You Say Tomato  The tomato primer, including a breakdown of canned
tomato varieties. Tomatoes.
Never Buy Jarred Tomato Sauce Again  It’s too fast not to make
yourself: Tomato Sauce.
Oil and Anything  Why a lot of olive oil, something flavorful, and low
heat is a “recipe” for pasta sauces that practically cook themselves. Pasta
with Olive Oil and Other Stuff.
One-Pot Pastas  Everything happens in the pot; no colander needed. Orzo
Risotto with Asparagus and “Poached” Eggs; Pasta with Squash and Ham,
Risotto Style; Fideos with Squid, Tomatoes, and Corn.
Shape Matters  Different pasta shapes require different cooking times: For
a general rule, see Pasta Cooking Times.

The Ultimate Shortcut  Substitute egg roll wrappers or wonton skins for
fresh pasta. Three-Cheese Lasagna with Fresh Noodles.
Using Fresh Pasta  Substitute fresh pasta for dried in any of these recipes.
Fresh Pasta Options.
The Asian Noodle Aisle  An introduction to the other (and probably
original) pasta: Asian Noodles.
Noodles Get Company  Noodles and vegetables boil together. Noodles
with Snow Peas and Chile Oil; Noodles, Shrimp, and Sweet Potatoes in
Curry Broth.
World’s Fastest Noodle  Two lightning-quick ways to cook vermicelli rice
noodles. Singapore-Style Noodles with Chicken, Peppers, and Basil;
Noodles, Shrimp, and Sweet Potatoes in Curry Broth.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cacio e Pepe (Cheese and Pepper)
Among the most fundamental and basic of all Italian pastas.
Melting cheese (cacio) and fresh pepper (pepe) mingle in a simple
dish that is much more than the sum of its parts. To be authentic,
the cheese should be pecorino (from sheep), and pecorino Romano
is widely available; if you can’t find that, use (real) Parmesan. And
lots of coarsely ground black pepper.

Ingredients
Salt
8 ounces pecorino Romano or Parmesan cheese (2 cups grated)
1 pound pasta, any shape you like
1 tablespoon black pepper, or more to taste

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
Grate 2 cups pecorino Romano or Parmesan.
2. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
3. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving about 3
cups cooking water. Return the pasta to the pot.
4. Add the cheese, 1 tablespoon pepper, and enough of the cooking water
to make it saucy (you may only need a cup or so). Toss, taste and
adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Buttery Cacio e Pepe
For an even richer version, add 4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, softened, to
the final dish.
Pasta with Blue Cheese and Black Pepper
Tangy and extra creamy. Substitute 1 cup crumbled blue cheese for the
pecorino.
Pasta with Ricotta, Pepper, and Nutmeg
Use 1 cup ricotta cheese instead of the pecorino and add about a cup of
grated Parmesan and a few gratings of nutmeg (or a couple of pinches of
ground nutmeg) along with the black pepper.
Pasta with Mascarpone and Red Pepper
Sweet meets heat. Use 1 cup mascarpone cheese instead of the pecorino and
a pinch of red chile flakes instead of the black pepper.

NOTES
SALTING PASTA WATER
A token pinch of salt in a giant pot of water simply isn’t enough when
you’re cooking pasta, because the noodles are seasoned by the cooking
water. When you cook pasta, the water should taste noticeably salty, almost
like the ocean. If that seems like too much, remember that most of the water
is going to be drained off. Be bold and salt your pasta water like you really
mean it.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad
Tomato Salad
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Mac and Cheese
This is simple mac and cheese, not mac with cheese sauce. Instead
of making a béchamel, you use the heat of the pasta to melt a load
of cheese; a splash of milk makes it saucy. Bread crumbs and a spin
under the broiler make the top crisp.

Ingredients
Salt
12 ounces cheddar, Gruyère, or Swiss cheese or a combination (3 cups
grated)
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
1 pound cut pasta, like elbows, penne, or ziti
½ cup milk
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
Pepper
½ cup bread crumbs

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
Grate 3 cups cheddar, Gruyère, or Swiss cheese. Grate 1 cup
Parmesan.
Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
2. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
3. When the pasta is barely tender, drain it and reserve some cooking
water. Return the pasta to the pot.
4. Add the grated cheddar, Gruyère, or Swiss, ½ cup milk, 4 tablespoons
butter, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Stir until the cheese melts,
adding cooking water a tablespoon at a time to thin if necessary. Taste
and adjust the seasoning.
5. Transfer the pasta to a 9 × 13-inch baking dish. Sprinkle the Parmesan
over the top and sprinkle with ½ cup bread crumbs.
6. Broil until the cheese is bubbly and brown and the bread crumbs crisp,
2 to 5 minutes. Serve.
VARIATIONS
9 Ways to Flavor Mac and Cheese
Stir any of the following, alone or in combination, into the pasta along with
the cheese:
1. ½ cup chopped fresh parsley, cilantro, or basil
2. 1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary, sage, thyme, or oregano

3. Up to 1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
4. Up to 1 teaspoon nutmeg
5. Dash of hot sauce or Worcestershire
6. Up to 1 cup crumbled cooked bacon or sausage
7. Up to 2 cups chopped tomatoes
8. Up to 2 cups Garlicky Mushrooms
9. Up to 2 cups chopped Sautéed Greens with Garlic
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Bread Crumbs
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Mac and Cheese Deluxe
If you want to make béchamel—an undeniably luxurious sauce—start by
heating 2½ cups milk in a small saucepan over medium-low heat. When
small bubbles appear around the sides, after about 5 minutes, turn off the
heat. In another small saucepan over medium-low heat, melt 3 tablespoons
butter. When the butter is foamy, add 3 tablespoons flour and cook, stirring
until the mixture browns, about 5 minutes. Start whisking in the milk, about
¼ cup at a time at first, until the mixture is smooth; continue whisking in
the milk until the sauce is thick and smooth. Whisk in the cheese until it’s
melted, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and toss the sauce with the cooked
pasta. Top and broil as directed.
FILLING THE POT
There’s a limit to how quickly you can throw together a pasta dish—the
time it takes a pot of water to boil. It’s tempting to save time by skimping
on water, but the time saved is soon spent stirring the pasta and pulling it

apart when it inevitably clumps together. Do yourself a favor: Fill your pot
with ample water—a gallon per pound of pasta is about right—and spend
the 20 minutes it takes to boil making something else.
SIDES
Green Salad
Tomato Salad
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower
Sautéed Greens with Garlic

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Broccoli Rabe and Ricotta
Stir a cup of ricotta cheese into hot pasta, add a splash of cooking
water, and you’ve got a rich and creamy sauce that took you 30
seconds to make. Slightly bitter broccoli rabe is the perfect
vegetable to cut through the richness of the cheese.

Ingredients
Salt
3 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds broccoli rabe
Pepper
2 garlic cloves
¼ teaspoon red chile flakes
1 pound cut pasta, like elbows, penne, or ziti
1 cup ricotta cheese

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Trim and chop the broccoli rabe, separating any thick stems.
3. Raise the heat under the skillet to medium-high. Add any thick stems
to the skillet and cook until they begin to soften, 3 or 4 minutes.
4. Add the leaves, a handful at a time if necessary to fit them in, and
sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook until just wilted, 3 or 4 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet along with ¼
teaspoon red chile flakes.
5. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
6. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Return the pasta to the pot.
7. Add the broccoli rabe, 1 cup ricotta, a sprinkle of salt and pepper, and
a splash of the cooking water to make it saucy. Toss, taste and adjust
the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pasta with Sausage, Broccoli Rabe, and Ricotta
Before adding the broccoli rabe to the skillet, brown 12 ounces crumbled
Italian sausage. Remove it from the skillet if needed to make room for the
broccoli rabe, then stir it into the pasta in Step 7.
Pasta with Asparagus and Ricotta

With or without the sausage in the first variation. Use asparagus instead of
broccoli rabe. After trimming, cut it into 1-inch pieces, separating and
cooking any thick stems as described in Steps 2 and 3. The asparagus might
take a little longer to cook in Step 4.
Pasta with Spinach, Ricotta, and Lemon
Substitute spinach leaves for the broccoli rabe; it will take a little less time
to wilt. Use nutmeg instead of red chile flakes and add the grated zest of a
lemon to the sauce as well.
Pasta with Kale, Feta, and Olives
Use kale instead of the broccoli rabe; it will take a little more time to wilt.
Substitute 1 cup crumbled feta for the ricotta and add ½ cup chopped pitted
kalamata olives to the sauce as well.
SIDES
Green Salad
Tomato Salad
Garlic Bread
Fennel Salad with Olives
Celery Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Pesto and Cherry
Tomatoes
Part pesto, part salsa cruda. There’s no reason not to combine two
standouts in the same dish.

Ingredients
Salt
1 large bunch basil
1 small garlic clove
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
2 tablespoons pine nuts
½ cup olive oil
1 pound any pasta
1 pint cherry tomatoes

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
Strip about 2 cups basil leaves from the stems. Put in a food processor.
Peel 1 small garlic clove; add it to the food processor.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
2. Add 2 tablespoons pine nuts, ¼ cup olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt.
Process, streaming in another ¼ cup olive oil as you go and stopping to
scrape down the sides as necessary until the pesto is smooth.
3. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 3 minutes.
Halve the cherry tomatoes.
4. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Return the pasta to the pot.
5. Add the pesto, tomatoes, about half of the Parmesan, and a splash of
the cooking water to make it saucy. Toss, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve hot, warm, or at room temperature, passing the
remaining Parmesan at the table.
VARIATIONS
Pasta with Dill and Lemon Pesto
Substitute dill for the basil, the juice of a lemon for the Parmesan.
Pasta with Buttery Spinach Pesto
Substitute baby spinach leaves for the basil, ¼ cup chopped walnuts for the
pine nuts, and 2 tablespoons softened butter for 2 tablespoons of the olive

oil (process in the butter at the end).
NOTES
PLENTY OF PESTOS
Nowadays the word pesto has come to describe virtually any herbs,
vegetables, or fruit ground with garlic, cheese, and nuts. Cilantro pesto,
spinach pesto, broccoli pesto, peach pesto—I’ve seen it all. Some are better
ideas than others, but there’s no harm in trying out the foods you like, green
or otherwise. Just use the proportions here; double the recipe if you want to
skip the tomatoes. The cheese may be stirred into the pesto or omitted
entirely. (Cilantro pesto, for example, would not go well with Parmesan.)
STORING PESTO
Unless I have tons of basil growing in my garden or get a huge haul from
the farmers’ market, I usually just make small batches of pesto and eat them
right away. But if you do make a large batch and you want to store it in the
freezer for later, two tips will help the pesto keep its bright green color:
Don’t add Parmesan to the pesto before you store it; wait until after you
thaw the frozen pesto to stir in the cheese. Drizzle a layer of olive oil on the
top of the pesto before you freeze it. That will help form a seal to keep the
air out and prevent the pesto from oxidizing and turning brown.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Fennel Salad with Olives

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Artichokes, Toasted Bread
Crumbs, and Lemon
You can certainly prepare your own artichokes for this dish, but
frozen are pretty good. Your prep time is better spent toasting and
grinding quality bread. Homemade bread crumbs add an irresistible
crunch and flavor to this multitextured dish.

Ingredients
Salt
3 cups frozen artichoke hearts
¼ cup olive oil
4 thick slices any rustic bread (a little stale is fine)
Pepper
2 garlic cloves
1 lemon
2 tablespoons butter
¼ cup white wine
1 pound any pasta

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
Take 3 cups artichoke hearts out of the freezer.
2. Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over low heat.
Tear 4 thick slices bread into chunks. Transfer to a food processor and
pulse into coarse crumbs.
3. Raise the heat under the skillet to medium-high. Add the bread crumbs
to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and stir gently to coat in
the oil. Cook, stirring frequently and adjusting the heat to prevent
burning, until the crumbs are golden and crisp, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Halve the lemon.
4. When the bread crumbs are crisp, transfer them to a bowl, carefully
wipe out the skillet, add 2 tablespoons butter, and return the skillet to
medium-high heat.
5. When the oil is hot, add the artichokes and cook, stirring occasionally
until they’re warmed through, 3 to 5 minutes.
6. Add the garlic, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook until the garlic
is fragrant, about 30 seconds. Add ¼ cup white wine, squeeze in the
lemon juice, and scrape any browned bits off the bottom of the skillet.
7. Let the liquid bubble until it reduces by about half, 2 or 3 minutes,
then turn the heat as low as it will go.
8. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.

9. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet and return the heat to
medium-high. Add a splash of the cooking water to make it saucy,
toss, taste, and adjust the seasoning.
10. Divide the pasta among 4 bowls, top with bread crumbs, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pasta with Fennel, Toasted Bread Crumbs, and Lemon
Substitute 1 large fennel bulb, sliced, for the artichoke hearts. Sauté the
fennel in the olive oil until tender and lightly browned, 5 or 6 minutes;
proceed with the recipe.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the bread crumbs described in Step 2, use Bread Crumbs
you’ve already made.
FROZEN, JARRED, AND CANNED ARTICHOKES
There is nothing like a fresh artichoke, but unfortunately few vegetables are
as time-consuming to prepare. Luckily, their hearts come in some
respectable alternative forms, which are quite good in pasta dishes, omelets,
dips—pretty much anything. This recipe uses cooked frozen artichoke
hearts, which you can thaw ahead of time or toss directly into the hot
skillet. They most closely capture the flavor of fresh.
Jarred artichoke hearts packed in oil are also fine. They’re a bit softer
and will break apart into the sauce a little more as you cook them, so add
them toward the end of cooking. Avoid water-packed artichokes; they’re too
. . . well, watery.

SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad
Tender Vegetables

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Fennel, White Beans, and
Stock
For an especially hearty and cozy bowl of pasta, try serving it in a
shallow bowl with a brothy sauce. The flavorful liquid pools at the
bottom of the bowl, wafting savory aromas upward as you eat, and
moistens every single bite.

Ingredients
Salt
¼ cup olive oil
2 medium fennel bulbs
2 garlic cloves
2 cups any cooked or canned white beans (one 15-ounce can)
Pepper
1 cup chicken or vegetable stock
1 pound any cut pasta

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium heat.
Trim and chop the fennel, saving a few of the fronds for garnish.
3. Add the fennel to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until it
begins to soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
4. When the fennel begins to soften, add the garlic, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and cook until the garlic is fragrant, about 30 seconds.
5. Add the white beans and 1 cup stock. Bring the mixture to a simmer,
then turn the heat as low as it will go.
6. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
7. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet and turn the heat to
medium-high. Add a splash of the cooking water if you want even
more broth. Toss, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pasta with Sausage, Fennel, White Beans, and Stock
Before adding the fennel, brown 12 ounces crumbled Italian sausage in the
skillet.
Pasta with Chorizo, Red Onions, Black Beans, and Stock

Use 2 medium red onions instead of the fennel and black instead of white
beans. Before adding them, brown 12 ounces crumbled fresh Mexican
chorizo in the skillet.
Pasta with Kale, Lima Beans, and Stock
Substitute 1 pound chopped kale for the fennel and lima beans for the white
beans. Cook the kale just until it wilts, 5 or 6 minutes, then proceed with
Step 3.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Whole wheat pasta, which takes only a little longer to cook, is a wonderful
option in this dish.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Caprese Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Steamed Tender Vegetables

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Spaghetti with Garlicky Fresh
Tomato Sauce
Make this with really good ripe tomatoes and it’s astounding. But
even made out of season with canned tomatoes it’s pretty great. A
little saffron goes a long way—to add its distinctive floral flavor—
so use just a pinch if you decide to include it.

Ingredients
Salt
2 tablespoons butter
1 tablespoon olive oil
4 garlic cloves
Pinch of saffron (optional)
5 or 6 medium ripe tomatoes (2 pounds)
¼ cup white wine
Pepper
1 pound spaghetti
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 2 tablespoons butter and 1 tablespoon oil in a large skillet or large
pot over low heat.
Peel and thinly slice 4 garlic cloves.
3. Add the garlic to the skillet along with a pinch of saffron if you’re
using it and raise the heat to medium. Let the garlic and saffron flavor
the fat without letting the garlic brown.
Core and chop the tomatoes; begin adding them to the pan as soon as
the garlic is fragrant.
4. Add ¼ cup white wine and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Bring to a
boil, adjust the heat to produce a steady bubble, and cook, stirring
occasionally until the tomatoes break down and the sauce thickens, 10
to 15 minutes.
5. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
6. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet and turn the heat to
medium-high. Add the Parmesan, parsley, and a splash of the cooking
water if you want to make it saucier. Toss, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS

Spaghetti with Creamy Fresh Tomato–Saffron Sauce
Use cream instead of the wine.
Spaghetti with Chorizo Tomato Sauce
Add 8 ounces chopped smoked Spanish chorizo along with the garlic and
saffron in Step 3.
Spaghetti with Clams and Fresh Tomato Sauce
Once the tomato sauce has started to thicken, add 1½ pounds littleneck
clams to the skillet, cover, and raise the heat to medium-high. Cook until
the clams open, 5 to 10 minutes. Toss the pasta with the sauce as directed,
skipping the Parmesan if you like.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the sauce as described in Steps 2 through 4, use 2 cups
Tomato Sauce with Lots of Garlic.
PASTA COOKING TIMES
The cooking time for dried pasta varies wildly depending on the type and,
more important, on how old it is and how long it was stored. (And you
cannot trust the package timing at all.) The range for dried pasta can be
from 3 minutes (for angel hair) to 12 or so minutes; this is why you check it
frequently. Smaller and thinner pasta cuts will cook faster than thicker,
denser shapes, and whole wheat pasta almost always takes longer to cook
than regular pasta.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad

Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Spicy Eggplant and
Tomato Sauce
Eggplant is one of my favorite vegetables, in part because it can be
meaty and silky at the same time. Browned in olive oil and
simmered with tomatoes, it creates a hearty, rich sauce that vies
with anything containing meat. For crunch I like to sprinkle this
dish with toasted bread crumbs (see If You Have More Time).

Ingredients
Salt
¼ cup olive oil
1 medium onion
1 medium eggplant (about 1 pound)
2 garlic cloves
1 teaspoon red chile flakes
Pepper
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
1 pound any pasta
Several sprigs fresh basil

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-high
heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
3. When the oil is hot, add the onion and cook until it begins to soften, 3
to 5 minutes.
Trim and chop the eggplant into ¼- to ½-inch pieces.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
4. When the onion begins to soften, add the eggplant, garlic, 1 teaspoon
red chile flakes, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring
occasionally, until the eggplant is browned all over, 5 to 10 minutes.
5. When the eggplant is browned, add the diced tomatoes with their juice
and adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the tomatoes start to break down and
the eggplant is tender, 5 to 10 minutes.
6. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop.
7. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet. Add the basil and a splash
of the cooking water if you want to make it saucier. Toss, taste and
adjust the seasoning, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Pasta with Eggplant Puttanesca
Along with the diced tomatoes in Step 5, add ½ cup chopped pitted olives, 2
tablespoons capers, and 3 or 4 chopped anchovy fillets.
Pasta with Spicy Curried Cauliflower Tomato Sauce
Substitute 1 small head cauliflower for the eggplant and 1 fresh hot green
chile, minced, for the red chile flakes. Add 1 tablespoon minced fresh
ginger and 1 teaspoon curry powder along with the garlic and chile in Step
4. Use cilantro instead of basil.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making a tomato sauce as described in Steps 2 through 5, just
brown the eggplant in the oil and then add 3 cups Tomato Sauce.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Fried Bread Crumbs
Sprinkling some toasted bread crumbs on the pasta before serving is a real
crowd-pleaser: Tear 4 thick slices any rustic bread into chunks and pulse
them into coarse crumbs in the food processor. Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large
skillet over medium heat. When hot, add the bread crumbs and cook,
stirring frequently until they are golden and crisp, 3 to 5 minutes.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad
Two-Step Broccoli
Asparagus Gratin

INGREDIENT

Tomatoes
Tomatoes range from bright ripe fresh fruit through
canned types to the intense flavors of tomato paste
and dried tomatoes. All are useful in a fast kitchen, if
for slightly different reasons. So if you’ve always got
at least one kind or another on hand, you’ll be able to
choose from a wide range of dishes, including Fresh
Tomato Salsa, Caprese Salad, and Tomato Sauce—
along with all sorts of tomatoey soups and stews.
Tomato Season
The ideal season for growing tomatoes depends on climate—if you’re
reading this in northern California you’re very lucky—but generally
tomatoes are in season from summer to early fall. Most supermarket
tomatoes are either grown in hothouses or ripened off the vine. Neither is
very good, so when it’s not tomato season I typically opt for canned, and
you should, too.
Types of Tomatoes
There are three main groups of tomatoes: cherry, plum, and slicing. I love
cherry tomatoes (and their oblong kin, the so-called grape tomatoes) for
both their sweetness and their convenience. You can toss them whole into
raw salads, warm them with pastas and grains, sauté them quickly, or broil
with olive oil, salt, and pepper. Plum (Roma) tomatoes are the oval-shaped
type and famous for being the base of many Italian sauces. They’re meaty,

perfect for sauces, braises, soups, and stews. Slicing tomatoes are a wide
variety of large, spherical tomatoes that you would typically slice into
rounds. In season, they are best eaten raw.
Buying and Storing Tomatoes
When buying tomatoes, give them a little squeeze. You want flesh that is
soft and yielding to the touch but not mushy. The color should be rich and
deep, not light and pale. Store tomatoes at room temperature—never in the
fridge.
Canned Tomatoes
What’s the Story?
WHOLE PEELED
TOMATOES
Many people say that whole peeled
canned tomatoes are of a higher quality
than diced or crushed, because it’s harder
to pass off a lackluster tomato if you have
to keep it intact. Maybe. In any case,
whole peeled tomatoes are generally quite
good. They take slightly more time and
work than other canned varieties because
you either have to chop them up a bit
before using or allot some extra time for
them to break down while cooking.
Typically when I use them in sauces or
soups I split the difference, roughly
chopping them before adding them, then
using a wooden spoon to break them up
more as they cook.

DICED TOMATOES
Diced tomatoes occupy the middle ground
between whole peeled and crushed. If
anything the flesh is slightly firmer than
you might get with whole peeled
tomatoes, but the difference is negligible,
and the time and effort you save with the
reduced prep is a help.
CRUSHED TOMATOES
Crushed tomatoes are just that; they have
slightly more pulp than what is labeled
“Tomato Sauce” (which is actually
sweetened and seasoned and to be
avoided) or “Tomato Purée” (which is like
thick tomato juice). Since the fruit is
pulverized, manufacturers can get away
with using lower-quality tomatoes than
those used for whole canned.
Nevertheless, crushed tomatoes can be
useful in fast cooking. Unlike whole
peeled or diced tomatoes, crushed have the
consistency of sauce right out of the can.
All they require is a bit of simmering and
seasoning and they’re ready to eat. If you
need to throw together a sauce or soup in a
pinch, crushed tomatoes can get you there
in just a few minutes.

DRIED TOMATOES
Sun-dried tomatoes have been left in the
sun (or in a low oven) to dry,
concentrating their sugars and flavors. The
tomato flavor is still there, but it’s carried
to you with an almost candylike
sweetness, and a little goes a long way. I
don’t use dried tomatoes often, but it’s
nice to have them around for when you
want to add a little extra punch to a sauce
or a salad. They keep almost indefinitely
in the pantry.
TOMATO PASTE
Tomato paste is tomato purée that has
been reduced substantially. Look for
tomato paste in tubes instead of cans. It
lasts for months in the fridge, allowing
you to use a teaspoon or tablespoon at a
time, unlike the cans, which go bad after a
few days. Stir tomato paste into pasta
sauces, bean stews, and soups to give a
little extra flavor and body.

MASTER RECIPE

Tomato Sauce
This is about as useful a sauce as there is, fast and
easy enough to make you forget about buying sauce
in a jar. Plus, you can spin the basic recipes in any
number of directions, some of which follow.
This recipe makes 4 servings. It’s easily doubled
and will keep in the fridge for several days. To freeze
it, let it cool, then pack it in freezer bags or tightly
sealed containers and store for up to 6 months. Pack
the sauce in smaller quantities to avoid ever having to
thaw and refreeze or use more sauce than you want.
Tomato Sauce
1
Sweat the Onions
Put 2 tablespoons olive oil or butter in a large skillet over medium-high
heat. When the oil is hot or the butter is melted, add 1 medium onion,
chopped. Cook, stirring occasionally until soft, 2 or 3 minutes.
2
Add the Tomatoes
Add one 28-ounce can whole peeled tomatoes (drained and chopped)
and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
3
Simmer the Sauce

Cook, stirring occasionally until the tomatoes break down and thicken
the sauce, 10 to 15 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve
or cool and store.
VARIATIONS
Fresh Tomato Sauce
Substitute 2 cups chopped ripe fresh tomatoes for the canned. The cooking
time will be about the same.
Tomato Sauce with Lots of Garlic
Skip the onion. Crush and peel up to 10 garlic cloves. Cook them in the oil
or butter over medium-low heat, turning occasionally until golden brown,
about 5  minutes. Raise the heat to medium-high before adding the
tomatoes. Fish out the cloves before serving or serve the sauce with them,
as you like.
Tomato Sauce with Wine (Red or White)
Right before adding the tomatoes, add ¼ cup red or white wine and cook
until it’s mostly evaporated.
Herby Tomato Sauce
At the last minute, stir in ¼ to ½ cup chopped fresh basil, parsley, mint, or
dill or 1 to 2 teaspoons chopped fresh rosemary, thyme, sage, or oregano.
Creamy Tomato Sauce
A few minutes before the sauce is done, stir in ¼ cup cream. (For Vodka
Sauce, stir in ¼ cup vodka along with the cream.)
Puttanesca
Skip the onion and use olive oil. When the oil is hot, add a few minced
garlic cloves, a few anchovies, 2  tablespoons capers, ½ cup pitted black

olives, and a pinch of red chile flakes. Break up the anchovies a bit as you
stir, then add the tomatoes.
Mirepoix Tomato Sauce
Add about ½ cup each finely chopped carrot and celery and finely chop the
onion. Cook until all the vegetables are soft, 8 to 10 minutes, then add the
tomatoes.
Tomato Sauce with Mushrooms
Add about 1 cup chopped or sliced mushrooms along with the onion. Cook
until soft and lightly browned, then add the tomatoes.
Roasted Red Pepper and Tomato Sauce
Add at least 1 chopped roasted red pepper along with the tomatoes.
Dried Tomato Sauce
Reconstitute about ¼ cup dried tomatoes in warm water, chop them, and
add them to the skillet a minute before adding the canned tomatoes.
Smooth Tomato Sauce
When the sauce is finished, let it cool a bit, then purée it in the blender until
smooth.
Intense Tomato Sauce
Stir about ¼ cup tomato paste into the onion before adding the tomatoes.
Unexpected Ways to Use Tomato Sauce
Once you have tomato sauce on hand, sure, pasta can be ready in a flash.
But so can lots of other dishes. (And all of these ideas work well for the
simplest tomato sauce or any of the variations.)
For breakfast (yes, breakfast) bring about an inch of sauce to a gentle
bubble in a skillet and use it to poach eggs; just crack in a few eggs, cover

with a tight-fitting lid, and cook until the whites set and the yolks are as
firm as you like. Or use the heated sauce to fill or garnish an omelet.
For lunch or dinner, smear a thin layer of tomato sauce on thickly sliced
bread (or flour tortillas or pocketless pita bread), top with grated cheese,
and pop in the broiler for instant “pizzas.” Or sear meat, fish, or poultry in
some olive oil in a large skillet, then add a little sauce—and cut-up
vegetables if you like—for a quick stir-fry. If you’ve got enough sauce to
submerge the meat, bring it to a boil, lower to a steady but gentle bubble,
cover, and simmer until it’s tender for a quick stew.
Side dishes come to life with tomato sauce. Once hot, you can use it to
warm or top already cooked vegetables, or as a liquid to poach raw ones
until they’re crisp-tender. I also like to reheat whole grains with a few
spoonfuls of tomato sauce for extra flavor.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Broiled Ziti
All the flavors of a classic baked ziti, but more bubbly crust and
way less time. Crowd-pleasers don’t come much easier than this.

Ingredients
Salt
3 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for greasing the baking sheet
1 medium onion
2 garlic cloves
One 28-ounce can crushed tomatoes
Pepper
1 pound ziti
1 pound mozzarella cheese, preferably fresh
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 3 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
3. Add the onion and garlic to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally
until the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Grease a rimmed baking sheet with olive oil.
Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
4. When the onion is soft, add the tomatoes, stirring them to combine,
sprinkle with salt and pepper, and bring to a boil. Lower the heat so the
mixture bubbles gently, and cook, stirring occasionally; if the sauce
gets too thick, add a splash of pasta-cooking water.
5. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
Chop or grate 1 pound mozzarella.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan.
6. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it and return the pasta to
the pot. Add the tomato sauce and half of the mozzarella and stir.
Transfer the pasta to the rimmed baking sheet and spread it in an even
layer. Top with the remaining mozzarella and the Parmesan.
7. Broil until the cheese is bubbly and brown and the top layer is crisp, 2
to 5 minutes. Let cool for a few minutes before serving.

VARIATIONS
Creamy Broiled Ziti
Add 1 cup ricotta cheese to the pasta along with the tomato sauce in Step 6.
Broiled Ziti with Sausage
Before adding the onion to the skillet, brown 12 ounces crumbled Italian
sausage.
Broiled Ziti with Olives and Feta
Add 1 cup chopped pitted kalamata olives along with the tomatoes in Step
4. Substitute feta cheese for half of the mozzarella and omit the Parmesan.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making a sauce as described in Steps 2 through 4, use 3 cups
Tomato Sauce.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Tender Vegetables

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Greens and Eggs
With the richness of eggs and Parmesan and the fresh bite of
sautéed spinach and garlic, this dish is like a meatless version of
pasta carbonara. You can use kale, collards, chard, or broccoli rabe
as well; each will take a minute or two longer to cook than the
spinach. (For classic carbonara, see the Variations.)

Ingredients
Salt
3 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds spinach
2 garlic cloves
1 pound any pasta
3 eggs
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Trim off any thick stems from the spinach.
3. Raise the heat under the skillet to medium-high. Cook the spinach,
adding a handful at a time and stirring between batches until the leaves
are just wilted, about 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet.
4. When the spinach is wilted, turn off the heat.
5. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
Crack the eggs into a bowl.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese and add to the bowl; sprinkle with salt
and lots of pepper.
6. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet and pour in the egg mixture.
Toss, adding a splash of the cooking water if you want to make it
saucier. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pasta Carbonara
Skip the spinach. Sauté 8 ounces chopped guanciale, pancetta, or bacon in
the olive oil until crisp. Drain off some of the fat if you like—or not. Keep
the garlic if you like or skip it. If you do use garlic, turn off the heat before
adding it to the skillet. Proceed as directed.

Pasta with Cherry Tomatoes and Eggs
Substitute 1 pint cherry tomatoes, halved, for the spinach. Cook them in the
olive oil until they begin to break down and release some of their juice, 5 or
6 minutes. Proceed as directed.
Pasta with Mushrooms and Eggs
Use 1 pound mushrooms, sliced, instead of the spinach. Cook them in the
olive oil until they are tender and beginning to dry out, 10 to 15 minutes.
Proceed as directed.
SIDES
Green Salad
Chopped Salad
Tomato Salad
Garlic Bread
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Linguine with Clams
Clams, butter, olive oil, garlic, and parsley are one of the great
flavor combinations. If you were truly shooting for speed, you
could just skip the pasta and serve this with grilled bread. Tossed
with linguine, it’s heaven.

Ingredients
Salt
3 pounds littleneck or other small hard-shell clams
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 garlic cloves
1 teaspoon red chile flakes, or to taste
Pepper
1 pound linguine or other long pasta
Several sprigs fresh parsley
2 tablespoons butter

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
Scrub the clams.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium
heat.
3. When the oil is hot, add the clams and turn the heat to high. Cook,
shaking the skillet occasionally until the first few start to open, about 5
minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
4. When a few clams have opened, add the garlic and 1 teaspoon red
chile flakes and sprinkle with pepper. Cover the skillet and cook until
all the clams open, 3 to 5 minutes. Turn off the heat and leave the
clams covered.
5. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
6. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet and turn the heat to
medium-high. Add 2 tablespoons butter, the parsley, and a splash of
the cooking water to make it saucier. Toss, taste and adjust the
seasoning, adding more chile flakes, if you like, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Linguine with Mussels

Substitute 1½ pounds mussels for the clams; in addition to scrubbing them,
you’ll want to pull off their fibrous “beards.” Mussels will open a few
minutes faster than clams.
Linguine with Red Clam Sauce
Just before adding the pasta to the clams in Step 6, stir about 2 cups
chopped fresh or canned tomatoes into the skillet.
Linguine with Clams, White Wine, and Cream
Add ¼ cup white wine and ½ cup cream along with the garlic, red chile
flakes, and pepper in Step 4.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you like unimpeded eating, remove the clam meat from the shells after
they’ve opened; discard the shells.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad
Fennel Salad
Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Tuna and Dried Tomatoes
Don’t let painful memories of childhood tuna noodle casserole sour
you on the idea of mixing tuna with pasta. When you use tuna
packed in olive oil, especially the kinds imported from the
Mediterranean, you’ll see the combination is terrific. Both the tuna
and dried tomatoes have been prepared ahead of time by someone
else, so there’s not much work left for you other than cooking the
pasta.

Ingredients
Salt
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 garlic cloves
1 cup dried tomatoes
Two 6-ounce jars or cans tuna, packed in olive oil
Pepper
1 pound any pasta
Several sprigs fresh parsley

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over low heat.
Peel and thinly slice 2 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet.
Chop 1 cup dried tomatoes; add them to the skillet.
3. Add the tuna (with its oil) to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper,
and stir to break it up a bit. Let everything warm up slowly in the
skillet as the pasta cooks.
4. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
5. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet. Add the parsley and a
splash of the cooking water if you want to make it saucier. Toss, taste
and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pasta with Tuna, Capers, and Lemon
Substitute ½ cup capers and the grated zest of a lemon for the dried
tomatoes.
Pasta with Anchovies and Garlic
Intense. Skip the dried tomatoes and increase the olive oil to ¼ cup and the
garlic to 4 cloves. Use about a dozen chopped anchovy fillets instead of the
tuna.

NOTES
PASTA WITH OLIVE OIL AND OTHER STUFF
Olive oil, warmed in a skillet and seasoned with salt and pepper, is a pasta
sauce in itself; in fact it’s nearly perfect. But you can also use the time that
the water’s boiling to slowly warm up a host of other ingredients in that oil
to create even more flavorful pasta sauces. The tuna and dried tomato sauce
here is one example, but you needn’t get fussy. Garlic; anchovies; olives;
capers; lemon zest; chopped fresh rosemary, sage, or oregano; red chile
flakes or minced fresh chiles; chopped shallots; fresh tomatoes; cured
sausage; and prosciutto are all wonderful. Combine any of those things with
a big glug of olive oil in a skillet over low heat and by the time you’ve
cooked the pasta you’ll have a delicious, olive oil–based sauce ready for
tossing.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Grape Salad with Mint
Carrot Salad with Olives and Rosemary
Celery Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Scallops and Potatoes
Pasta tossed with a humble mixture of chopped potatoes and onions
takes a turn toward the luxurious with the addition of sweet seared
scallops nestled in at the end.

Ingredients
Salt
4 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
1 medium onion
2 or 3 medium russet or Yukon Gold potatoes (1 pound)
Pepper
1 pound sea scallops
Several sprigs fresh parsley
1 pound any long pasta
2 tablespoons butter
¼ cup white wine

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the skillet.
Chop the potatoes into ¼-inch pieces.
3. Add the potatoes to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook,
stirring frequently and adjusting the heat or adding olive oil so they
don’t burn, until the potatoes and onions are well browned and tender,
10 to 15 minutes.
Pat the scallops dry with a paper towel.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
4. When the potatoes and onions are browned and tender, transfer them to
a plate and wipe out the skillet (you may need to rinse some stuck
potato bits off the bottom).
5. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
6. Add 2 tablespoons butter and 2 tablespoons olive oil to the skillet and
return it to medium heat; when they’re hot, add the scallops and
sprinkle with salt and pepper.
7. Cook, turning once, until the scallops are nicely browned on both
sides, 2 or 3 minutes per side.
8. When the scallops are browned, add ¼ cup white wine and let it
bubble mostly away; turn off the heat and transfer the scallops to a

plate with a slotted spoon.
9. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet along with the potatoes and
onions. Add the parsley and a splash of the cooking water if you want
to make it saucier. Toss, taste, and adjust the seasoning. Divide among
4 plates, nestle the scallops back into the pasta, drizzle with a little
more olive oil if you like, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pasta with Shrimp and Potatoes
Substitute shrimp for scallops. Cook until they are lightly browned on the
outside and cooked all the way through, 2 or 3 minutes total.
Pasta with Scallops, Potatoes, and Chorizo
Before adding the onion to the skillet in Step 2, brown 12 ounces crumbled
fresh Mexican chorizo.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Asparagus Gratin
Tomatoes with Fried Bread Crumbs
Brussels Sprouts with Bacon

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Fideos with Shrimp, Tomatoes, and
Peas
Fideos—short thin noodles, typically used in Spanish cooking—are
hard to find at regular supermarkets. Don’t kill yourself looking for
them; just break up some regular angel hair. Here the noodles are
cooked almost risotto style, with shrimp and peas stirred in at the
end.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
3 garlic cloves
8 ounces angel hair pasta
½ cup white wine
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
Salt and pepper
12 ounces peeled shrimp
2 cups frozen peas

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
2. Add the garlic to the skillet and raise the heat a bit. Hold the angel hair
over the skillet and break it into 1- or 2-inch pieces with your hands.
Drop the pieces into the skillet as you go.
3. Toast the pasta, stirring frequently until it is glossy with oil and
slightly browned, 3 or 4 minutes.
4. Add ½ cup white wine and cook, stirring until it evaporates, 3 or 4
minutes. Add the tomatoes and their juice and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper. Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily but not
vigorously.
5. Cook, stirring occasionally until the pasta is just tender but still has a
bit of a bite, 8 to 12 minutes.
Chop the shrimp.
6. When the pasta is just tender, stir in the shrimp and 2 cups frozen peas.
Cook until the peas are warmed through and the shrimp turns pink and
cooks through, 2 or 3 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning and
serve.
VARIATIONS
Fideos with Squid, Tomatoes, and Corn
Substitute 12 ounces sliced squid for the shrimp and 2 cups fresh or frozen
corn kernels for the peas. The squid will take only a minute or 2 to cook.
Fideos with Chicken, Tomatoes, and Rosemary

Substitute red wine for white and add a couple sprigs of fresh rosemary
along with the tomatoes. About 5 minutes after adding the tomatoes, stir in
12 ounces chopped boneless, skinless chicken thighs instead of the shrimp.
By the time the noodles are tender, the chicken should be cooked through.
Keep the peas or skip them if you prefer. Remove the rosemary stems
before serving.
Fideos with Chorizo, Tomatoes, and White Beans
Add 8 ounces chopped smoked Spanish chorizo along with the garlic in
Step 2. Use 2 cups cooked or drained canned white beans instead of the
peas.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the sauce as described in Steps 1 through 4, just toast the
pasta and then add 3 cups Tomato Sauce with Wine, using white wine.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Fennel Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Crunchy Okra

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Squid and Tomatoes
The first time I made this dish I knew it had to be in this book. The
simple sauce of garlic, tomatoes, and squid comes together so
quickly that you don’t have to start cooking it until the pasta is
already in the water, and the result is astoundingly delicious.

Ingredients
Salt
3 garlic cloves
2 or 3 medium ripe tomatoes
12 ounces cleaned squid
1 small dried hot red chile
1 pound spaghetti
2 tablespoons olive oil
Pepper
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
Core and chop the tomatoes.
Cut the squid bodies into rings and the tentacles (if you have them) in
half if they’re large.
Chop the chile.
2. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
3. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat. When it’s hot, add the garlic and cook until fragrant, a
minute or 2.
4. Add the tomatoes, squid, chile, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Raise
the heat to high and cook, stirring occasionally until the mixture
becomes saucy, 2 or 3 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
5. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet along with the parsley and a
splash of the cooking water if you want to make it saucier. Toss, taste
and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pasta with Shrimp and Tomatoes
Replace the squid with chopped shrimp.

Pasta with Bay Scallops and Tomatoes
Use small whole bay scallops instead of squid.
Pasta with Crab and Tomatoes
Use lump crabmeat instead of the squid. In Step 4, wait to add it until the
tomatoes are saucy, then stir it in and let it heat through for a minute or 2
before proceeding.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad
Fennel Salad with Olives
Asparagus Gratin

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Three Bs Pasta
Roasted Brussels sprouts are more addictive than potato chips.
They are one of the three Bs in this favorite cold-weather recipe,
the others being blue cheese and balsamic vinegar.

Ingredients
Salt
1 pound Brussels sprouts
3 tablespoons olive oil
5 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 1 pound)
Pepper
½ cup walnuts
4 ounces blue cheese (1 cup crumbled)
1 pound any cut pasta
¼ cup balsamic vinegar

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
Trim and halve the Brussels sprouts.
2. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
low heat.
Cut the chicken into ½-inch chunks.
3. Add the chicken to the skillet and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Raise
the heat to medium-high and cook, undisturbed, until the pieces brown
and release easily, a minute or 2. Then lower the heat to medium and
cook, stirring occasionally until the meat is no longer pink, 2 or 3
minutes.
4. When the chicken is no longer pink, transfer it to a plate with a slotted
spoon and add the Brussels sprouts to the skillet. Sprinkle with salt and
pepper and cook, stirring once or twice, until they are deeply browned
and just tender, 5 to 10 minutes.
Chop ½ cup walnuts.
Crumble 1 cup blue cheese.
5. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
6. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water.
7. Return the chicken to the skillet and add ¼ cup balsamic vinegar. Then
add the pasta to the skillet; add the walnuts and the blue cheese, and
add a splash of cooking water if you want to make it saucier. Toss,
taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Pasta with Chicken, Beets, Blue Cheese, and Balsamic
Substitute 1 pound beets, peeled and chopped into ¼-inch pieces, for the
Brussels sprouts, cooking the beets until they are just tender, 10 to 15
minutes.
Pasta with Chicken, Brussels Sprouts, Feta, and Lemon
Substitute feta for the blue cheese and the juice of a lemon for the balsamic.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you prefer smaller pieces of Brussels sprouts, cut them into quarters or
chop them into smaller bits.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Caprese Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Garlicky Mushrooms

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Chicken, Mushrooms, and
Wine
Use red wine and this dish is hearty for the fall or winter; use white
and it becomes lighter for spring or summer. You won’t go wrong
either way.

Ingredients
Salt
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons butter
3 boneless, skinless chicken thighs or 1 boneless, skinless breast (8
ounces)
Pepper
1½ pounds button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
3 garlic cloves
¾ cup red or white wine
1 pound any cut pasta
Several sprigs fresh parsley
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil and 1 tablespoon butter in a large skillet or
large pot over medium-high heat.
Cut the chicken into ½-inch chunks.
3. Add the chicken to the skillet and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook,
undisturbed, until the pieces brown and release easily, a minute or 2.
Then cook, stirring occasionally until the meat is no longer pink, 2 or 3
minutes.
Trim and quarter the mushrooms. (If you’re using shiitakes, discard the
stems.)
4. When the chicken is no longer pink, transfer it to a plate with a slotted
spoon.
5. Add 1 tablespoon olive oil and 1 tablespoon butter to the skillet, then
the mushrooms. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and cook, stirring
occasionally until they soften, 5 to 10 minutes.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves; add them to the mushrooms.
6. When the mushrooms are soft, return the chicken to the skillet, add ¾
cup wine, and scrape any browned bits off the bottom of the skillet.
Let the wine bubble away until it reduces by about half; then turn the
heat as low as it will go.
7. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.

Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
8. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet and turn the heat to
medium-high. Add the parsley, Parmesan, and a splash of the cooking
water if you want to make it saucier. Toss, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pasta with Chicken, Leeks, and Wine
Substitute 2 leeks, sliced, for the mushrooms. Cook the leeks until they are
soft, 3 to 5 minutes. Omit the garlic if you like and use white wine.
Substitute 3 sprigs fresh thyme for the parsley.
Pasta with Chicken, Eggplant, and Balsamic
Use 4 tablespoons olive oil and omit the butter. Substitute 1 medium
eggplant, chopped, for the mushrooms. Cook the eggplant until it’s tender
and browned, 5 to 10 minutes. Use ½ cup red wine and ¼ cup balsamic
vinegar.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Tomato Salad
Carrot Salad with Olives and Rosemary

RECIPE-FREE

Pasta
1
Bring a large pot of water to boil.
Fill a stockpot or other large pot with a gallon of water for every
pound of noodles. Leave a couple inches of headspace so there’s
room for the pasta. Add several large pinches—at least 2 tablespoons
—salt to the pot. Cover and crank up the heat.

2
Make the sauce.
The simplest recipes here call for little more than seasonings and
cheese; others are more involved. Make your sauce before you tackle
side dishes. If you run out of time and don’t get to making something
on the side, remember that a bowl of pasta makes a fine dinner.
3
Check the water.
Is it boiling but the sauce isn’t ready? Turn it down to a gentle bubble.
If the sauce is ready but the water isn’t, remove the skillet from the
heat.

4
Cook the pasta.
When the water and the sauce are ready, add the pasta; stir every so
often to prevent it from sticking. Start tasting after 5 minutes. Since it
will keep softening after draining and saucing, the idea is to anticipate
the doneness so it doesn’t get too mushy.
5
Heat the sauce.
After you first taste the pasta, put the sauce over medium-low heat;
you’ll need to return to the stove about every minute from now on to
check the pasta and stir the sauce. If you turn your attention to other
things, set a timer so you don’t overcook the pasta.

6
Drain the pasta.
The pasta is ready when there’s some resistance when you bite down
but it’s no longer chalky inside. Remove at least a cup of the cooking
water with a ladle or measuring cup, then drain the noodles in a
colander. Don’t rinse them.

7
Sauce and toss.
Add the noodles to the skillet (or pour the sauce and pasta back into
the large pot and set it over low heat). Stir or toss the pasta with the
sauce, adding cooking water if necessary to bring it together. Add
cheese, herbs, or other garnishes, and serve right away.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Spaghetti with Nearly Instant
Bolognese
Traditional Bolognese sauce requires simmering chunks of meat for
hours; it’s amazing, but not something to make on a weeknight.
Enter Instant Bolognese. The flavors still develop into something
impressively deep and rich.

Ingredients
Salt
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 pound ground beef, pork, or veal or a combination of all 3
1 small onion
1 carrot
1 celery stalk
2 garlic cloves
Pepper
¼ cup tomato paste
½ cup white or red wine
¼ cup cream
1 pound spaghetti
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
3. When the oil is hot, add the ground meat and cook, stirring
occasionally and breaking it apart with a spoon until it’s brown and
crisp, 10 to 15 minutes.
Trim, peel, and finely chop the onion. Trim, peel, and finely chop the
carrot. Trim and finely chop the celery stalk. Peel and finely chop 2
garlic cloves. Toss each one as you finish chopping it into the pan
with the browning meat.
Sprinkle with salt and pepper.
4. When the meat is browned, add ¼ cup tomato paste and cook, stirring
until it darkens slightly, about a minute. Add ½ cup wine and scrape
any browned bits off the bottom of the skillet. Let the wine bubble
away until it reduces by about half; stir in ¼ cup cream and turn the
heat as low as it will go.
5. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
6. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Add the pasta to the skillet and turn the heat to
medium-high. Add half of the Parmesan and a splash of the cooking
water if you want to make it saucier. Toss, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve with the remaining cheese on top.

VARIATIONS
Tomatoey Spaghetti Bolognese
Add one 14-ounce can diced or crushed tomatoes along with the wine.
More-Veggie-than-Meat Spaghetti Bolognese
Use half as much ground meat and twice as many onions, carrots, and
celery. Add more garlic if you’d like.
Spaghetti with Mushroom Bolognese
Use 8 ounces ground meat and add 1 pound finely chopped mushrooms
along with it in Step 3. Cook until the meat and mushrooms are nicely
browned, 10 to 15 minutes.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of chopping the vegetables finely by hand, pulse them in the food
processor.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Slower Bolognese
Still not the classic, but an approximation: Cut 1 pound boneless beef
chuck, pork shoulder, or veal shoulder (or a combination) into chunks and
pulse them into small pieces (roughly ¼ inch) in the food processor; you
can also chop them by hand. Use that in place of the ground meat. Add one
28-ounce can diced tomatoes along with the wine (save the cream for the
end). Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles very gently; simmer, adding a
splash of water if the mixture gets too dry, until the meat is very tender,
nearly falling apart, 45 minutes to an hour. Stir in the cream before tossing
in the pasta.

SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Spaghetti and Drop Meatballs with
Tomato Sauce
The most time-consuming part of making meatballs is rolling them.
The solution? Don’t. Just use two spoons to drop little mounds of
the mixture into the hot skillet. (Skipping the rolling also prevents
you from overworking the meatballs until they get tough.) Leave
them alone to brown beautifully on the bottom while you start
building the tomato sauce around them.

Ingredients
Salt
2 tablespoons olive oil
12 ounces ground beef
6 ounces Parmesan cheese (1½ cups grated)
1 bunch fresh parsley
¼ cup bread crumbs
1 egg
Pepper
1 large onion
3 garlic cloves
Two 28-ounce cans diced tomatoes
3 bay leaves
1 pound spaghetti

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Put the ground beef in a medium bowl.
Grate 1½ cups Parmesan cheese and add 1 cup to the bowl.
Chop ¼ cup parsley leaves and add to the bowl.
3. Add ¼ cup bread crumbs to the bowl, crack in the egg, and sprinkle
with salt and pepper. Gently mix together until everything is just
combined.
4. When the oil is hot, use 2 spoons to drop rounds of the meatball
mixture into the skillet (without touching if you can help it).
5. Once you’ve used up all the mixture, let the meatballs cook,
undisturbed, until they’re nicely browned on the bottom, 5 or 6
minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; scatter it around the meatballs.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves; scatter them on the onions.
6. When the meatballs are nicely browned on the bottom, add the
tomatoes and their juice to the skillet, along with 3 bay leaves and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles
gently, then cover the skillet (by the time the pasta is cooked, the
meatballs will be firm).
7. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.

8. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it, reserving some
cooking water. Return the pasta to the pot. Discard the bay leaves and
spoon about half of the tomato sauce into the pasta pot, leaving the
meatballs behind. Toss the pasta, adding a splash of cooking water if
you want to make it saucier.
9. Divide the pasta among 4 plates or bowls; top with the meatballs and
the remaining sauce, sprinkle the remaining ½ cup Parmesan over the
top, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Spaghetti and Pork Drop Meatballs with Tomato Sauce
Use ground pork instead of beef and add 1 tablespoon fennel seeds in
addition to the parsley.
Spaghetti and Lamb Drop Meatballs with Tomato Sauce
Substitute ground lamb for the beef and 2 sprigs fresh rosemary for the
parsley.
Spaghetti and Drop Chicken Meatballs with Tomato Sauce
Use ground chicken instead of beef and fresh basil instead of parsley.
Spaghetti and Drop Turkey Meatballs with Tomato Sauce
Substitute ground turkey for the beef and 2 sprigs fresh sage for the parsley.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Bread Crumbs
EVEN FASTER
Use Tomato Sauce and skip the onion, garlic, and tomato prep. Just add the
sauce in Step 6.

SIDES
Garlic Bread
Fennel Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Pasta with Squash and Ham, Risotto
Style
This pasta, cooked in the style of risotto, has fall written all over it.
With ham, butternut squash, and sage, it would fit nicely on a
Thanksgiving table.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons butter
1 large shallot
4 ounces ham
1 small butternut squash (1½ to 2 pounds)
1 pound any cut pasta
Salt and pepper
½ cup white wine or water
4 to 5 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
2 sprigs fresh sage

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil and 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet or
large pot over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and mince the shallot.
Chop the ham.
2. Add the shallot and ham to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally
until the shallot softens and the ham is lightly browned, 5 or 6 minutes.
Cut the squash in half crosswise; peel and trim it, and scoop out the
seeds. Chop it into ¼-inch pieces (don’t worry about making them
perfect).
3. When the shallot softens and the ham is lightly browned, add the pasta,
sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until it’s
glossy, 2 or 3 minutes.
4. Add ½ cup white wine or water, stir, and let it bubble until nearly
gone. Add the squash and raise the heat to medium-high.
5. Start adding the stock or water 1 cup at a time; stir after each addition.
When the pan is almost dry, add another cup of stock and stir again.
Continue this process until the pasta and squash are tender (the pasta
should still have a little bite), 15 to 25 minutes.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
Strip the sage leaves from 2 sprigs and chop.
6. When the pasta and squash are tender, stir in the Parmesan and the
sage. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.

VARIATIONS
Pasta with Mushrooms and Bacon, Risotto Style
Substitute bacon for the ham; 1½ pounds button, cremini, or shiitake
mushrooms, quartered, for the squash; and thyme for the sage.
Pasta with Fennel and Sausage, Risotto Style
Use Italian sausage in place of ham, 2 large fennel bulbs, chopped, instead
of squash, and parsley instead of sage.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Shred the squash in a food processor with a grating disk. This will result in
a creamier dish, since the grated squash will get more tender and break
apart a bit as it cooks.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Fennel Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Orzo Risotto with Asparagus and
“Poached” Eggs
Cooking orzo in the style of risotto makes it creamy and rich, and it
takes little time to coax the starch out of the pasta. A bonus: The
bottom develops a delicious crunchy crust. When the dish is just
about done, crack a few eggs into the pan and “poach” them right
in the skillet.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons butter
1 large shallot
1 pound orzo
Salt and pepper
½ cup white wine or water
4 to 5 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
1 small bunch asparagus (about 12 ounces)
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
4 eggs

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet or large pot over medium
heat.
Trim, peel, and mince the shallot.
2. Add the shallot to the butter and cook, stirring occasionally until it
softens, 2 or 3 minutes.
3. Add the orzo, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring
occasionally until it’s glossy, 2 or 3 minutes. Add ½ cup white wine or
water, stir, and let it bubble away.
4. Start adding the stock ½ cup at a time; stir after each addition. When
the liquid is almost gone, add another ½ cup stock and stir again.
Continue this process until the orzo is beginning to get tender but is
still a bit too crunchy to eat, about 10 minutes.
Trim the asparagus and cut it into thin diagonal slices.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
5. When the orzo is beginning to get tender, stir in the asparagus.
Continue cooking, adding the stock and stirring as necessary, until the
orzo is tender but still has the slightest bit of crunch, 5 to 10 minutes
more. At this point the asparagus will be tender.
6. Stir in the Parmesan, taste, and adjust the seasoning. With the back of a
spoon, make 4 indentations in the orzo. Crack an egg into each one,
turn the heat to medium-low, and cover the skillet.
7. Cook until the eggs are barely set—the yolks should still be runny—7
to 10 minutes. Serve immediately.

VARIATIONS
Lemony Orzo Risotto with Asparagus and “Poached” Eggs
In Step 3, add the grated zest of a lemon along with the orzo and the juice
of the lemon along with the wine.
Pasta Risotto with Asparagus and “Poached” Eggs
Instead of orzo, use another small cut pasta like shells, elbows, or
orecchiette. The cooking time will be a little longer.
Orzo Risotto with Chard and Ricotta
Substitute 12 ounces chopped chard for the asparagus. Instead of cracking
eggs into the pot at the end, just stir in ½ cup ricotta and ½ teaspoon nutmeg
along with the Parmesan.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
If you want to top the orzo with eggs but don’t want to cook them in the
same skillet, just fry or poach the eggs separately while the orzo finishes
cooking. Divide the orzo among 4 plates or bowls and lay the eggs on top.
STEAM-POACHED EGGS
One of my favorite techniques is steaming eggs on top of other ingredients.
All you need is a skillet full of something into which you can nestle raw
eggs—a mixture that’s sturdy enough to cradle and support the eggs but
yielding enough to let you make the indentations. The heat of whatever is in
the skillet cooks the eggs from the bottom, while the steam that’s created
when you cover the skillet cooks them from the top.

Besides the orzo here, great mixtures for cooking eggs this way include
thick tomato or other vegetables sauces, sautéed greens, puréed vegetables,
just-cooked rice or grains, and beans that are starting to break apart. For
another example in this book, see Fast Florentine in the breakfast chapter.
SIDES
Green Salad
Warm Buttery Bread
Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 8

Three-Cheese Lasagna with Fresh
Noodles
My trick for lasagna on the fly is treating egg roll wrappers like
fresh pasta, which is actually what they are. You don’t even need to
boil them first; the tomato sauce has enough moisture in it that the
wrappers will cook right in the pan. Since lasagna is a dish usually
made for a crowd—or with leftovers in mind—I make this in a
9 × 13-inch baking pan.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for greasing the pan
4 garlic cloves
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
One 28-ounce can crushed tomatoes
Salt and pepper
1 cup ricotta cheese
1½ pounds mozzarella cheese (6 cups grated)
15 egg roll wrappers

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet
over medium-high heat.
Peel and mince 4 garlic cloves.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
2. When the oil is hot, add the garlic and cook until fragrant, about 30
seconds.
3. Add the tomatoes and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Bring the sauce to
a bubble, then adjust the heat so that it bubbles gently but steadily.
4. Add 1 cup ricotta to the tomato sauce, then add the Parmesan. Stir to
incorporate the cheeses; taste and adjust the seasoning. Simmer until
you’re ready to assemble the lasagna.
Grate 6 cups mozzarella.
5. Grease a 9 × 13-inch baking pan with a little olive oil. Put down a layer
of the egg roll wrappers, using a knife or kitchen scissors to cut them
as necessary so they cover the pan but don’t overlap too much (you’ll
want to do that for each layer). You’ll use 3 wrappers per layer, for a
total of 5 layers of noodles.
6. Spread a thin layer of the tomato sauce on top of the wrappers,
followed by a heaping cup of mozzarella. Make 4 more layers like this,
being sure that the final layer is topped with mozzarella.
7. Bake the lasagna (with a rimmed baking sheet underneath in case it
drips) until it’s bubbly and brown, about 15 minutes. If you want some
additional browning on top, put the dish under the broiler at the end.
Let it rest for 5 to 10 minutes before cutting and serving.

VARIATIONS
7 Additions to Three-Cheese Lasagna
Layer any of the following along with the cheese and tomato sauce:
1. Sautéed Greens with Garlic
2. Garlicky Mushroom
3. Creamed Spinach
4. Roasted Squash
5. Roasted Red (or Other Large) Peppers
6. Olives, capers, or dried tomatoes
7. Cooked crumbled bacon, sausage, or prosciutto
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the sauce as described in Steps 1 through 3, use 3 cups
Tomato Sauce.
EGG ROLL WRAPPERS AND WONTON SKINS
These are nothing more than fresh pasta, which makes them good stand-ins
for ravioli wrappers and lasagna. You can also use them as noodles for soup
or like fresh pasta handkerchiefs, boiled until tender and tossed with tomato
sauce and cheese.
FRESH PASTA OPTIONS
Good fresh pasta is a special treat, and as an added bonus, it cooks in a flash
—just a couple of minutes. All the recipes in this chapter also work for
fresh pasta; just start checking it after a minute.

SIDES
Garlic Bread
Green Salad
Cucumber Salad
Tender Vegetables

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Ricotta Dumplings with Spinach and
Brown Butter
There is no homemade pasta faster to whip up than ricotta
dumplings. The only part that requires patience is cooking them in
batches so you don’t overload the pot. It’s worth the short wait,
though; these are downright luxurious.

Ingredients
Salt
6 ounces Parmesan cheese (1½ cups grated)
2 eggs
2 cups ricotta cheese
Pepper
¾ to 1 cup flour
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter
1 bunch spinach (1 pound)

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
Grate 1½ cups Parmesan.
2. Crack the eggs into a large bowl and beat them. Add 2 cups ricotta, a
sprinkle of salt and pepper, and 1¼ cups of the Parmesan. Add about ¾
cup of the flour and stir, adding more flour as needed to form a very
sticky dough.
3. Put 6 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Cook until
the butter just turns light brown. Turn off the heat.
Trim off any thick stems from the spinach.
4. When the water is very hot, but not yet boiling, add the spinach and
cook just until it’s wilted, 2 or 3 minutes. Remove the leaves from the
pot, rinse them under cold water, squeeze them dry, and chop them.
5. When the water boils, reduce the heat so it bubbles steadily. Pinch off
a piece of the dough and boil it to make sure it will hold its shape. If
not, stir a bit more flour into the dough until it does.
6. Start dropping rounded tablespoons of the dough into the boiling water
(you’ll likely want to cook these in 2 batches to avoid overcrowding
the pot).
7. The dumplings will sink at first, then rise to the surface. A minute or 2
after they rise to the surface, scoop them out with a slotted spoon and
transfer them to a platter. Repeat with the second batch.
8. Add the spinach to the skillet with the brown butter and sprinkle with
salt and pepper. Turn the heat to medium and toss to warm the spinach

through, adding a splash of cooking liquid if you want to make it
saucier.
9. Spoon the butter and spinach over the dumplings, sprinkle the
remaining ¼ cup Parmesan over the top, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Ricotta Dumplings with Spinach and Sage Brown Butter
Once the butter turns light brown, add about 10 sage leaves, let them sizzle
for a minute, then turn off the heat and proceed.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of blanching the spinach in the boiling water in Step 4, chop the raw
spinach leaves and add them to the butter once it turns light brown. Cook
just until the spinach wilts, then turn off the heat and proceed.
SIDES
Tomato Salad
Fennel Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cold Peanut Noodles with Whatever
You Have
The “whatever you have” part of this recipe could be any number
of ingredients hanging around in your fridge—cooked meat,
chicken, shrimp, or vegetables, cubes of tofu, or any veggies that
you’d eat raw. As long as what you use goes well with peanut
butter, these noodles will be a perfect backdrop.

Ingredients
Salt
Stir-In Ingredients: 8 ounces to 1 pound cooked meat, fish, or tofu or
any cooked or raw vegetables
½ cup peanut butter
1 tablespoon sesame oil
1 tablespoon honey
3 tablespoons soy sauce
1 tablespoon rice vinegar
Dash of chile oil or hot sauce
Pepper
½ inch fresh ginger
12 ounces udon or soba noodles
3 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
Gather your stir-in ingredients from the fridge and chop or slice as
needed.
2. Combine ½ cup peanut butter, 1 tablespoon sesame oil, 1 tablespoon
honey, 3 tablespoons soy sauce, 1 tablespoon rice vinegar, a dash of
chile oil or hot sauce, and a sprinkle of pepper in a large bowl.
Peel and mince ½ inch fresh ginger; add it to the bowl.
3. Whisk, thinning the sauce with hot water until it has the consistency of
heavy cream. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
4. When the water boils, add the noodles and stir occasionally. Start
tasting after 3 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. When the noodles are tender but not mushy, drain them, rinse them
under cold water until completely cool, then drain again.
6. Add the noodles to the bowl with the sauce, along with whatever
you’re stirring in and the scallions. Toss, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Cold Sesame Noodles with Whatever You Have
Use tahini instead of the peanut butter.
Cold Cashew Noodles with Whatever You Have

Use cashew butter—your own (see DIY Nut Butter) or store-bought—
instead of the peanut butter.
NOTES
ASIAN NOODLE DISHES WITH PASTA
Of course, the tastiest Asian noodle dishes are made with noodles like udon
or soba, but there’s certainly nothing about the taste of pasta that excludes it
from being used with Asian ingredients. So, if you’re craving soy, sesame,
coconut, or ginger but don’t have any Asian noodles, just use whatever you
have on hand. Linguine is often a good option, as is any type of egg noodle.
SIDES
Ginger-Orange Bean Sprouts
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin
Avocado with Lemon and Salt

INGREDIENT

Asian Noodles
I’ve been cooking noodles for a long time, but I still
get excited at Asian markets—or in the ever-
improving Asian food aisles in supermarkets—when
I see just how wide the variety is. You could cook
Asian noodles for a week or longer and not use the
same one twice. Some are similar in taste and
cooking technique to Italian pasta; others are
strikingly different. It doesn’t really matter which
types of Asian noodles you choose to stock in your
pantry, but here is a rundown of those you’re likely to
encounter, including both the ones that I call for here
and others that make good substitutes.
Noodle
Description

CHINESE EGG
NOODLES
These are the noodles used in lo mein and
many other Chinese noodle dishes, and,
like fresh Italian pasta, they’re made with
wheat flour and eggs and come both fresh
and dried. They are long, thin, and golden
in color; the width of the noodle can vary.
The fresh variety cooks in about 3
minutes, the dried in roughly 5. If you’re
boiling these before stir-frying (as in Stir-
Fried Noodles with Beef and Celery),
you’ll want to undercook them slightly to
account for the extra time in the skillet.
RAMEN AND SAIMIN
Otherwise knows as the crinkly bricks of
noodles that come in the instant ramen
packages—although you can also find
them fresh if you go out of your way. Fun
fact: The ones in the instant ramen
packages are usually deep fried to remove
moisture before they are dried and
packaged. Follow the package directions
for cooking or soaking time.

UDON NOODLES
Japanese wheat noodles, which can be
round, square, or flat and come in a wide
range of thicknesses and lengths. Udon
noodles have a wonderful chew if you
don’t overcook them; they’re often served
in soups, but you can also stir-fry them or
serve them cold. They come both fresh
and dried. Cook the same way you would
both fresh and dried pasta.
SOBA NOODLES
Japanese noodles made from a
combination of buckwheat and wheat
flour. The buckwheat gives them a
uniquely nutty flavor and a grayish brown
color—they’re actually quite beautiful.
They’re long, thin, and flat, and—
although you can find them fresh—almost
always dried. Because of the buckwheat
flour, they take a little longer to cook than
other dried noodles, 5 to 7 minutes. You
can find soba noodles that are pure
buckwheat (and thus gluten-free). If you
use those, cook them carefully according
to the directions; they are more fragile
than the type that contains wheat.

RICE NOODLES
The thicker versions are called rice sticks,
while the wispy thin ones are called rice
vermicelli. Typically used in Southeast
Asian cooking, they’re made with rice
flour and are dried, white, and slightly
translucent. They are a revelation for fast
cooks because you only need to soak them
in hot or boiling water until softened
before eating—it could take anywhere
from 5 to 30 minutes, depending on the
thickness. (To speed things up even more,
you can boil them as you would Italian
pasta until tender, which takes only a few
minutes.) If you’re adding them to soup
(as in Noodles, Shrimp, and Sweet
Potatoes in Curry Broth), you don’t need
to presoak them. These are a favorite with
gluten-free cooks.

GLASS NOODLES
Also know as bean threads, cellophane
noodles, mung bean noodles, and spring
rain noodles, these are long, thin,
translucent noodles made from mung bean
starch. Like rice noodles, you only need to
soak them in hot or boiling water until
tender —somewhere between 5 and 15
minutes— but you can also boil them.
And like rice noodles, they do not contain
wheat. They tend to be quite long, so use
kitchen scissors to cut them into smaller
pieces once they’re cooked.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Noodles with Snow Peas and Chile
Oil
Warning: Don’t cook this recipe unless you’re prepared never to
buy an overpriced bottle of chile oil in the store again. Great chile
oil is stunningly easy to make at home—it’s not much more than
chiles simmered in oil. Dried chiles give you more of a toasted
flavor, while fresh chiles produce a brighter-tasting oil. Either
version plays very well here.

Ingredients
Salt
¼ cup vegetable oil
5 dried red chiles or 3 fresh hot chiles (like Thai or serrano)
4 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
12 ounces soba or udon noodles
12 ounces snow peas
Sesame seeds for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put ¼ cup vegetable oil in a small saucepan over low heat.
If you’re using dried chiles, leave them whole; if you’re using fresh,
slice them thinly. Add them to the saucepan.
Crush 4 garlic cloves and slice 1 inch fresh ginger (don’t bother to peel
either). Add them to the saucepan.
3. Adjust the heat so that the oil bubbles ever so slightly, turning it down
if anything starts to smell too toasted; let the flavors infuse the oil
while you cook the noodles and snow peas.
4. When the water boils, add the noodles and stir occasionally. Start
tasting after 3 minutes.
5. When the noodles are almost tender, add the snow peas to the pot.
Continue cooking until the noodles are tender but not mushy and the
snow peas are softened but still crisp.
6. Drain the noodles and snow peas, rinse them under cold water until
they’re room temperature, then drain again.
7. Return the noodles and snow peas to the pot. Pour the oil into the pot
through a strainer (discarding the solids). Toss, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and divide among 4 bowls. Garnish with the sesame seeds
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Noodles with Spinach and Chile Oil
Substitute 1 pound chopped spinach for the snow peas.

Noodles with Crisp Pork, Chile Oil, and Snow Peas
Start by cooking 12 ounces ground pork in a medium skillet until browned,
6 to 8 minutes. Then build the chile oil right in that skillet, leaving the pork
and any rendered fat to flavor the oil. Since you won’t be straining the oil
before tossing it with the noodles, mince the chiles and peel and mince the
garlic and ginger before adding them.
Noodles with Tofu, Chile Oil, and Edamame
Put a tablespoon of oil in a medium skillet. Add 12 ounces crumbled extra-
firm tofu and cook until browned, 5 to 10 minutes. Then build the chile oil
right in that skillet, leaving the tofu in the skillet to soak up the oil. Since
you won’t be straining the oil before tossing it with the noodles, mince the
chiles and peel and mince the garlic and ginger before adding them.
Substitute 3 cups frozen edamame for the snow peas. Add them to the pot
with the noodles to take the chill off.
NOTES
MAKING CHILE OIL
Once you realize how delicious and easy homemade chile oil is, you’ll want
to have some on hand at all times. It’s as useful a condiment as soy sauce or
sesame oil, and I use it in all the same ways: drizzling it on noodles and
rice, simply cooked vegetables, shrimp, and tofu and stirring it into all sorts
of Asian-style sauces (like peanut sauce) to give them a kick. Even though
it’s made with neutral oil, you want to make sure not to use chile oil to stir-
fry other ingredients, since the bits of aromatics that have infused it will
burn over high heat. I recommend making chile oil in batches that you feel
confident using up in a week or 2 (I usually shoot for about ½ cup). You can
store it comfortably in a jar in the fridge for about that long, but after that it
may begin to go bad. Luckily, whipping up a new batch every few weeks
could hardly be easier.

SIDES
Soy Slaw
Scallion-Miso Bean Sprouts
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Udon with Teriyaki Tofu
Teriyaki is a consummate crowd-pleaser and a snap to make from
scratch. And tofu loves the teriyaki treatment. It soaks up the
sauce’s flavor like a sponge and emerges with a wonderful syrupy
coating that’s got the perfect balance of sweet and savory flavors.

Ingredients
Salt
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 brick firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces)
2 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
½ cup soy sauce
½ cup mirin or ¼ cup honey mixed with ¼ cup water
12 ounces udon noodles
4 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet or large pot over
medium-high heat.
Pat the tofu dry and cut it into ½-inch cubes.
3. When the oil is hot, add the tofu to the skillet and cook, stirring or
shaking the pan occasionally until the tofu is lightly browned, 5 or 6
minutes.
Peel 2 garlic cloves and 1 inch fresh ginger; mince them together.
4. When the tofu is lightly browned, carefully add ½ cup soy sauce, ½
cup mirin (or ¼ cup honey mixed with ¼ cup water), and the garlic
and ginger to the skillet. Bring the mixture to a boil, then adjust the
heat so that it bubbles gently.
5. When the water boils, add the noodles and stir occasionally. Start
tasting after 3 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
6. When the noodles are tender but not mushy, drain them and add them
to the skillet. Toss to coat with the sauce, being careful not to break up
the tofu too much if you can help it. Garnish with the scallions and
serve.
VARIATIONS
Udon with Teriyaki Beef
Substitute 12 ounces boneless beef sirloin or rib-eye, thinly sliced, for the
tofu. Sauté it in the skillet until it just loses its red color, then build in the

teriyaki sauce as directed.
Udon with Teriyaki Chicken
Substitute 12 ounces boneless, skinless chicken thighs or breasts, thinly
sliced, for the tofu. Sauté it in the skillet until it just loses its pink color,
then build in the teriyaki sauce as directed.
Udon with Teriyaki Pork
Use 12 ounces thinly sliced pork shoulder instead of the tofu. Sauté it in the
skillet until it just loses its pink color, then build in the teriyaki sauce as
directed.
NOTES
SOY SAUCE
Soy sauce, which has been around for thousands of years, is made by
fermenting soybeans, and usually wheat, with salt and bacteria. The vast
majority of real soy sauces (as opposed to salt, water, and food coloring;
such “soy” sauces are to be avoided) are Japanese, and mostly “dark”;
“light” soy sauce is somewhat saltier. (“Low sodium” soy sauce has almost
half of its salt removed after brewing and should not be confused with
“light.”) Tamari is a special variety with a stronger flavor, usually made
from 100 percent soy. (If you’re incredibly sensitive to gluten, this is the
stuff you want.) Chinese soy sauces (less common) can also either be
“light” (salty and thin) or “dark” (sweet and viscous). Anything but the
viscous kinds will do just fine in these recipes.
SIDES
Green Salad with Sesame-Soy Dressing
Soy Slaw
Ginger-Orange Bean Sprouts

Stir-Fried Bok Choy
Scallion-Miso Bean Sprouts
Simmered Squash

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Noodles, Shrimp, and Sweet Potatoes
in Curry Broth
This homey Malaysian one-pot meal is somewhere between a
regular noodle dish and a soup. You start by building a fragrant
broth with aromatics and spices; thin slices of sweet potato and rice
noodles thicken the broth with their starch, while lime at the end
brightens it up.

Ingredients
One 15-ounce can coconut milk
1 tablespoon curry powder
4 whole star anise
2 bay leaves
Salt
2 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
1 pound sweet potatoes
1 lime
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
4 ounces dried rice vermicelli noodles
3 tablespoons fish sauce
12 ounces peeled shrimp

Prep | Cook
1. Put 4 cups water in a large skillet or large pot over high heat. Add the
coconut milk, 1 tablespoon curry powder, 4 whole star anise, 2 bay
leaves, and a generous pinch of salt.
Peel 2 garlic cloves and 1 inch fresh ginger. Trim the chile and seed it
if you’d like to reduce the heat. Mince them all together and add
them to the pot.
Peel the sweet potatoes, halve them lengthwise, and cut them into half-
moons ⅛ to ¼ inch thick. Add them to the pot.
2. Bring the mixture to a boil, reduce the heat slightly to let the mixture
simmer, and cook until the sweet potatoes are just about tender, 6 to 8
minutes.
Halve the lime.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
3. When the sweet potatoes are tender, add the rice noodles and stir.
Squeeze in the lime juice, add 3 tablespoons fish sauce, and stir in the
shrimp. Cook until the shrimp turns pink and cooks through, 2 or 3
minutes.
4. Fish out the star anise and bay leaves. Taste and adjust the seasoning,
divide among 4 bowls, garnish with the cilantro, and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Noodles, Chicken, and Sweet Potatoes in Curry Broth

Substitute 12 ounces boneless, skinless chicken thighs for the shrimp. Chop
the chicken into ½-inch pieces and add to the pot along with the noodles in
Step 3.
Noodles, Shrimp, and Sweet Potatoes in Lemongrass Broth
Omit the bay leaves. Substitute two 3-inch pieces lemongrass for the curry
powder and 2 or 3 fresh basil stems for the star anise. Remove the
lemongrass and basil stems before serving. Garnish with basil leaves.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder
EVEN FASTER
If you have a mandoline, use it to slice the potatoes very thinly. Not only
does it make for faster slicing, but they’ll take just a couple of minutes to
become tender.
ONE-POT NOODLES
There’s no rule saying you have to cook noodles in water by themselves.
Cooking them with other ingredients lets the noodles absorb the flavor of
the sauce or broth as they cook and, more important, I think, allows the
starch that’s released by the noodles to thicken the cooking liquid. The
result is a wonderfully fortified sauce or broth that makes for a very
comforting one-dish meal.
SIDES
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt
Edamame Succotash
Sesame-Soy Black Beans

Tender Vegetables

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cool Noodles with Chicken and
Cilantro-Scallion Pesto
We’re long past the time when pesto meant only basil. Alternative
versions abound, and many are wonderful. This loose interpretation
uses cilantro, ginger, and quickly blanched scallions. Tossing the
pesto with the noodles a bit before serving allows the flavors to
develop and is a good use of the time it takes to cook the chicken.

Ingredients
Salt
½ inch fresh ginger
1 bunch fresh cilantro
1 bunch scallions
⅓ cup plus 2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 tablespoon sesame oil
Pepper
12 ounces udon or fresh Chinese egg noodles
4 chicken cutlets (about 12 ounces)

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it. Also bring a small
saucepan of water to a boil.
2. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Peel and roughly chop ½ inch fresh ginger; put it in a food processor.
Cut off about 1 cup cilantro. Add it to the food processor.
Trim and roughly chop the scallions.
3. When the saucepan of water boils, add the scallions and cook for 1
minute. Drain and rinse under cold water until cool; add them to the
food processor.
4. Add ⅓ cup vegetable oil and 1 tablespoon sesame oil to the food
processor along with a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Process, scraping
down the sides and thinning the mixture with a splash of water if
necessary, until it becomes a thick, smooth sauce. Transfer half of the
sauce to a large bowl.
5. When the stockpot of water boils, add the noodles and stir
occasionally. Start tasting after 3 minutes.
Drizzle the chicken with 2 tablespoons vegetable oil and sprinkle with
salt and pepper.
6. When the noodles are tender but not mushy, drain them, rinse them
under cold water until completely cool, then drain again. Add the
noodles to the bowl with the sauce and toss.
7. When the grill or broiler is hot, cook the chicken, turning once, until
lightly browned on both sides and just cooked through, 2 to 5 minutes

per side.
8. While the chicken cooks, divide the noodles among 4 bowls.
9. When the chicken is cooked through, transfer it to a cutting board and
slice it. Lay the chicken on top of the noodles, top with the remaining
sauce, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Cool Noodles with Beef and Spicy Cilantro-Scallion Pesto
Add 1 fresh hot green chile, chopped, to the food processor along with the
ginger. Substitute 12 ounces skirt or flank steak for the chicken. Grill or
broil it until a bit pinker inside than you like it, 2 to 5 minutes per side. Let
it rest for 5 minutes before slicing.
Cool Noodles with Chicken and Peanut-Cilantro-Scallion Pesto
Along with the cilantro, add ¼ cup peanut butter to the food processor.
Since it’s thick, you’ll likely need a little extra water to thin out the pesto.
SIDES
Soy Slaw
Ginger-Orange Bean Sprouts
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Ginger and Soy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Singapore-Style Noodles with
Chicken, Peppers, and Basil
Since rice vermicelli noodles cook so quickly, there’s time for an
initial soak to get them almost tender and a final stir-fry to finish
them off and coat them with sauce. Inspired by curried noodles
from Singapore, this dish is bursting with vibrant flavors.

Ingredients
Salt
6 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (1 pound)
2 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
2 red bell peppers
4 ounces dried rice vermicelli noodles
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 tablespoon curry powder
1 teaspoon sugar
1 tablespoon soy sauce, or more to taste
1 tablespoon fish sauce, or more to taste
1 bunch fresh basil

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil and salt it.
Cut the chicken into ½-inch chunks.
Peel 2 garlic cloves and 1 inch fresh ginger; mince them together.
Core, seed, and slice the bell peppers.
2. When the water comes to a boil, add the noodles, stir once or twice,
turn off the heat, and let them steep until they’re not quite fully tender,
3 to 5 minutes.
3. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
4. When the oil is hot, add the garlic and ginger to the skillet and sauté
until fragrant, 1 or 2 minutes. Add the chicken and cook, undisturbed,
until the pieces brown and release easily, 2 or 3 minutes. Then cook,
stirring occasionally until the meat is no longer pink, 2 or 3 minutes.
5. When the noodles are done, drain well, reserving some of the soaking
liquid and shaking off as much excess water as you can.
6. Stir 1 tablespoon curry powder and 1 teaspoon sugar into the skillet.
Cook until the curry powder is fragrant, about a minute.
7. Add 1 tablespoon soy sauce, 1 tablespoon fish sauce, and the red
peppers and stir to combine.
Strip about ½ cup basil leaves from the stems.
8. When the peppers begin to soften and the chicken is cooked through,
add the noodles and a splash of the reserved soaking liquid. Cook,

tossing with tongs, until the noodles are tender and most of the liquid
evaporates.
9. Taste and adjust the seasoning, adding more fish sauce or soy sauce if
desired. Stir in the basil and serve.
VARIATIONS
Singapore-Style Noodles with Pork, Peppers, and Cilantro
Substitute 1 pound boneless pork shoulder, thinly sliced, for the chicken
and cilantro for the basil.
Singapore-Style Noodles with Beef, Onions, and Mint
Use 1 pound boneless beef sirloin or rib-eye, thinly sliced, instead of
chicken, 1 large red onion instead of bell peppers, and mint in place of
basil.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you prefer a thicker noodle, use rice sticks or wide rice noodles instead of
rice vermicelli. Cook them in a stockpot of boiling water until almost tender
(start tasting after 3 minutes). Proceed as directed.
SIDES
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin
Avocado with Lemon and Salt
Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Noodles with Beef and
Celery
Conventional wisdom for cooking stir-fries says you should prep
all of your ingredients first, because once you start cooking, it all
goes lightning-quick. That’s true if you’re using a lot of different
ingredients (and have a super-powerful stove), but if you narrow
them down to a key few—as in this lo-mein-style dish—you can
prep as you go without having to sweat it.

Ingredients
Salt
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
12 ounces boneless beef sirloin or rib-eye
1 medium onion
3 celery stalks, with any leaves
1 lemon
2 tablespoons soy sauce
12 ounces fresh or dried Chinese egg noodles

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet or large pot over
medium-high heat.
Slice the beef as thinly as you can.
3. When the oil is very hot, add the beef and sprinkle with salt. Cook,
stirring once or twice, until it loses its pink color, 3 or 4 minutes.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
Trim and slice the celery; chop and save the leaves for garnish.
4. When the beef loses its pink color, remove it from the skillet. Add the
onion and celery and sprinkle with salt. Cook, stirring occasionally
until the onion begins to brown and the celery is just tender (but still
has some crunch), 3 to 5 minutes.
Halve the lemon.
5. When the vegetables are done, return the beef to the skillet. Squeeze in
the lemon juice and add 2 tablespoons soy sauce. Cook for 30 seconds
to a minute, then turn off the heat.
6. When the water boils, add the noodles and stir occasionally. Start
tasting after 3 minutes.
7. When the noodles are tender but not mushy, drain them, reserving
some of the cooking water. Add the noodles to the skillet along with a
small splash of cooking water and turn the heat to medium-high.
8. Add the celery leaves and cook, tossing with tongs, until the noodles
are coated with sauce. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve

immediately.
VARIATIONS
Stir-Fried Noodles with Beef and Bean Sprouts
Substitute 8 ounces bean sprouts for the celery. To keep them nice and
crunchy, instead of cooking them along with the onion, add them to the
skillet when you return the beef in Step 5.
Stir-Fried Noodles with Tofu and Celery
Use a brick of firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces) instead of the beef. Cut the tofu
into ½-inch cubes and cook it in the skillet until it’s lightly browned, 5 or 6
minutes. Remove it from the skillet and proceed as directed.
SIDES
Green Salad with Sesame-Soy Dressing
Soy Slaw
Steamed Tender Vegetables

Rice and Grains
RICE
Rice, Beans, and Broccoli
Rice with Cabbage, Scrambled Eggs, and Scallions
Creamy Chinese Rice with Clams
Fast Jook with Chicken and Snow Peas
Hoppin’ John with Collards
Chipotle Rice and Corn with Seared Beef
Rice Bowl with Sausage
Three-Stir Mushroom Risotto
Curried Lentils and Rice with Fried Onions
Fast Thai Sticky Rice with Meaty Vegetable Sauce
Rice and Smoked Salmon Cakes with Cucumber Salsa
Shrimp and Tomato Paella
Jambalaya des Herbes with Shrimp
Rice and Wings

GRAINS
Quinoa Pilaf with Chickpeas and Dried Fruit
Smoky Bulgur with Eggplant, Dried Tomatoes, and Feta
Quinoa Puttanesca with Fresh Mozzarella
Couscous Gratin with Leeks and Gruyère
Masa and Rajas
Farro with White Beans and Tuna
Warm Tabbouleh with Mussels
Shrimp over Grits
Couscous Helper
Polenta with Sausage and Mushrooms
Pozole and Pork Chops
Couscous Paella with Chicken and Zucchini
Skillet Shepherd’s Pie with Quinoa Crust

Rice and Grains
Rice and other grains are the human race’s main
source of calories; they have been staples since the
beginning of agriculture. But I’m guessing none of
that crosses your mind when you’re staring into your
pantry, looking for something to get on the table
quickly.
If it did, you might consider the tremendous
variety of grain dishes, many substantial and many
quite quick. A pot of rice—which could be the most
loved food on the planet—takes maybe 15
unattended minutes to cook and can be taken in
infinite directions; bulgur or couscous takes even less
time.
Some rices and grains take too long to cook to
fall within the scope of this book, so I call for only
varieties that you can cook in 45 minutes or less.
That said, there’s certainly no need to walk down the

dark path toward products like “instant rice” or other
overly processed convenience foods.
A word on washing: I wash all my grains, organic
or not, in several changes of water before cooking
them. You never know what kind of residue may be
on them, and washing does help.
Take a look at the impressive variety of stir-ins,
season-withs, and scatter-on-tops that transform plain
grains into satisfying and often stunning main dishes.

Chapter Highlights
Rice and Grains 101  Notes on the different kinds of rices and grains that
you might want to incorporate into your rotation. Rice and Grains.
Brown Rice for White  Want to use brown rice? Here’s how. Substituting
Brown Rice for White.
Cooking Grains  A master recipe for cooking all different kinds of grains.
Rice and Other Grains, Fast and Slow.
Pilaf Aplenty  Pilaf—a grain dish in which aromatic ingredients are
simmered along with the grain—is one of the most useful dishes in the
world. Recipe-Free Pilaf.
Almost Fried Rice  Classic flavors, fast. Rice with Cabbage, Scrambled
Eggs, and Scallions.
Lazy Man’s Risotto  You might think risotto requires constant stirring and
unwavering attention; it doesn’t. Three-Stir Mushroom Risotto.
Paella, Easier than You Might Think  Paella is not a huge production,
but a simple (and relatively fast) baked rice dish. Shrimp and Tomato
Paella; Couscous Paella with Chicken and Zucchini.
Overcooking Rice  It’s not something you want to do all the time, but
sometimes overcooking rice—until the kernels burst and release starch—
has its advantages. Fast Thai Sticky Rice with Meaty Vegetable Sauce, Rice
and Smoked Salmon Cakes with Cucumber Salsa, Fast Jook with Chicken
and Snow Peas, Creamy Chinese Rice with Clams.

A Sticky Shortcut  A shortcut that gets you firm, chewy sticky rice in no
time. Fast Thai Sticky Rice with Meaty Vegetable Sauce.
Rice Cakes  The fastest way to turn rice into cakes. Rice Cakes.
Grain Casseroles  Though we may not think of them as such, grains are
perfect for casseroles. Quinoa Puttanesca with Fresh Mozzarella, Couscous
Gratin with Leeks and Gruyère, Skillet Shepherd’s Pie with Quinoa Crust.
Crunchy Grains Aren’t Just for Cereal  Crisp grains add wonderful
texture to all sorts of dishes. Crisp Grains.
Deconstructed Tamales  Tamale flavor without much of the work. Masa
and Rajas.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Rice, Beans, and Broccoli
An incredibly hearty one-pot meal. Here I use white beans, which
begin to break down and get creamy as the rice cooks. If you want
your beans more intact, cook the rice first, then toss the beans in at
the end, just long enough to warm them.

Ingredients
2 cups any cooked or canned white beans (one 15-ounce can)
1½ cups long-grain white rice
Salt
Water or stock (2½ to 3 cups)
2 garlic cloves
1 medium head broccoli (1 to 1½ pounds)
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)
1 large bunch fresh basil (2 cups leaves)
2 tablespoons olive oil or butter
Pepper

Prep | Cook
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
1. Put the beans and 1½ cups rice in a large pot or deep skillet; add a big
pinch of salt and water or stock to cover by about an inch. Bring to a
boil.
Peel and thinly slice 2 garlic cloves; add them to the pot.
2. When the liquid boils, adjust the heat so it bubbles steadily but not
vigorously; cover. Cook, undisturbed, until the rice is beginning to get
tender but is still too hard to eat, 5 to 7 minutes.
Trim the broccoli and separate into florets; slice any thick stems.
Grate ½ cup Parmesan.
Strip about 2 cups basil leaves from the stems. Roughly shred the
leaves with your hands.
3. When the rice is beginning to get tender, stir in the broccoli, adding
more liquid if necessary. Cover the pot and cook, undisturbed, until the
rice and broccoli are tender, 5 to 7 minutes more. Tip the pot; if any
liquid remains, cover and keep cooking until the rice is dry, checking
every minute or 2.
4. Stir in 2 tablespoons olive oil or butter, the Parmesan, basil, and some
pepper. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Curried Rice, Beans, and Hearty Greens
Use chickpeas instead of white beans. Substitute one 15-ounce can coconut
milk for 1½ cups of the water. Add 1 inch fresh ginger, minced, 1 fresh hot

green chile, minced, and 1 tablespoon curry powder to the pot along with
the garlic. Substitute 1 bunch kale or collards, chopped, for the broccoli.
Rice, Beans, and Broccoli with Bacon or Prosciutto
Before you add the rice and beans to the saucepan, cook 4 ounces chopped
bacon or prosciutto in a little olive oil until crisp. You can either leave it in
to cook with the rice and beans or, to keep it crisp, remove it, then add it
back right before serving.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
Beef Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Peel off the broccoli stem’s tough skin before chopping.
SUBSTITUTING BROWN RICE FOR WHITE
Since brown rice takes a long time to cook, I don’t call for it in the main
recipes in this book, but you can easily substitute it: Bring a pot of salted
water to a boil, then stir in the same quantity of brown rice as is called for
in the recipe. Adjust the heat so the water bubbles steadily but not too
vigorously. Cook, undisturbed, for 10 to 15 minutes, then drain it. Now it’s
ready to use in any recipe that calls for white rice; you can parcook the rice
up to an hour before you use it. And once it’s finished cooking, you can
refrigerate it for a few days. Microwave it to reheat, adding a little water if
it seems dry.

SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Cucumber Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Carrot Salad with Olives and Rosemary

INGREDIENT

Rice and Grains
There are thousands of varieties of rice and grains.
This chart describes the handful that can be cooked
quickly—the ones you’ll use in this chapter—as well
as a few more that are useful to know about. For a
master recipe and cooking times for everything here,
see Easy Cooked Grains.
Rice or Grain
Description
SOUTHERN LONG-
GRAIN RICE
The most common long-grain rice in the
world, grown widely in the United States.
Any rice at the supermarket simply
labeled long-grain is likely to be this.
BASMATI RICE
Originally from India, basmati has a
supremely nutty aroma and fantastic
flavor, and the grains separate from each
other beautifully when cooked. The
various American aromatic varieties, like
Texmati, Kasmati, Calmati, and Jasmati,
are not as flavorful as the original but are
still pretty good.
JASMINE RICE
Usually associated with Thailand, this has
a milder flavor than basmati, a slightly
stickier texture, and a distinctive aroma.

LONG-GRAIN STICKY
RICES
Southeast Asian, mostly, where the grains
are formed into balls or squares and eaten
like bread; they’re aromatic, sweet, and
uniquely textured. Look for variety names
like Thai, sticky jasmine, glutinous, and
sweet. (You’ll also find short-grain sticky
rices, which are plump and slightly sweet
and often used in desserts.)
COMMON SHORT-
AND MEDIUM-GRAIN
RICES
Most commonly found in Southeast Asia
and Japan (where they are used for sushi),
these are glossy, sticky, and firm, with a
neutral flavor. I like to keep both white
and brown versions on hand; both are a
good substitute for more expensive
varieties like Arborio and Valencia.
RISOTTO RICES
Arborio is the most common, but other
versions include Carnaroli and Vialone
Nano. Their starchy outer layers absorb
liquid and give risotto its creamy texture,
while their centers remain firm and al
dente, as long they’re not overcooked.

COUSCOUS
Not a grain but rather tiny bits of pasta,
couscous comes in white (which takes 5 to
10 minutes to cook) and whole wheat (10
to 15). There’s also pearl or Israeli
couscous, which are larger, toasted pieces
that have more chew. Most cooks treat
couscous more like a grain than a pasta,
which is why it’s included here.
BULGUR
Wheat kernels that are steamed, hulled,
dried, and ground to fine, medium, and
coarse, sometimes identified by numbers:
#1 for fine and #3 or #4 for the coarsest. It
takes 10 to 20 minutes to become tender,
depending on the grind, and has a nutty,
mild flavor and a dry, fluffy texture.
ROLLED OATS
Oats flattened with giant rollers into the
flakes we all know. Avoid the quick-
cooking and instant varieties. Oats almost
always get a breakfast or sweet treatment,
though some adventurous cooks use them
in savory dishes.
QUINOA
Shaped like disks and about the size of
pinheads, quinoa has a distinctly grassy
and nutty flavor and an almost crunchy
texture when cooked (it takes about 20
minutes). The most common variety is
light tan in color, but you can also find it
in red and black.

PEARLED BARLEY
This is the kind of barley that’s sold
everywhere, as opposed to hulled barley,
which takes much longer to cook. Pearled
barley has been hulled, steamed, and
polished. It cooks in about 20 minutes and
has a creamy yet chewy texture.
CORNMEAL
Most commonly yellow or white (but
sometimes blue or red), cornmeal is dried
corn kernels that are ground to varying
degrees. The fine grind is best for baking,
while the medium grind is best for
polenta. It cooks in 20 to 30 minutes. Grits
and pozole are made from hominy, corn
kernels that have been dried and processed
with lime or lye.
CRACKED WHEAT
Often confused with bulgur, but instead of
being steamed, it’s completely raw, which
means it takes a little longer to cook—20
to 30 minutes. It has the same nutty flavor
as bulgur but is chewier and heartier.
MILLET
Purported to be one of the first grains used
by humans, millet has a mildly nutty,
almost cornlike flavor. It’s fluffy when
cooked and takes 20 to 30 minutes.
FARRO
A chewy ancient wheat-related grain that
has a nutty, wheaty flavor. Makes a
wonderful whole grain substitute in
risotto; takes 20 to 30 minutes to cook.

MASTER RECIPE

Rice and Other Grains, Fast and Slow
The happy truth about grains is that you can cook
almost every kind perfectly using the simple method
here. (The most notable exceptions are bulgur and
couscous, which get their own recipes—see Cooked
Bulgur and Couscous—and wild rice, which takes
quite a while to cook.)
The only significant variable is the timing: Some
grains—like couscous—will take as little as 10
minutes, while others, like wheat berries, could take
more than an hour. Cooking times are never quite
exact, so taste the grains every now and then and
trust your judgment; they should be tender enough to
eat but still have a little bite. This recipe makes 3 or 4
cups, but if you’re cooking a big batch—which I
recommend—see the final step for tips on storing.
And see the list that follows for a few ideas for
flavoring grains once they are cooked.
My method for cooking rice has become more
casual over the years. I no longer bother to measure
the liquid and the grains (usually a ratio of 2:1, liquid

to grains). Instead, I rinse the grains, put them in the
pot, cover them by about an inch of liquid, and boil
them, adding more liquid if the grains start drying out
before they finish. The results are just as good. You
can use the more traditional “boil, cover, simmer, let
rest” method if you prefer. You can also boil the
grains in abundant water as you would pasta and
drain them in a strainer.
Easy Cooked Grains
1
Wash the Grains
Put 1 cup of grains in a large bowl and rinse them in several changes of
water. Drain them.
2
Combine Grains and Water
Put the washed grains and a large pinch of salt in a small to medium
saucepan. Add water to cover by about an inch. Bring to a boil, then
adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles gently.
3
Cook Until Tender
Cook, stirring occasionally until the grain is tender, anywhere from 7 or
8 minutes to over an hour, depending on the type of grain. Like pasta,
the grain should retain a little bite when it’s done. Whole grains will
always have a certain amount of chew to them, but milled or cut grains
will become mushy if you cook them for too long, so taste frequently.
Ideally, by the time the grain is tender all of the liquid will have been

absorbed. If at any point the pot gets too dry before the grain is tender,
add more water. If any water remains when the grain is tender, drain it.
4
Serve or Store
If you’re serving the grain right away, toss it with olive oil or butter to
taste, with any of the ingredients from the following list or really
anything that you feel like. Or cover (toss with a little oil first if you
want to prevent sticking) and store in the refrigerator for up to 4 or 5
days or the freezer for up to a few months. Reheat with a little water or
oil.
Cooking Times for Rice and Other Grains
Long-Grain Rice: 10 to 15 minutes
Basmati Rice: 15 to 20 minutes
Jasmine Rice: 15 to 20 minutes
Long-Grain Sticky Rice: 20 to 25 minutes
Short- and Medium-Grain Rice: 25 to 30 minutes
Risotto Rice: 20 to 30 minutes
Couscous: 5 to 10 minutes
Bulgur: 10 to 25 minutes
Rolled Oats: 10 to 15 minutes
Quinoa: 15 to 20 minutes
Pearled Barley: 20 minutes
Cornmeal: 20 to 30 minutes
Cracked Wheat: 20 to 30 minutes
Millet: 20 to 30 minutes
Farro: 20 to 30 minutes
VARIATIONS
11 Ways to Flavor Cooked Grains

Toss any of the following, alone or in combination, with the cooked grains
along with olive oil or butter:
1. 1 tablespoon chopped fresh herbs
2. A few spoonfuls of simple Vinaigrette
3. Lots of pepper
4. ½ cup grated or crumbled cheese
5. 1 to 2 cups cooked beans, peas, or lentils
6. 1 to 1½ cups dried fruit
7. ½ cup chopped scallions
8. ½ cup tomato sauce or salsa
9. ½ to 1 teaspoon ground spices
10. ½ cup crumbled cooked bacon
11. ½ cup chopped nuts or dried fruit

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Rice with Cabbage, Scrambled Eggs,
and Scallions
Tender, slightly crisp stir-fried cabbage, scrambled eggs, and
crunchy sharp scallions are a stellar combination, and freshly made
rice gives this dish a fluffy quality that’s different from standard
fried rice; I like it a lot.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more if needed
1 tablespoon sesame seeds
1½ cups long-grain white rice
Salt
1 small head Napa or Savoy cabbage (1 pound)
4 eggs
4 scallions
Soy sauce for serving

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 tablespoon vegetable oil in a medium saucepan over medium
heat.
2. When the oil is hot, add 1 tablespoon sesame seeds, 1½ cups rice, and
a sprinkle of salt. Cook, stirring frequently until the rice is glossy and
starting to color slightly, 3 to 5 minutes.
3. Add 3 cups of water. Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so the
mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously. Cover and cook,
undisturbed, until small craters appear on the surface, 10 to 15
minutes.
4. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Trim, core, and quarter the cabbage. Cut each quarter crosswise into
thin ribbons.
5. Turn the heat up to medium-high. Add the cabbage to the skillet and
sprinkle with salt. Cook, stirring occasionally until the cabbage is
lightly browned and wilted (it should still have a little crunch), 6 to 8
minutes.
Crack the eggs into a bowl, sprinkle with salt, and beat them.
Trim and chop the scallions.
6. Move the cabbage to one side of the skillet and add a drizzle of oil to
the empty space if it looks dry. Add the eggs and cook, stirring
constantly until they’re scrambled and set, a minute or 2.
7. Toss the eggs and cabbage together in the skillet and turn off the heat.
8. When small craters appear on the surface of the rice, tip the pot to see
if any liquid remains. If so, cover and keep cooking until the rice is

dry, checking every minute or 2.
9. Add the cooked rice to the skillet with the cabbage and eggs. Add the
scallions and stir to combine. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve,
passing soy sauce at the table.
VARIATIONS
Rice with Bok Choy, Scrambled Eggs, and Scallions
Substitute bok choy, stems and leaves sliced crosswise, for the cabbage. If
you want the stems to be nice and crunchy, add them at the same time as the
leaves. Otherwise, add them by themselves first and cook for 2 or 3 minutes
before adding the leaves.
Rice with Tomatoes, Scrambled Eggs, and Basil
Use olive oil instead of vegetable and skip the sesame seeds. Substitute 1½
pounds ripe fresh tomatoes, chopped, for the cabbage. Cook the tomatoes
just until they start to release some of their juice but not so much that they
turn into sauce, 3 or 4 minutes. Then add the eggs and proceed as directed,
substituting ½ cup torn fresh basil for the scallions. Pass Parmesan cheese
instead of soy sauce.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
More Like Fried Rice
If you have 3 to 4 cups leftover refrigerated rice on hand, use that and start
at Step 4. Toast the sesame seeds in a dry pan and add them with the rice in
Step 9.
SIDES
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy

Daikon Salad with Fish Sauce and Peanuts

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Creamy Chinese Rice with Clams
Soft and creamy rice is the perfect plain foil for this quick and
intensely flavored stir-fry of clams, chile, and fermented Chinese
black beans (more on those in the Notes).

Ingredients
1½ cups short-grain white rice
Salt
¼ cup fermented black beans
½ cup rice wine
3 pounds littleneck or other hard-shell clams
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
2 garlic cloves
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
4 scallions
Sesame oil for serving

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1½ cups rice in a medium saucepan; add a big pinch of salt and
water to cover by about 1½ inches. Bring to a boil.
Put ¼ cup fermented black beans in a small dish with ½ cup rice wine.
2. When the water boils, adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily
but not vigorously. Cover and cook, stirring occasionally until the rice
is soft and slightly creamy and most of the liquid is absorbed, 15 to 20
minutes.
Scrub the clams.
3. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Peel 2 garlic cloves and trim the chile. Mince them together.
4. Turn the heat up to medium-high and add the garlic and chile to the
skillet. Cook, stirring until fragrant, 30 seconds to a minute.
5. Add the clams and ¼ cup water and cover the skillet. Cook until the
clams open, 5 to 10 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
6. When the clams open, uncover the skillet and stir in the fermented
black bean mixture. Cook, stirring to toss the clams in the sauce. Turn
off the heat.
7. When the rice is soft and slightly creamy, divide it among 4 plates or
shallow bowls. Top with the clams, garnish with the scallions, and
serve, passing sesame oil for drizzling at the table.
VARIATIONS

Creamy Rice with Chipotle Clams
Substitute 1 (or more) chipotle in adobo for the fermented black beans. No
need to soak; just chop it and stir it (with some of the adobo sauce) into the
skillet in Step 6. Skip the sesame oil.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Cook the rice normally: Cover with 1 inch of water, add the salt, bring to a
boil, then adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously.
Cook, undisturbed, until small craters appear on the surface of the rice, 10
to 15 minutes.
FERMENTED BLACK BEANS
Fermented black beans, made from black soybeans, are earthy and salty.
Even in small quantities, they add huge flavor to stir-fries and require only a
quick soak in liquid (something flavorful like rice wine or sherry is
traditional) before they’re ready to go. You can find them at any Chinese
market and even many supermarkets.
SIDES
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy
Soy Slaw
Carrot Salad with Soy Sauce and Scallions
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fast Jook with Chicken and Snow
Peas
Jook is a traditional Chinese porridge made by simmering rice for
hours until it breaks apart into a mass of silky starch. Since we
don’t have hours here, I’ve expedited the process, cooking the rice
in stock over high heat until thick and creamy. While that happens
you stir-fry some chicken and snow peas to top the rice at the end.

Ingredients
1½ cups short-grain white rice
4 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
Salt
1 pound boneless, skinless chicken thighs
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
2 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
12 ounces snow peas
Pepper
3 scallions
Soy sauce for serving

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1½ cups rice, 4 cups stock or water, and a pinch of salt in a
medium saucepan. Bring to a boil.
Cut the chicken into ½-inch chunks.
2. When the water boils, adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily
but not vigorously. Cook, stirring occasionally and adding more liquid
if necessary until the rice is very soft and its starch has thickened the
liquid to the consistency of porridge, about 15 minutes.
3. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
4. When the oil is hot, add the chicken to the skillet and cook,
undisturbed, until the pieces brown and release easily, 3 or 4 minutes.
Then cook, stirring occasionally until the meat is no longer pink, 2 or 3
more minutes.
Peel 2 garlic cloves and 1 inch fresh ginger; mince them together.
5. When the chicken is no longer pink, stir in the garlic and ginger and
cook until fragrant, about a minute.
6. Stir in the snow peas, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring
occasionally until they soften slightly (they should still be mostly
crunchy), 3 or 4 minutes. Turn off the heat.
Trim and chop the scallions.
7. When the rice reaches the consistency of porridge, divide it among 4
bowls. (If you feel the rice is too thick, stir in some water to thin it
out.) Top with the chicken and snow peas, garnish with the scallions,
and serve, passing soy sauce at the table.

VARIATIONS
Fast Jook with Beef and Bean Sprouts
Use beef stock to cook the rice. Swap beef sirloin, thinly sliced, for the
chicken, and 8 ounces bean sprouts for the snow peas. As soon as you stir in
the bean sprouts, turn off the heat
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
For extra-creamy jook, once the liquid boils, adjust the heat so that it
bubbles very gently. Cook, stirring occasionally and adding more liquid if
necessary until the rice almost completely breaks apart, at least an hour.
Brown Rice Jook with Chicken and Snow Peas
Substitute short-grain brown rice for white. It will take an extra 20 minutes
or so to reach the desired consistency.
SIDES
Soy Slaw
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Hoppin’ John with Collards
The best American rice and beans dish, boosted by the addition of
collards, which are not traditional but are hearty and delicious.

Ingredients
4 ounces bacon (preferably slab)
1 medium onion
3 garlic cloves
2 sprigs fresh thyme
1 small bunch collard greens (8 ounces)
4 cups cooked or canned black-eyed peas (two 15-ounce cans)
Red chile flakes to taste
Salt and pepper
1½ cups long-grain white rice

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3½ cups water in a large pot; bring to a boil.
Chop the bacon into pieces; add it to the pot.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; peel and mince 3 garlic cloves. Add
them to the pot.
Strip the leaves from 2 sprigs fresh thyme and add to the pot.
Trim the collards; slice the leaves in half along the stem, then
crosswise into thin ribbons; add them to the pot.
If you’re using canned black-eyed peas, rinse and drain them; add the
beans to the pot.
2. When the mixture boils, season with red chile flakes, salt, and pepper
to taste. Stir in 1½ cups rice and adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles
steadily but not vigorously. Cover and cook until the rice is tender and
the liquid is absorbed, 15 to 20 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Hoppin’ John, Portuguese Style
Substitute linguiça or smoked Spanish chorizo for the bacon, kale for the
collard greens, and chickpeas for the black-eyed peas.
Hoppin’ John with Green Beans and Ham
Instead of the bacon, use 4 ounces chopped ham. Substitute 1 pound green
beans for the collards, sliced into 1-inch pieces. If you want them crisp-
tender, wait to add them to the pot until the rice has cooked for 10 minutes.

Then put them on top and return the lid. Fluff with a fork just before
serving.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
EVEN FASTER
Cook the rice in a separate pot. Instead of simmering the bacon, collards,
and black-eyed peas, start by rendering some of the bacon fat in the pan,
then add the remaining ingredients as you finish prepping them. Cook until
the onions are soft and the collards are wilted, then stir the mixture into the
cooked rice at the end.
SIDES
Warm Flour Tortillas
Coleslaw
No-Mayo Slaw
Succotash

RECIPE-FREE

Pilaf
1
Pick a grain.
If you’re using rice, you’ll want a long-grain variety; basmati is ideal.
Bulgur, quinoa, farro, millet, and cracked wheat all make excellent
pilafs too. The cooking time for these alternatives will vary so check
them for tenderness occasionally as they cook.
2
Sauté something flavorful.
Put 2 or more tablespoons butter or oil in a large, deep skillet with a
lid over medium-high heat. Add chopped aromatic vegetables,
mushrooms, and/or raw ground or chopped meat. Cook until the
vegetables have slightly softened and the meat is browned.

3
Toast the grain.
Add 1½ cups rice or other grains and lower the heat to medium.
Cook, stirring frequently until the grains are glossy, coated with the
butter or oil, and barely beginning to brown, about 5 minutes. At this
point, add any spices, chopped nuts, or dried fruit.

4
Add liquid.
Add 2½ cups stock or water, bring to a boil, then turn the heat down
so it bubbles gently. At any point during cooking you can add other
ingredients—chopped vegetables or greens, cooked meat, fish, or
shellfish—timed so that they’re ready when the grain becomes tender.

5
Let the magic happen.
Cover and cook until the liquid is absorbed, 15 to 30 minutes,
depending on the grain, and holes form on top. If the rice sticks
before getting tender, add a little more water and adjust the heat.
When it’s ready turn the heat off; you can let pilaf sit for up to 10
minutes before serving.

6
Garnish, fluff, and serve.
Stir in any last-minute additions like chopped fresh herbs, citrus zest,
soy sauce, or more butter or oil. Toss gently with a fork to fluff the
grains, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chipotle Rice and Corn with Seared
Beef
Rice simmered with smoky, spicy chipotles in adobo and finished
with fresh corn and scallions turns into a southwestern pilaf. The
seared chili-rubbed steak served on top would be good on anything
but is especially welcome here.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
2 garlic cloves
1 chipotle chile (or more) in adobo
1½ cups long-grain white rice
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds skirt or flank steak
1 teaspoon chili powder
2 ears fresh corn
3 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a medium saucepan over medium-
high heat.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Chop 1 (or more) chipotle.
2. Add the garlic and chipotle (with some of its adobo sauce) to the pan.
Cook, stirring until the garlic is fragrant, about a minute.
3. Add 1½ cups rice, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring
occasionally until coated with the chipotle mixture and lightly toasted,
1 to 2 minutes.
4. Add water to cover by about an inch. Bring to a boil, then adjust the
heat so the mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously. Cover and
cook, undisturbed, until small craters appear on the surface, 10 to 15
minutes.
5. Put a large skillet over high heat. Pat the steak dry with a paper towel
and rub with 1 teaspoon chili powder and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Cut the steak in half if needed to fit in the skillet. When the skillet is
very hot, add 1 tablespoon vegetable oil and swirl it around.
6. Add the steak and cook, turning once, until browned on both sides but
still a bit pinker inside than you like it, 3 to 5 minutes per side.
Husk the corn and cut the kernels off the cob.
Trim and chop the scallions.
7. When the steak is done, transfer it to a cutting board. Carefully add ¼
cup water to the skillet and turn off the heat (it will release the
drippings and make a little sauce).

8. When small craters appear on the surface of the rice, tip the pot to see
if any liquid remains. If so, cover and keep cooking until the rice is
dry, checking every minute or 2.
9. Add the corn and scallions to the rice, fluff with a fork, taste, and
adjust the seasoning. Divide the rice among 4 plates.
10. Thinly slice the steak against the grain and lay it on top of the rice.
Spoon the pan sauce over the top of the steak and serve.
VARIATIONS
Chipotle Rice with Corn and Pinto Beans
Skip the steak and stir in 2 cups cooked pinto or other beans after you’ve
toasted the rice in Step 3. If you prefer the beans to remain intact, stir them
in along with the corn.
Tomato Rice with Corn and Seared Shrimp
Substitute 2 tablespoons tomato paste for the chipotle and 1 pound peeled
shrimp for the steak. Sauté the shrimp over medium-high heat, stirring
occasionally until they turn pink and cook through, 2 or 3 minutes.
Miso Rice with Snow Peas and Seared Chicken
Substitute 2 tablespoons miso paste for the chipotle and stir in 1 teaspoon
rice vinegar as the rice cooks. Use 1 pound chicken cutlets instead of steak.
Sprinkle with salt and pepper and sear for 2 or 3 minutes per side.
Substitute 1 cup sliced snow peas for the corn. Skip the pan sauce after
cooking the chicken. Instead, once the dish is plated, just drizzle on a little
soy sauce.
SIDES
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt

Warm Flour Tortillas
Jícama and Radish Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Rice Bowl with Sausage
In the Japanese tradition of chirashi, bowls of sushi rice have all
sorts of ingredient combinations scattered on top. This one is not at
all Japanese, although the flavors can go in any direction you like;
see the variations.

Ingredients
1½ cups short-grain white rice
Salt
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for drizzling
1 pound hot or sweet Italian sausage links
2 large fennel bulbs
Pepper
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup shaved)
Several sprigs fresh basil for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1½ cups rice in a medium saucepan; add a big pinch of salt and
water to cover by about an inch. Bring to a boil.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Cut the sausages into slices; add them to the skillet.
Trim and slice the fennel; add it to the skillet.
3. Sprinkle the sausage and fennel with salt and pepper and cook, stirring
occasionally until the sausage is browned and the fennel is golden, 10
to 15 minutes.
4. When the water boils, adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily
but not vigorously. Cover and cook, undisturbed, until small craters
appear on the surface, 10 to 15 minutes.
Shave 1 cup Parmesan cheese with a vegetable peeler.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop.
5. When small craters appear on the surface of the rice, tip the pot to see
if any liquid remains. If so, cover and keep cooking until the rice is
dry, checking every minute or 2.
6. Divide the rice among 4 bowls, and spoon the sausage and fennel over
the top. Garnish with the Parmesan and basil, and a drizzle of olive oil
if you like, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Rice Bowl with Chorizo and Pineapple
Substitute fresh Mexican chorizo for the Italian sausage and 2 medium red
onions for the fennel. When the chorizo and onions are a few minutes shy

of being done, stir in 1 cup chopped pineapple. Use queso fresco instead of
Parmesan and cilantro instead of basil.
Rice Bowl with Andouille
Use andouille or another spicy sausage instead of Italian sausage and 2
small red bell peppers and 1 cup corn kernels instead of fennel. Skip the
cheese and garnish with scallions instead of basil.
SIDES
Tomato Salad
Green Salad
No-Mayo Slaw
Sautéed Greens with Garlic

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Three-Stir Mushroom Risotto
While risotto does need to be stirred, it does not demand laborious
babysitting. Add the stock in three larger additions—as opposed to
many smaller ones—and stir the rice three times; the effort is
minimal. For even better results, warm your plates in the oven
while the risotto cooks. The rice will stay loose and creamy (as it
should), as opposed to firming up as you eat.

Ingredients
½ cup dried porcini mushrooms
1 cup hot water
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 medium onion
1½ cups Arborio or other short- or medium-grain white rice
Salt and pepper
½ cup dry white wine or water
3½ cups stock or water
8 ounces button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
Put ½ cup dried mushrooms in a bowl with 1 cup hot water to cover and
leave them to soak.
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet or large pot over medium
heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the butter is melted, add the onion and cook, stirring
occasionally until it softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
3. Add 1½ cups rice and cook, stirring occasionally until it is glossy and
coated with butter, 2 to 3 minutes.
4. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and add ½ cup dry white wine or water.
Stir and let the liquid bubble until nearly evaporated.
Remove the mushrooms from the soaking water, chop, and add them
to the rice.
5. Add ½ cup stock or water and the mushroom soaking liquid, being
careful to leave behind any sediment in the bowl. Let the rice cook,
undisturbed, until the liquid is almost completely evaporated, 5 to 8
minutes.
6. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a medium skillet over high heat.
Trim and chop the fresh mushrooms.
7. Add the fresh mushrooms to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally
until they soften and brown, 8 to 10 minutes. Remove the skillet from
the heat.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan.

8. When the stock is almost completely evaporated, add another 1½ cups
stock and stir vigorously. Again, let the rice cook undisturbed until the
liquid is almost completely evaporated, 5 to 8 minutes. Add the final
1½ cups stock and stir vigorously.
9. As the final addition of stock is absorbed, taste the rice; it should be
tender but still have a bit of crunch. Continue cooking until the liquid
is almost completely evaporated. Add the cooked fresh mushrooms
and stir.
10. Add the Parmesan and stir vigorously one more time. Taste and adjust
the seasoning and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Three-Stir Sausage Risotto
Skip the dried and fresh mushrooms. While the rice is cooking, sauté 8
ounces chopped or crumbled Italian sausage in olive oil until browned and
slightly crisp. Stir it into the rice in the final step.
Three-Stir Smoky Shrimp Risotto
Skip the dried and fresh mushrooms. Add 2 teaspoons smoked paprika to
the rice as it toasts in Step 3. As the final addition of stock bubbles away,
stir in 8 ounces peeled shrimp, chopped. In the time it takes to finish the
risotto, the shrimp will cook through.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
Beef Stock

SIDES
Green Salad
Tomato Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Curried Lentils and Rice with Fried
Onions
Lentils are the fastest legume to cook from scratch, but they still
take a little while. So, rather than building flavor in the pot before
adding the lentils, start them right away and add flavor as they
cook. Here a classic Indian tarka—spices toasted in butter—is key.

Ingredients
1 cup dried brown lentils
1 bay leaf
5 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water, plus more if needed
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 inch fresh ginger
2 tablespoons cumin seeds
1 teaspoon coriander
1 teaspoon turmeric
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 medium onions
1½ cups white basmati rice
Salt and pepper
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 cup brown lentils, a bay leaf, and 5 cups stock or water in a large
pot. Bring to a boil.
2. Put 4 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over medium heat.
Peel and mince 1 inch fresh ginger.
3. When the butter is melted, add the ginger, 2 tablespoons cumin seeds,
1 teaspoon coriander, and 1 teaspoon turmeric. Cook, stirring until the
ginger and spices are fragrant, a minute or 2. Add the mixture to the
lentils.
4. When the liquid boils, adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles gently but
steadily, partially cover, and cook for 20 minutes.
5. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in the skillet (no need to clean it) over
medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onions.
6. Add the onions to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally and
adjusting the heat if they start to burn, until they are deeply browned
and slightly crisp, 10 to 15 minutes.
7. After the lentils have simmered for 20 minutes (they shouldn’t be
tender yet, and there should still be about 3 cups liquid in the pot), stir
in 1½ cups rice and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cover and cook until
the lentils and rice are tender, 10 to 15 minutes, adding a splash of
stock or water of the pot gets too dry along the way.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
8. When the onions are dark brown and slightly crisp, sprinkle them with
salt and turn off the heat.

9. When the lentils and rice are tender, remove the bay leaf, stir in the
onions, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve, garnished with the
cilantro.
VARIATIONS
Smoky Lentils and Rice with Fried Onions
Use ¼ cup olive oil instead of the butter. Substitute 3 garlic cloves for the
ginger, 1 tablespoon smoked paprika for the cumin seeds, and 1 teaspoon
ground cumin for the coriander. Skip the turmeric. Garnish with parsley
instead of cilantro.
Curried Lentils and Rice with Fried Onions and Tomatoes
Stir in a cup or 2 of chopped fresh tomatoes when you add the cooked
onions in Step 9. For extra brightness, squeeze in the juice of a lime.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
SIDES
Cucumber Raita
Tomato Salad with Olive Oil and Yogurt
Fennel Salad with Olives

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Fast Thai Sticky Rice with Meaty
Vegetable Sauce
Thai sticky rice traditionally takes a while, but in this method you
boil the rice and then freeze it. The result is a wonderful canvas for
a Thai meat and vegetable sauce.

Ingredients
1½ cups short-grain white sushi rice or glutinous rice
Salt
1 large carrot
1 celery stalk
1 small onion
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 pound ground pork
Pepper
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
2 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
2 cups coconut milk
2 teaspoons fish sauce
Several sprigs fresh Thai basil or regular basil for garnish
1 lime

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1½ cups rice in a medium saucepan; add a big pinch of salt and 5
cups water. Bring to a boil.
Trim, peel, and chop the carrot.
Trim and chop the celery.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the water boils, continue to cook over high heat, stirring
frequently and adding more water if the pot gets too dry, until the rice
is soft and the starch has released into the water to form a thick,
risottolike mixture, 8 to 10 minutes.
Line a large plate or a rimmed baking sheet with plastic wrap.
3. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
4. When the oil is hot, add the ground pork, carrot, celery, onion, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the pork is
browned and the vegetables are soft, 5 to 10 minutes.
5. When the rice is done, pour it out onto the prepared plate and spread it
with the back of a spoon into an even ½-inch-thick layer. Put the plate
in the freezer until the rice is firm enough to cut, 10 to 15 minutes.
Trim the chile. Peel 2 garlic cloves and 1 inch fresh ginger. Mince
them all together and stir them into the skillet.
6. When the pork is browned and the vegetables are tender, stir in 2 cups
coconut milk and 2 teaspoons fish sauce. Bring to a boil and let the
liquid bubble away until it reduces into a thick sauce. Taste and adjust
the seasoning and turn off the heat.

Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop.
Cut the lime into wedges.
7. When the rice is firm, cut it into 4 or 6 equal pieces. Use the plastic
wrap to lift out each piece and divide the pieces among 4 or 6 plates or
shallow bowls. Spoon the sauce over the top. Garnish with the basil
and lime and serve.
VARIATIONS
Fast Thai Sticky Rice with Pork and Mustard Greens
Substitute 1 bunch mustard greens, chopped, for the carrot and celery.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Don’t bother freezing the rice. As soon as it’s tender, spoon it out onto 4
plates or shallow bowls. It will firm up a bit as it sits there. Then just top
with the sauce when it’s ready.
SIDES
Green Salad with Sesame-Soy Dressing
Ginger-Orange Bean Sprouts
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Rice and Smoked Salmon Cakes with
Cucumber Salsa
The key to this dish is overcooking the rice so it releases its starch.
That, along with an egg and a quick chill in the freezer, lets you
form the rice into cakes that will hold together enough to panfry
until golden and crisp.

Ingredients
1½ cups short-grain white rice
Salt
1 large cucumber
1 small red onion
1 bunch fresh dill
1 lemon
4 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
Pepper
6 ounces smoked salmon
2 eggs

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1½ cups rice in a medium saucepan; add a big pinch of salt and 5
cups of water to cover by about 2 inches. Bring to a boil.
2. When the water boils, continue to cook over high heat, stirring
frequently and adding more water if the pot gets too dry, until the rice
is soft and the starch has released into the water to form a thick,
risotto-like mixture, 15 to 20 minutes.
Peel the cucumber if necessary; cut it in half lengthwise and scoop out
the seeds with a spoon. Finely chop and put in a medium bowl.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the bowl.
Strip ¼ cup dill leaves from the stems and chop; add them to the bowl.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
3. Add 2 tablespoons olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the
bowl; stir to combine, taste, and adjust the seasoning.
4. When the rice is done, pour it into a shallow baking dish, spread it in a
thin layer, and put it in the freezer for 5 minutes to cool.
Chop the smoked salmon.
5. Remove the rice from the freezer; crack in the eggs and add the
smoked salmon and a sprinkle of pepper. Mix gently.
6. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
7. Form the rice mixture into 12 small patties and add them to the skillet
as you go. (Cook in 2 batches, 6 at a time.) Cook, turning once, until
they’re browned and crisp on both sides, 3 to 5 minutes per side. Add a

little more oil as needed and cook the remaining 6 patties. Serve with
the salsa.
VARIATIONS
Rice and Smoked Trout Cakes with Cucumber Salad
Substitute smoked trout for smoked salmon.
Rice and Chorizo Cakes with Tomato Salsa
Substitute 4 ounces fresh Mexican chorizo for the smoked salmon (take the
meat out of the casings). For the salsa, use 2 medium tomatoes instead of
cucumber, cilantro in place of dill, and 2 limes instead of lemon.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the rice mixture chill in the refrigerator until firm, about an hour.
RICE CAKES
As you can see in this recipe and the one before it, a quick way to make
firm patties out of rice is to use starchy rice (short-grain rice or a glutinous
long-grain variety is best), cook it high and fast so that the starch seeps out,
then rapidly cool the rice down in the freezer so it becomes firm. While the
individual grains of rice will be overcooked, the process of binding the rice
with its own starch leaves you with cakes that have a wonderful chew.
SIDES
Tomato Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Creamed Spinach

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Shrimp and Tomato Paella
Paella need not be a huge ordeal; if it were called baked rice and
shrimp in a skillet, you’d think it was a piece of cake—which it is.

Ingredients
3½ cups shrimp or vegetable stock or water, plus more if needed
Pinch of saffron
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 medium onion
Salt and pepper
1 pound peeled shrimp
3 large ripe tomatoes (1½ pounds)
2 cups short- or medium-grain white rice, preferably paella or Arborio
rice
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF. Put 3½ cups stock or water and a pinch of
saffron in a small saucepan over medium heat.
2. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large ovenproof skillet over medium-
high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
3. Add the onion to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until it softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Cut the shrimp into ½-inch chunks.
Core the tomatoes and cut them into wedges.
4. When the onion is soft, stir in 2 cups rice and cook, stirring
occasionally, until it’s glossy, a minute or 2. Add the warmed stock and
stir in the shrimp.
5. Lay the tomato wedges on top of the rice and put the skillet in the
oven. Cook, undisturbed, for 15 minutes.
6. After 15 minutes, check to see if the rice is dry and just tender. If not,
return the skillet to the oven for another 5 minutes. If the rice looks too
dry but still not quite done, add a small splash of stock or water.
7. When the rice is ready, turn off the heat and let the pan sit in the oven
for 5 minutes.
Chop several sprigs parsley.
8. Remove the skillet from the oven, sprinkle with the parsley, and serve
hot or warm.

VARIATIONS
Squid and Tomato Paella
Substitute 1 pound cleaned squid for the shrimp. Cut the bodies into thin
rings and the tentacles (if there are any) in half vertically into small pieces.
Add them to the stock and saffron at the very beginning.
Chorizo and Tomato Paella
Substitute 8 ounces sliced smoked Spanish chorizo for the shrimp. Add the
chorizo to the skillet along with the onion in Step 3.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Shrimp Stock
Vegetable Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
To develop more of a crust on the bottom of the rice (soccarat, the hallmark
of great paella), after removing the skillet from the oven, put it on a burner
over high heat and cook, undisturbed, for 2 or 3 minutes. Do not burn.
PAELLA RICE
Arborio or other short- or medium-grain rice will work just fine in paella,
but there are rices that are particularly well suited to the job. These are
medium-grain varieties that get creamy, like Arborio, but the grains remain
more separate. The different types that you might come across, generically
called Spanish paella rice, are Valencia, Bomba, Bahia, and Granza.
SIDES
Green Salad
Chopped Salad

Warm Buttery Bread
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Crunchy Okra

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Jambalaya des Herbes with Shrimp
To accommodate Catholics who were abstaining from meat during
Lent, a vegetarian version of gumbo with lots of greens—gumbo
z’herbes—was often served in New Orleans. This recipe takes the
same approach with another bayou classic, jambalaya.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 large onion
2 celery stalks
2 green bell peppers
3 garlic cloves
Salt and pepper
1½ cups long-grain white rice
2 large ripe tomatoes (1 pound)
1 teaspoon paprika
½ teaspoon cayenne
1 teaspoon dried thyme
3 bay leaves
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 pound peeled shrimp
Hot sauce for serving (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the skillet.
Trim and chop the celery; add it to the skillet.
Trim, core, seed, and chop the peppers; add them to the skillet.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet.
2. Sprinkle the vegetables with salt and pepper and cook, stirring
occasionally until they soften, 5 to 10 minutes.
3. Put 1½ cups rice in a large pot; add a big pinch of salt and water to
cover by about ½ inch (2½ cups water). Bring to a boil.
Core and chop the tomatoes.
4. When the water boils, adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily
but not vigorously; cover.
5. When the vegetables are soft, stir in 1 teaspoon paprika, ½ teaspoon
cayenne, and 1 teaspoon dried thyme. Cook, stirring, for a minute.
6. Add the vegetable mixture, tomatoes, and 3 bay leaves to the rice; stir
and cover. Cook, checking occasionally until the rice is just tender, 10
to 15 minutes. If the rice begins to get tender and there is too much
liquid in the pot, remove the cover and continue cooking to let some of
the liquid evaporate.
Chop 1 cup parsley.
7. When the rice is just tender, fish out the bay leaves, add the shrimp and
parsley, and toss with a fork. Cover and cook until the shrimp turn pink
and cook through, 2 or 3 minutes.

8. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Serve, passing a bottle of hot sauce at
the table if you like.
VARIATIONS
Jambalaya des Herbes with Fish
Substitute 1 pound thin white fish fillets, cut into chunks, for the shrimp.
They take just a few minutes longer to cook than the shrimp, so add them
just before the rice is tender.
Jambalaya with Lots of Herbes
Use 10 ounces baby spinach instead of the shrimp. Stir the leaves into the
pot in Step 7, cover, and cook until the spinach is just wilted, 2 or 3
minutes. The raw spinach will take up a lot of room before it wilts, so
consider that when choosing a pot.
Jambalaya with Collards
Substitute 1 pound collard greens, sliced into ribbons, for the shrimp. Stir
them into the pot along with the vegetables in Step 6.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Bring the rice to a boil at the very beginning. By the time you’re ready to
add the softened vegetables, the rice will be pretty close to tender, so you’ll
essentially just be stirring everything into the cooked rice at the end. The
rice picks up a little less flavor when it isn’t cooked with the vegetables, but
this is a fine compromise and certainly a time-saver.
SIDES
Green Salad
Warm Flour Tortillas

Crunchy Okra
Coleslaw

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Rice and Wings
The one-pot magic of arroz con pollo meets the flavors and fixings
of the chicken and rice that you get at Middle Eastern street carts in
New York City.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons butter
1½ pounds chicken wings
Salt and pepper
2 medium ripe tomatoes
1 small head iceberg lettuce (you’ll need only half)
2 teaspoons turmeric
1 teaspoon cumin
1½ cups long-grain white rice
3 cups chicken stock or water
One 8-inch pita
1 garlic clove
¼ cup mayonnaise
¼ cup Greek yogurt

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil and 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet or
large pot over medium-high heat.
2. When the fat is hot, add the chicken wings and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Cook, turning as necessary until browned on both sides, 5 to
10 minutes.
Core and chop the tomatoes; put them in a medium bowl.
Cut the head of lettuce in half; chop 1 half and add it to the bowl.
Refrigerate the other half for another use.
3. When the wings are browned, stir in 2 teaspoons turmeric and 1
teaspoon cumin. Cook, stirring until the spices are fragrant, about a
minute. Add 1½ cups rice and cook, stirring occasionally until glossy
and coated with the spices, 2 or 3 minutes.
4. Add 3 cups chicken stock or water and bring to a boil.
Chop the pita into 1-inch pieces.
5. When the mixture boils, adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily
but not vigorously. Cover and cook until the rice is tender and the
liquid is absorbed, 10 to 20 minutes.
6. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil in a medium skillet over medium heat. When
it’s hot, add the pita and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the pita is golden and crisp, 4 or 5
minutes.
Peel and mince the garlic clove; put it in a small bowl.
Add ¼ cup mayonnaise and ¼ cup yogurt to the bowl; stir in enough
water to make the sauce pourable. Season with salt and pepper.

7. When the pita is golden and crisp, turn off the heat.
8. When the rice is tender and the liquid absorbed, divide the rice and
wings among 4 plates. Top with the chopped tomatoes, lettuce, and
toasted pita. Drizzle the white sauce over the top and serve.
VARIATIONS
Rice and Thighs
For a meatier dish, substitute boneless, skinless chicken thighs.
Rice and Wings with Mexican Flavors
Substitute chili powder for the turmeric, 2 corn tortillas for the pita, and
sour cream for the yogurt. In addition to the tomatoes and lettuce, garnish
with chopped cilantro, lime wedges, and hot sauce if you like.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Mayonnaise
SIDES
Hummus
Tahini-Creamed Spinach
Crunchy Okra

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Quinoa Pilaf with Chickpeas and
Dried Fruit
You won’t find a pilaf with better textures than this one. Toasted
and simmered nuts retain their crunch, dried fruit becomes creamy,
chickpeas are meaty yet soft, and quinoa adds its unique pop. With
parsley, mint, and lemon zest stirred in at the end, this dish isn’t shy
in the flavor department either.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 cup walnuts, almonds, pecans, pistachios, or a combination
2 cups cooked or canned chickpeas (one 15-ounce can)
1½ cups quinoa
Salt and pepper
1 cup dried cranberries, cherries, apricots, or raisins
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 bunch fresh mint
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a medium saucepan over medium heat.
Chop 1 cup nuts.
2. Add the nuts to the skillet and cook, shaking the pan occasionally until
lightly browned and fragrant, 2 or 3 minutes.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
3. Stir 1½ cups quinoa into the lightly browned nuts and add a sprinkle of
salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the quinoa is glossy
and coated with oil, 2 or 3 minutes.
Measure 1 cup dried fruit, chopping up larger items like apricots.
4. When the quinoa is glossy, stir in the chickpeas and dried fruit and add
4 cups water. Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so the liquid bubbles
gently. Cover and cook, undisturbed, until small craters appear on the
surface, 15 to 20 minutes.
Chop ½ cup parsley and ¼ cup mint leaves.
5. When small craters appear on the surface of the quinoa, tip the pot to
see if any liquid remains. If so, cover and keep cooking until the
quinoa is dry, checking every minute or 2.
6. Stir in the parsley and mint and grate in the zest of a lemon. Taste and
adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
7 Dried Fruit and Nut Combos for Pilaf
1. Dried apples and walnuts

2. Dried peaches and pecans
3. Dried cherries and pistachios
4. Dried tomatoes and pine nuts
5. Dried cranberries and almonds
6. Dried dates and walnuts
7. Dried currants and cashews
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
EVEN FASTER
Instead of toasting the nuts at the beginning, just chop them and add them
(raw) along with the herbs and lemon zest in Step 6.
STOCK FOR WATER
Any pilaf can benefit from being cooked in stock instead of water, so if you
have some on hand, by all means use it in the same quantities as water.
Chicken, vegetable, and beef stock are the most useful options, but if the
ingredients lend themselves to fish or shrimp stock, you can use those as
well.
SIDES
Fennel Salad with Olives
Carrots with Curry Vinaigrette
Simmered Squash

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Smoky Bulgur with Eggplant, Dried
Tomatoes, and Feta
Finely ground bulgur steeps in a broth of browned eggplant and
onions, dried tomatoes, smoked paprika, and cumin, and a
spectacular pilaf results. This is also stellar left over, cold or at
room temperature.

Ingredients
¼ cup olive oil
1 medium eggplant (about 1 pound)
1 medium red onion
1 cup dried tomatoes
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
1 teaspoon cumin
1 cup finely ground bulgur
1 bunch fresh parsley
4 ounces feta cheese (1 cup crumbled)
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. Bring 2 cups water to a boil.
2. Put ¼ cup oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim and chop the eggplant into ½-inch pieces; put it in the skillet.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the skillet.
Chop 1 cup dried tomatoes; add them to the skillet.
3. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and cook, stirring occasionally until the
vegetables are browned and soft, 10 to 12 minutes.
4. When the water comes to a boil, turn the heat to low.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
5. When the vegetables are browned and soft, stir in the garlic, 1
teaspoon smoked paprika, and 1 teaspoon cumin. Cook, stirring until
fragrant, a minute.
6. Stir 1 cup bulgur and the boiled water into the skillet; cover and turn
off the heat. Let steep until the bulgur is tender, 10 to 15 minutes.
Chop ½ cup parsley.
Crumble 1 cup feta cheese.
Halve the lemon.
7. When the bulgur is tender, add the parsley, feta, and squeeze in the
lemon juice; fluff with a fork. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Smoky Bulgur with Eggplant, Dates, and Feta

Substitute 1 cup chopped dates for the dried tomatoes.
Lemony Bulgur with Zucchini, Olives, and Ricotta Salata
Gets nice and creamy as the zucchini breaks down. Substitute 1 pound
zucchini for the eggplant and ½ cup chopped olives for the dried tomatoes.
Substitute the zest and juice of a lemon for the smoked paprika and cumin
and ricotta salata for the feta.
Smoky Bulgur with Eggplant, Roasted Red Peppers, and Manchego
Substitute 1 cup chopped roasted red peppers for the dried tomatoes. Use 2
teaspoons smoked paprika and no cumin and substitute grated manchego
cheese for the feta.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
As soon as the water boils, stir in the bulgur, turn off the heat, cover, and
cook it by itself. Continue sautéing the vegetables until they are very tender
and well browned, then stir the cooked bulgur into the vegetables at the end.
SIDES
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Cucumber Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Garlicky Fresh and Dried Mushrooms

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Quinoa Puttanesca with Fresh
Mozzarella
Noodle casseroles—think mac and cheese—are beloved, while
grain casseroles (can you even name any?) not so much. There’s no
reason this should be the case.

Ingredients
Salt
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 garlic cloves
3 or 4 anchovy fillets
½ cup black olives
2 tablespoons capers
½ teaspoon red chile flakes
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
Pepper
1½ cups quinoa
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
8 ounces fresh mozzarella cheese
Several sprigs fresh basil for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil and salt it.
2. Put 2 tablespoons oil in a large ovenproof skillet over medium heat.
Peel 2 garlic cloves; mince them together with 3 or 4 anchovies.
Pit ½ cup olives if necessary and chop them up a bit.
3. Add the garlic, anchovies, and olives to the skillet along with 2
tablespoons capers and ½ teaspoon red chile flakes. Turn the heat to
medium-high and cook, stirring, for a minute.
4. Add the tomatoes with their juice and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the tomatoes break down and thicken
the sauce, 10 to 15 minutes.
5. When the water boils, add 1½ cups quinoa, adjust the heat so it
bubbles steadily, and stir occasionally. Start tasting after 7 minutes.
Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan.
Thinly slice 8 ounces fresh mozzarella.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop.
6. When the quinoa is tender, drain it, reserving some cooking water. Add
the quinoa to the skillet along with the Parmesan and a splash of the
cooking water if you want to make it saucier. Taste and adjust the
seasoning.
7. Lay the sliced mozzarella on top and broil until the cheese is bubbly
and brown, 2 or 3 minutes. Let the dish cool for a few minutes, then
garnish with the basil and serve.

VARIATIONS
Quinoa Puttanesca with Ricotta
Instead of the mozzarella, use 2 cups ricotta. You can season it with ⅛
teaspoon nutmeg if you’d like. In Step 7, drop tablespoons of the cheese on
top of the quinoa, spread it around a little with the back of the spoon, and
broil as directed.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Use crushed tomatoes instead of diced; the sauce will be ready 5 to 10
minutes after you add the tomatoes.
Instead of making the tomato sauce in Steps 2 to 4, use Puttanesca Sauce.
SIDES
Green Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Couscous Gratin with Leeks and
Gruyère
Adding cooked couscous to the classic leeks au gratin is a fast and
easy way to turn a side dish into a hearty meal. Treat this as the
model for grain-bolstered vegetable gratins—see the variations for
a few other ideas.

Ingredients
2 cups couscous
Salt
4 medium leeks
3 tablespoons butter
Pepper
8 ounces Gruyère cheese (2 cups grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 cups couscous in a medium saucepan; add 3 cups water and a big
pinch of salt. Bring to a boil.
Trim the leeks and slice the white and light green parts only.
2. As soon as the water boils, cover and remove from the heat.
3. Put 3 tablespoons butter in a large ovenproof skillet over medium heat.
When it foams, add the leeks, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until they’re soft, 6 to 8 minutes. Do not brown.
Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Grate 2 cups Gruyère.
4. When the leeks are soft, turn off the heat and spread them evenly in the
bottom of the skillet.
5. Fluff the couscous with a fork and layer it on top of the leeks. Sprinkle
the cheese on top and broil until bubbly and brown, 2 or 3 minutes. Let
the dish cool for a minute before serving.
VARIATIONS
Quinoa Gratin with Leeks and Gruyère
Use cooked quinoa (or any other cooked grain) in place of couscous. Add it
in Step 5.
Couscous Gratin with Onions and Broccoli and Cheddar
Substitute 1 large head broccoli, chopped, for the leeks. In Step 3, cook
until the broccoli is just tender, 5 to 10 minutes, and proceed as directed.
Use cheddar cheese instead of Gruyère if you like.

Couscous Gratin with Mushrooms and Parmesan
Substitute 1½ pounds chopped button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms for
the leeks. In Step 3, cook until the mushrooms are tender and starting to dry
out, 10 to 15 minutes, and proceed as directed, using Parmesan cheese
instead of Gruyère.
Couscous Gratin with Poblanos and Jack
Nice and spicy. Use olive oil instead of butter. Substitute 1½ pounds sliced
poblano peppers for the leeks. Cook over medium-high heat until the
peppers are tender and lightly browned, 5 to 10 minutes, and proceed as
directed. Use Jack cheese instead of Gruyère if you like.
SIDES
Green Salad
Refried White Beans with Rosemary
Bruschetta

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Masa and Rajas
Tamale flavors without fuss: Make a masa dough and cook it as
one big cake in a covered skillet; this way it gets golden and crisp
on the bottom but remains puffy and tender on top. Finish with a
stir-fry of poblanos (rajas means “slices” and refers to the small
pieces of poblano), onions, and a touch of cream.

Ingredients
1½ cups masa harina
¾ teaspoon baking powder
Salt and pepper
5 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 large onion
4 poblano peppers
2 garlic cloves
¼ cup cream

Prep | Cook
1. Combine 1½ cups masa harina, ¾ teaspoon baking powder, a sprinkle
of salt and pepper, and 1 tablespoon vegetable oil in a medium bowl.
Stir to combine into a coarse meal, then add 1½ cups warm water and
stir to make a thick batter.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Trim, core, seed, and slice the poblanos.
2. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
3. When the oil is hot, add the onion, peppers, and garlic and sprinkle
with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the vegetables
are soft, 8 to 12 minutes.
4. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in another large skillet over medium-
high heat. When it’s hot, add the masa batter, spreading it into an even
layer (about ½ inch thick) with a rubber spatula or carefully pressing it
with the palm of your hand.
5. Cover the skillet and cook, adjusting the heat so the bottom doesn’t
burn, until the cake is crisp on the bottom and slightly puffed up and
firm on the top, 5 to 10 minutes.
6. When the cake is done, cut it into 4 wedges and put them on plates.
7. When the vegetables are soft, stir in ¼ cup cream and cook until it
reduces slightly, a minute or 2. Taste and adjust the seasoning, spoon
the mixture over the top of the masa cakes, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Masa and Rajas with Chicken
Before adding the vegetables, slice 3 boneless, skinless chicken thighs and
cook them in the skillet, undisturbed, until they brown and release easily, 2
or 3 minutes. Then cook, stirring occasionally until the meat is no longer
pink, 2 or 3 more minutes. Remove the chicken from the skillet while you
cook the vegetables, than stir it back in along with the cream in Step 7.
Masa and Rajas with Chorizo
Before adding the vegetables, cook 8 ounces fresh Mexican-style chorizo
until lightly browned. Add the vegetables to the skillet and proceed as
directed.
SIDES
Carrot Salad with Cilantro and Lime
Fresh Tomato Salsa
Chile-Cumin Black Beans

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Farro with White Beans and Tuna
Farro, an ancient grain that’s become popular again, has a
distinctively nutty flavor and chewy texture. It’s a fabulous base for
salads, tossed with olive oil, lemon, and whatever else you’ve got
—here it’s tuna and white beans. You can cook farro as you would
most other grains, but it’s faster to boil it like pasta.

Ingredients
Salt
¼ cup olive oil
1 lemon
1 small red onion
4 cups any cooked or canned white beans (two 15-ounce cans)
One 6-ounce jar or can tuna, packed in olive oil
¼ cup capers
1½ cups farro
1 bunch fresh parsley
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a medium pot of water to a boil and salt it.
Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large bowl.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion; add it to the bowl.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them. Add the beans to
the bowl.
2. Add the tuna (with its oil) to the bowl along with ¼ cup capers (with
or without any brine).
3. When the water boils, add the farro and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 10 minutes.
Chop ½ cup parsley and add it to the bowl.
4. When the farro is tender, drain it. Add it to the bowl, sprinkle with salt
and pepper, and toss. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Farro with White Beans, Tomatoes, and Fennel
Skip the tuna. Substitute 1 large fennel bulb for the red onion and add 2
medium ripe tomatoes, chopped.
Farro and White Beans, Greek Style
Skip the tuna. Add 2 medium ripe tomatoes, chopped; 1 cucumber,
chopped; ½ cup kalamata olives; and 1 cup crumbled or chopped feta
cheese.
Farro with White Beans, Arugula, and Parmesan

Instead of the tuna use 3 ounces grated Parmesan cheese (¾ cup). Skip the
capers and substitute 1 large bunch arugula for the parsley.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
SUSTAINABLE CANNED TUNA
When we think about “sustainable seafood,” we usually focus on the
seafood counter. But sustainability applies as much to canned fish as to
fresh. The tuna industry has relied notoriously on unsustainable methods to
keep the price of canned tuna low. For instance, the most common devices
used to catch skipjack (aka “chunk light”) tuna (like Fish Aggregating
Devices, or FADs) result in huge amounts of “bycatch,” the capturing of
species that aren’t intended to be caught. In the case of albacore (aka “solid
white”) tuna, fishing vessels generally rely on conventional longline
operations that kill thousands of sharks, turtles, seabirds, and other animals.
If you do a little poking around in the grocery store you might come
across canned tuna that is caught in a more responsible way. When buying
“light” tuna, look for what’s called “pole-and-line skipjack” or “FAD-free
seined skipjack.” When buying “white” tuna, look for “pole-and-line
albacore,” or any indicator of a company that is using better and more
progressive longline practices (like, as of this writing, Safeway’s
“Responsibly Caught” albacore). It’s also important to note that the
“Dolphin Safe” logo is not an indication of these practices and does not
guarantee that the tuna in question has been captured in a sustainable
manner.
SIDES
Green Salad

Chopped Salad
Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Warm Tabbouleh with Mussels
Like no tabbouleh you’ve had before. Instead of steeping in plain
water, the bulgur soaks in briny mussel-cooking liquid. The result
is a meal studded with gems of mussel meat and infused with the
flavor of the sea.

Ingredients
2 pounds mussels
3 large ripe tomatoes (1½ pounds)
4 scallions
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 bunch fresh mint
1 cup finely ground bulgur
1 lemon
⅓ cup olive oil
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Bring 2½ cups water to a boil in a large pot with a lid.
Rinse and debeard the mussels; discard any that don’t close when you
press the shell together.
2. When the water boils, add the mussels and cover the pot. Cook,
undisturbed, until the shells open, 5 to 10 minutes.
Core and chop the tomatoes; put them in a large serving bowl.
Trim and chop the scallions; add them to the bowl.
Chop about ¾ cup parsley and ¼ cup mint leaves; add them to the
bowl.
3. Remove the mussels from the pot with a slotted spoon, leaving the
liquid behind. If the mussels have released a lot of sediment, strain the
liquid through a cheesecloth-lined strainer and return the clear liquid to
the pot.
4. Stir 1 cup bulgur into the pot, cover, and turn off the heat. It will take
10 to 15 minutes to become tender.
Remove the mussel meat from the shells and add it to the bowl.
Have the lemon; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
5. Add ⅓ cup olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl; toss
until combined.
6. When the bulgur is tender, drain it in a strainer, pressing out any
excess liquid with a spoon, and add it to the bowl.
7. Toss the contents of the bowl, taste and adjust the seasoning, and
serve.

VARIATIONS
Warm Tabbouleh with Tuna
Skip the mussels and just steep the bulgur in 2½ cups boiling water. Add
one 6-ounce can oil-packed tuna to the bowl along with the tomatoes.
Warm Tabbouleh with Clams
Substitute about 4 pounds littleneck or other hard-shell clams for the
mussels. They generally take a few more minutes to steam open than
mussels.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Put the herbs in the food processor and pulse until finely chopped. Then add
the tomatoes and scallions and pulse until coarsely chopped.
SAVING SHELLFISH LIQUID
Most of the time that you steam mussels and clams you’ll serve the
steaming liquid right along with them, but if there are ever occasions when
you don’t have any plans for the liquid, make sure to save it. The seawater
remaining in mussels and clams releases into the pot as you cook the
mollusks. When mixed with plain water, white wine, or aromatics, the briny
water creates an irresistible broth that can be used for cooking grains, as it
is here, or bolstering all sort of dishes that already contain seafood, from
soups and braises to pastas and stir-fries. Any extra shellfish liquid that you
might have will keep in the fridge for a few days—just long enough to
figure out what to do with it.
SIDES
Crisp Seasoned Pita

Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Shrimp over Grits
This sublime southern classic is easy to make: Simmer a pot of
grits while a pan of smoked sausage or ham, vegetables, and
shrimp sizzles alongside. The vegetables need to cook long enough
get soft and luscious, but other than that it all goes quickly.

Ingredients
1¼ cups milk
Salt
2 tablespoons butter
4 ounces andouille sausage or tasso ham
1 cup grits, preferably stone-ground
1 medium onion
2 celery stalks, with any leaves
1 green bell pepper
2 garlic cloves
Pepper
2 large ripe tomatoes (1 pound)
1 pound peeled shrimp

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1¼ cups milk, 1¼ cups water, and a pinch of salt in a small
saucepan over medium-high heat.
2. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a medium skillet over medium heat.
Chop 4 ounces andouille or tasso; put it in the skillet.
3. When the liquid comes to a boil, turn the heat to low and slowly whisk
in 1 cup grits, trying to eliminate any lumps.
4. Cover and cook, stirring occasionally and adding more liquid if the
grits become too thick, until the liquid is absorbed and the grits are
creamy, 10 to 15 minutes. Stir the meat as necessary.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the skillet.
Trim and chop the celery (saving any leaves for garnish). Add it to the
skillet.
Trim, core, seed, and chop the pepper; add it to the skillet.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet.
5. Sprinkle the meat and vegetables with salt and pepper and cook,
stirring occasionally until they soften, 5 to 10 minutes.
Core and chop the tomatoes.
6. When the vegetables are soft, stir in the tomatoes and cook, stirring
once or twice until they begin to release their juice, 3 or 4 minutes.
7. Stir in the shrimp, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring
occasionally until they turn pink and cook through, 2 or 3 minutes.
8. Divide the grits among 4 bowls. Spoon the shrimp mixture over the
top, garnish with the celery leaves, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Creamy Shrimp over Grits
Stir ¼ cup cream into the vegetable mixture right before adding the shrimp.
Shrimp over Polenta
A couple switches and the dish veers toward Italy. Use sweet or hot Italian
sausage or prosciutto instead of the andouille and medium-grind cornmeal
instead of the grits.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Shrimp over Shrimpy Grits
Buy shrimp with the shells on and take them off yourself. Add the shrimp
shells to the milk and water mixture as you bring it to a boil, then use a
slotted spoon to fish them out before stirring in the grits. What you’re
basically doing is making a shrimp stock that will flavor the grits as they
cook.
SIDES
Green Salad
Chopped Salad
Mexican Street Corn

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Couscous Helper
Hamburger Helper (with real ingredients) goes to Morocco, in a
road trip to remember.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons olive oil
1 large red onion
12 ounces ground beef
Salt and pepper
3 garlic cloves
2 oranges
2 teaspoons cumin
½ teaspoon cinnamon
1 cup couscous
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the oil is hot, add the beef and the onion, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until the beef is browned and
the onions are golden, 5 to 10 minutes.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
Half the oranges and squeeze them to get ½ cup juice; refrigerate any
remaining fruit.
3. When the beef is browned and the onions are golden, stir in the garlic,
2 teaspoons cumin, ½ teaspoon cinnamon, and 1 cup couscous.
4. Cook, stirring until the spices are fragrant and the couscous is lightly
toasted, a minute or 2.
5. Add the orange juice and 1 cup water, bring to a boil, then cover and
turn off the heat. Let it steep until the couscous is tender and the liquid
is absorbed, about 5 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
6. When the couscous is ready, add the parsley and 2 tablespoons olive
oil and fluff with a fork. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Couscous Helper, Chinese Style
Substitute vegetable oil for the olive oil, ground pork for the beef, and
yellow onion for red. Instead of the cumin and cinnamon, use 2 teaspoons

five-spice powder. For the liquid, use 1½ cups chicken stock or water with a
dash of soy sauce mixed in. Garnish with scallions and some sesame oil
instead of the parsley and olive oil.
Couscous Helper, Italian Style
Substitute ground chicken or turkey for the beef, 1 tablespoon fennel seeds
for the cumin, and ½ teaspoon red chile flakes for the cinnamon. For the
liquid, use 1¼ cups chicken stock or water and ¼ cup white wine. Garnish
with basil instead of parsley and a little grated Parmesan if you like.
Vegetarian Couscous Helper
Instead of the beef use 3 cups drained cooked or canned chickpeas (if
canned rinse them first). In Step 2, wait to add the chickpeas until the
onions are almost ready. Then stir them into the pan with a fork or potato
masher, breaking them up as they warm before proceeding.
SIDES
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Hummus
Tahini Creamed Spinach
Watermelon, Feta, and Mint Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Polenta with Sausage and
Mushrooms
There’s not much that’s cozier than a dish of creamy Parmesan
polenta topped with a meaty sauté of Italian sausage and
mushrooms. All you need is a glass of wine and a cool day.

Ingredients
½ cup milk, plus more if needed
Salt
4 tablespoons olive oil, plus more if needed
1 pound sweet or hot Italian sausage
1 cup cornmeal
1 medium red onion
1½ pounds button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
Pepper
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Put ½ cup milk, 2 cups water, and a big pinch of salt in a medium
saucepan and bring to a boil.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Chop the sausage or remove the meat from the casings and break it up.
3. Add the sausage to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until it
starts to brown, 3 or 4 minutes.
4. When the liquid comes to a boil, add 1 cup cornmeal in a steady
stream, whisking constantly to prevent lumps. Adjust the heat so that it
simmers and cook, whisking frequently until the mixture is creamy and
the grains are soft, 10 to 15 minutes. If the mixture becomes too thick,
whisk in more water or milk.
Peel, trim, and chop the onion; add it to the skillet.
Trim and slice the mushrooms. (If you’re using shiitakes, discard the
stems.) Add them to the skillet as you work.
5. Sprinkle the mushrooms with salt and pepper and cook, stirring
occasionally and adding more olive oil if the skillet gets too dry, until
the sausage is nicely browned and the mushrooms are tender, 8 to 12
minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
6. When the polenta is done, stir in the Parmesan, 2 tablespoons olive oil,
and lots of pepper. Taste and adjust the seasoning and divide among 4
bowls.

7. Top with the sausage and mushroom mixture, garnish with the parsley,
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Polenta with Chicken and Asparagus
Substitute boneless, skinless chicken thighs, cut into ½-inch chunks, for the
sausage, and 1 pound asparagus, cut into 1-inch pieces, for the mushrooms.
Cook the chicken until it loses its pink color, then add the asparagus and
continue cooking until the asparagus is just tender and the chicken is
cooked through, 5 or 6 minutes. Garnish with tarragon instead of parsley.
Polenta with Sausage and Fennel
Substitute 2 medium fennel bulbs, thinly sliced, for the mushrooms.
SIDES
Green Salad
Caprese Salad
Tomato Salad
Bruschetta

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pozole and Pork Chops
Pozole—also known as hominy—is corn that has been processed
with lime (or lye; in any case, calcium hydroxide) to remove the
outer germ and bran. It is an intoxicatingly corny ingredient, but in
its dried form it can take up to 4 hours to cook. Luckily, it also
comes canned and ready to go, which makes this Mexican-inspired
dish a weeknight treat.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
4 bone-in pork chops (about 2 pounds)
Salt and pepper
1 medium red onion
3 garlic cloves
1 small head green cabbage (1 pound)
1 tablespoon chili powder
One 15-ounce can hominy (2 cups)
1 cup chicken or vegetable stock or water
4 radishes
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish
Sour cream for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
2. When the oil is hot, add the pork chops and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Cook, turning once, until browned on both sides, 3 to 5
minutes per side.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
3. When the pork chops are browned on both sides, remove them from
the skillet and add the onion and garlic. Cook, stirring occasionally
until the onion starts to soften, 2 or 3 minutes.
Trim, core, and quarter the cabbage. Cut each quarter crosswise into
wide ribbons.
4. When the onion starts to soften, stir in 1 tablespoon chili powder and
cook, stirring once or twice, until fragrant, a minute or 2.
Drain and rinse the hominy.
5. When the chili powder is fragrant, add the cabbage and hominy to the
pot, along with a sprinkle of salt and pepper and 1 cup stock or water.
6. Nestle the pork chops back into the skillet and adjust the heat so the
mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously. Cover and cook until the
cabbage and pork chops are tender, 5 to 10 minutes.
Trim and thinly slice 4 radishes.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.

7. When the cabbage and pork chops are tender, divide the mixture
among 4 plates or shallow bowls, spooning a little extra liquid over the
top.
8. Garnish with the radishes, cilantro, and a dollop of sour cream and
serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Pozole and Chicken Thighs
Substitute 4 to 6 bone-in chicken thighs for the pork chops. Brown them on
both sides just as you would the pork and proceed as directed.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
SIDES
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt
Corn Bread Skillet Stuffing
White Rice

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Couscous Paella with Chicken and
Zucchini
The technique of letting couscous cook and crisp slightly in a hot
oven—accompanied by bone-in chicken and vegetables—is
derived from paella. Call it whatever; it’s quite tasty.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
4 chicken thighs
Salt and pepper
2 medium zucchini
3 garlic cloves
1½ cups chicken stock or water
1 cup couscous

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large
ovenproof skillet over medium-high heat.
Pat the chicken dry with a paper towel.
2. Put the chicken in the skillet, skin side down, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and cook, undisturbed, until browned, 4 or 5 minutes.
Trim the zucchini; cut them into ¼-inch coins.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
3. When the skin side of the chicken is browned, turn it over and add the
zucchini, garlic, and 1½ cups chicken stock or water.
4. Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously.
Cover and cook until the chicken cooks through and the zucchini is
tender, 6 to 8 minutes.
5. Remove the chicken thighs and bring the mixture to a boil. Stir in 1
cup couscous and a sprinkle of salt and pepper, nestle the chicken back
in, and put the skillet (uncovered) in the oven.
6. Cook until the couscous is tender, the liquid has evaporated, and the
top of the couscous and chicken is starting to crisp, 10 to 12 minutes.
Serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Couscous Paella with Chicken and Fennel
Substitute 2 large fennel bulbs, sliced, for the zucchini. They won’t quite
break apart like the zucchini, but they will get tender and add a ton of
flavor.

Warm-Spiced Couscous Paella with Chicken and Zucchini
Add 1 cinnamon stick, 4 allspice berries, 1 teaspoon ground cumin, and 1
teaspoon ground coriander right before adding the zucchini and stock in
Step 3.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
Use boneless, skinless chicken thighs and cut the zucchini into thinner
coins. Once the chicken is browned and you add the zucchini and stock,
you’ll need only a few minutes for the chicken to cook through and the
zucchini to become tender.
SIDES
Green Salad
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Warm Buttery Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Skillet Shepherd’s Pie with Quinoa
Crust
In this twist on shepherd’s pie, nutty, crisped quinoa replaces the
mashed potatoes. You still get that beautiful browning on top, but
the quinoa brings more texture to the party.

Ingredients
1½ cups quinoa
Salt and pepper
4 tablespoons olive oil
2 carrots
1 medium onion
2 garlic cloves
1 pound ground lamb
1 tablespoon tomato paste
2 teaspoons fennel seeds
1 cup beef or chicken stock or water
1 cup frozen peas
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1½ cups quinoa in a medium saucepan; add a big pinch of salt, a
sprinkle of pepper, and water to cover by about an inch. Bring to a
boil.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large ovenproof skillet over low heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the carrots. Add them to the skillet.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion. Add it to the skillet.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves. Add them to the skillet.
3. When the water boils, adjust the heat so it bubbles gently. Cover and
cook, undisturbed, until small craters appear on the quinoa’s surface,
15 to 20 minutes.
4. Add the lamb to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and raise the
heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring to break up the meat until the
lamb is browned and the onions are golden, 5 to 10 minutes.
5. When the lamb is browned and the onions are golden, stir in 1
tablespoon tomato paste and 2 teaspoon fennel seeds; cook for a
minute.
6. Add 1 cup stock or water, 1 cup frozen peas, and some salt and pepper.
Bring to a boil and let the liquid bubble until it reduces to a thin gravy.
Turn off the heat. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
7. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
8. When small craters appear on the surface of the quinoa, tip the pot to
see if any liquid remains. If so, cover and keep cooking until the
quinoa is dry, checking every minute or 2.

Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
9. Stir 2 tablespoons olive oil into the quinoa. Spread the quinoa on top
of the lamb mixture, pressing it down into a flat layer, and put the
skillet in the broiler. Cook until the crust is browned, 2 or 3 minutes.
Remove from the broiler and let it sit for a few minutes before serving,
garnished with the parsley.
VARIATIONS
Bolognese-Style Skillet Shepherd’s Pie with Quinoa Crust
Substitute 8 ounces ground beef and 8 ounces ground pork for the lamb. Up
the tomato paste to 2 tablespoons, use ¼ cup cream instead of the fennel
seeds, and replace ½ cup of the stock or water with white wine. Skip the
peas if you like.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Beef Stock
Chicken Stock
CRISP GRAINS
We don’t usually think of broiling grains, but they’re particularly well
suited to being crisped under high heat; think of them as an alternative to
bread crumbs. You can sprinkle them on top of dishes and run them under
the broiler for a little added crunch, or you can create an even layer for a
uniform crust. Any cooked grain can achieve this effect. It helps to toss
them in olive oil first or drizzle some on top; the fat facilitates the
browning.
SIDES

Tender Vegetables
Green Salad

Vegetables
Bubbling Caprese
Sweet Pepper Queso Fundido
Eggplant Steaks with Fresh Tomato–Garlic Sauce
Glazed Brussels Sprouts with Vietnamese Flavors
Unstuffed Cabbage
Potato Rösti with Fresh Apple Sauce
Squash au Gratin with Toasted Nuts
Cauliflower “Polenta” with Mushrooms
Stuffed Poblanos with Black Beans and Cheese
Sweet Potato Flautas
Potato and Spinach Saag
Zucchini Fattoush
Scrambled Broccoli with Parmesan and Lemon
Bok Choy Pancake with Soy Dipping Sauce
Fried Fennel and Arugula
Celery Root Tempura with or Without Shrimp
Quick-Stewed Green Beans with Bacon

Braised Cabbage, Sauerkraut, and Ham
Pan-Seared Corn and Pork
Roasted Spaghetti Squash with Brown Butter and Walnuts
Spanish Tortilla
Vegetable Flatbread with Kale and White Bean Stew
Cherry Tomato Cobbler
Tortilla Lasagna
Skillet Spanakopita
Cauliflower Tikka with Boiled Eggs

Vegetables
Cooking vegetables is among the most important
skills you’ll ever learn, up there with driving a car. If
we all had to pass a vegetable cooking test when we
were sixteen, our general health would be much
improved. Since vegetables should be the largest
component of our diet, we should be just as good at
cooking them—and using them creatively—as we are
at cooking ingredients like meat or pasta.
Many cookbooks feature vegetable recipes only
as side dishes (you’ll find those in the Sides chapter),
but here we move vegetables to the center of the
plate, spanning a variety of cooking methods and
expanding the way we think about incorporating
them in daily cooking. Many include small amounts
of eggs, nuts, or bacon, which boost flavor and add
protein; these can easily be made vegetarian. Some
are made better with bread or rice on the side; many
others are satisfying alone.

Vegetables do require more prep work than other
ingredients—the illustrations in Prep Shortcuts offer
helpful tips—so only a few of these recipes take 15
minutes or less. But the cooking moves along
quickly. This chapter constitutes a repertoire of
delicious, healthy, and filling dishes that should be
the cornerstone of our diets.

Chapter Highlights
Braising and Glazing  One of the best methods for cooking vegetables.
Braising and Glazing.
Potato, the Pancake  One big pancake is a fine main dish. Potato Rösti
with Fresh Apple Sauce.
Take It Apart  Classic, labor-intensive recipes reworked for speed and
ease. Unstuffed Cabbage, Skillet Spanakopita.
Pepper Primer  All about fresh or dried chile peppers; see Peppers.
Vegetable Polenta  A vegetable base for your vegetables. Cauliflower
“Polenta” with Mushrooms.
Roast ’Em  Roast vegetables in large batches to have on hand at all times.
Roasted Vegetables.
The Incredible Egg  Eggs and veggies are a magical and easy
combination. Eggs to the Rescue.
Lasagna, Hold the Noodles  Faster with tortillas. Tortilla Lasagna.
Crust Gone Wild  Three recipes with unconventional crusts. Squash au
Gratin with Toasted Nuts, Skillet Spanakopita, Cherry Tomato Cobbler.
Batter Up  The key to fast and easy flatbreads from scratch. Vegetable
Flatbread with Kale and White Bean Stew.

A Cheesy Refuge for Vegetables  Give your vegetables a home in
lasagnas or gratins. Impromptu Lasagnas and Gratins.
Eat on Your Feet  The rare occasions when eating standing up, crowded
around the stove is the thing to do. Eating Around the Stove.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Bubbling Caprese
The hard-to-beat trio of tomatoes, mozzarella, and basil, made all
hot and bubbly in the broiler. The quantities here are flexible;
tinker according to taste and what you have on hand. You could add
some chicken or eggplant underneath for a full-on Parmigiana (see
Fastest Chicken Parm), but my favorite way to eat this dish is
simply with a crusty hunk of bread.

Ingredients
5 or 6 medium ripe tomatoes (2 pounds)
Olive oil for drizzling
12 ounces fresh mozzarella cheese
Salt and pepper
1 bunch fresh basil
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Core the tomatoes; slice crosswise into rounds about ½ inch thick; put
them on a rimmed baking sheet. Drizzle with some olive oil.
Slice the mozzarella about the same thickness.
2. Sprinkle the tomatoes with salt and pepper and lay the mozzarella on
top of the tomatoes. (You may have to cut some of the cheese slices in
half.) Drizzle with a little more olive oil and broil until the cheese is
bubbly and browned, about 5 minutes.
Strip about ½ cup basil leaves from the stems.
3. When the cheese is browned, remove from the broiler and drizzle with
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar. Tear the basil leaves over the top and
serve.
VARIATIONS
6 Other Cheese, Herb, and Drizzle Combinations
1. Blue cheese, tarragon, and balsamic vinegar
2. Cheddar, scallions, and hot sauce
3. Manchego cheese, parsley, and sherry vinegar
4. Feta cheese, mint, and lemon juice
5. Oaxaca cheese, cilantro, and lime juice
6. Gruyère cheese, thyme, and red wine vinegar

NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you’d like the tomatoes to get a little browned as well, broil them on their
own for 5 to 8 minutes before topping with the cheese.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Garlic Bread
Bruschetta
Green Salad
Pasta, Plain and Simple

MASTER RECIPE

Roasted Vegetables
When vegetables roast, their flavors concentrate; they
brown outside and soften inside. If you have roasted
vegetables on hand in your refrigerator, when you
need a shortcut for dinner, inspiration for lunch, or
just something healthy to snack on, your everyday
cooking will be much easier and more enjoyable.
You can roast vegetables in small quantities if
you like, but since the same method works for all
different vegetables and you’ve already got the oven
cranking, you might as well make the biggest batch
you can. Spread the vegetables you want to roast
between two or more rimmed baking sheets or
roasting pans. Make sure not to crowd them or they
won’t brown. Arrange the vegetables in groups on
the baking sheets, keeping like with like so you can
easily remove those that cook quickest and give more
time to bigger, slower ones.
Here are the vegetables that are best for roasting,
roughly in order from quickest cooking to slowest:
asparagus, summer squash and zucchini, leeks,

fennel, mushrooms, shallots, onions, eggplant (use a
little extra oil or butter), broccoli, cauliflower,
radishes, Brussels sprouts, carrots, parsnips, potatoes,
sweet potatoes, turnips, rutabaga, celery root, winter
squash. Leave small or narrow things whole
(asparagus, shallots, thin carrots), break broccoli and
cauliflower into florets, and cut other vegetables into
thick slices or chunks.
The Roasted Peppers recipe here will work for
any bell pepper, poblanos, or other large long or
round peppers.
Roasted Vegetables
1
Prepare the Vegetables
Heat the oven to 425°F. Drizzle some olive oil or melted butter on the
bottom of your baking sheets or roasting pans. Prepare the vegetables
and spread them evenly, leaving enough space between them for them
to brown properly. Drizzle with a little more olive oil or butter and
sprinkle with salt and pepper; toss or stir to coat.
2
Roast
Roast the vegetables, stirring gently and/or turning once or twice, until
they are tender and beginning to brown. The fastest vegetables can take
as little as 15 minutes and the slower ones around an hour. If they are
browning too quickly, lower the temperature to 400°F and stir more

frequently. Sample the vegetables occasionally to check for tenderness,
removing them from the oven as they finish cooking. Taste and adjust
the seasoning.
3
Store
If you are not using the vegetables right away, let them cool, then store
them in airtight containers in the refrigerator for up to a week.
VARIATIONS
8 Ways to Flavor Roasted Vegetables
Toss any of the following with the vegetables:
1. Chopped fresh herbs
2. Citrus juice or grated zest
3. Toasted Bread Crumbs or Croutons
4. Chopped nuts
5. Any flavorful oil, like olive, sesame, or nut oils
6. Vinaigrette
7. Spices or spice blends
8. Butter (simple and classic)
Roasted Peppers
1
Pick Your Heat Source
Heat the oven to 450°F, turn the broiler to high and put the rack 4
inches from the heat, heat a charcoal or gas grill to moderately high
heat and put the rack 4 inches from the heat, or turn on a few gas
burners on your stove.

2
Blacken the Peppers
Roast, broil, grill, or cook the peppers right in the gas flame, turning as
necessary until they’re dark brown or black all over and they collapse
in on themselves. Roasting can take up to an hour, broiling and grilling
about 15 minutes, and cooking in the gas flame about 10.
3
Peel the Peppers
Wrap the cooked peppers in foil or put them in a bowl and cover it
tightly with plastic wrap; the steam will help the skins peel off easily.
When they are cool enough to handle, remove the skins, seeds, and
stems—doing this under running water is easiest. It’s okay if they fall
apart a bit. Now they’re ready to serve or store in the fridge for a few
days or the freezer for a few months.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sweet Pepper Queso Fundido
Queso fundido is Mexico’s answer to fondue. It’s usually served as
a snack, often with a token scattering of poblanos, mushrooms, or
chorizo, but bulked up with vegetables and served with warm
tortillas or tortilla chips, it makes a great dinner.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
4 large bell peppers of the same color
2 garlic cloves
Salt and pepper
12 ounces Jack, Oaxaca, or mozzarella cheese (3 cups grated)
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
2. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a medium ovenproof skillet over
medium-high heat.
Trim, core, seed, and slice the peppers.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
3. Add the bell peppers and garlic to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until the peppers soften, 5 to 10
minutes.
Grate 3 cups cheese.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
4. When the peppers are soft, turn off the heat, add the cheese to the
skillet, and toss so the peppers are well distributed throughout.
5. Broil until the cheese is bubbly and brown, 2 or 3 minutes. Garnish
with the cilantro and serve.
VARIATIONS
5 Other Vegetables to Use Instead of Bell Peppers
1. Poblano peppers
2. Mushrooms (1 pound)
3. Spinach (8 ounces; sauté until it wilts and its water evaporates)
4. Tomatoes (don’t sauté first)
5. Red onions (just 1)

SIDES
Warm Flour or Corn Tortillas
White Rice
Avocado with Hot Sauce and Cilantro
Jícama and Radish Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Eggplant Steaks with Fresh Tomato-
Garlic Sauce
Grilling or broiling the eggplant gives this dish a delicious
smokiness, and this quick, garlicky sauce is hard to beat. Feel free
to use chopped canned tomatoes if fresh ones aren’t in season.

Ingredients
6 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
4 medium ripe tomatoes
4 garlic cloves
Salt and pepper
1 large or 2 medium eggplant (about 2 pounds)
1 bunch fresh basil
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a medium skillet over medium heat.
Core and chop the tomatoes; add them to the skillet as you go.
Peel and mince 4 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet.
3. Sprinkle the tomatoes with salt and pepper and cook, stirring
occasionally until they begin to break down, 8 to 10 minutes.
Trim and slice the eggplant into ½-inch-thick rounds.
Rub the eggplant with 4 tablespoons olive oil; sprinkle with salt and
pepper.
4. Grill or broil the eggplant, turning once or twice and brushing with
more oil if it looks dry, until tender and browned on both sides, about
10 minutes total.
Strip ½ cup basil leaves from the stems.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan.
5. When the tomatoes start to break down, turn off the heat; taste and
adjust the seasoning.
6. When the eggplant is tender and browned on both sides, put the slices
on a platter and spoon the tomato sauce over them. Sprinkle the
Parmesan over the top, tear the basil leaves and scatter them all
around, and serve.
VARIATIONS

Eggplant Steaks with Tomatillo Sauce
Substitute 2 cups chopped husked tomatillos for the tomatoes and add a
seeded and chopped poblano pepper. Garnish with crumbled queso fresco
instead of the Parmesan and ¼ cup chopped cilantro instead of the basil.
Eggplant Steaks with Fresh Tomato-Olive Sauce
Add ½ cup or more pitted black olives along with the tomatoes.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the sauce as described in Steps 2 and 3, use 1 or 2 cups
Tomato Sauce.
Serve the eggplant with a raw tomato “sauce”: Combine chopped tomatoes
with a little minced garlic, olive oil, chopped basil, salt, and pepper.
SIDES
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Bruschetta
Garlic Bread
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Glazed Brussels Sprouts with
Vietnamese Flavors
A Vietnamese-style glaze breathes sweet and spicy life into
Brussels sprouts; add more chiles if you want to kick up the heat.
Serve with some white rice or noodles and this becomes a meal.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
2 pounds Brussels sprouts
Salt and pepper
1 garlic clove
1 fresh hot chile (like Thai or jalapeño)
2 limes
2 tablespoons fish sauce
2 teaspoons sugar
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet with a lid over low
heat.
Trim the Brussels sprouts.
2. Add the Brussels sprouts to the skillet along with a sprinkle of salt and
pepper and ⅓ cup water. Raise the heat to medium-high.
3. Cover and cook, checking once or twice and adding small amounts of
water if the pan looks dry, until the Brussels sprouts are a little shy of
tender, 6 to 10 minutes, depending on their size.
Peel 1 garlic clove. Trim the chile. Mince them together and put them
in a small bowl.
Halve the limes; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
Add 2 tablespoons fish sauce, 2 teaspoons sugar, and ⅓ cup water to
the bowl and stir to combine.
4. When the Brussels sprouts are a little shy of tender, remove the cover,
add the lime and fish sauce mixture, and raise the heat to high. Cook,
stirring just a few times to coat the Brussels sprouts, until the liquid
reduces to a thick glaze and the Brussels sprouts become brown and
crisp in places, 4 to 6 minutes.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
5. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Sprinkle with the cilantro and serve hot
or warm.
NOTES
HEARTIER BRAISED VEGETABLES

Add any of the following to the Brussels sprouts during the final few
minutes of cooking:
1. Chopped peanuts, cashews, or almonds
2. Tofu cubes
3. Cooked chicken or meat
4. Raw shrimp, scallops, or squid
5. Cooked rice, noodles, or grains
BRAISING AND GLAZING
This has become one of my favorite ways to cook firmer vegetables that
take some time to become tender, like Brussels sprouts, winter squash,
parsnips, or other roots like beets and carrots. The braising part consists of
nothing more than simmering the vegetables with a little water and oil or
butter in a covered skillet until they are nearly tender—the steam from the
liquid helps get this done fairly quickly. Then you uncover the pot, turn the
heat to high, and let the liquid bubble away until the skillet is dry and the
near-tender vegetables become glazed with fat. (You can let them brown a
bit too.) By that time the vegetables will be tender and ready to go.
SIDES
White Rice
Fire and Ice Noodles
Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Unstuffed Cabbage
The most onerous part about making stuffed cabbage is actually
stuffing and rolling the cabbage, which requires blanching the
leaves to make them pliable. When you use the cabbage leaves as a
base instead of a wrapper, all that work becomes unnecessary.

Ingredients
1 large head Savoy or green cabbage
2 garlic cloves
1 cup couscous
1 tablespoon olive oil, plus more for drizzling
1 cup canned diced tomatoes with juice
2 teaspoons smoked paprika
Salt and pepper
1 cup vegetable or chicken stock or water
1 bunch fresh parsley

Prep | Cook
Core the cabbage; peel away 8 to 12 large outer leaves. Refrigerate the
remaining cabbage for another use. If your cabbage leaves have thick
stems, cut out the spines.
1. Line the bottom of a large skillet with the cabbage leaves.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; put them in a medium bowl.
2. Add 1 cup couscous, 1 tablespoon olive oil, 1 cup canned diced
tomatoes, 2 teaspoons smoked paprika, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper to the bowl. Stir to combine.
3. Spread the couscous mixture over the top of the cabbage; add 1 cup
stock or water and bring to a boil.
4. Reduce the heat to a simmer, cover, and cook until the cabbage and
couscous are tender and most of the liquid is absorbed, 5 to 10
minutes.
Chop about ¼ cup parsley.
5. When the cabbage and couscous are tender, taste and adjust the
seasoning. Drizzle with a little more olive oil, garnish with the parsley,
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Unstuffed Cabbage with Ground Meat
Brown 8 to 12 ounces ground beef, lamb, pork, chicken, turkey, or sausage
and 1 small onion, chopped, in the skillet, then transfer to a large bowl and
line the skillet with the cabbage leaves. Make the couscous mixture in the

bowl with the browned meat, then layer on top of the cabbage and proceed
as directed.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Vegetable Stock
Chicken Stock
SAVOY CABBAGE
This versatile, long-storing vegetable is worth grabbing whenever you see
it. Like green and red cabbages, Savoy comes in a tightly packed head, only
the leaves are curly and less firm, and the flavor is a little milder. So it’s
perfect for salads and slaws and has a supple texture when cooked.
SMOKED PAPRIKA
I don’t really do favorites, but this is as close as it gets. Even if you haven’t
heard of smoked paprika—or pimentón—you’ve almost certainly eaten
some in chorizo, where its sweet-smoky flavor is dominant. Thankfully
even supermarkets carry it now, so you can incorporate its pleasantly
haunting taste into all sorts of dishes.
Like all paprika, it’s made from dried chiles, but in this case, they’re
smoked first. Pimentón may be either hot or picante (which is not that hot)
or sweet or dulce (which is not sweet but mild). It adds as much smokiness
as bacon and a stunning brick-red color to any dish it touches, Spanish or
not.
SIDES
Steamed Tender Vegetables
Hummus
Carrot Salad with Olives and Rosemary

Cucumber Raita with Cinnamon and Mint
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Potato Rösti with Fresh Apple Sauce
Potato pancakes with apple sauce is a classic of eastern European
cooking, but it’s a lot easier to cook one giant pancake than many
little ones. That’s just what they do in Switzerland, where rösti are
beloved. Call it whatever you want, a crisp potato cake with apple
sauce and a dollop of sour cream is good eating.

Ingredients
4 to 6 medium russet or Yukon Gold potatoes (2 pounds)
Salt and pepper
3 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
3 medium apples (about 1 pound)
½ teaspoon cinnamon
Sour cream for garnish (optional)

Prep | Cook
Peel the potatoes if you like. Shred them in a food processor with a
grating disk or by hand with a box grater.
Drain the potatoes well in a colander or strainer, patting them dry with a
paper towel and squeezing out the moisture. Sprinkle with salt and
pepper and toss.
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large nonstick skillet over medium-
high heat.
2. Put the potatoes in the skillet and press them down with a spatula.
Cook, shaking the pan occasionally until the bottom of the cake is
crisp, 6 to 8 minutes.
3. Put 4 tablespoons butter in a large pot over medium heat.
Core the apples and cut them into thin slices.
4. When the butter has melted, add the apples, ½ teaspoon cinnamon, a
sprinkle of salt, and ⅓ cup water. Cook, stirring occasionally and
adding more water if the mixture gets too dry, until the apples break
down slightly into a sauce, 10 to 15 minutes.
5. When the first side of the rösti is browned, slide it onto a plate, top that
plate with another plate, and flip. Add a little more oil to the skillet and
slide the potatoes back in. Continue to cook, adjusting the heat if
necessary, until the second side is browned, 5 to 10 minutes.
6. Cut the rösti into slices, top with warm apple sauce and a dollop of
sour cream if you like, and serve.
VARIATIONS

Beet Rösti with Fresh Pear Sauce
Use peeled beets instead of the potatoes and pears in place of the apples.
Skip the cinnamon and garnish with crumbled blue cheese instead of sour
cream.
Sweet Potato Rösti with Orange Sauce
Like warm marmalade, only better. Use sweet potatoes. Instead of the
apples use 3 oranges. Grate the zest from 1 of them, then peel them all.
Chop into chunks and add the pulp and the zest to the pot in Step 4. (Wait to
see if you need to add water; you might not.)
SIDES
Green Salad
Brussels Sprouts with Sausage
Tahini Slaw

RECIPE-FREE

Casseroles
1
Sauté aromatics.
Heat the oven to 375°F. Cook aromatics like onions, leeks, shallots,
garlic, ginger, or chiles in a few tablespoons oil or butter over
medium heat until softened and fragrant. A large ovenproof skillet is
best, so you can build the casserole right in the pan.

2
Vary the flavors.
Stir spices or other seasonings into the aromatics to give the casserole
its characteristic flavor. Chipotle chiles in adobo lend a smoky heat;
Dijon mustard and thyme or tarragon lend a French flair; for Italian
flavors, try rosemary and lemon zest; for Chinese, five-spice powder
and soy sauce do the trick; and for Indian flavors, add curry powder
or garam masala.

3
Build in the main ingredients.
Casseroles are the perfect place for leftovers like cooked vegetables,
grains, pasta, beans, or meat. You can also stir in frozen or quick-
cooking raw vegetables or greens (sauté those until just short of
tender before proceeding).

4
Add liquid if you want.
For saucy casseroles, add cream, tomato sauce, salsa, pesto, or even
beaten eggs (to make something akin to a frittata). You want the main
ingredients moistened, but not swimming. (If the vegetables or grains
are raw or underdone, add extra liquid and cover the pan with foil for
the first half of baking.)

5
Top.
The best part is the cheesy, crunchy topping. Any decent melting
cheese will work; bread crumbs are classic for crunch, but chopped
nuts or crushed potato chips, tortillas chips, or pretzels could all get
the job done. Sprinkle everything in an even layer.

6
Bake.
Bake until the cheese is bubbly and the top is brown, 15 to 30
minutes, depending on how much you have in the pan. For extra
browning, run the casserole under the broiler for a minute or 2. Let it
rest for a few minutes before serving.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Squash au Gratin with Toasted Nuts
A luxurious treat. The cream is infused with sage, and the shredded
squash becomes velvety. The top offers a crunchy contrast in the
form of chopped nuts and grated Parmesan. This could be the star
at your next Thanksgiving.

Ingredients
1 large butternut or other winter squash (2 to 2½ pounds)
3 sprigs fresh sage
2 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
1 cup cream
1 cup hazelnuts, pecans, or pistachios
4 ounces Parmesan (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF.
Cut the squash in half crosswise, trim and peel it, scoop out and
discard the seeds, and cut it into chunks. Shred the squash in a food
processor with a grating disk (by far the easier method) or by hand
with a box grater.
Strip the sage leaves from 3 sprigs and chop them.
2. Put the squash in a 9 × 13-inch baking dish. Add the sage, 2
tablespoons olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper; toss and spread
in an even layer. Pour 1 cup cream over the top.
3. Cover the baking dish with aluminum foil and bake until the squash is
tender and the cream is bubbly and thick, 15 to 20 minutes.
Chop 1 cup nuts.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan.
4. When the squash is tender, uncover the dish, sprinkle the Parmesan
over the top, and sprinkle with the nuts. Return to the oven and bake,
uncovered, until the top is lightly browned, about 5 minutes more.
5. Let cool for a minute or 2 before serving.
VARIATIONS
Beet Gratin with Toasted Nuts
Substitute beets for the squash, tarragon for the sage, and add a few dollops
of goat cheese along with the cream. Use pistachios and skip the Parmesan.
Celery Root Gratin with Toasted Nuts

Replace the squash with celery root and the sage with dill. Use hazelnuts
and substitute Gruyère for the Parmesan.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Sauté the squash and sage in a large ovenproof skillet with olive oil until
slightly softened, then stir in ½ cup cream and simmer until the squash is
tender, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle with the cheese and nuts and broil until
browned and bubbling.
SIDES
Rice Pilaf
Quinoa
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Refried White Beans with Rosemary

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cauliflower “Polenta” with
Mushrooms
Polenta is a great comfort food of Italy and a wonderful venue for
all kinds of toppings from meat stews to vegetable ragouts. With
the right seasonings puréed cauliflower impersonates it brilliantly,
increasing your vegetable intake without decreasing your pleasure.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons olive oil
1 cup chicken or vegetable stock, water, or white wine
12 ounces button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
1 large head cauliflower
Salt and pepper
1 large shallot
3 tablespoons butter
2 tablespoons sour cream
2 sprigs fresh rosemary
4 ounces Parmesan or pecorino cheese (1 cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
low heat.
2. Put 1 cup stock, water, or wine in a saucepan over high heat.
Trim and slice the mushrooms. (If you’re using shiitakes, discard the
stems.) Add them to the skillet as you work.
Trim the cauliflower and cut into small florets.
3. Sprinkle the mushrooms with salt and pepper and raise the heat to
medium. Cook, stirring occasionally until tender and lightly browned,
about 10 minutes.
4. Add the cauliflower to the saucepan, lower the heat to medium, and
cook until quite tender, at least 10 minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the shallot.
5. When the mushrooms are tender and lightly browned, add 2
tablespoons olive oil and the shallot. Cook, stirring, for a minute, then
remove from the heat.
6. Transfer the florets from the cooking liquid to the food processor.
Process them in batches, adding 2 tablespoons cooking liquid to each,
until they are as smooth as polenta. Transfer each batch to a large
bowl. Stir 2 tablespoons butter and 2 tablespoons sour cream into the
finished purée.
Strip the leaves from 2 sprigs rosemary and chop finely.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan.

7. Add the rosemary, 1 tablespoon butter, and the Parmesan to the bowl
and stir to combine.
8. Spoon the cauliflower “polenta” into bowls, top with the mushrooms,
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Mashed Potatoes with Mushrooms
Substitute peeled potatoes for the cauliflower. Mash by hand. They may
need 10 minutes more cooking time.
Red Cauliflower “Polenta” with Mushrooms
Use red wine for half of the liquid.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
STRIPPING ROSEMARY
Stripping rosemary leaves from their stems is one of the more satisfying
bits of kitchen prep (see the illustration in Prep Shortcuts). Hold the sprig
from the top with the leaves pointed up (like an open flower), pinch the top
of the sprig with the thumb, forefinger, and middle finger on your other
hand, and pull all the way down. The leaves will strip right off as you slide
your fingers down toward the bottom. Now they’re ready to chop.
SIDES
Asparagus Gratin
Green Salad

Broiled Cherry Tomatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stuffed Poblanos with Black Beans
and Cheese
Stuffed poblano recipes usually have you wrangling with fragile
roasted peppers, struggling to keep them intact. That’s too much
work. If you treat poblanos like normal bell peppers—that is, stuff
them raw—the process is utterly manageable.

Ingredients
8 poblano peppers
1 cup cooked or canned black beans
1 small red onion
1 bunch fresh cilantro
4 ounces manchego or Jack cheese (1 cup grated)
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 limes

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Cut a slit down the length of each poblano and carefully pry each one
open just wide enough to remove the seeds (and later to stuff them).
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them; put the beans in a
bowl.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the bowl.
Chop ⅓ cup cilantro and add it to the bowl.
Grate 1 cup cheese and add to the bowl.
2. Sprinkle the mixture with salt and pepper and stir to combine.
3. Using your fingers, gently stuff the poblanos with the bean mixture.
When all the peppers are stuffed, put them on a rimmed baking sheet,
rub with 2 tablespoons olive oil, and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
4. Broil, turning occasionally to avoid burning until the peppers are soft
and lightly charred on all sides and the cheese is melted, 10 to 15
minutes.
Cut the limes into wedges.
5. When the peppers are done, put them on plates or a platter and serve
with the lime wedges.
VARIATIONS
Stuffed Poblanos with Corn and Cheese
Substitute fresh or frozen corn kernels for the black beans (or do half and
half).

Stuffed Poblanos with White Beans and Mozzarella
Substitute white beans for black, parsley for the cilantro, mozzarella for the
manchego, and lemons for the limes.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you want to roast, peel, and seed the peppers first, see Roasted Peppers
for instructions. Once the peppers are ready to go, carefully stuff them, put
them on a baking sheet, and bake them at 375ºF until the cheese is hot and
melted, about 20 minutes.
SIDES
Warm Flour or Corn Tortillas
Jícama and Radish Salad
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt
White Rice

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sweet Potato Flautas
Flautas—stuffed and rolled tortillas—are typically fried, which is a
bit of work. You can get some of the same shattering crunch by
brushing them with oil and broiling them, the crisp tortillas giving
way to tender sweet potatoes inside. These are perfect for a casual
party.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
2 pounds sweet potatoes
Salt and pepper
6 scallions
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
Twelve 8-inch flour tortillas
Sour cream for garnish
Salsa for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
2. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Peel the sweet potatoes; shred them in a food processor with a grating
disk or by hand with a box grater.
3. Put the sweet potatoes in the skillet with ½ cup water, sprinkle with
salt and pepper, and raise the heat to medium-high.
4. Cook, stirring occasionally until they begin to soften and lighten in
color, 8 to 10 minutes. Add a tablespoon or 2 more oil if they start to
stick to the skillet.
Trim and chop the scallions.
Trim and mince the chile.
5. When the sweet potatoes begin to lighten in color, add the scallions
and chile. Cook, stirring frequently until the potatoes are tender but not
mushy, 2 or 3 minutes.
6. Spoon about ¼ cup of the mixture onto each of 12 tortillas. Roll them
up tightly, leaving the ends open, and brush the outsides with some
olive oil.
7. Put the flautas on a rimmed baking sheet, seam side down so they stay
closed. Broil until the tops are brown and crisp, 2 to 3 minutes. Turn
and brown the other side, about 2 minutes. Watch them so the tortillas
don’t burn. Serve with sour cream and salsa on top or alongside.
VARIATIONS
Potato and Chorizo Flautas

Substitute russet or Yukon Gold potatoes for the sweet potatoes. Before
adding the potatoes to the skillet, sauté 8 ounces fresh Mexican chorizo
until brown.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Fresh Tomato Salsa
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Soak 8 toothpicks in water for 15 minutes and use them to fasten the flautas
shut. Broil, turning once, until both sides are brown and crisp.
Fasten the flautas shut with toothpicks (as described above) and fry them in
about ½ inch of vegetable oil over medium-high heat (350ºF; a pinch of
flour will sizzle but not burn) until golden and crisp, about 2 minutes.
SIDES
White Rice
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Jícama and Radish Salad
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Potato and Spinach Saag
Saag, an Indian stew of spinach and aromatics, is even more
luxurious when bolstered with cream. The potatoes lend some of
their starch to the sauce, which thickens it even further. You’ll want
rice or bread to sop it up.

Ingredients
Salt
1½ pounds russet or Yukon Gold potatoes
1½ pounds spinach
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 inch fresh ginger
2 garlic cloves
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
1 tablespoon garam masala or curry powder
Pepper
1¼ cups cream

Prep | Cook
1. Put a stockpot of water over high heat and salt it.
Peel the potatoes and cut them into ½-inch cubes, adding them to the
pot as you finish.
2. Cover the pot, bring to a boil, and cook until the potatoes are tender, 5
to 15 minutes.
Trim and finely chop the spinach; discard any thick stems.
3. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet with a lid over
medium-high heat.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 2 garlic cloves; trim the chile. Mince them all
together.
4. Add the ginger, garlic, and chile, 1 tablespoon garam masala or curry
powder, and a sprinkle of salt to the skillet. Cook, stirring until
fragrant, about a minute.
5. Add the spinach to the skillet, a handful at a time if necessary to fit it
in, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring until just wilted, 5
to 8 minutes.
6. When the potatoes are fully tender but not mushy, drain them in a
colander or strainer.
7. When the spinach is wilted, add the potatoes to the skillet along with
1¼ cups cream. Stir to combine and heat through, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Mushroom and Spinach Saag

Substitute 1 pound mushrooms, sliced or quartered, for the potatoes. Instead
of boiling them, sauté them for 5 or 10 minutes in the oil at the beginning of
Step 3 before you add the aromatics.
Tofu and Spinach Saag
Use 2 bricks firm or extra-firm tofu instead of the potatoes. Add directly to
the sauce in Step 7 and cook until the tofu warms through and the sauce
thickens.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder
EVEN FASTER
Cut the potatoes into smaller cubes, or thinly slice them so they take less
time to cook.
CREAMY GREEN SAUCES
Stirring a creamy liquid into sautéed greens can turn them into a fantastic
sauce. Cream is most commonly used for this (like creamed spinach), but
coconut milk, yogurt, tahini thinned with a little water, or puréed silken tofu
(or any combination of these) will all provide that thick, rich base into
which the greens can just melt away. The rule of thumb for measuring is 1½
pounds of greens to 1 to 2 cups creamy base. Once the greens are wilted
and the creamy component is added, the sauce is ready to serve, but
simmering the mixture for a bit not only allows all the flavors to come
together but also gives you the opportunity to cook something else—like
potatoes or chopped chicken—directly in the sauce. Note that very delicate
greens like arugula and spinach will meld into a sauce almost instantly.
Collards and other thick ones will take more time to cook or retain some
crunch if you pull them off the heat early. If you can chop them very finely

before you work with them, they’ll break down faster, and it’s also helpful
to add up to a cup of water, ¼ cup at a time, to the creamy base as the thick
greens cook.
SIDES
Cucumber Raita
White Rice
Carrots with Curry Vinaigrette

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Zucchini Fattoush
Fattoush is usually a cold salad composed of raw tomatoes and
toasted bread. Adding other vegetables to the mix—zucchini here
—and serving it warm makes the dish feel heartier and adds only a
few minutes to the prep time.

Ingredients
Two 8-inch pitas
4 tablespoons olive oil
2 large zucchini
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
3 or 4 medium ripe tomatoes
½ cup olives
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 350ºF. Put the pitas on a baking sheet, brush with 1
tablespoon olive oil, and put in the oven (it’s okay that it isn’t heated
yet). Bake, turning once, until crisp, about 15 minutes.
2. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim and chop the zucchini.
3. Add the zucchini to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until tender, 5 or 6 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Core and chop the tomatoes.
Pit ½ cup olives if necessary.
4. When the zucchini is tender, add the garlic, tomatoes, and olives.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the tomatoes are warmed and slightly
softened but the mixture isn’t yet saucy, 2 or 3 minutes.
Chop ½ cup parsley.
Halve the lemon.
5. When the tomatoes are warmed and slightly softened, turn off the heat.
When the pita is crisp, crumble it into the skillet, add the parsley, and
squeeze in the lemon juice. Toss to combine, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Warm Pita Fattoush with Feta
Toss in some cubes of feta cheese right before serving.

Warm Pita Fattoush with Shrimp
Add 8 to 12 ounces chopped shrimp along with the tomatoes and olives in
Step 4. By the time the tomatoes are warmed and softened, the shrimp will
be cooked through.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Grill or broil the pita instead of baking it. You’ll have to keep a closer eye
on it, but it will take less time to crisp up.
SIDES
Refried White Beans with Rosemary
Tahini Slaw
Rice Pilaf
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Couscous
Hummus

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Scrambled Broccoli with Parmesan
and Lemon
Somewhere between scrambled eggs and a broccoli frittata, this
dish pairs the hearty richness of eggs and Parmesan with the bright
punch of lemon juice. If you’re not enthralled by broccoli, there are
plenty of other vegetables that you can treat the same way; see the
list that follows. And any will work with the completely different
taste of the variations.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more if needed
1 large head broccoli (1½ to 2 pounds)
8 eggs
1 lemon
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated), plus a little more for garnish
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Break or chop the broccoli into small florets.
2. Add the broccoli to the skillet along with ⅓ cup water. Partially cover
and cook until the broccoli is just tender and the skillet is dry, 5 or 6
minutes.
Crack the eggs into a medium bowl.
Grate the lemon zest into the bowl, then halve the lemon.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan and add to the bowl.
3. Sprinkle the eggs with salt and lots of pepper and beat.
4. When the broccoli is just tender and the pan is dry (there should still
be some oil left; if not, add some), turn the heat to low and pour in the
egg mixture.
5. Cook, uncovered, stirring occasionally until the eggs are just set, just a
few minutes. Grate a little more Parmesan over the top and squeeze the
lemon juice over the top to taste. Taste and adjust the seasoning and
serve.
VARIATIONS
Scrambled Broccoli with Soy Sauce and Lime
Substitute 1 tablespoon vegetable oil and 1 tablespoon sesame oil for the
olive oil, 2 limes for the lemon, and 2 tablespoons soy sauce for the
Parmesan.
8 Other Vegetables to Cook Like This with Eggs

1. Asparagus
2. Green beans
3. Cauliflower
4. Greens
5. Mushrooms
6. Bell peppers
7. Summer squash or zucchini
8. Eggplant
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Chop the broccoli into small pieces, but keep an eye on them, because they
will become tender fairly quickly.
EGGS TO THE RESCUE
If you ever have vegetables in the fridge and feel totally uninspired, turn to
eggs. They cook almost instantly and can turn sautéed vegetables—which
might otherwise feel like a side dish—into something far more substantial.
Whether you scramble them (Scrambles), broil them (Broiled Eggs), make
an omelet (Omelet for Two), or turn them into a frittata (White Bean and
Spinach Frittata), eggs offer a fast and foolproof canvas for all sorts of
vegetables that you might have lying around.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Garlic Bread
Bruschetta

White Rice

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Bok Choy Pancake with Soy Dipping
Sauce
Think of a thicker scallion pancake with lots of stir-fried bok choy
coursing through it instead of scallions and you’ve got the idea.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more if needed
1 large head bok choy (1½ pounds)
Salt and pepper
1 egg
¾ cup flour, plus more if needed
3 tablespoons soy sauce
½ teaspoon sesame oil
1 tablespoon mirin or
1½ teaspoons water and
1½ teaspoons honey

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet (preferably nonstick)
over medium heat.
Trim the bok choy; cut or pull off the leaves and thinly slice the stems.
2. Add the stems to the skillet and raise the heat to medium-high. Cook,
stirring occasionally until they start to soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
Cut the bok choy leaves into thin ribbons.
3. Add the leaves, a little salt, and some pepper to the skillet. Cook,
stirring occasionally until the leaves wilt and the stems are nearly
tender but still have some crunch, 3 or 4 minutes.
4. Meanwhile, in a large bowl combine the egg, ¾ cup flour, 1 tablespoon
soy sauce, ½ teaspoon sesame oil, and ½ cup water. Whisk until
smooth. It should have the consistency of thin pancake batter; if it
doesn’t, add more water or flour as necessary.
5. When the bok choy is done, stir it into the batter. Put a thin film of
vegetable oil in the skillet if necessary.
6. When the oil is hot, pour the batter into the skillet and spread it into an
even layer with a spatula. Cook, undisturbed, until the edges crisp and
the batter sets, 4 to 6 minutes; adjust the heat so the pancake sizzles
but doesn’t burn.
In a small bowl, whisk together 2 tablespoons soy sauce and 1
tablespoon mirin (or 1½ teaspoons honey mixed with 1½ teaspoons
water).
7. Flip the pancake with a broad spatula and cook until the second side is
crisp and the pancake is cooked all the way through (use a paring knife

to cut into it and peek), another 4 to 6 minutes.
8. Transfer the pancake to a cutting board. Cut it into wedges and serve
with the dipping sauce.
VARIATIONS
Broccoli Rabe Pancake with Ricotta Dipping Sauce
Substitute olive oil for the vegetable oil and broccoli rabe for the bok choy.
Instead of adding soy sauce and sesame oil to the batter, add 1 tablespoon
olive oil, 1 garlic clove, minced, and some red chile flakes. For the dipping
sauce, thin some ricotta cheese with olive oil and season with lemon zest,
salt, and pepper.
SIDES
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fried Fennel and Arugula
If anything can be deep-fried, dipped in mayonnaise, and still
manage to feel light, it’s fennel. Even if you slice it thinly, it stays
crunchy and turns slightly sweet. Meanwhile, the lemon in the
mayonnaise keeps every bite tart and bright.

Ingredients
Vegetable oil for frying
1 large fennel bulb
1 bunch fresh parsley
2 cups all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
Salt and pepper
1 egg
¾ cup beer or sparkling water
1 lemon
⅓ cup mayonnaise
⅓ cup olive oil
1 pound arugula
2 large tomatoes
1 small red onion
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF. Put an inch of vegetable oil in a large deep
skillet over medium heat (the oil should reach 350ºF).
Trim the fennel and thinly slice crosswise to get a pile of crescent-
shaped pieces (pull apart any that are stuck together). Discard any
hard center pieces.
Chop ½ cup parsley.
2. Mix 1 cup flour and 1 teaspoon baking powder in a large bowl and
sprinkle with salt and pepper. Add the egg and ¾ cup beer or sparkling
water and whisk until just combined; it should be the consistency of
pancake batter. Stir in the parsley.
Put 1 cup flour on a shallow plate. Line another plate with paper
towels.
3. When a pinch of flour sizzles in the oil but doesn’t burn (around
350ºF), dredge the fennel pieces lightly in the flour, dip into the batter,
and add to the oil, a few pieces at a time, until the pot is full but not
overcrowded.
4. Cook in batches, adjusting the heat to maintain the temperature of the
oil and turning the fries once, until they are nicely browned all over, 4
to 6 minutes per batch.
5. Drain the fries on paper towels, sprinkle with a little salt, and keep
them warm in the oven while you cook the rest.
Grate the lemon zest into a small bowl. Halve the lemon and add the
juice to the bowl.

6. Add ⅓ cup mayonnaise, ⅓ cup olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper to the bowl; stir to combine.
Trim the arugula; add it to a large serving bowl.
Core the tomatoes and cut them into wedges; add them to the serving
bowl.
Peel and thinly slice the onion; add it to the serving bowl.
Grate ½ cup Parmesan.
7. When you’ve cooked all of the fries, add them to the arugula and
tomato salad, sprinkle with the Parmesan, and serve with the lemon-
mayonnaise dressing.
VARIATIONS
Parmesan Fennel Fries
Omit the arugula, tomato, and onion. Add the Parmesan directly to the
batter in Step 2. Omit the olive oil to make a lemon-mayonnaise dipping
sauce.
Arugula and Jícama Fry Salad with Creamy Lime Sauce
Substitute jícama matchsticks for the fennel, cilantro for the parsley, cotija
cheese or finely crumbled queso fresco for the Parmesan, and lime for the
lemon.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
SIDES

Panfried Corn and Onions
Peas with Prosciutto and Mint
Simmered Squash

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Celery Root Tempura with or Without
Shrimp
Root vegetables make great tempura. Sweet potato is a common
choice, but celery root is even better. (Of course you can do mixed
vegetables too.) If you like shrimp, throw in some of those. These
are delicious dipped in wasabi-spiked soy sauce or mayonnaise
with soy sauce in it.

Ingredients
Vegetable oil for deep frying
Ice cubes
3 eggs
2½ cups flour
2 pounds celery root
6 or 8 large peeled shrimp (optional)
Soy sauce for serving
Wasabi for serving

Prep | Cook
1. Put at least 2 inches of oil in a large deep skillet over medium heat
(you want the oil to get to 350ºF).
2. Combine 2 cups cold water and a cup or 2 of ice in a large bowl and let
it sit for a minute.
Separate 3 eggs; put the yolks in another large bowl and discard the
whites or save for another use.
3. Measure out 2 cups of the ice water (without the ice) and add it to the
yolks along with 1½ cups flour. Beat the mixture lightly; the batter
should be lumpy and very thin.
Trim and peel the celery root; cut it into thin disks or batons (not so
big that you can’t eat a piece in a few bites).
If you’re using shrimp, slice them in half lengthwise.
Put 1 cup flour in a shallow bowl for dredging.
Line a plate with paper towels.
4. When a pinch of flour sizzles in the oil but doesn’t burn (around
350ºF), begin dipping pieces of celery root and shrimp in the flour,
then in the batter. Fry in batches, adjusting the heat to maintain the
temperature and turning once if necessary, until each piece is golden, 3
to 5 minutes.
Mix together some soy sauce and wasabi to taste.
5. Drain the pieces on paper towels as they finish and serve immediately
with the soy and wasabi for dipping. Continue frying and eating as you
go until there’s nothing left.

VARIATIONS
7 Other Root Vegetables for Tempura
1. Sweet potato
2. Rutabaga
3. Daikon
4. Turnip
5. Kohlrabi
6. Butternut or any winter squash
7. Beets
NOTES
EATING AROUND THE STOVE
Eating dinner standing up in the kitchen is not something I usually
recommend, but some dishes are not only fun but optimal when consumed
while gathered around the stove, and tempura is one of them. So are other
delicate, fried dishes that don’t do too well just sitting around on a counter
or in a low oven. The sooner you eat it, the better it will taste, so instead of
seeing the timing as stressful, embrace the opportunity to do something
different. Besides, there’s nothing quite like nibbling on something crispy
and fried while you’re watching the next batch bubble away in the oil.
SIDES
White Rice
Edamame Succotash
Peas with Ginger

Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Quick-Stewed Green Beans with
Bacon
As wonderful as barely cooked, perfectly crisp-tender green beans
are, sometimes you want them soul food style: soft and stewed.
Bacon and beer send this over the top.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
4 slices bacon
1 large onion
2 garlic cloves
2 pounds green beans
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
1 cup beer
Salt and pepper
4 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoon olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium
heat.
Chop the bacon and add it to the skillet.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the skillet.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet.
2. Cook, stirring occasionally until the bacon is crisp and the onion is
golden and soft, 5 to 10 minutes.
Trim the green beans.
3. Add the green beans to the cooked bacon and onion, along with the
tomatoes with their juice, 1 cup beer, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
4. Turn the heat to high and let the mixture bubble vigorously, adding a
splash of water if the pan gets too dry, until the tomatoes break down
into a thick sauce and the green beans are very tender, 10 to 15
minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. When the beans are ready, taste and adjust the seasoning. Garnish with
the scallions and serve.
VARIATIONS
Quick-Stewed Green Beans with Sausage or Ham
Substitute chopped or sliced sausage or chopped smoked ham for the bacon.
Quick-Stewed Green Beans with Shrimp

You can omit the bacon if you like, but you can also keep it in. When the
green beans are just about as tender as you want them to be, stir in 12
ounces peeled shrimp. Make sure they are coated in the sauce and simmer
until they are just cooked through, 3 or 4 minutes.
Quick-Stewed Green Beans with Chicken
Add 12 ounces boneless, skinless chicken thighs, cut into large chunks,
along with the bacon. Let them brown a bit with the bacon and onions, then
keep it in the skillet for the entire cooking process.
NOTES
COOKING WITH BEER
Wine is called for as an ingredient much more often than beer, but cooking
with beer makes just as much sense. For starters, beer is a logical option
when you need a flavorful cooking liquid: It has a better flavor than store-
bought stocks, and it’s not unlikely that you’ll have some in your fridge.
And, like wine, if you don’t finish a beer you can drink it or pop it into the
fridge and cook with it over the next few days. (Flat beer is fair game for
cooking.) Whole books cover the intricacies of beer flavors. For now, just
know that lagers and wheat beers will produce a lighter, fruitier dish;
porters will add richness; and stouts will impart deep, caramelized flavors.
SIDES
White Rice
Warm Flour Tortillas
Warm Buttery Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Braised Cabbage, Sauerkraut, and
Ham
Sauerkraut is a valuable staple of the fast pantry, and it’s about as
natural and healthy as a store-bought food can be. You can serve it
straight from the jar, but when you treat it like an ingredient and
braise it with seasonings like ham, dill, and beer, everything tastes
as if you’ve been cooking for hours. The fresh cabbage increases
the mileage you get out of the kraut, and the crunch is a wonderful
counterpart.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
8 ounces smoked ham steak
1 large onion
1 pound sauerkraut
1 head Savoy cabbage (about 1½ pounds)
1 bunch fresh dill
2 bay leaves
Salt and pepper
2 cups water or beer
Mustard for serving (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet or large pot over
medium-high heat.
Cut the ham into ½-inch cubes.
2. Add the ham to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until it’s
nicely browned all over, 5 to 10 minutes.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
Rinse and drain the sauerkraut.
3. Add the onion to the browned ham and cook, stirring occasionally
until it softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Core and shred the cabbage.
Strip ⅓ cup dill leaves from the stems and chop.
4. When the onion softens, add the sauerkraut, cabbage, and dill, along
with 2 bay leaves, a sprinkle of salt and pepper, and 2 cups water or
beer. Bring the mixture to a boil, then adjust the heat so that it bubbles
steadily.
5. Cook, stirring occasionally and adding more liquid if the mixture gets
too dry, until the cabbage is tender and most of the liquid is gone, 8 to
12 minutes.
6. Remove the bay leaves from the pot, taste and adjust the seasoning,
and serve with mustard on the side if you like.
VARIATIONS
Braised Cabbage, Kimchi, and Bacon

Substitute slab bacon for the ham (drain the fat after cooking), kimchi for
the sauerkraut, and Napa cabbage for Savoy. Omit the dill and mustard.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
If you’ve got a lot of sauerkraut to burn through, feel free to double the
amount and skip the fresh cabbage. Once you add it to the pan you’ll only
need to simmer it with a splash of liquid until it heats through.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Quinoa
German-Style Potato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pan-Seared Corn and Pork
Skillet-charred corn kernels are fantastic. Combine them with crisp
bits of pork shoulder and a bit of tropical flavor and you have a
meal.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 pound boneless pork shoulder
Salt and pepper
8 ears fresh corn
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
1 lime
1 bunch fresh cilantro

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet (preferably cast iron) over
low heat.
Chop the pork shoulder into small bits (about ¼ inch, but no need to be
exact).
2. Add the pork to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and raise the
heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring once or twice until the pork is
browned and crisp on at least a few sides, 5 to 10 minutes.
Husk the corn and strip the kernels off the cobs.
Trim and mince the chile.
3. When the pork is browned and crisp, transfer it to a bowl with a slotted
spoon. Add the corn and chile to the skillet and sprinkle with salt and
pepper.
4. Cook, shaking the pan occasionally and keeping the corn in as much of
a single layer as possible, until the kernels are well browned on at least
one side, 5 to 10 minutes.
Halve the lime.
Chop ¼ cup cilantro.
5. When the corn is ready, stir the pork back into the skillet and cook
until it warms through, a few minutes more. Squeeze the lime juice
over the top, garnish with the cilantro, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pan-Seared Corn and Poblanos

Instead of the pork, sauté 4 sliced poblanos until tender and lightly
browned. Then stir them back into the corn in Step 5.
Pan-Seared Corn and Steak
Substitute 1 pound skirt or flank steak, cut into small cubes, for the pork.
Sear the steak until browned and crisp on at least a few sides.
Pan-Seared Corn and Shrimp
Start the corn and chile in the skillet first. When they’re browned in places,
stir in 1 pound chopped peeled shrimp, sprinkle with a little more salt and
pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until the shrimp is just cooked
through, 3 or 4 minutes.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Use frozen corn (about 3 cups). Since the kernels usually have some
moisture clinging to the outside, they won’t brown quite as well as fresh
corn kernels, so pat them dry as best you can before adding them to the
skillet.
SIDES
Warm Flour or Corn Tortillas
Jícama and Radish Salad
White Rice
Fajita Peppers and Onions

INGREDIENT

Peppers
Here is a list of some of the peppers you’ll be turning
to often, starting with fresh hot chiles and moving to
dried chiles and then sweet peppers. Smaller peppers
tend to be hotter than larger ones, while mature
peppers (red and orange) are hotter than green ones.
The seeds and white veins inside the pepper are the
hottest part, so you can control the heat to a certain
extent by including those or leaving them out.
Chiles can actually burn you, so wash your hands
well after you work with them and try to avoid
touching your eyes or other sensitive areas. If you
want to quench the heat of a hot chile that you’ve just
eaten, milk, bread, crackers, or bananas will do a
much better job than thin liquids, which just slosh the
heat all around your mouth.
Peppers
Description
Heat

HABANERO
AND
SCOTCH
BONNET
Not technically the same, but you can
use them interchangeably. They are
walnut size, ranging in color from neon
green to red, yellow, and orange. Both
are incredibly hot but also slightly
fruity.
Very hot
THAI
Also known as Thai bird. Pinky size or
smaller; green when young, red when
mature.
Very hot
SERRANO
Finger size or smaller, thin skinned;
green when young (most common), red
when mature.
Hot
JALAPEÑO
Usually sold when green but
sometimes red; the flavor is slightly
herbaceous.
Hot to medium
FRESNO
Like jalapeños, but with thinner flesh,
usually sold when red (mature) but
sometimes green.
Hot to medium
POBLANO
Like a smaller, flatter bell pepper, but
with a mild heat; usually dark green
but sometimes red.
Medium to mild
ANAHEIM
Long, wide, and somewhat flat; green
and red.
Medium to mild
CHIPOTLE
Smoked jalapeños; the flavor is
incomparable. You’ll find them either
canned with adobo (seasoned vinegar
sauce) or dried.
Very hot to hot

CHILE DE
ÁRBOL
Unlike many dried chiles, these retain a
bright reddish brown to almost orange
color; narrow and a couple inches long;
nice heat and depth of flavor.
Very hot to hot
DRIED
THAI
Dried Thai chiles (see above); small,
narrow, and brownish red.
Hot
RED CHILE
FLAKES
The familiar combination of dried
seeds and bits from a variety of
peppers, always red/yellow in color.
Great for adding plain old heat.
Hot to medium
GUAJILLO
Dark reddish brown with shiny, thick
skin; flat and about an inch wide and a
few inches long.
Medium
ANCHO
Dried poblanos. Almost purple or
black; compact, squarish; medium size.
The classic in mild chili powder and an
excellent mild dried chile.
Medium to mild
PASILLA
Almost black, very wrinkled, long, and
narrow.
Hot to mild
BELL
PEPPERS
The ubiquitous red, orange, yellow, and
green peppers with crisp flesh that has
a grassy, sweet flavor. Immature
(green) ones are slightly bitter.
None or almost
none
SHISHITO
Finger sized and pale green, they are
wonderful fried or grilled whole and
served with salt.
Mostly mild, but
one out of every
ten or so is hot

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Roasted Spaghetti Squash with
Brown Butter and Walnuts
Silky strands of squash soaking up nutty, earthy brown butter taste
like fall. It takes a little time for the squash to become tender, but
once you get it roasting you can walk away until it’s time to make
the brown butter, which is best done at the last minute.

Ingredients
2 medium spaghetti squash
Olive oil
Salt and pepper
½ cup walnuts
2 sprigs fresh sage
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 500ºF.
Halve the squash lengthwise and scrape out the seeds.
2. Put the squash on a rimmed baking sheet, drizzle with olive oil, and
sprinkle with salt and pepper. Turn them cut side down.
3. Put the squash in the oven—it doesn’t have to be fully heated. Roast
until the squash are tender and a knife easily pierces the skin, 30 to 40
minutes.
Chop ½ cup walnuts.
Strip the leaves from 2 sprigs sage and chop.
4. After the squash has cooked for 25 minutes or so, put 4 tablespoons
butter in a small saucepan over medium heat. Cook, swirling
occasionally until the foam subsides and the butter turns nut brown, 3
to 5 minutes. Stir in the walnuts, sage, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper. Turn off the heat.
5. When the squash are tender, carefully use a fork to scrape and loosen
the strands of squash, keeping them inside the skin.
6. Put each squash half on a plate, sprinkle with salt and pepper, spoon
the butter mixture over the top, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Roasted Spaghetti Squash with Rosemary-Garlic Oil and Walnuts
Instead of the butter, put ⅓ cup olive oil, some chopped fresh rosemary, and
sliced garlic in a saucepan over medium-low heat. Let the oil bubble gently
and infuse with the flavor of the rosemary and garlic, 5 to 10 minutes.

Roasted Spaghetti Squash with Hazelnuts and Gorgonzola
Skip the butter and chop ¾ cup hazelnuts instead of the walnuts. When the
squash is tender, remove it from the oven, turn the broiler to high, and move
the rack 6 inches from the heat. After loosening the squash strands in Step
5, sprinkle first with the sage, then with the nuts. Crumble 4 ounces (1 cup)
Gorgonzola over all and broil until bubbly and fragrant.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Quinoa

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Spanish Tortilla
One of the world’s great vegetarian dishes, Spanish tortilla takes
the humblest of ingredients—potatoes, onion, and eggs—and turns
them into a meal fit for any time of day. Don’t skimp on the olive
oil; it’s the key to success. See the list of ingredient additions that
follows for ways to spike tortilla with a little more flavor.

Ingredients
1 cup olive oil
1 medium onion
1½ pounds Yukon Gold potatoes
Salt and pepper
8 eggs

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 cup olive oil in a large skillet (preferably nonstick) over medium
heat.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
Thinly slice the potatoes.
2. Add the onion and potatoes to the skillet and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Adjust the heat so the oil bubbles gently and cook, turning the
potatoes every few minutes until you can easily pierce them with the
tip of a knife (don’t let the potatoes brown), about 20 minutes.
Crack the eggs into a large bowl, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
beat.
3. When the potatoes are tender, drain them and the onion in a colander,
reserving the cooking oil. Wipe out the skillet, return it to medium
heat, and add 2 tablespoons of the reserved oil.
4. Add the potatoes and onion to the eggs, then pour the mixture into the
skillet. Cook just until the edges are firm, a minute or 2, then reduce
the heat to medium-low and cook, undisturbed, for 5 minutes.
5. Run a rubber spatula around the edges to make sure the tortilla will
slide out of the skillet, then gently slide it onto a plate. Add another
tablespoon of the reserved oil to the skillet.
6. Cover the tortilla with another plate and, holding the plates tightly
together, invert the tortilla. Slide it back into the skillet and cook until
it’s just set all the way through, 3 to 5 minutes.
7. Slide the tortilla onto a plate or cutting board and serve warm or at
room temperature.

VARIATIONS
8 Additions to Spanish Tortilla
Stir any of the following into the beaten eggs in Step 4:
1. ½ cup chopped pitted olives
2. ¼ cup capers
3. 1 tablespoon minced garlic or fresh chiles
4. 2 teaspoons smoked paprika
5. Up to 1 cup grated manchego cheese
6. ½ cup chopped smoked Spanish chorizo or Serrano ham
7. ½ cup chopped Roasted red peppers
8. A few chopped anchovy fillets
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
If you have a mandoline, use that to slice the potatoes very thinly. Not only
will the slicing go more quickly, but the potatoes will cook a lot faster as
well; start checking after 5 minutes.
SIDES
Green Salad
Warm Buttery Toast
Tomato Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Vegetable Flatbread with Kale and
White Bean Stew
Try chickpea flour (excellent stuff) and you’ll get a variation of the
Provençal favorite, socca. Use the baking time to make a quick
kale and white bean stew, perfect for serving with or spooning over
the bread.

Ingredients
8 tablespoons olive oil
4 ounces button or cremini mushrooms
1 small onion
Salt and pepper
1 cup flour (all-purpose, whole wheat, or chickpea), plus more as
needed
2 or 3 sprigs fresh rosemary
1 pound kale
2 garlic cloves
2 cups cooked or canned white beans (one 15-ounce can)
½ cup chicken or vegetable stock or water
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large
ovenproof skillet over medium heat.
Trim and thinly slice the mushrooms; trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice
the onion.
2. Add the vegetables to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
cook, stirring occasionally until soft, 5 to 10 minutes.
3. Put 1 cup flour in a medium bowl; sprinkle with salt and pepper, then
slowly add 1½ cups warm water, whisking to eliminate lumps. The
batter should be the consistency of thin pancake batter. Cover with a
towel and let sit while the oven heats.
Strip the rosemary leaves from 2 or 3 sprigs and chop; add them to the
batter.
4. When the vegetables are soft, add them to the batter. Put 4 tablespoons
olive oil in the skillet and let it heat up.
5. Pour in the batter and swirl it around to make sure the vegetables are
spread out evenly. Bake until the flatbread is browned and crisp around
the edges (it will release easily from the pan when it’s done and a
toothpick inserted will come out clean), about 30 minutes.
6. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a medium skillet over medium heat.
Trim and chop the kale. Discard any very thick stems.
7. Add the kale to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook
until the leaves are just wilted, 4 or 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.

If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
8. When the kale is just wilted, add the garlic and cook, stirring until
fragrant, about a minute. Add the beans and ½ cup stock or water.
Adjust the heat so the mixture simmers very gently; cover and cook,
adding more liquid if the pan gets too dry, until the flatbread is done.
9. When the flatbread is browned and crisp and a toothpick comes out
clean, transfer it to a cutting board and let it rest for a few minutes.
Taste the kale and white bean stew and adjust the seasoning; divide it
among shallow bowls. Grate ½ cup Parmesan over the top.
10. Cut the bread into wedges and serve alongside the stew.
VARIATIONS
“Pizza” with Kale and White Bean Stew
When the bread is done, top as you would a pizza—smear a thin layer of
tomato sauce (like the Master Recipe) on first if you like, then add a
sprinkling of cheese and any other toppings you like.
Broil until the cheese is bubbly and browned.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
SIDES
Green Salad
Tomato Salad

Caprese Salad
Fennel Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cherry Tomato Cobbler
This is a classic cobbler turned savory with tomatoes, onions, and
garlic. You don’t get to put whipped cream on it, but you do get to
shower the crisp biscuit top with Parmesan cheese.

Ingredients
Olive oil
2 tablespoons cold butter, plus some for greasing the pan
1 egg
¾ cup flour, plus more if needed
¾ cup finely ground cornmeal
¾ teaspoon baking powder
¼ teaspoon baking soda
Salt
½ cup buttermilk, plus more if needed
2 pints cherry tomatoes
2 garlic cloves
1 medium red onion
Pepper
Several sprigs fresh basil for garnish
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 425ºF.
Grease a medium ovenproof skillet (preferably not cast iron) with
olive oil or butter.
Cut 2 tablespoons cold butter into cubes.
Crack the egg into a small bowl and beat it.
2. Put ¾ cup flour, ¾ cup cornmeal, ¾ teaspoon baking powder, ¼
teaspoon baking soda, and a sprinkle of salt in a food processor. Add
the cubed butter and pulse until the mixture looks like coarse bread
crumbs.
3. Add the beaten egg and ½ cup buttermilk and pulse a few more times
until the mixture comes together in a thick, sticky batter. (If the
mixture seems too wet, add more flour; if too dry, add more
buttermilk.)
Halve the cherry tomatoes and put them in a medium bowl.
Peel and thinly slice 2 garlic cloves; add them to the bowl.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the red onion; add it to the bowl.
4. Drizzle the tomato mixture with some olive oil, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and toss.
5. Put the tomato mixture in the skillet; spoon dollops of the biscuit batter
across the top.
6. Bake until the biscuits are golden and cooked through and the
tomatoes and onions are softened, 20 to 25 minutes.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs.

Grate ½ cup Parmesan.
7. When the cobbler is done, sprinkle the Parmesan on top and tear the
basil leaves over all. Drizzle with a little olive oil if you like. Serve
hot, warm, or at room temperature.
VARIATIONS
Tomato Cobbler with Olives and Fennel
Substitute 1 cup pitted olives for half of the tomatoes (no need to halve
them) and fennel for the red onion.
Tomato and Corn Cobbler
Especially great in summer. Fold 1 cup fresh corn kernels into the biscuit
batter by hand at the end of Step 3.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Put the biscuit batter on a greased rimmed baking sheet and press until it’s
½ inch thick. Bake until golden and cooked through, 8 to 12 minutes. Sauté
the tomato, garlic, and onion mixture in a little olive oil in a large skillet
until the tomatoes just start to break down. When the biscuit is done, spread
the tomato mixture over the top.
SIDES
Green Salad
Chopped Salad
Fennel Salad
Pinzimonio
Refried White Beans with Rosemary

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tortilla Lasagna
In the Pasta and Noodles chapter, egg roll wrappers stand in for
lasagna noodles; here flour tortillas do the job. The tortillas on the
bottom soak up the juices from the vegetables, while the ones on
top become wonderfully crisp.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more for greasing the skillet
1 onion
3 poblano peppers
12 ounces button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
Salt and pepper
3 or 4 medium ripe tomatoes
2 teaspoons chili powder
1 teaspoon cumin
8 ounces Jack or cheddar cheese (2 cups grated)
Eight to ten 6-inch flour tortillas
1 bunch fresh cilantro
6 radishes

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 425ºF. Put 3 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large
ovenproof skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the skillet.
Core, seed, and chop the poblanos; add them to the skillet.
Trim and slice the mushrooms. (If you’re using shiitakes, discard the
stems.) Add them to the skillet.
2. Sprinkle the vegetables with salt and pepper and cook, stirring
occasionally until they’re soft, 8 to 12 minutes.
Core and chop the tomatoes.
3. When the vegetables are soft, add 2 teaspoons chili powder and 1
teaspoon cumin and cook, stirring until fragrant, about a minute. Add
the tomatoes and cook, stirring occasionally until they begin to break
down, 3 to 5 minutes.
Grate 2 cups Jack cheese.
4. When the tomatoes begin to break down, transfer the vegetable
mixture to a bowl and wipe out the skillet. Grease the skillet with a
little vegetable oil, then layer about half of the tortillas in the bottom of
the skillet and curling up along the sides.
5. Top with the vegetable mixture and about half of the cheese, then layer
the remaining tortillas on top, sprinkle with the rest of the cheese, and
drizzle with a little more oil.
6. Cover and bake until the cheese is melted and the vegetables are
bubbly, 20 minutes. Then remove the cover and continue baking until
the top is crisp, about 5 minutes more.

Chop ¼ cup cilantro.
Chop the radishes.
7. When the top of the lasagna is crisp, remove the skillet from the oven,
garnish with the cilantro and radishes, and let it cool for a few minutes
before cutting into wedges and serving.
VARIATIONS
Green Tortilla Lasagna
Use spinach tortillas if you can find them and substitute 1 bunch spinach,
chopped, for the mushrooms and 6 to 8 tomatillos for the tomatoes. Garnish
with chopped avocado instead of or in addition to the radishes.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
EVEN FASTER
After layering the lasagna in the skillet, just run it under the broiler until the
top is bubbly and brown.
IMPROMPTU LASAGNAS AND GRATINS
If you ever find yourself staring into a refrigerator dotted with random
vegetables that aren’t pulling you in one direction or another, you can
always fall back on the lasagna treatment. Sauté a collection of vegetables
until they are all more or less tender, then layer them in an ovenproof skillet
or baking dish with cheese and some stand-in for lasagna noodles, be it
tortillas, sliced bread, or cooked noodles or grains. Then bake or broil until
bubbly and hot. It gives those random vegetables an immediately
recognizable and delicious context and is a great way to use up what’s in
your fridge.

SIDES
Mexican Street Corn
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Jícama and Radish Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Skillet Spanakopita
Buttering individual sheets of phyllo dough is not fast. This skillet
spanakopita preserves all the flavors and textures of the classic dish
but eliminates much of the busywork.

Ingredients
10 to 12 sheets phyllo dough
3 tablespoons olive oil
4 scallions
Two 10-ounce bags spinach
Salt and pepper
2 eggs
6 ounces feta cheese (1½ cups crumbled)
1 teaspoon dried dill
¼ teaspoon nutmeg
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter

Prep | Cook
Remove 10 to 12 sheets of phyllo (typically one plastic-wrapped roll)
from the freezer.
1. Heat the oven to 350ºF. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a medium
ovenproof skillet over low heat.
Trim and chop the scallions and the spinach.
2. Raise the heat to medium-high and add the scallions and spinach, a
handful at a time; sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring
frequently until the spinach leaves are just wilted, 2 or 3 minutes after
the last addition.
Crack the eggs into a medium bowl and beat them.
Crumble 1½ cups feta and add to the bowl. Add 1 teaspoon dill and ¼
teaspoon nutmeg.
Melt 4 tablespoons butter in the microwave or in a small pot over
medium-low heat.
On a dry surface, cut the phyllo into thin shreds.
3. When the spinach is wilted, stir in the egg and feta mixture and
sprinkle the shredded phyllo dough over the top. Drizzle the melted
butter over the phyllo.
4. Bake until the phyllo is crisp, about 30 minutes. Cut the pie into
wedges and serve hot, warm, or at room temperature.
VARIATIONS
Deconstructed Spinach, Tomato, and Ricotta Pie

Replace the feta with ricotta and add some grated lemon zest and red chile
flakes to the mixture along with the nutmeg. Stir in ½ cup chopped tomato
or ¼ cup chopped dried tomatoes when you add the egg and cheese mixture
to the spinach in Step 3.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Classic Spanakopita
Start with a 1-pound package phyllo. Brush the bottom of a 9 × 13-inch
baking dish with butter. Lay 6 phyllo sheets in the pan (they should hang
over the side), brushing each one with melted butter as you go. Spread half
of the spinach and feta mixture over the phyllo, then top with another 4 or 5
sheets, again brushing each one with butter. Top with the remaining spinach
mixture and fold in the edges to close the pie. Add some of (or all of) the
remaining phyllo to close any open spaces if necessary and brush the top
with butter. Score the pie into squares or triangles and bake until golden
brown.
SIDES
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Rice Pilaf
Chopped Salad
Tomato Salad with Olive Oil and Yogurt

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cauliflower Tikka with Boiled Eggs
Tossed with a yogurt-curry marinade and roasted in a hot oven,
cauliflower florets become tender and beautifully charred in places.
A boiled egg is a rich and welcome addition.

Ingredients
¾ cup yogurt
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 tablespoon curry powder or garam masala
Salt and pepper
1 large head cauliflower (about 2 pounds)
4 eggs
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF.
2. Combine ¾ cup yogurt, 2 tablespoons vegetable oil, 1 tablespoon curry
powder or garam masala, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper in a large
bowl.
Break or chop the cauliflower into small florets.
3. Add the cauliflower to the bowl and toss to coat in the yogurt mixture.
Spread the cauliflower out on a rimmed baking sheet.
4. When the oven is hot, roast the cauliflower, turning occasionally until
it’s tender and charred in a few places, 15 to 20 minutes.
5. While the cauliflower roasts, fill a medium saucepan about two-thirds
full of water and bring it to a boil.
6. When the water boils, use a spoon to lower the eggs into the gently
boiling water. Adjust the heat so the water barely simmers, then cook
until as runny or firm as you like (6 minutes for soft-boiled, 10
minutes for hard).
Chop several sprigs parsley.
7. When the eggs are cooked to your liking, put the pot under cold
running water for 30 to 60 seconds. If the eggs are firm, peel away the
shells; if they are still runny, wait until the cauliflower is on the plates,
then scoop them out of the shells onto the cauliflower.
8. When the cauliflower is tender and charred in spots, divide it among 4
plates. Top each one with an egg, sprinkle the eggs with a little salt and
pepper, garnish with the parsley, and serve.

VARIATIONS
BBQ Cauliflower with Boiled Eggs
Substitute ketchup for the yogurt, 2 teaspoons chili powder and 1 teaspoon
cumin for the curry powder, and 1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce for 1
tablespoon of the vegetable oil. Garnish with chopped scallion instead of
the parsley.
Chipotle Cauliflower with Boiled Eggs
Substitute mayonnaise for the yogurt and 2 chopped chipotles with some of
their adobo for the curry powder. Garnish with cilantro instead of parsley.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder
EVEN FASTER
Chop the cauliflower into smaller pieces and broil them 6 inches away from
the heat. Keep an eye on them, because they will start to char pretty quickly,
SIDES
White Rice
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Cucumber Raita

Beans and Tofu
BEANS
Beans on Toast
Hot and Sour Black Beans with Bok Choy
White Beans with Sausage, Greens, and Garlic
Stewed White Beans and Tomatoes with Parmesan Toast
Stir-Fried Curried Chickpeas with Potatoes and Carrots
Lemony Limas with Broccoli
Red Beans and Cabbage in Buttery Tomato Sauce
Lima Bean and Cabbage Gratin with Rye Crumbs
White Bean and Spinach Frittata
Beer-Braised Black Beans with Chicken and Corn
White Beans with Pork and Cabbage, Kimchi Style
White Bean and Ham Gratin
Fast Feijoada
Lentil and Mushroom Stew
Red Lentils with Toasted Cauliflower
Tomato-Braised Lentils and Potatoes

Braised Lentils with Salmon
BBQ Lima Beans with Collards

TOFU
Stir-Fried Tofu and Green Beans
Deep-Fried Tofu with Peanut Sauce and Scallions
Manchurian Tofu and Cauliflower
Eggs Sukiyaki
Smoky Tofu and Black Bean Chili
Roasted Tofu with Sesame Drizzle
Braised Tofu with Tomatoes and Broccoli

Beans and Tofu
More of us have come to appreciate beans, and with
good reason; not only are they a low-fat, low-calorie
source of quality protein and fiber, but they’re
versatile, they almost never go bad, they’re easy on
the environment, and they’re cheap.
Tofu is a tougher sell for some people, mostly
because they think of it as a meat replacement. They
shouldn’t. Tofu, essentially the simplest form of soy
“cheese,” is densely packed with protein, ready to eat
right out of the package, and delicious once you
know what to do with it. Which is minimal and
which you’ll learn here.
Beans offer a bit of a conundrum for the fast
cook. They come in two major categories: dried,
which take a long time to cook from scratch but are
undeniably superior, and canned, which are as fast
and convenient as it gets but not quite as good. This
chapter lets you have it both ways; all of the bean

recipes (barring those for lentils, which you can cook
from scratch quickly) call for cooked or canned
beans. If you want to use canned, go for it; if you
want to cook beans from scratch to have on hand for
any of these recipes, you’ll find instructions in the
Master Recipe.
Either way, the more you integrate beans and tofu
into your cooking repertoire, the better off you’ll be.

Chapter Highlights
Beans 101  What to know about beans before you start cooking. Beans.
Beans from Scratch  Strategies for using homemade beans every time.
Beans, Soaked and Unsoaked.
Lentil Lexicon  Lentils cook from scratch in less than 45 minutes. Here are
the three most popular varieties. Lentils.
Cooking Dal  The greatest family of lentil dishes on the planet. Red
Lentils with Toasted Cauliflower.
Tofu 101  An intro to the world of tofu. Tofu.
Boozy Beans  Beer makes a superb cooking liquid, for beans, tofu, and
beyond. Cooking with Beer.
Braising in Beans  Beans as a medium for other foods. Braising with
Beans.
Bean Gratins  Run ’em under the broiler. Lima Bean and Cabbage Gratin
with Rye Crumbs, White Bean and Ham Gratin.
Fast Takes on Slow Beans  Two dishes that typically take hours,
significantly sped up. BBQ Lima Beans with Collards, Fast Feijoada.
Thinking Outside the Can  Really, there are few rules about which beans
should go with which flavor profiles. White Beans with Pork and Cabbage,
Kimchi Style, Hot and Sour Black Beans with Bok Choy.

Global Tofu  Just because tofu comes from Asia doesn’t mean we should
use it only in Asian dishes. Braised Tofu with Tomatoes and Broccoli.
The Sticking Point for Tofu  Why stir-frying tofu in a nonstick pan makes
so much sense. Tofu and Nonstick Cookware.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Beans on Toast
As a snack or for breakfast or lunch, beans on toast is hearty and
comforting. With a simple salad on the side, it’s suitable for dinner.

Ingredients
8 thick slices any good bread
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 garlic clove
4 cups cooked or canned navy or other white beans (two 15-ounce cans)
1 teaspoon sugar
1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
Salt and pepper
Several sprigs chopped fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Toast 8 slices bread.
2. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil in a medium saucepan over medium-low
heat.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove.
3. Add the garlic to the pan and cook until fragrant, a minute or 2.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
4. When the garlic is fragrant, add the beans to the pan along with 1
teaspoon sugar, 1 tablespoon Worcestershire, 2 teaspoons Dijon, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper.
5. Raise the heat to medium and cook, stirring occasionally until the
beans are warmed through and the mixture is slightly saucy, 3 to 5
minutes.
Strip the leaves from several sprigs parsley and chop.
6. When the beans are warmed through, taste and adjust the seasoning.
Spoon them onto the toast, sprinkle with the parsley, and serve.
VARIATIONS
White Beans on Toast with Parmesan and Sage
Use cannellini or other large white beans. Swap ¼ teaspoon red chile flakes
for the sugar, ¼ cup grated Parmesan for the Worcestershire, and 2
teaspoons chopped fresh sage for the Dijon. Skip the parsley.
Smoky Pinto Beans on Toast

Use pinto beans. Swap 1 teaspoon cumin for the sugar, 1 teaspoon chili
powder for the Worcestershire, and ½ teaspoon smoked paprika for the
Dijon. Add the spices along with the garlic. Garnish with cilantro instead of
parsley.
Lima Beans on Toast with Lemon and Rosemary
Use lima beans. Use the grated zest of a lemon in place of sugar and
Worcestershire and 2 teaspoons chopped fresh rosemary instead of Dijon.
Edamame on Toast with Sesame Oil and Scallions
Use frozen edamame. Substitute vegetable oil for the olive oil, 1 teaspoon
soy sauce for the sugar, and 2 teaspoons sesame oil for the Worcestershire.
Skip the Dijon. Garnish with scallions and sesame seeds instead of parsley.
Curried Chickpeas on Toast
Use chickpeas. Replace the olive oil with butter, the sugar with 1
tablespoon curry powder, and the Worcestershire and Dijon with 1 teaspoon
cumin seeds. Add the spices along with the garlic. Garnish with cilantro
instead of parsley.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you prefer, cook the beans, adding a little stock or water and mashing
them up as you go, until they are very soft and creamy, 20 to 30 minutes.
SIDES
Green Salad
Chopped Salad

Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Hot and Sour Black Beans with Bok
Choy
Black beans take on classic Chinese flavors well. (If you come
across black soybeans, snap ’em up, but ordinary black turtle beans
are just fine.) Here a quick marinade makes them salty, sweet, sour,
and hot all at once. A toss with stir-fried bok choy is all it takes to
make a meal.

Ingredients
4 cups cooked or canned black beans (two 15-ounce cans)
2 tablespoons soy sauce
1 tablespoon sesame oil
2 tablespoons rice vinegar
1 teaspoon sugar
½ teaspoon red chile flakes, or more to taste
Pepper
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 large head bok choy (1½ pounds)
2 garlic cloves
Salt

Prep | Cook
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them; put the beans in a
medium bowl.
1. Add 2 tablespoons soy sauce, 1 tablespoon sesame oil, 2 tablespoons
rice vinegar, 1 teaspoon sugar, ½ teaspoon red chile flakes, and a good
amount of pepper to the beans. Toss to coat and let sit.
2. Put 3 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Trim the bok choy; cut or pull the leaves from the stems. Thinly slice
the stems.
3. Add the stems to the skillet and raise the heat to medium-high. Cook,
stirring occasionally until they start to soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
Cut the leaves into wide ribbons.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
4. Add the leaves, garlic, a little salt, and some pepper to the skillet.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the leaves wilt and the stems are
nearly tender but still have some crunch, 3 or 4 minutes.
5. Stir in the black beans and all of the marinade and cook, stirring to
combine, just until the beans are warmed through, 3 or 4 minutes.
Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Lemony Chickpeas with Kale
Swap chickpeas for the black beans, a sprinkle of salt for the soy sauce, 1
tablespoon olive oil for the sesame oil, and lemon juice for the rice vinegar.
Skip the sugar. Use kale instead of bok choy; since the stems are smaller,

you need to cook them on their own for only 2 or 3 minutes before adding
the leaves.
Hot and Sour Chicken with Bok Choy
Perfect when you have leftover roast chicken. Instead of the beans, use 1
pound plainly cooked white or dark meat chicken. Remove the bones if
necessary and shred or chop it into bite-sized pieces, then add it to the
marinade in Step 1.
Hot and Sour Beef with Asparagus
You can use any plainly cooked cut: roast beef, grilled steak, or even
crumbled ground meat. Remove the bones if necessary and shred or chop it
into bite-sized pieces, then add it to the marinade in Step 1. Instead of the
bok choy, use 1½ pounds asparagus. Cut into 1-inch pieces, keeping any
thick stems separate. Give a head start as described for the bok choy stems
in Step 3, then proceed with the recipe to cook the tips and add the
marinated meat.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

White Beans with Sausage, Greens,
and Garlic
White beans, greens, and Italian sausage make one of the holy
trinities of the kitchen. Cook this quickly if you want the beans to
remain intact or long and slow if you’ve got the time and want the
beans to fall apart a bit. See the Notes on the opposite page.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
12 ounces sweet or hot Italian sausage
1½ pounds spinach, kale, collards, escarole, chard, or broccoli rabe
2 garlic cloves
4 cups cooked or canned white beans (two 15-ounce cans)
½ cup chicken stock or water
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
Cut the sausage into slices.
2. Add the sausage to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until
lightly browned, 5 or 6 minutes.
Trim and chop the greens, keeping any thick stems separate (discard
thick spinach stems).
3. When the sausage is lightly browned, add any chopped stems to the
skillet and cook until they begin to soften, 3 or 4 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
4. When the stems begin to soften, add the leaves, a handful at a time if
necessary to fit them in, along with the garlic, beans, and ½ cup
chicken stock or water.
5. Cook, stirring occasionally until the beans are warmed through and the
greens are just wilted—3 or 4 minutes for spinach; 4 or 5 minutes for
escarole, chard, and broccoli rabe; 5 or 6 minutes for kale and collards.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan.
6. Add the Parmesan to the skillet and stir. Season with salt and pepper.
Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
White Beans with Bacon, Greens, and Garlic

Substitute chopped bacon for the sausage. Cook until crisp and drain the
excess fat before adding the stems.
Black Beans with Chorizo, Greens, and Garlic
Substitute fresh Mexican-style chorizo for the Italian sausage and black
beans for white. Omit the Parmesan.
Kidney Beans with Ham, Greens, and Garlic
Substitute chopped smoked ham for the Italian sausage and kidney beans
for the white beans. Omit the Parmesan and add a dash of hot sauce instead
if you like.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you want a soft stewy mixture, let the beans and greens bubble gently,
adding more stock or water if the pan gets too dry, until the greens are very
tender and the beans begin to break apart, up to 45 minutes.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Bruschetta
Caprese Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stewed White Beans and Tomatoes
with Parmesan Toast
A warm, cozy pot of stewed beans and tomatoes cries out for
something crusty and crunchy to dip into it. Thick slices of
Parmesan-topped toast is the ultimate accompaniment.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for drizzling
1 medium onion
3 garlic cloves
3 or 4 medium ripe tomatoes
Salt and pepper
4 cups cooked or canned white beans
4 thick slices any rustic bread
½ cup white wine
2 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water, plus more if needed
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
Several sprigs fresh basil

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
2. Add the onion and garlic to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally
until the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Core and chop the tomatoes.
3. When the onion softens, add the tomatoes and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the tomatoes begin to soften,
about 5 minutes.
4. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
Put 4 slices bread on a rimmed baking sheet.
5. When the tomatoes begin to soften, add ½ cup white wine and let it
bubble until evaporated. Add 2 cups stock or water, the beans, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Bring the mixture to a boil, then adjust the
heat so it bubbles gently but steadily.
6. Cook, stirring occasionally and adding more liquid if the mixture gets
too dry, until the tomatoes break down and the beans soften, 10 to 15
minutes.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop.

7. Drizzle both sides of the bread with a little olive oil. Broil until the
tops are golden, a minute or 2. Remove, flip the bread, and sprinkle the
untoasted sides with the Parmesan. Broil until the cheese is bubbly and
brown, another minute or 2.
8. When the tomatoes are ready, taste and adjust the seasoning. Divide
among 4 bowls, scatter the basil over the top, drizzle with olive oil,
and serve with the Parmesan toast for dipping.
VARIATIONS
Stewed White Beans and Kale with Parmesan Toast
Substitute 1 pound chopped kale (preferably lacinato) for the tomatoes.
After adding it to the skillet in Step 3, cook until it wilts down a bit, 5 to 10
minutes, then proceed with the recipe.
Stewed Pinto Beans and Tomatoes with Cheesy Tortillas
Substitute vegetable oil for olive oil, pinto beans for the white beans, and
beer for the white wine. Instead of bread, use four 6-inch flour or corn
tortillas and top them with cheddar or Jack instead of Parmesan. Garnish
with cilantro instead of basil.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
After the onion softens, add the wine and let it bubble until evaporated, then
add the tomatoes, beans, and stock. Simmer together just until you’ve made
the Parmesan toast.

SIDES
Green Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Brussels Sprouts with Sausage

INGREDIENT

Beans
Beans are convenient and delicious, the perfect food
to keep on hand to toss into salads and stir-fries,
stews and gratins, and many other dishes. Here’s all
you need to know to become a bean lover.
Dried vs. Canned
Other than those made with lentils, none of the recipes in this chapter calls
for cooking dried beans from scratch. That’s because without a pressure
cooker you can’t cook a dried bean in less than 45 minutes, which is the
upper time limit for recipes in this book. (If you have a pressure cooker, you
can use it to cook beans from scratch in less than half an hour.) For speed, I
use dried beans cooked ahead of time or canned beans. Canned beans are
incredibly useful, and it’s worth keeping them stocked in your pantry, but
like anything else that isn’t home-cooked, there are some disadvantages:
You can’t control their texture: The texture of canned beans is what
it is, and it tends to be on the soft side.
The flavor of canned beans is never as deep as that of home-
cooked.
The liquid from beans you cook yourself is usually delicious and
usable; the viscous liquid that comes in the can is something you
want to rinse off.
Only the most common bean varieties are canned.
Canned beans are more expensive.

Freezing Beans
Since frozen beans keep perfectly, the best way to avoid canned beans is to
cook large batches of beans (see Beans, Soaked and Unsoaked) and freeze
whatever you don’t use in the next day or two. (You can refrigerate cooked
beans for up to 5 days.) To freeze cooked beans, let them cool in their
liquid, then put them, liquid and all, in zipper bags or plastic containers
with tight-fitting lids. You can freeze them like this for up to 6 months. To
thaw frozen beans, either leave them in the refrigerator for about a day,
defrost them in the microwave, or put the frozen block in a covered pan
with a little water over medium-low heat. (Don’t stir too much or the beans
will break apart.)
Storing Dried Beans
Dried beans don’t go bad, but they do get old and stale, and older beans
take longer to soften. While you have no way of knowing when beans were
dried, broken or discolored beans and beans with imperfect skins are clues
that they might not be the freshest. Try to use all the beans you’ve
accumulated throughout the year over the summer, then buy new ones in the
fall. That ensures that you’re not keeping beans in the pantry for more than
a year and gives you a chance of getting beans from the latest crop.
Lentils
Dried lentils are essential ingredients in the fast kitchen—they cook from
scratch in as little as 15 minutes. These are the varieties you’re likely to
cook with the most.
Type of Lentil
Description

BROWN LENTILS
The most ubiquitous variety of lentil,
ranging from khaki colored to dark brown
and black, with a mild, earthy flavor. They
cook in 20 to 30 minutes and tend to hold
their shape during cooking.
RED LENTILS
They should really be called orange lentils
because few are actually red. They are
usually peeled and split, which means they
cook very quickly, in about 15 minutes.
Even if you don’t overcook them, they get
very soft and fall apart when tender, so
they’re an excellent choice for dals, soups,
or any dish you want to thicken a bit as the
lentils break apart. There are yellow lentils
as well, which you can use in place of red;
split peas are acceptable substitutes.
GREEN LENTILS
Green lentils range from dark green to
greenish brown and have a very deep, full
flavor. They take the longest to cook of all
the lentils (could be 45 minutes) and hold
their shape perfectly, which makes them
ideal for lentil salads. The best variety are
French green lentils, called Puy or lentilles
du Puy.
Store-Bought Frozen Beans
Some stores sell frozen cooked beans, and that’s another excellent option.
The beans you see most often frozen are lima beans, butter beans, black-
eyed peas, and edamame; white, black, red, and pink beans are sometimes

frozen as well. Thaw them in the microwave before incorporating them into
the dish or just let the heat of whatever you’re cooking warm the beans
right in the pan. You can use frozen lima beans and frozen shelled edamame
interchangeably.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Curried Chickpeas with
Potatoes and Carrots
Crisp spiced chickpeas are one of the great snack foods of all time,
too good to confine to nibbling. Here they’re added to a grated-
root-vegetable stir-fry, which benefits greatly from the extra crunch
and seasoning.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons vegetable oil
4 cups cooked or canned chickpeas (two 15-ounce cans)
1½ pounds russet or Yukon Gold potatoes
1 pound carrots
2 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
1 tablespoon curry powder
Salt and pepper
1 bunch fresh cilantro
¼ cup coconut milk

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
If you’re using canned chickpeas, rinse and drain them.
2. Add the chickpeas to the skillet and cook, stirring or shaking the pan
occasionally until they are golden and crisp, 10 to 15 minutes.
Scrub the potatoes; trim and peel the carrots. Shred both in a food
processor with a grating disk or by hand.
Peel 2 garlic cloves and 1 inch fresh ginger; mince them together.
3. When the chickpeas are golden and crisp, add 1 tablespoon curry
powder and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring until the curry
powder is fragrant, a minute or 2. Transfer the chickpeas to a plate.
4. Add 2 tablespoons vegetable oil to the skillet along with the garlic and
ginger. Cook, stirring until they’re fragrant, 30 seconds to a minute.
5. Add the potatoes and carrots, stirring them around to coat in whatever
curry powder was left behind. Cook, stirring occasionally until the
vegetables are tender and lightly browned, 8 to 12 minutes.
Chop ½ cup cilantro.
6. When the vegetables are tender and lightly browned, sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Stir in ¼ cup coconut milk, scraping any browned bits off
the bottom of the skillet.
7. Stir in the cilantro and the chickpeas, taste and adjust the seasoning,
and serve.

VARIATIONS
Spicy Stir-Fried Chickpeas with Sweet Potatoes
Swap 2½ pounds sweet potatoes for the potatoes and carrots, 1 minced
fresh hot green chile for the ginger, and 2 teaspoons chili powder and ½
teaspoon cayenne for the curry powder. Omit the coconut milk.
Stir-Fried Curried Chickpeas with Chicken and Carrots
Skip the potatoes. Before adding the garlic and ginger in Step 4, cook 12
ounces chopped boneless, skinless chicken thighs until they lose their pink
color and are cooked through, 5 or 6 minutes. Add them to the chickpeas
and stir both of them back into the skillet in Step 7.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Curry Powder
EVEN FASTER
Cook the garlic, ginger, and vegetables in another skillet while the
chickpeas are crisping.
SIDES
White Rice
Cucumber Raita
Crisp Seasoned Pita

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Lemony Limas with Broccoli
These are not the soggy, gray canned limas of myth. Frozen limas
are bright, convenient, and delicious and even more so with a
squeeze of lemon and a savory broccoli stew. Add a sprinkle of
grated Parmesan or crumbled feta cheese if you like.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons butter
2 large shallots
1 medium head broccoli (1 to 1½ pounds)
½ cup white wine
4 cups frozen lima beans
1 cup chicken or vegetable stock or water
Salt and pepper
1 lemon
Several sprigs fresh parsley

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet or large pot over medium
heat.
Trim, peel, and chop 2 shallots.
2. Add the shallots to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until they
soften, 2 or 3 minutes.
Trim and break or chop the broccoli into small florets.
3. When the shallots soften, add ½ cup white wine and let it bubble until
mostly evaporated. Add the broccoli, 4 cups lima beans, and 1 cup
stock or water and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
4. Turn the heat to high, bring to a boil, then bring the heat back to
medium. Cover and cook, stirring occasionally until the broccoli is just
tender, 5 to 10 minutes.
Grate the zest from the lemon, then cut it in half.
Strip the leaves from several sprigs parsley and chop.
5. When the broccoli is just tender, squeeze in the lemon juice and stir in
the zest and the parsley. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve hot or
at room temperature.
VARIATIONS
Soy-Lemon Edamame and Asparagus
Substitute 1 large bunch asparagus, cut into 2-inch pieces, for the broccoli,
frozen edamame for the lima beans, and ¼ cup soy sauce for the white
wine. The asparagus will take less time to become tender than the broccoli,
so keep an eye on it. Use cilantro or scallions instead of the parsley.

Limy Limas and Poblanos
Substitute a small red onion for the shallots, 3 or 4 poblano peppers, cut
into strips, for the broccoli, and beer for the wine. The poblanos will take
less time to become tender than the broccoli, but it’s okay if they get soft.
Swap a lime or 2 for the lemon and cilantro for the parsley. If you have any
queso fresco, crumble some on at the end.
Lemony Limas with Spinach and Eggs
Substitute 1 pound spinach for the broccoli. In Step 4, cook, stirring
occasionally, until the leaves just start to wilt. Then adjust the heat so the
liquid bubbles gently; make 4 indentations in the vegetable mixture and
crack an egg into each. Cover and cook until the vegetables are hot and the
eggs set to your liking, 3 to 10 minutes.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
SIDES
Grape Salad with Mint
Caprese Salad
Quick Brown Rice

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Red Beans and Cabbage in Buttery
Tomato Sauce
Here you get the soft, silky texture of braised cabbage, beans, and
tomatoes, the richness of butter, and the sharp bite of ginger. This
has the feeling of a long-cooked dish but takes only as long as the
tomatoes need to break down and the cabbage needs to become
tender.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
2 inches fresh ginger
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
1 small head Savoy or green cabbage (1 pound)
4 cups cooked or canned red beans (two 15-ounce cans)
½ cup chicken or vegetable stock or water, plus more if needed
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a large pot over medium heat.
Peel and mince 2 inches fresh ginger.
2. Add the ginger to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until
fragrant, a minute or 2.
3. Add the tomatoes and turn the heat to medium-high.
Trim, core, quarter, and chop the cabbage; add it to the pot as you go.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them; add the beans to
the pot.
4. Add ½ cup stock or water, sprinkle the whole mixture with salt and
pepper, and stir to combine.
5. Reduce the heat to medium and cook, stirring occasionally and adding
more liquid if the mixture gets too dry, until the tomatoes break down,
the cabbage becomes tender, and the beans get creamy, 10 to 15
minutes.
6. Stir in 2 tablespoons butter, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Pintos and Peppers in Buttery Tomato Sauce
Substitute 2 garlic cloves and 1 fresh hot green chile, both minced, for the
ginger, 4 sliced bell peppers for the cabbage, and pinto beans for the red
beans.
Red Beans and Okra in Buttery Tomato Sauce

Swap 1 pound okra, cut into thin rounds, for the cabbage. If you don’t like
the slimy texture of okra, you can add a little more liquid to the pot and
simmer the mixture, partially covered, until the okra more or less melts into
the sauce, about an hour.
Red Beans and Cabbage in Coconutty Tomato Sauce
Use coconut milk instead of stock or water. Omit the 2 tablespoons butter at
the end.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
SIDES
White Rice
Warm Buttery Bread
Celery Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Lima Bean and Cabbage Gratin with
Rye Crumbs
A lighter and even vegetarian ode to the Reuben sandwich. While
lima beans are certainly not corned beef, they do offer satisfying
heft, and you can eat this dish often, without guilt. (If you don’t
mind guilt, see the Notes.)

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 small head red cabbage (1 pound)
¼ cup red wine vinegar
Salt and pepper
2 slices rye bread (a little stale is fine)
4 ounces Gruyère cheese (1 cup grated)
4 cups frozen lima beans
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Put 4
tablespoons butter in a large ovenproof skillet over low heat.
Trim, core, quarter, and chop the cabbage.
2. Turn the heat under the skillet to medium-high and add the cabbage to
the skillet along with ¼ cup red wine vinegar and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the cabbage is softened, 8 to
10 minutes.
Tear 2 slices rye bread into pieces, transfer to a food processor, and
pulse into coarse crumbs.
Grate 1 cup Gruyère.
3. When the cabbage softens, stir in 4 cups lima beans and 1 tablespoon
Dijon. Cook, stirring occasionally until the lima beans are warmed
through, 2 or 3 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
4. Spread the mixture out evenly in the skillet, sprinkle it with the
Gruyère, and scatter the bread crumbs over the top.
5. Broil until the cheese is bubbly and brown and the bread crumbs are
crisp. Let it cool for a minute or 2, then serve.
VARIATIONS
Black Bean and Cabbage Gratin with Tortilla Crumbs and Jack
Substitute olive oil for the butter, green cabbage for red, and the juice of 2
limes for the red wine vinegar. Instead of pulsing rye bread in the food
processor, roughly crumble tortilla chips with your hands (enough to make
½ to ¾ cup). Swap Jack cheese for the Gruyère, rinsed and drained black

beans for the lima beans, and 1 or 2 chopped chipotles in adobo for the
Dijon. Garnish with chopped fresh cilantro or scallions.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the rye crumbs as described in Step 2, use Bread Crumbs
you’ve already made.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Corned Beef Cabbage Gratin with Lima Beans
Before adding the cabbage to the skillet, sauté about 1 cup chopped corned
beef or pastrami until the edges start to get crisp, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove
it with a slotted spoon, then add the cabbage and proceed. Either stir the
meat back in along with the beans and Dijon in Step 3 or, for extra crunch,
sprinkle it on top along with the bread crumbs. Or do a little of each.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Garlicky Mushrooms
Quinoa

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

White Bean and Spinach Frittata
Frittata is as versatile a dish as there is: You put nearly anything in
it—including leftovers—and it’s appropriate to eat at any time of
day. Beans are an uncommon addition but contribute wonderful
heartiness and a nice contrast to the spinach.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 small onion
1 pound spinach
Salt and pepper
6 eggs
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
2 cups cooked or canned white beans (one 15-ounce can)
Several sprigs fresh basil

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large ovenproof skillet over medium
heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. Add the onion to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until it’s
softened, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim and chop the spinach, discarding any thick stems.
3. Raise the heat to medium-high. Add the spinach to the softened onion,
a handful at a time, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Stir and cook
until the spinach is just wilted and the liquid has evaporated, 5 to 10
minutes.
Crack the eggs into a medium bowl.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan and add it; sprinkle with salt and pepper and
beat the mixture.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop.
4. When the spinach is wilted and the liquid has evaporated, add the
beans, basil, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Stir to combine and turn
the heat to low.
5. Pour the eggs into the skillet, tilting it or using a spoon to distribute
them evenly. Cook until the eggs are barely set, 5 to 10 minutes.
6. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
7. When the eggs are barely set, transfer the skillet to the broiler and
cook just until the top turns golden, a minute or 2.

8. Cut the frittata into wedges and serve, hot, warm, or at room
temperature.
VARIATIONS
Pinto Bean and Poblano Frittata
Substitute red onion for yellow and 4 poblano peppers, chopped, for the
spinach. Cook the onions and poblanos together until both are soft. Use
grated Oaxaca cheese (or any melting cheese—Jack would work well)
instead of the Parmesan, pinto beans instead of the white beans, and cilantro
instead of the basil.
Pea and Arugula Frittata
Shouts of spring. Substitute arugula for the spinach and fresh or frozen peas
for the white beans. Sauté the arugula leaves until they are barely wilted, a
couple of minutes. Parmesan is perfect here, but you can beat 4 ounces soft
goat cheese into the eggs instead. Use mint or chives instead of the basil.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
SIDES
Green Salad
Tomato Salad
Fennel Salad with Olives

MASTER RECIPE

Beans, Soaked and Unsoaked
The value of soaking beans is arguable, but most
experienced cooks now consider it optional. The
benefit of soaking is that you don’t have to check on
the beans as often while they’re cooking or add as
much water; the downside, of course, is that you have
to think a little farther ahead. Cooking time,
ultimately, is not much different. Here, then, are two
methods for cooking beans, which take the same
amount of time and result in the same taste and
texture. No matter which method you choose, see the
lists that follow for ideas about flavoring the beans
either during or after cooking.
No-Soak Beans
1
Wash and Pick Over
Rinse beans, lentils, or split peas (a pound is a nice amount, since
they’re packaged that way) and discard any broken bits or discolored
beans.
2
Combine Beans and Water
Put them in a large pot and cover with cold water by 2 or 3 inches.
Bring to a boil, then reduce the heat so the liquid bubbles gently.

3
Simmer Until Tender
Partially cover the pot and cook, stirring only once in a while and
adding water if the liquid gets low before the beans are done; check for
doneness every 15 minutes or so. When the beans start to get tender,
sprinkle with salt and pepper and continue cooking until the beans are
done the way you like them, a total of 20 to 45 minutes for lentils and
up to an hour or more for other beans. Pour off any extra water if the
beans are done before the water has evaporated. Taste and adjust the
seasoning and use immediately or store (see Beans for storing
instructions).
Quick-Soaked Beans
Use this method for any beans except for lentils and split peas or split
beans.
1
Boil—Then Soak—the Beans
Put the beans in a large pot and cover with cold water by 2 or 3 inches.
Bring to a boil and let it boil for about 2 minutes. Cover the pot, turn
off the heat, and let the beans soak for 2 hours.
2
Start Cooking
After 2 hours, taste a bean. If it’s tender (it won’t yet be fully done),
sprinkle with salt and pepper and make sure the beans are covered with
about an inch of water. If the beans are still hard, don’t add any salt;
cover with about 2 inches of water. Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat
so the liquid bubbles gently. Partially cover the pot and cook, stirring
only once in a while and adding water if the pot gets too dry.
3
Simmer Until Tender

Check for doneness every 15 minutes or so. If you haven’t added salt
and pepper yet, add them when the beans start to get tender. Continue
cooking until the beans are done the way you like them. Taste and
adjust the seasoning and use immediately or store (see Beans for
storing instructions).
VARIATIONS
5 Ways to Flavor Beans as They Cook
Add any of the following ingredients to the pot, alone or in combination,
when you start cooking the beans:
1. Herbs or spices: A bay leaf, a couple of cloves, some peppercorns,
thyme sprigs, parsley leaves and/or stems, chili powder, or other herbs
and spices
2. Aromatics: An unpeeled onion, a carrot, a celery stalk, and/or 3 or 4
cloves of garlic
3. Stock: Chicken, beef, or vegetable stock in place of all or part of the
water
4. Other beverages: A cup or so of beer or wine or, if you feel like
experimenting, coffee, tea, or juice
5. Smoked meat: Ham hock, pork chop, beef bone, bacon, or sausage,
fished out after cooking, the meat chopped and stirred back into the
beans
8 Ways to Flavor Cooked Beans
Add any of the following ingredients to cooked beans (the quantities are for
4 servings of beans):
1. 2 tablespoons butter, olive oil, or sesame oil
2. ½ cup chopped fresh parsley, cilantro, mint, or any basil leaves

3. 2 tablespoons chopped fresh rosemary, tarragon, oregano, thyme, or
sage leaves
4. Up to ½ cup any Vinaigrette
5. A tablespoon or so of curry powder or chili powder
6. Soy, Worcestershire, or Tabasco sauce to taste
7. 1 or 2 tablespoons miso thinned with hot bean-cooking liquid and
warmed gently with the beans
8. Chopped onion or other aromatic vegetables added during reheating

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Beer-Braised Black Beans with
Chicken and Corn
Toasting tomato paste, garlic, and spices along with the chicken
and onions sets the stage for the addition of beer, which pulls all
those deep flavors together into a saucy glaze.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
6 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 1 pound)
1 onion
2 garlic cloves
4 cups cooked or canned black beans (two 15-ounce cans)
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 teaspoon chili powder
1 teaspoon cumin
1 cup beer
3 cups frozen corn
Salt and pepper
1 bunch fresh cilantro
4 ounces queso fresco (1 cup crumbled)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Cut the chicken into ½-inch chunks.
2. When the oil is hot, add the chicken to the skillet and cook,
undisturbed, until the pieces brown and release easily, 2 or 3 minutes.
Then cook, stirring occasionally until the meat is no longer pink, 2 or 3
minutes longer.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
3. Add the onion to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until it
softens, 2 or 3 minutes.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
4. Add the garlic, 1 tablespoon tomato paste, 1 teaspoon chili powder,
and 1 teaspoon cumin to the skillet. Cook, stirring until the mixture
darkens and becomes fragrant, 1 or 2 minutes.
5. Add 1 cup beer, stirring to scrape up any browned bits. Add the beans,
3 cups corn, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
6. Adjust the heat so the mixture simmers gently but steadily and cook
until the liquid reduces to a glaze, 3 or 4 minutes.
Chop ½ cup cilantro.
7. When the liquid has reduced to a glaze, taste and adjust the seasoning.
Stir in the cilantro and divide among 4 bowls. Sprinkle with the queso
fresco and serve.

VARIATIONS
Beer-Braised Black Beans and Corn with Chorizo
Cook 4 to 8 ounces smoked Spanish chorizo, cut into cubes or small pieces,
over medium heat until crisp. Scoop out the chorizo with a slotted spoon
and use the fat to cook the onion. Proceed with the recipe, stirring in the
cooked chorizo at the last minute.
Beer-Braised Pinto Beans with Chiles and Sour Cream
Use pinto beans instead of black beans. Cook 2 chopped poblano chiles
with the onion (add some seeded chopped jalapeños as well if you want
more heat). Add the juice of a lime along with the beer and top each serving
with a dollop of sour cream.
Wine-Braised White Beans with Cherry Tomatoes and Parmesan
Substitute white beans for the black beans, white wine for the beer, cherry
tomatoes for the corn, and basil for the cilantro. Skip the chili powder and
cumin. Garnish with freshly grated Parmesan and lots of olive oil.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chili Powder
EVEN FASTER
Instead of cooking chicken as described in Step 2, cut 1 cup Whole Roast
Chicken into chunks and add in Step 5.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Cut fresh corn kernels off the cob instead of using frozen.

SIDES
Coleslaw
White Rice
Warm Tortillas
Jícama and Radish Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

White Beans with Pork and Cabbage,
Kimchi Style
An impromptu skillet kimchi is bolstered by stir-fried pork and
white beans and spreads its salty-sweet-spicy flavors all across the
dish. The Korean red pepper paste gochujang is available at many
Asian markets, but if you can’t find it, red chile flakes, or even a
few shakes of Sriracha to taste, will add the heat you’re looking for.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
8 ounces boneless pork shoulder
4 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
Salt and peper
1 small head Savoy or Napa cabbage (1½ pounds)
3 tablespoons gochujang or 1 tablespoon red chile flakes
3 tablespoons soy sauce
2 tablespoons sugar
2 cups cooked or canned white beans (one 15-ounce can)
4 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet or large pot over low
heat.
Cut the pork into thin slices or strips.
Peel 4 garlic cloves and 1 inch ginger; mince them together.
2. Raise the heat under the skillet to high. When the oil is hot but not
quite smoking, add the pork and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook
undisturbed until the pieces release from the pan, about 1 minute. Then
cook, stirring occasionally until browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim, core, quarter, and roughly chop the cabbage.
3. When the pork is browned, add the garlic and ginger and cook, stirring
until fragrant, 30 seconds to a minute. Add the cabbage to the skillet, a
handful at a time if necessary to fit it in. Reduce the heat to medium.
4. Once all the cabbage is added, stir in 3 tablespoons gochujang or 1
tablespoon red chile flakes, 3 tablespoons soy sauce, and 2 tablespoons
sugar. Cook, tossing occasionally until the cabbage is softened and
coated in the sauce, 5 or 6 minutes.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. When the cabbage is softened, stir in the beans and cook just until
warmed through, 2 or 3 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning,
garnish with the scallions, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Edamame with Pork, Cabbage, and Miso

Substitute miso for the gochujang and frozen edamame for the white beans.
Edamame with Chicken and Cabbage
Use boneless chicken thighs instead of the pork in the main recipe (or the
first variation).
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
EVEN FASTER
Omit the garlic and ginger. Instead of using the cabbage and the sauce
ingredients, just stir in 2 cups store-bought kimchi in Step 5.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you prefer a softer cabbage, cook it longer in Step 4 until it loses most of
its crunch.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Scallion Pancakes
Cucumber Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

White Bean and Ham Gratin
A hurry-up cassoulet: Combine beans with meat, top with crispy
bread crumbs, and eat. Pork and white beans are the classic
combination, but the variations are also terrific.

Ingredients
¼ cup olive oil, plus more for drizzling
1 medium red onion
2 garlic cloves
8 ounces smoked ham
4 cups cooked or canned white beans (two 15-ounce cans)
1 lemon
¼ cup white wine or water
Salt and pepper
½ cup bread crumbs
Several sprigs fresh basil for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Put ¼ cup
olive oil in a large ovenproof skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
2. Add the onion and garlic to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally
until the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Chop the ham.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
Grate the zest from the lemon; refrigerate the fruit for another use.
3. When the onion softens, stir in the ham, beans, lemon zest, ¼ cup
white wine or water, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
4. Spread the mixture out evenly in the skillet, scatter the bread crumbs
over the top, and drizzle with a little more olive oil.
5. Broil until the beans are hot and bubbly and the bread crumbs are
crisp, 3 to 5 minutes.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop.
6. When the beans are bubbly and the bread crumbs are crisp, garnish
with the basil, let cool for a minute or 2, and serve.
VARIATIONS
White Bean and Smoked Fish Gratin
Substitute 8 ounces smoked salmon or trout for the ham. Garnish with dill
instead of the basil.

Chickpea and Chorizo Gratin
Swap 8 ounces smoked Spanish chorizo for the ham and chickpeas for the
white beans. Stir ½ teaspoon smoked paprika into the bread crumbs before
sprinkling them over the top. Garnish with parsley instead of the basil.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Bread Crumbs
COOKING WITH HAM
Most recipes in this book (and others) use ham that’s cut into chunks. If you
can’t find thick-cut smoked ham steaks or smoked pork chops (those will
work too), just ask for 1 extra-thick slice (between ¼ and ½ inch) of ham at
the deli counter. When you want really crisp ham—great to sprinkle on
soups and salads—start with thin slices, slice them into wispy shreds, and
sauté in oil, stirring frequently, until they become crunchy. This process (I
call it frizzling), works fine for regular deli ham, but is even tastier with dry
varieties like prosciutto and Serrano.
SIDES
Green Salad
Chopped Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Simmered Squash

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fast Feijoada
Feijoada (pronounced fay-JWA-da) is the cassoulet of Brazil, a one-
pot dish of dried beans and cured meats that inspires rhapsodies,
arguments, memories, and other passions. This version uses canned
beans (or your own precooked beans) to cut way back on the cook
time. It may not inspire you to write a poem, but it’s super-tasty.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 large onion
3 garlic cloves
8 ounces linguiça or kielbasa
8 ounces bacon (preferably slab)
8 ounces smoked pork chops or ham steak
6 cups cooked or canned black beans (three 15-ounce cans)
2 dried hot red chiles (like chile de árbol), or more to taste
1 cup chicken stock or water
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet or large pot over
medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
2. Add the onion and garlic to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally
until the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Cut all the meat into chunks.
3. When the onion softens, add the meat and cook, stirring occasionally
until it browns and crisps, 8 to 12 minutes.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
Trim the dried chiles; seed them if you like and mince.
4. When the meat is brown, stir in the beans, chiles, and 1 cup stock or
water. Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles
steadily but not vigorously.
5. Cook, stirring occasionally until the liquid mostly disappears, 5 to 10
minutes. Stir in salt to taste and serve.
VARIATIONS
Fast Cassoulet
This dish usually takes days, so doing it in 30 minutes is obviously
cheating, but it still satisfies. Use an ovenproof skillet or large pot.
Substitute boneless, skinless duck breast for the linguiça. Cut it into cubes
and brown it along with the rest of the meat. Substitute cannellini beans for
black beans and 2 teaspoons fresh thyme for the chiles. Once you’ve

simmered the beans and meat, sprinkle Bread Crumbs over the top and broil
until bubbly and browned.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Start with dried beans. After the meat is browned, add about 3 cups dried
black beans, the chiles, and enough stock or water to cover by about an
inch. Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so the mixture simmers gently but
steadily. Cook, adding more liquid if the mixture gets too dry, until the
beans are tender and the liquid is mostly absorbed, up to 1½ hours.
SIDES
White Rice
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Green Salad
Ripe Plantains

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Lentil and Mushroom Stew
The addition of dried and fresh mushrooms to earthy lentils gives
this stew an irresistible depth of flavor. Add some grated Parmesan
at the end to make it even better.

Ingredients
¼ cup any dried mushrooms
2 medium leeks
1½ pounds button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for garnish
1½ cups lentils
4 cups stock or water
3 sprigs fresh thyme
Salt and pepper
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated; optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¼ cup dried mushrooms in a small bowl with hot water to cover.
Trim the leeks and slice the white and light green parts only.
Trim and quarter the fresh mushrooms. (If you’re using shiitakes,
discard the stems.)
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium-high heat. Add
the leeks and fresh mushrooms to the pot and cook, stirring
occasionally until they soften, 5 to 10 minutes.
3. Add 1½ cups lentils, 4 cups stock or water, and 3 sprigs thyme.
4. Remove the dried mushrooms from their soaking liquid, chop, and add
them to the pot. Pour in the soaking liquid as well, being careful to
leave any sediment behind.
5. Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so the liquid bubbles gently but
steadily. Simmer, adding more liquid if the mixture gets too dry, until
the lentils are tender, anywhere from 20 to 40 minutes.
Grate ½ cup Parmesan if you’re using it.
6. When the lentils are tender, sprinkle with salt and pepper. Fish out the
thyme sprigs and divide among 4 bowls. Sprinkle the Parmesan over
the top if you like; drizzle with a little more olive oil and serve.
VARIATIONS
Creamy Lentil and Mushroom Stew
Particularly luxurious. Stir in ½ cup cream during the last few minutes of
cooking. Skip the Parmesan.

Lentil and Chile Stew
Swap 3 dried hot red chiles for the dried mushrooms, 1 medium onion for
the leeks, and 4 poblano peppers, chopped, for the mushrooms. Use fresh
oregano instead of the thyme and garnish with a little sour cream and
cilantro if you like instead of the Parmesan.
Beefy Lentil Stew with Dried Mushrooms
Keep the dried mushrooms, but instead of the fresh mushrooms use 1 pound
chuck steak, cut into ½-inch pieces. In Step 2, cook the meat by itself in the
hot olive oil, stirring occasionally, until browned in places, 3 to 5 minutes.
Then add the leeks and cook until they soften, another 5 minutes or so.
Then proceed with the recipe.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Beef Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Since the lentils don’t start cooking until a little way into the recipe,
choosing a quicker-cooking lentil like red (see Lentils) will guarantee that
you finish this in less than 45 minutes.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Carrot Salad with Raisins
Sautéed Greens with Garlic

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Red Lentils with Toasted Cauliflower
There is no better use for lentils than dal, the stewed, spiced lentil
dishes ubiquitous in India. The idea is to cook them long enough so
they begin to break apart and become creamy. Toasted cauliflower
adds another layer of texture.

Ingredients
5 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 small onion
1 garlic clove
1 inch fresh ginger
1 tablespoon curry powder
3 cups coconut milk (two 15-ounce cans)
1½ cups red lentils
1 large head cauliflower (about 2½ pounds)
Salt and pepper
4 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a medium saucepan over medium-
high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. Add the onion to the pan and cook, stirring occasionally until it
softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel the garlic clove and 1 inch ginger; mince them together.
3. When the onion softens, add the garlic and ginger and 1 tablespoon
curry powder. Cook, stirring until they’re fragrant, a minute or 2.
4. Add 3 cups coconut milk, 1½ cups water, and 1½ cups red lentils.
Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles gently but
steadily. Partially cover and cook, adding more water if the mixture
gets too dry, until the lentils are tender and begin to break down and
become saucy, 25 to 30 minutes.
5. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Trim and chop the cauliflower into small pieces (roughly ½ inch, but
you don’t need to be exact).
6. Put the cauliflower on a rimmed baking sheet, toss with 3 tablespoons
oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper, and spread it out in an even layer.
7. Broil, undisturbed, until the cauliflower is tender and nicely browned
and crisp on top, 15 to 20 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
8. When the lentils are tender and beginning to break down, stir them
vigorously with a spoon for a minute. Sprinkle them with salt and

pepper and divide them among 4 bowls. Spoon the cauliflower on top
of the lentils, garnish with the scallions, and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Yellow Lentils with Charred Broccoli
Broccoli gives this dish an entirely different flavor. Substitute yellow lentils
for red and cook them the same way. Use broccoli, chopped into roughly ½-
inch pieces, instead of the cauliflower. It takes a bit less time to become
tender, but make sure to brown and crisp it well, stirring and tossing as
necessary until the outside has a bit of a crunch.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder
SIDES
White Rice
Cucumber Raita
Tender Steamed Vegetables

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tomato-Braised Lentils and Potatoes
Tomato juice mixed with water adds a welcome acidity to this dish
of lentils and potatoes, a hearty creation that falls somewhere
between soup and stew.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 medium onion
2 garlic cloves
½ teaspoon red chile flakes
One 28-ounce can whole tomatoes
5 cups water or a combination of water and chicken stock
1½ cups lentils
Salt and pepper
2 or 3 medium russet or Yukon Gold potatoes (1 pound)
2 sprigs fresh oregano

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
2. Add the onion, garlic, and ½ teaspoon red chile flakes to the pot and
cook, stirring occasionally until the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
3. Add the tomatoes with their juice, 5 cups water or a combination of
water and stock, and 1½ cups lentils. Sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so it bubbles gently but steadily.
Simmer, adding more liquid if the mixture gets too dry, until the lentils
are tender, anywhere from 20 to 40 minutes.
Scrub the potatoes and peel them if you like; cut them into ½-inch
cubes.
4. Add the potatoes to the pot; by the time the lentils are cooked, the
potatoes will be tender.
Strip the oregano leaves from 2 sprigs and chop.
5. When the lentils and potatoes are tender, stir in the oregano, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Tomato-and-Soy-Braised Lentils and Potatoes
For the liquid, use 2 cups tomato juice, 1 ¾ cups water, ¼ cup soy sauce,
and 2 tablespoons sesame oil. Instead of stirring in oregano, garnish with
cilantro.

Tomato-and-Dijon-Braised Lentils and Potatoes
Add 2 tablespoons Dijon mustard to the cooking liquid and use 2
tablespoons chopped fresh tarragon instead of the oregano.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
If you use a quicker-cooking variety of lentil (see Lentils) and chop the
potatoes into small pieces, they’ll both become tender faster.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
For a little crunch, cook the lentils and potatoes, then transfer everything to
an ovenproof dish, scatter some Bread Crumbs over the top, and drizzle
with olive oil. Bake in a 400ºF oven until the bread crumbs are brown and
crisp.
BRAISING WITH BEANS
Ingredients that need to be braised for a longer amount of time can always
be added to a pot of beans at the beginning: think ham, beef, or root
vegetables. But the point at which beans and lentils are close to fully
cooked but haven’t yet absorbed all of their cooking liquid is a perfect
moment to add in something that needs only a quick simmer to cook.
Shrimp, scallops, or thin fish fillets can go in raw since they don’t take
much time to cook, and certainly tofu or fairly tender vegetables and greens
are fair game; partly cooked fish fillets or cuts of meat and poultry work
too. Cover the pot so whatever you’ve added will warm from both below
and the steam above, cooking quickly and evenly.
SIDES

Garlicky Mushrooms
Crunchy Okra
Brussels Sprouts with Sausage
Creamy Polenta

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Braised Lentils with Salmon
Lentils and salmon are great partners, an old-style surf and turf.
This wine-based lentil stew with sautéed salmon on top is bistro
cooking at its best.

Ingredients
2 medium leeks
2 tablespoons butter
1 cup white wine
6 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
1½ cups lentils
1 small shallot
4 sprigs fresh tarragon
2 tablespoons tomato paste
1 tablespoon sherry vinegar
5 tablespoons olive oil
Handful of fresh chives for garnish (about 1 cup chopped)
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds skin-on salmon fillet

Prep | Cook
Trim the leeks and slice the white and light green parts only.
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a medium saucepan over medium heat.
When it foams, add the leeks and cook, stirring occasionally until
they’re soft, 3 to 5 minutes. Do not brown.
2. Add 1 cup white wine to the softened leeks and let it bubble until
evaporated. Add 6 cups stock or water and 1½ cups lentils. Bring to a
boil, then adjust the heat so it bubbles gently but steadily.
3. Simmer, adding more liquid if the mixture gets too dry, until the lentils
are just tender and the liquid is absorbed, anywhere from 15 to 35
minutes.
Peel and mince the shallot. Strip the tarragon leaves from 4 sprigs and
mince. (You should have about 2 tablespoons.)
4. Stir together 2 tablespoons tomato paste, 1 tablespoon sherry vinegar,
the minced shallot and tarragon, and 4 tablespoons olive oil.
Chop the chives.
5. When the lentils are just tender and the liquid is absorbed, season with
salt and pepper and stir in the dressing; whisk to combine. Turn off the
heat and let marinate while you cook the salmon.
6. Put a large skillet over medium-high heat. Rub the salmon with 1
tablespoon olive oil and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
7. When the pan is smoking hot, add the salmon skin side down and cook
until the skin is browned and crisp, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip the salmon,
cook until the outside is crisp and the interior medium-rare, another
minute or 2, then remove from heat.

8. Divide the salmon into 4 portions and serve them over the lentils.
VARIATIONS
Braised Lentils with Pork Chops
Substitute bone-in or boneless pork chops for the salmon. Sear them on
both sides until a crust forms, then add ½ cup white wine and lower the heat
to medium; after the wine evaporates, add ½ cup water and turn the heat to
low. Cover and cook for 10 to 15 minutes.
Braised Lentils with Chicken
Substitute bone-in chicken thighs for the salmon. Sear them skin side down
until the skin is brown and crisp, then flip them over and cook for the same
amount of time on the other side, about 15 minutes total.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Instead of searing the salmon, you can skin it, cut it into cubes, and stir the
pieces into the lentils a few minutes before the lentils are done cooking.
SIDES
White Rice
Cucumber Salad
Tender Vegetables
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

BBQ Lima Beans with Collards
Limas are so meaty that it makes sense to give them the classic
BBQ treatment. Adding greens turns a side dish into a satisfying
meal.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons olive oil
1 medium onion
2 garlic cloves
1 cup ketchup
¼ cup cider vinegar
2 tablespoons molasses
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
Salt and pepper
2½ cups frozen or fresh lima beans
8 ounces bacon (preferably slab)
1 large or 2 small bunches collard greens (1 pound)

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large
ovenproof skillet or large pot over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
2. Add the onion and garlic to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally
until the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
3. Add 1 cup ketchup, ¼ cup cider vinegar, 2 tablespoons molasses, 1
tablespoon Dijon, 1 tablespoon water, ½ teaspoon salt, and ½ teaspoon
pepper. Cook until the mixture bubbles, then add 2½ cups lima beans
and turn the heat to low.
4. Put 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Chop the bacon into small pieces.
5. Add the bacon to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until crisp,
5 to 10 minutes.
Trim the collards; slice the leaves in half lengthwise along the stem,
then crosswise into thin ribbons.
6. When the bacon is crisp, add the collards and cook, stirring
occasionally until they wilt, 3 to 5 minutes.
7. Add the collards and bacon to the beans and stir to combine. Taste and
adjust the seasoning, then put the pot in the oven.
8. Bake, uncovered, just until the top gets a little brown and crisp, 10 to
15 minutes. Serve hot or warm.

VARIATIONS
Spicy Kidney Beans with Chorizo and Kale
Swap kidney beans for the lima beans, fresh Mexican chorizo for the bacon,
and kale for the collard greens. For a little extra spice, add 1 chopped
chipotle in adobo or some cayenne to the barbecue sauce.
Creamy White Beans with Prosciutto and Escarole
Substitute white beans for the lima beans, prosciutto for the bacon (it will
crisp in 3 to 5 minutes), and escarole for the collard greens. Instead of the
barbecue sauce mixture, add about 1 cup of the white beans, ¼ cup olive
oil, ½ cup water, and the juice of a lemon in Step 3. Mash it together until
the mixture becomes creamy, then stir in the rest of the beans and proceed.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of mixing the barbecue sauce ingredients as described in Step 3, use
Barbecue Sauce you’ve already made.
Skip the baking; just serve after combing the collards with the lima beans.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
To develop an even crispier crust on top, bake the dish for up to 30 minutes.
SIDES
Warm Flour Tortillas
Coleslaw
Mexican Street Corn

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Tofu and Green Beans
A stir-fry in two parts: Get the tofu started right away, then turn
your attention to the green beans and sauce. Since the tofu will be
partly soft when you’re tossing everything in the sauce at the end,
do it as gently as you can so it doesn’t crumble too much.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
2 bricks firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces each)
Salt and pepper
1 pound green beans
1 garlic clove
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
3 tablespoons soy sauce
2 tablespoons honey
2 teaspoons sesame oil
Sesame seeds for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet (preferably nonstick)
over medium-high heat.
Cut the tofu into slices or cubes.
2. Add the tofu to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring and turning occasionally until it’s golden and crisp on at least a
few sides, 5 to 10 minutes total.
Trim the green beans.
Peel 1 garlic clove; trim the chile. Mince them together and put them
in a small bowl.
3. When the tofu is golden and crisp on at least a few sides, remove it
from the pan.
4. Add the green beans, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring
occasionally until they brown lightly, 3 to 5 minutes.
Add 3 tablespoons soy sauce, 2 tablespoons honey, and 2 teaspoons
sesame oil to the bowl with the garlic and chile. Whisk to combine.
5. When the green beans are lightly browned, return the tofu to the skillet
and add the sauce. Toss gently to coat everything. Taste and adjust the
seasoning.
6. Sprinkle with sesame seeds and serve.
VARIATIONS
Gingery Stir-Fried Tofu and Green Beans
Add 1 inch minced fresh ginger to the sauce.

Stir-Fried Tofu and Snow Peas
Swap snow peas for green beans. Reduce the amount of honey to 1
tablespoon and increase the sesame oil to 1 tablespoon.
Stir-Fried Tofu and Carrots with Soy and Mustard
Use 4 or 5 carrots, thinly sliced on the bias, instead of green beans. After
removing the tofu, stir-fry them until they’re lightly browned and just
tender, 6 to 8 minutes. Add 2 teaspoons Dijon mustard to the sauce. Garnish
with cilantro.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
To get the tofu firmer and crisper, let it get golden and crisp all over. This
could take up to 15 minutes, depending on the size of your skillet.
SIDES
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy
White Rice
Sesame Noodles

INGREDIENT

Tofu
Tofu, aka bean curd, is as versatile as it gets. Think
of it as a unique ingredient and you’ll be won over, if
you haven’t been already. All tofu is made in pretty
much the same way—it’s coagulated soy milk, just as
cheese is coagulated cow’s milk—and it comes in a
few main varieties:
Type of Tofu
Description
“REGULAR” TOFU
Also known as brick or Chinese tofu, this
is the block that you most often see in
sealed plastic tubs filled with water. It has
a dense and crumbly texture and comes in
four levels of firmness: soft, medium,
firm, and extra-firm. Firm and extra-firm
—what I call for most of the time in this
book—hold their shape during cooking,
which means they are suitable for stir-
frying, grilling, broiling, baking, or
braising. Unless you cook them in liquid,
soft and medium tofu break apart during
cooking, so they are best served raw or
used as thickeners in places that you might
otherwise use yogurt or milk, like
smoothies.

SILKEN TOFU
Also known as Japanese tofu, it’s also
brick shaped and sold in soft, firm, and
extra-firm varieties; all of these are soft
and creamy, with a jiggly texture almost
like custard. Like soft or medium
“regular” tofu, silken tofu is an ideal
thickener or replacement for eggs or dairy.
The firm and extra-firm versions can be
cut into cubes and added to broths and
soup, stir-fried or deep-fried if you’re
careful, or crumbled into anything you
like.
PRESSED TOFU
While pressed tofu has popped up in some
supermarkets, it’s mostly available at
Asian markets. Regular tofu is subjected
to high pressure until it becomes dense
and chewy. (If you’re looking for tofu that
comes closest to the texture of meat, this is
it.) Pressed tofu ranges in color from beige
to dark brown and comes plain, seasoned,
and sometimes “smoked” or even fried.
Slice and stir-fry pressed tofu—it will not
fall apart—or marinate and grill or broil it,
use it raw in salads, or toss it into soups
for texture. It’s also good as a snack.
Storing Tofu
Once opened, tofu can be stored in the refrigerator for a few days; put it in a
container, cover it with fresh water, and change the water daily. (If it starts

to smell sour, you can shave the ends off the rectangle; the interior is
probably still good. Again, it’s just like cheese.) To freeze tofu, drain it and
pat it dry, then wrap it in plastic or put it in a container; use within 3
months. The benefit of freezing tofu is that it completely changes its
texture, so that it’s darker, firmer, chewier, and meatier. If you find you like
it more after freezing, just keep some in the freezer and take it out so it
defrosts before you cook with it.
Pressing Tofu
Just the way that packaged pressed tofu has much of the water squeezed out
of it to give it a firmer texture, regular tofu can be subjected to the same
process to make it drier and firmer. You won’t achieve nearly the same
consistency as commercially pressed tofu, but it does make a difference.
Cut the brick of tofu (firm or extra-firm is best) in half through its equator.
Put the halves on a clean kitchen towel and cover them with another towel
(or use several layers of paper towel above and below). Put something
heavy on top so the tofu bulges at the sides slightly but doesn’t get crushed
or cracked. Wait, changing the towels if they become saturated, for 20 to 30
minutes, or longer if you have time. The longer you press it, the more liquid
it will release and the drier and easier to handle the tofu will be, but even
the few minutes that it takes to get your other ingredients ready will make a
difference.
 
Tofu and Nonstick Cookware
Tofu will stick to the bottom of most regular skillets, even well-seasoned
ones, so if you have a large nonstick skillet, now’s the time to use it. If you
must use a regular skillet, try to get as much moisture as you can out of the
tofu before you start (see above) and make sure the skillet and oil are very

hot when you put the tofu in the pan. Then wait until the pieces release to
start turning or stirring.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Deep-Fried Tofu with Peanut Sauce
and Scallions
If you think you don’t like tofu, try deep-frying it until golden and
serving with this peanut sauce—then we’ll talk. Serve it with rice,
noodles, or vegetables on the side.

Ingredients
Vegetable oil for frying
2 bricks firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces each)
1 garlic clove
½ inch fresh ginger
¼ cup peanut butter
1 tablespoon soy sauce
1 tablespoon rice vinegar
2 teaspoons sesame oil
Salt
3 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Put at least 2 inches of vegetable oil in a deep heavy skillet or
saucepan over medium heat (you want the temperature to reach
350ºF).
Cut each brick of tofu in half across its equator, then cut each of those
halves into 2 triangles; pat them dry with a paper towel. You’ll end
up with 4 pieces for each brick.
Peel 1 garlic clove and ½ inch ginger; mince them together and put
them in a small bowl.
2. Add ¼ cup peanut butter, 1 tablespoon soy sauce, 1 tablespoon rice
vinegar, and 2 teaspoons sesame oil to the bowl. Stir to combine,
adding enough hot water to turn it into a sauce.
3. When the oil reaches 350ºF, fry the tofu in batches, turning
occasionally until golden brown and puffed up, 2 to 4 minutes.
4. As each batch is finished, remove the pieces with a slotted spoon to
drain on paper towels; sprinkle with salt.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. When all the tofu is fried, pile it on a platter, scatter the scallions over
the top, and serve the peanut sauce on the side for dipping.
VARIATIONS
Deep-Fried Tofu with Pistachio Sauce and Cilantro
Use ½ cup pistachios for the peanut butter. Substitute 2 tablespoons lime
juice for the soy sauce and rice vinegar, ¼ cup coconut milk for the sesame

oil, and a few cilantro sprigs for the scallions. While the oil is heating, put
the sauce ingredients in a blender and purée.
5 More Dipping Sauces for Fried Tofu
Just like Roasted Tofu, fried tofu is a blank canvas for all sorts of dipping
sauces:
1. Tomato Sauce
2. Fresh Tomato Salsa
3. Vinaigrette
4. Barbecue Sauce
5. Mayonnaise
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Manchurian Tofu and Cauliflower
This Chinese-Indian dish is a riff on a recipe from my friend (and
phenomenal Indian chef) Suvir Saran. The ketchup-based sauce is
addictive.

Ingredients
5 tablespoons vegetable oil
2 bricks firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces each)
Salt and pepper
1 small head cauliflower
2 garlic cloves
1 cup ketchup
½ teaspoon cayenne

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet (preferably nonstick)
over medium-high heat.
Cut the tofu into slices or cubes.
2. Add the tofu to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring and turning occasionally until it’s golden and crisp on at least a
few sides, 5 to 10 minutes total.
Trim and break or chop the cauliflower into small florets.
3. When the tofu is golden and crisp on at least a few sides, remove it
from the pan.
4. Add 2 tablespoons oil and the cauliflower to the skillet, sprinkle with
salt and pepper, and raise the heat to high. Cook undisturbed until the
florets brown, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
5. When the florets are brown on the bottom, turn and sear on the other
side, another 2 or 3 minutes.
6. Add the garlic to the skillet along with 1 cup ketchup and ½ teaspoon
cayenne. Cook, stirring until the ketchup starts to bubble and
caramelize around the edges of the skillet.
7. Return the tofu to the skillet and toss to coat with the sauce; add a
splash of water if the mixture needs to be a bit saucier.
8. Turn the heat to medium, cover, and cook until the tofu is warmed
back through and the cauliflower is tender, 2 or 3 minutes. Serve.

VARIATIONS
BBQ Tofu and Cauliflower
Substitute 1 teaspoon paprika for the cayenne and add 1 teaspoon yellow
mustard, 1 tablespoon molasses, and 1 tablespoon cider vinegar along with
the ketchup.
Chipotle-Orange Tofu and Cauliflower
Along with the ketchup in Step 6, add 1 chopped chipotle in adobo (or more
to taste) and the juice of an orange. The orange juice will make the mixture
saucier, so you won’t need to add much extra water (if any).
SIDES
White Rice
Quick Brown Rice
Stir-Fried Bok Choy
Peas with Ginger

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Eggs Sukiyaki
Sukiyaki is a category of slow-simmered soups and stews from
Japan, where the meat may be cooked in the broth right at the table.
The dish often contains eggs, which here are poached in a thick,
flavorful broth of stewed onions, ginger, and soy.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons sesame oil
2 inches fresh ginger
2 onions
1 pound shiitake mushrooms
¼ cup soy sauce
1 tablespoon brown sugar
8 ounces firm tofu
1 pound spinach
1 cup dashi or water
8 eggs
4 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons sesame oil in a large skillet over medium-low heat.
Peel and mince 2 inches ginger; add it to the skillet.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onions.
2. Add the onions to the skillet and raise the heat to medium. Cook,
stirring occasionally until they are very tender, 5 to 8 minutes.
Trim and slice the mushrooms, discarding the stems.
3. When the onions are tender, add the mushrooms. Stir and cook for 1
minute, then add ¼ cup soy sauce and 1 tablespoon brown sugar; stir
to combine. Cook until the mushrooms are soft, 5 to 10 minutes.
Cut the tofu into ½-inch cubes. Trim the spinach, discarding any thick
stems.
4. Add the tofu and spinach to the skillet; stir and cook until tender, 5
minutes.
5. Add 1 cup dashi or water, or just enough to almost cover the
vegetables, and cook for another minute. Taste and adjust the
seasoning.
6. Crack the eggs over the broth, turn the heat to medium, and cover the
skillet. Cook until the eggs are barely set (the yolks should still be
runny), 5 to 10 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
7. When the eggs are barely set, sprinkle with the scallions and serve
immediately.

VARIATIONS
Eggs Poached in Fennel
Omit the tofu. Substitute olive oil for the sesame oil; 3 garlic cloves for the
ginger; 3 fennel bulbs, sliced, for the onions, mushrooms, and spinach;
white wine for the soy sauce; and ½ teaspoon red chile flakes for the brown
sugar. Garnish with parsley instead of the scallions and sprinkle on some
Parmesan if you like.
Eggs Poached in Poblanos and Cream
Skip the tofu. Substitute olive oil for the sesame oil, 3 garlic cloves for the
ginger, 4 large poblanos for the onions and mushrooms, cream for the soy
sauce, and ½ teaspoon cumin for the brown sugar. Garnish with cilantro
instead of or in addition to the scallions.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Dashi
EVEN FASTER
To soften the vegetables faster, cook them over medium-high heat. If at any
point the pan gets too dry, add a splash of water, scrape any browned bits
off the bottom, and continue cooking.
SIDES
Soy Slaw
White Rice
Sesame Noodles

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Smoky Tofu and Black Bean Chili
A superior vegetarian chili. Browning crumbled tofu instead of
beef sounds sacrilegious, but this chili is brimming with enough
earthy, spicy flavors that you won’t miss the meat.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 brick firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces)
1 medium onion
2 garlic cloves
2 canned chipotles in adobo
4 cups cooked or canned black beans (two 15-ounce cans)
1 tablespoon chili powder
1 tablespoon cumin
Salt
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
2 cups beer, water, or a combination
4 ounces cheddar cheese (1 cup grated)
3 scallions
Sour cream for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
2. When the oil is hot, crumble the tofu into the pot. Cook, stirring and
scraping occasionally until the tofu bits are lightly browned, 5 or 6
minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
3. When the tofu is lightly browned, add the onion and garlic; cook until
the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Finely chop 2 chipotles in adobo.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
4. When the onion is softened, stir in the chipotles with some of their
adobo if you like, 1 tablespoon chili powder, 1 tablespoon cumin, and
a sprinkle of salt. Cook, stirring until the spices are fragrant, a minute
or 2.
5. Stir in the beans, the tomatoes and their juice, and 2 cups beer, water,
or a combination. Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so the mixture
bubbles steadily but not vigorously.
6. Partially cover and cook, stirring occasionally and adding more liquid
if the mixture gets too dry, until the tomatoes and beans start to break
down and the chili thickens, 15 to 20 minutes.
Grate 1 cup cheddar cheese.
Trim and chop the scallions.

7. When the chili thickens, taste and adjust the seasoning and divide it
among 4 bowls. Top with some cheddar and a dollop of sour cream,
sprinkle with the scallions, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Spicy Tofu and White Bean Chili
Substitute olive oil for the vegetable oil, 1 tablespoon tomato paste for the
chipotles, 1 teaspoon dried oregano for the chili powder, and 1 teaspoon red
chile flakes for the cumin. For the liquid, use 1½ cups water or stock and ½
cup red wine. Use Parmesan instead of cheddar, basil in place of scallions,
and a drizzle of olive oil instead of a dollop of sour cream.
Smoky Tofu and Black-Eyed Pea Chili with Collards
Use 2 cups black-eyed peas in place of the black beans and add 1 pound
collard greens, sliced into thin ribbons, in Step 5.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chili Powder
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
The longer you simmer the chili, the more the beans will break down and
become creamy, and the more the flavors will develop—even up to a couple
of hours.
SIDES
Avocado with Lemon and Salt
Warm Tortillas

White Rice

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Roasted Tofu with Sesame Drizzle
Roasting whole bricks is a fantastic way to prepare tofu. The
outsides become golden and slightly chewy, while the insides
remain wonderfully creamy. It takes some time for this to happen,
but the upside is that it’s absolutely effortless.

Ingredients
2 bricks firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces each)
3 scallions
Sesame oil for drizzling
Soy sauce for drizzling
Sesame seeds for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 425ºF.
Pat the tofu dry and put it in a large ovenproof skillet (the bricks
shouldn’t be touching).
2. When the oven is hot, roast the tofu, turning once halfway through,
until the outsides are golden and crisp, 30 to 35 minutes total.
Trim and chop the scallions.
3. When the tofu is crisp, transfer it to a cutting board and slice it
between ¼ and ½ inch thick.
4. Put the tofu on a platter or plates, drizzle with sesame oil and soy
sauce, garnish with scallions and sesame seeds, and serve.
VARIATIONS
5 More Things to Put on Roasted Tofu
1. Tomato Sauce
2. Fresh Tomato Salsa
3. Vinaigrette
4. Barbecue Sauce
5. Spice Blends (rub them on the outside before roasting)
5 Ways to Use Roasted Tofu, with or Without a Drizzle or Sauce
First slice the whole bricks after roasting as described in the main recipe or
cut them into cubes.
1. Fill and dress sandwiches.

2. Toss into green or vegetable salads.
3. Stir into soups at any point during cooking.
4. Add to noodle or rice dishes just before serving.
5. Add to stir-fries during the last minute or 2 of cooking.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Seared Tofu
Start by putting 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in the skillet and put the skillet
in the oven while it heats. When the oven is hot, carefully add the tofu to
the skillet; the hot oil will start browning the bottom of the bricks as they
roast and cut the cooking time by 10 minutes.
SIDES
Green Salad with Sesame-Soy Dressing
White Rice
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Braised Tofu with Tomatoes and
Broccoli
Something wonderful happens when you cook tofu and tomatoes
together; they each soften and begin to break down, and the tofu
takes on the acidity of the tomatoes as they cook. The broccoli
provides contrast if you leave it crisp-tender. Or try cooking it until
completely soft and watch it meld with the tofu and tomatoes.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 bricks firm tofu (12 to 14 ounces each)
Salt and pepper
1 medium onion
3 garlic cloves
1 small head broccoli (about 1 pound)
One 14-ounce can diced tomatoes
2 bay leaves
Several sprigs fresh basil for garnish
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated; optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet (preferably nonstick) over
medium-high heat.
Cut the tofu into cubes.
2. Add the tofu to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring and turning once in a while until it’s golden and crisp on at
least a few sides, 5 to 10 minutes total.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
3. When the tofu is golden and crisp on at least a few sides, add the onion
and garlic and cook, stirring occasionally until the onion softens, 3 to 5
minutes.
Trim and break or chop the broccoli into small florets.
4. When the onion softens, stir in the tomatoes with their juice, the
broccoli, 2 bay leaves, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
5. Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles gently.
Cover and cook, adding a splash of water if the mixture gets too dry,
until the broccoli is as tender as you like, anywhere from 10 to 20
minutes.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan if you’re using it.
6. When the broccoli is done, remove the bay leaves. Add the Parmesan
to the skillet if you like, taste, and adjust the seasoning.
7. Divide among 4 bowls, garnish with the basil, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Curried Tofu with Tomatoes and Peas
Use vegetable oil instead of olive oil. Substitute 1 inch fresh ginger,
minced, for the garlic and add 1 tablespoon curry powder when you add the
onion and ginger in Step 3. Let the tomatoes simmer with the tofu for about
10 minutes, then add 3 cups frozen peas instead of the broccoli and cook
just until they’re warmed through. Use ¼ cup yogurt or cream instead of
Parmesan, and garnish with cilantro instead of basil.
Moroccan-Spiced Tofu with Tomatoes and Cauliflower
Add 1 teaspoon cumin, 1 teaspoon coriander, and ½ teaspoon cinnamon
when you add the onion and garlic in Step 3. Substitute cauliflower for
broccoli and garnish with parsley and mint instead of basil.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making a tomato sauce as described in Steps 2–4, use about 1½
cups Tomato Sauce.Skip browning the tofu. Start by softening the onion
and garlic, then add the tofu, tomatoes, broccoli, and bay leaves and
proceed from Step 5.
SIDES
White Rice
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Creamy Polenta
Garlic Bread

Seafood
Salmon and Asparagus with Toasted Bread Crumbs
Salmon with Fresh Salsa
Pan-Seared Tuna with Ginger-Scallion Snow Peas
Tuna Poke with Daikon and Peanuts
Smoky Shrimp Scampi
Buffalo Shrimp
Black Pepper Scallops and Broccoli
Steamed Clams with Chorizo and Cherry Tomatoes
Salmon with Gingery Greens
Roasted Salmon with Potato Crust
Sole (or Other Thin Fillets) with Glazed Carrots
Swordfish (or Other Fish Steaks) with Picante Verde
Striped Bass (or Other Thick Fillets) and Zucchini Ribbons
Cod (or Other Thick Fillets) and Chickpea Stew
Caramel-Cooked Cod (or Other Thick Fillets)
Olive Oil–Poached Halibut (or Other Thick Fillets) with
Endive

Blackened Catfish (or Other Thick Fillets) with Green
Beans
Miso-Glazed Catfish (or Other Thick Fillets) and
Mushrooms
Fish Kebabs over Bulgur Pilaf
Malaysian-Style BBQ Fish with Cool Cucumbers
Poached Fish in Creamy Tomato Broth
Panfried Trout with Bacon and Leeks
Mediterranean Mackerel with Mint
Stir-Fried Shrimp with Tomato, Eggs, and Scallions
Shrimp and Cauliflower with Rustic Romesco
Seared Scallops in Tomato Sauce with Basil and Chiles
Fish and Chips with Tartar Sauce
Roasted Trout (or Other Whole Fish) with Fennel and
Orange
Shrimp Simmered in Dal
Baked Potato and Crab Cakes
Scallop and Corn Pan Broil
Mussel and Vegetable Pan Roast with Saffron Aïoli


Seafood
The benefits of fish are impressive. It comes in such
a wide variety of flavors and textures that you could
cook it every day without getting bored. It’s the
healthiest animal product you can eat. It rewards the
simplest preparation. And it’s ridiculously fast to
cook—usually between 0 and 10 minutes.
But: Buying fish can be difficult. The global fish
market is complicated; there is a dizzying variety of
fish available to us at the supermarket, composed of
species that can be either wild or farmed, caught
responsibly or recklessly, shipped from in state or
around the world, frozen and thawed (or not), fresh
(or not). I’ve been writing about fish for more than
30 years, and in this chapter I’ve tried to summarize
ways to avoid—or at least reduce—fish counter
paralysis.
Cooking Seafood contains links to websites that
can keep you up to date with the ever-shifting list of

which seafood is sustainable and which isn’t, along
with general groupings of fish that can be cooked in
similar ways, so when you’re in the store looking for
fish they don’t have, you can substitute something
else without having to change the recipe.
The good news is that once you’ve got good
seafood in your fridge a great meal is minutes away,
and this chapter provides a number of fast and
delicious ways to get from raw to cooked, including
grilling, roasting, steaming, searing, and much more.

Chapter Highlights
Five Categories of Fish  Within any of these groups, most fish can be
substituted for one another. Seafood.
Buying Fish  Two invaluable resources for learning which seafood you
should be buying and which you should avoid. Sustainable Seafood.
Yes, You Can Make Sushi  Some clarity on selecting fish for eating raw.
Making the Sushi Grade.
Shrimp = Squid = Scallops  Use shrimp, squid, and scallops
interchangeably and watch your seafood repertoire grow exponentially.
Shrimp, Squid, and Scallop Doneness.
And: Mussels = Clams  What you need to know about switching between
mussels and clams. (Not much.) Swapping Mussels for Clams.
Fast Oil Poaching  A new way to oil-poach fish using less oil and a little
steam. Oil Poaching Meets Steaming.
Blackening  A fast way to create big flavor. Blackened Anything.
Fish for Roasting  Thick fish steaks and fillets lend themselves brilliantly
to roasting. Fish Roasts.
Two Skewers Are Better Than One  Use two skewers for every kebab
and gain confidence at the grill. Two Skewers, One Kebab.
Steaming Fish with Vegetables  The best combo there is: fish and veg.
Steamed Fish.

In Praise of “Oily Fish”  Dark-fleshed, fatty fish make for some of the
best eating. Oily Fish.
Whole Fish, No Problem  It sure beats carving a turkey. Serving Whole
Fish.
Prepping in Vein  I never take the veins out of my shrimp, but here’s how.
Deveining Shrimp.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Salmon and Asparagus with Toasted
Bread Crumbs
Salmon takes 10 minutes to broil, and the same goes for thin
asparagus. A large rimmed baking sheet accommodates both,
which saves time and keeps skillet juggling to a minimum.

Ingredients
5 tablespoons butter
1 large bunch thin asparagus (1 pound)
4 thick salmon steaks or fillets (1½ pounds)
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 cup bread crumbs
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Melt 5 tablespoons butter in the microwave or in a small pot over
medium-low heat.
Trim the asparagus.
2. Put the salmon and asparagus on a rimmed baking sheet, drizzle with
the butter, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. If using skin-on fillets,
place the skin side up.
3. Broil, turning the salmon and asparagus about halfway through the
cooking, until the salmon is cooked as you like (no more than 10
minutes for medium to medium-well, and less if you like your salmon
closer to medium-rare) and the asparagus is tender and browned.
4. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a medium skillet over medium-high
heat. When it’s hot, add 1 cup bread crumbs, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and stir gently to coat with the oil. Cook, stirring frequently
and adjusting the heat to avoid burning, until the crumbs are golden
and crisp, 3 to 5 minutes.
Cut the lemon into wedges.
5. When the salmon and asparagus are done, divide among 4 plates. Then
sprinkle the bread crumbs over the top, and serve with the lemon
wedges.
VARIATIONS
Scallops with Asparagus and Toasted Bread Crumbs

Substitute scallops for the salmon; give the asparagus a few minutes’ head
start before adding the scallops to the baking sheet, because they need only
a few minutes. (Don’t overcook!)
Any Fish Fillets or Steaks and Cherry Tomatoes with Toasted Bread
Crumbs
Substitute halibut, tuna, snapper, swordfish, cod, striped bass, catfish, or
other thick fish fillets or steaks for the salmon and cherry tomatoes for the
asparagus. Cooking time will depend on the thickness of the fish.
Any Fish Fillets or Steaks and Zucchini with Toasted Bread Crumbs
Substitute halibut, tuna, snapper, swordfish, cod, striped bass, catfish, or
other thick fish fillets or steaks for the salmon and zucchini, cut lengthwise
into planks, for the asparagus. Cooking time will depend on the thickness of
the fish.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Bread Crumbs
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Thicker asparagus are also terrific broiled, but they take a bit longer. If you
have an extra 5 to 10 minutes, use the thicker ones and cook up some white
rice while you’re at it.
SIDES
Green Salad
Couscous
Fennel Salad with Capers and Dill

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Salmon with Fresh Salsa
Both wild salmon and tomatoes are in season during summer—and
you’ve also got your grill out. Perfect. But the broiler also makes
quick and delicious work of this dish. And there are lots of
variations to consider.

Ingredients
3 medium ripe tomatoes (about 1 pound)
1 small onion
1 fresh hot green chile (like jalapeño)
1 bunch fresh cilantro
2 limes
Salt and pepper
4 thick salmon steaks or fillets (1½ pounds)
2 tablespoons olive oil

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Core and chop the tomatoes; put them in a medium bowl.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the bowl.
Trim and mince the chile; add it to the bowl.
Chop ½ cup cilantro and add it to the bowl.
Halve the limes; squeeze the juice into the bowl. Sprinkle with salt and
pepper and stir.
2. When the grill or broiler is hot, brush the salmon with 2 tablespoons
olive oil and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3. Grill or broil, carefully turning about halfway through the cooking, for
no more than 10 minutes for medium to medium-well and less if you
like your salmon closer to medium-rare, about 7 minutes.
4. Top the salmon with the salsa and serve.
VARIATIONS
Any Grilled or Broiled Fish Steaks or Thick Fillets with Fresh Salsa
Skip the salmon and try striped bass, halibut, bluefish, grouper, monkfish,
or any other thick fish fillets or steaks. Cooking time will depend on the
thickness of the fish.
Any Broiled Thin Fish Fillets with Fresh Salsa
Instead of salmon, use any thin fish fillets. Use the broiler (they are too
delicate for the grill). Time under the broiler will be 90 seconds to 2

minutes; rarely more. Do not turn; the fillets are so thin it’s not necessary.
The fish is ready when it becomes opaque and the tip of a knife flakes the
thickest part easily.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the salsa as described in Step 1, use 1 cup Fresh Tomato
Salsa.
F YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the salsa marinate for 15 to 20 minutes before serving.
SALMON TEMPERATURE
It used to be more common to cook salmon until it was dry and flaky.
(Maybe a more fitting word is crumbly. Even worse: chalky.) But salmon
tastes a lot better when you remove it from the heat when it’s slightly soft
and dark pink in the middle. (It’s welcome news when cooking something
properly means cooking it for less time.) To know when it’s done, just peek
into the middle of the fish with a paring knife. If it looks too rare, keep
cooking and checking until it reaches a texture you like.
SIDES
Warm Flour Tortillas
Mexican Street Corn
Sweet Potato Fries
Jícama and Radish Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pan-Seared Tuna with Ginger-
Scallion Snow Peas
This dish takes advantage of two ingredients that cook very quickly
in a screaming-hot skillet: fresh tuna and snow peas. If you’re
going to make a side, start it first.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons soy sauce, plus more to taste
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
1½ pounds fresh tuna
1 inch fresh ginger
2 garlic cloves
1 pound snow peas
4 scallions
Salt and pepper
Sesame seeds for garnish (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over high heat. Combine 3 tablespoons soy sauce
and 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a small bowl. Put the tuna on a plate
and rub all over with the soy marinade.
2. When the skillet is very hot, add the tuna (saving the leftover
marinade) and cook, turning once, until it’s browned on both sides but
still raw in the center, 3 or 4 minutes per side.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 2 garlic cloves; mince them together.
3. When the tuna is done, remove it from the skillet. Add 1 tablespoon
vegetable oil to the skillet, followed by the snow peas, garlic and
ginger, remaining tuna marinade, and a splash of water.
4. Cook, stirring frequently, until the snow peas are tender and glossy and
the liquid has mostly evaporated, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. When the snow peas are tender, taste and adjust the seasoning, adding
salt and pepper and more soy sauce if desired. Serve with the tuna,
garnished with the scallions and with sesame seeds if you like.
VARIATIONS
Pan-Seared Tuna with Tomatoes and Olives
Substitute 3 tablespoons lemon juice and 2 teaspoons chopped fresh thyme
leaves for the soy sauce and olive oil for vegetable. Use chopped or cherry
tomatoes instead of the snow peas, ½ cup chopped olives instead of the
ginger, and garnish with parsley instead of scallions and sesame seeds.
Pan-Seared Halibut with Garlicky Watercress or Spinach

Use thick halibut fillets instead of tuna (you’ll want to cook them for a little
longer, until they are just cooked through in the center). Substitute 3
tablespoons lemon juice for the soy sauce and olive oil for vegetable.
Increase the garlic to 4 cloves, skip the ginger, and use watercress or
spinach instead of snow peas (sauté until wilted). Garnish with chopped
nuts or toasted bread crumbs instead of the scallions and sesame seeds.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the tuna marinate in the soy sauce and vegetable oil mixture for 15
minutes or so.
MAKING THE SUSHI GRADE
You may have heard the phrase sushi grade used to describe fish that is fit
to consume raw; in fact there’s no such designation. The FDA does require
that any fish served raw be frozen before consumption to kill parasites. As
with buying any seafood, the best way to go about it is to find a source that
you trust. If you say you want fish you can eat raw, the fishmonger should
be able to steer you in the right direction, and chances are that reputable
ones will have strict standards for their “sushi grade” fish beyond just the
freezing requirement.
SIDES
White Rice
Quinoa
Sesame Noodles
Scallion Pancakes

INGREDIENT

Fish Groups
Most recipes in this chapter call for specific kinds of
fish. But in almost every case any fish of a similar
kind will work equally well. Take, for example, Sole
(or Other Thin Fish Fillets) with Glazed Carrots. The
title of this recipe tells you that if you can’t find (or
don’t like) sole, you can choose any thin fish fillet to
take its place.
This list is a primer on the different groups of fish
referred to throughout the chapter and the fish that
are in them. There’s some overlap among the groups
because some fish are sold in various forms—fillets
or steaks, for example—or in fillets of varying
thickness. Referring to these groups will instantly
broaden your fish-cooking repertoire and ensure that
you’ll wind up with something that fits the cooking
method you choose. (This list does not take
sustainability into account; see Sustainable Seafood
for a note on that and resources you can use to inform
your choices. And see Roasted Trout (or Other

Whole Fish) with Fennel and Orange for cooking
whole fish.)
Thick White Fish Fillets
The fish on this list are white, mild flavored, and tender; they should be at
least an inch thick but could even reach 2 inches. The thickness gives you
some flexibility in the kitchen; you can broil or grill these fillets, roast
them, fry them, or sear them in a skillet long enough to form a nice crust
without overcooking.
Atlantic pollock, also known as Boston bluefish (wild, and not to
be confused with Alaskan pollock, which is similar to cod).
Sea bass, also known as black sea bass; mild-flavored.
Carp, a flavorful, meaty freshwater fish.
Catfish, freshwater fish and a favorite in the South; at its best, mild
flavored and similar to snapper. Wild is better than farmed.
Cod, the North Atlantic standard, prized for its mild flavor and
tenderness.
Grouper, meaty and delicious.
Halibut, when cut as fillets usually quite thick and meaty; do not
undercook.
Monkfish, dense fleshed, with meat that’s more similar to lobster
than that of other fish. Do not undercook.
Pacific pollock, also known as Alaskan pollock, much like cod.
Red snapper and other snappers, mild and meaty.
Salmon, always better wild than farm raised.

Striped bass, very meaty and rich; wild is far better than farmed.
Do not undercook.
Turbot, a close relative of halibut; farmed is increasingly common
and pretty good.
Whiting, very tender fleshed and mild.
Thin White Fish Fillets
The fish in this group, less than an inch thick and sometimes as little as ¼
inch, cook extremely quickly, yielding (usually) mild-flavored and delicate
fillets. Don’t overcook and take care when turning.
Catfish
Flatfish of any type: flounder, fluke, sole, dab, plaice, and so on.
All are sweet and mild flavored.
Haddock, similar to cod but usually smaller.
Ocean perch (also known as rockfish), similar to haddock.
Red snapper or other snappers.
Sea bass
Tilapia, almost all farmed, inexpensive and not usually very
flavorful.
Trout, distinctively flavored and mostly farmed.
Whiting
Fish Steaks
Big fish can be cut into steaks, some with bones, others without. All are
great for grilling, broiling, roasting, and pan-cooking, and their near-

uniform thickness means they cook pretty evenly. Some of the most
common fish steaks (like tuna, swordfish, and salmon) are best when
they’re cooked to medium or even medium-rare, so take care not to let them
overcook by checking them frequently.
Cod
Grouper
Halibut
Mako, shark, with mild-flavored and extremely meaty flesh (do not
undercook).
Monkfish (works well in steak recipes).
Salmon
Swordfish, among the best; rich and meaty.
Tuna, also among the best and good at every stage from raw to
cooked through.
Oily Fish
These are on the lower end of the food chain, the fish that are eaten by the
bigger fish above.
Anchovies, soft and delicious when fresh.
Bluefish, strong and distinct—you love it or you hate it, but in any
case it’s superb with acidic ingredients.
Mackerel, milder than you might have been led to believe—think
of it as small tuna.
Mahi-mahi, sturdy and mild.
Salmon

Sardines, tender and meaty when perfectly fresh.
Trout

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tuna Poke with Daikon and Peanuts
Poke (pronounced POKE-ay) is a traditional Hawaiian dish of
cubed raw fish—salty, spicy, and nearly addictive. It’s often served
with cashews and seaweed; this is a spin on that, using peanuts and
daikon radish.

Ingredients
⅓ cup peanuts
2 tablespoons sesame seeds
1½ pounds fresh tuna
½ small daikon radish, or other radishes, or white turnips (about 8
ounces)
5 scallions
1 lemon
¼ cup mayonnaise
3 tablespoons soy sauce
2 teaspoons sesame oil
Sriracha

Prep | Cook
1. Put a small skillet over medium-high heat.
Chop ⅓ cup peanuts.
2. Put the peanuts and 2 tablespoons sesame seeds in the skillet. Cook,
shaking the pan occasionally until lightly toasted and fragrant, 3 to 5
minutes.
Cut the tuna into ½-inch chunks. Put it in a large bowl.
Peel and chop the daikon; add it to the bowl.
Trim and chop the scallions; add them to the bowl.
Halve the lemon; refrigerate 1 half for another use.
3. Squeeze the lemon juice into a small bowl and stir in ¼ cup
mayonnaise, 3 tablespoons soy sauce, 2 teaspoons sesame oil, and
Sriracha to taste.
4. Pour the dressing over the tuna and sprinkle with the toasted peanuts
and sesame seeds. Toss to combine, taste and adjust the seasoning, and
serve.
VARIATIONS
Shrimp Poke with Radishes and Peanuts
Use peeled shrimp instead of tuna. Before Step 1, put the shrimp in a
saucepan with water to cover and bring to a boil. Turn off the heat; when
the shrimp turn pink all over, drain and rinse under cold water.
Tuna Poke with Kohlrabi and Cashews
Use kohlrabi instead of daikon and cashews instead of peanuts.

4 Other Fish That Make Great Poke
1. Salmon
2. Hamachi
3. Scallops
4. Yellowtail
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you don’t like raw tuna, you can sear the tuna in a hot skillet until crusty
on the outside but still pink in the middle. Cut it into bite-sized cubes and
proceed with the recipe.
SIDES
White Rice
Warm Flour Tortillas
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Smoky Shrimp Scampi
Lots of garlic and olive oil, smoked paprika, parsley, and lemon
juice—the best bath a shrimp could ever ask for. A perennial
favorite.

Ingredients
⅓ cup olive oil, or more as needed
4 garlic cloves
1 bunch fresh parsley
1½ pounds peeled medium shrimp
Salt and pepper
1½ teaspoons smoked paprika
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. Put ⅓ cup olive oil in a large skillet over low heat. There should be
enough olive oil to cover the bottom of the pan; don’t skimp.
Peel and mince 4 garlic cloves.
Chop ½ cup parsley leaves.
2. Add the garlic, shrimp, a sprinkle of salt and pepper, and 1½ teaspoons
smoked paprika to the skillet. Toss to coat. Cook until the shrimp turn
pink on one side, about 2 minutes.
Halve the lemon; refrigerate 1 half for another use.
3. When the shrimp turn pink on 1 side, turn them over and add about
half of the chopped parsley. Cook until the shrimp are pink all over
and cooked through, about 2 minutes more.
4. Squeeze in the lemon juice and cook for another 30 seconds. Garnish
with the remaining parsley and serve.
VARIATIONS
Smoky Scallop Scampi
Use scallops in place of shrimp, but wait to add the garlic and paprika until
after you’ve turned them in Step 3. Cook over high heat until they are
nicely seared on both sides but still pearly in the middle, less than 2 minutes
per side.
Smoky Squid Scampi
Substitute squid for shrimp. After adding the squid in Step 2, cook and stir
them until just opaque, only a minute or two, then stir in all the parsley and
the lemon juice and serve right away.

NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you’ve peeled your own shrimp and have shells lying around, put them in
a small saucepan with water just to cover. Bring it to a bubble, then let it
simmer steadily while the garlic and shrimp are cooking. Add a splash of
the shrimp stock along with the lemon juice in Step 4 and let it bubble
mostly away before serving. This will intensify the shrimpy flavor of the
dish. (Save the rest of the stock for risotto, paella, or other dishes.)
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Bruschetta
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Fennel Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Buffalo Shrimp
Toss something in hot sauce and butter, add blue cheese, and it’ll
be pretty great. The lucky vehicle here is shrimp, broiled simply
and served with a celery and blue cheese dressing.

Ingredients
5 celery stalks
4 ounces Gorgonzola, Maytag blue, or other flavorful blue cheese (1
cup crumbled)
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
Salt and pepper
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1½ pounds peeled shrimp
⅓ cup hot sauce, plus more for serving

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Trim and finely chop the celery; put in a medium bowl.
Crumble 1 cup blue cheese.
2. Add the cheese, 2 tablespoons olive oil, 2 tablespoons red wine
vinegar, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl. Stir to combine.
Melt 4 tablespoons butter in the microwave or in a small pot over
medium-low heat.
3. Put the shrimp on a rimmed baking sheet and toss with the melted
butter, ⅓ cup hot sauce, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
4. Broil, turning once, until the shrimp are lightly browned on the outside
and just cooked through, 2 or 3 minutes per side.
5. Toss the shrimp with a little more hot sauce if you like and serve with
the sauce on the side.
VARIATIONS
Buffalo Shrimp with Rémoulade
Substitute 1 small celery root, grated, for the celery and ½ cup mayonnaise
and 2 tablespoons Dijon mustard for the blue cheese. Omit the olive oil.
Buffalo Shrimp with Blue Cheese Slaw
Use ½ small green cabbage, shredded, instead of the celery.
Harissa Shrimp
Substitute harissa for the hot sauce, olive oil for the melted butter, and feta
for the blue cheese. Add 1 teaspoon chopped fresh thyme leaves and 1

tablespoon sesame seeds to the sauce.
Buffalo Cauliflower
Works with the main recipe or any of the variations. Instead of the chicken,
use 2 medium heads cauliflower, trimmed and cut into large florets. Set the
oven rack 6 inches from the heat for long-distance broiling. Coat the
cauliflower as described in Step 3 and spread out on 1 or 2 rimmed baking
sheets. In Step 4, broil, turning the pieces once or twice, until crisp-tender
and browned in places, 10 to 15 minutes. Serve with the celery and
dressing.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Before you start making the sauce, put the butter in a large skillet over
medium-high heat. When it’s melted, add the shrimp and sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Cook for 2 or 3 minutes per side, stirring in the hot sauce and
tossing the shrimp to coat during the last minute of cooking.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Black Pepper Scallops and Broccoli
This Sichuan-style dish features scallop nuggets blasted with black
pepper, cooked in hot oil, then tossed with crisp-tender broccoli.

Ingredients
¼ cup vegetable oil, plus more as needed
1½ pounds sea scallops
2 tablespoons flour
Salt and pepper
1 large head broccoli (1½ to 2 pounds)
1 inch fresh ginger
2 garlic cloves
½ cup chicken stock or water
2 tablespoons soy sauce

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¼ cup vegetable oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Pat the scallops dry and cut them into quarters; put them in a bowl.
Line a plate with paper towels.
2. Add 2 tablespoons flour, a sprinkle of salt, and lots of pepper and toss
to coat.
3. Raise the heat to high; when the oil is hot, add the scallops to the
skillet and cook, tossing occasionally until they are golden and crisp
all over, 3 to 5 minutes.
Break or chop the broccoli into florets and thinly slice the stems.
4. When the scallops are golden and crisp, transfer them to the paper
towels with a slotted spoon. Add more oil to the skillet if it’s dry, then
add the broccoli and cook, stirring occasionally until it’s bright green
and glossy and beginning to brown, about 5 minutes.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 2 garlic cloves; mince them both together.
5. When the broccoli is beginning to brown, add the garlic and ginger
along with ½ cup stock or water and 2 tablespoons soy sauce.
Continue to cook, stirring frequently, until most of the liquid has
evaporated and the broccoli is tender, 3 to 5 minutes. Taste and adjust
the seasoning.
6. Return the scallops to the skillet and toss to coat lightly with the sauce
and heat through. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Black Pepper Shrimp and Broccoli

Substitute peeled shrimp (leave them whole) for the scallops.
Black Pepper Squid and Bok Choy
Substitute squid, cut into ¼- to ½-inch pieces, for the scallops and bok choy
for broccoli. Chop the bok choy stems and leaves and cook just until the
stems are tender and browned and the leaves are wilted; it won’t take as
long as the broccoli.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
SHRIMP, SQUID, AND SCALLOP DONENESS
Shrimp, squid, and scallops all cook quickly, and you can use them
interchangeably. There are subtle differences in timing, though: Shrimp
should be cooked until they are pink all over and firm in the middle; if
they’re mushy or mealy, they aren’t cooked enough. Whether you sear
scallops to brown the outsides or cook them more slowly, you want the
insides to remain slightly creamy; a translucent center is perfect. Squid are
tricky: Cook them only until they turn white, which happens very quickly.
(Alternatively, you can cook them for a long, long time, but that’s not
“fast.”)
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Scallion Pancakes
Panfried Rice Noodles

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Steamed Clams with Chorizo and
Cherry Tomatoes
A huge pot of steamed clams is always tempting. Flavored with
chorizo and cherry tomatoes, it’s especially delicious, and the
liquid makes for fantastic dunking, so serve with crusty bread. See
the Notes if you want to use mussels instead.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
8 ounces smoked Spanish chorizo
4 garlic cloves
3 pounds littleneck or other small hard-shell clams
1 pint cherry tomatoes
½ cup white wine
Pepper
1 bunch fresh parsley

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet or a large pot over medium-high
heat.
Chop the chorizo; add it to the skillet.
Peel and thinly slice 4 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet.
2. Cook the chorizo and garlic, stirring occasionally until the garlic is
golden, 2 or 3 minutes.
Scrub the clams.
3. When the garlic is golden, add the clams, tomatoes, ½ cup white wine,
and a sprinkle of pepper.
4. Raise the heat to high, cover, and cook, shaking the skillet occasionally
until the clams have opened, 8 to 10 minutes.
Chop ⅓ cup parsley.
5. When the clams have opened, sprinkle with the parsley and serve with
the broth.
VARIATIONS
Steamed Thai-Style Clams with Spinach
Substitute butter or vegetable oil for the olive oil, 2 inches minced ginger
for the garlic, 1 tablespoon curry powder for the chorizo, 1 cup coconut
milk for the wine and cilantro for the parsley.
Steamed Clams with Tarragon and Cream
Skip the chorizo. Use butter instead of olive oil and 2 shallots instead of
garlic. Add ¼ cup cream along with the wine and garnish with some

tarragon instead of parsley.
NOTES
SWAPPING MUSSELS FOR CLAMS
You can substitute the first for the second in almost all recipes, but clams
weigh a lot more so figure you’ll need half as much. Mussels tend to open a
bit faster than clams, but they take more effort to clean (pulling off their
beards) than clams, which need just a good scrub. (Farm-raised mussels are
usually sold cleaned; they need just a rinse. But wild mussels are better.)
One significant benefit of mussels is that they are much less expensive.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Bruschetta
Warm Buttery Bread
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Crisp Roasted Potatoes with Smoked Paprika

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Salmon with Gingery Greens
A pile of just-wilted greens makes a perfect bed for steaming fish,
providing enough moisture to cook it through without any
scorching or drying out. Here loads of ginger in the greens
permeates the salmon and leaves you with a tasty side dish.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons butter
1 large bunch kale or collards (1½ pounds)
2 inches fresh ginger
Salt and pepper
½ cup chicken or fish stock or water
4 thick salmon steaks or fillets (1½ pounds)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over low heat.
Trim and chop the greens, separating any thick stems if necessary.
2. Raise the heat to medium-high. Add any thick stems to the skillet and
cook until they begin to soften, 3 or 4 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 inches ginger.
3. Add the ginger and the leaves, a handful at a time if necessary, to the
skillet and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook until the leaves are just
wilted, 4 or 5 minutes.
4. Add ½ cup stock or water, lay the salmon on top of the greens, and
sprinkle with salt and pepper.
5. Lower the heat to medium, cover, and cook for no more than 10
minutes for medium to medium-well and less if you like your salmon
closer to medium-rare. Transfer to plates or a platter and serve.
VARIATIONS
Salmon with Garlicky Stewed Greens and Tomatoes
Use 4 garlic cloves instead of the ginger and 2 tomatoes, chopped, instead
of the stock or water.
Salmon with Sweet and Sour Bok Choy
Substitute bok choy for the kale or collards and 2 tablespoons rice vinegar,
1 tablespoons soy sauce, and 1 tablespoon honey for the stock or water.
Salmon with Creamed Spinach
Substitute spinach for the kale or collards, 1 large shallot for the ginger, and
½ cup cream for the stock or water. Add a pinch of nutmeg to the spinach as

well; the leaves will take only 2 or 3 minutes to wilt.
Salmon with Gingery Creamed Corn
An unexpectedly good combination. Substitute 4 cups fresh or frozen corn
kernels for the greens. Skip Step 2 but prepare the ginger as directed. In
Step 3, cook the ginger and corn in the hot butter just long enough for them
to soften a little, 1 or 2 minutes. Substitute ½ cup cream for the stock or
water in Step 4.
Salmon with Gingery Creamed Peas
Follow the directions for the variation above, swapping peas for the corn.
Use ½ cup cream instead of the stock or water in Step 4.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Fish Stock
SIDES
White Rice
Quinoa
Sesame Noodles

RECIPE-FREE

Steamed Fish
1
Choose a skillet and heat some fat.
The pan should have a tight-fitting lid and be large enough to
accommodate all the vegetables and the fish, but not so big that the
vegetables can’t cover the bottom in a solid layer. Put 2 or more
tablespoons oil or butter in the skillet over medium-high heat.

2
Prepare vegetables.
Start with aromatics, then choose one or more main vegetables.
Watery vegetables like greens, zucchini, and fresh tomatoes will
release liquid and help the steaming process. Starchier vegetables like
potatoes will not, so you’ll have to add a splash of liquid later.

3
Sauté vegetables.
For soft vegetables, cook until they are almost fully tender. In the
time that it takes to steam the fish the vegetables will become soft.
For vegetables you want barely tender, sauté until they’re still slightly
too firm to eat. Add enough water to keep them from sticking.

4
Check your liquid level.
If vegetable juices are bubbling in the bottom of the skillet, don’t add
any extra liquid. Otherwise, add a splash. If you want something more
like a stew, add enough liquid to make the vegetables saucy.

5
Add your fish.
Thick fish fillets, shrimp, clams, and mussels are ideal steamed—they
cook quickly, and stay moist. (This is also a great way to cook
boneless chicken.) Figure 1 to 2 pounds. Lay them on top of the
vegetables, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cover the skillet.

6
Steam, garnish, and serve.
Steam until the fish is just cooked through, carefully checking every
now and then and adding more liquid if needed. When the fish is
cooked, the vegetables will be too. To serve, scoop up some
vegetables and fish onto a plate, then drizzle with the pan juices.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Roasted Salmon with Potato Crust
Topping salmon with a thin layer of shredded potatoes and roasting
it in a hot oven is as impressive as it is delicious.

Ingredients
2 or 3 medium russet or Yukon Gold potatoes (8 ounces)
4 thick salmon fillets (1½ pounds)
3 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
1 bunch fresh chives

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 475ºF.
Scrub the potatoes. If you’re using a food processor for grating, cut
them into chunks that will fit through the feed tube. Line a colander
with paper towels.
2. Shred the potatoes in a food processor with a grating disk or by hand
with a box grater. Put the potatoes in the colander and squeeze out as
much moisture as you can.
3. Put the salmon in a baking dish or on a rimmed baking sheet, skin side
down. Spread the potatoes over the top of the fish, pressing them down
and covering the fish in a thin, even layer. Drizzle with 3 tablespoons
olive oil and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
4. Roast until the salmon is cooked through and the potatoes are crisp,
about 10 minutes.
Chop a few tablespoons chives.
5. If the salmon cooks through before the potatoes are as crisp as you
want, put the pan under the broiler until the potatoes are done to your
liking. Garnish with the chives and serve.
VARIATIONS
4 Other Grated Vegetables to Use
Peel them first:
1. Sweet potatoes
2. Parsnips
3. Celery root

4. Beets
3 Other Toppings to Use for Crust
1. Coarsely ground bread crumbs
2. Pulverized rolled oats
3. Coarsely ground nuts
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you’re up for a little more maneuvering for the sake of a fried potato
crust, heat a few tablespoons of olive oil in a large skillet. Press the potatoes
firmly into the top of the fish. When the oil is hot, gently lay the fish in the
pan, potato side down, trying to minimize the amount of potatoes that fall
off. Cook until the potatoes are golden and crisp, then turn the salmon and
cook on the other side just until the fish is done to your liking.
SIDES
Green Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Garlicky Mushrooms
Quinoa

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sole (or Other Thin Fillets) with
Glazed Carrots
Two French preparations, glazed carrots and sole cooked in butter,
take turns in the skillet, both streamlined slightly to get everything
on the table quickly.

Ingredients
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter
1 pound carrots
1 teaspoon sugar
2 sprigs fresh thyme
Salt and pepper
1 orange
Four 6-ounce fillets of sole or any other thin white fish fillets
1 bunch fresh parsley
½ cup white wine or water

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over
medium-low heat.
Trim, peel, and slice the carrots into coins.
2. Raise the heat to medium-high. When the butter foams, add the
carrots, 1 teaspoon sugar, 2 fresh thyme sprigs, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the carrots are tender, 5 to
10 minutes.
Halve the orange.
Sprinkle the fish with salt and pepper.
3. When the carrots are tender, transfer them to a platter, wipe out the
pan, and add 2 tablespoons butter. When the butter foam subsides, add
the fish and cook, in batches if necessary, until it’s golden on each
side, 4 or 5 minutes total. Transfer to the oven to keep warm and repeat
with the remaining fish.
Chop ¼ cup parsley.
4. Once all the fish is cooked, put it on top of the carrots. Squeeze the
orange juice into the skillet and add ½ cup wine or water and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Let the liquid reduce a bit, then stir in 2
tablespoons butter and the parsley.
5. Pour the sauce over the fish and carrots and serve.
VARIATIONS
Sole (or Other Thin Fillets) with Sesame Bean Sprouts

Substitute bean sprouts for the carrots and sauté them in 1 tablespoon butter
and 1 tablespoon sesame oil until they soften slightly but retain their
crunch. Substitute ¼ cup soy sauce and the juice of 2 limes for the orange
juice and cilantro for the parsley.
Sole (or Other Thin Fillets) with Balsamic Radicchio
Substitute chopped radicchio for the carrots, ¼ cup balsamic vinegar mixed
with ¼ cup water for the orange juice, and basil for the parsley.
Sole (or Other Thin Fillets) with Lemony Asparagus
Use asparagus instead of carrots and a lemon instead of the orange. Omit
the sugar. In Step 2, cook the asparagus until they’re just beginning to get
tender, closer to 5 than 10 minutes. Use mint instead of parsley to finish the
sauce if you’d like.
SIDES
Green Salad
White Rice
Buttered Egg Noodles
Warm Buttery Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Swordfish (or Other Fish Steaks) with
Picante Verde
This quick skillet tomatillo salsa is an ideal accompaniment to
simply cooked fish. If you can find only canned tomatillos, use a
28-ounce can and include their juice. They are already softened, so
just cook until they break apart and thicken a bit.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons olive oil
1 red onion
1 poblano pepper
1 pound tomatillos (5 or 6 large ones)
2 garlic cloves
1 lime
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds swordfish steaks or other fish steaks

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Put 2
tablespoons olive oil in a medium skillet over medium-high heat.
As you work, add everything to the skillet:
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Trim, core, seed, and chop the poblano.
Husk and chop the tomatillos.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Halve the lime and squeeze in the juice.
2. Sprinkle the mixture with salt and pepper and cook, stirring
occasionally until the tomatillos break down and thicken the sauce,
about 10 minutes.
Pat the swordfish dry.
3. While the sauce cooks, drizzle the swordfish with 2 tablespoons olive
oil and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Broil, turning about halfway
through, for no more than 10 minutes; do not overcook.
4. When the tomatillos have thickened the sauce, taste and adjust the
seasoning. Spoon it on top of the swordfish and serve.
VARIATIONS
Broiled Swordfish (or Other Fish Steaks) with Picante Rojo
Use tomatoes in place of the tomatillos.
Broiled Swordfish (or Other Fish Steaks) with Picante Amarilla

Substitute 2 cups chopped pineapple and 1 cup corn kernels for the
tomatillos.
Broiled Swordfish (or Other Fish Steaks) with Warm Tapenade
Substitute 1 cup chopped pitted black or green olives for the tomatillos, ¾
cup chopped dried tomatoes for the poblano, ¼ cup capers for the onion,
and an additional ⅔ cup olive oil for the lime juice.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Smooth Cooked Salsa
Put all the salsa ingredients in the blender and purée, adding a little water to
get the machine going if necessary. Simmer the mixture in a skillet or
saucepan until the swordfish is done, or 10 to 15 minutes.
SIDES
Warm Flour Tortillas
White Rice
Mexican Street Corn
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Chipotle and Lime
Jícama and Radish Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Striped Bass (or Other Thick Fillets)
and Zucchini Ribbons
Sear striped bass in a skillet to a beautiful golden brown and serve
with a rustic sauce of herbs, garlic, and capers and everyone will be
pleased. Serve over a bed of shaved raw zucchini ribbons and
they’ll be wowed.

Ingredients
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 bunch fresh mint
1 garlic clove
2 medium zucchini (1 pound)
2 tablespoons capers
5 tablespoons olive oil
1 teaspoon red wine vinegar
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds 1-inch-thick striped bass fillets or other thick fillets (skin
on)

Prep | Cook
Strip ½ cup parsley leaves and ¼ cup mint leaves from the most tender
stems.
Peel 1 garlic clove.
Trim the zucchini; shave them into ribbons with a vegetable peeler.
1. In a food processor or by hand, mince 2 tablespoons capers, the
parsley, mint, and garlic and blend with 3 tablespoons olive oil, 1
teaspoon red wine vinegar, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
2. Put the zucchini in a large bowl and toss with about half of the herb
mixture. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
3. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Pat the fish dry. Sprinkle it with salt and pepper.
4. When the oil is hot, add the fish skin side down. Cook until the skin is
browned and crisp, 4 or 5 minutes. Turn and cook until the fish is just
cooked through and tender, another few minutes.
5. Divide the zucchini among 4 plates. When the fish is done, serve it on
top of the zucchini, spooning the remaining herb mixture over all.
VARIATIONS
Striped Bass (or Other Thick Fillets) and Cucumber Ribbons
Substitute 1 pound cucumbers for the zucchini. When peeling off the
ribbons, turn the cucumber as you work and stop when you get to the seeds.
Striped Bass (or Other Thick Fillets) and Fennel

Substitute 2 large fennel bulbs, thinly sliced, for the zucchini and fennel
fronds for the mint.
SIDES
Couscous
Rice Pilaf
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cod (or Other Thick Fillets) and
Chickpea Stew
This hearty Spanish stew of chickpeas, spinach, and cod comes
together very quickly in a single skillet. Any thick white fish fillet
that is sturdy enough to hold its own with the flavor and texture of
chickpeas will work perfectly.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 onion
3 garlic cloves
1 bunch spinach (1 pound)
2 cups cooked or canned chickpeas (one 15-ounce can)
2 teaspoons smoked paprika
Salt and pepper
½ cup stock or water
Four 6-ounce cod or other thick white fish fillets
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
2. Add the onion and garlic to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally
until the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim off any thick stems from the spinach and chop the leaves.
If you’re using canned chickpeas, rinse and drain them.
3. When the onions soften, add 2 teaspoons smoked paprika and cook,
stirring until fragrant, a minute or 2.
4. Add the spinach, a handful at a time if necessary to fit it in, and the
chickpeas and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring, just until
the spinach wilts.
5. Add ½ cup stock or water. Sprinkle the fish with salt and pepper and
lay it on top of the spinach and chickpeas. Adjust the heat so the
mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously.
6. Cover the skillet and cook until a thin-bladed knife inserted into the
thickest part of the fish meets little resistance, 6 to 10 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
7. When the fish is done, sprinkle the parsley over everything and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Cod (or Other Thick Fillets) and White Bean Stew

Substitute 1 teaspoon chopped fresh rosemary for the smoked paprika,
escarole for the spinach, white beans for the chickpeas, and basil for the
parsley.
Cod (or Other Thick Fillets) and Fava Stew
Substitute 1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon for the smoked paprika and
fava beans for the chickpeas. Garnish with a squeeze of lemon juice in
addition to the parsley.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Fish Stock
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Instead of using individual fillets, cut the fish into chunks and nestle them
into the chickpea and spinach mixture before covering and cooking. They’ll
take no more than 5 minutes.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Quick Brown Rice
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Couscous

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Caramel-Cooked Cod (or Other
Thick Fillets)
If you haven’t been to Vietnam (or a good Vietnamese restaurant),
this dish may sound crazy; caramel is for ice cream, not seafood!
But fish in caramel sauce is a spectacular Vietnamese technique;
the sauce is bittersweet and loaded with the pleasant sharpness of
black pepper.

Ingredients
1 cup sugar
3 or 4 shallots
3 limes, plus more to taste
½ cup fish sauce, plus more to taste
2 bunches scallions
1½ pounds cod or other thick white fish fillets
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
1 bunch fresh cilantro
Rice vinegar for serving (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from heat.
2. Put a large deep skillet over medium heat and add 1 cup sugar and 1 or
2 tablespoons water. Cook, occasionally shaking the pan gently until
the sugar liquefies completely, about 5 minutes.
Trim, peel, and thinly slice the shallots.
Halve 3 limes.
Mix ½ cup fish sauce with ½ cup water.
3. When the sugar is all liquid, cook until it darkens slightly, another 2 or
3 minutes; remove from the heat. Carefully, and at arm’s length, add
the fish sauce mixture to the melted sugar. Turn the heat to medium-
high and cook, stirring constantly until the caramel melts into the
liquid, 1 or 2 minutes.
4. Add the shallots and cook, stirring occasionally until they soften, 3 to
5 minutes.
Trim the scallions.
Cut the fish into fillets as necessary to fit in the pan.
5. Put the scallions on a rimmed baking sheet, toss with 1 tablespoon
vegetable oil, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Broil, turning as
necessary, until lightly charred all over, 4 or 5 minutes.
6. While the scallions broil, squeeze the lime juice into the skillet, add 1
teaspoon (or more) pepper, and lay the fish in the sauce. If the sauce
does not reach at least halfway up the fish, add some water. Adjust the
heat so that the poaching liquid bubbles lightly. Simmer until a thin-

bladed knife inserted into the center meets little resistance, 8 to 12
minutes.
Chop ¼ cup cilantro.
7. When the fish is done, taste the sauce and add more fish sauce, lime
juice, or pepper if necessary. Serve with the scallions, pouring the
sauce over the top, garnishing with the cilantro, and passing rice
vinegar at the table if you like.
VARIATIONS
Caramel-Cooked Shrimp
Substitute shrimp for the cod and carrots, cut lengthwise into quarters, for
the scallions. The shrimp will take only 5 minutes or so to cook.
Caramel-Cooked Scallops
Substitute scallops for the cod and leeks, cut lengthwise into quarters, for
the scallions. The scallops will take only 5 minutes or so to cook.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Spread a broiler-safe pan with vegetable oil. Dredge the cod in a mixture of
brown sugar and lots of coarse pepper. Broil carefully with the scallions; the
fish will brown quickly. Drizzle with fish sauce and lime juice.
SIDES
White Rice
Quinoa
Fire and Ice Noodles
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Olive Oil–Poached Halibut (or Other
Thick Fillets) with Endive
Half oil-poached, half-steamed, this method gives both the halibut
and the endive great silky texture, while citrus zest and thyme
gently infuse them with bright and earthy flavor.

Ingredients
Olive oil for poaching
½ cup white wine
1 lemon
1 orange
3 sprigs fresh thyme
4 heads Belgian endive
Four 6-ounce halibut or other skinless thick white fish fillets
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¼ to ½ inch olive oil and ½ cup white wine in a large skillet or
large pot over medium-high heat.
Peel a few strips of lemon and orange zest and add them to the pan
(refrigerate the fruit for another use).
Add 3 thyme sprigs to the pan.
Cut each endive head in half lengthwise.
2. When the oil begins to send up tiny bubbles, sprinkle the fish with salt
and pepper and add it to the pan. Put the endive around the fish (and
on top if you run out of room). Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles
gently but steadily.
3. Cover the pan and cook, turning the fish halfway through and
occasionally splashing everything with the oil, until a thin-bladed knife
inserted into the thickest part of the fish meets little resistance, 15 to
20 minutes. (Since the fish will be soft, you still want the inner parts of
the endive to be a bit crunchy.)
4. When the fish is done, discard the citrus peels and thyme sprigs. Serve
the fish and endive with a little of the poaching liquid if you like,
sprinkling with salt and pepper as needed.
VARIATIONS
Butter-Poached Halibut (or Other Thick Fillets) with Peas
Substitute melted butter for all or some of the olive oil and 3 cups fresh
peas for the endive. If you use frozen peas, just add them to the skillet about
5 minutes before the fish is done.

NOTES
OIL POACHING MEETS STEAMING
Poaching fish (or anything) in olive oil is a luxurious cooking method that
keeps the food incredibly moist and infuses it with loads of flavor but
typically requires enough oil to submerge whatever it is you’re cooking. If
you combine oil poaching with steaming, you save both money and time:
Cover the fish about halfway with oil, then cover the skillet so the fish
steams from the top while the oil cooks it from below. Add a safety net in
the form of some white wine. The liquid helps prevent the oil from
browning the fish (which you don’t want in the case of poaching) and lets
you bring the oil to a slightly higher temperature, which allows the fish to
cook a little faster.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Quinoa
Crisp Roasted Potatoes
Refried White Beans with Rosemary
Pasta, Plain and Simple

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Blackened Catfish (or Other Thick
Fillets) with Green Beans
Here’s blackened catfish, with green beans sizzled in what’s left of
the delicious cooked spice mixture when the fish is done.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons butter, plus more as needed
1 tablespoon paprika
2 teaspoons dried oregano
½ teaspoon cayenne
½ teaspoon sugar
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds catfish or other thick white fish fillets
1 pound green beans
¼ cup almonds

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a large ovenproof
skillet over medium-low heat.
2. Combine 1 tablespoon paprika, 2 teaspoons oregano, ½ teaspoon
cayenne, ½ teaspoon sugar, and some salt and pepper in a small bowl.
Rub the spice mixture all over the fish.
3. When the butter foams, raise the heat to medium-high and add the fish
(in 2 batches if necessary, adding more butter as needed). Cook,
turning once, until the fish is nicely blackened on both sides and
cooked through, about 4 minutes per side.
Trim and chop the green beans into 2-inch lengths.
4. When the fish is done, transfer it to the oven to keep it warm. Add 1
tablespoon butter and the green beans to the skillet and sprinkle with
salt and pepper.
5. Cook, stirring occasionally until they are just tender and beginning to
brown in spots, 3 to 5 minutes, or longer if you like them softer.
Chop ¼ cup almonds.
6. When the green beans are done, put the catfish on top, sprinkle with
the almonds, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Dijon Catfish with Green Beans
Skip the spices and instead coat the fish with a mixture of 2 tablespoons
Dijon mustard, 1 tablespoon lemon juice, a sprinkle of salt, and lots of

pepper. The fish won’t blacken in the same way, but the mustard coating
will get crusty and brown.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Spice Blends
BLACKENED ANYTHING
Blackening adds a ton of flavor in a very short time. It consists of coating a
piece of fish, chicken, meat, tofu, or anything else in a mixture of spices
and dried herbs and cooking it at high heat until the spices turn dark and
crusty (just shy of burning). As they toast, the spices take on a deeper, more
complex flavor, a transformation that happens in a matter of minutes.
To do this, mix your spices in a bowl, sprinkle them generously on the
fish (or whatever), and rub them into the flesh, shaking off any excess
spices before cooking over high heat. (You can also blacken on a baking
sheet in the broiler, which gives you room to cook a larger batch.)
The blackening technique usually brings to mind Cajun flavors, but the
spices that you use can come from anywhere. And you don’t need to make
mixtures; even a single spice—like cumin or smoked paprika—or a
premade mixture—like five-spice powder or curry powder—can make a
huge difference.
SIDES
White Rice
Creamy Polenta
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes
French Fries

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Miso-Glazed Catfish (or Other Thick
Fillets) and Mushrooms
Catfish is often deep-fried—at least on the Mississippi—but it
roasts well too. The miso glaze was made famous in a dish with
black cod but is delicious on anything.

Ingredients
1½ pounds button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
4 thick catfish or other thick white fish fillets (1½ pounds)
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
¼ cup sugar
1 cup miso, preferably dark
½ cup mirin or ¼ cup honey mixed with ¼ cup water
4 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF.
Trim and quarter the mushrooms. (If you’re using shiitakes, discard the
stems.)
2. Put the catfish in a roasting pan and scatter the mushrooms around it;
drizzle everything with 2 tablespoons vegetable oil. Roast, turning the
fish once and stirring the mushrooms occasionally until the fish is
nearly cooked through and the mushrooms are lightly browned, 10 to
15 minutes.
3. Combine ¼ cup sugar, 1 cup miso, and ½ cup mirin (or ¼ cup honey
mixed with ¼ cup water) in a small saucepan over low heat. Bring
almost to a boil, stirring occasionally to combine, then turn off the
heat.
Trim and chop the scallions.
4. When the fish is nearly cooked through and the mushrooms are lightly
browned, generously baste both with the miso glaze and cook until the
fish is done and the glaze is slightly caramelized but not burned,
another 5 minutes or so.
5. Garnish with the scallions and serve with the remaining glaze on the
side.
VARIATIONS
Miso-Glazed Fish Fillets and Carrots
Substitute sliced carrots for the mushrooms.
Hoisin-Glazed Fish Fillets and Shiitakes

Substitute ½ cup soy sauce for the sugar, ½ cup hoisin for the miso, and rice
vinegar for the mirin. Use all shiitake mushrooms.
Teriyaki-Glazed Fish Fillets and Sweet Potatoes
Use ½ cup soy sauce instead of the sugar and 1 tablespoon minced ginger, 1
clove garlic, minced, and ¼ cup chopped scallion instead of the miso.
Substitute thinly sliced sweet potatoes for the mushrooms.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Substitute thin fish fillets for thick and thinly slice the mushrooms instead
of quartering them. Halve the cooking time.
FISH ROASTS
Most pieces of fish can be cooked in a skillet or under the broiler in a
matter of minutes. But big steaks and fillets—especially the triangular
fillets from large round fish like swordfish—may be thick enough to qualify
as roasts, and you can cook them as such, either by roasting them in a hot
oven from beginning to end—as in this recipe—or by searing them on one
side in an ovenproof skillet and finishing them in the oven or under the
broiler. It’s still very quick, usually taking 15 to 20 minutes.
SIDES
White Rice
Fire and Ice Noodles
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Ginger and Soy
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fish Kebabs over Bulgur Pilaf
Somewhere between a pilaf and a tabbouleh, this minty,
Mediterranean-inspired bulgur is a simple and satisfying bed for
grilled or broiled fish kebabs.

Ingredients
1 lemon
1 large bunch fresh mint
1 small red onion
¾ cup green olives
¼ cup olive oil, plus more for brushing the fish
Pepper
1 cup bulgur
Salt
1½ pounds fish steaks

Prep | Cook
1. Bring 2½ cups water to a boil. If you’re using wooden skewers, soak
them in water.
2. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into a medium bowl.
Strip 1 cup mint leaves from the stems, chop, and add them to the
bowl.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion. Pit ¾ cup olives if necessary and chop
them. Add both to the bowl.
Add ¼ cup olive oil and plenty of pepper to the bowl and stir to
combine.
3. Put 1 cup bulgur in a large bowl with a large pinch of salt. Pour the
boiling water over it and cover with a plate. Finely ground bulgur will
become tender in 10 to 15 minutes, medium 15 to 20, and coarse 20 to
25.
4. Cut the fish into large chunks and thread them onto skewers. Brush the
fish with a little olive oil and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
5. Grill or broil, turning as each side browns, until the fish is tender but
not dry, about 2 minutes per side or 5 minutes total.
6. When the bulgur is tender, drain it in a strainer, pressing out any
excess water with a spoon, and return it to the bowl.
7. Spoon some of the mint and olive mixture over the kebabs and stir the
rest into the bulgur. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve the
kebabs over the bulgur.

VARIATIONS
Fish Kebabs over Italian-Style Bulgur Pilaf
Substitute parsley for the mint and ½ cup raisins plus ½ cup pine nuts for
the olives. If you like, grate a little Parmesan into the bulgur after you stir in
the sauce.
Shrimp Kebabs over Tomato Bulgur
Use mint, basil, or parsley for the herb and 2 large ripe chopped tomatoes
instead of the olives. Substitute 1½ pounds peeled large shrimp for the fish
steaks. In Step 5 the shrimp will take as little as half the cooking time to
become just pink and opaque, so figure 1 or 2 minutes a side.
Chicken Kebabs over Seasoned Bulgur
Works for the main recipe or any of the variations. Use boneless, skinless
chicken thighs instead of the fish steaks. They’ll take longer to cook, 8 to
12 minutes a side.
NOTES
TWO SKEWERS, ONE KEBAB
Whether you are making kebabs with fish, meat, or vegetables, inserting
two skewers through each kebab will make them a lot easier to turn on the
grill or in the broiler, which will give them a better chance of cooking
evenly. What often happens when you use just one skewer is that once
whatever you’re cooking heats up, it begins to shrink a bit, and all of a
sudden the hole that you made with the skewer is wider than the skewer
itself.
So when you go to turn the kebabs, the food just spins around on the
skewer, vastly reducing your chances of browning every side evenly. Using
two parallel skewers may take a few extra minutes on the threading end but

will ultimately make cooking a lot easier by keeping your ingredients
locked in place.
SIDES
Green Salad
Bruschetta
Tomato Salad
Fennel Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Malaysian-Style BBQ Fish with Cool
Cucumbers
Use this salty, sweet, and spicy sauce on any kind of seafood you
like. Grilling and broiling are the best methods, as they perfectly
caramelize the sauce.

Ingredients
2 large cucumbers
2 tablespoons rice vinegar
Salt
1 garlic clove
1 inch fresh ginger
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
3 tablespoons fish sauce
3 tablespoons soy sauce
3 tablespoons honey
1½ pounds any thick fish fillets or steaks
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 tablespoon sesame oil
1 bunch fresh cilantro
1 lime

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Trim the cucumbers and peel if you like; cut them in half lengthwise
and scoop out the seeds with a spoon. Slice them and put them in a
medium bowl.
2. Toss the cucumbers with 2 tablespoons rice vinegar and a sprinkle of
salt. Put the bowl in the freezer to chill.
Peel 1 garlic clove and 1 inch ginger; trim the chile. Mince everything
together.
3. Put the garlic, ginger, and chile in a small saucepan along with 3
tablespoons each fish sauce, soy sauce, and honey. Bring to a bubble
and cook until slightly thickened, a minute or 2.
4. Rub the fish with 1 tablespoon each vegetable and sesame oil. Grill or
broil, turning about halfway through and basting with the sauce for the
last few minutes, for no more than 10 minutes. You want the sauce to
caramelize and form a crust on the fish but not for the sugars to burn.
Chop ½ cup cilantro.
Cut the lime into wedges.
5. When the fish is cooked, remove the cucumbers from the freezer; taste
and adjust the seasoning. Scatter the cilantro on top of the fish and
serve with the lime wedges, cucumbers, and any extra sauce on the
side.
VARIATIONS

Malaysian-Style BBQ Fish with Cool Watermelon
Replace 1 cucumber with 2 cups cubed watermelon.
Mustard-Glazed Fish with Crisp Apples
Skip the BBQ sauce and omit the sesame and vegetable oil. Instead, whisk
together 1 tablespoon olive oil, ½ cup mayonnaise, ⅓ cup Dijon mustard,
and 1 tablespoon chopped fresh dill; rub on the fish before grilling or
broiling. Substitute apples for the cucumbers, cider vinegar for the rice
vinegar, dill for the cilantro, and lemon for the lime.
Hoisin-Glazed Fish with Cool Radishes
Substitute 2 cups halved radishes for the cucumbers, ¼ cup ketchup for the
honey, and hoisin sauce for the fish sauce. Reduce the soy sauce to 1
tablespoon and add 1 tablespoon rice vinegar.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Use thin fish fillets (broiled; don’t bother turning them), shrimp, or scallops
instead of steaks or thick fillets. Keep a close eye on them; they’ll cook in 5
minutes.
SIDES
White Rice
Fire and Ice Noodles
Ripe Plantains

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Poached Fish in Creamy Tomato
Broth
Sautéed aromatic vegetables, tomato paste, stock, and cream join to
form a fast and flavorful broth for poaching fish that simmers into a
beautifully balanced sauce.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons butter
3 carrots
3 celery stalks
2 medium onions
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
1 tablespoon tomato paste
2 cups fish, chicken, or vegetable stock
½ cup cream
1½ pounds fish steaks or thick fillets
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and cut the carrots into chunks; add to the skillet.
Trim and cut the celery into chunks; add to the skillet.
Trim, peel, and cut the onion into chunks; add to the skillet.
2. Sprinkle the vegetables with salt and pepper and cook, stirring
occasionally until they soften, 5 to 10 minutes.
Peel and thinly slice 2 garlic cloves.
3. When the vegetables soften, stir in the garlic and 1 tablespoon tomato
paste. Cook, stirring until the tomato paste darkens slightly, a minute
or 2.
4. Add 2 cups stock and ½ cup cream and nestle the fish into the
vegetables. Bring the mixture to a boil, then adjust the heat so it
simmers gently but steadily. Cover and cook until the fish is just
cooked through, 5 to 10 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
5. When the fish is done, transfer it to a platter or bowls. If you like, turn
the heat to high and continue cooking until the liquid reduces further
and the vegetables get softer.
6. Serve the fish with the vegetables and some of the broth, garnished
with the parsley.
VARIATIONS
Fish Steaks Poached in Soy Broth

Swap ¼ cup soy sauce for the cream.
Fish Steaks Poached in Coconut Milk
Substitute 1 inch fresh ginger, minced, for the tomato paste and 1 cup
coconut milk for 1 cup of the stock. If you can find coconut cream,
substitute it for the regular cream.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Fish Stock
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
EVEN FASTER
Cut the vegetables into smaller pieces and use thin fish fillets, shrimp,
scallops, or squid if you like. It will cook in about half the time.
SIDES
Pasta, Plain and Simple
White Rice
Garlic Bread
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Panfried Trout with Bacon and Leeks
Campfire food without the campfire. Use a large cast-iron skillet if
you have one, return the leeks and bacon to the pan, and take the
whole thing right to the table for serving.

Ingredients
4 slices bacon
2 medium leeks
Salt and pepper
1 cup cornmeal
2 whole trout, gutted
2 tablespoons butter
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Chop 4 slices bacon.
2. Add the bacon to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until nearly
crisp, 5 to 10 minutes.
Trim and slice the leeks.
3. When the bacon is nearly crisp, add the leeks, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and cook until the leeks soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
Put 1 cup cornmeal in a shallow dish big enough to hold the fish.
Sprinkle the trout with salt and pepper and dredge them on both
sides in the cornmeal.
4. When the leeks are soft, remove them and the bacon with a slotted
spoon, leaving any bacon fat behind.
5. Add 2 tablespoons butter to the skillet, then the trout. Cook, turning
once, until both sides are nicely browned and the interior of the fish
turns white, 8 to 12 minutes.
Chop ¼ cup parsley.
Cut the lemon into wedges.
6. When the trout is browned and the interior is white, serve (1 fish for 2
people) with the leeks and bacon, garnished with the parsley and
lemon wedges.
VARIATIONS
Panfried Trout with Bacon and Brussels Sprouts

Use 1 pound Brussels sprouts, halved, instead of the leeks. They’ll take a
few extra minutes to become tender.
Panfried Trout with Chorizo and Red Onions
Substitute 4 to 8 ounces chopped fresh Mexican chorizo for the bacon and 2
red onions for the leeks.
Panfried Soft-Shell Crabs with Bacon and Leeks
Substitute 4 soft-shell crabs for the trout. Cook until they are golden brown
on the outside, no more than 5 minutes.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
As soon as the bacon renders a little fat, spoon a tablespoon or 2 into
another skillet and cook the trout while the bacon and leeks finish cooking.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Creamy Polenta with Parmesan
Green Salad
Mexican Street Corn

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Mediterranean Mackerel with Mint
Mint lightens everything it touches, and mackerel is a strongly
flavored fish that benefits from some levity. Put the two together
along with cumin, tomatoes, onions, and peppers and you’ve got
something wonderful, especially when served on a bed of
couscous. Or try one of the sides options on the opposite page.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 yellow onion
1 sweet Italian long pepper (any type)
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 bunch fresh mint
1 tablespoon cumin
¼ teaspoon red chile flakes
Salt and pepper
One 28-ounce diced tomatoes
1½ pounds skin-on mackerel fillets

Prep | Cook
1. Heat 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Peel and chop the onion. Trim, core, seed, and chop the pepper. Add
both to the skillet.
2. Turn the heat up to medium-high and cook until the vegetables soften,
about 5 minutes.
Chop 1 cup each parsley and mint leaves.
3. Turn on the broiler and put a cast-iron or other ovenproof skillet 6
inches from the heat.
4. When the onion and pepper are soft, add 1 tablespoon cumin, ¼
teaspoon red chile flakes, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook until
soft and fragrant, about 3 minutes. Add the parsley and mint leaves
and the tomatoes with their juice, stirring to combine. Reduce the heat
to low, cover, and simmer.
5. Remove the hot skillet from the oven and add the mackerel fillets, skin
side up. Return to the oven and broil until the flesh flakes with a fork,
no more than 10 minutes.
6. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Spoon the tomato mixture into bowls,
top with the mackerel fillets, and serve.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you prefer whole mackerel to fillets (or that’s all you can find), feel free
to substitute 2 pounds of them here, keeping in mind that they will take a
few minutes longer to cook.

OILY FISH
Fish like mackerel, sardines, and bluefish are indeed “oily,” “fatty,” and
“fishy.” But these are all desirable attributes in seafood, meaning that it has
plenty of flavor and will stay moist during cooking. (Not to mention that
fish oil is good for you.) The other great thing about these kinds of fish is
that they are generally among the most sustainable of all seafood. They are
abundant, cheap, and you can eat them with a clear conscience.
SIDES
Couscous
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Steamed Tender Vegetables
Peas with Bacon and Onion
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

TECHNIQUE

Cooking Seafood
Because fish cooks so quickly, it’s important not to
lose track of it while multitasking. If you err on the
side of cutting and peeking often, you’ll turn out
perfectly cooked fish regularly. For fish that you
want to cook through, the easiest way to determine
doneness is simply to poke the center with a skewer
or thin-bladed knife; when it penetrates without
resistance, the fish is done. (If you want fish that’s
less than fully cooked, you have to peek.) Here are
some guidelines for buying sustainable fish, cooking
it, and recognizing doneness.
Type of Seafood
Cooking Suggestions
WHITE FILLETS LESS
THAN ½ INCH THICK
The look of the exterior is a solid
indication of whether the middle is cooked
through; when it’s opaque, the inside will
be just about done. In any case, it will
finish cooking by the time it gets to the
table. Take care not to overcook.

WHITE FILLETS
BETWEEN ½ AND 1
INCH
These shouldn’t be cooked for any longer
than 8 minutes total. To check, use a thin-
bladed knife to peek between the flakes of
the fish; if most of the translucence is
gone and the fish is tender, it’s done.
THICKER WHITE
FILLETS AND STEAKS
A good guideline is about 8 minutes per
inch of thickness. Begin checking after 7
minutes of cooking time per inch. Use a
thin-bladed knife to gently open the fish at
its thickest part and peek inside; if it’s
nearly opaque, stop cooking; the fish will
finish cooking on the way to the table.
SWORDFISH
Swordfish is at its most moist if you stop
cooking when just a little translucence
remains in the center; cook it to the well-
done stage if you prefer, but get it off the
heat quickly or it will be dry.
TUNA AND SALMON
Tuna is typically best when still red to
pink in the center. Likewise, salmon is
best when it’s still slightly orange in the
center, not pale pink (see Salmon
Temperature).
OTHER OILY FISH
Start with the nick-and-peek technique.
When they are very nearly white
throughout (or dark pink in the case of
salmon—see Salmon Temperature),
remove them from the heat.

MAKO, MONKFISH,
HALIBUT, AND
STRIPED BASS
Judge doneness not only by appearance
but also by tenderness; sometimes they are
tender just before the translucence
disappears, other times just after. It will be
a matter of just a minute or two.
SHELLFISH
Shrimp, squid, and scallops all cook
quickly, and you can use them
interchangeably. There are subtle
differences in cooking times, though:
Shrimp should be cooked until they are
pink all over and firm in the middle; if
they’re mushy or mealy, they aren’t
cooked enough. Whether you sear scallops
to brown the outsides or cook them more
slowly, you want the insides to remain
slightly creamy; a translucent center is
perfect. Squid are tricky: cook them only
until they turn white, which happens very
quickly. (Alternatively, you can cook them
for a long, long time, but that’s not “fast.”)
Clams and mussels are done when all (or
almost all) of the shells have opened.
 
Sustainable Seafood
Buying seafood was always more complicated than cooking it, and now the
situation is worse than ever. Fish comes to our supermarket from all over
the world. Some is wild, and some is farmed; some is abundant, and some is
depleted; some is caught in ways that protect the environment, and some is

caught in ways that destroy it. To make a long story short, it is hard to grasp
all these things when we’re staring at the fish counter trying to decide what
to make for dinner. The lists of what’s sustainable and what isn’t change all
the time as fish stocks are depleted and then built back up or as farming
methods change. Many fish are considered endangered one year and just
fine to eat the next, and nothing in print can keep up with that, so I want to
point you to two invaluable resources to help you purchase fish with
confidence and a clear conscience.
The Monterey Bay Aquarium:
http://www.montereybayaquarium.org/cr/seafoodwatch.aspx
Blue Ocean Institute’s Seafood Guide http://blueocean.org/seafoods/

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Shrimp with Tomato, Eggs,
and Scallions
Scrambled eggs with shrimp and soy sauce is a fantastic dish all by
itself and only gets better when you weave in tomatoes and
scallions. This is well on its way to being shrimp fried rice, so if
you cook up a pot of white rice or noodles on the side, you’ll have
everything you need.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons butter
6 eggs
Salt and pepper
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 tablespoon sesame oil
1 inch fresh ginger
2 garlic cloves
1 pound peeled shrimp
2 or 3 medium ripe tomatoes
4 scallions
Soy sauce for serving

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Crack the eggs into a medium mixing bowl, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and beat.
2. When the butter starts to sizzle, add the eggs. Cook, stirring frequently
and scraping the sides with a heatproof rubber spatula until they begin
to curdle.
3. If some parts of the eggs are drying out, remove the skillet from the
heat and continue stirring until the cooking slows down a bit. Then
return to the heat. When the eggs are creamy, soft, and still a bit runny,
transfer them to a plate and wipe out the skillet.
4. Put 1 tablespoon vegetable oil and 1 tablespoon sesame oil in the
skillet over medium heat.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 2 garlic cloves; mince them together.
5. Turn the heat up to medium-high. Add the ginger and garlic and the
shrimp and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally
until the shrimp are just starting to turn pink, 2 or 3 minutes.
Core and chop the tomatoes; add them to the skillet as you go.
6. Cook until the tomatoes release some of their liquid, another 2 or 3
minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
7. When the tomatoes release some liquid, stir the scrambled eggs back
into the skillet along with the scallions. Toss to combine and serve,
passing soy sauce at the table.

VARIATIONS
Stir-Fried Shrimp with Tomato, Eggs, and Basil
Substitute 2 tablespoons olive oil for the vegetable and sesame oils, ½
teaspoon red chile flakes for the ginger, and ½ cup chopped fresh basil for
the scallions. Instead of passing soy sauce at the table, pass more olive oil
or even some grated Parmesan.
Stir-Fried Shrimp with Shiitakes, Eggs, and Cilantro
Swap 2 cups sliced shiitake mushrooms for the tomatoes. Before adding the
ginger, garlic, and shrimp in Step 5, stir-fry the shiitakes until they begin to
get tender and lightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes. Swap ½ cup chopped fresh
cilantro for the scallions.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
A little less saucy than the main recipe. Start by stir-frying the ginger,
garlic, and shrimp for a minute or 2, then pour in the beaten eggs and
scramble them. Stir in the chopped tomatoes and cook for a minute or 2,
then garnish with the scallions and serve.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Panfried Rice Noodles

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Shrimp and Cauliflower with Rustic
Romesco
Instead of making this Catalan nut and red pepper sauce in the food
processor, I add all the romesco ingredients to a stir-fry of
cauliflower and shrimp, which infuses the dish with all the right
flavors but leaves the texture rough and rustic.

Ingredients
¼ cup almonds
2 thick slices any rustic bread (a little stale is fine)
1 medium head cauliflower (1 to 1½ pounds)
3 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
1 cup roasted red peppers
1 pound peeled shrimp
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
2 tablespoons sherry vinegar
1 bunch fresh parsley

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Chop ¼ cup almonds.
Chop 2 thick slices bread into large crumbs.
2. Add the almonds and bread crumbs to the skillet and cook, shaking the
pan frequently until they are fragrant and toasted, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim and break or chop the cauliflower into small florets.
3. When the almonds and bread crumbs are toasted, transfer them to a
bowl and wipe out the skillet. Add 3 tablespoons olive oil.
4. When the oil is hot, add the cauliflower and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally it’s lightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Chop 1 cup roasted red peppers.
5. When the cauliflower is lightly browned, stir in the garlic, peppers,
shrimp, 1 teaspoon smoked paprika, 2 tablespoons sherry vinegar, and
¼ cup water. Cover and cook, shaking the skillet once or twice, until
the shrimp is cooked through and the cauliflower is just tender, another
3 or 4 minutes.
Chop ½ cup parsley.
6. When the shrimp and cauliflower are done, stir in the parsley,
almonds, and bread crumbs. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve
hot, warm, or at room temperature.
VARIATIONS

Squid and Cauliflower with Rustic Romesco
Substitute sliced squid for the shrimp. Add it to the skillet just for the last
minute of cooking.
Shrimp and Cauliflower Curry
Substitute cashews for the almonds, 1 inch fresh ginger for the garlic,
tomatoes for the peppers, 1 cup coconut milk for the vinegar and water, and
1 tablespoon curry powder for the smoked paprika. Garnish with cilantro
instead of the parsley.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Roasted Red (or Other Large) Peppers
SIDES
Bruschetta
Couscous
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Seared Scallops in Tomato Sauce
with Basil and Chiles
If you’re tempted to use two skillets to make this dish go faster,
resist. Searing the scallops and then building the tomato sauce in
the same skillet infuses the sauce with that great briny sweetness of
the scallops as it cooks. Add some pasta or bread to sop it all up.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds sea scallops
Salt and pepper
1 or 2 fresh hot green chiles (like serrano)
1 small red onion
½ cup white wine or water
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
1 bunch fresh basil

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Pat the scallops dry.
2. When the oil is hot, add the scallops and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Cook, turning once, until the scallops are nicely browned on both
sides, 2 or 3 minutes per side.
Trim and thinly slice 1 or 2 chiles.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the onion.
3. Transfer the browned scallops to a plate and add the chile and onion to
the skillet. Cook, stirring occasionally until the onion softens, 3 to 5
minutes.
4. Add ½ cup white wine or water and let it bubble until nearly
evaporated. Add the tomatoes with their juice and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper. Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily but not
vigorously and cook, adding a splash of liquid if it gets too dry, until
the tomatoes begin to break down, about 10 minutes.
Strip ¼ cup basil leaves from the stems and chop.
5. When the tomatoes begin to break down, return the scallops and any
juices to the skillet. Cook, gently tossing the scallops in the sauce, for
another minute or 2. Stir in the basil and serve.
VARIATIONS
Seared Scallops in Tomato-Basil Sauce
Substitute 4 garlic cloves, minced, for the chile and yellow onion for red.

Seared Scallops in Curried Tomato Sauce
Add 1 inch ginger, minced, along with the chile and onion and 1 tablespoon
curry powder along with the tomatoes. Substitute cilantro for the basil (or
use some of each).
Seared Squid in Any of These Tomato Sauces
To use squid in any of these sauces, cut the bodies into thin rings (and any
tentacles into halves) and stir them into the sauce for the last 2 minutes of
cooking. No need to sear them first.
Seared Shrimp in Any of These Tomato Sauces
To use shrimp in any of these sauces, cook them for just 2 or 3 minutes total
at the beginning, then stir them into the sauce for the last few minutes of
cooking.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
This dish is also wonderful with fresh tomatoes. Chop about a pound and
use them instead of canned.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Bruschetta
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Couscous
Creamy Polenta
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Fish and Chips with Tartar Sauce
It may seem like a tall order to make fried fish, French fries, and
tartar sauce in under 45 minutes. But smart multitasking makes it a
quick and relatively stress-free production.

Ingredients
Peanut oil for deep frying
2 pounds russet or Yukon Gold potatoes
Salt and pepper
1 egg
2½ cups flour
¾ cup beer
4 thick white fish fillets (about 1½ pounds)
1 lemon
2 sweet pickles or ¼ cup capers
1 cup mayonnaise
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 400ºF. Put 2 inches of peanut oil in a large pot over
medium-high heat. (Use an oil thermometer clipped to the side if you
have one.)
Halve the potatoes lengthwise and cut them into wedges about ⅛ inch
thick.
2. Put the potatoes on a rimmed baking sheet, drizzle with 3 or 4
tablespoons oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and toss to coat. Roast
(it’s okay if the oven isn’t completely heated yet) undisturbed for the
first 15 minutes, then turn as necessary until they are crisp on the
outside and tender, another 15 to 20 minutes.
Crack the egg into a medium bowl and add 1 cup flour, ¾ cup beer,
and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Whisk; the batter should be fairly
thin (a little lumpy is fine).
Put 1½ cups flour in a shallow bowl and stir in a sprinkle of salt and
pepper.
Line a baking sheet with paper towels.
3. When the oil reaches 350ºF (or a drop of batter added to the oil
bubbles vigorously but doesn’t turn brown right away), you’re ready to
cook the fish. One piece at a time, dredge the fillets in the flour, shake
off any excess, then dip in the batter, shaking off excess batter as well.
Working in batches to avoid crowding the pot, carefully put the fish
into the oil. Adjust the heat as necessary. If the oil starts to smoke,
remove it from the heat immediately to cool.
4. Fry the fish, turning once or twice, until it’s lightly browned and a
skewer or thin-bladed knife passes through each piece with little

resistance, no more than 5 minutes unless the fish is especially thick.
As the fish is done, transfer it to the paper towels with a slotted spoon.
Cut the lemon into wedges. Chop 2 pickles or ¼ cup capers; put them
in a small bowl.
5. Add 1 cup mayonnaise, 1 tablespoon Dijon, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper to the bowl; stir to combine.
6. When the fish and potatoes are done, serve them with the tartar sauce
and lemon wedges.
VARIATIONS
Fish and Chips with Smoked Paprika Aïoli
Substitute 2 teaspoons lemon juice for the pickles and 3 garlic cloves,
minced, for the Dijon. Whisk constantly and slowly drizzle in ¼ cup olive
oil. Season to taste with salt, pepper, and smoked paprika.
Fish and Chips with Curried Yogurt Sauce
Substitute 1 tablespoon curry powder for the pickles, yogurt for the
mayonnaise, and lime juice for the Dijon. Replace the lemon wedges with
lime.
Fish and Chips with Vinegar-Shallot Sauce
Use ⅓ cup malt vinegar and ⅓ cup water instead of the mayonnaise, 2
sliced shallots for the pickles, and sugar instead of the Dijon.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Instead of making the chips as described in Steps 1 and 2, use French Fries.

SIDES
Green Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Fennel Salad
Warm Buttery Bread
Succotash

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Roasted Trout (or Other Whole Fish)
with Fennel and Orange
Consider this recipe a template for roasting whole fish of all sizes;
the main variable will be the cooking time, and the only limiting
factor will be the size of your pan. Be forewarned, though: Big fish
will take a while. All the more time for a side dish.

Ingredients
2 large fennel bulbs
1 orange
4 whole trout, gutted
Olive oil
Salt and pepper
1 cup stock, white wine, or water

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF.
Trim the fennel and cut it into thick slices, saving the fronds.
Cut the orange into thin slices.
Cut 3 or 4 parallel diagonal gashes in both sides of the trout, almost
down to the bone.
2. Grease a roasting pan with a little olive oil and add the fennel. Drizzle
with a little more oil and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3. Put the trout on top of the fennel. Rub the fish with some more oil,
sprinkle inside and out with salt and pepper, and stuff with the fennel
fronds. Drizzle the fish with some oil and lay the orange slices on top.
4. Roast the fish until the skin browns and crisps, 15 to 20 minutes. Lift
the fish out of the pan and add 1 cup stock, wine, or water, scraping up
any browned bits and stirring the fennel.
5. Return the fish to the pan and continue to roast until the fish is opaque
on the inside but still juicy, another 15 minutes or so, depending on the
size. Add more liquid to the pan if it looks too dry. Serve with the pan
juices, fennel, and orange.
VARIATIONS
Roasted Trout (or Other Whole Fish) with Carrots and Lime
Substitute 1 pound carrots, cut into chunks, for the fennel and 3 limes for
the orange. Stuff the fish with chopped dill.
NOTES

MAKE YOUR OWN
Fish Stock
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Roasted Larger Fish
Roast a larger fish (about 3 pounds) such as grouper or haddock, which will
feed four. The cooking time will be longer: Start checking after 30 minutes.
SERVING WHOLE FISH
If you’ve cooked one or two larger fish for people to share, remove the
meat from the bones and put some on everyone’s plate. The slits that you
made across the fish before cooking will help you with this. The meat
between the slits is all above the bones, so just use a large spoon to remove
it in the largest chunks that you can. Once you’ve removed those meatiest
parts of the fish—which should be plenty for people to start with—you can
use a fork and your finger to pull the skeleton out of the fish, which will
free up some more meat for you to dish out. This usually turns into a finger-
food situation, which is fine.
SIDES
Rice Pilaf
Warm Buttery Bread
Boiled Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Shrimp Simmered in Dal
The beloved stewed lentils of India are a fantastic accompaniment
to shrimp as well as a fine cooking medium. Instead of broiling or
sautéing the shrimp separately, I nestle them in the lentils at the end
of their cooking time. Serve with rice or flatbread.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 small onion
1 garlic clove
1 inch fresh ginger
1 tablespoon curry powder
2 cups coconut milk (one and a half 15-ounce cans)
1 cup dried red lentils
1 bunch fresh cilantro
1½ pounds peeled shrimp
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons oil in a medium saucepan with a lid over medium-
high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. Add the onion to the pan and cook, stirring occasionally until it
softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel 1 garlic clove and 1 inch ginger; mince them together.
3. When the onion softens, add the garlic and ginger and 1 tablespoon
curry powder. Cook, stirring until they’re fragrant, a minute or 2.
4. Add 2 cups coconut milk, ½ cup water, and 1 cup red lentils. Bring to
a boil, then adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles gently but steadily.
Partially cover and cook, undisturbed, adding more liquid if the
mixture gets too dry, until the lentils are nearly tender and beginning to
break down, 20 to 25 minutes.
Chop ½ cup cilantro.
5. When the lentils are nearly tender, nestle in the shrimp and sprinkle
with salt and pepper. Cook, turning once, until the shrimp are pink and
just cooked through, 3 or 4 minutes per side.
6. By the time the shrimp are cooked, the lentils should be tender and
saucy. Taste and adjust the seasoning, garnish with the cilantro, and
serve.
VARIATIONS
Shrimp Simmered in Buttery Lentils with Tarragon

Omit the ginger and curry powder. Replace the coconut milk with a mixture
of water and chicken stock. Right before adding the shrimp, stir in 2
tablespoons chopped fresh tarragon leaves and 2 to 4 tablespoons butter.
Shrimp Simmered in Thai Coconut Lentils
Substitute 1 tablespoon Thai red curry paste for the curry powder. Garnish
with lime wedges along with the cilantro.
Salmon Simmered in Dal
Use salmon, cut into a few fillets or large chunks, instead of the shrimp.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder
DEVEINING SHRIMP
The shrimp recipes in this book don’t say anything about deveining. That’s
because it just isn’t necessary. The “vein” of the shrimp is a dark line
running down the outside curve, which is the animal’s intestinal track.
Most people don’t even notice it once it’s cooked—and if you’re buying
it already peeled, the vein is often already removed—but if you want to
remove it, just cut a shallow slit all the way down the curve with a paring
knife, then use the tip of the knife and your fingers to pull out the vein.
Some running water can help things along as well. It’s not hard to do, but
when you have 30 shrimp to devein it certainly adds some time to your prep
work.
SIDES
White Rice
Noodles with Curry and Coconut Milk

Crisp Roasted Potatoes
Cucumber Raita

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Baked Potato and Crab Cakes
Think part crab cake, part croquette. It’s a perfect blend of
crabmeat and potatoes, baked in the oven. Double or triple the
recipe and you’ve got party food.

Ingredients
¼ cup vegetable oil
8 ounces russet potatoes (about 2 medium potatoes)
2 scallions
1 small red bell pepper
1 pound cooked lump crabmeat
1 egg
¼ cup mayonnaise
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
3 tablespoons bread crumbs, or as needed
Salt and pepper
About 1 cup flour for dredging
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 375ºF. Put ¼ cup vegetable oil on a rimmed baking
sheet and put it in the oven.
Peel the potatoes if you like; grate them by machine or hand and put
them in a large bowl.
Trim and chop the scallions; add them to the bowl.
Trim, core, seed, and chop the bell pepper; add it to the bowl.
2. Pick through the crabmeat, discarding any pieces of shell or cartilage.
Add it to the bowl. Crack the egg into the bowl and add ¼ cup
mayonnaise, 1 tablespoon Dijon, 3 tablespoons bread crumbs, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper.
3. Stir to combine. Divide the mixture into 8 to 10 equal portions and
shape them into cakes, squeezing out excess liquid and adding more
bread crumbs if needed to hold their shape. Put 1 cup flour in a
shallow dish and gently dredge the cakes on both sides.
4. Put the cakes on the baking sheet and cook, turning once halfway
through, until they are golden on both sides and the potatoes are
tender, about 15 minutes.
Cut the lemon into wedges.
5. When the cakes are golden and the potatoes are tender, serve with the
lemon wedges.
VARIATIONS
Baked Sweet Potato and Chipotle Crab Cakes

Substitute sweet potatoes for russets and 1 chipotle in adobo, chopped, for
the Dijon. Serve with lime wedges.
Baked Celery Root and Crab Cakes
Substitute peeled celery root for the potatoes, ¼ cup chopped red onion for
the scallions, and 2 celery stalks for the bell pepper.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
Bread Crumbs
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Breaded Baked Potato and Crab Cakes
After dredging the cakes in the flour, dredge them in beaten eggs, then the
bread crumbs. Panfry the cakes in a large skillet for about 5 minutes per
side. Ideally, you’ll be able to do this in 2 batches. If you really need speed,
use 2 skillets at the same time.
SIDES
Fresh Tomato Salsa
Green Salad
Fennel Salad
Coleslaw
Creamed Spinach

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Scallop and Corn Pan Broil
Once the oven is heated and the corn is shucked, this one-pan broil
takes only as long as the scallops need to brown and cook through,
which is, like, five minutes. While that happens, you chop up some
scallions, chiles, and cilantro to add freshness at the end.

Ingredients
6 ears fresh corn
1 pint cherry tomatoes
1½ pounds sea scallops
¼ cup olive oil
Salt and pepper
4 scallions
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
1 bunch fresh cilantro
1 lime

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Shuck the corn and strip all of the kernels off the cob with a sharp
paring knife.
2. Put the corn, tomatoes, and scallops on a rimmed baking sheet; drizzle
with ¼ cup olive oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper, toss, and spread
them out in a single layer.
3. Put the pan under the broiler and cook until the tops of the scallops and
corn are lightly browned, 2 or 3 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
Trim and mince the chile.
4. When the scallops and corn are browned, stir the corn and turn the
scallops. Cook until the other sides of the scallops are lightly browned,
another 2 or 3 minutes.
Chop ¼ cup cilantro.
Cut the lime into wedges.
5. When the scallops are browned all over, remove the baking sheet from
the oven and stir in the scallions, chile, and cilantro. Taste and adjust
the seasoning and serve with the lime wedges.
VARIATIONS
Scallop and Kale Pan Broil
Substitute 1 bunch kale, chopped, for the corn, ¼ cup chopped black olives
for the chiles, 1 small red onion for the scallions, parsley for the cilantro,
and lemon for the lime.

Scallop and Green Bean Pan Broil
Substitute 1 pound green beans for the corn, ¼ cup chopped almonds for the
chiles, 1 shallot for the scallions, parsley for the cilantro, and lemon for the
lime.
Sausage and Corn Pan Broil
Or try this method with either of the first two variations. Instead of the
scallops, cut 1½ pounds hot or sweet Italian sausage into 1-inch chunks. In
Step 2, spread the sausage on the baking sheet by itself and broil, turning
the pieces once or twice, until they start to brown, 3 to 5 minutes. Move
them to one side, then add the corn and tomatoes to the pan and proceed
with the recipe.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Garlic Bread
Quinoa
Rice Pilaf

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Mussel and Vegetable Pan Roast with
Saffron Aïoli
Pan roast is code for throw some vegetables, shellfish, and liquid
in a roasting pan, toss it in the oven, and come back when
everything is done. This version with mussels, potatoes, corn, and
tomatoes—kind of a one-pot clambake—is ideal in summer.

Ingredients
1 pound new potatoes
3 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
4 ears fresh corn
2 pounds mussels
8 ounces andouille, kielbasa, linguiça, or other smoked sausage
½ cup beer, white wine, or water
1 pint cherry tomatoes
1 small garlic clove
1 lemon
Pinch of saffron
½ cup mayonnaise
1 bunch fresh parsley

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 400ºF.
Cut the potatoes into halves or quarters.
2. Put the potatoes in a large roasting pan; toss with 2 tablespoons olive
oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. When the oven is hot, roast,
stirring once or twice until the potatoes are lightly browned, about 20
minutes.
Husk the corn and cut each ear into thirds.
Scrub and debeard the mussels; discard any that don’t close when you
press the shell together.
Cut the sausage into chunks.
3. When the potatoes are lightly browned, stir in ½ cup beer, white wine,
or water, scraping any browned bits from the bottom of the pan. Add
the tomatoes, corn, mussels, and sausage.
4. Continue roasting until the mussels open and the potatoes are tender,
another 15 minutes or so.
Peel and mince 1 small garlic clove; put it in a small bowl.
Grate 1 teaspoon lemon zest into the bowl; refrigerate the fruit for
another use.
5. Add a pinch of saffron to the bowl along with 1 tablespoon hot water.
Let the mixture sit for a few minutes, then stir in ½ cup mayonnaise
and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Chop ¼ cup parsley.

6. When the mussels are open and the potatoes are tender, divide the pan
roast among 4 shallow bowls or serve it on a platter, garnished with
parsley, with the aïoli on the side for drizzling and dipping.
VARIATIONS
Mussel and Vegetable Pan Roast with Coconut Curry
Omit the aïoli. Substitute 1 tablespoon curry powder for the sausage,
coconut milk for the beer, and cilantro for the parsley.
Mussel and Vegetable Pan Roast with Spicy Tomato Broth
Skip the aïoli and use hot Italian sausage. Use 1 cup crushed tomatoes
instead of the beer and add 1 teaspoon red chile flakes with the vegetables
in Step 3. Garnish with basil instead of parsley.
Shrimp and Vegetable Pan Roast with Saffron Aïoli
Substitute large unpeeled shrimp for the mussels. Give the rest of the
vegetables a head start and add the shrimp with about 10 minutes left in the
cooking.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
EVEN FASTER
Parboil the whole potatoes while the oven heats, about 10 minutes, then add
everything to the roasting pan at the same time once the oven is hot.
PRYING OPEN MUSSELS AND CLAMS
Many people will tell you that those mussels or clams that don’t open
during cooking should be tossed, but I prefer to be a bit more selective. Pry
open these stragglers with a butter knife; if they look or smell spoiled, or

you’re worried about them for any reason, by all means chuck ’em; but if
they seem just as good as the rest, eat them (I do).
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Quinoa
Buttered Egg Noodles
Roasted Sweet Potatoes

Chicken
Broiled Chicken Breasts with Avocado Salsa
Chicken with Creamy Spinach-Cashew Sauce
Breaded Cutlets with Pan Sauce
Fastest Chicken Parm
Prosciutto-Crusted Chicken with Endive
Tapenade-Crusted Chicken with Eggplant
Poached Chicken and Asparagus with Lemon Aïoli
Moroccan-Spiced Chicken Cutlets with Chickpeas and
Dried Fruit
Chicken with Creamed Spinach
Chicken Marsala with Lots of Mushrooms
Stir-Fried Chicken and Kale
Stir-Fried Chicken and Broccoli with Black Bean Sauce
Sesame Chicken and Snow Peas
Chile-Rubbed Chicken with Corn and Scallions
Chicken and Cauliflower Curry with Apricots
Provençal Chicken

Chicken Stroganoff
Charred Chicken and Pita with Gyro Fixings
Jerk Chicken and Onions
Chicken and Peppers with Black Bean “Mole”
Thai Peanut Chicken with Crisp Cabbage and Bean Sprouts
Chicken and Chard Gratin
Chicken and Chile Fundido
Chicken and Ricotta Sausage over Broccoli Rabe
Korean-Style Chicken and Vegetable Pancakes
Braised and Glazed Chicken and Leeks
Turkey Burgers
Seared Duck Breast with Fruit Sauce
Chicken, Vegetables, and Noodles in Soy Broth
Cornmeal Fried Chicken
Crisp Baked Chicken Tenders
Oven-Fried Chicken with Roasted Corn
Honey-Ginger-Soy-Roasted Chicken and Celery
Chicken and Tomato Packages
Chicken and Green Beans

Collard-Wrapped Chicken
Split Whole Chicken and Vegetables
Za’atar Wings and Eggplant with Yogurt-Harissa Sauce
Chicken and Sweet Potato Adobo
Chicken and Dumplings with Lots of Peas
Arroz con Pollo
Chicken and Spinach Meat Loaf
Roast Turkey with Sage Sausage Stuffing
Red Wine–Braised Turkey

Chicken
Americans buy and eat more chicken than any other
meat, and no wonder: It cooks quickly and takes well
to an almost infinite range of treatments. This chapter
focuses on speedy, efficient chicken cookery,
resulting in a richly varied collection of recipes that
guarantees this ubiquitous weeknight dinner is
anything but same old, same old.
A combination of simple seasoning strategies and
cooking techniques will enhance chicken’s unique
advantages and minimize its challenges. For starters,
you can be more assertive than you think with
flavorings. The meat has a relatively mild taste, but
unlike seafood it’s not delicate. The recipes here give
you permission to treat chicken like a blank canvas
and sprinkle it liberally with spices and herbs before,
during, and after cooking if you like—especially salt
and pepper.

By far the most common mistake people make is
to overcook chicken. The fastest cuts are also the
leanest and the quickest to dry out, and the thickness
and sizes vary wildly. So check the interior frequently
—the easiest way is to nick with a knife and peek—
and remove pieces from the heat as they’re done.
Many of the recipes use boneless cuts of chicken,
fast to cook and easy to eat and handle. I rely
especially on boneless, skinless thighs; while they
take a minute or two longer to cook than breasts, the
extra flavor and juiciness (they’ve got more fat)
justifies a few more minutes at the stove. But you can
also cook bone-in parts in 30 to 45 minutes. And
although this is the “chicken” chapter, I’ve included
recipes for turkey and duck.

Chapter Highlights
Chicken 101  Useful notes on chicken labels and safety. Chicken Lingo.
Roast Your Own Chicken  The starting point for all kinds of quick meals.
Make a habit of roasting one while you’re doing something else. Whole
Roast Chicken.
Saucy Vegetables  When you’ve finished sautéing chicken cutlets, you can
use the hot skillet to cook up vegetables and a sauce. Vegetable Pan Sauce.
Full Steam Ahead  You don’t need to own a steamer (I don’t); just make
one out of a couple bowls or plates. Rigging a Fast Steamer.
Bubble, Bubble, Broil and Bubble  For fast flavor, broil chicken briefly to
brown it, then simmer in flavorful sauce. Broiling and Bubbling.
The Butterfly Effect  Here’s how to cook a whole chicken in less than an
hour. Butterflying a Chicken.
Free-Form Meat Loaf  Less fussy than using a loaf pan, and you get better
browning too. Shaping Meat Loaf.
Quick Braising  Braising offers more time flexibility than you might think,
and it’s an ideal method for improvisation—not just with chicken, but with
meat and vegetables too. Recipe-Free Braised Meat.
Hot Pan, Fast Dinner  Stir-fries are a staple of any fast kitchen. Here’s an
all-purpose map to making your own. Recipe-Free Stir-Fry.

Turkey the Rest of the Year  When cut up, turkey is both fast and easy
and worth enjoying year-round. Turkey Parts.
Instant Thanksgiving  A roast turkey dinner in 45  minutes. Roast Turkey
with Sage Sausage Stuffing.
Ground Rules  Ground chicken gets exciting. Korean-Style Chicken and
Vegetable Pancakes, Chicken and Chile Fundido, Chicken and Ricotta
Sausage over Broccoli Rabe.
For the Kids  A hassle-free method for crisp chicken fingers in the oven.
Crisp Baked Chicken Tenders.
Duck!  There’s only one duck recipe in this chapter, but it’s one you’ll use
again and again. Seared Duck Breast with Fruit Sauce.

INGREDIENT

Chicken Lingo
You may already know your way around a bird, but
to sum it all up, the keys to great chicken dishes are
buying well, cooking safely, and keeping it moist.
Get these points sorted out and a lifetime of delicious
chicken awaits.
Type of Chicken
What’s the Story?
NATURAL
The term natural means nothing when
applied to chicken. It’s not a designation
that’s regulated by the federal government
or anyone else, so it’s entirely up to the
producer to label a bird natural or not, and
why wouldn’t they when there are no
repercussions for calling a chicken that’s
been pumped with antibiotics “natural”?
Ignore it.

FREE-RANGE
A meaningful but still misleading label.
Free-range evokes images of chickens
roaming around in a field, but the
designation means only that the birds have
access to outdoor space. This doesn’t
mean they go there. And the label says
nothing of the chickens’ diet or living
conditions. A free-range label is no
guarantee of a humanely raised or
flavorful bird, but it’s a bit of a starting
place.
ORGANIC
Organic certification doesn’t paint a full
picture of how chickens are raised, but at
least it’s a term that’s defined and
regulated by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. To receive this certification
producers must at least provide the
chickens with some amount of mobility,
never give them antibiotics or other drugs,
nor feed them genetically modified
organisms. This doesn’t guarantee that a
chicken will taste incredible or be free of
salmonella, but it is the only way we can
know for sure that it was raised decently.

HERITAGE OR LOCAL
Neither of these terms is regulated in any
way, but they are generally used to
describe breeds of chickens that have
superior flavor and texture or birds that
have been raised in a healthy and
responsible way—although they’re not
necessarily organic. These are the kinds of
chickens that you’ll find at farmers’
markets, specialty butchers, or high-end
supermarkets. They are usually superior
and are priced accordingly.

Piecing Out
Popularity comes with benefits. You can buy chicken any way you want it:
whole bird, quartered, cut into eight or sixteen pieces, or all—or a
combination—of parts like thighs or wings. And almost all cuts come bone-
in or bone out, with or without skin. Each has pros and cons in the fast
kitchen.
A whole bird takes close to an hour to cook. And though it’s easy
enough, that timeframe does not merit the “fast” moniker. But when you
want to pull together leisurely sides or don’t mind butchering a chicken
yourself, it’s usually the best buy in terms of quality and price. And for
precooked meat to use in salads or sandwiches, it’s a great way to go. (See
the master recipes.)
For the ideal combination of flavor, juiciness, and speed, bone-in
chicken parts are best: They’re undeniably convenient and cook more
quickly than whole birds. I use them in some recipes here, and there’s
another master recipe.
Cutlets made from thighs, breasts, and tenderloins (or “tenders”) are by
far the most convenient and fast-cooking. But without the flavor and
protection of bone and skin, the meat can become lackluster and dry quickly
during cooking. Fortunately both challenges are easily overcome with
confident seasoning and a watchful eye. (And helpful recipes!)
Chicken Safety and Doneness
Food safety is particularly important when it comes to chicken, since an
unnervingly high percentage of birds routinely contain the bacteria
salmonella. The way to kill salmonella (theoretically) is to cook the chicken
until it is fully done, which you ensure in two ways. The most reliable way

to know whether chicken is cooked through is by using a quick-read
thermometer (this works best on larger bone-in chicken parts or whole
chickens). Insert the thermometer into a few places in the breast and/or
thigh, avoiding the bones. The government officially recommends cooking
chicken to 165°F, which almost certainly guarantees dried-out white meat.
To ensure that chicken is both safe and not overcooked, I remove the
chicken from the heat after it reaches 155° to 160°F on a quick-read
thermometer and let it continue to rise those last few degrees while it rests
on the cutting board.
The other way to check for doneness is simply to make a small cut into
the chicken and take a peek. For bone-in pieces, cut right down to the bone,
while for boneless chicken make sure you can see the middle of the thickest
part. The meat should be opaque; the tiniest trace of pink in the meat is
okay since it will continue to cook as you get it to the table, but you
shouldn’t see any traces of red, and the juices that spill out of the meat
should run clear.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Broiled Chicken Breasts with
Avocado Salsa
Garlic burns easily under the broiler; to impart its flavor without
having charred bits, broil whatever you’re making first—in this
case chicken—then rub the exterior with a cut clove, as you would
with bruschetta. Halving the chicken breasts first speeds up
cooking and gets you more surface area for the garlic and the
avocado salsa topping.

Ingredients
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 teaspoons paprika
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
2 avocados
1 small red onion
1 cup cherry tomatoes
1 lime
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Cut each chicken breast in half horizontally to make 2 thin cutlets.
Press down on each with the heel of your hand to flatten.
2. Put the cutlets on a rimmed baking sheet, rub with 2 tablespoons olive
oil, and sprinkle with 2 teaspoons paprika and some salt and pepper.
3. Broil, turning once, until lightly browned on both sides and just cooked
through, 2 to 5 minutes per side.
Peel and halve 2 garlic cloves.
Halve and pit the avocados, cut the flesh into cubes, and scoop it out of
the skin into a medium bowl.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the bowl.
4. Rub the browned cutlets all over with the raw garlic and put them on
plates or a platter. Discard what’s left of the garlic.
Halve 1 cup cherry tomatoes; add them to the bowl.
Halve the lime.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
5. Squeeze the lime juice into the salsa and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Spoon the salsa over the top of the chicken, garnish with the cilantro,
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Broiled Chicken Breasts with Peach Salsa
Substitute peaches for the avocados.

Broiled Chipotle Chicken Breasts with Watermelon Salsa
Instead of using paprika, rub the cutlets with 2 tablespoons chopped
chipotle chiles in adobo sauce. Use 2 cups cubed watermelon instead of the
avocado.
Broiled Curried Chicken Breasts with Pineapple Salsa
Swap curry powder for the paprika and 2 cups chopped pineapple for the
avocado. Add ¼ cup chopped mint to the salsa.
Herb-Rubbed Chicken Breasts with Peas and Parmesan
Use dried herbes de Provence instead of paprika, 2 cups warmed peas
instead of avocado, ½ cup grated Parmesan in place of onion, and lemon
instead of lime.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the salsa in Steps 3 through 5, use 1 cup Fresh Tomato
Salsa and add chopped avocado.
SIDES
White Rice
Warm Flour Tortillas
Jícama and Radish Salad
Mexican Street Corn

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken with Creamy Spinach-
Cashew Sauce
This is a classic Indian preparation, achieving a delicious
creaminess in almost no time.

Ingredients
Two 10-ounce packages frozen spinach
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
2 pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs
Salt and pepper
1 cup cream
1½ cups unsalted cashews
2 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
1 teaspoon garam masala
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
Thaw the spinach in the microwave; put it in a blender.
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Chop the chicken into large chunks.
2. Add the chicken to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until the chicken just loses its pink color, 3 to 5
minutes.
3. Add 1 cup cream, 1½ cups cashews, ¾ cup water, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper to the blender. Turn the machine on and blend until it
becomes a smooth sauce.
Peel 2 garlic cloves and 1 inch ginger; mince them together.
4. When the chicken loses its pink color, add the garlic, ginger, and 1
teaspoon garam masala. Cooking, stirring frequently until fragrant,
about a minute.
5. Pour the sauce into the skillet. Adjust the heat so the mixture simmers
gently but steadily and cook, stirring occasionally until the sauce
thickens slightly and the chicken is cooked through, 4 to 6 minutes.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
6. Taste and adjust the seasoning, garnish with the cilantro, and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Chicken with Coconut-Spinach-Cashew Sauce
Use coconut milk in place of cream.

Chicken with Creamy Scallion-Peanut Sauce
Substitute 1 cup chopped scallions for the spinach and peanuts for the
cashews.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Toast the cashews in a dry skillet before adding to the blender.
SIDES
White Rice
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Cucumber Raita

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Breaded Cutlets with Pan Sauce
Always popular and simple to make. A lot of different side dishes
will complement these cutlets, or you can incorporate vegetables
right into the sauce.

Ingredients
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
2 cups flour
2 cups bread crumbs
2 eggs
Salt and pepper
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 lemon
½ cup white wine
½ cup chicken stock
2 tablespoons butter

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF.
Cut each chicken breast in half horizontally to make 2 thin cutlets.
Press down on each with the heel of your hand to flatten.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
3. Set up 3 shallow bowls for dredging; fill one with 2 cups flour, one
with 2 cups bread crumbs, and crack the eggs into the last bowl and
beat them. Season all with salt and pepper.
4. Dredge the chicken cutlets one at a time in flour, then egg, then bread
crumbs. As you finish each cutlet, put it in the skillet (you’ll need to
work in batches). Raise the heat to medium-high.
5. Cook the cutlets, rotating them occasionally and adjusting the heat so
they sizzle but don’t burn, until they are browned, 3 or 4 minutes. Turn
and cook on the other side until browned and cooked through, another
3 or 4 minutes.
6. As each piece is done, transfer it to the oven to keep warm; continue
cooking the remaining cutlets, adding more oil to the skillet as needed.
Chop ¼ cup parsley leaves.
Halve the lemon.
7. When all the cutlets are cooked and warming in the oven, add ½ cup
wine to the skillet; cook, scraping the bottom of the pan until it is
reduced by about half, a minute or 2.
8. Add ½ cup chicken stock along with any juices that have accumulated
around the chicken; cook until the sauce thickens a bit, another 2 or 3
minutes.

9. Stir in 2 tablespoons butter, squeeze in the lemon juice, and stir in the
parsley. Cook, swirling the pan to melt the butter. Taste and adjust the
seasoning, pour the sauce over the cutlets, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Spicy Breaded Cutlets with Pan Sauce
Add 2 teaspoons chili powder to the flour; substitute lime for lemon and
cilantro for parsley.
Parmesan-Breaded Cutlets with Balsamic Pan Sauce
Add ½ cup grated Parmesan to the bread crumbs; stir in 1 tablespoon
vinegar just before adding the butter at the end.
Breaded Cutlets with Mushroom Pan Sauce
Cook ½ cup chopped mushrooms and 1 chopped shallot in the skillet until
softened, about 3 minutes. Then add the wine and proceed as directed.
5 Ways to Flavor Pan Sauce
Add any of the following to the pan sauce in Step 9:
1. Minced garlic, ginger, or chiles
2. Chopped fresh rosemary, sage, thyme, or oregano
3. Chopped capers, olives, or anchovies
4. Pinch of saffron
5. Curry powder, chili powder, or other dried spices
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Bread Crumbs
Chicken Stock

EVEN FASTER
Skip the eggs and bread crumbs and just dredge the cutlets in the flour
before cooking.
SIDES
Green Salad
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Tomato Salad
Creamy Polenta
Garlic Bread
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Pasta, Plain and Simple

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fastest Chicken Parm
This take on the classic couldn’t be easier: Instead of dredging and
panfrying, just stack the ingredients in two stages on a baking sheet
and broil. Done this way, the tomatoes get lightly roasted and the
bread crumbs stay nice and crunchy. (For eggplant like this, see the
Variations.)

Ingredients
5 tablespoons olive oil
3 medium ripe tomatoes
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)
Salt and pepper
8 ounces fresh mozzarella cheese
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)
1 bunch fresh basil
1 cup bread crumbs

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Put 2
tablespoons olive oil on a rimmed baking sheet and spread it around;
put the baking sheet in the broiler.
Core and slice the tomatoes.
Cut the chicken breasts in half horizontally to make 2 thin cutlets for
each breast. Press down on each with the heel of your hand to
flatten.
2. Carefully remove the baking sheet from the broiler. Put the chicken
cutlets on the sheet and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Top with the
tomatoes, and broil one one side only until the chicken is no longer
pink in the center, rotating the pan if necessary for even cooking, 5 to
10 minutes.
Grate the mozzarella and Parmesan.
Strip 16 to 20 basil leaves from the stems.
Combine the bread crumbs, mozzarella, and Parmesan in a small bowl.
3. When the chicken is cooked through, remove the baking sheet from the
broiler. Lay the basil leaves on top of the tomatoes, sprinkle with the
bread crumb and cheese mixture, and drizzle with 3 tablespoons olive
oil.
4. Return to the broiler, and cook until the bread crumbs and cheese are
browned and bubbly, 2 to 4 minutes. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Cubano Chicken

Use sliced dill pickles instead of the tomatoes and Swiss cheese instead of
the mozzarella. Omit the basil. Before putting the pickles on top of the
chicken in Step 2, spread a little Dijon mustard on the cutlets. Instead of the
Parmesan, mix ½ cup chopped ham into the bread crumb and Swiss
topping.
Chicken Melt
Use Gruyère cheese instead of the mozzarella and 1 tablespoon fresh thyme
leaves instead of the basil. Omit the Parmesan. Before putting the tomatoes
on top of the chicken in Step 2, spread a little Dijon mustard over the
cutlets.
Fastest Eggplant Parm
Instead of the chicken, slice about 2 pounds large eggplant crosswise 1 inch
thick. After the pan heats in Step 2, spread out the eggplant slices—but not
the tomatoes—and turn to coat them in some oil and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Broil until softened and browned in places, about 3 to 5 minutes.
Flip the eggplant, then top with the tomatoes and proceed with the recipe
from the end of Step 2.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Bread Crumbs
EVEN FASTER
Spread about 2 cups Tomato Sauce on the cutlets instead of sliced tomatoes.
SIDES
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Garlic Bread

Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Chopped Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Prosciutto-Crusted Chicken with
Endive
Pounding a slice of prosciutto into the top of a boneless, skinless
chicken breast is a tasty way to keep the meat moist. The Parmesan
helps the prosciutto adhere to the meat and boosts the flavor even
more, while the wrapper forms a crisp crust.

Ingredients
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
Salt and pepper
8 slices prosciutto
4 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
4 heads Belgian endive (1 to 1½ pounds)
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF.
Cut the chicken breasts in half horizontally to make 2 thin cutlets for
each breast.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan.
2. Sprinkle the cutlets with salt and pepper and half of the Parmesan. Lay
a slice of prosciutto over each cutlet, folding over any edges around the
sides.
3. Put a large piece of plastic wrap over the cutlets and bang on them a
few times with the bottom of a large skillet to flatten them a bit and get
the prosciutto to stick.
4. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in the large skillet and put it over medium-
high heat. When it’s hot, add the cutlets prosciutto side down (you’ll
need to work in batches). Cook until the prosciutto is crisp, 4 to 6
minutes, then turn and cook until the chicken is cooked through,
another 2 or 3 minutes.
5. As each piece is done, transfer it to the oven to keep warm; continue
cooking the remaining cutlets, adding more oil to the skillet as needed.
Trim and chop the endive.
6. When all the cutlets are cooked and warming in the oven, add 2
tablespoons oil to the skillet. Add the endive and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper; cook, stirring occasionally until it’s lightly browned and just
tender but still with some crunch, 3 to 5 minutes.
Cut the lemon into wedges.

7. Sprinkle ½ cup Parmesan over the endive and toss. Serve with the
cutlets, garnished with the lemon wedges.
VARIATIONS
Prosciutto-Crusted Chicken with Kale
Substitute 1 bunch kale, chopped, for the endive; sauté until it just wilts, 4
or 5 minutes.
Bacon-Crusted Chicken with Apples
Substitute thin-cut bacon strips for the prosciutto; to cover the chicken,
either cut 8 slices bacon in half or use 16 slices (2 per cutlet). Substitute
cheddar for the Parmesan and sliced apples for the endive: Sauté them until
they are tender and nicely browned, 5 to 10 minutes.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Garlic Bread
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Refried White Beans with Rosemary
Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tapenade-Crusted Chicken with
Eggplant
Olive tapenade isn’t just a great dip; it also works as an intensely
flavorful paste for seasoning chicken or other meats. Spread on
chicken breasts, it turns into an irresistible, briny crust under the
broiler. Spoon any leftovers onto the eggplant.

Ingredients
1 large or 2 medium eggplant (about 2 pounds)
8 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
Salt and pepper
8 ounces black olives
1 garlic clove
1 tablespoon capers
3 or 4 anchovy fillets
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Trim and slice the eggplant into 1-inch rounds and put them on a
rimmed baking sheet.
2. Drizzle the eggplant with 4 tablespoons olive oil and sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Broil, turning once or twice and brushing with more oil if
it looks dry, until nicely browned and cooked through, 10 to 12
minutes total.
Pit 8 ounces black olives if necessary; put them in a food processor.
Peel and chop 1 garlic clove; add it to the food processor.
3. Add 1 tablespoon capers, 3 or 4 anchovy fillets, 2 tablespoons oil, and
a sprinkle of pepper to the food processor. Pulse, adding oil if
necessary, until the mixture becomes a thick paste.
Cut the chicken breasts in half horizontally to make 2 thin cutlets for
each breast. Press down on each with the heel of your hand to
flatten.
4. When the eggplant is done, transfer it to a platter. Put the chicken on
the baking sheet, drizzle with 2 tablespoons oil, and sprinkle with
pepper. Broil until the top is lightly browned, 2 to 5 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
5. When the cutlets are browned, flip them and carefully spread a layer of
tapenade over the top of each. Continue broiling until the tapenade
becomes slightly crusty and the chicken cooks through, another 2 to 5
minutes.

6. Put the chicken on top of the eggplant, garnish with the parsley and a
drizzle of oil if you like, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pesto-Crusted Chicken with Eggplant
Substitute 1 cup loosely packed fresh basil leaves for the olives, 1
tablespoon pine nuts or chopped walnuts for the capers, and ¼ cup grated
Parmesan for the anchovies.
Puttanesca-Crusted Chicken with Fennel
Use fennel, cut into thick slices, instead of the eggplant. Broil, turning or
tossing once or twice, until the fennel is nicely browned and tender, 10 to 12
minutes. Substitute 1 cup dried tomatoes for half of the olives. Add ¼ cup
grated Parmesan if you like.
SIDES
Green Salad
Bruschetta
Couscous
Quinoa

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Poached Chicken and Asparagus with
Lemon Aïoli
Two techniques in one pot: While the chicken poaches in herb-
seasoned water, asparagus steams on top. Both pair well with a
simple garlic and lemon mayo.

Ingredients
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)
3 sprigs fresh thyme
1 large bunch asparagus (1 pound)
1 garlic clove
1 lemon
½ cup mayonnaise
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put the chicken, 2 cups water, and 3 sprigs thyme in a large pot over
high heat.
2. When the liquid boils, lower the heat so it bubbles steadily but not
vigorously and turn the chicken. Cover and cook until the chicken is
opaque and just cooked through, 12 to 15 minutes.
Trim the asparagus.
3. About 7 minutes after you covered the chicken, add the asparagus and
re-cover the pot: By the time the chicken is cooked through, the
asparagus will be tender but still have a little crunch, 5 to 8 minutes. If
one finishes before the other, remove it first.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove; add it to a small bowl.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
4. Add ½ cup mayonnaise and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl;
stir to combine.
5. When the chicken and asparagus are done, put the asparagus on a
platter. Cut the chicken on the bias into long diagonal slices and add
them to the platter.
6. Sprinkle the chicken and asparagus with a little salt and pepper and
spoon the aïoli over the top or serve it on the side.
VARIATIONS
Poached Chicken and Snap Peas with Curry Aïoli
Use ¼ teaspoon whole cumin seeds, 2 cardamom pods, 1 teaspoon
coriander seeds, and ¼ teaspoon mustard seeds instead of the thyme and

snap peas instead of the asparagus. The peas will take just a few minutes to
cook, so add them closer to the end. Add 1 tablespoon curry powder to the
aïoli.
Poached Chicken and Carrots with Lemon-Soy Aïoli
Substitute 1 tablespoon orange juice and 1 tablespoon soy sauce for the
thyme and carrots (thin ones or halved lengthwise) for the asparagus. The
carrots take longer to cook than the asparagus, so add them to the pan as
soon as you’re done prepping them. Add 2 teaspoons soy sauce to the aïoli.
Poached Chicken Cutlets and Red Peppers with Smoked Paprika Aïoli
Replace the asparagus with red peppers, cut into thick slices; they’ll take a
little less time to cook. Add 2 teaspoons smoked paprika to the aïoli.
Chinese-Style Poached Chicken and Bok Choy
Substitute 1 inch ginger, sliced, and a few fresh basil sprigs for the thyme
and chopped bok choy for the asparagus. Instead of the aïoli, serve with a
mixture of soy sauce, sesame oil, minced ginger, and chopped fresh basil.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
White Rice
Quinoa

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Moroccan-Spiced Chicken Cutlets
with Chickpeas and Dried Fruit
It takes forever to make a tagine, but you can infuse all the same
warm Moroccan flavors into this simple two-step sauté and get it
done in a flash.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)
2 teaspoons cumin
1 teaspoon coriander
½ teaspoon cinnamon
¼ teaspoon cayenne
Salt and pepper
2 cups cooked or canned chickpeas (one 15-ounce can)
1 cup dried apricots
¼ cup red wine vinegar
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet
over medium-low heat.
Cut the chicken breasts in half horizontally to make 2 thin cutlets for
each breast. Press down on each with the heel of your hand to
flatten.
2. Combine 2 teaspoons cumin, 1 teaspoon coriander, ½ teaspoon
cinnamon, ¼ teaspoon cayenne, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper in a
small bowl. Rub the spices all over the chicken.
3. Raise the heat to medium-high and add the cutlets to the skillet (you’ll
need to work in batches). Cook the cutlets, rotating them occasionally
and adjusting the heat so they sizzle but don’t burn, until the spices are
nicely browned, 3 or 4 minutes. Turn and cook on the other side until
the chicken is cooked through, another 3 or 4 minutes.
4. As each piece is done, transfer it to the oven to keep warm; continue
cooking the remaining cutlets, adding more oil to the skillet as needed.
If you’re using canned chickpeas, rinse and drain them.
Chop 1 cup dried apricots.
5. When all the cutlets are cooked and warming in the oven, add ¼ cup
red wine vinegar to the skillet, scraping up the browned bits from the
bottom. Add the chickpeas and apricots, sprinkle with salt and pepper,
and cook, stirring occasionally until warmed through, 3 or 4 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
6. When the chickpeas and apricots are warm, stir in most of the parsley,
taste, and adjust the seasoning. Serve with the chicken, garnished with

the remaining parsley and a drizzle of olive oil.
VARIATIONS
BBQ-Spiced Chicken Cutlets with Pinto Beans and Ham
Substitute chili powder for the coriander and paprika for the cinnamon. Use
pinto beans instead of chickpeas and replace red wine vinegar with cider
vinegar and the apricots with 1 cup chopped smoked ham or other cooked
smoked pork.
Smoked Paprika–Spiced Chicken Cutlets with White Beans and Dried
Tomatoes
Substitute 1 tablespoon smoked paprika for the spices, white beans for the
chickpeas, sherry vinegar for the red wine vinegar, and 1 cup chopped dried
tomatoes for the dried apricots.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
SIDES
Couscous
Cucumber Raita
Tahini Slaw

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken with Creamed Spinach
Creamed spinach goes with everything, but the leanness of the
chicken breast highlights the richness of the spinach like nothing
else. A lovely old combination.

Ingredients
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, plus more as needed
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
1 cup flour
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds spinach
1 garlic clove
¾ cup cream
¼ teaspoon nutmeg

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF.
Cut the chicken breasts in half horizontally to make 2 thin cutlets for
each breast. Press down on each with the heel of your hand to
flatten.
2. Put 2 tablespoons butter and 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet
over medium-high heat.
Put 1 cup flour in a shallow bowl; sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3. Dredge the chicken cutlets one at a time in the flour. As you finish
each, put it in the skillet (you’ll need to work in batches).
4. Cook the cutlets, rotating them occasionally and adjusting the heat so
they sizzle but don’t burn, until browned on the bottom, 3 or 4
minutes. Turn and cook on the other side until browned and cooked
through, another 3 or 4 minutes.
5. As each piece is done, transfer it to the oven to keep warm; continue
cooking the remaining cutlets, adding more fat to the skillet as needed.
Trim off any thick stems from the spinach and finely chop the leaves.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove.
6. When all the cutlets are cooked and warming in the oven, add ¾ cup
cream, 2 tablespoons butter, the garlic, ¼ teaspoon nutmeg, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper to the skillet. Reduce the heat to medium.
7. Add the spinach to the pan, a handful at a time if necessary to fit.
8. Cook, stirring occasionally until the spinach is completely wilted and
tender and the cream has reduced and thickened to the consistency you

like, 5 to 10 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning and spoon onto
plates.
9. Cut the chicken on the bias into long diagonal slices, fan them out over
the spinach, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Seared Chicken with Curried Creamed Spinach
Replace the garlic with ½ inch ginger, minced, and the nutmeg with 1
tablespoon curry powder.
Seared Chicken with Creamed Onions
Substitute 1 pound onions, thinly sliced, for the spinach. Before adding the
cream, sauté the onions in a little butter until soft. Then add the remaining
ingredients and cook until the onions are very tender and the cream has
reduced and thickened to the consistency you like.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Cook the creamed spinach in a separate saucepan while you cook the
chicken.
SIDES
Crisp Roasted Potatoes
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Garlicky Mushrooms

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken Marsala with Lots of
Mushrooms
Chicken Marsala is a favorite that doesn’t need much in the way of
tweaking. This version increases the mushrooms. Their earthiness
balances the sweet sauce brilliantly.

Ingredients
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, plus more as needed
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
1 cup flour
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish
¾ cup Marsala
1 cup chicken or beef stock

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF.
Cut the chicken breasts in half horizontally to make 2 thin cutlets for
each breast. Press down on each with the heel of your hand to
flatten.
2. Put 2 tablespoons butter and 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet
over medium-high heat.
Put 1 cup flour in a shallow bowl; sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3. Dredge the chicken cutlets one at a time in the flour and add to the
skillet (you’ll need to work in batches).
4. Cook the cutlets, rotating them occasionally and adjusting the heat so
they sizzle but don’t burn, until browned on the bottom, 3 or 4
minutes. Turn and cook on the other side until browned and cooked
through, another 3 or 4 minutes.
5. As each piece is done, transfer it to the oven to keep warm; continue
cooking the remaining cutlets, adding more fat to the skillet as needed.
Trim and slice the mushrooms. (If you’re using shiitakes, discard the
stems.)
6. When all of the cutlets are in the oven, add more fat to the skillet if it’s
dry, then add the mushrooms. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and cook,
stirring occasionally until the mushrooms are tender and the pan is
beginning to dry out, 8 to 12 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
7. Add ¾ cup Marsala and 1 cup stock to the mushrooms; raise the heat
to high and let the liquid bubble away until it thickens into a sauce. Stir

in 2 tablespoons butter, taste, and adjust the seasoning.
8. Pour the sauce over the cutlets, garnish with the parsley, and serve.
VARIATIONS
7 Other Liquids to Use in Place of Marsala:
1. Red or white wine
2. Beer
3. Apple cider
4. Cognac (about ½ cup)
5. Half water, half soy sauce
6. Coconut milk
7. Crushed tomatoes
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Fast Chicken Stock
Beef Stock
EVEN FASTER
Sauté the mushrooms in a separate skillet while you cook the chicken.
VEGETABLE PAN SAUCE
The easiest way to turn a dish like this into a meal is to cook a vegetable in
the same pan you used to cook the chicken. Remove the chicken from the
skillet when it’s done, then add a little more oil to the pan, followed by
some chopped vegetables like zucchini, mushrooms, kale, or whatever you
think makes sense. When the vegetables are tender, either remove them and

make the sauce or leave them in the skillet and build the pan sauce right
around them.
SIDES
Buttered Egg Noodles
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Creamy Polenta
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Chicken and Kale
It might not be a common green used in stir-fries, but kale takes
well to high-heat preparations. The leaves wilt quickly but remain
chewy and acquire wonderful singed brown spots (especially in a
cast-iron skillet) that deepen their earthy flavor.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons vegetable oil
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs or breasts
Salt and pepper
1 inch fresh ginger
2 garlic cloves
4 scallions
1½ pounds kale (1 large bunch)
2 tablespoons soy sauce
Sesame oil for serving

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Thinly slice the chicken or chop it into small pieces.
2. Add the chicken to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until it loses its pink color and is cooked through,
5 to 10 minutes.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 2 garlic cloves; mince them together.
Trim and chop the scallions; separate the white and light green parts
from the dark green tops.
Rinse and trim the kale, cutting out any thick stems. Cut the leaves into
thin ribbons.
3. When the chicken is done, add the ginger, garlic, and white and light
green parts of the scallions. Cook, stirring until fragrant, about a
minute. Transfer the chicken mixture to a bowl.
4. Add 2 tablespoons oil to the skillet. Add the kale, a handful at a time if
necessary to fit it in, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook until the
leaves wilt and begin to brown slightly, 5 or 6 minutes.
5. Return the chicken mixture to the skillet; add 2 tablespoons soy sauce
and stir to coat. Taste and adjust the seasoning, garnish with the
scallion tops, and serve, passing sesame oil at the table.
VARIATIONS
Stir-Fried Chicken and Collards with Dried Chiles

Swap collards for kale. Mince 3 or 4 dried red chiles and add them along
with the ginger in Step 3.
Stir-Fried Chicken and Chard and Citrus
Substitute chard for kale. Add 1 teaspoon each grated lemon and orange
zest along with the ginger in Step 3. Add a little of the citrus juice along
with the soy sauce in Step 5.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you want to include the kale stems, slice them thinly and give them a 1-
or 2-minute head start in the skillet before adding the leaves.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Chicken and Broccoli with
Black Bean Sauce
The secret to the delicious black bean sauce you get in Chinese
restaurants is fermented black beans—beans that have been salted
for so long they break down. They add a deep, earthy flavor and
deliver a little kick of salt.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons fermented black beans
2 tablespoons rice wine or white wine
2 tablespoons soy sauce
1 teaspoon sugar
4 tablespoons vegetable oil
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs or breasts
Salt and pepper
1 inch fresh ginger
4 garlic cloves
3 scallions
1 medium head broccoli (1 to 1½ pounds)
1 tablespoon sesame oil

Prep | Cook
1. Combine 2 tablespoons fermented black beans, 2 tablespoons rice wine
or white wine, 2 tablespoons soy sauce, and 1 teaspoon sugar in a
small bowl.
2. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Thinly slice the chicken or chop it into small pieces.
3. Add the chicken to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally, until it loses its pink color and is cooked through,
5 to 10 minutes.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 4 garlic cloves; mince them together.
Trim and chop the scallions, separating the white and light green
bottoms from the dark green tops.
Trim the broccoli; break or chop it into small florets.
4. When the chicken is done, add the ginger, garlic, and white and light
green parts of the scallions to the skillet. Cook, stirring until fragrant,
about a minute. Transfer the chicken mixture to a bowl.
5. Add 2 tablespoons oil to the skillet. Add the broccoli and cook, stirring
occasionally until it browns slightly, 3 or 4 minutes. Add ¼ cup water,
cover the skillet, and cook until the broccoli is just tender, another 3 or
4 minutes.
6. When the broccoli is just tender, remove the lid and let the remaining
water mostly bubble away. Return the chicken to the skillet and add the
fermented black bean mixture, tossing to coat everything with the
sauce.

7. Drizzle with 1 tablespoon sesame oil, taste, and adjust the seasoning.
Garnish with the scallion tops and serve.
VARIATIONS
Stir-Fried Chicken and Broccoli with Tomato-Soy Sauce
Increase the soy sauce to 3 tablespoons. Substitute 1 tablespoon tomato
paste for the fermented black beans and red wine for the rice wine.
Stir-Fried Chicken and Cauliflower with Orange–Black Bean Sauce
Add 2 tablespoons orange juice to the fermented black bean mixture and
skip the sugar. Substitute cauliflower for the broccoli.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Prepare the broccoli in a separate skillet while you cook the chicken. When
both are cooked, add the broccoli to the skillet with the chicken and stir in
the black bean sauce.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Fire and Ice Noodles
Panfried Rice Noodles
Scallion Pancakes

RECIPE-FREE

Stir-Fry
1
Pick a game plan.
Stir-frying goes so fast that it’s often advantageous to prep ingredients
before you start. If you decide to prep as you go, make sure you’re
starting with the ingredients that will take a little longer to cook, like
chicken thighs and broccoli, not shrimp and snow peas.

2
Cook the first wave.
Put a film of vegetable oil, like peanut or grapeseed, in a large skillet
over high heat. When it’s hot, add chopped or sliced meat or tofu (if
using seafood, hold off until you add the vegetables) and cook,
stirring once or twice to brown everything in places.

3
Add aromatics.
Garlic, ginger, and/or chiles are the norm, but shallots, anchovies,
leeks, and rosemary are also good—the flavors needn’t be ones
traditionally associated with this technique. Stir constantly until
fragrant, then remove everything from the skillet.

4
Cook vegetables (and seafood).
Add more oil if necessary. Quick-cooking vegetables—like snow peas
and bean sprouts—or seafood—like shrimp or squid—need only a
few minutes. Firmer vegetables like broccoli will cook faster if you
add a small splash of water.

5
Combine, sauce, and serve.
Return everything to the skillet and add a small splash of liquid to
make a sauce, anything from soy sauce or fish sauce to lemon juice or
tomato sauce (or more water). Add any final seasonings like herbs or
a drizzle of sesame oil. Toss, taste, and serve.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sesame Chicken and Snow Peas
The trick to cooking the thick, sweet sauces associated with
American Chinese food is cornstarch. For sesame chicken, the
restaurant favorite, it’s a must.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons sesame seeds
4 tablespoons vegetable oil
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs or breasts
Salt and pepper
1 inch fresh ginger
2 garlic cloves
1 lemon
2 tablespoons cornstarch
1 pound snow peas
3 tablespoons soy sauce
2 teaspoons honey

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons sesame seeds in a large skillet over medium-high
heat. Cook, shaking the pan frequently until the seeds are lightly
browned and fragrant, 2 or 3 minutes. Transfer them to a small bowl.
2. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in the skillet over medium-high heat.
Slice the chicken or cut it into small chunks.
3. Add the chicken to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until the chicken loses its pink color and is cooked
through, 6 to 8 minutes.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 2 garlic cloves; mince them together.
Halve the lemon.
Whisk together 2 tablespoons cornstarch and ⅓ cup water in a small
bowl.
4. Transfer the cooked chicken to a bowl. Add 2 tablespoons oil to the
skillet along with the ginger, garlic, and snow peas. Cook, stirring
occasionally until the snow peas are slightly tender but still have some
crunch, 2 or 3 minutes.
Add the lemon juice, 3 tablespoons soy sauce, and 2 teaspoons honey
to the cornstarch mixture and whisk to combine.
5. When the snow peas are slightly tender, return the chicken to the
skillet. Add the cornstarch mixture and most of the sesame seeds (save
some for garnish).
6. Cook, stirring until the chicken and snow peas are coated in a thick
sauce. Taste and adjust the seasoning, garnish with the remaining
sesame seeds, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Sesame Beef and Broccoli
Swap beef sirloin for the chicken and chopped broccoli for the snow peas.
Stir-fry the broccoli until just tender, sprinkling a little water to speed the
cooking, 6 to 8 minutes, then add the garlic and ginger and cook for another
minute before returning the chicken to the skillet.
Cumin Lamb with Green Peppers
Substitute cumin seeds for the sesame seeds, lamb shoulder or loin for the
chicken, sliced green bell peppers for the snow peas, and 2 limes for the
lemon.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Chinese-American-style sesame chicken involves frying the chicken and
tossing it in the sauce. To do this, dredge the chicken in cornstarch and
shallow- or deep-fry it until golden brown and cooked through. Let it drain
on paper towels while you cook the snow peas, then return it to the skillet as
directed in Step 5.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chile-Rubbed Chicken with Corn and
Scallions
The simple skillet stir-fry gets a lot out of its ingredients in a short
amount of time. Chicken with a spiced cornmeal coating becomes
crunchy and smoky, while corn kernels develop an earthy char.
Serve with warm tortillas or something more unexpected from the
opposite page.

Ingredients
5 tablespoons vegetable oil
½ cup cornmeal
2 teaspoons chili powder
2 teaspoons cumin
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs or breasts
4 ears fresh corn
6 scallions
1 lime
1 bunch fresh cilantro
4 ounces queso fresco (1 cup crumbled)
Hot sauce for serving

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-low
heat.
2. Combine ½ cup cornmeal, 2 teaspoons chili powder, 2 teaspoons
cumin, 1 teaspoon salt, and ¼ teaspoon pepper in a large bowl.
Thinly slice the chicken or chop it into small pieces.
3. Add the chicken to the cornmeal mixture and toss to coat. Raise the
heat to medium-high.
4. Add half of the chicken to the skillet, shaking off excess coating.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the chicken is cooked through and its
coating is crisp, 5 to 10 minutes. Transfer to a plate. Add another 2
tablespoons oil and cook the second batch.
Husk the corn and strip the kernels off the cobs.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. When the second batch of chicken is cooked and crisp, transfer it to the
plate.
6. Add 1 tablespoon oil to the skillet. Add the corn and scallions and
sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook, shaking the pan occasionally and
keeping the corn in as much of a single layer as possible, until the
kernels are well browned on at least one side, 5 to 10 minutes.
Halve the lime.
Chop ¼ cup cilantro.
7. When the corn is browned, return the chicken to the skillet and cook,
tossing, to heat it through. Taste and adjust the seasoning.

8. Squeeze in the lime juice; crumble 1 cup queso fresco and sprinkle
over the top. Garnish with the cilantro and serve, passing hot sauce at
the table.
VARIATIONS
Curry-Rubbed Stir-Fried Chicken with Corn and Red Onion
Substitute 1 tablespoon curry powder for the chili powder and cumin and 1
large red onion for the scallions. Skip the queso fresco and garnish with
lime, cilantro, mint, and ¼ cup chopped cashews.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
EVEN FASTER
Stir-fry the corn and scallions in a separate skillet while you cook the
chicken.
SIDES
Warm Corn Tortillas
White Rice
Refried Beans
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Ripe Plantains

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken and Cauliflower Curry with
Apricots
Inspired by tandoori: Yogurt-marinated chicken thighs and
cauliflower char under the broiler while you prepare a creamy curry
sauce brightened by dried apricots.

Ingredients
1 cup yogurt
4 tablespoons vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
1 small head cauliflower (1½ pounds)
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs
1 onion
2 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
1 cup dried apricots
1 tablespoon curry powder
One 15-ounce can coconut milk
½ cup cream
1 bunch fresh cilantro

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
2. Combine 1 cup yogurt, 2 tablespoons vegetable oil, and a sprinkle of
salt and pepper in a large bowl.
Trim the cauliflower and break or chop it into small florets and add
them to the bowl.
Cut the chicken into large chunks; add them to the bowl.
3. Toss the chicken and cauliflower to coat, then spread them out on a
rimmed baking sheet. Broil, turning once or twice, until they are brown
in spots and cooked through, 10 to 15 minutes.
4. Put 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-high
heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
5. Add the onion to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until it
softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel 2 garlic cloves and 1 inch ginger; mince them together.
Chop 1 cup dried apricots.
6. When the onion is soft, add the garlic, ginger, 1 tablespoon curry
powder, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring until fragrant,
a minute or 2.
7. Add the coconut milk, ½ cup cream, and the apricots and stir. Adjust
the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously and cook
until the liquid reduces into a creamy sauce, 2 or 3 minutes.
Chop ¼ cup cilantro.

8. When the chicken and cauliflower are done, add them to the sauce and
stir to coat. Cook for a minute or 2 to combine the flavors. Taste and
adjust the seasoning, garnish with the cilantro, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Chicken and Cauliflower Curry with Tomatoes
Substitute cherry tomatoes, halved, for the apricots.
Chicken and Eggplant Green Curry
Skip the apricots. Substitute eggplant, cut into small chunks, for the
cauliflower and 2 tablespoons green curry paste for the curry powder.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the chicken and cauliflower marinate in the yogurt for up to a day. The
longer they marinate, the more tender and flavorful they will be.
To give a deeper flavor to the sauce, cook the onions slowly over medium
heat until they are dark brown, 10 to 15 minutes.
SIDES
White Rice
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Cucumber Raita

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Provençal Chicken
I’m a sucker for the flavors of Provence: olives, capers, garlic, and
tomatoes. They are the makings of this hearty country stew.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs
Salt and pepper
2 large zucchini
3 medium ripe tomatoes (1 pound)
½ cup black olives
2 tablespoons capers
4 garlic cloves
2 sprigs fresh thyme
½ cup chicken stock, white wine, or water
Several sprigs fresh basil for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
Cut the chicken into large chunks.
2. Add the chicken to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until it loses its pink color and is nearly cooked
through, 6 to 8 minutes.
Trim and chop the zucchini. Core and chop the tomatoes.
Pit ½ cup olives if necessary; chop 2 tablespoons capers.
3. When the chicken is nearly cooked through, transfer it to a bowl.
4. Add 2 tablespoons oil to the skillet. Add the zucchini, sprinkle with
salt and pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until lightly browned, 4
or 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 4 garlic cloves.
Strip the thyme leaves from 2 sprigs.
5. When the zucchini is lightly browned, add the tomatoes, olives, capers,
garlic, thyme, ½ cup stock, wine, or water, and lots of pepper. Scrape
any browned bits from the bottom of the pan, then return the chicken
the pan.
6. Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously and
cook, stirring once or twice, until the tomatoes thicken a bit and the
chicken finishes cooking, 5 to 10 minutes.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop.

7. When the tomatoes have thickened and the chicken is cooked, taste
and adjust the seasoning. Garnish with the basil and serve.
VARIATIONS
Provençal Chicken with Goat Cheese
For a creamier, richer dish, stir ¼ cup goat cheese into the skillet along with
the basil.
Creamy Provençal Chicken
Also creamy, but less tangy than the first variation. Stir ¼ cup (or a little
more) cream or crème fraîche into the skillet along with the basil.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Red Wine and Rosemary Quinoa
Buttered Egg Noodles
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken Stroganoff
It doesn’t get much more comforting than stroganoff, the rich
mushroom and sour cream sauce that’s more commonly simmered
with beef (see the variation) than chicken. Either way you get one
of those amazing dishes that tastes like it’s been cooking forever.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons butter
1 onion
1½ pounds button or cremini mushrooms
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs
1 medium ripe tomato
1 cup chicken stock
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
1 bunch fresh dill
½ cup sour cream

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion. Trim and slice the mushrooms.
2. Add the onions and mushrooms to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and raise the heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring occasionally
until the onion is very soft but not browned, about 10 minutes.
Cut the chicken into large chunks.
Core and chop the tomato.
3. When the onion is very soft, add the chicken to the skillet, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally for a minute or 2.
4. Add the tomato, 1 cup chicken stock, and 1 tablespoon Dijon. Adjust
the heat so the mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously and cook,
stirring occasionally until the chicken is cooked through, 5 to 10
minutes.
Strip ¼ cup dill leaves from the stems and chop.
5. When the chicken is cooked, stir in ½ cup sour cream and turn off the
heat. Taste and adjust the seasoning, stir in the dill, and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Beef Stroganoff
Substitute beef tenderloin for the chicken; it’ll probably take about the same
amount of time to cook.
Pork Stroganoff

Use boneless pork loin instead of the chicken. Substitute 1 tablespoon
chopped fresh sage (or 1 teaspoon dried) for the dill.
Curried Chicken and Mushrooms
Swap 1 tablespoon curry powder for the Dijon; add it to the skillet along
with the chicken in Step 3. Use cilantro instead of dill and yogurt instead of
sour cream.
Chicken Paprikash
Replace the Dijon with 1 tablespoon paprika; add it to the skillet along with
the chicken in Step 3.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
SIDES
Buttered Egg Noodles
White Rice
Steamed Tender Vegetables
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Charred Chicken and Pita with Gyro
Fixings
Gyros—those meaty, saucy loose wraps—have a tendency to fall
apart when you eat them, so here you don’t bother assembling them
in the first place. Serve everything on a platter and let people make
sandwiches, scoop up bites with the toasted pita, or devour as they
like.

Ingredients
2 pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 teaspoon cumin
½ teaspoon turmeric
Salt and pepper
1 lemon
¼ cup yogurt
¼ cup mayonnaise
½ head iceberg lettuce
2 medium ripe tomatoes
1 small red onion
Four 6- to 8-inch pitas (with or without pockets)

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
2. Put the chicken on a rimmed baking sheet; drizzle it with 2 tablespoons
olive oil and sprinkle with 1 teaspoon cumin, ½ teaspoon turmeric, and
some salt and pepper. Toss to coat the chicken in the oil and spices.
3. When the broiler is hot, cook the chicken, turning once, until lightly
charred on both sides and just cooked through, 6 to 8 minutes per side.
Halve the lemon and squeeze the juice into a medium bowl.
4. Add ¼ cup yogurt, ¼ cup mayonnaise, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper to the bowl. Stir to combine.
Chop ½ head of lettuce; add it to the bowl.
Core and chop the tomatoes; add them to the bowl.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the onion; add it to the bowl.
5. Toss the vegetables with the dressing, taste, and adjust the seasoning.
6. Rub the pitas with 1 tablespoon oil. Sprinkle with salt and pepper.
7. When the chicken is lightly charred and cooked through, transfer it to a
cutting board.
8. Put the pitas on a clean baking sheet and broil, turning once, until
browned or even slightly charred on both sides, 2 to 5 minutes total.
9. Slice or chop the chicken and put on plate or a platter. Add the pitas.
Serve with the chopped salad over the top or on the side.
VARIATIONS
Charred Chicken and Tortillas with Taco Fixings

Substitute chili powder for the turmeric, flour tortillas for the pita, lime for
the lemon, and ½ cup crumbled queso fresco and a dash of hot sauce for the
yogurt.
Charred Chicken and Crusty Bread with Hero Fixings
Use 1 teaspoon oregano instead of the cumin and turmeric, thick slices of
crusty bread for the pita, 2 tablespoons red wine vinegar for the lemon juice,
and 3 tablespoons olive oil for the mayonnaise and yogurt. If you have any
olives or spicy pickled peppers lying around, throw some of those into the
salad as well.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
SIDES
Rice Pilaf
Couscous
Hummus
Refried White Beans with Rosemary

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Jerk Chicken and Onions
In addition to being easy and insanely flavorful, this jerk dish will
remind you of all the worthy and underused spices in your pantry.
Once the marinade comes together, all you have to do is toss it with
a mess of chicken and sliced onions and broil away, which gives
you an uninterrupted stretch to whip up a side.

Ingredients
1 garlic clove
½ inch fresh ginger
1 teaspoon dried thyme
2 teaspoons allspice
½ teaspoon cayenne
1½ teaspoons paprika
1½ teaspoons sugar
3 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
2 large onions
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Peel 1 garlic clove and ½ inch ginger; mince them together and put
them in a small bowl.
2. Add to the bowl 1 teaspoon dried thyme, 2 teaspoons allspice, ½
teaspoon cayenne, 1½ teaspoons paprika, 1½ teaspoons sugar, 3
tablespoons olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Stir into a
paste.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onions.
3. Put the onions and chicken on a rimmed baking sheet. Rub the spice
paste onto everything (getting your hands messy is the best way).
Spread everything in a single layer.
4. Broil, turning the chicken once and tossing the onions occasionally,
until the chicken is browned and cooked through and the onions are
browned and tender, 12 to 16 minutes total. Serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Five-Spice Chicken and Scallions
Substitute 2 tablespoons five-spice powder for the jerk spices, vegetable oil
for the olive oil, and 2 or 3 bunches scallions, trimmed, for the onions.
Za’atar Chicken and Onions
Substitute 2 tablespoons za’atar for the jerk spices.
Lemon-Pepper Chicken and Onions
Use 1½ tablespoons grated lemon zest and lots of pepper instead of the jerk
spices.

SIDES
White Rice
Ripe Plantains
Ripe Plantains with Cinnamon and Cumin
Crunchy Okra

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken and Peppers with Black
Bean “Mole”
There are many versions of mole, the classic Mexican sauce, many
of them notorious for including upward of thirty ingredients, taking
hours to make and years to perfect. My solution is a black bean
sauce that retains the deep, earthy flavors of the original. It’s legit.

Ingredients
3 bell peppers (any color)
8 bone-in, skin-on chicken thighs
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
2 cups cooked or canned black beans (one 15-ounce can)
2 ounces bittersweet or semisweet chocolate
1 garlic clove
¾ cup almonds or peanuts or a combination
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon chili powder
½ teaspoon cinnamon
2 cups chicken stock or water
1 lime
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish
Sour cream (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Core, seed, and quarter the peppers.
2. Put the peppers and chicken (skin side up) on a rimmed baking sheet.
Drizzle with 2 tablespoons vegetable oil and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Broil until the chicken and peppers are nicely browned on 1
side, 6 to 12 minutes, depending on your broiler.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them. Put the beans in a
blender.
Roughly chop 2 ounces chocolate and add it to the blender.
Peel and crush the garlic clove and add it to the blender.
3. Add to the blender ¾ cup nuts, 1 teaspoon cumin, 1 teaspoon chili
powder, ½ teaspoon cinnamon, 2 cups stock or water, and a sprinkle of
salt and pepper.
4. Blend until smooth.
5. Transfer the sauce to a large skillet or saucepan. Bring it to a boil, then
adjust the heat so that it bubbles gently but steadily.
6. Add the browned chicken and peppers to the sauce along with any
juices from the baking sheet. Cover the pan and simmer, tossing once
or twice, until the chicken is cooked through, 12 to 15 minutes.
Cut the lime into wedges.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
7. When the chicken is cooked, taste the sauce and adjust the seasoning.
Garnish with the cilantro and serve with the lime wedges and a dollop

of sour cream if you like.
VARIATIONS
Chicken and Peppers with Pumpkin Seed Mole
Use hulled pumpkin seeds instead of the nuts.
Chicken and Peppers with Tomatillo Sauce
Replace the black beans with 2 cups chopped tomatillos. Omit the
chocolate.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chili Powder
Chicken Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the chicken simmer in the sauce for 30 to 60 minutes, adding an extra
splash of liquid if the sauce gets too thick. The chicken will become more
tender and the sauce more complex.
BROILING AND BUBBLING
The broiler is perfect for getting some nice color on bone-in chicken parts,
but once the meat is browned, the broiler doesn’t impart any extra flavor.
Often I’ll brown chicken well under the broiler, then let it finish cooking in
a sauce on the stovetop, where it soaks up additional flavor. Almost any
sauce fits the bill—this mole, Tomato Sauce, or Barbecue Sauce, for
example. Bone-in chicken pieces or fattier cuts of meat that won’t overcook
as they simmer are ideal for this method, but since the sauce adds so much

moisture, even leaner cuts like chicken breast or pork tenderloin will remain
pretty tender.
SIDES
Warm Tortillas
White Rice
Jícama and Radish Salad
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Chipotle and Lime
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Thai Peanut Chicken with Crisp
Cabbage and Bean Sprouts
Whole boneless thighs get the brush-and-broil treatment with a
peanut sauce that you can whip up just in time to slather on chicken
as it finishes cooking. Crisp stir-fried cabbage and bean sprouts
provide a light, refreshing bed for the tender chicken.

Ingredients
1 garlic clove
½ inch fresh ginger
½ cup peanut butter
2 tablespoons soy sauce
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs
4 tablespoons vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
1 small Savoy or green cabbage (1 pound)
8 ounces bean sprouts (1½ to 2 cups)
3 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Peel 1 garlic clove and ½ inch ginger; mince them together and put
them in a medium bowl.
Add ½ cup peanut butter, 2 tablespoons soy sauce, and ¼ cup hot
water. Stir, adding more hot water if necessary, until the sauce is
smooth. Reserve half of the sauce in a separate bowl for serving.
2. Rub the chicken with 2 tablespoons vegetable oil and sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Broil, turning once and brushing with the peanut sauce,
until the sauce is caramelized and the chicken is cooked through, 6 to 8
minutes per side.
3. Put 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim, core, and quarter the cabbage. Cut each quarter crosswise into
thin ribbons.
4. Add the cabbage and bean sprouts to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until they are slightly softened
but still crunchy, 2 to 4 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. When the cabbage and bean sprouts are slightly softened, put them on
a platter. When the chicken is done, put the pieces on top of the
vegetables. Drizzle with the reserved peanut sauce, garnish with the
scallions, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Herby Chicken Thighs with Crisp Cabbage and Fennel

Instead of the peanut sauce, brush the chicken with a mixture of 1 garlic
clove, minced, 1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary, 2 teaspoons chopped
fresh oregano, ¼ cup olive oil, 2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Use 1 fennel bulb, trimmed and thinly sliced,
instead of the bean sprouts.
BBQ Chicken Thighs with Crisp Cabbage and Red Onion
Use barbecue sauce instead of the peanut sauce and 1 large red onion, thinly
sliced, instead of the bean sprouts.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Shred the cabbage as finely as you can and leave it and the bean sprouts
raw. Toss with vegetable oil, salt, and pepper.
SIDES
White Rice
Fire and Ice Noodles
Bulgur with Corn
Sesame-Soy Black Beans

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken and Chard Gratin
What starts as a simple stir-fry ends up as a bubbly, crisp, and rich
gratin.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil, plus a little more for drizzling
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs or breasts
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
1½ pounds chard
4 to 8 ounces Gruyère cheese (1 to 2 cups grated)
2 thick slices any rustic bread (a little stale is fine)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large ovenproof skillet over medium-
high heat. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Chop the chicken into chunks.
2. Add the chicken to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until it just loses its pink color, 3 or 4 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Trim the chard, cutting out any thick stems. Chop the leaves.
Grate 1 to 2 cups Gruyère.
3. When the chicken is no longer pink, add the garlic, chard, and another
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the chard
leaves are just wilted, 3 or 4 minutes.
Tear 2 slices bread into pieces and put them in a food processor; pulse
into coarse crumbs (you should have about 1 cup).
4. When the chard is just wilted, sprinkle the Gruyère and bread crumbs
over the top and drizzle with a little more olive oil. Broil until the
cheese is bubbly and the bread crumbs are browned and crisp, 2 to 5
minutes. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Mexican-Style Chicken and Chard Gratin
Add a minced fresh hot green chile along with the garlic, substitute cheddar
or Jack cheese for the Gruyère, and use 2 cups tortilla chips instead of bread
(pulse them into coarse crumbs).
Chicken and Broccoli Rabe Gratin

Substitute broccoli rabe for the chard and mozzarella for the Gruyère. If you
like, stir ½ cup Tomato Sauce into the skillet once the chard is wilted. Grate
a little Parmesan over the top before broiling.
Chicken and Chard Gratin with Blue Cheese and Walnuts
Substitute crumbled blue cheese for the Gruyère and 1 cup chopped walnuts
for the bread crumbs. (Walnuts can burn easily under the broiler, so keep an
eye on them; if the blue cheese isn’t fully melted by the time the nuts are
brown, that’s fine.)
5 Other Great Dishes to Turn into Gratins
A nice alternative to serving over rice or noodles: Top any of these with
cheese and/or bread crumbs and run under the broiler until toasted and
bubbly.
1. White Beans with Sausage, Greens, and Garlic
2. Scrambled Broccoli with Parmesan and Lemon
3. Quick-Stewed Green Beans with Bacon
4. Pan-Seared Corn and Pork
5. Smoky Shrimp Scampi
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making crumbs in Step 3, use Bread Crumbs you already have on
hand.
SIDES
Green Salad
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes

Quinoa
Buttered Egg Noodles

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken and Chile Fundido
The queso fundido you usually encounter in restaurants consists
mostly of melted cheese with scant amounts of toppings and is
eaten as an appetizer or snack. But if you load it up with vegetables
(like Sweet Pepper Queso Fundido) and/or meat (like this one), it
becomes a meal.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 medium onion
1 pound ground chicken
3 garlic cloves
3 poblano peppers
2 medium ripe tomatoes
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon chili powder
Salt and pepper
8 ounces Jack or Oaxaca cheese (2 cups grated)
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF. Put 3 tablespoons oil in a large ovenproof
skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. Add the chicken and onion to the skillet.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet.
Core, seed, and slice the poblanos; core and chop the tomatoes. Add
them to the skillet.
3. Add 1 teaspoon cumin, 1 teaspoon chili powder, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the chicken is browned
and the vegetables are soft, 8 to 12 minutes.
Grate 2 cups Jack or Oaxaca cheese.
4. When the chicken is browned and the vegetables are soft, taste and
adjust the seasoning. Stir in half of the cheese so it’s incorporated and
sprinkle the other half over the top.
5. Bake until the cheese is bubbly, 5 to 10 minutes.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
6. When the cheese is bubbly, garnish with the cilantro and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Smoky Lamb and Sweet Potato Fundido
Substitute ground lamb for ground chicken, 1 pound sweet potatoes, peeled
and grated, for the poblanos, and 1 tablespoon chopped chipotle chiles in

adobo for the chili powder.
Chicken and Roasted Red Pepper Skillet Bake
Use olive oil instead of vegetable oil, 1 cup chopped roasted red peppers
instead of the poblanos, and mozzarella instead of the Jack or Oaxaca
cheese.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
MEXICAN CHEESES
There are both melting and non-melting kinds. The most famous melter is
queso Oaxaca, a pearly white, mild variety that’s stretched and pulled into a
ball; mozzarella is the best substitute, with Jack cheese close behind. Of the
nonmelting cheeses, queso fresco is the most common and the most useful;
it’s crumbly and slightly salty, perfect for sprinkling on tacos or over salads,
beans, or rice. If you can’t find it, feta and ricotta salata are excellent
proxies. Salty cotija cheese is a lot like queso fresco when it is fresh, but as
it ages and hardens it’s perfect for grating; you can always use Parmesan
instead.
SIDES
Warm Tortillas
White Rice
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Ripe Plantains
Jícama and Radish Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken and Ricotta Sausage over
Broccoli Rabe
Store-bought chicken sausages tend to be unexciting. Better to
season ground chicken yourself and fry it up in crispy patties. Here
ricotta adds fat to the lean chicken and garlicky broccoli rabe
provides a luscious and colorful bed for the juices.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds broccoli rabe
4 garlic cloves
Several sprigs fresh basil
Salt and pepper
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)
½ cup ricotta cheese
1½ pounds ground chicken

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Trim and chop the broccoli rabe, keeping thick stems separate.
2. Raise the heat to medium-high. Add any chopped stems to the skillet
and cook until they begin to soften, 3 or 4 minutes.
Peel and mince 4 garlic cloves; add half to the skillet and put the other
half in a large bowl.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs, chop, and add to the garlic in
the bowl.
3. Add the broccoli rabe leaves to the skillet, a handful at a time if
necessary to fit them in, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook until
they’re just wilted, 3 or 4 minutes. Transfer to a platter and cover with
aluminum foil to keep warm.
Grate ½ cup Parmesan and add to the garlic and basil.
4. Add ½ cup ricotta, the ground chicken, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper to the bowl. Mix gently with your hands to combine. Put 2
tablespoons oil in the skillet over medium-high heat.
5. Gently shape the meat into 4 patties, adding them to the skillet as you
go. Cook, turning once, until the burgers are nicely browned on both
sides and the chicken is just cooked through, 4 or 5 minutes per side.
6. Serve the patties on top of the broccoli rabe.
VARIATIONS
Chicken and Feta Sausage over Sautéed Spinach

Use spinach instead of the broccoli rabe, mint instead of the basil, ¼ cup
chopped kalamata olives instead of the Parmesan, and crumbled feta in
place of the ricotta. The spinach will take a little less time to wilt than the
broccoli rabe.
Chicken and Blue Cheese Sausage over Sautéed Kale
Substitute kale for the broccoli rabe, tarragon for the basil, and crumbled
blue cheese for the ricotta. The kale will take a little more time to wilt than
the broccoli rabe.
Maple-Chicken-Apple Sausage over Sautéed Collards
Substitute collard greens for the broccoli rabe, sage for the basil, 1
tablespoon maple syrup for the Parmesan, and ¼ cup chopped dried apples
for the ricotta. The collards will take a little more time to wilt than the
broccoli rabe.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
The flatter the patties, the faster they’ll cook.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Bruschetta
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Caprese Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Korean-Style Chicken and Vegetable
Pancakes
Korean pa jun are a delicious take on scallion pancakes: fluffy,
crisp, and loaded with all sorts of vegetables. Add ground chicken
to the mix and dinner is served.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more as needed
8 ounces ground chicken
Salt and pepper
2 eggs
2 cups flour
4 scallions
1 carrot
1 small zucchini
1 tablespoon rice vinegar
3 tablespoons soy sauce
1 teaspoon sugar

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF. Put 1 tablespoon oil in a large skillet
(preferably nonstick) over medium-high heat. When it’s hot, add the
chicken, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook until browned, 5 to 10
minutes.
2. Crack the eggs into a medium bowl; add 2 cups flour and 1½ cups
water and whisk to form a smooth batter.
Trim and chop the scallions; add them to the batter.
Trim and peel the carrot; trim the zucchini. Grate both and add to the
batter.
3. When the chicken is browned, add it to the batter and wipe out the
skillet. Stir the batter to incorporate all the ingredients.
4. Put 3 tablespoons oil in the skillet and return it to medium-high heat.
Ladle half of the batter into the skillet and spread it out into a circle (if
the first pancake is too thick, stir a little water into the remaining
batter).
5. Cook, adjusting the heat so the pancake sizzles but doesn’t burn, until
the bottom is browned, about 3 minutes. Flip and cook until the other
side is browned, about 2 minutes.
6. If the pancake is crisp but still not cooked in the middle, turn the heat
to medium-low and cook, flipping once, until cooked through. Transfer
the pancake to the oven to keep warm and repeat with the remaining
batter, adding more oil to the skillet if needed.
Combine 1 tablespoon rice vinegar, 3 tablespoons soy sauce, and 1
teaspoon sugar in a small bowl.

7. When the pancakes are done, cut them into wedges and serve with the
dipping sauce.
VARIATIONS
Korean-Style Chicken and Vegetable Cornmeal Pancakes
Replace ½ cup of the flour with ½ cup cornmeal.
Garlic-Rosemary Chicken and Vegetable Pancakes
Use 2 garlic cloves, minced, and 1 tablespoon minced rosemary instead of
the scallions. For the dipping sauce, combine 3 tablespoons olive oil, 1
tablespoon lemon juice, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. If you like, grate a
little Parmesan over the pancakes while they’re still warm.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Cook the pancakes in two skillets at the same time.
SIDES
Stir-Fried Bok Choy
Cucumbers with Peanut Vinaigrette
White Rice
Fire and Ice Noodles
Cold Sesame Noodles

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Braised and Glazed Chicken and
Leeks
If you braise meat and vegetables in very little liquid, there’s
enough to generate steam for cooking but not so much that you
need to spend time reducing it into a sauce at the end. Just open the
pot, toss in a little butter, and you’re all set.

Ingredients
1 tablespoon olive oil
8 bone-in chicken thighs (about 2 pounds)
Salt and pepper
2 leeks
¼ cup white wine
½ cup chicken stock or water
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish
1 tablespoon butter

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
Pat the chicken thighs dry.
2. When the oil is hot, add the chicken skin side down (in batches if
necessary) and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook, undisturbed, until
the skin is nicely browned, about 10 minutes, then transfer the chicken
to a plate.
Trim the leeks and halve them lengthwise; cut them into 2-inch pieces.
3. When all the chicken is browned and on the plate, drain all but 1
tablespoon of the fat from the pan. Add ¼ cup wine and ½ cup stock or
water to the skillet, scraping any browned bits from the bottom. Add
the leeks and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
4. Return the chicken to the pot and adjust the heat so the mixture
bubbles gently. Cover and simmer until the chicken is cooked through
and the leeks are tender, 15 to 20 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
5. Uncover the pot and transfer the chicken to a platter. Add 1 tablespoon
butter to the pot and stir to melt. Pour the leeks and sauce over the
chicken. Garnish with the parsley and serve.
VARIATIONS
Braised and Glazed Chicken with Onions and Soy
Substitute vegetable oil for the olive oil, 1 large onion, sliced, for the leeks,
soy sauce for the white wine, and cilantro for the parsley. Go easy on the

salt.
Braised and Glazed Chicken and Brussels Sprouts
Use 12 ounces Brussels sprouts instead of the leeks.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
Use boneless, skinless chicken thighs and brown well on one side.
SIDES
Buttered Egg Noodles
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Warm Buttery Bread
Quinoa

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Turkey Burgers
Since ground turkey is so mild and lean, it needs help. Bring these
burgers to life by incorporating a sofrito, a cooked-down mixture of
green pepper, onions, garlic, and tomato paste that contributes
flavor and moisture, turning dry turkey burgers into something that
can compete with the best.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more as needed
1 green bell pepper
1 large onion
2 garlic cloves
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1½ pounds ground turkey
Salt and pepper
4 buns for serving (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Core, seed, and chop the pepper.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel 2 garlic cloves. Chop all of them together; it’s okay if the pieces
are uneven as long as they’re small.
2. Raise the heat to medium-high and add the vegetables and 1
tablespoon tomato paste. Cook, stirring occasionally until the
vegetables soften and the tomato paste darkens, 3 to 5 minutes.
3. Put the turkey in a large bowl. When the vegetables are ready, add
them to the turkey. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and mix gently with
your hands to incorporate the sofrito.
4. Wipe out the skillet, add 2 tablespoons oil, and return the pan to
medium-high heat.
5. Gently shape the meat into 4 patties, adding them to the skillet as you
go. Cook, turning once, until the burgers are nicely browned on both
sides and the turkey is just cooked through, 4 or 5 minutes per side.
6. While the burgers cook, toast buns if you’re using them. Serve the
burgers on the buns or plain, with your favorite condiments.
VARIATIONS
10 Ways to Flavor Turkey Burgers
Add any of the following to the sofrito as it cooks:
1. 2 teaspoons smoked paprika

2. 1 teaspoon cumin and 1 teaspoon chili powder
3. Pinch of saffron
4. 2 teaspoons curry powder
5. 2 teaspoons chopped fresh rosemary, sage, thyme, or oregano (or 1
teaspoon dried)
6. 1 tablespoon chopped capers
7. A few minced anchovy fillets
8. 2 teaspoons harissa, Sriracha, or Worcestershire
9. ½ cup grated Parmesan cheese (stir it into the turkey mixture)
10. ½ cup chopped nuts or dried fruit
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Remember, the thinner the patties, the faster they’ll cook.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Grind your own turkey by pulsing pieces in the food processor until they’re
minced but not puréed. Dark meat will be richer, but you could also add
some skin to the work bowl. (The same suggestions apply to chicken.)
SIDES
Green Salad
Chopped Salad
Tomato Salad
German-Style Potato Salad
Coleslaw

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Seared Duck Breast with Fruit Sauce
Duck breasts are low maintenance and high flavor. You don’t even
need to oil the pan; they cook in their own delicious fat until the
skin is irresistibly crisp.

Ingredients
4 boneless duck breasts
Salt and pepper
1 shallot
1 cup cherries or blackberries (or a combination)
1 tablespoon butter

Prep | Cook
1. To score the duck skin, make a few slices across each breast, cutting
down into the fat but not the meat (about ¼ inch deep). Sprinkle both
sides with salt and pepper.
2. Put the breasts skin side down in a large skillet over medium-low heat.
Cook, undisturbed, until much of the fat has rendered and the skin is
crisp, 8 to 12 minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the shallot.
Pit the cherries if you’re using them. Chop the cherries or berries.
3. When the duck skin is crisp, turn the breasts and cook until the duck is
done, 2 to 4 minutes for medium-rare (about 130ºF on a quick-read
thermometer or rosy pink in the middle if you cut into it and peek).
Transfer the breasts to a plate and tent with aluminum foil to keep
warm.
4. Pour off all but 1 tablespoon of the rendered duck fat (save it in the
fridge for roasting potatoes if you want) and put the skillet over
medium heat. Add the shallot and cook for a minute, then stir in the
fruit and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
5. Cook, stirring occasionally until the fruit breaks down and the mixture
gets saucy, 5 to 10 minutes. Stir in 1 tablespoon butter and any juices
that have accumulated around the duck; taste and adjust the seasoning.
6. Slice the duck if you like and spoon the sauce over the top or serve it
on the side.
VARIATIONS

4 Other Fruits to Use for Seared Duck Breast with Fruit Sauce
1. Mango
2. Blueberries
3. Raspberries
4. Peaches
6 Ways to Flavor Fruit Sauce
As the sauce cooks, add any of the following to taste:
1. Minced fresh ginger
2. Minced chile
3. Chopped chipotle chiles in adobo
4. Whole black peppercorns
5. Vanilla bean (seeds scraped out of the pod)
6. Chopped fresh rosemary
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Once the duck renders some fat, spoon a tablespoon of it into a small skillet
or saucepan. Put it over medium heat and make the fruit sauce in there
while the duck cooks. Let the duck rest for 5 minutes before serving.
SIDES
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Roasted Squash
Crisp Roasted Potatoes
Brussels Sprouts with Bacon

Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken, Vegetables, and Noodles in
Soy Broth
This dish is inspired by white-cut chicken, a Chinese preparation
where a whole chicken is simmered in broth and served at room
temperature with soy sauce. The dish begs for noodles, so I’ve built
them right in, cooking them in the broth as soon as the chicken is
done.

Ingredients
2 inches fresh ginger
5 scallions
2 pieces star anise
2 tablespoons sugar
⅓ cup soy sauce, plus more for serving
2 carrots
1 large onion
3 to 4 pounds bone-in chicken parts
8 ounces Chinese egg noodles

Prep | Cook
Cut 2 inches ginger into coins (don’t bother to peel).
Trim the scallions.
1. Put the ginger and scallions in a large pot, along with 2 pieces star
anise, 2 tablespoons sugar, ⅓ cup soy sauce, and 6 cups water. Bring to
a boil.
Trim, peel, and slice the carrots.
Trim, peel, halve, and thickly slice the onion.
2. When the liquid comes to a boil, add the chicken, return the liquid to a
boil, then adjust the heat so that it bubbles steadily. Add the carrots and
onion and cover the pot.
3. Simmer until the chicken is cooked through and the carrots and onion
are tender, 15 to 20 minutes. When they’re done, transfer them to a
platter. Pull or slice the chicken from the bones, leaving the pieces in
large chunks.
4. Bring the liquid to a boil and add the noodles. Fresh noodles will be
done in just a few minutes; dried will take a bit longer.
5. When the noodles tender but not mushy, divide them among 4 shallow
bowls. Add some chicken and vegetables, ladle some broth over the
top (leaving the scallions and ginger behind), and serve, passing more
soy sauce at the table if you like.
VARIATIONS
Chicken, Vegetables, and Noodles in Miso Broth

Omit the soy sauce and substitute 1 piece kombu (seaweed) for the star
anise and mirin for the sugar. After the noodles are cooked and in the bowls,
stir ¼ cup miso into the broth until it dissolves.
Boiled Chicken, Vegetables, and Noodles in Coconut Curry Broth
Swap 1 cinnamon stick for the star anise, salt to taste for the sugar, and 1
tablespoon curry powder or Indian curry paste for the soy sauce. Use 3 cups
coconut milk in place of 3 cups of the water.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
For a very fast (though slightly less flavorful) spin, use boneless chicken
and tender vegetables like snow peas or chopped greens. Simmer until the
chicken is cooked through, then remove and add the noodles.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
White-Cut Chicken with Noodles
Use a whole chicken instead of parts. Simmer for about 20 minutes, then
turn off the heat and leave it in the pot until it is cooked through, another 10
minutes or so.
SIDES
Cucumbers with Peanut Vinaigrette
Ginger-Orange Bean Sprouts
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cornmeal Fried Chicken
You can make real fried chicken in under 45 minutes. Dredging the
chicken in a paper bag speeds prep and cleanup. From then on, the
hot oil does all the work.

Ingredients
Vegetable oil for frying
½ cup buttermilk
Cayenne or hot sauce
Salt and pepper
1 cup cornmeal
1 cup flour
3 pounds chicken parts

Prep | Cook
1. Put ½ inch vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Put ½ cup buttermilk in a large bowl along with a pinch of cayenne or
a few dashes of hot sauce and a generous sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Put 1 cup cornmeal, 1 cup flour, and another generous sprinkle of salt
and pepper in a large paper bag.
2. Add the chicken parts to the buttermilk and toss to coat each piece.
Transfer them to the paper bag, roll the top so that it’s sealed, and
shake, holding the top of the bag so it stays closed, until the chicken is
fully coated.
3. Test the oil by adding a pinch of flour; it will sizzle when the oil is
ready. Carefully add the chicken pieces skin side down. It’s okay if it’s
a tight fit; just keep adjusting the heat so the chicken sizzles but
doesn’t burn.
4. Cover and cook until the skin is browned and the pieces release easily
from the skillet, 5 to 10 minutes. Turn the chicken and cook,
uncovered, until the other side is nicely browned, 5 to 10 minutes.
5. Continue to cook, uncovered, turning every few minutes and
transferring the pieces to paper towels as they finish cooking (smaller
pieces will be done first), until all the chicken is cooked through,
another 5 to 10 minutes. The chicken is done when it registers between
155º and 160ºF on a quick-read thermometer or when its juices run
clear and there are no traces of pink in the meat. Serve hot, warm, or at
room temperature.
VARIATIONS

Coconut-Curried Fried Chicken
Replace half of the buttermilk with coconut milk and add 1 tablespoon
curry powder to the liquid.
Korean Fried Chicken
In a large bowl, combine 3 garlic cloves, minced, 1 inch ginger, minced, 3
tablespoons soy sauce, 3 tablespoons gochujang (Korean red chile paste), 1
tablespoon rice vinegar, 1 teaspoon sesame oil, and 1 tablespoon honey. The
mixture should be the consistency of a vinaigrette; add a splash of water to
thin it if necessary. When the chicken is fried, add it to the bowl and toss
gently to coat with the sauce.
7 Other Seasonings to Add to the Buttermilk Mixture
1. 1 teaspoon chili powder
2. 1 teaspoon cumin
3. 1 teaspoon smoked paprika
4. 2 teaspoons chopped fresh rosemary or sage
5. 1 tablespoon soy sauce
6. 1 teaspoon minced garlic, ginger, or chiles
7. 2 teaspoons maple syrup or honey
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the chicken sit in the buttermilk overnight before dredging and frying.
SIDES
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Coleslaw

Peach, Blue Cheese, and Tarragon Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Mexican Street Corn

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Crisp Baked Chicken Tenders
I am obsessed with this method of making chicken tenders. Instead
of fussy dredging and frying, you toss the chicken in a pile of
homemade bread crumbs and bake. The crumbs become this
irresistibly crunchy topping, while the chicken stays moist. Dead
easy.

Ingredients
1½ pounds chicken tenders
Olive oil
Salt and pepper
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)
4 thick slices any rustic bread (a little stale is fine)
1 lemon
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 375ºF. Put the chicken tenders on a rimmed baking
sheet or in a 9 × 13-inch baking dish. Rub with a little olive oil and
sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Grate ½ cup Parmesan and put into a medium bowl.
2. Tear 4 slices bread into pieces, put in a food processor, and pulse into
crumbs (you should have about 1½ cups).
3. Add the bread crumbs and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the
Parmesan and toss to combine. Scatter the mixture over the chicken
and drizzle generously with oil.
4. When the oven is hot, bake the chicken, undisturbed, until the bread
crumbs are golden and crisp and the chicken is cooked through, 20 to
25 minutes.
Cut the lemon into wedges.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
5. When the crumbs are crisp and the chicken is cooked, garnish with the
parsley and serve with the lemon wedges, spooning extra crumbs on
top if you like.
VARIATIONS
Mustard-Pretzel Chicken Tenders
Rub the chicken with a mixture of 1 tablespoon Dijon mustard and 1
tablespoon olive oil and use 1½ cups ground pretzels instead of the bread
crumbs.
Chipotle Chicken Tenders

Swap cotija cheese for the Parmesan or just leave it out. Rub the chicken
with 1 tablespoon chopped chipotle chiles in adobo and 1 tablespoon olive
oil and use 1½ cups ground tortilla chips instead of the bread crumbs.
Miso-Cashew Chicken Tenders
Omit the Parmesan. Rub the chicken with 1 tablespoon miso and 1
tablespoon vegetable oil and use 1½ cups ground cashews instead of the
bread crumbs.
Peanut-Coconut Chicken Tenders
Omit the Parmesan. Substitute 2 tablespoons peanut butter mixed with 1
tablespoon warm water for the olive oil and shredded unsweetened coconut
for the bread crumbs.
Sesame Chicken Tenders
Skip the Parmesan. Rub the chicken with 1 tablespoon tahini and 1
tablespoon olive oil and use 1½ cups sesame seeds instead of the bread
crumbs.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the bread crumbs as described in Step 2, use Bread
Crumbs you already have on hand.
SIDES
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Rice Pilaf
Creamed Spinach
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Oven-Fried Chicken with Roasted
Corn
A homemade TV dinner: retro and awesome.

Ingredients
1 egg
¼ cup milk
Salt and pepper
2 cups corn flakes (or other plain flaked cereal)
2 sprigs fresh rosemary
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)
4 ears fresh corn

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 375ºF.
Crack the egg into a shallow bowl or dish. Add ¼ cup milk and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl and beat.
Put 2 cups corn flakes in a large bowl and crush them with your hands
or the bottom of a heavy glass.
Strip the rosemary leaves from 2 sprigs and chop. Add to the corn
flakes along with a sprinkle of salt and pepper and toss.
2. Melt 4 tablespoons butter in the microwave; drizzle half on a rimmed
baking sheet and spread it around.
3. Cut the chicken breasts in half horizontally to make 2 thin cutlets for
each breast. Press down on each with the heel of your hand to flatten.
4. Dip the cutlets in the egg mixture, then dredge them in the seasoned
corn flakes. Put them on the baking sheet, leaving some room for the
corn if you can.
Husk the corn; put it on the baking sheet next to the chicken.
5. Drizzle the remaining butter over the chicken and corn. Bake, turning
once, until the chicken is cooked through and the corn is lightly
browned, 15 to 20 minutes. Serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Pecan Oven-Fried Chicken with Roasted Corn
Substitute coarsely ground pecans for the corn flakes.
Wheaty Oven-Fried Chicken with Roasted Corn
Use crumbled shredded wheat or wheat flakes instead of corn flakes.

Oven-Fried Pork Chops with Roasted Corn
Use 1-inch-thick boneless pork loin chops instead of the chicken in the
main recipe or any of the variations.
SIDES
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Green Salad
Smashed Peas
Garlicky Mushrooms

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Honey-Ginger-Soy Roasted Chicken
and Celery
This dish is highly adaptable. The bed of vegetables can be
anything you like. Try fennel or carrots instead of celery. The
method is perfect and timeless.

Ingredients
6 tablespoons olive oil
1 bunch celery
Salt and pepper
3 to 4 pounds bone-in chicken parts
1 lemon
1 inch fresh ginger
¼ cup soy sauce
1 tablespoon honey
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF. Drizzle the bottom of a roasting pan or rimmed
baking sheet with 4 tablespoons olive oil.
Trim and chop the celery into large chunks.
2. Put the celery in the roasting pan, toss with the oil, and sprinkle with
salt and pepper.
3. Put the chicken parts on top of the celery, skin side up, drizzle with 2
tablespoons oil, and sprinkle with salt (not too much) and pepper.
Roast for 15 minutes.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into a small bowl.
Peel 1 inch ginger; grate or finely mince it and add it to the bowl.
4. Add ¼ cup soy sauce and 1 tablespoon honey to the bowl. Taste and
adjust the seasoning.
5. After the chicken has roasted for 15 minutes, start basting occasionally
with the soy mixture and the pan drippings, rotating the pan whenever
you do and lowering the heat if the chicken starts to burn.
6. Continue to roast and baste until the chicken is browned and cooked
through (its juices will run clear and there will be no traces of pink in
the meat) and the celery is lightly browned and tender, 30 minutes
total.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
7. When the chicken is done, garnish with the cilantro. Serve the chicken
and the celery with some of the pan drippings and any extra basting
sauce spooned over the top.

VARIATIONS
Maple-Chile-Beer Roasted Chicken and Peppers
Substitute 4 large bell peppers, thickly sliced, for the celery. Swap lime for
the lemon, 1 fresh hot green chile, minced, for the ginger, maple syrup for
the honey, and ½ cup beer for the soy sauce. Garnish with scallions instead
of the cilantro.
Dijon-Garlic-Cider Roasted Chicken and Carrots
Replace the celery with 1 pound carrots, cut into ¼-inch slices. Swap 2
garlic cloves for the ginger, mustard for the honey, and ½ cup apple cider
for the soy sauce. Garnish with chopped fresh tarragon instead of the
cilantro.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Roasting and basting chicken parts on a bed of vegetables is faster and more
flavorful than roasting a whole bird and has become my roasting method of
choice for that reason. But there is an even faster way: While the oven heats
up, put a few tablespoons of oil in the roasting pan and set it on 2 burners
over medium heat. Sauté the chicken, skin side down, until the skin is
nicely browned, about 10 minutes. Remove the chicken, add the celery, and
put the chicken skin side up on top. With this head start, the roasting time
will be reduced. Start basting after 10 minutes and check the chicken for
doneness after 20.
SIDES
Sesame Noodles
White Rice
Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken and Tomato Packages
Cooking in individual foil packages not only makes for incredibly
moist chicken and vegetables, but it’s also a fun way to serve a
meal. And there are practically no dishes to wash when you’re
done. For when you have time to be more elegant, see the Notes.

Ingredients
3 medium ripe tomatoes
½ cup black olives
2 garlic cloves
8 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (1½ to 2 pounds)
4 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
4 sprigs fresh thyme

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 425ºF.
Core and chop the tomatoes; put them in a medium bowl.
Pit ½ cup black olives if necessary; add to the bowl.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; add to the bowl.
2. Cut aluminum foil into 4 rectangles each about 12 × 18 inches; fold
each in half crosswise to crease, then reopen.
3. Spoon the tomato mixture onto 1 half of the rectangle as close to the
center as you can. Top each with 2 chicken thighs, drizzle with 1
tablespoon olive oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and top with a sprig
of thyme.
4. Fold over and seal the packages, rolling the edges tightly to completely
enclose the filling.
5. Put the packages on a rimmed baking sheet and put it in the oven. Bake
until the chicken is cooked through and the tomatoes are tender and
saucy, 25 to 30 minutes (open up 1 package to check).
6. Open the packages carefully and serve hot or warm right in the
packages or on plates with the juices poured over.
VARIATIONS
Chicken, Tomato, and Feta Packages
Substitute oregano for the thyme and add a sprinkle of feta to each package.
Chicken and Potato Packages
Heartier. Replace some of the tomatoes with very thin slices of potato,
peeled if you like.

NOTES
PARCHMENT PACKAGES
For speed and ease, aluminum foil is the undisputed champ for this
technique. But if you’re after elegance and gorgeous browned edges, use
parchment paper. The assembly process is the same, although you must be
more diligent about crimping the paper’s edges, since it doesn’t self-seal
like foil. Tightly roll each side of the open edges, pressing down to form a
tight seal so the moisture can’t escape. For rounded packages, fold the
rectangle in half and cut it around as if you were making one half of a heart.
Fill as usual, then crimp the rounded open edge by folding overlapping
pleats all the way to the point.
SIDES
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Creamy Polenta
Couscous
Bruschetta

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken and Green Beans
You can’t go wrong with well-browned meat simmered in a little
bit of liquid and a good amount of vegetables. This one features a
rich—and substantial—mustard cream sauce.

Ingredients
1 tablespoon olive oil
8 bone-in chicken thighs (about 2 pounds)
Salt and pepper
2 shallots
½ cup chicken stock or water
½ cup white wine
1 pound green beans
Several sprigs fresh tarragon
2 tablespoons Dijon mustard
½ cup cream

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
Pat the chicken thighs dry.
2. When the oil is hot, add the chicken skin side down and sprinkle with
salt and pepper. Cook, undisturbed, until the skin is nicely browned,
about 10 minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the shallots.
3. When the chicken skin is nicely browned, turn the thighs and spoon
out all but about 1 tablespoon of fat. Add the shallots. Cook until the
shallots soften slightly, then add ½ cup stock or water and ½ cup white
wine.
4. Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles gently but steadily. Cover and
cook until the chicken is just cooked through, 10 to 15 minutes.
Trim the green beans.
5. When the chicken is cooked, add the green beans on top and sprinkle
with salt and pepper. Cover and cook until the green beans are just
tender but still retain some crunch, 6 to 8 minutes.
Strip the tarragon leaves from several sprigs and chop.
6. Transfer the chicken and green beans to a platter. Add 2 tablespoons
Dijon, ½ cup cream, and the tarragon to the skillet and adjust the heat
so the liquid bubbles steadily.
7. Cook, stirring frequently until the sauce thickens to the consistency
that you like. Taste and adjust the seasoning, pour the sauce over the
chicken and green beans, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Chicken and Green Bean Sauté with Mustard and Soy
Skip the cream and replace 2 tablespoons of the wine with 2 tablespoons
soy sauce.
Veal and Mushroom Sauté with Mustard and Cream
Substitute 1½ pounds veal shoulder or breast, cut into 1½-inch cubes, for
the chicken. Brown the veal very well on one side before turning and
adding the shallots. Use mushrooms, halved, in place of green beans and
add them to the skillet along with the shallots. The veal will take a little
longer to become tender than the chicken.
Lamb and Carrot Sauté with Mustard and Miso
Use 1½ pounds lamb shoulder, cut into 1½-inch cubes, instead of the
chicken. Brown the lamb very well on one side before turning and adding
the shallots. Replace the green beans with carrots, cut into coins, and add
them about halfway through the cooking. Swap ¼ cup miso for the cream
and cilantro for the tarragon. The lamb will take a little longer to become
tender than the chicken.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Use boneless thighs instead of bone-in. Brown them very well on one side
before turning and adding the shallots. They will cook through in 10 to 15
minutes.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
French Fries

Panfried Corn and Onions
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Collard-Wrapped Chicken
Collard leaves make a delicious and sturdy wrapper for steaming
chicken. The seasonings flavor the chicken from inside their little
packages, and the meat stays moist. If you don’t own a steamer,
don’t worry; see the Notes.

Ingredients
1 bunch collards
Ice cubes
1 inch fresh ginger
2 garlic cloves
1 or 2 fresh hot chiles (like serrano or Thai)
¼ teaspoon cinnamon
⅛ teaspoon allspice
⅛ teaspoon cloves
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 2 pounds)

Prep | Cook
1. Rig a steamer and bring the water to a boil.
Trim the collards. Pull out 6 to 8 of the biggest leaves, depending on
their size, and slice out the thick stems that run through the middle,
keeping the leaves intact. If there are any left over, refrigerate for
another use.
2. When the water boils, adjust the heat so it simmers gently. Add the
collard leaves to the steamer, cover, and cook until they are pliable, 2
or 3 minutes.
Prepare a large bowl of ice water for the collards.
3. When the collards are pliable, carefully drop them into the ice bath to
cool. Turn the heat under the steamer to low.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 2 garlic cloves; trim 1 or 2 chiles. Mince
everything together and put in a small bowl.
4. Add ¼ teaspoon cinnamon, ⅛ teaspoon allspice, and ⅛ teaspoon
cloves to the bowl; add 1 tablespoon vegetable oil, ½ teaspoon salt,
and ¼ teaspoon pepper and stir to combine.
5. Pat the collard leaves dry with paper towels and lay them out on a
cutting board or the counter. If 1 leaf is big enough to wrap a chicken
breast, fantastic; if not, overlap 1½ or 2 leaves.
6. Put each chicken breast on top of a collard wrapper and rub with some
of the spice paste. Wrap the chicken in the collard leaves, folding in
the sides like a burrito.
7. Put the packages in the steamer, adding more water if necessary, and
bring the liquid to a simmer. Cover and cook until the chicken is

opaque and just cooked through, 15 to 20 minutes (you’ll need to
pierce one with a thin-bladed knife to check).
8. Remove the packages from the steamer and let cool for a minute or 2.
Serve them whole or cut them in half or into thick slices.
VARIATIONS
Cabbage-Wrapped Miso Chicken
Use cabbage leaves instead of collards, ¼ cup miso paste instead of the
cinnamon, allspice, and cloves, and sesame oil instead of the vegetable oil.
Collard-Wrapped BBQ Chicken
Instead of the spice paste, use ⅓ cup Barbecue Sauce.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Lay a few raw collard leaves in the steamer; rub the chicken all over with
the spice paste and put them on top. Lay more collard leaves over the top
and steam.
RIGGING A FAST STEAMER
Simply turn a shallow bowl or 2 or 3 ramekins upside down in a large pot
with a tight-fitting lid and put a plate right side up on top. Make sure it’s
stable. Add an inch or so of water. The plate becomes your steaming rack.
SIDES
White Rice
Ripe Plantains
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Split Whole Chicken and Vegetables
The fastest way to cook a whole chicken. Flattening out the bird
and broiling it gives you the added bonus of an even layer of skin
that gets more uniformly crisp than if you roasted the chicken
whole. It’s really one of the greatest methods ever. If you have a
butcher who will butterfly a chicken for you, request it. If not, see
the Notes.

Ingredients
2 garlic cloves
2 sprigs fresh rosemary
1 lemon
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for garnish
Salt and pepper
1 whole chicken (3 to 4 pounds)
1½ pounds mixed vegetables (bell peppers, onions, asparagus,
mushrooms, eggplant, or zucchini)

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; put them in a small bowl.
Strip the rosemary leaves from 2 sprigs, mince, and add them to the
bowl.
Halve the lemon and squeeze the juice into the bowl.
2. Add 1 tablespoon olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the
bowl. Stir to combine.
Butterfly the chicken if necessary.
3. Rub the garlic and herb mixture all over the chicken, tucking some
under the skin as well. Put the chicken skin side down on a rimmed
baking sheet. Loosely cover the exposed areas of the baking sheet with
pieces of foil to prevent smoking. Transfer the chicken to the broiler
and cook skin side down, undisturbed, for 15 minutes.
Trim the vegetables and chop or slice as necessary.
4. Remove the foil pieces and reserve. Scatter the vegetables around the
chicken, drizzle with 1 tablespoon oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper,
and return to the broiler.
5. Turn the vegetables occasionally, leaving the chicken alone, until they
are tender and browned, 10 to 15 minutes. When the vegetables are
just tender, transfer them to a platter. Replace the foil.
6. Broil the chicken until the skin is browned, another 5 to 10 minutes.
Check for doneness (a quick-read thermometer should register 155º to
160ºF or the juices will run clear when you pierce a piece close to the
bone). If the chicken still needs a few more minutes, cook it skin side

down until done, then skin side up for just another minute or 2 to make
sure the skin is crisp.
7. Let the chicken rest for 5 minutes, then cut it up and add it to the
platter with the vegetables. Drizzle with the pan juices and serve.
VARIATIONS
Grilled Split Whole Chicken and Vegetables
Takes longer but is quite a treat. Heat a charcoal or gas grill, with the fire
built up on one side so part of the grill is cool; put the rack 6 inches from
the heat. Put the chicken skin side up on the cool side of the grill, cover, and
cook, turning once, until most of the fat renders, about 20 minutes total.
Continue to cook, turning once or twice, until the chicken is cooked
through, another 30 minutes. Cut the vegetables into large pieces. Move the
chicken to the hot part of the grill and cook, turning frequently, until nicely
browned. (While the chicken is on the cool side of the grill, cook the
vegetables on the hot side.)
NOTES
BUTTERFLYING A CHICKEN
To butterfly a chicken (also known as spatchcocking), put it on a cutting
board with the breasts facing up. The backbone (which is what you are
removing) is now resting against the cutting board. Use a heavy knife to cut
on each side of that backbone, from the front to the rear. Those two cuts will
free the backbone enough that you can cut it out with the tip of a knife or
(better yet) pull it out with your hands. Now you should be able to open the
chicken like a book and lay it flat.
SIDES
Rice Pilaf

Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Quinoa
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Hummus

MASTER RECIPE

Roast Chicken
A whole roast chicken stashed in your refrigerator
makes for great repurposing throughout the week. It
takes about an hour (for faster methods ideal for
immediate eating, you can roast it in parts, or
butterflied), but that’s almost all unattended time. Get
into the habit of roasting a bird when you happen to
be home doing something else—it’s faster than a trip
to the market, and the results will be much better.
Whole Roast Chicken
1
Heat the Oven and Skillet
Heat the oven to 450°F. Put a heavy ovenproof skillet (preferably cast
iron) on a rack set low in the oven while it heats up.
2
Rub the Chicken
Trim any excess fat from a 3- to 4-pound chicken, rub it with olive oil,
and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3
Roast
When the oven is hot, carefully put the chicken, breast side up, in the
heated skillet. Roast, undisturbed, for 40 to 50 minutes; the chicken is
done when a thermometer inserted into the thickest part of the thigh
registers 155° to 165°F on a quick-read thermometer or when its juices
run clear and there are no traces of pink in the meat.

4
Rest and Store (or Eat)
Transfer the chicken to a platter and let it rest for at least 5 minutes. If
you’re serving the chicken right away, quarter it or cut it into parts and
serve with some of the pan juices spooned over the top. To store in the
fridge, let the chicken cool to room temperature, then cut it into parts or
leave it whole. Store in a freezer bag or tightly sealed container for up
to a week.
VARIATIONS
8 Ways to Flavor Any Roast Chicken
1. Herbs: Start cooking the chicken without any olive oil. Halfway
through, spoon a mixture of ¼ cup olive oil and 2 tablespoons chopped
fresh parsley, basil, cilantro, or dill or 1 tablespoon rosemary, sage,
thyme, or oregano over the chicken.
2. Lemon: Halve a lemon and put it in the chicken’s cavity during
roasting. Squeeze the juice from the cooked lemon over the chicken
before serving or storing.
3. Chinese Style: Substitute vegetable oil for the olive oil. Make a
mixture of ¼ cup soy sauce, 2 tablespoons honey, 1 teaspoon minced
garlic, and 1 teaspoon minced ginger; spoon or brush it over the
chicken about halfway through cooking.
4. Cumin and Orange: Make a mixture of 2 tablespoons orange juice, 2
tablespoons honey, 1 teaspoon minced garlic, and 2 teaspoons cumin;
spoon or brush it over the chicken about halfway through cooking.
5. Chile-Lime: Make a mixture of 3 tablespoons lime juice, 1 teaspoon
minced fresh hot green chile, chopped fresh cilantro, and 2 tablespoons
vegetable oil; spoon or brush it over the chicken about halfway through
cooking.

6. Honey-Mustard: Combine 3 tablespoons Dijon mustard and 2
tablespoons honey and brush it over the chicken for the last 5 to 10
minutes of cooking.
7. Curry: Substitute vegetable oil for the olive oil. Combine ½ cup
coconut milk and 2 tablespoons curry powder and brush it over the
chicken for the last 5 to 10 minutes of cooking.
8. Wine and Garlic: Put ½ cup white wine and a few crushed garlic
cloves in pan for basting the chicken as it roasts.
Roast Chicken Parts
1
Heat the Oven and Pan
Heat the oven to 450ºF. Put 4 tablespoons butter or olive oil in a large
roasting pan and put the pan in the oven until the oil is hot or the butter
melts, just a few minutes.
2
Coat the Chicken
Carefully remove the pan from the oven and add about 3 pounds cut-up
chicken parts (any combination you like). Roll the pieces in the fat to
coat them all over, and turn them skin side up with as much space in
between them as possible. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and put the
pan back in the oven.
3
Roast
Roast the chicken, undisturbed, until the skin is crisp and the chicken is
cooked through, 30 to 45 minutes. When the chicken is ready you’ll see
clear juices if you make a small cut in the meat near the bone; a
thermometer will register between 155º to 165ºF. Remove pieces from
the pan as they are ready.

4
Rest and Store (or Eat)
Skim the excess fat from the pan juices if necessary and spoon the
juices over the chicken if you’re eating it right away. To store in the
fridge, separate the chicken and juices and cool to room temperature
before chilling. Store both in freezer bags or tightly sealed containers
for up to a week.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Za’atar Wings and Eggplant with
Yogurt-Harissa Sauce
Buffalo wings go to Beirut. Za’atar is a spice blend containing
thyme, sumac, and sesame seeds that’s ubiquitous in the Middle
East.

Ingredients
1 small garlic clove
1 lemon
1 cup yogurt
1 tablespoon harissa
Salt and pepper
1 large or 2 medium eggplant (about 2 pounds)
3 pounds chicken wings
¼ cup olive oil
2 tablespoons ground sumac
1 tablespoon dried thyme
2 teaspoons sesame seeds

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF.
Peel and mince 1 small garlic clove; put it in a medium bowl.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
2. Add 1 cup yogurt, 1 tablespoon harissa, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper to the bowl. Stir to combine, taste and adjust the seasoning, and
refrigerate.
Trim the eggplant and cut it in half lengthwise, then slice into ½-inch-
thick half-moons. Put them on a rimmed baking sheet or in a
roasting pan.
If the wings aren’t already divided into 2 pieces, cut them through the
center joint to separate the flat from the drumette. (If you like, cut
off the wing tips and save them for stock; otherwise, just leave them
on.) Put the wings on another rimmed baking sheet.
3. Drizzle the wings and eggplant with ¼ cup olive oil and sprinkle with
salt and pepper.
4. Put both pans in the oven and roast, turning once or twice (when the
wings are ready to turn, they will release easily from the pan), rotating
pans, and spooning off excess fat from the wings, until the wings are
browned and the eggplant is browned and tender, 25 to 30 minutes.
Mix together 2 tablespoons sumac, 1 tablespoon dried thyme, and 2
teaspoons sesame seeds in a small bowl.
5. When the wings and eggplant are browned and cooked, sprinkle with
the spice blend and toss. Roast for another 3 to 5 minutes to toast the
spices.

6. Divide the wings and eggplant among 4 plates and serve with the
yogurt sauce on the side or drizzle over the top.
VARIATIONS
Hot Wings and Brussels Sprouts with Yogurt–Blue Cheese Sauce
Substitute ½ cup crumbled blue cheese for the harissa, halved Brussels
sprouts for the eggplant, and a few tablespoons hot sauce for the thyme and
sesame seeds.
Cumin Wings and Eggplant with Yogurt-Tahini Sauce
Swap 1 tablespoon tahini for the harissa, 1 tablespoon cumin for the thyme,
and 1 teaspoon paprika for the sesame seeds.
SIDES
Tahini Slaw
Carrot Salad with Raisins
Couscous
Watermelon, Feta, and Mint Salad
Roasted Red Pepper Hummus

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken and Sweet Potato Adobo
The national dish of the Philippines is a contender for the best
chicken dish, period. The salty, tangy, and spicy sauce is that good.
White rice is ideal for soaking up the sauce.

Ingredients
2 garlic cloves
1 pound sweet potatoes
8 bone-in chicken thighs (about 2 pounds)
½ cup soy sauce
½ cup rice or white wine vinegar
2 bay leaves
½ teaspoon pepper
2 dried chipotle chiles (or 1 canned chipotle chile in adobo)

Prep | Cook
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; put them in a large pot.
Peel the sweet potatoes and cut them into 1-inch cubes.
1. Add the chicken to the pot along with the sweet potatoes, ½ cup soy
sauce, ½ cup vinegar, 2 bay leaves, ½ teaspoon pepper, 2 dried chipotle
chiles (or 1 canned chipotle chile), and 1¼ cups water.
2. Cover and bring to a boil, then reduce the heat so the mixture simmers
gently. Cook, covered, turning the chicken once or twice, until it’s
cooked through and the sweet potatoes are tender, about 30 minutes.
3. While the chicken cooks, turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches
from the heat. Line a rimmed baking sheet with foil.
4. When the chicken and sweet potatoes are cooked, transfer them to the
sheet with a slotted spoon; spoon off some of the fat from the liquid.
Bring the liquid to a boil and cook until it is reduced to about 1 cup, 5
to 10 minutes.
5. Pat the chicken dry and broil with the sweet potatoes, turning once,
until brown and crisp on both sides, 3 to 5 minutes per side.
6. If you used dried chipotle chiles, remove them from the finished sauce.
Serve the chicken with the sweet potatoes on the side and the sauce
poured over the top.
VARIATIONS
Curried Chicken and Potatoes, Adobo Style
Substitute 1 inch fresh ginger for the garlic, russet or Yukon Gold potatoes
for the sweet potatoes, 2 tablespoons curry paste or powder for the vinegar,

coconut milk for the water, and 1 fresh hot green chile for the chipotle.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Marinate the chicken (not the sweet potatoes) in the liquid for up to 3 hours
before adding the sweet potatoes and boiling.
SIDES
White Rice
Stir-Fried Bok Choy
Peas with Ginger
Smashed Curried Peas

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chicken and Dumplings with Lots of
Peas
Comfort in a bowl. Making your own biscuit dough is worth it for
this dish, but see Even Faster for a nonbiscuit shortcut.

Ingredients
6 cups chicken stock
1 large onion
2 medium carrots
1 celery stalk
1½ pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs or breasts
4 sprigs fresh thyme
Salt and pepper
1 cup flour, plus more as needed
1½ teaspoons baking powder
½ teaspoon baking soda
3 tablespoons butter (keep it in the fridge)
½ cup yogurt or buttermilk
3 cups frozen peas

Prep | Cook
1. Put 6 cups chicken stock in a large pot and bring to a boil.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the pot.
Trim, peel, and slice the carrots and chop the celery; add them to the
pot.
Chop the chicken and add it to the pot.
2. Add 4 sprigs thyme, a sprinkle of salt, and lots of pepper to the pot.
When it boils, adjust the heat so the mixture simmers gently but
steadily. Cook until the vegetables are tender and the chicken is cooked
through, 5 to 10 minutes.
3. Combine 1 cup flour, ¼ teaspoon salt, 1½ teaspoons baking powder,
and ½ teaspoon baking soda in a food processor. Cut up 3 tablespoons
cold butter and add to the food processor.
4. Pulse a few times to blend the butter into the flour mixture. Add ½ cup
yogurt or buttermilk and pulse until the mixture just forms a ball.
Sprinkle a little flour onto your cutting board, turn out the dough, and
knead it 10 times.
5. When the chicken and vegetables are done, transfer them to a bowl
with a mesh strainer or slotted spoon (fish out the thyme). Adjust the
heat so the stock bubbles gently and never boils.
6. Drop about 8 heaping tablespoons of biscuit dough into the stock and
cover. Cook, adjusting the heat to maintain a gentle bubble, until the
dumplings are puffed and cooked through (a toothpick will come out
clean), 12 to 15 minutes.

7. Nestle the chicken and vegetables underneath the dumplings and add 3
cups frozen peas. Cook until the peas are warmed through, a minute or
2, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Chipotle Chicken and Dumplings with Beans
Substitute 1 or 2 chopped chipotle chiles in adobo for the thyme and cooked
or canned black beans or pinto beans for the peas.
Chicken and Egg Noodles with Lots of Peas
Swap 1 pound egg noodles for the dumplings. Boil in the stock until tender
but not mushy.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
Chicken and Bread Stew
To thicken the stew without having to make biscuit dough, tear off pieces of
rustic bread (3 or 4 cups) and add them to the pot when the chicken and
vegetables are done (no need to remove them from the pot). Let the bread
soften, but serve before it totally disintegrates. Alternatively, put the pieces
of bread in the bottom of the bowls and pour the soup right on top.
SIDES
Green Salad
Chopped Salad
Tender Vegetables

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Arroz con Pollo
The absolute essentials for great arroz con pollo are rice, chicken,
and onions. Everything else boosts those ingredients. Chicken stock
adds flavor, but water works fine; saffron (as usual) is optional. If
you don’t use saffron but want that yellow color, add a few pinches
of turmeric.

Ingredients
3 cups chicken stock or water
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 large onion
2 red bell peppers
2 garlic cloves
Salt and pepper
1½ cups short-grain rice
Pinch of saffron (optional)
1 chicken, cut up, or any combination of parts (3 to 4 pounds)
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 lime

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 cups stock or water in a small pot over medium-high heat. Put 3
tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-high
heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the skillet.
Core, seed, and chop the peppers. Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves. Add
them to the skillet.
2. Sprinkle the vegetables with salt and pepper and cook, stirring
occasionally until they soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
3. When the vegetables are soft, add 1½ cups rice and cook, stirring, until
it’s coated with oil, a minute or 2. Stir in a pinch of saffron if you’re
using it.
4. Nestle the chicken pieces into the rice and sprinkle with a little more
salt and pepper. Pour in the warmed stock and bring the mixture to a
boil.
5. Adjust the heat so the mixture bubbles gently but steadily. Cover and
cook until all the liquid is absorbed and the chicken is cooked through,
20 to 25 minutes.
Chop ¼ cup parsley leaves.
Cut the lime into wedges.
6. When the liquid is absorbed and the chicken is cooked, taste the rice
and adjust the seasoning. Garnish with the parsley and serve with the
lime wedges.
VARIATIONS

Smoky Arroz con Pollo
Add 1 or 2 chopped chipotle chiles in adobo instead of the saffron.
Curried Rice and Chicken
Omit the saffron. Add 1 inch fresh ginger, minced, and 1 tablespoon curry
powder along with the onions, peppers, and garlic. Garnish with cilantro
instead of parsley.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
To deepen the flavor of the dish, let the onions, peppers, and garlic cook
over medium heat until they are very soft and nearly melting, 15 to 20
minutes.
SIDES
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Tomato Salad
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt
Ripe Plantains

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Chicken and Spinach Meat Loaf
You might think ground chicken isn’t fatty enough for meat loaf,
but the spinach adds moisture and tenderness. Don’t skip the
nutmeg here; it’s wonderful.

Ingredients
Salt
1 small bunch spinach (about 12 ounces)
1 cup bread crumbs
½ cup milk
2 pounds ground chicken
½ teaspoon nutmeg
Pepper
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)
1 garlic clove
1 egg
2 tablespoons olive oil

Prep | Cook
1. Put an inch of water and a sprinkle of salt in a large pot; bring to a boil.
Heat the oven to 425ºF.
Trim any thick stems from the spinach.
2. When the water boils, add the spinach leaves, cover, and cook, stirring
once or twice, until the spinach is wilted. Run the spinach under cold
water to cool it, squeeze dry, and chop into large pieces.
3. Put the spinach in a large bowl along with 1 cup bread crumbs, ½ cup
milk, the ground chicken, ½ teaspoon nutmeg, and 2 teaspoons salt and
½ teaspoon pepper.
Grate ½ cup Parmesan and add to the bowl. Peel and mince 1 garlic
clove; add it to the bowl.
Crack the egg into the bowl.
4. Grease a rimmed baking sheet with 1 tablespoon olive oil. Gently mix
together the ingredients in the bowl with your hands, turn it out onto
the baking sheet, and shape it into a roughly 8 × 5-inch loaf. Drizzle
with 1 tablespoon olive oil and rub to coat the loaf all over.
5. Bake until the loaf is nicely browned and firm, 30 to 35 minutes (a
quick-read thermometer inserted into the center should read between
160º and 165ºF).
6. Let cool for a few minutes before slicing and serving.
VARIATIONS
Chicken and Chard Meat Loaf

Substitute chard for the spinach and ¼ cup ricotta for ¼ cup of the
Parmesan.
Moroccan-Spiced Turkey and Spinach Meat Loaf
Substitute ground turkey for the chicken, use a mixture of 1 teaspoon
cumin, 1 teaspoon coriander, and ½ teaspoon cinnamon instead of the
nutmeg, and use ½ cup golden raisins instead of the Parmesan.
Pork and Bok Choy Meat Loaf
Omit the Parmesan. Substitute bok choy for the spinach, ground pork for
the chicken, and a pinch of red chile flakes for the nutmeg. Serve with white
or brown rice and pass soy sauce at the table.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Bread Crumbs
EVEN FASTER
Use 8 ounces frozen spinach instead of fresh.
The flatter you form the loaf, the faster it will cook.
SHAPING MEAT LOAF
I’ve always preferred making free-form meat loaves to packing them into
loaf pans. Not only are they fast and easy to shape by hand, but they brown
on three sides instead of just on the top, and the fat is allowed to run off,
rather than being trapped in the loaf pan next to the meat. Another benefit is
that since you’re not constricted by the volume of a loaf pan, you can make
the meat loaf as tall or as flat as you like. If you’re short on time, press the
loaf a bit flatter and it will cook through faster.

SIDES
Creamy Polenta
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Tomato Salad
Caprese Salad
Bruschetta

SPEED  
  SERVES 6

Roast Turkey with Sage Sausage
Stuffing
For this fast riff on Thanksgiving dinner, the whole bird is replaced
by a quick-roasted butterflied turkey breast. In place of crisp skin I
crust the turkey in a sausage stuffing that gets golden and crisp as
the meat finishes roasting.

Ingredients
One 3-pound boneless, skin-on turkey breast
3 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
3 tablespoons butter
8 ounces sage or Italian pork sausage
2 sprigs fresh sage
6 to 8 slices any rustic bread
2 eggs
1 cup chicken stock

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF.
Remove and discard the turkey skin. To butterfly the breast, cut
horizontally partway through so it opens like a book, creating a
fairly even thickness of about 1 inch.
2. Put the opened turkey breast on a rimmed baking sheet, rub with 1
tablespoon oil, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Flip it over and
repeat with oil and salt and pepper. Break 1 tablespoon butter into bits
and scatter on top. When the oven is hot, roast the turkey for 30
minutes.
3. Put 1 tablespoon oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Remove the sausage meat from the casings.
Strip the leaves from 2 sage sprigs and chop.
4. Add the sausage to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until the
sausage is browned, 5 to 10 minutes, adding the sage for the last
minute or 2.
Cut 6 to 8 slices bread into small cubes and put them in a large bowl
(you should have 4 to 5 cups of cubes).
Mix 2 eggs into the bowl.
5. When the sausage is browned, add it to the bowl along with a sprinkle
of salt and pepper and ¼ cup chicken stock. Mix well to combine; you
want the bread to absorb the moisture. If it needs more liquid, add up
to another ¼ cup stock.
Melt 2 tablespoons butter in the microwave or on the stove.

6. After the turkey has roasted for 30 minutes, gently pack the stuffing on
top of the breast to cover (it’s okay if some falls off). Drizzle on the
melted butter and return to the oven to finish roasting for 15 minutes.
It’s done when the turkey is firm to the touch, white or very pale pink
inside, and 160º to 165ºF on a quick-read thermometer.
7. When the turkey and stuffing are cooked, transfer it all to a cutting
board, add ½ cup stock to the baking sheet, and stir to scrape up any
browned bits from the bottom.
8. To serve, transfer the stuffing to a platter, slice the turkey and put on
top, then drizzle the pan juices over all.
VARIATIONS
5 Ways to Flavor Stuffing
Add during the last few minutes of cooking:
1. 1 tablespoon minced garlic, ginger, or chiles
2. 2 teaspoons cumin, smoked paprika, or curry powder
3. 1 tablespoon chopped chipotles in adobo
4. ¼ cup chopped scallions
5. ¼ cup chopped dried fruit
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
Instead of using bread as described in Step 4, use Bread Crumbs you have
on hand.

SIDES
Brussels Sprouts with Bacon
Simmered Squash
Tender Vegetables
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Red Wine–Braised Turkey
With their dark, rich meat and somewhat coarse texture, turkey
thighs are reminiscent of pork. Substitute them for chicken parts or
pork in any braise.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 to 4 bone-in turkey thighs (about 3 pounds)
Salt and pepper
1 cup red wine
1 cup chicken stock
3 sprigs fresh thyme
1 large onion
2 carrots
2 celery stalks
1 garlic clove
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
Remove and discard the turkey skin. Pat the turkey thighs dry.
2. When the oil is hot, add the turkey thighs and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Add 1 cup wine, 1 cup chicken stock, and 3 sprigs thyme.
Cover the pot and bring to a boil. When the mixture boils, adjust the
heat so that it bubbles gently. Cook, turning the thighs once, for 30
minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion and carrots.
Trim and chop the celery.
Peel and crush 1 garlic clove.
3. After 30 minutes, add the vegetables and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Cover and continue to cook until the turkey thighs are fully cooked and
the vegetables are tender, about 10 minutes more; they should reach
155º to 160ºF on a quick-read thermometer.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
4. When the turkey thighs are cooked and the vegetables are tender,
transfer them all to a platter. Boil the remaining liquid until it reduces
into a thick sauce, 3 or 4 minutes.
5. Pour the sauce over the turkey and vegetables, garnish with the parsley,
and serve.
VARIATIONS
White Wine–Braised Turkey and Celery Root

Use 2 to 3 cups chopped celery root instead of the carrots and celery and
white wine instead of red.
Cider-Braised Turkey and Squash
Substitute 2 to 3 cups chopped winter squash for the carrots and celery and
apple cider for the red wine.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Use 1½ pounds boneless, skin-on turkey breast instead of thighs. Cut it into
2-inch chunks. Chop the vegetables into smaller pieces; the turkey and
vegetables will be cooked in about 20 minutes.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Brown the turkey thighs on both sides, remove them from the pot, and cook
the vegetables until they’re lightly browned, 5 to 10 minutes. Then return
the thighs and proceed as directed.
TURKEY PARTS
Obviously, supermarkets start packing their shelves with turkey in the run-
up to Thanksgiving, but you can reliably find a few different turkey parts in
the stores year-round. Boneless breast is one of them, and it is a fantastic
way to get roast turkey on the table in less than 45 minutes. Another useful
cut is bone-in thigh, which is meaty, flavorful, and wonderful for braising
(as in this recipe). As with whole turkeys, the size of the parts can vary
significantly; I’ve seen breasts that weigh 7 pounds and thighs that weigh 3.
For some reason I tend to prefer them on the smaller end, but if you have a
crowd to feed, go big.
SIDES
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes

Buttered Egg Noodles
Warm Buttery Bread
Creamy Polenta

Meat
BEEF
Seared Steak with Mustard Spinach
Thai-Style Steak, Lettuce, and Herb Wraps
Stir-Fried Beef with Skillet Kimchi
Caramel Stir-Fried Beef and Green Beans
Steak and Vegetables with Chimichurri
Soy-Marinated Flank Steak and Cherry Tomatoes
Beef and Mushroom Kebabs with Spicy Peanut Sauce
The Better Burger
Sloppy Joes
Stir-Fried Beef and Broccoli with Scallions and Ginger
Veal Scaloppini with Lemon and Capers
Braised Veal with Peas
Curry-Braised Beef and Eggplant
Pan-Roasted Beef Tenderloin with Potatoes
Skillet Meat Loaf
Steak and Potato Enchiladas

Beef Stew

PORK
Stir-Fried Pork with Edamame and Scallions
Seared Pork Chops with Apples and Onions
BBQ Baby Back Ribs
Pork Souvlaki with Zucchini
Spice-Rubbed Pork with Pineapple Salsa
Five-Spice Pork Meatballs with Bok Choy
Homemade Chorizo with Pinto Beans
Maple-Glazed Ham Steaks with Collards
Braised Pork with Cabbage and Beer
Browned and Braised Sausage and Endive
Bangers and Mash
Pork Tenderloin with Butternut Purée
Porchetta-Style Pork Loin with Parsnips
Pork Stew and Dumplings
Pork and Onion Carnitas
Pork, White Bean, and Kale Stew
Provençal Braised Pork and Fennel
Moroccan-Style Braised Pork with Couscous and Grapes

LAMB
Lamb Chops with Balsamic Couscous
Stir-Fried Lamb and Green Peppers with Cumin
Seared Miso Lamb Chops with Carrots
Lamb and Rice with Dried Fruit
Herb-Rubbed Leg of Lamb with Chopped Greek Salad
Lamb and Bulgur Meatballs in Tomato Sauce

Meat
The appeal of meat is easy to understand. It’s
flavorful, filling, fast, and easy to prepare. For many
of us, meat has moved from the center of the plate to
the side, from a two- or three-time daily habit to a
treat, which means it’s more important than ever that
when we do eat meat we thoroughly enjoy it. Part of
that means buying higher-quality meat, and part of it
means being sure you cook it well.
These recipes are designed to help you get the
most out of meat in the shortest amount of time,
covering a range of cooking methods from super-fast
stir-frying to relatively languid braising. Some
cooking methods and cuts of meat are typically
associated with quick cooking, while tricks like
slicing pork or lamb shoulder thin for quick braising
or browning cubes of meat thoroughly on just one or
two sides as opposed to every surface show how to
save time while still developing good flavor. You’ll

even find some long-cooking classics, like porchetta
and leg of lamb, reimagined so that you can get them
on the table in 45 minutes or less.

Chapter Highlights
A Method to the Meatiness  Systems for speed: The Fastest Cuts of Meat.
Fire It Up  Put your grill or broiler to work using whatever ingredients are
on hand. Broiling and Grilling.
Try a Little Tenderloin  Do-it-yourself deli meats: fantastic. Homemade
Cold Cuts.
Homemade Spice Blends  They’ll speed your cooking and make
everything taste better. Spice Blends.
Marinate on It  Preseasoning food doesn’t mean slow. Marinades and
“Rub-in-ades”.
Let It Sit  Letting meat sit for a few minutes after cooking is time well
spent. Give It a Rest.
Chop Talk  These cuts of pork and lamb are fast, easy, and delicious.
Boneless vs. Bone-In Pork Chops, Lamb Chops.
Skillet Stir-Fries  No, you actually don’t need a wok. Wok the Other Way.
Big Meat  Two classic roasts reworked for the fast kitchen. Porchetta-Style
Pork Loin with Parsnips, Herb-Rubbed Leg of Lamb with Chopped Greek
Salad.
Mexican Chorizo  Fresh chorizo isn’t much harder to make than burgers.
Homemade Chorizo with Pinto Beans.

One-Pot Meals  Comfort food can be homey or exotic: your choice. Pork
Stew and Dumplings, Moroccan-Style Braised Pork with Couscous and
Grapes.
Grind Your Own  Pulsing chunks of any meat in the food processor will
always produce better ground meat than any you can buy. You decide which
cut to use. You control how much fat to include. You determine the
coarseness of the grind. And it’s easy. The only inconvenience is cleaning
the machine when you’re done, and I almost always consider that a good
trade-off. See the pork meatballs for a demonstration.
Drop, Don’t Roll  Perhaps you reserve meatballs for special occasions
because you don’t want the fuss of rolling them out. So why bother? It’s
much easier to drop seasoned ground meat from a spoon, just like you do
cookie dough. This technique works whether you cook them in the oven or
on the stove and, since you won’t over-handle them, they’ll remain tender.
Some examples are Five-Spice Pork Meatballs with Bok Choy, Lamb and
Bulgur Meatballs in Tomato Sauce, and Cocktail Meatballs.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Seared Steak with Mustard Spinach
Skillet, steak, spinach; the simplicity of this dish is phenomenal.

Ingredients
1½ pounds beef rib-eye, sirloin, or strip steak (about 1 inch thick)
Salt and pepper
1 tablespoon olive oil
1½ pounds spinach
1 shallot
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
¼ cup white wine 

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over high heat. Pat the steaks dry with a paper towel
and sprinkle both sides with salt and pepper. Cut the steaks as needed
to fit in the skillet.
2. When the skillet is very hot, add 1 tablespoon olive oil and swirl it
around. Add the steaks and cook, turning once, until browned on both
sides but still a bit pinker inside than you like it, 5 or 6 minutes per
side.
Trim and chop the spinach, discarding any thick stems.
Trim, peel, and mince the shallot.
3. When the steaks are done, transfer them to a cutting board. Lower the
heat to medium-high. Carefully add the shallot, 1 tablespoon Dijon,
and ¼ cup wine, followed immediately by the spinach.
4. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and cook, stirring occasionally until the
spinach is wilted and coated with the mustard, 2 or 3 minutes. Taste
and adjust the seasoning. Slice the steak and serve with the spinach.
VARIATIONS
Seared Steak with Lemon Spinach
Replace the mustard with 2 tablespoons lemon juice.
Seared Steak with Creamy Spinach
Use ¼ cup cream instead of the mustard. Add a pinch of nutmeg to the
spinach while it cooks if you like.
Seared Steak with Parmesan Spinach

Omit the mustard and use 4 smashed garlic gloves instead of the shallots.
After the spinach and garlic cook in Step 4, drizzle with another tablespoon
olive oil and sprinkle with ½ cup grated Parmesan cheese. Toss until it
melts a little before serving.
Seared Steak with Garlicky Chard
Skip the mustard. Swap chard (keep the stems) for the spinach, red wine for
white, and 2 garlic cloves for the shallots. Before adding the chard leaves to
the skillet, sauté the chopped stems by themselves to soften a bit, 3 or 4
minutes.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Couscous
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Thai-Style Steak, Lettuce, and Herb
Wraps
A fresh, light Thai dish everyone loves. Make a quick dipping
sauce while the steak grills. Then lay out herbs and lettuce leaves
and let everyone assemble wraps at the table.

Ingredients
1½ pounds beef flank or skirt steak
Salt and pepper
2 limes
1 fresh hot red chile (like Thai bird; optional)
2 tablespoons peanuts
¼ cup fish sauce
1 tablespoon brown sugar
1 head Boston lettuce
1 bunch fresh mint
1 bunch fresh cilantro
1 bunch fresh Thai or regular basil

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat. Blot the steak dry with a paper towel and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. 
2. Grill or broil the steak, turning as necessary, until it is charred on both
sides but still a bit pinker inside than you like it, 5 to 10 minutes total.
Halve the limes and squeeze the juice into a small bowl.
Trim and mince the chile if you’re using it; chop 2 tablespoons
peanuts; add both to the bowl.
3. Add ¼ cup fish sauce and 1 tablespoon brown sugar to the bowl. Stir
to combine; taste and adjust the seasoning.
4. When the steak is done, transfer it to a cutting board.
Remove the leaves from the head of lettuce, leaving them intact.
Strip about ½ cup each mint leaves, cilantro leaves, and Thai or regular
basil leaves from their stems.
5. Thinly slice the steak against the grain. Put it on a serving platter with
the lettuce and herbs.
6. Serve with the dipping sauce on the side. To eat, put the steak and
herbs in the lettuce leaves, roll, and dip in the sauce.
VARIATIONS
Italian-Style Steak, Lettuce, and Herb Wraps
Substitute lemon juice for lime, ¼ teaspoon red chile flakes for the fresh
chile, 1 minced garlic clove for the peanuts, and olive oil for the fish sauce.
Omit the brown sugar; season the dipping sauce with salt and pepper. Use 1

cup halved cherry tomatoes instead of the mint, ½ cup shaved Parmesan
instead of the cilantro, and regular basil in place of Thai.
Mexican-Style Steak, Lettuce, and Herb Wraps
Swap 1 minced garlic clove for the peanuts and 2 tablespoons vegetable oil
plus 2 tablespoons chopped chipotle chiles in adobo for the fish sauce. Omit
the fresh chile and brown sugar; season the dipping sauce with salt. Replace
the mint with 1 cup corn kernels and the basil with ½ cup thinly sliced red
onion.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Cucumber Salad with Hot Sauce and Lime Juice
Fire and Ice Noodles

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Beef with Skillet Kimchi
An easy stir-fry takes on bright, lively flavor thanks to spicy kimchi
seasonings.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more as needed
1½ pounds beef sirloin, flank, or rib-eye steak
Salt and pepper
1 medium Napa cabbage
1 inch fresh ginger
4 garlic cloves
½ teaspoon red chile flakes
1 teaspoon sugar
2 tablespoons rice vinegar
1 tablespoon gochujang (Korean red pepper paste) or Sriracha
(optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Slice the beef as thinly as you can.
2. Add half of the beef to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, turn
the heat to high, and cook, stirring occasionally until it’s lightly
browned, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer to a bowl and repeat with the
remaining beef, adding more oil as necessary.
Core, trim, and chop the cabbage.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 4 garlic cloves; mince them together.
3. Transfer the second batch of cooked beef to the bowl. Add 2
tablespoons oil to the skillet along with the ginger and garlic. Cook,
stirring until fragrant, 30 seconds to a minute.
4. Add the cabbage, ½ teaspoon red chile flakes, 1 teaspoon sugar, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until the
cabbage is tender but still has some crunch, 6 to 8 minutes.
5. Add 2 tablespoons rice vinegar to the skillet along with 1 tablespoon
gochujang or Sriracha if you’re using it and stir.
6. Return the beef to the skillet and toss to coat everything in the sauce
and heat the beef through. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Stir-Fried Pork with Skillet Sauerkraut

Substitute pork loin for the beef and green cabbage, thinly sliced, for the
Napa. Omit the ginger and substitute caraway seeds for the red chile flakes.
Use white or cider vinegar instead of the rice vinegar; omit the gochujang
and add 1 tablespoon Dijon if you want a mustardy bite.
SIDES
Carrot Salad with Cilantro and Lime
Edamame Succotash
White Rice
Scallion Pancakes
Panfried Rice Noodles

INGREDIENT

The Best Fast Cuts of Meat
There are enough different cuts of meat to make your
head spin, but when I need to throw together a quick
meal I find myself turning to the same ones time and
again. These go-to cuts, along with smart substitutes,
take well to various cooking methods and cook
quickly; they’re the ones called for most often in this
chapter.
BEEF SIRLOIN, RIB-EYE, FLANK STEAK
Pan-sear, grill, or broil whole steaks or thinly slice for stir-frying. Rib-
eye is the most tender and flavorful (it’s also the priciest). For my money,
it’s better to splurge on rib-eye for a showstopping steak than for a sliced-
up stir-fry, where the chew of sirloin and flank are an asset. Colder meat
is easier and faster to slice thinly for stir-frying; if you have a few
minutes to spare, pop it in the freezer before slicing.
Cuts to Substitute: Strip steak, skirt steak, and beef tenderloin. Other
than rib-eye, skirt is my favorite, but best thinly sliced either before or
after cooking. Tenderloin (aka filet mignon) is the most tender, most
expensive, and least flavorful, since it has so little fat.
Recipes: Caramel Stir-Fried Beef and Green Beans; Steak and
Vegetables with Chimichurri; Soy-Marinated Flank Steak and Cherry
Tomatoes

BEEF CHUCK
From a harder-working group of muscles—therefore loaded with fat and
flavor but also a bit tough—chuck is a wonderful middle ground between
fast and slow cooking. If you slice or cut it into small pieces, it’s good for
quick braises and stews: It cooks without drying out but isn’t so tough
that it takes hours to become tender enough to eat. For even faster
cooking, chop it finely in the food processor to make ground meat.
Cuts to Substitute: Brisket, round, beef shoulder roast, short ribs, and
shanks; all will take longer to get tender than chuck.
Recipes: Curry-Braised Beef and Eggplant; The Better Burger; Beef
Stew
PORK SHOULDER
Pork shoulder is an incredibly versatile addition to the fast kitchen. Like
beef chuck, it’s fatty and flavorful and useful in much the same way:
Thinly slice it for quick braises, grind it in the food processor for
meatballs, or char cubes under the broiler. Sliced very thin, it’s wonderful
in stir-fries and is considerably less expensive than other cuts.
Cuts to Substitute: Pork butt is actually the top section of the shoulder;
what’s called pork shoulder is the bottom section. I use the cuts
interchangeably. You might also come across country-style pork ribs,
which are ribs cut from the section of the shoulder closest to the loin. Cut
the meat as you would pork shoulder, and if you’re braising, throw the
bone into the pot for extra flavor.
Recipes: Pork Souvlaki with Zucchini; Five-Spice Pork Meatballs with
Bok Choy; Provençal Braised Pork and Fennel; Pork and Onion Carnitas

LAMB CHOPS
Even double-thick chops cook in a flash. They are perfect for pan-
searing, broiling, and grilling and come from all different parts of the
animal, offering varying degrees of tenderness, flavor, bone, and price
(for a quick rundown of the different types of lamb chops, see Lamb
Chops).
Cuts to Substitute: Boneless leg or shoulder sliced into steaks or cutlets.
Recipes: Lamb Chops with Balsamic Couscous; Seared Miso Lamb
Chops with Carrots
GROUND MEAT
It pays to have ground meat of one kind or another in your freezer or
fridge. It’s not only essential for burgers, meatballs, and meat loaves but
can be the base of lightning-quick stir-fries or pasta sauces. To speed up
the already fast cooking, break up the chunks of ground meat with the
edge of a spoon as you stir it.
Cuts to Substitute: Grind your own beef chuck, pork shoulder, or lamb
shoulder by pulsing it in the food processor or just use bulk sausage
meat.
Recipes: Lamb and Bulgur Meatballs in Tomato Sauce; Skillet Meat
Loaf; Sloppy Joes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Caramel Stir-Fried Beef and Green
Beans
Beef braised in caramel flavored with fish sauce is a staple of
Vietnamese clay pot cooking. The sauce also works terrifically in
quick skillet dishes, bubbling down to a sweet-salty coating for
beef and green beans in minutes.

Ingredients
1½ pounds beef sirloin, flank, or rib-eye steak
½ cup sugar
3 shallots
½ inch fresh ginger
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
1 pound green beans
3 tablespoons fish sauce
Pepper
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put the beef in the freezer. Put ½ cup sugar in a large skillet over
medium-low heat. Cook, shaking the pan occasionally until the sugar
becomes liquid and darkens slightly, 5 to 7 minutes.
Trim, peel, and thinly slice 3 shallots. Peel ½ inch ginger and trim the
chile; mince them together.
Trim the green beans.
2. When the sugar melts and darkens slightly, remove it from the heat and
carefully add ¼ cup water and 3 tablespoons fish sauce. Stir in a good
amount of pepper and return the skillet to medium heat.
3. Add the shallots, ginger, chile, and green beans. Cook, stirring
occasionally for 2 minutes.
Remove the beef from the freezer and slice it as thinly as you can.
4. Add the steak to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until it’s
cooked through and the caramel has thickened and coated the beef and
green beans, 3 to 5 minutes.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
5. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Garnish with the cilantro and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Orange Caramel Stir-Fried Pork and Green Beans
Swap pork loin for the beef and freshly squeezed orange juice for the fish
sauce. You’ll need to add a little salt.

Soy Caramel Stir-Fried Beef and Peppers
Swap soy sauce for the fish sauce and bell peppers (I like green ones here)
for the green beans.
SIDES
White Rice
Panfried Rice Noodles
Warm Tortillas
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy
Daikon Salad with Fish Sauce, Lime, and Peanuts

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Steak and Vegetables with
Chimichurri
Chimichurri, the addictive fresh herb sauce ubiquitous in
Argentina, is known as a sidekick for steak, but more often than not
I eat it with vegetables. Here you don’t have to choose.

Ingredients
1½ pounds beef sirloin, rib-eye, or strip steaks
Salt and pepper
8 ounces portobello mushrooms
1 pound Yukon Gold potatoes
1 large onion
2 red bell peppers
¾ cup olive oil, plus more as needed
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 bunch fresh cilantro
3 garlic cloves
2 tablespoons sherry vinegar
½ teaspoon red chile flakes (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat. Blot the
steaks dry with a paper towel and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Trim the mushrooms.
Peel the potatoes if you like and cut them into thin rounds.
Trim, peel, and slice the onion into rounds.
Core, seed, and quarter the peppers.
2. Toss the vegetables with ¼ cup olive oil and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Put the steaks and vegetables on a rimmed baking sheet or 2.
3. Broil, turning as necessary, until the steaks are charred on both sides
but still a bit pinker inside than you like them and the vegetables are
tender and lightly charred, 5 to 10 minutes for the steak and a little
longer for the vegetables.
Strip 2 cups parsley leaves from the stems and pull 1 cup cilantro
sprigs from the bunch.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
4. Put the herbs, garlic, ½ cup oil, 2 tablespoons sherry vinegar, ½
teaspoon red chile flakes if you’re using them, and some salt and
pepper in a food processor. Process until smooth, scraping down the
sides as necessary. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
5. When the steaks are done, transfer them to a cutting board and let them
rest while you finish cooking the vegetables. Slice the steak and serve
it on a platter alongside the vegetables, with the chimichurri spooned
over everything.

VARIATIONS
Pork Chops and Vegetables with Chimichurri
Chops are completely untraditional—but excellent—with this sauce.
Instead of the steaks, use 1½ pounds boneless pork chops, each about 1 inch
thick. Cook them with the vegetables as described in Step 3 until firm but
still a little pink inside, 10 to 15 minutes total, depending on their thickness.
Chicken Cutlets and Vegetables with Chimichurri
Substitute boneless, skinless chicken thighs for the steaks. They’ll take 10
to 15 minutes total cooking time in Step 3.
4 Other Vegetables to Try
1. Asparagus
2. Eggplant
3. Zucchini
4. Winter squash (thinly sliced)
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
To simplify things, cook just one vegetable, about 2 pounds total.
SIDES
Creamy Polenta
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
White Rice
Quinoa
Bruschetta

TECHNIQUE

Broiling and Grilling
The broiler is the most underappreciated kitchen
appliance. Like a grill flipped on its head, it provides
direct heat for searing food quickly. You can control
the speed at which it cooks by moving the rack closer
to or farther away from the heat. Unlike pan-searing,
which also provides a quick burst of heat, broiling
spreads heat over a large area, allowing you to sear
big batches of food at once. There’s a lot of broiling
in this book, so here’s a quick primer:
Getting to Know Your Broiler
Some broilers boast intense and powerful heat, while others are weak. One
way to see what kind of firepower you’re dealing with is to broil a slice of
bread about 4 inches away from the heat. If the top turns crusty and dark
brown in about a minute, your broiler is pretty powerful; if it takes 3
minutes or longer, you’ve got a wimpy one. I try to give time ranges to
account for all kinds of broilers, so if yours is strong, lean toward shorter
cooking times, and if it’s weak, broil for longer or move the food closer to
the heat—sometimes as close as possible.
The Broiler Rack
If your broiler is a drawer that pulls out from under your oven, it likely
comes with a rack that looks like a small baking pan. The broiler pan is

perfectly fine to cook on, but I prefer the larger surface area of baking
sheets.
Heating Broilers
Broilers may be gas flames or electric coils, located in a separate drawer
beneath the oven or inside the oven at the very top. No matter what kind
you have, it’s important to let it run for 5 minutes before you start cooking;
this time allows the roof of the broiler and the inside air temperature to heat
up, which enables faster and more even cooking. Generally, turn on the
broiler when you start a recipe; that way by the time the food is ready to
broil, the heat will be raring to go.
Controlling the Heat
Some broilers have heat settings that you can control with the turn of a
knob, but most don’t. (Even those that claim to often don’t.) The one fail-
safe way to adjust the heat during cooking is to change the position of the
rack. Say you’re cooking vegetables that are getting singed on the outside
but are still crunchy in the middle: Move them farther away from the heat.
Or if a steak isn’t getting the kind of char you want, move it closer.
If a food is charring too quickly, another option is to cover the pan
loosely with aluminum foil, which will slow the browning while continuing
to cook the food. Unlike an oven, a broiler doesn’t lose most of its
effectiveness when you open the door, so don’t be shy about checking on
the progress of your food often and turning food or adjusting the rack
position as needed.
Long-Distance and Regular Broiling
Most foods that you’re going to broil—tender vegetables, seafood, or
steaks, chops, or chicken pieces an inch or less thick—benefit from being
positioned close to the heat, about 4 inches away. Then there’s something I

call “long-distance broiling,” which means putting the rack farther away
from the heat—about 6 inches—so that food cooks more slowly. This is
best for thicker pieces of meat or vegetables that take longer to cook; if you
put them too close to the heat, they’ll burn on the outside before cooking
through in the middle. While it’s obviously not as fast as regular broiling, it
is a wonderful and quicker alternative to roasting.
 
Moving the Kitchen Outside
Gas Grilling
A broiler is just like a gas grill turned upside down; both use direct heat to
cook foods quickly and impart a slightly smoky char. And they’re
interchangeable when it comes to timing too, which is why a handful of
recipes here give you the option of either. But there’s one significant
difference that needs to be accounted for: The broiler is in your kitchen, and
the grill is outside. The flow of prepping and cooking on which these
recipes are based is much smoother when you don’t have to run back and
forth from the kitchen to the backyard. If you’re lucky enough to have a gas
grill positioned right outside of your kitchen—of if you’re cooking with a
friend and can share tasks—then use it in place of the broiler whenever you
like. But I’m not counting on it, so any recipe here that calls for grilling
takes those outside trips into account.
Charcoal Grilling
Grilling over charcoal provides deeper flavor and better char than grilling
over gas, and the cooking itself is quick, but charcoal grilling, overall, is too
slow to call “fast,” simply because it takes too much time to get the coals
going. However, if you account for heating time, you can use a charcoal
grill for any of the grilling recipes in this book.

Multitasking
If you’re into cooking outdoors big-time, then you’ll want to start bringing
out pots and pans and using the grill as a stove. Nothing is stopping you. In
fact, you can use these recipes to give it a try.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Soy-Marinated Flank Steak and
Cherry Tomatoes
Soy sauce is a classic marinade for steak; its savoriness—or umami
—also pairs wonderfully with sweet cherry tomatoes. The just-
burst tomatoes and an extra drizzle of the marinade provide all the
sauce that steak needs.

Ingredients
3 garlic cloves
1 inch fresh ginger
⅓ cup soy sauce
Pepper
1½ pounds flank steak
2 pints cherry tomatoes
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
2 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Peel 3 garlic cloves and 1 inch ginger; mince them together.
2. Put the garlic and ginger in a large dish or freezer bag; add ⅓ cup soy
sauce and a sprinkle of pepper. Add the steak and tomatoes and toss to
coat; let them marinate for 5 minutes.
3. Put a large skillet over high heat. Remove the steak from the marinade,
letting any liquid drip off, and pat dry with a paper towel. Cut the steak
in half if necessary to fit it into the skillet.
4. When the skillet is very hot, add 1 tablespoon vegetable oil and swirl it
around. Add the steak and cook, turning it once, until browned on both
sides but still a bit pinker inside than you like it, 3 to 5 minutes per
side.
5. Remove the tomatoes from the marinade and put them on a rimmed
baking sheet. Broil, shaking the pan occasionally until they’re charred
in spots and starting to burst, 4 to 6 minutes.
6. Pour the marinade into a small saucepan and bring it to a boil. Let boil
gently for 5 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
7. When the steak is done, transfer it to a cutting board. When the
tomatoes are lightly charred, put them on a platter or divide them
among 4 plates. Pour any accumulated juices into the simmering
marinade.
8. Slice the steak and drizzle it and the tomatoes with some of the
marinade. Garnish with the scallions and serve.

VARIATIONS
Mustard-Marinated Flank Steak and Cherry Tomatoes
Omit the ginger. Substitute 2 tablespoons red wine vinegar, 2 tablespoons
Dijon mustard, and 1 tablespoon olive oil for the soy sauce.
Soy-Marinated Flank Steak and Green Beans
Swap 1 pound green beans for the tomatoes. Broil, tossing once or twice,
until they’re browned and just tender but still have some crunch, 5 to 10
minutes.
Chipotle-Marinated Flank Steak and Asparagus
Substitute 1 bunch asparagus, cut into 3-inch pieces, for the tomatoes, 1
tablespoon lime juice for the ginger, and 3 tablespoons chopped chipotle
chiles in adobo for the soy sauce. Broil the asparagus, tossing once or twice,
until they’re browned and just tender but still have some crunch, 5 to 10
minutes.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Skip marinating. Prepare the soy sauce mixture while the steak and
tomatoes cook, then spoon it over as a sauce.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the steak and tomatoes marinate in the refrigerator for up to a few
hours.
SIDES
Warm Tortillas
White Rice
Panfried Rice Noodles

Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Beef and Mushroom Kebabs with
Spicy Peanut Sauce
Chile-tinged peanut sauce adds kick and helps the beef char
beautifully in the broiler.

Ingredients
20 button mushrooms
1½ pounds beef sirloin
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
1 garlic clove
½ inch fresh ginger
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
¼ cup peanut butter
1 tablespoon soy sauce
1 tablespoon rice vinegar
2 teaspoons sesame oil
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
If you’re using wooden skewers, soak them in water. Turn the broiler to
high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Trim 20 button mushrooms, leaving them whole.
Cut the beef into 1½-inch chunks.
1. Thread the mushrooms and the beef onto separate skewers. Rub with 2
tablespoons vegetable oil and some salt and pepper.
2. Put just the mushroom kebabs in the broiler and cook, turning once,
until they are tender and browned on 2 sides, 10 to 15 minutes.
Peel 1 garlic clove and ½ inch ginger and trim the chile; mince
everything together and put in a small bowl.
3. Add ¼ cup peanut butter, 1 tablespoon soy sauce, 1 tablespoon rice
vinegar, and 2 teaspoons sesame oil to the bowl. Stir to combine,
adding a little hot water to thin the sauce bit. Pour a little of the sauce
into a small bowl to save for later.
4. After you turn the mushrooms, put the beef kebabs in the broiler
alongside the mushrooms. Cook, basting everything with some of the
remaining sauce and turning the kebabs as they brown, until the sauce
is caramelized, the mushrooms are tender, and the beef is just cooked
through, 5 to 10 minutes more; cut a piece of beef to check for
doneness after about 5 minutes.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
5. When the mushrooms and beef are done, spoon the reserved peanut
sauce over the top, garnish with the cilantro, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Beef and Onion Kebabs with Mustard-Rosemary Sauce
Swap 5 small onions, quartered, for the mushrooms, 1 tablespoon chopped
fresh rosemary for the ginger and chile, ¼ cup Dijon mustard for the peanut
butter, lemon juice for the rice vinegar, and olive oil for the sesame oil.
Omit the soy sauce and garnish with parsley instead of cilantro.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Don’t skewer; just broil the beef and mushrooms on a rimmed baking sheet.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Scallion Pancakes
Stir-Fried Bok Choy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

The Better Burger
A burger is all about the texture and flavor of the meat, so if there’s
one dish that rewards spending the time to grind your own beef,
this is it. The no-frills recipe here benefits from a side or two. See
the list of options opposite.

Ingredients
1½ pounds boneless beef sirloin (not too lean) or chuck
Salt and pepper
4 hamburger buns

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a charcoal or gas grill with the rack 4 inches from the heat or
put a large skillet over medium-low heat.
Cut the beef into chunks; put them in the food processor.
Pulse until the beef is coarsely ground; transfer to a bowl and sprinkle
with salt and pepper.
2. Lightly shape the beef into 4 patties; sprinkle both sides with salt and
pepper.
3. If you’re cooking in a skillet, raise the heat to medium-high. Grill or
pan-cook the burgers, turning once, until they’re cooked as you like—
3 minutes per side for very rare and another minute per side for each
increasing stage of doneness.
4. Serve on buns, with whatever condiments you like.
VARIATIONS
The Better Pork and Scallion Burger
Substitute boneless pork shoulder for the beef and add ¼ cup chopped
scallions along with the salt and pepper. Cook until the pork is just cooked
through, about 5 minutes per side.
The Better Lamb and Red Onion Burger
Substitute boneless lamb shoulder for the beef and add ¼ cup chopped red
onion along with the salt and pepper. Keep it rare.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER

Use preground meat. Not as good, of course, but at least twice as fast.
THE BETTER CHEESEBURGER
Add cheese immediately after you flip the burgers. The surface that you put
the cheese on needs to be quite hot so the cheese melts before the burgers
overcook. Or make them diner style: Add the cheese, put a small splash of
water in the skillet, then quickly put a lid on top. The steam melts the
cheese in a flash.
SIDES
French Fries
German-Style Potato Salad
Coleslaw
Green Salad
Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sloppy Joes
Bad sloppy Joes are terrible. Good ones are a game-changer:
homemade meat sauce on a bun, here with some vegetables added
for good measure.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 onion
2 celery stalks
1 medium zucchini
2 bell peppers
3 garlic cloves
12 ounces ground beef
1 teaspoon chili powder
1 teaspoon cumin
Salt and pepper
One 14-ounce can diced tomatoes
¼ cup ketchup
1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
1 teaspoon soy sauce
4 hamburger buns

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the skillet.
Trim and chop the celery stalks and the zucchini; add them to the
skillet.
Core, seed, and chop the bell peppers; add them to the skillet.
2. Cook, stirring occasionally until the vegetables soften, 5 to 10 minutes.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
3. When the vegetables are soft, add the garlic, beef, 1 teaspoon chili
powder, 1 teaspoon cumin, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook,
stirring occasionally until the meat loses its pink color, 8 to 12
minutes.
4. Stir in the tomatoes, ¼ cup ketchup, 1 teaspoon Worcestershire, and 1
teaspoon soy sauce. Bring the mixture to a simmer and cook, stirring
occasionally and adding a splash of water if the pan gets too dry, until
the mixture is thick and the flavors come together, 10 to 15 minutes.
5. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve on buns.
VARIATIONS
Chinese-Style Sloppy Joes
Substitute ground pork for the beef, 1 inch ginger, minced, for the chili
powder, 1 minced fresh hot green chile for the cumin, ¼ cup hoisin for the
ketchup, and an extra teaspoon of soy sauce for the Worcestershire.

Moroccan-Style Sloppy Joes
Use red onion instead of yellow, ½ cup chopped dried apricots instead of
the celery, ground lamb instead of the beef, 1 teaspoon coriander and ½
teaspoon cinnamon instead of the chili powder, and 2 teaspoons chopped
fresh oregano or 1 teaspoon dried instead of the Worcestershire and soy
sauce. If you have harissa, replace 2 tablespoons of the ketchup with it.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
EVEN FASTER
Brown the beef in a separate skillet with the spices and garlic while the
vegetables soften; when it’s browned, add the vegetables to the skillet with
the beef; proceed from Step 4.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
For a deeper flavor, simmer the mixture for anywhere between 15 minutes
and an hour, adding liquid to the pan if it gets too dry.
SIDES
Green Salad
White Rice
Warm Tortillas
Coleslaw

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Beef and Broccoli with
Scallions and Ginger
This Chinese take-out staple takes less time to make at home than it
does to be delivered, and takeout can’t compete with fresh-from-
the-skillet flavor.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons vegetable oil
1½ pounds beef sirloin, flank, or rib-eye steak
Salt and pepper
1 inch fresh ginger
2 garlic cloves
1 medium head broccoli (1 to 1½ pounds)
4 scallions
1 tablespoon sesame oil
1 tablespoon hoisin sauce

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Slice the beef as thinly as you can.
2. Add the beef to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until it’s lightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 2 garlic cloves; mince them together.
Trim the broccoli and break or chop it into small florets.
3. When the beef is lightly browned, add the ginger and garlic. Cook,
stirring until fragrant, about a minute. Transfer the beef mixture a
bowl.
4. Add 2 tablespoons oil to the skillet. Add the broccoli and cook, stirring
occasionally until it browns slightly, 3 or 4 minutes. Add ¼ cup water,
cover the skillet, and cook until the broccoli is just tender, another 3 or
4 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. When the broccoli is just tender, remove the lid and let the remaining
water mostly evaporate. Return the beef to the skillet along with the
scallions, 1 tablespoon sesame oil, and 1 tablespoon hoisin sauce.
6. Toss to coat to coat everything with the sauce and heat the beef
through. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Stir-Fried Pork and Broccoli with Chiles

Swap pork loin for the beef and add 1 or 2 minced fresh hot green chiles
along with the ginger and garlic.
Stir-Fried Beef and Asparagus with Scallions and Ginger
Swap 1 large bunch asparagus, cut into 2-inch lengths, for the broccoli; it
will take a little less time to become tender.
NOTES
WOK THE OTHER WAY
Many people believe the only way to cook good stir-fries at home is with a
wok; it isn’t so. What makes woks so effective in Chinese restaurants is the
intense burners that fit under them, burners the size of the one under your
hot water heater, which allow you to stir-fry ingredients in a matter of
seconds. You’ll never get a pan that hot at home. But a cast-iron skillet—
which gets quite hot and holds the heat well—is as good as you’re going to
get, so there’s no reason to buy a wok, especially if storage space is an
issue.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin
Panfried Rice Noodles
Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Veal Scaloppini with Lemon and
Capers
Sautéed veal cutlets with white wine, lemon, and capers is old-
school Italian-American restaurant food. Like chicken with an extra
jolt of richness, the veal soaks up the tangy sauce and is as supple
and juicy as can be.

Ingredients
1 tablespoon olive oil, plus more as needed
2 tablespoons butter, plus more as needed
2 cups flour
Salt and pepper
1½ to 2 pounds veal cutlets
2 garlic cloves
1 lemon
2 tablespoons capers
1 bunch fresh parsley
½ cup white wine

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil and 1 tablespoon
butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
2. Put 2 cups flour in a shallow bowl; season with salt and pepper.
Sprinkle the cutlets with salt and pepper and dredge one at a time in
the flour, shake off the excess, and put in the skillet (you’ll need to
work in batches).
3. Cook the cutlets, rotating them occasionally and adjusting the heat so
they sizzle but don’t burn, until they are browned, 3 or 4 minutes. Turn
and cook on the other side until browned and cooked through, another
3 or 4 minutes.
4. As each piece is done, transfer it to the oven to keep warm; continue
cooking the remaining cutlets, adding more oil and/or butter to the
skillet as needed.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves. Halve the lemon.
Chop 2 tablespoons capers and ¼ cup parsley.
5. When all the cutlets are cooked and warming in the oven, add ½ cup
white wine to the skillet; cook, scraping the bottom of the pan, until it
is reduced by about half, a minute or 2.
6. Add the garlic, capers, and parsley; squeeze in the lemon juice and add
1 tablespoon butter and any juices that have accumulated around the
veal.
7. As the sauce bubbles, quickly dip each piece of veal into the skillet to
coat with the sauce; put them on a platter, pour the remaining sauce
over the top, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Veal Scaloppini with Peas and White Wine
Instead of capers, add ½ cup fresh or frozen peas.
Chicken Cutlets with Lemon and Capers
Swap 4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts for the veal. Cut each breast in
half horizontally to make 2 thin cutlets. Press down on each with the heel of
your hand to flatten a bit.
Veal Marsala
Make Chicken Marsala with Lots of Mushrooms using 1½ to 2 pounds veal
cutlets instead of the chicken.
NOTES
A WORD ON VEAL
For a long time it was nearly impossible to find veal that had been raised
under humane conditions, but that’s changing. Look for veal that is labeled
cage-free or free-range; as always, a butcher, farmer, or supermarket that
you trust is your best bet.
SIDES
Creamy Polenta
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Garlic Bread
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Braised Veal with Peas
Brimming with fresh flavor, this quick and simple braise is a
perfect dish for spring. Veal sirloin and leg will yield more tender
chunks of meat, while fattier breast will have more flavor and
chew. If you can get your hands on fresh shelled peas, even better.

Ingredients
1 tablespoon olive oil
2 tablespoons butter
1½ pounds veal sirloin, leg, or breast
Salt and pepper
1 pound shallots
½ cup white wine or water
Several sprigs fresh tarragon for garnish
2 cups fresh or frozen peas

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil and 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet or
saucepan over medium-high heat.
Cut the veal into 1-inch chunks.
2. Add the veal to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook
undisturbed until nicely browned on the bottom, about 5 minutes.
Trim, peel, and quarter the shallots.
3. When the veal is browned on the bottom, add the shallots and cook,
stirring occasionally until they soften slightly, 2 or 3 minutes. Add ½
cup white wine or water.
4. Adjust the heat so that the mixture bubbles gently but steadily. Cover
and cook until the veal is tender and cooked through, 15 to 20 minutes.
Strip the tarragon leaves from several sprigs and chop them.
5. When the veal is tender, stir in 2 cups peas and cook, stirring
occasionally until they heat through, 2 or 3 minutes. Sir in the
tarragon, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Soy-Braised Veal with Edamame
Add 1 inch fresh ginger, minced, along with the shallots and substitute ¼
cup soy sauce for ¼ cup of the wine, edamame for the peas, and 2 scallions
for the tarragon.
Braised Veal with Garlic and White Beans
Add 3 garlic cloves, thinly sliced, along with the shallots and swap cooked
white beans for the peas.

NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Stir-Fried Veal with Shallots and Peas
Cut the veal into thin slices and stir-fry it in a large skillet with the oil and
butter until lightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes. Remove and stir-fry the
shallots, sliced instead of quartered, until lightly browned and tender, 3 to 5
minutes. Return the veal to the skillet along with the peas and ¼ cup white
wine. Cook, stirring occasionally until the peas are warmed through, 2 or 3
minutes. Stir in the tarragon, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Use a tougher cut of veal (like the shoulder) and braise, adding more liquid
as needed, until it is fall-apart tender, up to 3 hours. At that point the
shallots will melt into the sauce; if you prefer them to stay intact, add them
closer to the end of cooking.
SIDES
Buttered Egg Noodles
Rice Pilaf
Warm Buttery Bread
Creamy Polenta

RECIPE-FREE

Braised Meat
1
Pick a cut of meat.
For braising you want the tougher (and cheaper) cuts that become
tender when simmered in liquid, usually for a long time. To speed
things up, cut or slice them into pieces no thicker than 1 inch. Beef
chuck and pork or lamb shoulder are perfect for this technique.

2
Brown, baby, brown.
Start by browning meat well in fat in a large pot. If you are short on
time, just brown it really well on one side. (I skip this flavor-building
step altogether if I’m really in a hurry; the stew will still be good.)
3
Add vegetables.
Remove the meat from the pot and brown any vegetables on their
own to get the most flavor. (These are typically aromatics, but you
can also include root vegetables at this point.) Again, if you’re in a
rush, just stir the vegetables into the pot with the meat.

4
Add liquid.
Add water, stock, juice, booze—whatever you want the stew to taste
like—scraping up any browned bits with a wooden spoon. Return the
meat to the pot, making sure there is enough liquid to barely cover the
ingredients. Bring to a boil, then reduce to a gentle bubble and cover.

5
Cook until tender.
Getting fall-apart-tender meat can take a long time, but with smaller
pieces you can still develop excellent flavor and tenderness in less
than an hour.

6
Sauce and serve.
Once the meat is tender, check the liquid. If it’s too thin, transfer the
meat to a platter, skim off some of the fat if you like, and boil until
the liquid thickens into a sauce. If there’s no liquid left, add a splash
more. Garnish and serve.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Curry-Braised Beef and Eggplant
The silky texture that eggplant develops as it becomes tender gives
this Thai-style curry a wonderful richness and warmth in a fairly
short amount of time. Browning the beef and vegetables at the
beginning develops great flavor in the pot, but you can skip it if
you’re in a pinch (see Even Faster).

Ingredients
4 tablespoons vegetable oil
1½ pounds boneless beef chuck
Salt and pepper
1 onion
1 large or 2 medium eggplant
1 bunch fresh Thai basil or sweet basil
2 tablespoons red or green curry paste or curry powder
One 15-ounce can coconut milk
1 lime
1 small bunch fresh cilantro

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
Cut the beef into 1-inch chunks.
2. Add the meat to the pan and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook,
undisturbed, until well browned on one side, 2 or 3 minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion. Trim the eggplant and cut into 1-inch
cubes.
3. Transfer the beef to a plate with a slotted spoon. Add 2 tablespoons oil
and then the onion and eggplant to the pot; cook, stirring occasionally
until the vegetables begin to soften, 5 to 10 minutes.
Strip 1 cup basil leaves from the stems and chop.
4. Stir 2 tablespoons curry paste or powder into the eggplant and cook
until fragrant, 1 to 2 minutes. Add the coconut milk, basil, and beef
with any juices. Bring to a boil, reduce the heat so the mixture bubbles
gently but steadily, and cover.
5. Cook, adding a splash of water if the skillet gets dry, until the beef and
eggplant are tender, 10 to 15 minutes.
Cut the lime into wedges. Chop ¼ cup cilantro.
6. When the beef and eggplant are tender, add more liquid if the skillet is
dry; taste and adjust the seasoning. Garnish with the cilantro and serve
with the lime wedges.
VARIATIONS
Curry-Braised Beef and Potatoes
Instead of eggplant, use 3 large potatoes, cut into ½-inch cubes.

Braised Beef and Eggplant with Tomato-Yogurt Sauce
Omit the basil and curry paste or powder. Add 3 cloves garlic, minced,
along with the onion and eggplant. Swap one 15-ounce can diced tomatoes
plus ½ cup Greek yogurt for the coconut milk. Use lemon instead of lime
and parsley instead of cilantro.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder
EVEN FASTER
Skip the browning; put all the ingredients except the lime and cilantro in the
pot, bring to a simmer, and cover. Cook, stirring once or twice, until the
beef and vegetables are tender, 15 to 20 minutes.
The smaller you cut the beef and eggplant, the faster they will cook.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Brown the beef on all sides.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Quinoa
Cucumber Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pan-Roasted Beef Tenderloin with
Potatoes
Beef tenderloin roasted in a sizzling oven gets a crackly crust while
maintaining luscious, rosy flesh. It’s a roast as decadent as it is fast,
with time to make crisp potatoes alongside.

Ingredients
2 pounds russet or Yukon Gold potatoes
1½ pounds beef tenderloin in 1 piece
4 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 500ºF; put a roasting pan in the oven while it heats
up.
Peel the potatoes if you like and cut them into 1-inch chunks.
2. Pat the beef dry with a paper towel; rub it with 1 tablespoon olive oil
and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3. When the oven is hot, carefully remove the roasting pan. Put the beef
in the middle and scatter the potatoes around it. Drizzle the potatoes
with 3 tablespoons oil and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
4. Roast, turning the beef once and stirring the potatoes occasionally until
the beef is somewhere between rare and medium-rare (120ºto 125ºF),
20 to 25 minutes. Transfer the beef to a cutting board.
5. If the potatoes still need a little more time to become tender and crisp,
continue roasting while the beef rests. Thickly slice the beef and serve
it with the potatoes, with any accumulated juices spooned over the top.
VARIATIONS
Pan-Roasted Beef Tenderloin with Chile Sweet Potatoes
Substitute sweet potatoes for regular potatoes and toss with 2 teaspoons
chili powder or smoked paprika when you add them to the roasting pan.
Pan-Roasted Pork Tenderloin with Celery Root
Substitute 1½ pounds pork tenderloin for the beef and celery root for the
potatoes. Since pork tenderloin is smaller than beef, it will roast faster; cook
until it reaches 145ºF, 15 to 20 minutes.

NOTES
GIVE IT A REST
When cooking thicker cuts of meat like steaks, chops, and roasts, don’t slice
the meat immediately after cooking. If you slice too soon, the hot juices,
which have become concentrated in the cool center, will spill out, leaving
your cutting board wet and your meat dry. To prevent this, let the meat sit
on a plate or cutting board for 5 to 10 minutes. During that time the outer
edges of the meat will cool a bit and reabsorb some of the juices that have
retreated into the center.
SIDES
Green Salad
Creamed Spinach
Garlicky Mushrooms
Sautéed Greens with Garlic

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Skillet Meat Loaf
Flattening out meat loaf to cook it in a skillet not only reduces
cooking time but also dramatically increases the surface area to
maximize crunch. It’s faster and better.

Ingredients
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 cup bread crumbs
½ cup milk
1 pound ground beef
1 pound ground pork
Salt and pepper
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)
1 garlic clove
1 egg
¼ cup ketchup

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 425ºF. Grease a large skillet (preferably cast iron)
with 1 tablespoon olive oil and put it in the oven while it heats and you
prepare the meat loaf.
2. Combine 1 cup bread crumbs, ½ cup milk, the ground beef and ground
pork, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper in a large bowl.
Grate ½ cup Parmesan and add to the bowl. Peel and mince 1 garlic
clove and add it to the bowl.
Crack the egg into the bowl.
3. Gently mix the ingredients together with your hands, then carefully
pack the mixture into the skillet. Drizzle ¼ cup ketchup on top.
4. Bake until the loaf is firm (a quick-read thermometer inserted into the
center should read 160ºF), 15 to 20 minutes.
5. Turn the broiler to high and put the rack 4 inches from the heat. Broil
the meat loaf until the top is brown and crisp, 2 to 5 minutes.
6. Let cool for a few minutes before slicing into wedges. Serve hot,
warm, or at room temperature.
VARIATIONS
Skillet BBQ Meat Loaf
Omit the Parmesan; brush the top with barbecue sauce instead of ketchup.
Skillet Chipotle Meat Loaf
Swap 1 teaspoon cumin and 1 teaspoon chopped chipotle chiles in adobo
(or to taste) for the Parmesan; brush the top with a bit of the adobo sauce
instead of the ketchup.

Blue Cheese Skillet Meat Loaf
Substitute ½ cup crumbled blue cheese or Gorgonzola for the Parmesan and
skip the ketchup.
Skillet Miso Meat Loaf
Substitute ½ cup any miso for the Parmesan and 1 inch peeled and minced
ginger for the garlic. Omit the ketchup.
Skillet Lamb Meat Loaf with Harissa Glaze
Substitute ground lamb for the beef and pork and crumbled feta for the
Parmesan. Brush the top with ¼ cup harissa thinned with a little water if
you can find it. Otherwise stick with the ketchup.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Bread Crumbs
SIDES
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Creamy Polenta
Two-Step Broccoli
Asparagus Gratin
Sautéed Greens with Garlic

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Steak and Potato Enchiladas
There’s much to do in this recipe—sautéing potatoes and steak,
simmering sauce, rolling tortillas—but it all happens fairly quickly.
And when you pull those smoky, cheesy enchiladas from the
broiler, you’ll be pleased you put in the work.

Ingredients
1½ pounds sirloin or flank steak
3 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more as needed
2½ pounds russet or Yukon Gold potatoes
Salt and pepper
One 28-ounce can crushed tomatoes
3 canned chipotle chiles in adobo
2 garlic cloves
4 scallions
4 to 8 ounces Jack cheese (1 to 2 cups grated)
Eight 10-inch flour tortillas
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish
Sour cream for serving

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Put the
steak in the freezer.
2. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-low
heat.
Peel the potatoes; shred them in a food processor with a grating disk or
by hand with a box grater.
3. Put the potatoes in the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and raise
the heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring occasionally until they soften,
8 to 10 minutes. Add more oil as needed.
4. Put the tomatoes in a small saucepan over medium heat.
Chop 3 chipotles in adobo; peel and mince 2 garlic cloves. Add them
to the saucepan.
5. Bring the tomato mixture to a bubble, then reduce the heat and let it
simmer gently, adding a splash of water if it gets too thick.
Remove the steak from the freezer and slice it as thinly as you can
without shredding it.
6. When the potatoes have begun to soften, continue to cook, stirring
more frequently, until they are tender but not mushy, 2 or 3 minutes.
Remove them from the skillet and wipe it out.
7. Add 1 tablespoon oil to the skillet, followed by the steak. Sprinkle
with salt and pepper and cook, stirring once or twice, until it’s lightly
browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.

Grate 1 to 2 cups Jack cheese.
8. When the steak is lightly browned, return the potatoes to the skillet,
add the scallions, and stir to combine. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
9. Spread a thin layer of tomato sauce into the bottom of a 9 × 13-inch
baking dish. Divide the potato mixture among 8 tortillas, roll them
tightly, and put them in the baking dish. Spread the rest of the sauce
over the top and sprinkle with the cheese.
10. Broil until the cheese is bubbly and browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
11. Divide the enchiladas among 4 plates, sprinkle with the cilantro, and
serve with a dollop of sour cream.
VARIATIONS
Pork and Sweet Potato Enchiladas
Use pork loin or shoulder instead of the steak and sweet potatoes instead of
russet or Yukon Gold.
Smoky Steak and Potato Enchiladas
Substitute 1 teaspoon each smoked paprika and cumin for the chipotles.
SIDES
White Rice
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Jícama and Radish Salad
Ripe Plantains

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Beef Stew
It’s impossible to replicate the fall-apart tenderness of long-
simmered meat quickly, but this shortcut stew has all the deep
flavor of browned beef and is given extra body with a sprinkling of
flour. The result: a hearty bowl in less than 45 minutes.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds boneless beef chuck or round
Salt and pepper
2 pounds russet or Yukon Gold potatoes
2 large carrots
3 celery stalks
2 tablespoons flour
2 sprigs fresh thyme
3 cups chicken or beef stock or water
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish
1 cup frozen peas

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
Cut the beef into 1-inch chunks.
2. Put the beef in the pot, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, turning
once, until well browned on 2 sides, 8 to 10 minutes.
Peel the potatoes if you like. Trim and peel the carrots and trim the
celery; cut them all into ½-inch chunks.
3. When the beef is browned, add 2 tablespoons flour to the pot and cook,
stirring until the flour is absorbed into the fat, about 2 minutes. Add 2
thyme sprigs and 3 cups stock or water. Bring to a boil. Add the
potatoes, carrots, and celery; then adjust the heat so the mixture
bubbles gently but steadily.
4. Cover and cook, stirring occasionally and adding more liquid if the
mixture gets too dry, until the beef and vegetables are tender, 25 to 30
minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop them.
5. When the beef and vegetables are tender, stir in 1 cup peas and cook
until they’re warmed through. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Divide
among 4 bowls, garnish with the parsley, and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Beef Carbonnade with Mushrooms
Swap 1 pound chopped cremini or button mushrooms for the carrots and
celery. Omit the flour and substitute 1½ cups dark beer for the stock or
water. If you like, stir in 1 tablespoon Dijon mustard before serving.

Lamb or Pork Stew
Substitute lamb or pork shoulder for the beef.
Beef, Lamb, or Pork Stew with Root Vegetables
Works with any of the cuts from the main recipe or the variations. Use
parsnips instead of carrots and 12 ounces celery root instead of the celery.
Cut everything into ½-inch chunks.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Beef Stock
EVEN FASTER
The smaller the pieces of beef, the faster they will become tender.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Thicker Beef Stew
Brown 2-inch chunks of beef on all sides, then remove from the pot and
brown some large chunks of chopped carrots, celery, and onions. Add the
flour and cook it for 2 minutes before returning the beef to the pot along
with the herbs and stock. Simmer until the meat and vegetables are very
tender, even falling apart if you like, 45 to 90 minutes.
SIDES
Buttered Egg Noodles
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Creamy Polenta
Warm Buttery Bread

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Pork with Edamame and
Scallions
Edamame add vibrant color and a fresh flavor to stir-fries. Add
them right out of the freezer bag toward the end: Their moisture
will loosen up any flavors stuck to the bottom of the pan.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1½ pounds boneless pork loin
Salt and pepper
1 inch fresh ginger
2 garlic cloves
6 scallions
3 cups frozen shelled edamame
1 lemon
1 tablespoon soy sauce

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Slice the pork as thinly as you can.
2. Add the pork to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until lightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 2 garlic cloves; mince them together.
Trim and chop the scallions; separate the white and light green
bottoms from the dark green tops.
3. Add the ginger, garlic, and scallion bottoms to the pork. Cook, stirring
until fragrant, about a minute.
4. Add 3 cups edamame and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring
occasionally until they are heated through, 2 or 3 minutes.
Halve the lemon.
5. Squeeze in the lemon juice and add 1 tablespoon soy sauce; toss to
coat. Stir in the scallion tops, taste and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Stir-Fried Pork with Peas and Shallots
Swap olive oil for vegetable, 3 minced shallots for the garlic and ginger,
peas for the edamame, and Dijon mustard for the soy sauce.
Stir-Fried Pork with Onions and Black Beans
Instead of scallions, chop 1 medium onion and add it in Step 3; use black
beans instead of edamame. Garnish with cilantro.

Stir-Fried Pork with Corn and Scallions
Substitute 1 minced fresh hot green chile for the ginger, corn kernels for the
edamame, lime for the lemon, and 1 tablespoon chopped chipotle chiles in
adobo for the soy sauce.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Soy Slaw
Panfried Rice Noodles
Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Seared Pork Chops with Apples and
Onions
Pork chops, apples, and onions make one of the greatest flavor
combinations. Rarely do so few ingredients taste like so much.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
Four 1-inch-thick pork chops (1½ to 2 pounds)
Salt and pepper
3 medium apples
1 large onion
½ cup chicken stock or water, plus more as needed
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish
1 tablespoon butter

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Pat the pork chops dry with a paper towel and sprinkle with salt and
pepper.
2. When the oil is hot, add the chops and raise the heat to high. Cook
until the chops are nicely browned on the bottom, 3 to 5 minutes.
Core and slice the apples. Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
3. When the chops are nicely browned on the bottom, turn them and
scatter the apples and onion around (and on top if necessary). Sprinkle
with salt and pepper and cook, tossing them occasionally until the
apples and onion soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
4. Add ½ cup stock or water and scrape up any browned bits from the
bottom of the pan. Bring to a boil; then adjust the heat so the mixture
simmers. Cover the skillet and cook until the chops are tender and
cooked through, 5 to 10 minutes.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop them.
5. When the chops are tender and cooked through, transfer them to a
platter. If the skillet is dry, add a splash of stock or water to make it
slightly saucy and scrape up any browned bits from the bottom of the
pan.
6. Stir in 1 tablespoon butter and the parsley. Taste and adjust the
seasoning, pour the apples and onions on top of the pork, and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS

Seared Pork Chops with Fennel
Swap 3 medium fennel bulbs for the apples and onions.
Seared Pork Chops with Brussels Sprouts
Substitute 1 pound halved Brussels sprouts for the apples and onions.
Brown the pork chops well on both sides, then remove them from the
skillet, add the Brussels sprouts, and sauté until lightly browned, about 5
minutes. Add the stock, return the chops to the skillet, and proceed from the
rest of Step 4.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
If you can find smoked pork chops, which taste like ham, all you need to do
is brown them and soften the apples and onions. Simmer for a few minutes
to make the mixture saucy if you like, but they’re already cooked.
BONELESS VS. BONE-IN PORK CHOPS
Chops that still have the bone may take an extra few minutes to cook, but
the bone adds flavor and keeps the meat moister. When given a choice, I
always opt for bone-in chops that are at least an inch thick. Many
supermarket chops are quite skinny, which greatly increases your chances
of overcooking them. Thicker chops with the bone give you a much better
shot at hitting the rosy-pink sweet spot.
SIDES
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Green Salad

Skillet Stuffing
Couscous

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

BBQ Baby Back Ribs
Baby back ribs are the meaty bones from the loin that are attached
to pork chops. They cook much faster than their counterpart
spareribs. A long-distance run in the broiler yields crusty, saucy,
finger-licking barbecue in a hurry.

Ingredients
Salt
1 tablespoon sugar
2 teaspoons cumin
Pepper
1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons chili powder
1 tablespoon paprika
2 or 3 pounds baby back ribs (2 or 3 slabs)
1 garlic clove
1 cup ketchup
¼ cup red wine or water
2 tablespoons wine vinegar
1 teaspoon soy sauce

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
2. Combine 1½ teaspoons salt, 1 tablespoon sugar, 2 teaspoons cumin, 1
teaspoon pepper, 2 teaspoons chili powder, and 1 tablespoon paprika in
a small bowl. Rub the spice mixture all over the ribs and place them on
a broiler pan or baking sheet.
3. Broil the ribs, turning as necessary, until both sides of the slabs are
browned, 8 to 12 minutes.
Mince 1 garlic clove; put it in a small saucepan.
4. Add to the saucepan 1 cup ketchup, ¼ cup red wine or water, 2
tablespoons wine vinegar, 1 teaspoon soy sauce, 1 tablespoon chili
powder, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Bring to a simmer and cook,
stirring occasionally while the ribs broil.
5. When the ribs are browned on both sides, start basting with the
barbecue sauce. Cook, turning as necessary, until the exterior is nicely
caramelized, 7 to 12 minutes.
6. Cut the slabs into individual ribs if you like and serve with the
remaining sauce on the side.
VARIATIONS
BBQ Ginger-Hoisin Baby Back Ribs
Swap five-spice powder for the paprika, ½ cup hoisin sauce for ½ cup of
the ketchup, rice vinegar for the wine vinegar, and 1 tablespoon minced
ginger for the chili powder. Just put the ginger in the sauce; no need to rub
any on the ribs.

BBQ Maple-Dijon Baby Back Ribs
Replace the ketchup with ¼ cup Dijon mustard. Add 2 tablespoons maple
syrup to the sauce.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
EVEN FASTER
Instead of making the barbecue sauce as described in Step 4, use about 1½
cups Barbecue Sauce if you have some in the fridge.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
For fall-off-the-bone tender ribs, bake them in a 275ºF oven until they are
as tender as you like, up to a few hours. Baste them with the sauce, then
broil or roast at 500ºF until the sauce browns.
SIDES
Coleslaw
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
German-Style Potato Salad
Watermelon, Feta, and Mint Salad
French Fries

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pork Souvlaki with Zucchini
An intense Greek-style marinade gives chunks of pork and zucchini
plenty of punch before broiling—no skewers necessary. There’s
minimal checking and turning, so use the downtime to make a side
like rice pilaf or toasted pita.

Ingredients
2 lemons
1 small bunch fresh mint
3 garlic cloves
2 large zucchini
1½ pounds boneless pork shoulder
¼ cup olive oil, plus more for garnish (optional)
¼ cup red wine
½ cup Greek yogurt
1 tablespoon dried oregano
Salt and pepper
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Halve the lemons and squeeze the juice into a large bowl.
Strip ½ cup mint leaves from the stems, chop, and add them to the
bowl.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves; add them to the bowl.
Trim the zucchini, cut it into 1-inch chunks, and add it to the bowl.
Cut the pork shoulder into 1-inch chunks and add it to the bowl.
2. Add to the bowl ¼ cup olive oil, ¼ cup red wine, ½ cup Greek yogurt,
1 tablespoon oregano, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Toss to
combine.
3. Put the zucchini on 1 side of a rimmed baking sheet and broil for 2
minutes.
4. Add the pork to the other side of the baking sheet. Cook, turning
everything once, until the zucchini is tender and browned, 6 to 10
minutes, and the pork is nicely browned on 2 sides and just cooked
through, 5 to 10 minutes (cut into a piece to check for doneness after
about 5 minutes).
5. Remove each ingredient as it is done, leaving the other to finish if need
be. Transfer the food to a platter as it finishes cooking.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop them.
6. Once all the pork and zucchini are on the platter, drizzle with a little
extra oil if you like, garnish with the parsley, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Broiled Jerk Pork with Pineapple
Instead of the yogurt marinade, use the spice paste from Jerk Chicken and
Onions. Substitute 1 small pineapple, cut into 1-inch chunks, for the
zucchini.
Broiled Pork Paprikash with Red Peppers
Use only 1 lemon. Swap parsley for the mint, sour cream for the yogurt, and
paprika for the oregano. Use 3 or 4 large red bell peppers, sliced, instead of
the zucchini.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Marinate the pork for at least a few hours or overnight; it will become more
tender. Add the zucchini to marinate for the last 30 minutes.
SIDES
Rice Pilaf
Crisp Seasoned Pita
White Rice
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Spice-Rubbed Pork with Pineapple
Salsa
Pork tenderloin is a perfect cut for this kind of broiling because the
outside browns in the time it takes to cook through. A spice rub
heightens the smoky char, while a fast pineapple salsa—made in
the same skillet—adds sweetness.

Ingredients
1 teaspoon cumin
½ teaspoon chili powder
½ teaspoon paprika
Salt and pepper
1 pork tenderloin (1½ pounds)
1 small pineapple
1 small red onion
1 small bunch fresh cilantro
2 limes
1 tablespoon vegetable oil

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Combine 1 teaspoon cumin, ½ teaspoon chili powder, ½ teaspoon
paprika, and some salt and pepper in a small bowl.
2. Rub the mixture all over the tenderloin. Put it in a large ovenproof
skillet and broil, turning periodically, until browned all over and
cooked through (a quick-read thermometer inserted into the center
should read 145ºF), 10 to 15 minutes.
Peel, core, and chop the pineapple into ½-inch chunks.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion. Chop ¼ cup cilantro.
Halve the limes.
3. When the pork is done, transfer it to a plate and tent with aluminum
foil.
4. Put 1 tablespoon vegetable oil in the skillet and set it over medium-
high heat. When hot, add the pineapple and onion; sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Cook until they begin to soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
5. Add the cilantro, squeeze in the lime juice, and add any meat juices to
the skillet. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Slice the pork and serve
with the salsa.
VARIATIONS
Curry-Rubbed Pork Tenderloin with Mango Salsa
Substitute 1 teaspoon curry powder for the chili powder and paprika and 2
ripe mangoes for the pineapple.

Paprika-Rubbed Pork Tenderloin with Peach and Tomato Salsa
Swap 2 teaspoons smoked paprika for the cumin, chili powder, and paprika
and 2 peaches and 2 tomatoes for the pineapple.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
EVEN FASTER
Add the pineapple and onion to the pan with the pork right after chopping
them. Stir them occasionally as the pork broils and make a raw salsa with
the same ingredients.
Garnish with the lime juice and cilantro and serve with the salsa.
SIDES
Warm Tortillas
White Rice
Refried Beans
Mexican Street Corn

MASTER RECIPE

Spice Blends
A big reward for 10 minutes of work, especially
when you taste how much these mixtures enhance
your food: The flavors that come from toasting and
grinding your own spices blow store-bought blends
out of the water. These yield about ¼ cup—enough to
store and use for weeks or even months. And once
you commit to buying the first round of whole spices,
you’ll have them on hand to make new batches
whenever you run out.
Chili Powder
1
Toast the Spices
Put the following in a small skillet: 2 tablespoons ground ancho or
other mild dried chile, ½ teaspoon cayenne, ½  teaspoon black
peppercorns, 2 teaspoons cumin seeds, 2 teaspoons coriander seeds,
and 1 tablespoon dried oregano (Mexican if you can find it). Turn the
heat to medium and toast the spices, shaking the pan occasionally until
the mixture is fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes.
2
Grind and Store
Let the spices cool, then transfer them to a spice or coffee grinder and
grind until they become a coarse powder. Store in a tightly covered
opaque container for up to several weeks.

Mild Curry Powder
1
Toast the Spices
Put the following in a medium skillet: ¼ teaspoon nutmeg pieces, 1
teaspoon cardamom seeds, 3 cloves, one 3-inch cinnamon stick, 1
teaspoon black peppercorns, 2 tablespoons cumin seeds, ¼ cup
coriander seeds, and 2 bay leaves. Turn the heat to medium and toast
the spices, shaking the pan occasionally, until the mixture is lightly
browned and fragrant, 2 or 3 minutes. Add 1 teaspoon ground
fenugreek and cook for another minute.
2
Grind and Store
Let the spices cool, then transfer them to a spice or coffee grinder and
grind until they become a coarse powder. Store in a tightly covered
opaque container for up to several months.
Hot Curry Powder
1
Toast the Spices
Put the following in a medium skillet: 2 small dried Thai or other hot
chiles, 1 tablespoon black peppercorns, 1 tablespoon coriander seeds, 1
teaspoon cumin seeds, and 1 teaspoon fennel seeds. Turn the heat to
medium and toast the spices, shaking the pan occasionally until the
mixture is lightly browned and fragrant, 2 or 3 minutes. Add 1
teaspoon ground fenugreek, 1 tablespoon ground turmeric, and 1
tablespoon ground ginger; cook for another minute.
2
Grind and Store
Let the spices cool, then transfer them to a spice or coffee grinder and
grind until they become a coarse powder. At this point if you want a

little extra kick, add a pinch of cayenne. Store in a tightly covered
opaque container for up to several months.
Five-Spice Powder
1
Toast the Spices
Put the following in a medium skillet: 1 tablespoon Sichuan
peppercorns or black peppercorns, 6 star anise, 1½ teaspoons whole
cloves, one 3-inch stick cinnamon, and 2 tablespoons fennel seeds.
Turn the heat to medium and toast the spices, shaking the pan
occasionally until the mixture is lightly browned and fragrant, 2 or 3
minutes.
2
Grind and Store
Let the spices cool, then transfer them to a spice or coffee grinder and
grind until they become a coarse powder. Store in a tightly covered
opaque container for up to several months; use to add an exotic kick to
stir-fries, soups, pilafs, or sauces.
 
Toasting Dried Chiles
The best way to bring out the smoky flavor of dried chiles is to toast them
first. Just a few minutes on each side in a dry skillet over medium heat will
do the trick, and you’ll be able to smell them getting toasty. But unless the
chile is really featured prominently in a dish, I usually don’t bother with
toasting.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Five-Spice Pork Meatballs with Bok
Choy
Grinding your own meat doesn’t seem like a shortcut, but once the
food processor is in use you can use it for everything—no mincing
by hand.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 large head bok choy (1½ pounds)
2 scallions
1 inch fresh ginger
1 bunch fresh cilantro
Salt and pepper
1 pound boneless pork shoulder
1 teaspoon five-spice powder or more pepper
½ cup bread crumbs
1 egg
Soy sauce for serving

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Trim the bok choy; cut the leaves into wide ribbons and thinly slice the
stems.
2. Add the stems to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until they
start to soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
Peel and chop 1 inch ginger.
Pull ¼ cup cilantro sprigs from the bunch.
3. When the bok choy stems start to soften, add the leaves and a sprinkle
of salt and pepper to the skillet. Cook, stirring occasionally until the
leaves wilt and the stems are nearly tender but still have some crunch,
3 or 4 minutes.
Cut the pork shoulder into 1-inch chunks.
4. When the bok choy is done, transfer to a platter and cover to keep
warm.
5. Put the scallions, ginger, and cilantro in a food processor and pulse
until finely chopped. Add the pork, 1 teaspoon five-spice powder, and
½ cup bread crumbs, and crack in the egg. Sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Pulse, scraping down the sides of the bowl as necessary, until
the pork is ground and the mixture combined.
6. Wipe out the skillet, add 2 tablespoons oil, and return the skillet to
medium-high heat.

7. Use 2 spoons to roughly shape meatballs and drop them into the skillet
as you go; cook, turning occasionally until they are browned all over
and cooked through, 8 to 10 minutes. Serve with the bok choy and pass
soy sauce at the table.
VARIATIONS
Mustard-Herb Pork Meatballs with Broccoli Rabe
Swap broccoli rabe for bok choy, ¼ cup chopped onion for the scallions, 1
teaspoon chopped fresh rosemary or thyme for the five-spice powder, 2
teaspoons Dijon mustard for the ginger, and parsley for the cilantro.
Chorizo Meatballs with Chard
Use fresh Mexican chorizo instead of pork. Substitute chard for bok choy,
¼ cup chopped onions for the scallions, 1 teaspoon smoked paprika for the
five-spice powder, 3 garlic cloves for the ginger, and parsley for the
cilantro.
Lamb and Feta Meatballs with Kale
Use lamb shoulder instead of pork. Swap kale for the bok choy, ¼ cup
chopped onion for the scallions, 1 teaspoon chopped rosemary or thyme for
the five-spice powder, ¼ cup crumbled feta for the ginger, and mint leaves
for the cilantro.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Bread Crumbs
EVEN FASTER
Use preground pork instead of grinding your own. Finely chop the
scallions, ginger, and cilantro before mixing them into the pork by hand.

IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you prefer rounder meatballs, roll them by hand.
SIDES
White Rice
Sesame Noodles
Scallion Pancakes
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Homemade Chorizo with Pinto Beans
Unlike Spanish chorizo, which is cured until dried, Mexican-style
chorizo is a fresh sausage: essentially spiced pork you cook in a
skillet. That means you can whip up a batch from scratch in no
time, cooking it loose for tacos or shaping patties for chorizo
burgers.

Ingredients
2 garlic cloves
1½ pounds boneless pork shoulder
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon chili powder
¼ teaspoon cayenne
Pinch of cinnamon
Pinch of cloves
1 teaspoon cider vinegar
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 large onion
2 cups cooked or canned pinto beans (one 15-ounce can)
1 lime
1 small bunch fresh cilantro

Prep | Cook
Peel 2 garlic cloves. Pulse in the food processor until minced.
Cut the pork into 2-inch chunks.
1. Add the pork to the food processor along with 1 teaspoon cumin, 1
teaspoon chili powder, ¼ teaspoon cayenne, a pinch each of cinnamon
and cloves, 1 teaspoon cider vinegar, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Pulse the mixture until the pork is coarsely ground but not puréed.
2. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
3. When the oil is hot, add the chorizo mixture and the onion. Cook,
stirring occasionally until the chorizo is cooked through and crisp, 5 to
10 minutes.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
Cut the lime into wedges; chop ¼ cup cilantro.
4. When the chorizo is crisp, stir in the beans and cook, stirring
occasionally until they heat through. Taste and adjust the seasoning,
garnish with the cilantro, and serve with the lime wedges.
VARIATIONS
Homemade Spanish-Style Chorizo with Chickpeas
The flavor of cured Spanish chorizo, made fresh: Swap 1 tablespoon
smoked paprika for the chili powder, cayenne, cinnamon, and cloves and
sherry vinegar for the cider vinegar. Use olive oil instead of vegetable oil.

Swap chickpeas for the pinto beans, lemon for the lime, and parsley for the
cilantro.
Homemade Italian Sausage with White Beans
Omit the cumin, chili powder, cayenne, cinnamon, and cloves; instead use 1
tablespoon fennel seeds and ¼ teaspoon red chile flakes. Substitute red
wine vinegar for the cider vinegar. Use olive oil instead of vegetable oil.
Replace the pinto beans with white beans, lime with lemon, and cilantro
with basil.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder
Cooked Beans
EVEN FASTER
Use preground pork rather than grinding your own.
SIDES
Warm Tortillas
White Rice
Jícama and Radish Salad
Avocado with Hot Sauce and Cilantro
Ripe Plantains

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Maple-Glazed Ham Steaks with
Collards
Smoked ham steaks are a great addition to your fast-cooking
pantry; they’re flavorful and, because they’re precooked, they can
be turned into a meal without much effort. Here a tangle of sliced
collards soaks up caramelized bits of maple-mustard glaze as the
collards wilt.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
¼ cup maple syrup
1 tablespoon cider vinegar
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
1½ pounds smoked ham steaks
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds collard greens
½ cup beer or chicken stock

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
2. Combine ¼ cup maple syrup, 1 tablespoon cider vinegar, and 1
teaspoon Dijon in a small bowl. Brush the glaze on 1 side of the ham
steaks and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3. Add the ham to the skillet glaze side down, brush the tops with glaze,
and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook, turning and brushing with
glaze periodically until the ham is nicely caramelized on both sides, 4
to 6 minutes.
Trim the collards and slice them into thin ribbons.
4. When the ham is caramelized, transfer it to a cutting board and lightly
tent with foil to keep warm. Add ½ cup beer or chicken stock to the
skillet, stirring to scrape up any browned bits from the bottom.
5. Add the collards and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cover and cook,
stirring occasionally until they just wilt, 4 or 5 minutes.
Cut the ham into thick slices.
6. When the collards are wilted, taste and adjust the seasoning and divide
them among 4 plates. Lay the ham slices over the top or on the side
and serve.
VARIATIONS
BBQ-Glazed Ham Steaks with Collards
Swap ¼ cup barbecue sauce for the maple syrup, vinegar, and mustard.
Honey-Mustard-Glazed Ham Steaks with Kale

Swap 3 tablespoons honey for the maple syrup and kale for the collards.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
If you have room in your skillet, add the beer and collards to the ham steaks
after you flip them the first time. Cover and simmer until the collards wilt.
SMOKED PORK STEAKS
If you can’t find smoked ham steaks or smoked pork chops, just have the
deli counter slice some extra-thick pieces of smoked sandwich ham.
SIDES
White Rice
Creamy Polenta
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Coleslaw

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Braised Pork with Cabbage and Beer
It’s hard to go wrong with pork, cabbage, and beer. Here the pork is
thinly sliced and the cabbage shredded to get them as tender as
possible during their quick simmer.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1½ pounds boneless pork shoulder
Salt and pepper
1 onion
1 Savoy or green cabbage (about 1½ pounds)
1 teaspoon caraway seeds
1 teaspoon mustard seeds
1 cup beer
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar or cider vinegar

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet or large pot over
medium-high heat.
Thinly slice the pork.
2. Add the pork to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until it is lightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
3. Add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally until it softens, 3 to 5
minutes.
Trim, core, and shred the cabbage.
4. Add the cabbage along with 1 teaspoon caraway seeds, 1 teaspoon
mustard seeds, 1 cup beer, 2 tablespoons vinegar, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper. Bring the mixture to a boil, then adjust the heat so that it
bubbles steadily.
5. Cook, stirring occasionally and adding more liquid if the mixture gets
too dry, until the cabbage is tender and the liquid has reduced into a
sauce, 8 to 12 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Braised Pork with Red Cabbage and Red Wine
Substitute red onion for yellow, red cabbage for Savoy, 2 sprigs fresh
rosemary for the caraway and mustard seeds, and red wine for the beer. Use
red wine vinegar.
Braised Pork with Celery and White Wine

Choose a sweetish white (like Riesling) for a surprisingly amazing sauce.
Use 1 bunch celery instead of the cabbage; reserve the leaves to chop for
garnish. (And fennel is always a good substitute for celery.)
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Use larger chunks of pork shoulder and simmer until they begin to fall
apart, up to a couple of hours. By that point the cabbage will be meltingly
tender: quite nice.
SIDES
German-Style Potato Salad
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Warm Buttery Bread
Skillet Stuffing
Quinoa

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Browned and Braised Sausage and
Endive
The near-perfect combination of fatty sausage and bitter endive
needs very little embellishment; as the endive cooks and mingles
with the sausage, it turns sweet and rich but holds just enough of its
edge to balance the flavor of the pork.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds hot or sweet Italian sausage links
4 heads endive (1 to 1½ pounds)
1 lemon
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)
Salt and pepper
½ cup chicken stock, white wine, or water

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. When
it’s hot, add the sausages and cook, turning occasionally until nicely
browned all over, 10 to 12 minutes.
Trim and chop the endive.
Grate the lemon zest and ½ cup Parmesan (refrigerate the fruit for
another use).
2. When the sausage is browned, remove it from the skillet; add the
endive and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally
until the endive is lightly browned, 6 to 8 minutes.
3. Return the sausages to the pan along with ½ cup stock, wine, or water.
Adjust the heat so the mixtures bubbles steadily but not vigorously;
partially cover the pan and cook 3 to 5 minutes.
4. Add the lemon zest and Parmesan to the skillet and stir. Taste and
adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
10 Other Vegetables to Use
1. Radicchio
2. Escarole
3. Kale
4. Brussels sprouts
5. Bell peppers
6. Onions

7. Mushrooms
8. Broccoli
9. Broccoli rabe
10. Leeks
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
Slice the sausages or crumble them into the pan before cooking. When
they’re lightly browned, add the endive and proceed as directed.
SIDES
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Garlic Bread
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Refried White Beans with Rosemary

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Bangers and Mash
This British meat and potatoes staple often uses the rendered
sausage fat as the base of a gravy. You can mash the potatoes right
in the skillet that you used to cook the sausage.

Ingredients
Salt
4 to 6 medium russet or Yukon Gold potatoes (2 pounds)
2 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds whole sausage links (preferably flavored with sage)
½ cup milk, plus more as needed
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 teaspoon cider vinegar
1 teaspoon dry mustard
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Fill a large pot with about an inch of water; add a pinch of salt and turn
the heat to high.
Halve the potatoes lengthwise and cut them into thin slices, dropping
them into the pot as you go.
2. Cover and boil until the potatoes are tender and just breaking apart, 15
to 20 minutes.
3. While the potatoes cook, put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet
over medium heat. When it’s hot, add the sausages and cook, turning
occasionally until nicely browned all over and cooked through, 10 to
15 minutes. Remove them from the skillet and cover with foil to keep
warm.
4. When the potatoes are tender, drain them well and transfer them to the
skillet. Add ½ cup milk, 4 tablespoons butter, 1 teaspoon vinegar, 1
teaspoon dry mustard, and a sprinkle of pepper.
5. Mash with a potato masher or fork, adding more milk if needed. Taste
and adjust the seasoning and serve alongside the sausages.
VARIATIONS
8 Other Vegetables to Mash
Peel before boiling:
1. Turnips
2. Rutabagas
3. Parsnips
4. Celery root

5. Sweet potatoes
6. Beets
7. Winter squash
8. Kohlrabi
NOTES
SAUSAGE DONENESS
Most sausages will cook through in 10 to 15 minutes over medium heat, but
since thickness can vary, instead of relying on time the best way to know is
to slice into one. It should be firm to the touch, and the juices that spill out
should be clear, not pink.
SIDES
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Green Salad
Creamed Spinach
Tomatoes with Fried Bread Crumbs
Smashed Peas

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pork Tenderloin with Butternut Purée
Lean pork tenderloins can always benefit from a little extra
seasoning, which is why I often stuff them with slivers of garlic;
here a creamy squash purée adds an automatic side dish.

Ingredients
1 medium butternut squash (1½ pounds)
2 garlic cloves
Salt
1 pork tenderloin (1½ pounds)
2 tablespoons olive oil
Pepper
½ cup sour cream

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 400ºF.
Cut the squash in half crosswise, peel and trim it, and scoop out and
discard the seeds. Chop it into roughly ¾-inch cubes.
Peel 2 garlic cloves.
2. Transfer the squash and 1 of the garlic cloves to a medium pot with
water to cover and a pinch of salt; bring to a boil and cook until the
squash is soft enough to purée, 12 to 15 minutes.
Thinly slice the remaining garlic clove.
Cut slits all over the pork with the tip of a paring knife; stuff each slit
with a garlic sliver.
3. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in large ovenproof skillet over medium-
high heat. When it’s hot, add the pork and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Cook until nicely browned on the bottom, about 5 minutes,
then turn the tenderloin and transfer the skillet to the oven. Roast until
the pork is cooked through with a hint of pink in the middle (145ºF),
about 15 minutes.
4. When the squash is tender, drain it well, reserving some cooking water.
Transfer the squash to a food processor, along with ½ cup sour cream
and a sprinkle of salt and pepper, and purée until smooth, adding a
splash of cooking water if needed to make a smooth purée. Taste and
adjust the seasoning.
5. When the pork is done, transfer it to a plate, cover with aluminum foil,
and let it rest for 5 minutes. Slice and serve with the squash and any
accumulated meat juices.

VARIATIONS
Pork Tenderloin with Sweet Potato Purée
Swap sweet potatoes for squash and stuff the pork with ½ inch fresh ginger,
thinly sliced, instead of the garlic. Use 2 tablespoons molasses instead of
the sour cream.
Pork Tenderloin with Parmesan Mashed Potatoes
Use russet or Yukon Gold potatoes instead of squash and add ¼ cup grated
Parmesan along with the sour cream. Instead of puréeing the potatoes in the
food processor, mash them in the pot with a potato masher.
NOTES
A FAST ROAST
Pork tenderloin is one of the fastest-roasting cuts of meat (it also broils
quickly; see Broiled Pork Tenderloin). It has almost no fat, so for the meat
to stay tender and juicy you want to leave it slightly pink in the center:
145ºF internal temperature is the highest I’d let it get before taking it out of
the oven, but you can even remove it close to 140ºF, as the temperature will
rise a bit as it rests.
SIDES
Green Salad
Quinoa
Rice Pilaf
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Warm Buttery Bread

MASTER RECIPE

Homemade Cold Cuts
Needless to say, having cooked meats on hand makes
whipping up a meal fast and easy. Most deli meats
are fine for sandwiches but not much else. Cooked
beef, pork, and turkey breast or tenderloins (a part of
the breast), however, are a fantastic alternative (as is
a roast chicken). You can slice them thinly for
sandwiches, cut them into thick slices or chunks, or
leave them whole for use in any number of recipes.
All of these take little time to cook and are seasoned
minimally so the meat can be used in dishes of any
flavor. Stored in an airtight container or wrapped
tightly with plastic wrap, these meats will keep in the
fridge for several days.
Roast Turkey Tenderloin
1
Season and Cook
Heat the oven to 400ºF. Rub 2 or 3 turkey tenderloins (about 2 pounds)
with olive oil and sprinkle them all over with salt and pepper. Roast
until a quick-read thermometer in the center reads 155º to 160ºF on a
quick-read thermometer, 30 to 40 minutes.
2
Rest

No matter what you’re doing with it, let the meat rest for about 5
minutes. If you’re eating it right away, slice and serve. If you’re storing
it in the fridge to use throughout the week, let it cool completely, then
wrap and refrigerate whole, cutting off pieces as you need them.
Broiled Chicken Breast
1
Heat the Broiler
Turn the broiler to high and put the rack 3 or 4 inches from the heat.
2
Season and Cook
Figure 1½ pounds of boneless, skinless chicken breasts will get you 4
to 6 servings. Rub the pieces with olive oil and sprinkle all over with
salt and pepper. Broil, turning as necessary to brown all sides.
3
Rest
Remove the breasts as they are done: The center should no longer be
pink but still be juicy. Let them cool a bit before slicing. Or let them
come to room temperature then wrap and refrigerate them for later.
Roasted Beef Tenderloin
1
Trim and Season
Heat the oven to 450ºF. Choose a piece of beef tenderloin that’s at least
2 pounds, pat the meat dry, rub it with olive oil, and sprinkle it all over
with salt and pepper. Put on a rack set in a roasting pan or on a rimmed
baking sheet.
2
Roast

Roast, undisturbed, for 20 minutes, then check the temperature with a
quick-read thermometer. When the meat measures 125ºF on a quick-
read thermometer in a few places, it will be medium-rare; if you prefer
it rare, or know you plan to cook the meat further as you use it
throughout the week, remove it at 120ºF. Transfer the meat to a cutting
board.
3
Rest
No matter what you’re doing with it, let the meat rest for about 5
minutes. If you’re eating it right away, slice and serve. If you’re storing
it in the fridge to use throughout the week, let it cool completely, then
wrap and refrigerate it whole, cutting off pieces as you need them.
Broiled Pork Tenderloin
1
Heat the Broiler
Turn the broiler to high and put the rack 3 or 4 inches from the heat.
2
Season and Cook
Rub the tenderloins (you should roast at least 2 pounds in a batch to
make it worth your while) with olive oil and sprinkle all over with salt
and pepper. Broil, turning the meat and rotating the pan as necessary to
brown all sides, 3 to 8 minutes total, depending on the thickness of the
pieces. If the meat starts to scorch, move the rack farther from the heat.
Cook until the pork is almost cooked through but still slightly pink in
the very center, 10 to 15 minutes (a quick-read thermometer in the
center should read no more than 145ºF).
3
Rest
No matter what you’re doing with it, let the meat rest for about 10
minutes. If you’re eating it right away, slice and serve. If you’re storing

it in the fridge to use throughout the week, let it cool completely, then
wrap and refrigerate whole, cutting off pieces as you need them.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Porchetta-Style Pork Loin with
Parsnips
Porchetta is a traditional Italian roast of pork wrapped in fat and
flavored with garlic and fennel seed. Here a quicker-cooking piece
of butterflied loin gets the same flavor treatment, turning crusty and
dark in a hot oven. I’ve listed ingredients rather than specific
quantities, and assume you’ll similarly season to your own taste
with salt and pepper.

Ingredients
1 boneless pork loin (2 pounds)
2 garlic cloves
1 lemon
4 tablespoons olive oil
1 tablespoon fennel seeds
½ teaspoon red chile flakes
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds parsnips
½ cup white wine

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF.
To butterfly the pork loin, use a long, sharp knife to cut the meat
lengthwise almost in half. Open it up like a book and flatten it out
with your hands. Put the pork in a large roasting pan.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Grate the lemon zest, refrigerating the fruit for another use.
2. Rub the pork all over with 2 tablespoons olive oil, the garlic, the lemon
zest, 1 tablespoon fennel seeds, ½ teaspoon red chile flakes, and some
salt and pepper.
Trim and peel the parsnips; cut them into 1½- to 2-inch chunks and
scatter them around the pork.
3. Drizzle the parsnips with 2 tablespoons oil and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Pour ½ cup white wine in the bottom of the pan and put it in
the oven.
4. Cook, turning the pork and parsnips once or twice and stirring the
parsnips 3 or 4 times until both are browned and tender and the pork
has just a hint of pink in the middle, 30 to 35 minutes. (A quick-read
thermometer inserted into the pork should read 145ºF.)
5. When the pork and parsnips are done, transfer the pork to a cutting
board and let it rest for 5 minutes. Cut it into slices and serve with the
parsnips.
VARIATIONS
Pernil-Style Pork Loin with Plantains

Substitute an orange for the lemon, dried oregano for the fennel seeds, and
cumin for the red chile flakes. Use ripe plantains, peeled and cut into
chunks, instead of the parsnips and beer or stock instead of wine.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
After rubbing the pork, let it sit in the refrigerator for an hour or 2 (or
overnight) before roasting. Bring it back to room temperature before you
put it in the oven.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Warm Buttery Bread
Pasta, Plain and Simple

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pork Stew and Dumplings
This chile-tinged pork stew turns into a hearty meal with the
addition of masa—tamale-like—dumplings that simmer right in the
broth.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds boneless pork shoulder
Salt and pepper
1 large onion
2 poblano peppers
3 garlic cloves
1 cup masa harina
½ teaspoon baking powder
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
4 cups chicken or beef stock or water
1 lime
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot over medium-high heat.
Thinly slice the pork shoulder.
2. Add the pork shoulder to the pot, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
cook, stirring occasionally until it is lightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion. Trim, core, and chop the poblanos.
Peel and mince 3 garlic cloves.
3. When the pork is lightly browned, add the onion, poblanos, and garlic,
sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until they
soften, 6 or 7 minutes.
4. Meanwhile, combine 1 cup masa harina, ½ teaspoon baking powder, ½
teaspoon salt and a sprinkle of pepper, and 1 tablespoon vegetable oil
in a medium bowl. Stir to combine into a coarse meal, then slowly add
1 cup warm water, incorporating it as you go, until the mixture forms a
thick dough.
5. When the vegetables are soft, add 4 cups stock or water to the pot.
Bring the mixture to a boil, then adjust the heat so that it simmers
gently but steadily. Cover and cook until the pork and vegetables are
tender and cooked through, 10 to 15 minutes.
6. When the pork and vegetables are tender, uncover the pot and drop
small dollops of dough into the bubbling liquid. Cover and cook until
the dumplings puff up a bit and are tender, 3 to 5 minutes.
Cut the lime into wedges. Chop several sprigs cilantro.
7. When the dumplings are tender, divide the stew among 4 bowls.
Garnish with the cilantro and serve with the lime wedges.

VARIATIONS
Chicken Stew and Dumplings
Swap boneless, skinless chicken thighs for the pork shoulder.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Beef Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Cut the pork into 1½-inch chunks and simmer them until they shred apart,
up to 2 hours. Pull the meat apart slightly before adding the dumplings to
the pot.
SIDES
Warm Tortillas
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Chipotle and Lime
Jícama and Radish Salad
Chile-Cumin Black Beans

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pork and Onion Carnitas
This version preserves the spirit of slow-cooked carnitas but cuts
way down on the time. Instead of braising large chunks of pork,
you chop the meat into small pieces that become crisp without
needing to braise long enough to fall apart. Warm tortillas are a
must.

Ingredients
1½ pounds boneless pork shoulder
2 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more as needed
1½ cups beer (one 12-ounce bottle or can)
2 onions
2 garlic cloves
1 teaspoon cumin
¼ teaspoon cayenne
Salt and pepper
4 radishes
1 lime
Several sprigs fresh cilantro for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Chop the pork into ½-inch pieces. Put them in a large skillet or pot
with 2 tablespoons vegetable oil and 1½ cups beer. Turn the heat to
high.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onions; add them to the pan.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; add them to the pan.
2. Add 1 teaspoon cumin, ¼ tablespoon cayenne, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper. When the mixture boils, adjust the heat so it bubbles
steadily but not vigorously.
3. Cover and cook, adding a splash of liquid if the pan gets dry, until the
pork is tender and the onions are very soft, about 20 minutes.
Trim and chop the radishes. Cut the lime into wedges.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
4. When the pork and onions are tender, uncover the pan and turn the
heat to high. Cook, stirring occasionally until the liquid evaporates and
the pork and onions brown and crisp in the rendered fat, 8 to 12
minutes (add a little more oil if the pan looks dry).
5. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve garnished with the radishes,
lime wedges, and cilantro.
VARIATIONS
Pork and Corn Carnitas
Omit the onions. Once you uncover the pot to start evaporating the liquid in
Step 4, stir in 3 cups corn kernels. Let them brown in the rendered fat along
with the pork.

Moroccan-Style Pork and Onion Carnitas
Substitute ½ teaspoon cinnamon for the cayenne and add ½ cup chopped
dried apricots to the braising mixture. Omit the radishes; swap lemon for
the lime and mint for the cilantro.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Chop the pork in the food processor.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Cut the pork into 2-inch chunks and simmer slowly until it shreds apart, for
up to a few hours. Pull the pork apart with a fork, then proceed with the
crisping in Step 4.
SIDES
Warm Tortillas
White Rice
Jícama and Radish Salad
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt
Ripe Plantains

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pork, White Bean, and Kale Stew
Stewing already cooked beans coaxes them into falling apart and
becoming wonderfully creamy. Paired with browned, fatty pork
and earthy wilted kale, this is perfect for a cold day.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for garnish
1½ pounds boneless pork shoulder
Salt and pepper
3 garlic cloves
1 small bunch kale
3 cups cooked or canned white beans (one and a half 15-ounce cans)
2 sprigs fresh rosemary
¼ teaspoon red chile flakes
1½ cups chicken stock or water
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated; optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large pot or Dutch oven over medium-
high heat.
Cut the pork into ½-inch pieces.
2. Add the pork to the pot, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until nicely browned, 8 to 10 minutes.
Peel and thinly slice 3 garlic cloves. Trim and chop the kale.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
3. When the pork is nicely browned, add the garlic, kale, beans, 2
rosemary sprigs, ¼ teaspoon red chile flakes, 1½ cups stock or water,
and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Stir to combine.
4. Bring the mixture to a boil, then adjust the heat so it simmers gently
but steadily. Cover and cook, stirring occasionally and adding more
liquid if the mixture gets too dry, until the beans have broken down a
bit, the kale is wilted, and the pork is tender, 25 to 30 minutes. Fish out
the rosemary sprigs.
5. Taste and adjust the seasoning, adding a splash of liquid if you want to
make it soupier. Divide among 4 bowls, grate ½ cup Parmesan and
sprinkle over the top if you like, drizzle with a little extra oil, and
serve.
VARIATIONS
Pork, Black Bean, and Collard Stew
For the last few minutes of browning, sprinkle the pork with 1 teaspoon
cumin and 1 teaspoon chili powder. Substitute collards for the kale, black

beans for white, oregano for the rosemary, and queso fresco for the
Parmesan.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
White Bean Chili
Use ground pork instead of cubes of shoulder. As soon as the beans break
down a bit and thicken the stew, 10 to 15 minutes, it’s done. Alternatively,
use chunks or slices of Italian sausage.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
The longer you simmer the stew (up to 3 hours), the more tender the pork
will become and the more the beans will break down. If you prefer that
some of them hold their shape, add half of the beans closer to the end of
cooking.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Garlic Bread
Tomato Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Pasta, Plain and Simple

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Provençal Braised Pork and Fennel
A rustic dish with the big flavors of southern France.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds boneless pork shoulder
Salt and pepper
2 large fennel bulbs
3 garlic cloves
¼ cup Niçoise or kalamata olives
3 sprigs fresh thyme
2 or 3 anchovy fillets
1 tablespoon capers
1 cup white wine
One 15-ounce can diced tomatoes or 2 large tomatoes
Several sprigs fresh basil for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Thinly slice the pork.
2. Add the pork to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook,
stirring occasionally until it is lightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim and thinly slice the fennel.
3. When the pork is lightly browned, add the fennel, sprinkle with salt
and pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until it softens, 3 to 5
minutes.
Peel 3 garlic cloves. Pit ¼ cup olives if necessary. Strip the thyme
leaves from 3 sprigs.
Chop the garlic, olives, and thyme, along with 2 or 3 anchovies and 1
tablespoon capers.
4. Add the garlic mixture; cook and stir until fragrant, a minute or 2. Add
1 cup white wine and let it bubble for a minute.
Core and chop the tomatoes if you’re using fresh ones.
5. Add the canned or fresh tomatoes to the pan. Bring the mixture to a
boil, adjust the heat so that it simmers gently but steadily, and cook,
stirring occasionally until the tomatoes break down and begin to
thicken the sauce, 10 to 15 minutes. Add more liquid if the pan gets
too dry.
Strip the basil leaves from several sprigs and chop them.
6. When the tomatoes break down, taste and adjust the seasoning, garnish
with the basil, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Provençal Chicken and Fennel
Replace the pork with boneless, skinless chicken thighs, cut into large
chunks.
Moroccan Lamb and Fennel
Substitute 1 teaspoon cumin and ½ teaspoon cinnamon for the capers. Add
them along with the garlic mixture in Step 4.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Cut the pork into 1½-inch chunks. After adding the tomatoes, cover the pot
and simmer until the pork falls apart easily, up to 3 hours. Add more liquid
if the mixture gets too dry.
SIDES
Garlic Bread
Warm Buttery Bread
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
White Rice
Couscous

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Moroccan-Style Braised Pork with
Couscous and Grapes
With warm spice, sweet grapes and onions, and tangy vinegar, this
Moroccan-scented pork stew hits every part of your taste buds.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds boneless pork shoulder
Salt and pepper
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon coriander
½ teaspoon cinnamon
1 large red onion
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 tablespoon harissa (optional)
1 cup white wine
1½ cups red grapes
1 cup chicken or vegetable stock or water
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
1 cup couscous
1 bunch fresh parsley

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
Cut the pork into ½-inch pieces.
2. Add the pork to the pot along with a sprinkle of salt and pepper, 1
teaspoon cumin, 1 teaspoon coriander, and ½ teaspoon cinnamon.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the spices are nicely browned but not
burned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onion.
3. When the pork is browned, add 1 tablespoon tomato paste and 1
tablespoon harissa if you’re using it and cook, stirring occasionally
until they darken slightly, a minute or 2.
4. Add 1 cup white wine, scraping any browned bits from the bottom of
the pot. Add the onion, 1½ cups grapes, 1 cup stock or water, and 2
tablespoons red wine vinegar.
5. Bring the mixture to a boil, then adjust the heat so it simmers gently
but steadily. Cover and cook, stirring occasionally and adding more
liquid if the mixture gets too dry, until the pork is nearly tender, 20 to
25 minutes.
6. Stir in 1 cup couscous, turn off the heat, and cover the pot. Let it steep
until tender, 5 to 10 minutes.
Chop ¼ cup parsley.
7. When the couscous is tender, fluff it a bit with a fork and taste and
adjust the seasoning. Stir in the parsley and serve.

VARIATIONS
Curried Pork with Couscous and Spinach
Swap 1 tablespoon curry powder or garam masala for the cumin, coriander,
and cinnamon. Omit the harissa. Use coconut milk instead of the wine, 3
cups chopped spinach instead of the grapes, and lime juice instead of the
vinegar. Garnish with cilantro.
Moroccan Braised Lamb with Couscous and Olives
Replace the pork shoulder with lamb shoulder and the grapes with 1 cup
pitted black or green olives.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
The longer you simmer the pork (up to 2 hours), the more tender it will
become.
SIDES
Carrot Salad with Raisins
Tomato Salad with Olive Oil and Yogurt
Tahini Slaw

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Lamb Chops with Balsamic
Couscous
A double-thick lamb rib chop takes longer to cook than a single,
but since you can fit all four chops in the skillet at once, you end up
saving time. Plus, those meaty chops are easier to keep rare or
medium-rare, so they burst with juice.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
2 tablespoons olive oil
4 double-thick lamb rib chops (about 1½ pounds)
Salt and pepper
1½ cups chicken stock or water
1 cup couscous
2 medium ripe tomatoes
1 bunch fresh mint

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium-high heat. Combine 2 tablespoons
balsamic vinegar and 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large bowl. Add the
lamb chops and toss to coat.
2. When the skillet is hot, sprinkle the bottom with salt and pepper and
add the lamb chops. (Reserve the marinade.) Sprinkle the tops with salt
and pepper and cook, turning a couple of times, until they are nicely
browned on both sides and medium-rare in the middle, 4 or 5 minutes
per side.
3. When the lamb is done, transfer the chops to a plate and cover with
aluminum foil to keep them warm. Add 1½ cups chicken stock or
water to the skillet, along with the reserved marinade and a sprinkle of
salt. Boil for about 1 minute.
4. Stir in 1 cup couscous, then turn off the heat. Cover the skillet and let
the couscous steep for about 5 minutes.
Core and chop the tomatoes. Strip ¼ cup mint leaves from the stems
and chop them.
5. When the couscous is tender, add the tomatoes and mint and fluff it
with a fork. Taste and adjust the seasoning and drizzle with any
accumulated meat juice. Serve the couscous alongside or underneath
the lamb.
VARIATIONS
Lamb Chops with Soy-Ginger Couscous
Swap soy sauce for the balsamic and cilantro for the mint. Add 1
tablespoon minced ginger to the skillet along with the couscous in Step 4.

Lamb Chops with Pomegranate Couscous
Omit the balsamic. Substitute ½ cup unsweetened pomegranate juice for ½
cup of the stock.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
While the lamb cooks, put the couscous in a medium pot with 1½ cups
water or stock, the remaining balsamic and oil mixture, and a pinch of salt.
Bring to a boil, then turn off the heat, cover, and steep for 5 minutes.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Lamb Chops with Balsamic Bulgur
Use bulgur instead of couscous and increase the amount of stock or water to
2½ cups.
LAMB CHOPS
Lamb rib chops (which are what I call for in this chapter) are the most
tender and fastest to cook. Loin chops (tender but bonier) and shoulder
chops (a bit tougher) are more flavorful and cheaper as well. Loin and
shoulder chops take slightly longer to cook than a single rib chop (and a
few minutes less than a double), but the cooking times are close enough that
you can substitute them as you like.
SIDES
Green Salad
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Carrot Salad with Olives and Rosemary

Cucumber Salad
Tomato Salad with Olive Oil and Yogurt

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Lamb and Green Peppers
with Cumin
Stir-fried lamb with cumin is a traditional dish from Mongolia; the
flavor is eye-opening. Red chile flakes provide the heat, while
green peppers cool the smoke and spice.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons vegetable oil
1½ pounds boneless lamb shoulder
2 teaspoons cumin
1 teaspoon red chile flakes, or to taste
Salt and pepper
1 inch fresh ginger
2 garlic cloves
3 green bell peppers
3 scallions
1 teaspoon soy sauce

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high
heat.
Slice the lamb as thinly as you can.
2. Add the lamb to the skillet, sprinkle with 2 teaspoons cumin, 1
teaspoon red chile flakes or to taste, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the spices and lamb are nicely
browned but not burned, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel 1 inch ginger and 2 garlic cloves; mince them together.
Core, seed, and thinly slice the peppers.
3. When the lamb is browned, add the ginger and garlic. Cook, stirring
until fragrant, about a minute. Transfer the lamb mixture to a bowl.
4. Add 2 tablespoons oil to the skillet. Add the peppers and cook, stirring
occasionally until they are lightly browned and just tender but still
have a little crunch, 3 to 5 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. When the peppers are done, return the lamb to the skillet and add 1
teaspoon soy sauce and the scallions. Toss everything to combine, taste
and adjust the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Stir-Fried Lamb and Leeks with Cumin
Swap 3 medium leeks, sliced, for the peppers.
Stir-Fried Lamb and Green Peppers with Curry

Use curry powder instead of the cumin.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Before beginning, heat 2 teaspoons cumin seeds and 2 or 3 small dried red
chiles in a dry skillet until lightly toasted, 3 or 4 minutes; grind them in a
spice grinder. Use these spices to sprinkle on the lamb in Step 2.
SIDES
White Rice
Fire and Ice Noodles
Sesame Noodles
Panfried Rice Noodles
Scallion Pancakes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Seared Miso Lamb Chops with
Carrots
The sweet-saltiness of lamb, carrots, and miso is both unfamiliar
and wonderful.

Ingredients
4 double-thick lamb rib chops (about ½ pound)
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
Salt and pepper
1 pound carrots
3 scallions
¼ cup chicken stock, white wine, or water
2 tablespoons any miso
1 teaspoon soy sauce

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium-high heat. Rub the lamb chops with 1
tablespoon vegetable oil and sprinkle all over with salt and pepper.
2. When the skillet is hot, add the chops. Cook, turning once, until they
are nicely browned on both sides and medium-rare in the middle, 4 or
5 minutes per side.
Trim, peel, and thinly slice the carrots.
3. When the chops are done, transfer them to a platter and cover with
aluminum foil to keep them warm. Add 1 tablespoon oil to the skillet.
4. When the oil is hot, add the carrots and cook, stirring occasionally
until they are lightly browned and just tender, 5 to 10 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. Add ¼ cup stock, wine, or water, 2 tablespoons miso, and 1 teaspoon
soy sauce. Stir, scraping up any browned bits from the bottom of the
skillet and coating the carrots with the sauce.
6. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve the carrots over the lamb
chops, garnished with the scallions.
VARIATIONS
Pan-Seared Miso Lamb Chops with Sweet Potatoes
Substitute grated sweet potatoes for the carrots.
Pan-Seared Dijon Lamb Chops with Parsnips
Swap parsnips for the carrots, 2 tablespoons chopped fresh tarragon for the
scallions, Dijon mustard for the miso, and cider or red wine vinegar for the
soy sauce.

NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
EVEN FASTER
Cook the carrots in a separate skillet while you sear the lamb chops.
SIDES
White Rice
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Sesame Noodles
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Lamb and Rice with Dried Fruit
Pilaf perfection. Between chunks of tender, browned lamb, sweet
dried fruit, and an earthy Moroccan spice mix, rice never had it so
good.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds boneless lamb shoulder
Salt and pepper
1 onion
2 garlic cloves
1 cup dried apricots or dates or a combination
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon coriander
¼ teaspoon cinnamon
¼ teaspoon cayenne
1½ cups long-grain rice
3 cups chicken stock or water
1 bunch fresh parsley

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet or large pot over medium-
high heat.
Cut the lamb into 1-inch chunks.
2. Add the lamb to the pan, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook
undisturbed until it’s nicely browned on the bottom, about 5 minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Chop 1 cup apricots or dates or a combination.
3. Add the onion, garlic, and dried fruit to the pan, along with 1 teaspoon
cumin, 1 teaspoon coriander, ¼ teaspoon cinnamon, and ¼ teaspoon
cayenne. Cook, stirring occasionally until the onion begins to soften
and the spices are fragrant, 2 or 3 minutes.
4. Add 1½ cups rice and cook, stirring occasionally, until glossy and
coated with the spices, 2 or 3 minutes. Add 3 cups chicken stock or
water and bring to a boil.
5. When the mixture boils, adjust the heat so it bubbles steadily but not
vigorously. Cover and cook until the rice is tender and the liquid is
absorbed, 10 to 20 minutes.
Strip ¼ cup parsley leaves from the stems and chop them.
6. When the rice done, stir in the parsley. Taste and adjust the seasoning
and serve.
VARIATIONS

Lamb and Rice with Green Olives
Replace the dried fruit with pitted green olives.
Pork and Rice with Pinto Beans
Swap pork shoulder, thinly sliced, for the lamb and 1 cup cooked or canned
pinto beans for the dried fruit. Swap 1 teaspoon chili powder for the
coriander and cilantro for the parsley.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Brown the lamb all over instead of on just one side.
SIDES
Green Salad
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Tomato Salad with Olive Oil and Yogurt
Carrot Salad with Raisins

TECHNIQUE

Flavor Before Cooking
These are my go-to seasoning combinations that you
can use not only on meat but chicken, fish, tofu, and
vegetables as well. The first chart is for typical wet
marinades, whereas the second lists what I’ve come
to call “rub-in-ades,” which flavor the ingredients
faster than wetter marinades and can help develop a
lovely crust. The charts offer two different options
for every base ingredient; I’ve listed combinations of
ingredients rather than specific quantities, and also
assume you’ll similarly season to your own tastes as
you do with salt and pepper.
Marinades
Toss or submerge the meat in these mixtures before cooking or use them to
drizzle over the finished dish like a sauce (or do both, but boil the marinade
briefly before drizzling if it’s come into contact with raw meat). These
should be thin and liquid. You can marinate for a long time or just a little.
Even a 10-minute bath will give your ingredients more flavor.
Base Ingredient
Seasonings Option 1
Seasonings
Option 2

SOY SAUCE
Minced garlic, minced ginger,
sesame oil
Lime juice,
minced
fresh hot
chile
OLIVE OIL
Lemon juice, minced garlic
White
wine,
minced
anchovies,
red chile
flakes
COCONUT MILK
Fish sauce, lime juice, basil, mint
Curry
powder,
minced
ginger
RED WINE
Orange zest, cinnamon stick,
whole cloves
Rosemary,
minced
garlic
ORANGE JUICE
Tarragon, dill, minced shallot
Chopped
chipotle
chiles in
adobo,
lime juice

Rub-in-ades
Rub all over the meat or other ingredient before cooking; if you’re using a
high-heat cooking method like pan-searing or grilling, steer clear of minced
garlic (it will burn and turn bitter). These should be the consistency of a
thick paste.
Base Ingredient
Seasonings Option 1
Seasonings
Option 2
SMOKED PAPRIKA
Olive oil, lemon zest
Sherry
vinegar,
tomato
paste
GROUND CUMIN
AND CORIANDER
Cinnamon, allspice, olive oil
Chili
powder,
cayenne,
vegetable
oil
DIJON MUSTARD
Minced garlic, rosemary, olive oil
Soy sauce,
honey
YOGURT
Tahini, lemon juice, cumin
Chopped
chipotle
chiles in
adobo,
lime juice

CHOPPED FRESH
PARSLEY
Olive oil, grated Parmesan, lemon
zest
Minced
olives,
minced
capers,
olive oil
TOMATO PASTE
Soy sauce, brown sugar, minced
scallion
Olive oil,
oregano,
grated
Parmesan
CURRY POWDER
Coconut milk, minced garlic,
minced ginger
Lime juice,
minced
chiles
PEANUT BUTTER
Soy sauce, minced ginger, sesame
oil
Chopped
chipotle
chiles in
adobo,
lime juice,
cumin
MINCED OLIVES
Minced anchovies, chopped
capers, olive oil
Tomato
paste,
lemon
juice, olive
oil
MISO (ANY KIND)
Honey, minced ginger
Orange
juice,
rosemary

SPEED  
  SERVES 6 TO 8

Herb-Rubbed Leg of Lamb with
Chopped Greek Salad
Butterflied leg of lamb is affordable, widely available, tender, and
easy to cook. Even its uneven thickness is a bonus, yielding meat
from rare to medium-well, so there’s something for everyone. The
best part: It cooks this way in about 30 minutes.

Ingredients
1 garlic clove
3 sprigs fresh rosemary or 2 teaspoons dried
3 sprigs fresh oregano or 2 teaspoons dried
1 lemon
One 3- to 4-pound butterflied leg of lamb
6 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
4 medium cucumbers
4 large ripe tomatoes
1 red onion
1 cup kalamata olives
4 ounces feta cheese (1 cup crumbled)
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Peel 1 garlic clove; strip the leaves from 3 sprigs each of rosemary and
oregano if you are using fresh herbs. Mince everything together
(crumble in the dried herbs if you’re using them) and put in a small
bowl.
Halve the lemon and squeeze the juice into the bowl.
If the lamb is tied, remove the string and unroll it.
2. Add 3 tablespoons olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the
bowl. Put the lamb in a roasting pan or on a rimmed baking sheet and
rub the garlic and herb mixture all over it.
3. Broil, turning as necessary until it is nicely browned (even a little
charred) on both sides, 20 to 30 minutes; the internal temperature at
the thickest part will be about 125ºF; this will give you some lamb that
is quite rare and some that is nearly well-done.
Trim the cucumbers and peel them if you like; cut them in half
lengthwise and scoop out the seeds with a spoon. Chop them and put
them in a large bowl.
Core and chop the tomatoes; trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the
onion. Add them to the bowl.
Pit 1 cup olives if necessary; add them to the bowl.
Crumble 1 cup feta and add to the bowl.
4. When the lamb is done, transfer it to a cutting board to rest for 5
minutes. Drizzle the salad with 2 tablespoons red wine vinegar, 3
tablespoons oil, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Toss.

5. Thinly slice the lamb and serve it with the salad.
VARIATIONS
Moroccan Spice-Rubbed Leg of Lamb with Shredded Carrot Salad
For the lamb rub, combine ¼ cup yogurt, 2 tablespoons olive oil, 1 teaspoon
cumin, 1 teaspoon coriander, ½ teaspoon cinnamon, ½ teaspoon paprika, a
sprinkle of salt and pepper, 1 minced garlic clove, and the juice of a lemon.
For the salad, combine 1½ pounds grated carrots, 1 sliced red onion, ½ cup
chopped pitted olives, ½ cup raisins, 2 tablespoons red wine vinegar, 3
tablespoons olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
After rubbing the lamb, let it marinate in the refrigerator for at least an hour
or up to overnight. Return the meat to room temperature before broiling.
SIDES
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Rice Pilaf
White Rice
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Couscous

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Lamb and Bulgur Meatballs in
Tomato Sauce
The Middle Eastern and North African tradition of making
meatballs with lamb and grains is a fantastic way to stretch a small
amount of meat while keeping it moist.

Ingredients
½ cup bulgur
Salt
4 tablespoons olive oil
1 red onion
1 teaspoon cumin
¼ cup raisins
¼ cup pine nuts
One 28-ounce can diced tomatoes
Pepper
1 pound ground lamb
1 egg
1 bunch fresh mint

Prep | Cook
1. Bring 1¼ cups water to a boil. Put ½ cup bulgur in a large bowl with a
large pinch of salt. Pour the boiling water over all and cover with a
plate.
2. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
3. Add the onion to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until
softened, 3 to 5 minutes. Add 1 teaspoon cumin, ¼ cup raisins, and ¼
cup pine nuts. Cook, stirring until the cumin is fragrant and the pine
nuts are lightly toasted, 2 or 3 minutes.
4. Add the tomatoes and their juice and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Adjust the heat so the mixture simmers and cook, stirring occasionally
until the tomatoes break down and thicken the sauce, 10 to 15 minutes.
5. Strain the bulgur, pressing out any excess water with a spoon (it’s okay
if it’s not fully tender), and return it to the bowl. Add the lamb, crack
the egg into the bowl, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Put 2
tablespoons oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
6. Gently combine the meatball mixture and use 2 spoons to start
dropping rounds of the mixture into the skillet. Cook in batches,
turning occasionally until the meatballs are browned all over, 8 to 10
minutes. Transfer them to a plate as they finish cooking and repeat
with the next batch.
Strip ¼ cup mint leaves from the stems and chop them.
7. When all the meatballs are browned, drop them into the tomato sauce
and toss gently to coat. Simmer gently until the meatballs are cooked

through, about 5 minutes. Garnish with the mint and serve hot or
warm.
VARIATIONS
Chicken and Bulgur Meatballs with Provençal Tomato Sauce
Substitute 1 yellow onion for the red, 3 minced garlic cloves for the cumin,
¼ cup chopped olives for the pine nuts, and 1 tablespoon each chopped
anchovies and capers for the raisins. Swap ground chicken for the lamb and
basil for the mint.
Beef and Bulgur Meatballs in Chipotle Tomato Sauce
Use 2 tablespoons chopped chipotle chiles in adobo instead of the pine nuts,
ground beef instead of the lamb, and cilantro in place of the mint. If you
have some queso fresco, crumble some over the top as well.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Form the lamb and bulgur mixture into patties instead of balls. Once they’re
browned and cooked through, spoon the tomato sauce over the top and
serve.
SIDES
Smashed Peas
Stuffed Portobellos
Avocado with Lemon and Salt
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower

Breakfast
FRUIT, GRAINS, TOAST, AND CEREAL
Loaded Muesli
Fruit, Yogurt, and Graham Cracker Parfait
Piña Colada Smoothie
Broiled Grapefruit with Almond–Brown Sugar Crunch
Toast with Toasted Almond Butter and Strawberries
Breakfast Bruschetta
Sautéed Apples and Bananas with Honey-Yogurt Sauce
Apricot-Cinnamon Couscous
No-Bake Fruit and Cereal Bars
Maple-Orange Oatmeal with Caramelized Pecans
Honey-Cheddar Grits with Sage

EGGS
Roasting-Pan French Toast
Tortilla French Toast
Omelet for Two
Fried Eggs with Chimichurri
Scrambled Eggs with Smoked Salmon and Dill
Goat Cheese and Spinach Scrambled Eggs
Tortilla Scramble
Chipotle Black Beans with Fried Eggs
Broiled Eggs
Fast Florentine
Fried Eggs with Mushrooms and Leeks
Eggs and Steak with Peppers and Onions
Classic Breakfast Burritos

MEATS, PANCAKES, AND WAFFLES
Pork ’n’ Greens Breakfast Patties
Smoky Two-Potato and Ham Hash
Prosciutto and Drop Biscuits
Jalapeño-Scallion Johnnycakes
Banana-Coconut Pancakes
Orange-Ricotta Pancakes
Cheddar Waffles with Bacon Maple Syrup

Breakfast
Most days, breakfast is the fastest meal that we cook
and eat. While it might be lovely to hang around the
stove every morning flipping pancakes or tending to
eggs, I like the hectic pace of a typical weekday
morning—it’s a welcome test of our fast cooking
reflexes, because it usually must be prepared while
juggling getting out of the house.
This time crunch can lead to the kind of morning
meltdown that ends in eating junk food on the run,
but it can just as easily produce tasty, easy, and
incredibly fast breakfasts from the pantry, things
you’ll want to make and eat every day. This chapter
includes plenty of recipes that are quick enough for a
weekday, as well as many others that you’ll want to
save for the weekend. And if you’ve never tried
eating breakfast for dinner, there are a lot of dishes
here that will make you a convert.

As tempting as it often is to grab breakfast at
work or on the road, or skip it altogether, making
breakfast at home—even if it’s as simple as oatmeal
—is a satisfying and healthy way to start the day.

Chapter Highlights
Homemade Cereal, Muesli, or Granola  Each takes just minutes, and you
know exactly what’s in them. Loaded Muesli.
Yogurt  Here’s what you need to know about buying the perfect
accompaniment to your homemade cereal. Yogurt.
New Takes on Toast  Recipes that take advantage of one of the fastest and
easiest breakfast foods on earth. Toast with Toasted Almond Butter and
Strawberries, Breakfast Bruschetta.
Raising the Bar  You’ll never need to buy breakfast bars in the
supermarket again. No-Bake Fruit and Cereal Bars.
Grains for Breakfast  We eat oats for breakfast all the time, so why not
spice things up with some different grains? Start with Apricot-Cinnamon
Couscous.
Eggs in a Nutshell  A quick rundown of what you need to know about
eggs, including how to decipher confusing labels. Eggs in a Nutshell.
Broiling Breakfast  Two of my favorite breakfasts can be cooked hassle-
free in the broiler. Broiled Grapefruit with Almond–Brown Sugar Crunch,
Broiled Eggs.
Poached Eggs, No Water  A skillet filled with vegetables, greens, or thick
sauce is a wonderfully forgiving place to poach eggs. Fast Florentine.

Try Grits  A staple in the South, but we’d all be wise to keep some in our
kitchens at all times. Honey-Cheddar Grits with Sage.
Breakfast for a Crowd  The easiest breakfast dishes to cook for a lot of
people. Loaded Muesli, No-Bake Fruit and Cereal Bars, Roasting-Pan
French Toast, Broiled Eggs, Scrambled Eggs with Smoked Salmon and
Dill, Goat Cheese and Spinach Scrambled Eggs.
Breakfast Burger  Making your own breakfast sausage is no harder than
making a hamburger. Pork ’n’ Greens Breakfast Patties.
Pancake Pointers  A few simple suggestions will get you flipping with
ease. See the Note A Few Tips for Cooking Pancakes.

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Loaded Muesli
Muesli purists insist on an overnight soaking in milk or yogurt for
maximal nutritional benefit and a pleasant creaminess. Try it that
way, but if you’re like me, you’ll probably just mix it together at
the last minute. Soaked or not, the muesli itself is fast to make and
leagues better than boxed cereal. You can even make larger
batches; see the Notes.

Ingredients
½ cup raisins or chopped dried fruit
3 cups rolled oats
1 cup any nuts and seeds
½ cup shredded unsweetened coconut
½ teaspoon cinnamon
Salt
Yogurt or milk for serving

Prep | Cook
Measure ½ cup raisins or other dried fruit, chopping up any larger items.
1. Combine the fruit, 3 cups rolled oats, 1 cup nuts and seeds, ½ cup
coconut, ½ teaspoon cinnamon, and a sprinkle of salt.
Taste and adjust the seasoning. Serve with yogurt or milk or store in
sealed containers (it will last pretty much indefinitely).
VARIATIONS
Ginger-Clove Muesli
Substitute ¼ cup chopped crystallized ginger for the raisins and cloves for
the cinnamon.
Apricot-Cardamom Muesli
Use chopped dried apricots for the fruit; use cardamom instead of
cinnamon.
12 Different Dried Fruits and Seeds to Use
1. Cranberries
2. Cherries
3. Currants
4. Golden raisins
5. Apricots
6. Mangoes
7. Apples or pears
8. Pineapple

9. Sunflower seeds
10. Pumpkin seeds
11. Sesame seeds
12. Flaxseeds
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Granola
Combine the muesli ingredients, minus the dried fruit, and ¼ to ½ cup
honey or maple syrup. Spread on a rimmed baking sheet and bake at 350ºF,
stirring occasionally until browned, about 30 minutes. Stir in the fruit and
cool completely before storing.
Big Batch Muesli or Granola
This is a perfect recipe to make a big batch of on the weekend. Just multiply
the quantities as many times as you like, adjusting here and there to suit
your tastes. It takes a bit more time to pull together a large batch, but once
it’s done you have breakfast ready for the entire week, or more. Both muesli
and granola keep for weeks in the fridge.
SIDES
Pick-a-Fruit Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Fruit, Yogurt, and Graham Cracker
Parfait
Sometimes just putting a few ingredients together is all you need or
want; this is “assembling,” rather than “cooking,” but don’t let that
bother you. In this case something creamy, something crunchy, and
something juicy combine to produce something delicious and kind
of pretty.

Ingredients
4 large graham crackers
2 cups berries or any other fruit
2 cups yogurt

Prep | Cook
Crumble 4 graham crackers with your fingers or chop them with a chef’s
knife.
Hull strawberries or peel and chop any other fruit as needed to get 2
cups.
1. Divide the fruit, 2 cups yogurt, and the graham crackers between 2
squat glasses, layering them in that order until you use everything up.
Serve.
VARIATIONS
12 Ways to Flavor Parfaits
Mix any of the following into the graham crackers:
1. Chopped nuts or whole seeds
2. Chopped dried fruit
3. Dried spices like cardamom, cinnamon, or ginger
Toss any of the following with the fruit:
4. Citrus juice
5. Chopped fresh basil or mint
6. Lemon or orange liqueur
7. Balsamic vinegar
Stir any of the following into the yogurt:
8. Honey or maple syrup
9. Cocoa powder

10. Small splash of coffee
11. Vanilla extract
12. Jam or jelly
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
In a hurry? Forget layering the ingredients. Just stir everything together.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Warm Fruit, Graham Cracker, and Yogurt Parfait
Cook the fruit with a tablespoon or so of brown sugar in a small skillet over
medium heat until it’s soft and juicy. Layer as directed.
YOGURT
There are probably a hundred different varieties of yogurt in most
supermarkets. Look for labels that say “live, active cultures” (or something
similar) and try to avoid anything with gelatin, gums, or stabilizers. You can
get pretty much any flavor imaginable, but I much prefer to buy plain
yogurt and make any flavor imaginable by stirring in various ingredients.
For any recipe in this book that calls for yogurt you can use either full-fat,
low-fat, or nonfat, but as always, the full-fat version will give you the
richest flavor. Greek-style yogurt is thicker than regular yogurt, and I use it
often.

SPEED  
  SERVES 2 TO 4

Piña Colada Smoothie
Smoothies make for endlessly variable breakfasts, and not much is
faster than throwing a bunch of stuff into the blender.

Ingredients
1 medium pineapple
2 bananas
One 14-ounce can coconut milk
Ice cubes
Water or orange juice, if needed

Prep | Cook
Cut the top and bottom off the pineapple; stand it upright and slice
around the outside to remove the skin. Still cutting from top to
bottom, slice around the core; you’ll have at least 4 pieces. Discard
the core and chop the flesh. Refrigerate half for another use.
Peel and chop the bananas.
1. Put the pineapple, bananas, coconut milk, and a few ice cubes in a
blender.
2. Blend until completely smooth, adding some water or orange juice to
thin it out if necessary, and serve. Leftovers will keep for a day or 2 in
the fridge.
VARIATIONS
Red Smoothie
Replace the coconut milk with 1½ cups yogurt and the pineapple and
banana with 4 cups combined strawberries and watermelon.
Orange Smoothie
Substitute 1 cup yogurt and ½ cup orange juice for the coconut milk and 4
cups combined chopped cantaloupe and mango for the pineapple and
banana.
Green Smoothie
Substitute 1½ cups soy milk for the coconut milk and 4 cups combined
chopped avocado and green grapes for the pineapple and banana.
Blueberry and Tofu Smoothie

Swap 1 cup silken tofu and ½ cup soy milk for the coconut milk and 4 cups
blueberries for the pineapple and banana.
Strawberry and Almond Milk Smoothie
Use 1½ cups almond milk in place of coconut milk and 4 cups strawberries
instead of pineapple and banana.
Peach-Raspberry Smoothie
Replace the coconut milk with 1½ cups yogurt and the pineapple and
banana with 4 cups combined chopped peaches and raspberries.
Apple-Ginger Smoothie
Substitute 4 cups chopped apples and 2 teaspoons minced fresh ginger for
the pineapple and banana.
Cantaloupe and Basil Smoothie
Substitute 1½ cups yogurt for the coconut milk and 4 cups chopped
cantaloupe and ¼ cup chopped fresh basil for the pineapple and banana.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Broiled Grapefruit with Almond–
Brown Sugar Crunch
A halved grapefruit is a classic breakfast and—obviously—pretty
fast. (Nor do you need a recipe for it.) Here’s an even better version
where you make an almond crumble with butter and brown sugar
and caramelize it under the broiler. The sweet, crunchy topping is a
wonderful match for the sour grapefruit.

Ingredients
2 grapefruits
¼ cup almonds
1 tablespoon packed brown sugar
1 tablespoon cold butter

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Halve the grapefruits. Put them on a baking sheet.
Chop ¼ cup almonds.
2. Combine the almonds with 1 tablespoon packed brown sugar and 1
tablespoon cold butter. Roughly mash everything together with your
fingers or a fork to make a crumbly mixture.
3. Sprinkle the almond mixture over the grapefruit halves and broil until
the tops are bubbly and browned, 2 to 5 minutes. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Broiled Grapefruit with Pecan-Honey Crunch
Use pecans instead of almonds and honey instead of brown sugar.
Broiled Grapefruit with Soy–Brown Sugar Glaze
Omit the almonds and butter. Mix the brown sugar with 2 teaspoons soy
sauce and brush the mixture on top of the grapefruits.
Broiled Pineapple with Coconut Crunch
Substitute 4 thick pineapple rounds for the grapefruit and shredded
unsweetened coconut for the almonds.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Grapefruit Brûlée
If you happen to have a kitchen torch lying around, these are excellent
candidates for browning. Instead of broiling, apply the torch flame to the

almond mixture until it starts to bubble a bit and turn brown.
Broiled Grapefruit
Skip the butter and almonds. Just sprinkle the grapefruits with the brown
sugar and broil until the sugar bubbles and browns.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
To coat even more of the fruit with topping, butter a piece of foil and put it
on a rimmed baking sheet. Peel and segment the grapefruit, spread the
pieces on the foil-lined baking sheet, sprinkle with the almond mixture, and
broil.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Toast with Toasted Almond Butter
and Strawberries
It’s amazing how simple it is to make nut butter at home. All you
do is give some nuts a whirl in the food processor with a little
water. It may take a minute or two for the mixture to get creamy,
but the food processor does the work while you do something else.

Ingredients
1 cup almonds
2 cups strawberries
4 thick slices rustic whole wheat bread
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. If you don’t have a toaster, heat the oven to 400ºF.
2. Put 1 cup almonds in a large dry skillet over medium heat. Cook,
shaking the skillet occasionally, until lightly browned and fragrant, 3
to 5 minutes.
Hull and slice 2 cups strawberries.
3. Toast 4 thick slices of bread in the toaster (or on a baking sheet in the
oven, turning once) until it’s as dark as you like.
4. Transfer the toasted almonds to a food processor; add a sprinkle of
salt. Grind to the consistency of coarse meal.
5. Add 2 tablespoons water. Process until creamy, 1 or 2 minutes. Add
more water, 1 tablespoon at a time, and process until smooth and
spreadable. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
6. Spread the toast generously with almond butter. Top with sliced
strawberries and serve. Refrigerate leftover almond butter in a sealed
container for up to a month.
VARIATIONS
Toast with Rich Toasted Almond Butter and Strawberries
Use softened butter instead of water (in the main recipe or any of the
following variations).
Toast with Toasted Pecan Butter and Peaches
Replace the almonds with pecans and the strawberries with 2 large or 3
medium peaches, pitted and sliced.
Toast with Toasted Walnut Butter and Apples

Substitute walnuts for the almonds and 1 large or 2 medium apples, cored
and sliced, for the strawberries.
Toast with Toasted Cashew Butter and Blueberries
Substitute cashews for the almonds, blueberries for the strawberries, and
lemon juice for the water.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Breakfast Bruschetta
Bruschetta is most often toasted bread rubbed with garlic and
drizzled with olive oil, but why not give it a sweet twist? In this
version, suitable for breakfast—or even dessert—you rub the
toasted bread with butter instead of garlic, drizzle it with diluted
honey instead of olive oil, and top it with chopped strawberries and
peaches. An instant fruit crisp.

Ingredients
8 thick slices any rustic bread (a little stale is fine)
1 cup strawberries
2 medium peaches
Several sprigs fresh mint
3 tablespoons honey
2 tablespoons butter

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
2. Put 8 thick slices of bread on a baking sheet and broil, turning once,
until browned on both sides, 2 to 5 minutes.
Hull and chop 1 cup strawberries.
Pit and chop the peaches.
Strip the mint leaves from several sprigs and chop.
3. Combine the strawberries, peaches, and mint in a small bowl.
4. Put 3 tablespoons honey in a liquid measuring cup and add enough
warm water to thin it a bit, 2 or 3 tablespoons.
5. When the bread is browned, spread each slice with a bit of butter, then
drizzle with the thinned honey. Top each slice with the fruit and serve.
VARIATIONS
Maple-Banana Breakfast Bruschetta
Use 2 cups chopped bananas instead of strawberries and peaches and maple
syrup in place of honey.
Mango-Lime Breakfast Bruschetta
Use 2 cups chopped mango instead of the strawberries and peaches and the
juice of 1 lime instead of the warm water.
Ricotta-Honey Breakfast Bruschetta
Substitute ½ cup ricotta for the butter.
Middle Eastern Breakfast Bruschetta

Omit the honey. Swap 1 cup chopped tomato and 1 cup chopped cucumber
for the strawberries and peaches and toss with the juice of ½ lemon and
some chopped fresh mint. Swap ½ cup hummus for the butter.
Maple-Bacon Breakfast Bruschetta
Substitute 1 cup crumbled cooked bacon (about 6 slices) for the
strawberries and peaches and maple syrup for the honey.
Egg and Chive Breakfast Bruschetta
Omit the fruit and honey. Scramble 4 eggs until they are just set (they
should still be a bit runny). Stir in ¼ cup chopped chives and top the
buttered toast with the egg mixture. See Scrambled Eggs with Smoked
Salmon and Dill for instructions on scrambling eggs.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Toast and Fruit Salad
Think of this as fruity panzanella: Increase the fruit to 4 cups and reduce the
bread to 4 slices. Spread the butter on both sides of the bread before
broiling. When the bread is toasted, chop it up into cubes and put it in a
large bowl. Thin the honey with lemon, lime, or orange juice and mix it
with the fruit. Add the fruit and honey mixture to the bread and toss.
Sprinkle with a little salt if you like and garnish with chopped fresh mint.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sautéed Apples and Bananas with
Honey-Yogurt Sauce
Warm caramelized apples are a classic topping for pancakes and
arguably way more delicious than the pancakes themselves. Why,
then, not eat them without the pancakes? It’s much faster and easier
and, with sliced bananas and a cool yogurt sauce, feels like a
proper breakfast.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 pound apples (about 3 medium)
1 tablespoon packed brown sugar
½ teaspoon cinnamon
3 bananas
1 cup Greek yogurt
2 tablespoons honey

Prep | Cook
1. Put 4 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over low heat.
Peel, core, and thinly slice 1 pound apples.
2. Add the apples, 1 tablespoon packed brown sugar, and ½ teaspoon
cinnamon to the pan and turn the heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring
occasionally until the apples are tender and nicely browned, 5 to 10
minutes.
Peel and slice the bananas.
Stir together 1 cup Greek yogurt and 2 tablespoons honey.
3. Add the bananas to the cooked apples and toss. Divide the fruit
mixture among 4 bowls, top each with a dollop of the yogurt sauce,
and serve.
VARIATIONS
7 Ways to Flavor Yogurt
Stir any of the following (alone or in combination) into the yogurt instead
of the honey:
1. 2 tablespoons maple syrup
2. 2 teaspoons grated citrus zest
3. 1 teaspoon vanilla extract
4. 1 tablespoon bourbon or rum
5. 1 tablespoon chopped fresh mint or basil
6. 1 teaspoon cardamom, allspice, or nutmeg
7. ¼ cup chopped nuts

NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Use 2 tablespoons of the butter to cook the apples. When they are done,
transfer them to a bowl, add the remaining 2 tablespoons butter to the
skillet, and cook the bananas, stirring occasionally until they are golden all
over. Add them to the apples and toss.

SPEED  
  SERVES 2 TO 4

Apricot-Cinnamon Couscous
Steeping couscous in cider—or other flavorful liquids—is a
fantastic and unexpected way to infuse it with a lot of flavor in the
short time that it cooks.

Ingredients
1 cup couscous
1 tablespoon packed brown sugar
1 cinnamon stick or ¼ teaspoon ground
Salt
1½ cups apple cider
½ cup dried apricots

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 cup couscous, 1 tablespoon packed brown sugar, 1 cinnamon
stick (or ¼ teaspoon ground), a sprinkle of salt, and 1½ cups apple
cider in a medium pot over high heat.
Chop ½ cup dried apricots.
2. Add the apricots to the pot. When the cider comes to a boil, cover the
pot and turn off the heat.
3. Let the couscous steep for about 5 minutes. Fish out the cinnamon
stick if you’re using it, fluff the couscous with a fork, taste and adjust
the seasoning, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Cranberry-Ginger Couscous
Use honey in place of brown sugar, 1 teaspoon minced fresh ginger (or ¼
teaspoon dried) instead of cinnamon, cranberry juice instead of apple cider,
and dried cranberries instead of apricots.
Orange-Clove Couscous
Substitute honey for the brown sugar, ¼ teaspoon cloves for the cinnamon,
orange juice for the apple cider, and chopped walnuts (stirred in right before
serving) for the apricots.
Tomato-Garlic Couscous
Swap 1 tablespoon olive oil for brown sugar, 1 garlic clove, minced, for
cinnamon, tomato juice for apple cider, and ¼ cup chopped fresh basil
(stirred in right before serving) for apricots.
Pineapple-Cardamom Couscous

Skip the sugar. Substitute ground cardamom for the cinnamon, pineapple
juice for the apple cider, and dried pineapple for the dried apricots.
SIDES
Pick-a-Fruit Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 8

No-Bake Fruit and Cereal Bars
These fruit and cereal bars come together so quickly that you can
make and set them in less than 30 minutes, with a little help from
the freezer. They’re also better and better for you than any granola
or energy bar you can buy.

Ingredients
4 cups muesli, granola, small puffed rice, crumbled shredded wheat, or
any other ready-to-eat breakfast cereal
3 cups dried fruit
¼ cup vegetable oil
Fruit juice or water

Prep | Cook
Put ½ cup of the cereal in a food processor and pulse until finely
chopped. Transfer to a bowl.
1. Add 3 cups dried fruit and ¼ cup vegetable oil to the food processor.
Purée until the fruit is smooth and sticky, adding just enough juice or
water to keep the machine running and scraping down the sides of the
bowl as necessary.
2. Transfer the fruit mixture to a large bowl and stir the remaining 3½
cups cereal into it by hand until it’s well incorporated and broken up a
bit.
3. Line an 8- or 9-inch square baking pan with plastic wrap. Spread the
fruit mixture evenly into the pan and press it down. Sprinkle with the
chopped cereal and lightly press it down; shake off any excess cereal
that doesn’t stick to the top.
4. Put the pan in the freezer until the bars are set, 15 to 20 minutes. Turn
them out of the pan, remove the plastic wrap, and cut them into
squares. Serve or store in the refrigerator for several days.
VARIATIONS
6 Ways to Flavor No-Bake Fruit and Cereal Bars
Add any of the following to the food processor along with the dried fruit:
1. ½ cup nuts or shredded unsweetened coconut (if it’s not already in the
cereal)
2. 1 teaspoon cinnamon, allspice, nutmeg, or cloves
3. 2 tablespoons honey, maple syrup, or peanut butter

4. 1 teaspoon vanilla extract
5. 1 tablespoon cocoa powder
6. 2 teaspoons grated citrus zest
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Loaded Muesli
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Put the bars in the refrigerator to firm up instead of the freezer. It will
probably take an hour or so.
DRIED FRUIT IN THE FOOD PROCESSOR
If you think that putting dried fruit in the food processor will result in a
sticky glob you’re exactly right. But sometimes that’s just what you want.
In the case of these breakfast bars, the sticky insides of the dried fruit are
what binds everything together. You can apply this technique to other dishes
as well: If you pulse dried fruit and nuts in the food processor, roll them
into balls, and dust them in cocoa powder, you’ve got bonbons. On the
savory end of things you can mix some of that sticky dried fruit with
ground meat to make meatballs or burgers; the fruit not only helps bind
them but also supplies flavor and moisture.

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Maple-Orange Oatmeal with
Caramelized Pecans
You’ve got to do something while oatmeal cooks and, even though
that time is minimal, you might as well take full advantage of it.
Here I make a sweet, rich maple-pecan topping.

Ingredients
1 cup rolled oats
1 cup milk
Salt
1 orange
2 tablespoons butter
¾ cup pecans
2 tablespoons maple syrup, plus more for drizzling

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 cup rolled oats, 1 cup milk, 1¼ cups water, and a sprinkle of salt
in a medium saucepan over high heat.
Grate the zest from the orange and add it to the pot; refrigerate the
remaining fruit for another use.
2. When the liquid comes to a boil, turn the heat to low and cook, stirring
occasionally until the liquid is just absorbed, 8 to 12 minutes.
3. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a medium skillet over medium heat.
4. When the butter starts to sizzle, add ¾ cup pecans and 2 tablespoons
maple syrup. Cook, stirring frequently and adjusting the heat so the
syrup doesn’t burn, until the pecans are coated and caramelized, 3 or 4
minutes. Turn off the heat.
5. When the oatmeal is done, divide it between 2 bowls. Top with the
pecan mixture, drizzle with a little more maple syrup if you like, and
serve.
VARIATIONS
Maple-Ginger Oatmeal with Caramelized Walnuts
Use walnuts instead of pecans and ½ inch minced fresh ginger instead of
orange zest.
Honey-Lemon Oatmeal with Caramelized Pine Nuts
Substitute pine nuts for the pecans, honey for the maple syrup, and lemon
for the orange.
Peanut and Jelly Oatmeal

Omit the orange. Substitute peanuts for the pecans and jelly (any kind you
like, plus a splash of water) for the maple syrup.
Oatmeal with Soy Sauce and Scallions
One of my favorite savory breakfasts. Skip the nuts and go straight to the
oatmeal. Cook the oatmeal in 2¼ cups water or a combination of water and
stock; divide it between the bowls and garnish with soy sauce and chopped
fresh scallions. A little Sriracha and/or sesame oil is great too.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Don’t caramelize the pecans, but chop them up. Stir the butter and maple
syrup into the oatmeal when it’s done and top with chopped nuts.

SPEED  
  SERVES 2 TO 4

Honey-Cheddar Grits with Sage
Grits are the oatmeal of the South. Most of the rest of the country
overlooks them, which is too bad, because they are fast, tasty, and
versatile. Make basic grits with a pat of butter and a pinch of salt
and you’ll understand all the fuss. Or if you have time, try this
gussied-up version, which is infused with sage and finished with
cheese and a swirl of honey.

Ingredients
1¼ cups milk
1 cup grits, preferably stone-ground
1 sprig fresh sage
2 ounces cheddar cheese (½ cup grated)
1 tablespoon honey, or to taste
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1¼ cups milk and 1¼ cups water in a small saucepan over
medium-high heat.
2. When the liquid comes to a boil, turn the heat to low and slowly whisk
in 1 cup grits, trying to eliminate any lumps.
3. Add 1 sprig fresh sage, cover, and cook, stirring occasionally and
adding more liquid if the grits become too thick, until all the liquid is
absorbed and the grits are creamy, 10 to 15 minutes.
Grate ½ cup cheddar cheese.
4. When the grits are done, remove and discard the sage and stir in the
cheddar until it melts. Stir in 1 tablespoon honey and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Maple-Almond Grits
Omit the sage. Replace the cheddar with ¼ cup chopped almonds and the
honey with maple syrup.
Parmesan Grits with Rosemary
Swap rosemary for the sage, Parmesan for the cheddar, and olive oil for the
honey.
Soy-Orange Grits with Ginger
Substitute 1 inch fresh ginger, sliced into coins, for the sage, 1 tablespoon
grated orange zest for the cheddar, and soy sauce for the honey.
Classic Buttery Grits
Omit the sage and cheddar. Swap 2 tablespoons butter for the honey.

NOTES
TOPPING GRITS
Anything you can stir into polenta will go equally well with grits. Try any
of these.
1. Sautéed Greens with Garlic
2. Garlicky Mushrooms
3. Crunchy Okra
4. Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
5. Fajita Peppers and Onions
6. Arugula with Fried Eggs and Shaved Parmesan
7. Charred Brussels Sprout Salad with Walnuts and Gorgonzola
8. Shrimp Gumbo
9. Beef and Butter Bean Chili
10. Collard Greens Stewed with Smoked Pork
11. Fast Feijoada
12. Provençal Chicken
13. Sloppy Joes
14. Homemade Chorizo with Pinto Beans
SIDES
Green Salad
Warm Tortillas
Pick-a-Fruit Salad

INGREDIENT

Eggs in a Nutshell
Eggs are among our most versatile and popular
ingredients, beloved not only at the breakfast table
but also for lunch and snacks. They’re essential to
many of our favorite desserts, and quite often the
perfect thing to cook when you’re not sure what to
make. And the best thing? They’re the most
satisfying food that you can cook in less than 3
minutes. Simply having them in your fridge is a
major step toward fast cooking.
Buying Eggs
The slowest thing about eggs is buying them. Eggs come not only in
multiple sizes and colors but with all kinds of labels and grades as well,
some of which can be helpful and others needlessly confusing—see What
Egg Labels Mean (or Don’t), opposite, for decoding advice. The ideal
situation is to buy eggs that are produced locally. And with more and more
farmers’ markets popping up, and even regular people starting to raise hens
in their backyards, they’re becoming easier to find. For the recipes in this
book, buy large or extra-large eggs; needless to say, the fresher the better.
Storing Eggs
Strangely enough, the door of the fridge is the worst place to store them
because it is often too warm. Keep them where it’s nice and cool, usually

the bottom, toward the back.
Checking Eggs for Freshness
Fresh eggs feature firm yolks that sit high on a mound of whites. An older
egg is runnier, with a flatter yolk; those are still fine to eat (unless, of
course, they smell rotten).
Cracking Eggs
Cracking an egg is fast. Fishing out tiny pieces of shell from the bowl is
not. To keep bits of shell out of the egg, smack the side sharply on a hard
flat surface instead of on the lip of the bowl.
Runny Yolks
There are few foods more luxurious and satisfying than an egg with an
oozing yolk. Also, a runny yolk is a lot faster to produce than a hard one.
But is it safe? The danger of salmonella in eggs is slim, but not nonexistent.
If you are concerned for any reason, make sure to use properly stored eggs,
rinse the shells before cracking, and cook them thoroughly. Salmonella is
killed in eggs when you maintain their temperature at 160°F—firm yolks—
for 1 minute or 140°F—runny yolks—for 5 minutes.
What Egg Labels Mean (Or Don’t)
Knowing what the labels on eggs mean (or don’t mean) will help you get in,
get eggs, and get out.
Type of Egg
Description

CAGE-FREE
The hens aren’t in cages, but they’re
probably not outside either.
HORMONE-FREE
It’s illegal to raise hens using hormones.
That’s not to say that there aren’t
producers who do it, but any claim about
hormone-free eggs is like saying “we obey
the law.”
FREE-RANGE
The hens have access to the outdoors, but
that doesn’t mean they actually go outside
—10,000 hens in a barn with a two-foot
door could be called free-range. Plus, the
USDA applies the term free-range only to
meat chickens, not laying hens, so there is
no official standard for “free-range” eggs.
NATURAL
There are no standards for “natural” eggs.
An egg producer’s putting a “natural”
label on a carton is the equivalent of my
putting one on the front of this book. In
other words, it’s meaningless.
VEGETARIAN-FED
In theory this would mean that there are
no animal by-products in the feed that the
hens eat, but vegetarian-fed is not a term
that is regulated or enforced.

PASTURED
Again, this is not a regulated standard, but
it refers to hens that are raised out on
pasture. They forage for seeds and insects
and are typically fed grain as well, which
may or may not be organic. Pastured eggs
typically come from small farms, so you
are less likely to see that label in the
supermarket.
ORGANIC (CERTIFIED
ORGANIC)
This is a label that actually means
something: The hens are raised without
cages and with access to the outdoors; are
fed organic, all-vegetarian diets; and are
raised without antibiotics, pesticides, or
insecticides. The eggs aren’t irradiated
(treated with radiation to kill pathogens).
It’s worth noting, however, that a small
farm that isn’t certified organic may very
well treat its hens better than a large farm
that is.
CERTIFIED HUMANE,
OR ANIMAL WELFARE
APPROVED
These are certifications granted by
independent organizations whose
inspection standards are approved by the
USDA. They guarantee a certain
(comparatively high) standard of living for
the animals on a given farm, often
ensuring a minimum amount of space,
fresh air, fresh water, food, and limited
stress.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Roasting-Pan French Toast
What slows French toast down is cooking it in batches in a skillet.
While not everyone owns a griddle, most have a roasting pan. Set it
over two burners and you can cook eight slices in one go. If you
decide to go the skillet route or are making several batches, keep
finished slices warm in a 200ºF oven on a baking sheet lined with a
rack to keep them crisp.

Ingredients
2 eggs
1 cup milk
1 tablespoon sugar
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Salt
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, plus more as needed
8 slices bread
Maple syrup for serving (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Set a roasting pan on 2 burners over medium-low heat.
2. Crack 2 eggs into a large, shallow bowl or dish. Add 1 cup milk, 1
tablespoon sugar, 1 teaspoon vanilla, and a sprinkle of salt; whisk to
combine.
3. Add 4 tablespoons butter to the roasting pan and swirl it around. Raise
the heat to medium.
4. Dip 8 slices bread, 1 slice at a time, into the egg mixture, soaking it
well and coating both sides. Put each slice in the roasting pan as you
finish.
5. Cook, turning once and adding more butter if the toast starts to stick,
until browned on both sides, 3 to 5 minutes per side. Serve with maple
syrup if you like.
VARIATIONS
Cinnamon-Orange French Toast
Add 1 teaspoon cinnamon and 1 teaspoon grated orange zest to the custard.
Rosemary-Parmesan French Toast
Omit the sugar, vanilla, and maple syrup. Add 1 teaspoon minced fresh
rosemary and ¼ cup grated Parmesan to the custard. Drizzle with olive oil.
SIDES
Pick-a-Fruit Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Tortilla French Toast
Flour tortillas aren’t an obvious choice for French toast, but when
you think about how good they are griddled in butter, like
quesadillas, using them this way starts to make sense. Stuffed with
ricotta and strawberries, rolled into hand-held packages, and
sprinkled with cinnamon sugar, they’re hard to resist. Ditto the
variations.

Ingredients
Butter
1 egg
½ cup milk
½ teaspoon vanilla extract
Salt
4 large flour tortillas
1 teaspoon cinnamon
1 teaspoon sugar
1 cup strawberries
1 cup ricotta cheese

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF. Put 1 teaspoon butter in a large skillet over low
heat.
2. Crack 1 egg into a baking pan large enough to hold the tortillas. Add ½
cup milk, ½ teaspoon vanilla, and a sprinkle of salt and whisk to
combine.
3. Dip a tortilla into the egg mixture, coating both sides, and put in the
skillet. Raise the heat to medium and cook, turning once and adding
another teaspoon of butter when the skillet gets too dry, until golden
and crisp on both sides but still pliable, 1 or 2 minutes per side.
Mix together 1 teaspoon cinnamon and 1 teaspoon sugar in a small
bowl.
4. As each tortilla is done, sprinkle it with some cinnamon sugar, put on a
baking sheet or a piece of aluminum foil, and transfer to the warm
oven. Continue with 3 more tortillas.
Hull and slice 1 cup strawberries.
5. Spread ¼ cup ricotta over each tortilla and top with the strawberries.
Roll up each tortilla, sprinkle the outsides with more cinnamon sugar,
and serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Jam-Filled Tortilla French Toast
Omit the strawberries, ricotta, cinnamon, and sugar. Spread the cooked
tortillas with a thin layer of any jam right before rolling. Sprinkle the
outsides with a little powdered sugar.

Mexican Tortilla French Toast
Better to eat with a knife and fork. Skip the strawberries, ricotta, cinnamon,
and sugar. Swap a dash of hot sauce for the vanilla. Spread the cooked
tortillas with a thin layer of salsa, sour cream, and/or guacamole right
before rolling. Top with chopped scallions and a little queso fresco.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
If you happen to have two skillets large enough to hold the tortillas, this
process will go twice as fast.
SIDES
Pick-a-Fruit Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Omelet for Two
Omelets are miraculous. Take a pantry staple, add whatever other
ingredients you have at hand—leftover vegetables or meat, cheese,
beans—and you end up with a dish that is much more than the sum
of its parts. A couple of tips: Make sure the heat is high enough and
add the cheese toward the end when the eggs have nearly set, so it
doesn’t burn.

Ingredients
5 eggs
2 tablespoons milk or cream (optional)
Salt and pepper
2 ounces Gruyère cheese (½ cup grated)
3 tablespoons butter

Prep | Cook
1. Crack the eggs into a medium mixing bowl. Add 2 tablespoons milk or
cream if you’re using it and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Whisk until
the egg yolks and whites are thoroughly combined.
Grate ½ cup Gruyère.
2. Put a medium skillet (preferably nonstick) over medium heat. After
about a minute, add 2 tablespoons butter and swirl it around. When the
foam subsides, add the eggs and cook, undisturbed, for 30 seconds.
3. Push the edges of the eggs toward the center with a heatproof rubber
spatula, tipping the pan so the uncooked eggs in the center slide out to
the perimeter.
4. When the eggs are becoming firm enough that they no longer slide
under the omelet, scatter the cheese on top. Continue cooking until the
omelet is mostly cooked but still runny in the center, about 3 minutes
total.
5. Fold the omelet in half or into thirds and slide it out of the pan onto a
plate. Rub the top with 1 tablespoon butter, cut it in half, and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
9 Ways to Flavor an Omelet
Add any of the following to the eggs before beating:
1. Up to ¼ cup chopped fresh parsley, basil, or dill
2. Up to 1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary, sage, thyme, or oregano
3. Up to 1 tablespoon soy sauce (go easy on the salt)

4. Up to 1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
5. Dash of hot sauce
Add any of the following to the omelet shortly before folding it up:
6. ½ cup any cooked meat, seafood, or vegetables
7. ½ cup chopped tomato
8. ½ cup any cooked grains or beans
9. ½ cup chopped fresh fruit or 2 tablespoons jam
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Green Salad
Tomato Salad
Garlicky Mushrooms
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Fried Eggs with Chimichurri
Chimichurri, the bright and spicy Argentine herb sauce, is
traditionally served with grilled steak. But it’s one of those
condiments that makes everything better, including simple fried
eggs. Plus it’s fast; a few whirls in the food processor while the
eggs cook and it’s ready to go.

Ingredients
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 bunch fresh cilantro
2 garlic cloves
1 tablespoon butter
4 eggs
¼ cup olive oil
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
¼ teaspoon red chile flakes
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Chop ½ cup parsley leaves and ½ cup cilantro.
Peel 2 garlic cloves. Put the herbs and garlic in a food processor.
1. Put a large skillet over medium heat. After about 1 minute, add 1
tablespoon butter and swirl it around. When the butter foam subsides,
crack the eggs into the skillet and cook until the whites are no longer
translucent, 2 or 3 minutes.
Add ¼ cup olive oil, 2 tablespoons red wine vinegar, ¼ teaspoon red
chile flakes, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the food processor.
2. When the egg whites are no longer translucent, turn the heat to low
and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Purée the herb mixture, stopping to scrape down the sides as necessary.
Taste and adjust the seasoning.
3. The eggs are done when the whites are completely firm and the yolks
are as runny as you like them, just another few minutes. Spoon some
of the chimichurri over the top, and serve immediately. Store any
leftover sauce in the fridge, covered, for a few days.
VARIATIONS
Fried Eggs with Pesto
Replace the parsley and cilantro with 1 cup fresh basil leaves, the red wine
vinegar with pine nuts, and the red chile flakes with ¼ cup grated
Parmesan.
Fried Eggs with Romesco

Substitute ½ cup chopped roasted red peppers for the parsley and cilantro,
sherry vinegar for the red wine vinegar, and ¼ cup almonds for the red chile
flakes.
NOTES
COOKING FRIED EGGS EVENLY
Sometimes when you crack an egg into a skillet it will spread out thin, but
other times it will set up very high—that’s the sign of a good, fresh egg but
it can make it harder to cook the whites evenly. To get a tall egg to finish
cooking quickly you can either cut through some of the uncooked parts of
the white with a paring knife or cover the skillet and cook for a minute or 2
longer. Alternatively, take your time; even a fried egg is as firm or as runny
as you like it in no more than 10 minutes.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Warm Tortillas
Green Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Scrambled Eggs with Smoked
Salmon and Dill
Soft scrambled eggs are the perfect canvas for the classic
combination of smoked salmon and dill. For extra creaminess, see
the cream cheese variation.

Ingredients
1 bunch fresh dill
4 ounces smoked salmon
2 tablespoons butter
1 tablespoon milk or cream (optional)
4 eggs
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Strip ¼ cup dill leaves from the stems and chop.
Slice or chop 4 ounces smoked salmon into 1-inch pieces.
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter and 1 tablespoon milk or cream if you’re
using it in a medium skillet. Crack 4 eggs into the skillet and turn the
heat to medium-high.
2. Cook, stirring constantly with a whisk. Be gentle so the eggs don’t
foam, but consistent so they don’t stick. If they are getting stuck to the
bottom of the pan, turn the heat down.
3. When the eggs have formed loose curds, stir in the dill and smoked
salmon. Continue cooking for another minute to warm through.
4. Taste, season with salt and pepper, and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Scrambled Eggs with Salmon, Cream Cheese, and Dill
Swap 2 tablespoons softened cream cheese for the milk or cream.
Scrambled Eggs with Prosciutto and Basil
Use basil instead of dill and prosciutto instead of smoked salmon.
Scrambled Eggs with Chorizo and Parsley
Substitute parsley for the dill and chopped smoked chorizo for the smoked
salmon.
Scrambled Eggs with Ham and Tarragon
Replace the dill with tarragon and the smoked salmon with sliced ham.
Scrambled Eggs with Smoked Trout and Dill

Instead of smoked salmon, use smoked trout.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Scramble the eggs over ultra-low heat, breaking curds up as they form. This
can take up to a half hour, but the results are incredible.
SCRAMBLING EGGS
Scrambled eggs very much lend themselves to fast cooking, because if you
don’t get them off the heat quickly they’ll overcook. And unless you like
your eggs firm, there is no good reason to cook them any other way but soft
and runny. The optional milk or cream helps prevent overcooking and adds
richness.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Warm Tortillas
Green Salad
Tomato Salad with Olive Oil and Yogurt
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Goat Cheese and Spinach Scrambled
Eggs
Scrambled eggs are creamy on their own but become exponentially
so with the addition of soft goat cheese, its subtle tang tempered by
the earthy spinach.

Ingredients
1 small bunch spinach (about 8 ounces)
3 tablespoons butter
Salt and pepper
4 eggs
1 sprig fresh rosemary
4 ounces goat cheese

Prep | Cook
Trim any thick stems from the spinach and chop the leaves.
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a medium skillet over medium-high heat.
2. When the butter starts to sizzle, add the spinach, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until wilted, 2 or 3 minutes.
Crack the eggs into a medium mixing bowl, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and beat.
Strip the rosemary leaves from 1 sprig and chop.
3. When the spinach is wilted, add 1 tablespoon butter to the skillet and
swirl it around. Add the eggs and cook, stirring frequently and
scraping the sides with a heatproof rubber spatula until they begin to
curdle.
4. Stir in the rosemary and 4 ounces goat cheese. If some parts of the
eggs are drying out, remove the skillet from the heat and continue
stirring until the cooking slows down a bit. Then return to the heat.
5. When the eggs are creamy, soft, and still a bit runny, they’re done, no
more than 10 minutes total. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Feta and Spinach Scrambled Eggs
Substitute oregano for the rosemary and feta for the goat cheese. If you like,
stir in a handful of chopped tomato when you add the oregano and feta.
Ricotta and Spinach Scrambled Eggs

Use ¼ cup chopped fresh parsley or basil instead of rosemary and ricotta in
place of goat cheese.
Parmesan and Kale Scrambled Eggs
Substitute kale for the spinach and ½ cup grated Parmesan for the goat
cheese. Allow a few extra minutes for the kale to wilt before adding the
eggs.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Start the eggs right away and add the spinach along with the rosemary and
goat cheese; the spinach will wilt as the eggs finish cooking. The spinach
will be chewier this way, more like a vegetable and less like a sauce.
SCRAMBLED EGGS FOR A CROWD
Unlike fried or poached eggs, scrambled eggs are not much harder to make
for a crowd than for just a few people. It takes a little extra time to crack,
beat, and cook the eggs, a skillet big enough to hold them all, and some
more of whatever ingredients you’re stirring in. Other than that the process
is the same, and the results don’t suffer a bit. Just make sure to stir often;
with a thick layer of eggs it’s harder to see the curds on the bottom of the
skillet that are getting firm, and you run the risk of sticking or even
scorching.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Warm Buttery Bread
Warm Tortillas
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes

Green Salad
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Tortilla Scramble
Admittedly, frying your own tortillas is not faster than buying
chips, but they’ll be better than anything you’ll find in the store. So
see Even Faster if this seems too much for you. Either way you do
it, crisp tortillas add phenomenal texture to soft scrambled eggs.
With all the colorful ingredients and garnishes in this dish, I like to
take the skillet right to the table.

Ingredients
2 corn tortillas
1 medium onion
¼ cup vegetable oil
2 poblano chiles
Salt and pepper
1 ripe tomato
1 avocado
2 scallions
4 eggs
2 ounces queso fresco (½ cup crumbled)

Prep | Cook
Line a plate with paper towels.
Cut the tortillas in half, stack, and cut into ½-inch-wide strips.
Trim, peel, and slice the onion.
1. Put ¼ cup vegetable oil in a medium skillet over medium heat.
Core, seed, and slice the poblanos.
2. When the oil is hot (toss in a bit of tortilla; it will sizzle), add the
tortilla strips. Cook, stirring constantly until they are golden brown and
crisp, 1 or 2 minutes. Transfer the strips to the paper towels with a
slotted spoon and sprinkle with salt.
3. Raise the heat to medium-high. Add the onion and poblanos to the
skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally,
until they soften and begin to brown, 5 to 10 minutes.
Core and chop the tomato.
Halve and pit the avocado, scoop out the flesh, and chop.
Trim and chop the scallions.
Crack the eggs into a medium bowl, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
beat.
4. Add the eggs to the skillet and cook, stirring frequently and scraping
the sides with a heatproof rubber spatula until they begin to curdle, 3
to 5 minutes.
5. Stir in the tomato and tortilla strips. If some parts of the eggs are
drying out, remove the skillet from the heat and continue stirring until
the cooking slows down a bit. Then return to the heat.

6. When the eggs are creamy, soft, and still a bit runny, they’re done, just
another minute or 2. Sprinkle with the avocado and scallions and
sprinkle ½ cup crumbled queso fresco over the top. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Pita Scramble
Use olive oil in place of vegetable oil and 1 pita pocket, split around the
equator and cut into strips, instead of tortillas. Substitute red onion for
yellow, red bell peppers for the poblanos, ½ cup chopped kalamata olives
for the avocado, ¼ cup chopped fresh parsley for the scallions, and feta for
the queso fresco.
French Bread Scramble
Substitute 2 tablespoons butter and 2 tablespoons olive oil for the vegetable
oil, 1 cup crusty bread cubes for the tortillas, 2 large shallots for the onion,
½ cup chopped ham for the poblanos, 2 tablespoons capers for the avocado,
2 tablespoons chopped fresh tarragon for the scallions, and goat cheese for
the queso fresco.
Chicken Tortilla Scramble
Add 2 chopped boneless, skinless chicken thighs along with the onion and
poblanos.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Instead of frying your own tortillas, crumble in store-bought tortilla chips.
Reduce the amount of oil you use to just a couple of tablespoons.
SIDES
Chile-Cumin Black Beans

Warm Tortillas
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt
Mexican Street Corn
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Chipotle and Lime

RECIPE-FREE

Scrambles
1
Heat the pan.
Put a few tablespoons of oil, butter, or a combination in a large skillet
over low heat. The fat will heat up very slowly, so you’ll have plenty
of time to pick out and prep a few ingredients.

2
Choose ingredients to sauté.
Think about chopped raw or cooked vegetables and greens; raw or
cooked bits of meat, poultry, or seafood; cubes of bread or chopped
tortillas; or cooked grains and beans. Use whatever you have handy
and figure 1 cup per egg.

3
Sauté.
Raw vegetables should be softened and raw greens wilted; raw meat,
poultry, and seafood should be cooked all the way through, while
bread and tortillas should be cooked until golden and crisp. Precooked
ingredients just need to be warmed.

4
Prepare eggs (or tofu).
Beat a few eggs with salt and pepper or open a package of soft or
silken tofu (or beat the two together). Either one adds creaminess to
the dish and binds everything together. One egg per person will do
just fine.

5
Stir in the eggs or tofu.
Once your ingredients are ready, add the eggs or tofu and cook,
stirring often with a rubber sspatula. (Tofu will break up into small,
scrambled-egg-like curds as you stir it.) Cook and stir over medium-
low heat until everything is hot and all the ingredients are combined.

6
Season and serve.
Add an extra burst of flavor with chopped fresh herbs or scallions,
citrus zest, Parmesan, soy sauce, sesame oil, or hot sauce. Serve right
away.

SPEED  
  SERVES 2 TO 4

Chipotle Black Beans with Fried
Eggs
Chipotle chiles (smoked jalapeños) in adobo sauce have an intense
heat and a smokiness that works wonders on black beans. That’s
why nearly every restaurant with a brunch—Mexican or not—has
something like this on its menu. The home-cooked version is
almost always better.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 small onion
2 garlic cloves
2 chipotle chiles in adobo, with their sauce to taste
4 cups cooked or canned black beans (two 15-ounce cans)
4 scallions
Salt and pepper
½ cup chicken or vegetable stock or water
1 tablespoon butter
4 eggs

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a medium skillet over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the oil is hot, add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally until
softened, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Chop 2 chipotles.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
Trim and chop the scallions.
3. When the onion is soft, add the garlic and chipotles (include some of
the adobo sauce if you like) and cook, stirring for a minute. Add the
beans, a sprinkle of salt and pepper, and ½ cup stock or water. Adjust
the heat so the mixture bubbles gently.
4. Put a large skillet over medium heat. After about 1 minute, add 1
tablespoon butter and swirl it around. When the butter foam subsides,
crack the eggs into the skillet.
5. When the egg whites are no longer translucent, just a minute, turn the
heat to low and sprinkle the eggs with salt and pepper.
6. The eggs are done when the whites are completely firm and the yolks
are as runny as you like them, just another few minutes. Meanwhile,
taste the beans and adjust the seasoning. Serve the eggs on top of the
beans, garnished with the scallions.
VARIATIONS

Tahini Chickpeas with Fried Eggs
Substitute olive oil for vegetable, red onion for yellow, 1 teaspoon cumin
for the chipotle chiles, chickpeas for the black beans, a handful of chopped
fresh parsley for the scallions, and ¼ cup tahini for ¼ cup of the stock. If
you like, roughly mash the chickpeas in the skillet with a potato masher.
BBQ Bacon Pinto Beans with Fried Eggs
Replace the onion with 4 slices chopped bacon, the chipotles with 1
teaspoon each paprika, chili powder, and brown sugar, the black beans with
pinto beans, the scallions with a handful of chopped cilantro, and ¼ cup of
the stock with ¼ cup ketchup.
White Beans and Zucchini with Fried Eggs
Substitute olive oil for vegetable, 4 cups grated zucchini and 2 cups white
beans for the black beans, a handful of chopped fresh parsley for the
scallions, and the juice of 1 lemon for ¼ cup of the stock.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock
CHIPOTLES IN ADOBO
Chipotles in adobo come in small cans, but even so you’ll rarely use the
whole thing in one go. If you don’t know when you’ll use them next,
transfer the chipotles and their adobo sauce to a small glass jar and keep
them in the fridge for a few weeks or longer in the freezer. If you freeze
them, store them in separate servings.

SIDES
Warm Tortillas
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt
Tomato Salad
Jícama and Radish Salad
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Chipotle and Lime

SPEED  
  SERVES 6

Broiled Eggs
You’ve probably never broiled an egg before, but if you’re cooking
for a crowd, this is the best way to make sure all your eggs finish at
the same time. The key to making it work is to position them as far
away from the heat as you can so they’ll cook all the way through
before the top gets too firm. The muffin tin helps keep each egg in
place, and the uniform shape allows them to cook evenly and at the
same rate.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons butter
12 eggs
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat. Grease a
12-cup muffin tin with 2 tablespoons butter.
2. Carefully crack 1 egg into each of the cups.
3. Put the muffin tin in the oven and broil until the eggs are just set (the
yolks should still be slightly runny), 6 to 8 minutes.
4. Gently remove each egg from the muffin tin. Sprinkle with salt and
pepper and serve.
VARIATIONS
7 Ways to Flavor Broiled Eggs
Sprinkle about 1 tablespoon of any of the following on each of the eggs
before baking:
1. Grated cheese
2. Goat cheese or cream cheese
3. Chopped olives or capers (use only a teaspoon)
4. Chopped prosciutto, crumbled cooked bacon, or ham
5. Chopped mushrooms, onions, or bell peppers
6. Chopped tomato
7. Chopped raw spinach leaves or other tender greens
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Baked Eggs

Bake the eggs in a 350ºF oven until just set, 15 to 20 minutes.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Crisp Roasted Potatoes
Green Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Fast Florentine
Typical eggs Florentine consist of sautéed spinach and a poached
egg on top of an English muffin with Mornay (cheese) sauce over
all. Cooking all of those components separately takes a while, and
I’m not convinced that the dish is any better because of it. Here I
cook everything except the English muffin in the same skillet,
wilting the spinach in the cheese sauce, then poaching the eggs
right in the spinach, which is actually better than poaching in water
because the spinach cradles the eggs.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons butter
1 tablespoon flour
1 cup milk
2 ounces Gruyère cheese (½ cup grated)
1 garlic clove
2 medium bunches spinach (1½ pounds)
Pinch of nutmeg
Salt and pepper
2 English muffins
4 eggs

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter and 1 tablespoon flour in a medium skillet
over medium heat. Cook, stirring occasionally until the flour is
incorporated into the butter, a minute or 2.
2. Add 1 cup milk, whisking to break up any lumps.
Grate ½ cup Gruyère.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove.
3. Add the Gruyère and garlic to the skillet, whisking constantly to
incorporate the cheese.
Trim any thick stems from the spinach and chop the leaves.
4. Add the spinach to the skillet (in batches if necessary) along with a
pinch of nutmeg and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring
occasionally until the spinach wilts into the sauce, 3 or 4 minutes.
Split and toast 2 English muffins. Spread with 1 tablespoon butter.
5. Make 4 indentations in the spinach mixture and carefully crack 1 egg
into each of them. Sprinkle the eggs with salt and pepper, cover the
skillet, and cook just until the whites are set and the yolks have filmed
over but are still runny, about 5 minutes.
6. When the eggs are cooked, carefully scoop them along with some
spinach mixture on top of the English muffins and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Eggs Poached in Mushrooms
Substitute Parmesan for the Gruyère, 1½ pounds sliced mushrooms for the
spinach, and 1 teaspoon chopped fresh rosemary for the nutmeg. Cook the

mushrooms in the butter until soft, 6 to 8 minutes, before sprinkling in the
flour. If the pan is too dry by the time you’re ready to add the flour, add a
little more butter first.
Eggs Poached in Creamy Tomato Sauce
Use Parmesan instead of the Gruyère, one 28-ounce can crushed tomatoes
instead of the spinach, and ¼ teaspoon red chile flakes instead of the
nutmeg.
SIDES
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Garlicky Mushrooms
Sweet Potato Fries
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 2

Fried Eggs with Mushrooms and
Leeks
There’s not much better than a soft egg yolk oozing over a pile of
meaty, caramelized mushrooms. The eggs cook in just a few
minutes, but you can’t rush the mushrooms or they won’t develop
the deep, earthy flavor that makes them so good.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons olive oil
1 medium leek
1 pound button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
Salt and pepper
1 garlic clove
Several sprigs fresh parsley
2 ounces Parmesan cheese (½ cup grated)
¼ cup white wine or water
4 eggs

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim the leek and slice the white and light green parts only.
2. When the oil is hot, add the leek.
Trim and quarter the mushrooms. (If you’re using shiitakes, discard the
stems.)
3. Add the mushrooms to the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
cook, stirring occasionally until tender and well browned, 8 to 10
minutes.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
Grate ½ cup Parmesan.
4. Stir ¼ cup white wine or water into the skillet and let the liquid mostly
bubble away. Stir in the garlic and parsley, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and divide between 2 plates.
5. Wipe out the skillet and return it to medium heat. After about 1
minute, add 1 tablespoon olive oil and swirl it around.
6. Crack 4 eggs into the skillet and cook until the whites are no longer
translucent, 2 or 3 minutes. Turn the heat to low and sprinkle the eggs
with salt and pepper.
7. The eggs are done when the whites are completely firm and the yolks
are as runny as you like them, just another few minutes. Remove the
eggs from the skillet and serve on top of the mushrooms and leeks,
garnished with the Parmesan and parsley.

VARIATIONS
Fried Eggs with Creamy Mushrooms and Leeks
Especially luxurious. Swap the white wine for cream.
Fried Eggs with Mushrooms and Poblanos
Use 2 poblano peppers, cut into strips, instead of the leek, cilantro instead
of parsley, beer in place of white wine, and Jack cheese rather than
Parmesan.
Fried Eggs with Tomatoes and Leeks
Substitute 2 cups chopped tomato for the mushrooms and 1 teaspoon
chopped fresh thyme for the parsley. Cook the tomato until it releases some
of its juice and the mixture thickens slightly.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Fry the eggs in a separate skillet while the mushrooms are cooking.
SIDES
Warm Buttery Bread
Tomato Salad
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 2 TO 4

Eggs and Steak with Peppers and
Onions
Thinner cuts of steak, like skirt and flank, cook very quickly in a
screaming-hot skillet (keep a fan close by; it gets a little smoky).
With peppers and onions steaks makes for a classic combination
(think fajitas). I like to add a fried egg on top to make it more
breakfasty.

Ingredients
1 medium onion
2 bell peppers
2 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
1 pound skirt or flank steak
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
2 scallions
1 tablespoon butter
4 eggs

Prep | Cook
Trim, peel, and slice the onion.
1. Put the onion in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Cover and
cook, undisturbed, until the onion is dry and starting to brown, 5 to 7
minutes.
Core, seed, and slice the bell peppers.
2. Uncover the skillet and stir in 2 tablespoons olive oil. Add the peppers,
sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until the
vegetables are soft, 5 to 10 minutes.
3. While the vegetables cook, put another large skillet over high heat. Pat
the steak dry with a paper towel and sprinkle both sides with salt and
pepper. Cut the steak in half if needed to fit in the skillet. When the
skillet is very hot, add 1 tablespoon vegetable oil and swirl it around.
4. Add the steak and cook, turning once, until browned on both sides but
still one shade pinker inside than you like it, 3 to 5 minutes per side.
Trim and chop the scallions.
5. Check on the peppers and onion; if they’re soft, turn off the heat.
6. When the steak is done, transfer it to a cutting board, carefully rinse
and wipe out the skillet, and put it over medium heat. After about 1
minute, add 1 tablespoon butter and swirl it around. When the butter
foam subsides, crack 4 eggs into the skillet.
7. When the egg whites are no longer translucent, after 1 minute, turn the
heat to low and sprinkle the eggs with salt and pepper.
8. Thinly slice the steak against the grain. Divide the steak among 2 or 4
plates and lay some of the peppers and onion on top.

9. The eggs are done when the whites are completely firm and the yolks
are as runny as you like them, just another few minutes. Top each plate
with an egg or 2, garnish with the scallions, and serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Spicy Eggs and Steak with Mushrooms and Onions
Use 1 pound sliced mushrooms instead of the bell peppers. Add a sprinkle
of cayenne whenever you use salt and pepper.
Smoky Eggs and Shrimp with Tomatoes
Substitute 2 large, ripe tomatoes for the bell peppers and 1 pound peeled
shrimp for the steak. Cook the tomatoes with the onion until they release
some of their juice and the mixture thickens slightly. Broil the shrimp until
pink all over and just cooked through, 1 to 3 minutes. Add a sprinkle of
smoked paprika wherever you use salt and pepper.
SIDES
Bruschetta
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Buttery Egg Noodles
Peas with Parmesan

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Classic Breakfast Burritos
Small details can make a huge difference between delicious
homemade dishes and mediocre fast or frozen food. The keys to
my breakfast burritos are simple: Keep the eggs creamy and soft,
make your own refried beans, and lightly char the tortillas right
before rolling. Rest assured this won’t take longer than a trip to the
drive-through.

Ingredients
6 slices bacon
1 small onion
1 large russet potato
1½ cups cooked or canned pinto beans (one 15-ounce can)
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
4 eggs
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
Pinch of cayenne
4 ounces Jack cheese (1 cup grated)
1 lime
4 large flour tortillas

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium heat.
Chop 6 slices bacon into 1-inch pieces.
2. Add the bacon to the skillet. Cook, stirring occasionally, until crisp, 5
to 10 minutes.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
Scrub the potato, peel it if you like, and grate it.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
3. Add the onion and potato to the skillet and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the potato is lightly browned
and almost tender, 5 to 10 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Chop several sprigs cilantro.
Crack the eggs into a medium mixing bowl, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, and beat.
4. Stir the eggs into the skillet. Cook, stirring frequently and scraping
down the sides with a heatproof rubber spatula.
5. When the eggs are creamy, soft, and still a bit runny, they’re done. It
shouldn’t take more than 10 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning
and transfer the mixture to a bowl or plate. Wipe out the skillet.
6. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in the skillet. When it’s hot, add the
beans, garlic, a pinch of cayenne, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Cook, mashing the beans with a potato masher until they’re partly

broken up. Continue to mash until the beans are mostly broken down,
about 5 minutes.
Grate 1 cup Jack cheese. Halve the lime.
7. If the bean mixture is too thick, stir in a splash of water until it’s the
consistency you like.
8. Put each tortilla (one at a time) directly over a gas burner and cook,
turning once, until lightly charred on both sides. (If you have an
electric range, broil them.)
9. Fill each tortilla with the beans and the egg mixture. Top with the
cheese, cilantro, and a squeeze of lime. Roll up and serve.
VARIATIONS
Sweet Potato and Chorizo Breakfast Burritos
Use 8 ounces fresh Mexican chorizo instead of bacon and sweet potato
instead of russet. Remove the chorizo from its casing and cook until
browned and slightly crisp.
Italian Breakfast Burritos
Substitute prosciutto for the bacon, white beans for pinto, basil for the
cilantro, red chile flakes for the cayenne, Parmesan for the Jack cheese,
olive oil for the vegetable oil, and lemon for the lime. Cook the prosciutto
in 2 tablespoons olive oil and keep an eye on the time; it will be faster.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
EVEN FASTER
Fry the beans in a separate skillet or saucepan while the eggs cook.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pork ’n’ Greens Breakfast Patties
Once you see how easy it is to make your own breakfast sausages,
you’ll be hooked. And once you see how delicious kale cooked in
sausage fat is, you’ll be in trouble.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 or 3 sprigs fresh sage or ½ teaspoon dried
1½ pounds ground pork
Pinch of nutmeg
Salt and pepper
1 bunch kale (1 pound)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Strip the leaves from 2 or 3 sage sprigs and chop them if you’re using
fresh.
2. Put 1½ pounds ground pork in a bowl along with the chopped sage or
½ teaspoon dried, a pinch of nutmeg, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Mix the seasonings into the pork.
3. Raise the heat to medium-high. Break off a very small piece of the
sausage mixture, flatten it, and fry it in the skillet until cooked through.
Taste it and adjust the seasoning as necessary.
4. Shape the sausage mixture into 4 patties and cook, turning as
necessary until they’re browned and crisp on both sides and cooked
through, 8 to 12 minutes total.
Trim and chop the kale.
5. Transfer the cooked sausages to a plate. Add the kale to the skillet,
sprinkle with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring occasionally until it’s
just wilted, 4 or 5 minutes. Serve immediately with the sausage patties.
VARIATIONS
Spicy Breakfast Patties with Sautéed Apples
Replace the sage with ½ teaspoon cayenne, the nutmeg with 1 teaspoon
minced garlic, and the kale with 1 pound apples, sliced. Cook the apples
until slightly softened and lightly browned; you still want them to be a little
crisp.
Italian Breakfast Patties with Sautéed Fennel

Substitute 1 tablespoon fennel seeds for the sage, 1 teaspoon minced garlic
for the nutmeg, and 1 pound fennel, thinly sliced, for the kale. Cook the
fennel until slightly softened and lightly browned.
Chorizo with Sautéed Peppers
Swap 1 tablespoon chili powder, 2 teaspoons garlic powder, 1 teaspoon
cumin, and ½ teaspoon cayenne for the sage and nutmeg and 4 thinly sliced
bell peppers for the kale. Cook the peppers until soft, about 5 minutes.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
It’s a treat to sauté the kale in the pork fat left over from frying the sausage,
but you can always cook the greens first, while you’re making the sausage
mix.
The thinner the patties, the faster they’ll cook.
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Breakfast patties are best when they incorporate a decent amount of fat, so
if you have the time, grind cubes of pork shoulder in the food processor
instead of using preground pork.
SIDES
Hummus
Creamy Polenta
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Smoky Two-Potato and Ham Hash
Grating potatoes allows them to cook as fast as possible and
develop the maximum amount of crisp exterior, which is what hash
is about. Supplementing regular potatoes with sweet potatoes adds
a perfect sweetness to balance the smoky ham and paprika.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
One 8-ounce piece ham
1 small onion
2 or 3 medium russet or Yukon Gold potatoes (1 pound)
2 medium sweet potatoes (1 pound)
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
Salt and pepper
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Cut the ham into small chunks or slices.
2. When the oil is hot, add the ham and cook, stirring occasionally until
it’s lightly browned, 8 to 10 minutes.
Trim and peel the onion and add it to the ham.
Trim the potatoes and peel them if you’d like.
Trim and peel the sweet potatoes. Grate both (together is fine) with the
large holes on a box grater or in a food processor.
3. Transfer the potato mixture to a colander and press to squeeze out as
much moisture as you can. Toss with 1 teaspoon smoked paprika and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper right in the colander.
4. When the ham is lightly browned, add 2 tablespoons olive oil to the
skillet and swirl it around. Add the potato mixture to the skillet, spread
it out, and press it down with a spatula.
5. Raise the heat to medium-high and cook, shaking the skillet
occasionally, until the bottom of the potatoes becomes crisp, 6 to 8
minutes.
6. Turn the potatoes with a spatula (in pieces is fine). Continue to cook,
adjusting the heat if necessary until the second side is browned, 6 to 8
minutes more.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
7. When the potatoes are browned, cut or divide the hash into 4 pieces,
garnish with the parsley, and serve.

VARIATIONS
Potato and Chorizo Hash
Substitute Spanish smoked chorizo for the ham and use 2 pounds russet or
Yukon Gold potatoes; omit the sweet potatoes.
Sweet Potato and Tofu Hash
Use 1 tablespoon sesame oil in place of 1 tablespoon of the olive oil, 8
ounces extra-firm tofu instead of ham, 1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger
rather than paprika, and 4 scallions in place of parsley. Use 2 pounds sweet
potatoes; omit the regular potatoes. Drizzle with soy sauce at the table if
you like.
Celery Root and Prosciutto Hash
Swap prosciutto for the ham, 2 pounds celery root for the regular and sweet
potatoes, and 1 tablespoon grated lemon zest for the paprika.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Don’t precook the ham. Chop it into small pieces, toss with the raw
potatoes and onions, and add everything to the skillet together.
SIDES
Green Salad
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Warm Tortillas

SPEED  
  MAKES 12 OR MORE BISCUITS

Prosciutto and Drop Biscuits
There are different ways to make biscuits, and while none is
especially time-consuming, the drop method saves you the fuss of
rolling and cutting the dough. Fill them with prosciutto while
they’re hot from the oven and you’ve got a fantastic breakfast
sandwich.

Ingredients
2 cups flour, plus more if needed
1 teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon pepper
1 tablespoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
4 tablespoons (½ stick) cold butter, plus a little more for greasing the
pan
1 cup buttermilk, plus more if needed
6 slices prosciutto or country ham

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF.
2. Put 2 cups flour, 1 teaspoon salt, ¼ teaspoon pepper, 1 tablespoon
baking powder, and 1 teaspoon baking soda into a food processor.
Pulse to combine.
3. Cut 4 tablespoons butter into ½-inch cubes, add to the food processor,
and pulse until the bits of butter are the size of peas.
4. Add 1 cup buttermilk and pulse just until the mixture forms a ball. (If
it seems very sticky and wet, pulse in more flour, a tablespoon at a
time, until the dough comes together. If it’s too dry, do the same with
buttermilk.)
5. Grease a baking sheet with butter and drop tablespoons of the dough
onto the sheet. Bake the biscuits until golden brown, 7 to 9 minutes.
Cut the prosciutto slices in half lengthwise.
6. When the biscuits are done, cut them in half across the equator and
fold a piece of prosciutto in the middle. Serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
10 Fillings for Biscuit Sandwiches
Swap any of the following for the prosciutto:
1. Cooked ham, Canadian bacon, salami, or smoked chorizo
2. Cooked bacon or sausage
3. Scrambled Eggs or Fried Eggs
4. Sautéed Greens with Garlic

5. Ripe tomato slices
6. Grated cheddar, Gruyère, Parmesan, or Jack cheese
7. Sliced fresh fruit
8. Butter and jam
9. Peanut butter or Nutella
10. Hummus, pesto, or Tomato Sauce
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Classic Prosciutto Biscuits
Prettier and slightly flakier. Once the dough comes together, turn it out onto
a lightly floured surface and knead it 10 times. It should still stick slightly
to your hands. Press the dough into a ¾-inch-thick rectangle and cut it into
2-inch rounds with a biscuit cutter or small glass. Put on the baking sheet
and bake as directed.
SIDES
Green Salad
Fennel Salad
Tomato Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Jalapeño-Scallion Johnnycakes
Johnnycakes are pancakes made with cornmeal instead of flour,
loaded with corn kernels and pretty much any seasonings you like
—in this case, jalapeño and scallions. Just be patient and let the
cornmeal hydrate for a few minutes so that it becomes a supple
batter.

Ingredients
1½ cups fine or medium-grind cornmeal
Salt
1 jalapeño chile
3 scallions
2 ears fresh corn (about 1 cup corn kernels)
½ cup milk, plus more if needed
2 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more for frying
Maple syrup for serving (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1½ cups water in a small saucepan over high heat. Heat the oven to
200ºF.
2. Combine 1½ cups cornmeal and 1 teaspoon salt in a large mixing
bowl. When the water comes to a boil, stir it into the cornmeal. Let the
mixture sit until the cornmeal absorbs the water and softens, 5 to 10
minutes.
Trim and mince the jalapeño.
Trim and chop the scallions.
Shuck the corn and cut 1 cup kernels from the cobs.
3. When the cornmeal has softened, put a large skillet over medium heat.
Stir ½ cup milk into the cornmeal; the batter should be spreadable but
still thick. If it’s too dry, add milk, a tablespoon at a time. Stir in the
corn kernels, the jalapeño, the scallions, 2 tablespoons vegetable oil,
and a sprinkle of salt.
4. Add a thin film of vegetable oil to the skillet. When the oil is hot,
spoon the batter into the skillet, working in batches and making any
size pancakes you like.
5. Cook until the bottoms are golden brown and bubbles appear and burst
on the top, 3 to 5 minutes. Flip and cook until the second sides are
golden, another 3 to 5 minutes.
6. As you finish, transfer the cooked cakes to the oven to keep them
warm. Continue making johnnycakes until you’ve used up all the
batter. Serve warm, with maple syrup if you like.

VARIATIONS
Jalapeño-Cheddar Johnnycakes
Substitute ½ cup grated cheddar for the scallions.
Honey-Walnut Johnnycakes
Use 2 tablespoons honey instead of jalapeño and ½ cup chopped walnuts
instead of scallions.
Bacon Johnnycakes
Omit the jalapeño. Swap ½ cup crumbled cooked bacon for the scallions.
Parmesan Johnnycakes
Substitute ½ teaspoon red chile flakes for the jalapeño and ¼ cup chopped
fresh parsley and ½ cup grated Parmesan for the scallions.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Use 1 cup thawed frozen corn kernels instead of fresh.
Get a second skillet going on the stovetop so you can cook two batches at
once.
SIDES
Green Salad
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Avocado with Hot Sauce and Cilantro
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Chipotle and Lime

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Banana-Coconut Pancakes
I’ve come to love pancakes that carry a little oomph in texture and
flavor. Adding cooked grains is a good way to do this (see the
Variation), but coconut and bananas create something special,
sweet and savory, with real texture. The batter comes together very
quickly too.

Ingredients
2 cups flour
2 teaspoons baking powder
½ teaspoon salt
½ cup shredded unsweetened coconut
1 tablespoon sugar
2 eggs
One 15-ounce can coconut milk
2 bananas
Butter for cooking
Maple syrup for serving (optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF.
2. In a large mixing bowl, combine 2 cups flour, 2 teaspoons baking
powder, ½ teaspoon salt, ½ cup coconut, and 1 tablespoon sugar.
3. Crack the eggs into a medium bowl and beat. Stir in the coconut milk.
Gently stir the wet ingredients into the dry. Mix only enough to
moisten the flour (don’t worry about lumps).
4. Put a large skillet over medium-low heat.
Peel and slice the bananas; gently fold them into the batter.
5. Put a tablespoon or so of butter into the skillet and swirl it around.
6. When the butter foam subsides, ladle the batter into the skillet,
working in batches and making any size pancakes you like, spreading
the batter with the bottom of the ladle. Cook until the bottoms are
golden brown and bubbles appear in the center, 2 to 4 minutes.
7. Flip and cook, adjusting the heat so that the bananas don’t burn, until
the second sides are lightly browned, another few minutes.
8. As the pancakes are done, put them on a baking sheet and transfer to
the warm oven. Continue cooking, adding a little more butter for each
batch, until you’ve used up all the batter. Serve warm, with maple
syrup if you like.
VARIATIONS
Banana–Chocolate Chip Pancakes
Substitute ½ cup chocolate chips for the shredded coconut and whole milk
for the coconut milk.

7 Ingredients to Stir into Pancake Batter
Add any of the following ingredients to the batter:
1. Up to 1 cup cooked grains, like rice, couscous, quinoa, or barley
2. Up to 1 cup fresh berries or chopped fruit
3. Up to 1 cup chopped nuts, dried fruit, or granola
4. 2 teaspoons grated orange or lemon zest
5. 2 teaspoons minced fresh or crystallized ginger
6. ¼ cup cocoa powder
7. Up to 1 cup crumbled cooked bacon
NOTES
A FEW TIPS FOR COOKING PANCAKES
1. Use a nonstick skillet if you have one.
2. Leave room between the pancakes so they’re easier to flip.
3. The edges of the pancakes will set first; it’s not until bubbles appear in
the center that they’re ready to flip.
4. Warm the maple syrup (on the stove or in the microwave) before
serving.
SIDES
Pick-a-Fruit Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Orange-Ricotta Pancakes
Ricotta and sour cream stiffen pancake batter a bit more than milk
and produce incredibly light and fluffy cakes with a little more heft
than normal pancakes. Orange zest brightens them up, as does
lemon (see the Variation).

Ingredients
2 cups flour
½ teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon salt
2 eggs
1 cup ricotta cheese
1 cup sour cream
1 tablespoon honey, plus more for serving (optional)
1 orange
Butter for cooking

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF.
2. In a large bowl, combine 2 cups flour, ½ teaspoon baking soda, and ½
teaspoon salt.
3. Crack the eggs into a medium bowl and beat. Stir in 1 cup ricotta, 1
cup sour cream, and 1 tablespoon honey.
4. Put a large skillet over medium-low heat.
Grate 1 tablespoon zest from the orange; then halve it.
5. Add the orange zest to the wet ingredients and squeeze in the juice.
Gently stir the wet ingredients into the dry. Mix only enough to
moisten the flour (don’t worry about lumps).
6. Put a tablespoon or so of butter into the skillet and swirl it around.
When the butter foam subsides, ladle the batter into the skillet,
working in batches and making any size pancakes you like. Cook until
the bottoms are golden brown and bubbles appear in the centers of the
pancakes, 2 to 4 minutes.
7. Flip and cook, adjusting the heat so that the pancakes don’t burn, until
the second sides are lightly browned, another few minutes.
8. As you finish, transfer the cooked pancakes to the oven to keep them
warm. Continue cooking, adding a little more butter for each batch,
until you’ve used up all the batter. Serve warm, with honey if you like.
VARIATIONS
Lemon-Ricotta Pancakes

Swap a lemon for the orange. If you like, add ¼ cup poppy seeds to the
batter.
NOTES
LEAVING LUMPS
One thing that slows a lot of pancake cooks down is painstakingly trying to
get rid of all the little lumps of flour that are left after they mix the wet
ingredients into the dry ones. Turns out, feverishly whisking the batter to
get rid of lumps does you a double disservice: It takes up time, and it results
in a tougher pancake. You want all pancakes to be a bit fluffy, not dense. So
don’t worry about the lumps; they’ll disappear as the pancakes cook.
SIDES
Pick-a-Fruit Salad

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Cheddar Waffles with Bacon Maple
Syrup
An addictive mix of sweet and savory. The waffles bake up crisp
and rich like grilled cheese sandwiches, only with the classic
flavors of breakfast on top.

Ingredients
Vegetable oil
6 slices bacon
4 ounces sharp cheddar cheese (1 cup grated)
2 cups flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
¼ teaspoon salt
2 eggs
1 cup milk
¾ cup maple syrup
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 200ºF. Brush a waffle iron lightly with oil and heat it.
Put a medium skillet over medium-high heat.
Chop 6 slices bacon into ½-inch pieces.
2. Add the bacon to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally, until crisp,
5 to 10 minutes.
Grate 1 cup cheddar and add to a large bowl.
3. Add 2 cups flour, 1 tablespoon baking powder, and ¼ teaspoon salt to
the bowl and stir to combine.
4. Crack 2 eggs into a medium bowl; add 1 cup milk and whisk until
smooth. Gently stir the wet ingredients into the dry, mixing only
enough to moisten the flour. (The batter will be thick and lumpy.)
5. When the bacon is crisp, add ¾ cup maple syrup to the skillet along
with a generous sprinkle of pepper and turn the heat as low as you can.
6. When the iron is hot, spread enough batter onto the iron to barely
cover it. Close the top and bake until the waffles are well browned,
crisp, and cooked through, 3 to 5 minutes, depending on your iron.
7. As the waffles are done, transfer them to the oven to keep them warm.
Continue cooking, brushing a little more oil on the iron each time,
until you’ve used up all the batter.
8. Serve the waffles with the bacon maple syrup on top.
VARIATIONS
Molasses Waffles with Ginger Maple Syrup

Omit the cheddar. Substitute 2 tablespoons molasses for 2 tablespoons of
the milk and 1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger for the bacon. No need to
cook the ginger first in Step 2; just combine it in a small saucepan with the
syrup and warm it over medium-low heat while you make the waffles.
Corn Waffles with Blueberry Maple Syrup
Substitute 1 cup fresh or thawed frozen corn kernels for the cheddar and ½
cup fresh blueberries for the bacon. Cook the blueberries in a little butter in
Step 2 until they start to soften and give up their juice, then add the maple
syrup.
SIDES
Pick-a-Fruit Salad

Appetizers
Rosemary Popcorn
Spiced Cashews with Bacon
No-Cook Spanish Skewers
Panfried Olives
Broiled Radishes with Soy
Edamame with Chili Salt
Raw Veggies with Romesco
Endive Spears with Olives
Pinzimonio
Goat Cheese Truffles
Prosciutto-Wrapped Pears
Greek Pita Pizzas
Bagel Chips with Smoked Salmon
Crab Toast
Peel-and-Eat Shrimp
Skewerless Chicken Satay
Tortillas Rojas

Roasted Nuts with Ginger, Soy, and Honey
Warm-Pickled Cucumber Spears
Green Beans with Onion Dip
Hard-Boiled Eggs with Dijon Mayo
Parmesan Crisps
Quesadillas with Pico de Gallo
Pizza Wedges

Appetizers
Anything that primes your appetite could be called an
appetizer. Soups count, and so do salads. But we
have separate chapters in this book for those things,
so what you’ll find here is more accurately described
as finger foods or snacks, “fancier” dishes that you’d
be likely to eat at a cocktail party as well as casual
ones that you might munch in front of the TV.
With the ascendance of the “small plates” craze,
these kinds of dishes are no longer required to be the
precursors to a more substantial meal: Sometimes,
eaten three or four at a time—or combined with a
salad or a side—they are the meal. That’s good news
for the home cook, because, for the most part, these
dishes don’t take very long to cook. None of the
recipes in this chapter takes more than 30 minutes,
and more than half of them can be made in 15.
Finger foods sound a little fussy (especially when
you call them hors d’oeuvres), while snacks are all

too often synonymous with junk. But when you make
your own versions, neither of those things is the case.
Something that I (and many others) would call
“elegant” can be as simple as a ball of goat cheese
coated in bread crumbs (Goat Cheese Truffles), while
a basic snack like popcorn can be elevated far beyond
the level of junk (Rosemary Popcorn).

Chapter Highlights
Finger Sandwiches  Any sandwich cut into small pieces makes a fine
appetizer. See Sandwiches.
A New Spin on Nuts  Elevating the bar snack to new heights. Spiced
Cashews with Bacon, Roasted Nuts with Ginger, Soy, and Honey.
Crudités  Raw vegetables with an addictive dip remain one of the best and
easiest kinds of appetizers I know. Raw Veggies with Romesco, Green
Beans with Onion Dip.
So Simple, So Good  Easy appetizers that will turn heads. Panfried Olives,
Broiled Radishes with Soy, Parmesan Crisps.
A Dip by Another Name  Lots of things that go by other names can
double as dips. Hummus and Pinzimonio) are as useful on a cocktail tray as
Onion Dip and Romesco.
Speed Demons  An equally delicious, faster version of deviled eggs. Hard-
Boiled Eggs with Dijon Mayo.
Chips in Salsa  You might not think to drench your chips in salsa, but it
works. Tortillas Rojas.
Pickles on the Fly  How to make something in 30 minutes that usually
takes 3 days. Warm-Pickled Cucumber Spears.
No Heat, No Problem  Appetizers sans cooking. No-Cook Spanish
Skewers, Endive Spears with Olives, Prosciutto-Wrapped Pears, Bagel

Chips with Smoked Salmon.
Many More Appetizers  For lots more recipes that you could serve as
appetizers, see the Sides chapter.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Rosemary Popcorn
Microwave popcorn is undeniably a “convenience” food, but really,
so is regular popcorn. It takes only a few minutes longer to cook
and pop kernels in a pot, and the result is real food—no
preservatives, really good oil. Add a little rosemary and you may
never go back.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
½ cup popping corn
3 sprigs fresh rosemary
2 tablespoons olive oil
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large pot over medium heat. Add 3
corn kernels and cover the pot.
2. When the 3 kernels pop, add ½ cup kernels, cover, and, holding the lid
in place, shake the pot.
3. Cook, shaking occasionally until the popping stops, about 5 minutes.
Strip the leaves from 3 rosemary sprigs and chop.
4. When the popping stops, transfer the popcorn to a large bowl and toss
with the rosemary, 2 tablespoons olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt. Serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
7 Ways to Flavor Popcorn
Toss with the popcorn instead of the rosemary:
1. 1 teaspoon cumin, curry powder, chili powder, or smoked paprika
2. 2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley, cilantro, or basil
3. 1 tablespoon grated citrus zest
4. ¼ cup grated Parmesan cheese
5. ½ cup dried fruit (chopped if necessary)
6. ½ cup chopped nuts
7. 1 tablespoon honey or maple syrup

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Spiced Cashews with Bacon
Sautéing nuts in rendered bacon fat is luxurious—and much faster
than roasting.

Ingredients
4 slices bacon
2 cups unsalted cashews
1 teaspoon curry powder
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium heat.
Chop 4 slices bacon into ½-inch pieces.
2. Add the bacon to the skillet. Cook, stirring occasionally until crisp, 5
to 10 minutes.
3. Transfer the bacon to a paper towel with a slotted spoon; keep the
rendered fat in the pan.
4. Add 2 cups cashews, 1 teaspoon curry powder, and a sprinkle of salt to
the skillet. Cook, stirring frequently and adjusting the heat to prevent
burning if necessary, until the nuts are lightly browned, 3 to 5 minutes.
5. Stir the bacon back into the nuts. Let the mixture cool for a few
minutes before serving.
VARIATIONS
Spiced Peanuts with Bacon
Substitute peanuts for the cashews and ½ teaspoon cayenne for the curry
powder.
Spiced Almonds with Bacon
Substitute almonds for the cashews and cumin for the curry powder.
Pecans with Bacon and Brown Sugar
Substitute pecans for the cashews and brown sugar for the curry powder.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Curry Powder

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

No-Cook Spanish Skewers
A tapas tray on a stick. Each ingredient already had a ton of work
and time put into it by somebody else, so all you have to do is a
little assembly. Rounded toothpicks are best here.

Ingredients
8 ounces smoked Spanish chorizo
8 ounces manchego cheese
1 cup dried apricots
A few pinches of smoked paprika

Prep | Cook
Cut 8 ounces chorizo and 8 ounces manchego into small cubes (you
should have about a cup of each).
Slice 1 cup dried apricots into halves.
1. Thread 1 or 2 pieces each of the chorizo, manchego, and apricots onto
toothpicks, alternating ingredients until you use them all.
2. Sprinkle the skewers with a few pinches of smoked paprika; serve
within a few hours.
VARIATIONS
No-Cook Salami Skewers
Substitute cured Italian salami for the chorizo, fresh mozzarella for the
manchego, dried tomatoes (soaked in a little warm water until soft) for the
apricots, and red chile flakes for the smoked paprika.
No-Cook Ham Skewers
Swap thick-cut smoked ham for the chorizo, cheddar for the manchego,
dried apples for the apricots, and pepper for the smoked paprika.
No-Cook Olive Skewers
Use 1 cup whole pitted green olives instead of the chorizo, fresh mozzarella
instead of the manchego, 1 cup crusty bread cubes in place of the apricots,
and pepper instead of the smoked paprika. Drizzle with a little olive oil if
you like.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Panfried Olives
No, it’s not as fast as eating olives right out of the jar. But sizzling
olives in a skillet with rosemary and garlic—which doesn’t take
long—is well worth the time.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 garlic cloves
2 sprigs fresh rosemary
1 pound olives, preferably a combination of black and green
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over the lowest possible
heat.
Peel and thinly slice 2 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet.
Strip the leaves from 2 rosemary sprigs, chop, and add to the skillet.
Pit the olives if necessary; blot them dry with a paper towel.
2. Add the olives to the skillet, sprinkle with pepper, and raise the heat to
medium. Cook, stirring occasionally until the olives have softened
slightly and browned in spots, 3 to 5 minutes.
3. Serve hot, warm, or at room temperature.
VARIATIONS
Panfried Olives with Chile and Mint
Substitute 1 fresh hot red chile (like Thai) for the garlic; keep the seeds if
you like spice. Use 2 tablespoons chopped fresh mint instead of the
rosemary; don’t stir it in until the very end.
Panfried Olives with Shallots and Thyme
Use a small shallot in place of the garlic and thyme instead of the rosemary.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Broiled Radishes with Soy
Spicy when raw, radishes mellow under the broiler. The Chinese-
style dressing adds wonderful dimensions of flavor.

Ingredients
¼ cup sesame oil
2 tablespoons soy sauce
1 teaspoon honey
1 pound radishes

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
2. In a large bowl, whisk together ¼ cup sesame oil, 2 tablespoons soy
sauce, and 1 teaspoon honey.
Trim the radishes; halve them and add them to the bowl.
3. Toss the radishes to coat them with the dressing. Put them cut side up
on a rimmed baking sheet, leaving any excess dressing in the bowl.
4. Broil until the tops of the radishes are golden brown or even slightly
charred, 2 to 5 minutes, depending on your broiler.
5. Serve warm or at room temperature, with any extra dressing for
dipping if you like.
VARIATIONS
Broiled Radishes with Olive Oil and Lemon
Skip the dressing. Toss the radishes with ¼ cup olive oil, 2 teaspoons grated
lemon zest, and salt.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Serve the radishes raw, tossed with the dressing, or with the dressing on the
side for dipping.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Edamame with Chili Salt
Boiled or steamed in-shell edamame with salt is a classic Japanese
snack and about as simple as it gets. Here a dash of chili powder
adds heat, a touch of sweetness, and a deep red color to the salt. If
you can find only shelled edamame, no problem; they’re just as
tasty and still big enough to pick up with your fingers like nuts (use
about 1 pound).

Ingredients
Salt
1 teaspoon chili powder
1½ pounds edamame in their pods (fresh or frozen)

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a medium pot of water to a boil and salt it.
Stir together 1 teaspoon chili powder and 1 teaspoon salt.
2. When the water boils, add the edamame and cook until tender and
warmed through, 3 to 5 minutes, depending on the beans. Drain well,
toss with the chili salt, and serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Microwaved Edamame
Put the beans in a covered microwave-safe dish with ¼ cup water. Cook on
high, checking and stirring every minute or so until they’re hot and plump.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Raw Veggies with Romesco
Romesco is a traditional Spanish sauce that’s made by blending
tomatoes, garlic, vinegar, olive oil, and almonds—which thicken
everything else nicely. Usually you just throw everything in the
food processor raw, but I like to give the tomatoes and almonds a
little char first. It’s worth the effort, but you can skip it.

Ingredients
3 garlic cloves
1 cup cherry tomatoes
2 tablespoons almonds
1½ pounds assorted vegetables (for eating raw)
2 tablespoons sherry vinegar
⅓ cup olive oil
½ teaspoon smoked paprika or chili powder
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet over medium heat.
Crush and peel 3 garlic cloves.
2. When the skillet is hot, add the garlic, the cherry tomatoes, and 2
tablespoons almonds. Cook, shaking the skillet occasionally so the
almonds don’t burn, until the tomatoes are a bit charred and the
almonds and garlic are lightly browned, 4 to 6 minutes.
Trim, peel, and seed the vegetables that need it and cut them into
pieces you can use for dipping. Put them on a platter.
3. Transfer the charred tomatoes, almonds, and garlic to a food processor.
Add 2 tablespoons sherry vinegar, ⅓ cup olive oil, ½ teaspoon smoked
paprika or chili powder, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
4. Process until the mixture is thick and relatively smooth but still has
some crunch from the almonds. Taste and adjust the seasoning.
5. Transfer the romesco to a serving bowl and serve with the vegetables
alongside for dipping.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Endive Spears with Olives
My grown-up version of ants on a log. Ten times better than the
original.

Ingredients
2 heads Belgian endive
½ cup black olives
4 ounces blue cheese (1 cup crumbled)
1 teaspoon olive oil
Pepper

Prep | Cook
Trim the endive and separate into individual leaves.
Pit ½ cup olives if necessary and chop them up a bit.
Crumble 1 cup blue cheese and put in a small bowl.
1. Add the olives, 1 teaspoon olive oil, and a sprinkle of pepper to the
blue cheese; stir to combine.
2. Spoon about a tablespoon of the filling into each endive spear,
spreading the mixture from end to end.
3. Serve immediately or refrigerate for a few hours and bring back to
room temperature before serving.
VARIATIONS
Endive Spears with Basil
Substitute ricotta for the blue cheese and ½ cup chopped fresh basil for the
olives. Add some salt to the mixture as well.
Endive Spears with Prosciutto
Use 4 ounces chopped prosciutto instead of the olives.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Broiled Endive Spears with Blue Cheese and Black Olives
Put the filled endive spears on a baking sheet and run under the broiler for a
minute or 2, just until the cheese is a bit melted and the edges of the endive
are slightly charred. Try it with either of the variations as well.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pinzimonio
Pinzimonio may sound complicated, but what could be simpler
than dipping raw vegetables in gently warmed seasoned olive oil?

Ingredients
2 or more garlic cloves
⅓ cup olive oil
Salt and pepper
2 carrots
2 celery stalks
1 large cucumber

Prep | Cook
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
1. Combine the garlic, ⅓ cup olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper
in a small saucepan over medium-low heat.
2. Cook, swirling the pot occasionally until the garlic is puffed and
fragrant; remove from the heat as soon as it starts to turn golden.
Trim and peel the carrots. Trim the celery. Trim and peel the cucumber,
cut it in half lengthwise, and scoop out the seeds with a spoon.
Cut all the vegetables into sticks and put them on a platter.
3. Put the warm oil in a small bowl next to the platter of vegetables and
serve.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Goat Cheese Truffles
We think of truffles as dessert—little balls of chocolate rolled
around in cocoa powder, or something along those lines. But
there’s no rule saying they can’t be savory too.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 thick slices any rustic bread (a little stale is fine)
Salt and pepper
8 ounces soft goat cheese

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Tear 2 thick slices of bread into pieces and put them into a food
processor. Pulse into coarse crumbs; you need 1 cup.
2. Raise the heat to medium. Add the bread crumbs to the skillet, sprinkle
with a little salt and some pepper, and stir gently to coat in the oil.
Cook, stirring frequently until the crumbs are golden and crisp, 6 or 7
minutes. Shake the pan every minute or so to keep the crumbs from
burning.
Break off pieces of the goat cheese with your fingers and roll them into
sixteen 1-inch balls.
3. When the crumbs are crisp, pour them into a shallow bowl.
4. Roll the goat cheese balls in the bread crumbs to coat lightly, pressing
the crumbs into the cheese a bit if needed to make them stick. Put them
on a plate and serve.
VARIATIONS
Nutty Goat Cheese Truffles
Substitute 1½ cups walnuts, almonds, pecans, or pistachios for the bread.
Toast them whole in a dry skillet over medium heat until lightly browned, 3
to 5 minutes. Then pulse them in the food processor until finely chopped.
Add salt and pepper to taste.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Prosciutto-Wrapped Pears
Classy, elegant, and easy: A piece of fruit wrapped in a piece of
prosciutto is about as simple as an appetizer gets, and it’s perfect
for entertaining. (If you have kids, let them do it.)

Ingredients
2 large pears
1 tablespoon sherry vinegar or red wine vinegar
Salt and pepper
8 slices prosciutto

Prep | Cook
Core the pears and cut each one into 8 wedges; put them in a medium
bowl.
1. Add 1 tablespoon vinegar, a sprinkle of salt, and plenty of pepper to
the bowl and toss to coat.
Cut 8 slices of prosciutto in half lengthwise.
2. Wrap each piece of prosciutto around a wedge of pear and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Prosciutto-Wrapped Cantaloupe
Use ½ small cantaloupe, cut into wedges, instead of the pears. Substitute a
pinch of smoked paprika for the pepper.
Ham-Wrapped Apples
Swap apples for the pears, cider vinegar for the sherry or red wine vinegar,
and thinly sliced smoked ham for the prosciutto.
Prosciutto-Wrapped Tomatoes
Use 2 large ripe tomatoes, cut into wedges, instead of pears and balsamic
instead of sherry or red wine vinegar.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Greek Pita Pizzas
The key to successfully broiling and topping bread is to give the
foundation a head start before adding ingredients. Just make sure
not to pile the ingredients on too high after flipping.

Ingredients
4 small pitas (preferably pocketless)
Olive oil
½ cup kalamata olives
3 sprigs fresh oregano or 1 teaspoon dried
4 ounces feta cheese (1 cup crumbled)

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
2. Brush both sides of 4 pitas with a little olive oil and put them on a
baking sheet.
Pit ½ cup olives if necessary and chop them up a bit.
If you’re using fresh oregano, strip the leaves from 3 sprigs and chop.
Crumble 1 cup feta.
3. When the broiler is hot, put the baking sheet under the broiler and
cook until the tops of the pita are lightly charred, 1 to 3 minutes.
4. Flip each pita over and top the untoasted side with the feta, olives, and
oregano. Cook until the cheese just starts to bubble, another 2 to 5
minutes.
5. Let the pitas cool for a minute or 2, drizzle with a little more olive oil,
cut into wedges, and serve.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Bagel Chips with Smoked Salmon
This recipe transforms the irresistible brunch combination of bagels
and lox into a light, elegant, and very fast hors d’oeuvre. Buy the
simplest bagel chips you can find (the best are found in bagel
shops); they should contain only bagels, oil, and salt, with minimal
preservatives. Or make your own—see below.

Ingredients
1 small cucumber
½ cup crème fraîche
16 store-bought plain bagel chips (8 ounces)
4 ounces smoked salmon
Pepper

Prep | Cook
Trim the cucumber, peel if necessary, and thinly slice.
1. Spread ½ cup crème fraîche on 16 bagel chips.
2. Lay the cucumber slices on top of the crème fraîche, then lay the
smoked salmon over the top, breaking it into smaller pieces so you
have enough for all of the chips. Sprinkle with pepper. Serve.
VARIATIONS
Bagel Chips with Prosciutto, Tomato, and Ricotta
Swap 1 ripe tomato, chopped, for the cucumber, ricotta for the crème
fraîche, and prosciutto for the smoked salmon.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Homemade Bagel Chips
Slice 1 bagel crosswise into rounds as thin as possible: ⅛ inch is ideal if
you can manage it. Brush both sides lightly with olive oil and put on a
baking sheet. Bake at 300ºF, turning once, until crisp, 10 to 15 minutes
(start checking them at 5 minutes and remove any that are already brown).
Cool completely before storing for up to a few days. These will be bigger
than the ones usually found in stores; either keep them whole before adding
the topping or break them in half.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 8

Crab Toast
Cooked crabmeat is an incredibly useful fast ingredient, with a
wonderful sweet, briny flavor.

Ingredients
1 bunch fresh dill
1 lemon
1 cup lump crabmeat (about 8 ounces)
2 tablespoons mayonnaise
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
Salt and pepper
4 thick slices any rustic bread
Olive oil

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Strip 3 tablespoons dill from the stems; chop 2 tablespoons and put in
a medium bowl. Save what’s left for garnish.
Grate 2 teaspoons lemon zest into the bowl; refrigerate the fruit for
another use.
Pick through 1 cup crabmeat, discarding any pieces of shell or
cartilage you find. Add it to the bowl.
2. Add 2 tablespoons mayonnaise, 2 teaspoons Dijon, and a sprinkle of
salt and pepper to the bowl. Stir to combine.
3. Drizzle both sides of 4 thick slices of bread with olive oil. Broil the
bread, turning once, until lightly browned on both sides, 2 to 5 minutes
total.
4. Spread the crab mixture on the bread, pressing it down lightly with
your fingers. Cut each slice of bread crosswise into 2 or 3 pieces,
garnish with the remaining dill, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Curried Crab Toast
Substitute cilantro for the dill and add ½ teaspoon curry powder to the
dressing.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise

MASTER RECIPE

Cocktail Meatballs
We all know that meatballs are a go-to combo with
spaghetti (see Spaghetti and Drop Meatballs with
Tomato Sauce), but they’re even more useful as
appetizers. Freeing the meatball from the confines of
pasta and tomato sauce allows you to experiment
with flavor combinations that you may have never
tried before. The master recipe is spiked with a
teriyaki sauce; see the variations for some easy
seasoning and dipping sauce adjustments. You can
even mix, shape, and bake them in batches large
enough to feed a crowd. (Figure the quantities here
make 4 main or 8 appetizer servings. The cooked
meatballs will keep in the fridge for a couple days or
the freezer for several months.) Either way, just pop
them, covered, into a 300ºF oven until they’re hot,
whip up the dipping sauce, and serve warm or at
room temperature.
Beef Teriyaki Meatballs
1
Heat the Oven

Heat the oven to 450°F; grease a rimmed baking sheet with 1
tablespoon vegetable oil.
2
Make the Sauce
In a small saucepan over high heat, combine ½ cup soy sauce and ½
cup mirin (or ¼ cup honey and ¼ cup water), 1 inch minced fresh
ginger, 1 minced garlic clove, and 4 chopped scallions. Bring to a
bubble, then remove the sauce from the heat.
3
Mix and Drop (or Roll)
Put 1 pound ground beef, 1 beaten egg, half the teriyaki sauce, and
some pepper in a large bowl; combine gently. Scoop out rounded
tablespoons of the mixture and drop them onto the baking sheet as you
go. Or, roll them between your palms to make balls.
4
Bake and Serve
Bake, turning the meatballs only as necessary to prevent burning, until
they’re lightly browned, 8 to 12 minutes. Put the meatballs on a platter
with the remaining teriyaki sauce on the side for dipping.
Lamb and Rosemary Meatballs with Yogurt Sauce  Use ground lamb
instead of beef and skip the teriyaki sauce. Instead, stir together 1 cup
Greek yogurt, 1 minced garlic clove, 2 teaspoons minced fresh rosemary, ¼
cup chopped fresh mint, the juice of 1 lemon, salt, and pepper (don’t cook
it). Stir half of that into the meat and egg mixture. Bake the meatballs as
directed, serving the remaining yogurt sauce on the side for dipping.
Chipotle Beef Meatballs  Omit the teriyaki sauce. Add 1 chopped chipotle
chile in adobo with some of its sauce directly to the ground beef and egg
mixture. Add 1 minced garlic clove, the juice of 1 lime, ¼ cup chopped
scallions, and some salt and pepper. Bake the meatballs as directed and

sprinkle with crumbled queso fresco before serving (no dipping sauce here
unless you want to put out a bowl of salsa).
Curry Pork Meatballs  Use ground pork instead of beef. Skip the teriyaki
sauce. Instead add the minced garlic and ginger directly to the ground pork
and egg mixture, along with ¼ cup chopped fresh cilantro, 1 tablespoon
curry powder, the juice of 1 lime, and some salt and pepper. Bake as
directed. While the meatballs cook, warm ¾ cup apricot jam with ¼ cup
cider vinegar and use that as the dipping sauce.
Chicken and Basil Meatballs  Use ground chicken (or turkey) instead of
beef. Omit the teriyaki sauce. Add ¼ cup chopped fresh basil, 1 minced
garlic clove, ½ cup freshly grated Parmesan, ¼ cup bread crumbs, ¼ cup
milk, and some salt and pepper directly to the chicken and egg mixture.
Bake the meatballs as directed. Grate a little Parmesan over the top before
serving with warmed Tomato Sauce on the side for dipping.
Swedish Meatballs  Substitute ground pork for half of the beef. Omit the
teriyaki sauce. Add ¼ teaspoon allspice, ¼ teaspoon nutmeg, some salt, and
lots of pepper directly to the ground meat and egg mixture. Bake the
meatballs as directed. For the sauce: Sauté 1 chopped medium onion in 3
tablespoons butter over medium heat until soft, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir in 3
tablespoons flour and cook, stirring frequently, until the flour and butter
form a paste and it turns light brown, another 3 to 5 minutes. Add 1 cup
beef broth and cook, stirring constantly until it thickens into the consistency
of gravy. Stir in ¼ cup cream, taste and adjust the seasoning, and pour on
top of the meatballs (or serve on the side for dipping).

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Peel-and-Eat Shrimp
Grilling or broiling shrimp with their shells on saves you time on
peeling and imparts more flavor while protecting them from getting
overcooked. Plus it’s fun to peel at the table before dipping into a
seasoned mayo. (For more ideas about flavoring the dip, see 7
Ways to Flavor Mayonnaise.) If you prefer, you can skip the
dipping sauce and just serve the shrimp with lemon wedges.

Ingredients
1 cup mayonnaise
2 teaspoons seasoning: curry powder, chili powder, cumin, coriander,
paprika, smoked paprika, or Old Bay
Salt and pepper
1½ pounds any size shell-on shrimp
1 tablespoon olive oil

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Put 1 cup mayonnaise, 2 teaspoons seasoning, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper in a serving bowl; stir to combine.
2. Put the shrimp on a rimmed baking sheet and toss with 1 tablespoon
olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
3. When the grill or broiler is hot, cook the shrimp, turning once, until
they’re lightly charred on the outside and just cooked through, 3 or 4
minutes per side.
4. Serve with the mayonnaise for dipping, letting people peel the shrimp
at the table.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise
Curry Powder
Chili Powder
VARIATIONS
Boiled Peel-and-Eat Shrimp
Instead of heating the broiler, bring a large pot of water to boil and salt it.
Cook the shrimp until just pink, 2 to 5 minutes depending on the size.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Skewerless Chicken Satay
This is better than the satay at most Thai restaurants, and you’ll
never miss the skewer.

Ingredients
6 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 18 ounces)
1 lime
1 garlic clove
½ inch fresh ginger
1 tablespoon soy sauce
1 tablespoon rice vinegar
1 teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon chili powder
2 tablespoons sugar
¼ cup peanut butter

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat. Put the
chicken in the freezer.
Halve the lime; squeeze the juice into a large bowl.
Peel 1 garlic clove and ½ inch fresh ginger. Mince them together and
add them to the bowl.
2. Add 1 tablespoon soy sauce, 1 tablespoon rice vinegar, 1 teaspoon
cumin, 1 teaspoon chili powder, and 2 tablespoons sugar to the bowl.
Whisk to combine. Divide the marinade in half, reserving half for
making the dipping sauce.
3. Remove the chicken thighs from the freezer, cut them into thin slices,
and add to 1 portion of the marinade; toss to coat.
4. Line a rimmed baking sheet with foil; using tongs, transfer the chicken
to the foil, discarding the marinade left behind. Spread out the chicken
so it overlaps as little as possible.
5. When the broiler is hot, cook the chicken, turning as necessary, until
lightly charred all over, 6 to 8 minutes.
6. While the chicken cooks, whisk ¼ cup hot water and ¼ cup peanut
butter into the reserved portion of marinade until smooth.
7. Pour the sauce into a serving bowl. When the chicken is done, let it
cool for a minute or 2, transfer it to a platter, and serve with the peanut
sauce for dipping.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tortillas Rojas
The quick blended salsa here is a keeper you’ll make again and
again.

Ingredients
One 9-ounce bag tortilla chips
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano)
2 garlic cloves
One 14-ounce can diced tomatoes
Salt
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
1 lime
Dash of hot sauce (optional)
4 ounces queso fresco (1 cup crumbled)

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 300ºF. Spread the tortilla chips on a rimmed baking
sheet; put them in the oven to warm.
2. Put 1 tablespoon vegetable oil into a small saucepan over medium
heat.
Trim the chile and seed it if you like. Peel 2 garlic cloves. Mince the
chile and garlic together.
3. Add the chile and garlic to the pan and cook, stirring frequently until
fragrant, 15 to 30 seconds.
4. Add the tomatoes and their juice to the pan, sprinkle with salt, and
raise the heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring once or twice, until the
tomatoes start to break apart, 5 to 8 minutes.
Chop several sprigs cilantro. Cut the lime into wedges.
5. Blend the tomatoes until smooth, starting the machine on low to avoid
splashing. Taste and adjust the seasoning, adding a dash of hot sauce if
you like.
6. Put the warmed chips in a large bowl. Add a few spoonfuls of the salsa
gradually, tossing constantly so the chips are evenly coated. Reserve
the remaining salsa.
7. Put the chips on a platter; crumble 1 cup queso fresco on top of the
chips. Garnish with cilantro and lime wedges and serve immediately
with the remaining salsa.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Roasted Nuts with Ginger, Soy, and
Honey
This salty, sticky-sweet, and spicy recipe blows store-bought nuts
out of the water.

Ingredients
1 inch fresh ginger
2 tablespoons honey
2 teaspoons soy sauce
Vegetable oil
2 cups any unsalted raw nuts
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 350ºF. Put a large skillet over medium-low heat.
Peel and mince 1 inch fresh ginger.
2. Add 2 tablespoons honey, 2 teaspoons soy sauce, and the ginger to the
skillet. Bring to a simmer.
3. Grease a rimmed baking sheet with vegetable oil.
4. Add 2 cups nuts to the skillet. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and toss to
coat.
5. Spread the nuts evenly on the baking sheet. Roast, shaking
occasionally, until lightly browned, 10 minutes. Let the nuts cool for a
few minutes before serving.
VARIATIONS
Roasted Nuts with Smoked Paprika and Lemon
Skip the honey. Substitute 2 teaspoons grated lemon zest for the ginger, 1
teaspoon smoked paprika for the soy sauce, and olive oil for the vegetable
oil.
Sweet and Salty Roasted Nuts, Thai Style
Use 1 fresh hot green chile (like serrano) in place of the ginger, fish sauce
for the soy sauce, and brown sugar for the honey. Add 2 teaspoons grated
lime zest.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Warm-Pickled Cucumber Spears
Steeping vegetables in hot brine infuses them with lots of flavor in
little time. They pick up a great tang from the vinegar and retain
their crunch. Kirby cucumbers make the best pickles if you can
find them, but the small Persian cukes and even English cukes also
work well.

Ingredients
½ cup red wine vinegar
1 bay leaf
1 teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon sugar
3 medium cucumbers (1 to 1½ pounds)
1 bunch fresh dill

Prep | Cook
1. Put ½ cup red wine vinegar, 1 bay leaf, 1 teaspoon salt, ½ teaspoon
sugar, and 2 cups water in a large pot over high heat.
Trim the cucumbers; cut them into thick spears.
Strip 2 tablespoons dill leaves from the stems and chop.
2. When the liquid comes to a boil, add the cucumbers and dill; cover and
turn off the heat.
3. Let the cucumbers sit for 10 to 15 minutes; Serve warm or at room
temperature. To store, let the cucumbers cool a bit, then submerge
them in the brine and refrigerate. They’ll keep for about a week and
pickle further in the fridge.
VARIATIONS
Warm-Pickled Bell Peppers
Substitute 1 pound red or yellow bell peppers, thickly sliced, for the
cucumbers and 1 teaspoon dried oregano for the dill.
Warm-Pickled Zucchini
Replace the cucumbers with 1 pound zucchini. Add 2 teaspoons grated
lemon zest to the pot along with the dill.
Warm-Pickled Carrots
Use 1 pound carrots, cut into sticks, instead of cucumbers and 1 tablespoon
cumin seeds instead of dill.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Green Beans with Onion Dip
Most onion dips feature caramelized onions, which are super but
can take an hour to cook. Onions that are cooked more quickly, just
until some charred spots start to appear, get very sweet with a hint
of pleasing bitterness—and you can’t beat those crisp edges.

Ingredients
¼ cup olive oil
2 large onions
Salt and pepper
1 bunch fresh chives
1 cup sour cream
½ cup Greek yogurt
1 pound green beans

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
Trim, peel, halve, and thinly slice the onions.
2. When the oil is hot, add the onions and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Cook, stirring occasionally until they begin to brown, 4 or 5 minutes.
Chop 2 tablespoons chives; put them in a medium bowl.
3. Add 1 cup sour cream, ½ cup Greek yogurt, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper to the bowl. Stir to combine and transfer the mixture to the
fridge.
4. When the onions begin to brown, lower the heat to medium and cook,
stirring a little more frequently, until they are shriveled, dry, and just
starting to char, 10 to 15 minutes.
Trim the green beans; put them on a platter or in a bowl.
5. When the onions are just starting to char, transfer them to paper towels
with a slotted spoon and let them cool for a few minutes. Chop the
onions and stir them into the sour cream and yogurt mixture. Taste and
adjust the seasoning.
6. Transfer to a serving bowl and serve with the green beans alongside
for dipping.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Hard-Boiled Eggs with Dijon Mayo
All the flavors of deviled eggs without the hassle. Not sure why I
never thought of this before now, but . . . they’re beauties. (For
more ways to flavor the mayo, see 7 Ways to Flavor Mayonnaise.)

Ingredients
4 eggs
Ice cubes
2 tablespoons mayonnaise
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
½ teaspoon paprika, plus more for garnish
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Fill a medium saucepan about two-thirds full with water and gently
submerge 4 eggs. Bring to a boil, turn off the heat, and cover. Set a
timer: Large to extra-large eggs will cook in 9 minutes.
Fill a large bowl with ice water.
Put 2 tablespoons mayonnaise, 2 teaspoons Dijon, ½ teaspoon paprika,
and a sprinkle of salt and pepper in a small bowl. Stir to combine.
2. When the eggs are done, transfer them to the ice water with a slotted
spoon. Leave them submerged for at least 1 minute.
3. Crack and peel the eggs, transfer them to a cutting board, and halve
them lengthwise.
4. Sprinkle the eggs with a little salt and dollop about 1 teaspoon of the
mayonnaise mixture on top of each. Garnish with a small dusting of
paprika and serve.
VARIATIONS
Hard-Boiled Eggs with Curry Mayo
Substitute curry powder for the paprika.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Mayonnaise

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Parmesan Crisps
Many believe that the best part of a grilled cheese sandwich is the
bit of cheese that oozes out and browns directly on the skillet. Well,
these crisps are that part. Use a nonstick skillet if you have one.
Note: This will work only with Parmesan that has been grated into
large or long pieces, not the kind that’s finely ground like a powder.

Ingredients
12 ounces Parmesan cheese (3 cups grated)
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put a large skillet (preferably nonstick) over medium-low heat.
Grate 3 cups Parmesan into a large bowl; add plenty of pepper and
toss.
2. Mound ¼ cup of the Parmesan in the skillet. Flatten it into a 3- to 4-
inch circle and cook until the cheese is fully melted and browning
around the edges, about a minute.
3. Flip the crisp over with a metal spatula and cook on the other side,
adjusting the heat as necessary to prevent burning, until golden brown
on the bottom, another minute or so.
4. Transfer to a paper towel and repeat the process with the rest of the
cheese. Serve at room temperature.
VARIATIONS
Rosemary-Parmesan Crisps
Add 2 teaspoons minced fresh rosemary to the Parmesan along with the
pepper.
Spicy Cheddar Crisps
Use cheddar cheese instead of Parmesan and ½ teaspoon cayenne instead of
pepper.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 8

Quesadillas with Pico de Gallo
Cooking quesadillas in the broiler lets you make four at once, as
opposed to the one or two that you can fit in a skillet. And that
leaves you time to whip up fresh pico de gallo.

Ingredients
1 large ripe tomato
1 fresh hot green chile (like jalapeño)
1 small onion
Several sprigs fresh cilantro
1 lime
Salt and pepper
6 scallions
4 ounces cheddar cheese (1 cup grated)
Four 6-inch flour tortillas
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
Sour cream for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Core and chop the tomato; put it in a medium bowl.
Trim the chile, remove the seeds if you’d like, and mince it; add it to
the bowl.
Trim, peel, and finely chop the onion; add it to the bowl.
Chop several sprigs cilantro and add to the bowl.
Halve the lime; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
2. Add a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl and stir to combine.
Trim and chop the scallions.
Grate 1 cup cheddar cheese.
3. Brush 1 side of the tortillas with 1 tablespoon vegetable oil; put them
oil side down on a rimmed baking sheet.
4. Sprinkle the cheese and scallions evenly over the tortillas. Broil until
the cheese melts, then carefully fold the tortillas in half.
5. Continue to cook, turning once, until the tortillas are golden and crisp
on both sides, 2 to 5 minutes total.
6. Cut the quesadillas in half if you like and serve with the pico de gallo
and some sour cream.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pizza Wedges
Remember those miniature pizza bagels that you cook in the
microwave and eat as a snack? These are not that much slower, and
they’re a hundred times more flavorful.

Ingredients
8 ounces fresh mozzarella cheese
Four 8-inch flour tortillas
4 tablespoons tomato paste
Olive oil
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF.
Thinly slice 8 ounces fresh mozzarella.
2. Put the tortillas in a single layer on 1 or 2 baking sheets. Put a
tablespoon of tomato paste on each tortilla and spread it out toward the
edges.
3. Lay the mozzarella slices on the tortillas, drizzle each tortilla with
olive oil, and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
4. Put them in the oven (even if it’s not fully heated yet), and bake,
checking once or twice, until the cheese is bubbly and brown and the
tortillas are crisp, 5 to 10 minutes.
5. Cut into wedges and serve.
VARIATIONS
Pesto Pizza Wedges
Use pesto instead of tomato paste.
Salsa and Jack Pizza Wedges
Swap 1 cup shredded Jack cheese for the mozzarella and salsa for the
tomato paste.
Fig and Gorgonzola Pizza Wedges
Substitute 1 cup crumbled Gorgonzola for the mozzarella and fig jam for
the tomato paste. Add slices of pear on top of the jam, cover with
Gorgonzola, then add arugula.

Sides
Garlic Bread
Warm Flour Tortillas
Crisp Seasoned Pita
Bruschetta
Couscous
Green Salad
Chopped Salad
Tomato Salad
Carrot Salad with Raisins
Cucumber Salad
Cucumber Raita
Fennel Salad
Jícama and Radish Salad
Ginger-Orange Bean Sprouts
Avocado with Lemon and Salt
Pick-a-Fruit Salad
Caprese Salad

Coleslaw
Sautéed Greens with Garlic
Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower
Two-Step Broccoli
Stir-Fried Bok Choy
Fajita Peppers and Onions
Asparagus Gratin
Tomatoes with Fried Bread Crumbs
Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Mexican Street Corn
Succotash
Peas with Bacon and Onion
Smashed Peas
Creamed Spinach
Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Refried Beans
Hummus
Scallion Pancakes
White Rice

Rice Pilaf
Quinoa
Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Creamy Polenta
Pasta, Plain and Simple
Sesame Noodles
Fire and Ice Noodles
Panfried Rice Noodles
Skillet Stuffing
Cucumbers with Peanut Vinaigrette
Tender Vegetables
Simmered Squash
Garlicky Mushrooms
Stuffed Portobellos
Brussels Sprouts with Bacon
Crunchy Okra
Ripe Plantains
Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
German-Style Potato Salad

French Fries
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes
Crisp Roasted Potatoes

Sides
When I was growing up in the fifties and sixties, the
only acceptable definition of a “meal” in my house—
and many others—was a piece of meat served with
both a starch and a vegetable on the same plate. The
way we eat has changed a lot since then, mostly for
the better. Certainly the way you assemble meals is a
lot less rigid.
“Sides” have become way more important, and
sometimes, as in the case of tapas and many
vegetarian meals, there is no more “center of the
plate.” If you’re after the traditional starch and
vegetable, there’s plenty here to mix and match; all
the “mains” in the book offer suggestions.
But you might want to use the sides in this
chapter—which includes many simple two- or three-
ingredient salads—as appetizers. You might not
always feel the need to fuss with another dish, or
you’ll be inspired to make a whole meal of them. You

decide what sides you put on the table when. This
flexibility helps you make the most efficient use of
your kitchen time.
After all, you almost never cook sides in a
vacuum. There’s always something else on the stove
or in the oven, so timing can become a potential point
of stress, especially when you’re in a hurry. But
recipes like these dovetail with your kitchen
choreography. You attend to them periodically, but
they need not dominate your activity. And almost
none need to be served piping hot—some aren’t even
cooked—which means they can sit around for a bit
while you wrap up the main recipe.

Chapter Highlights
A Side of Bread  Why overthink it? Sometimes the only side you need.
Warm Buttery Bread, Crisp Seasoned Pita, Bruschetta.
Instant Flatbread  You don’t have to cook Mexican food or wrap anything
to enjoy this simple, traditional accompaniment. Warm Flour Tortillas.
Beyond Salt and Pepper  There is a world of flavors in your kitchen.
Seasoning Sides.
Fewer Ingredients, Less Prep, Less Time  Discover the virtues of
prepping one or two ingredients instead of four or five. Pick-a-Fruit Salad.
Sides in the Microwave  The microwave can be the perfect place to cook
side dishes. Warm Flour Tortillas, Creamy Polenta, Two-Step Broccoli.
Your New “Knife”  For vegetable ribbons, use your peeler. Simmered
Squash.
Potatoes in a Hurry  Shortcuts to crispness. Crisp Roasted Potatoes,
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes.
Canned Beans, Transformed  Chile-Cumin Black Beans, Refried Beans.
Homemade Hummus  Try serving a spoonful as a bed for simply cooked
meat, fish, chicken, or vegetables. Hummus.
Cook Sides Simultaneously  All of the recipes in this chapter are designed
to be cooked while you prepare the main dish. It’s easy to coordinate the
timing: The chapter is organized with the fastest sides first. Once you

decide what you want to make—each main dish offers several suggestions
—use the clock icon at the top of the recipe to give you an idea when to
start. And when in doubt, you can always start the side dish first. If it’s done
before the rest of the meal, it’s rarely a big deal; just let it hang out until
you’re ready to eat.
Mix and Match  Almost all of the recipes in this book offer variations to
help you change ingredients and flavor profiles; they’re an important way to
keep your menus exciting, so I hope you incorporate them into your
repertoire. It’s easy to adjust the sides accordingly: Use the suggestions
after the main dishes to help you locate alternatives in this chapter and
quickly find the ideal side—either a main recipe or its variation—that
complements your meal.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Garlic Bread
Crisp-crusted bread turns lots of recipes into a complete meal.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, or to taste
4 garlic cloves
Several sprigs fresh parsley
1 loaf any rustic unsliced bread (about 1 pound)
1 tablespoon olive oil
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 375ºF. Put 4 tablespoons (more or less) butter in a
dish near the oven to soften. Or soften in the microwave on low for 10
to 40 seconds.
Peel and mince 4 garlic cloves.
Strip the leaves from several parsley sprigs and chop.
Cut thick slices downward into the bread without going all the way
through, leaving the pieces connected at the bottom.
2. When the butter is soft, mix in the garlic, parsley, 1 tablespoon olive
oil, and some salt and pepper. Spread a little between the slices of
bread. Wrap the loaf in aluminum foil so that the bottom and sides are
covered but the top is open.
3. Bake the bread directly on the oven rack until the crust is crackling
crisp, 10 to 15 minutes.
4. Remove the bread from the oven; serve the whole loaf and let
everyone break off pieces or finish slicing through the bottom crust to
separate it.
VARIATIONS
Warm Buttery Bread
Skip the seasonings and just add plain softened butter to the cuts you’ve
made in the bread.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Warm Flour Tortillas
Many if not most Mexican dishes deserve a stack of steaming
tortillas on the side, but flour tortillas—which are really just flat
bread—go with other styles of cooking too.

Ingredients
Eight 10-inch flour tortillas

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 375ºF.
Stack 8 flour tortillas and wrap in aluminum foil.
2. Bake the tortilla package directly on the oven rack until the tortillas are
steaming hot, 5 to 10 minutes. Keep them wrapped in the foil until
you’re ready to serve.
VARIATIONS
Warm Corn Tortillas
Use 12 small corn tortillas instead of the flour ones here.
Microwaved Tortillas
Wrap the tortillas in a damp paper towel and put them on a microwave-safe
plate. Microwave on high for 15 to 20 seconds.
Fried Tortillas
Never greasy if you do it like this. Heat ¼ inch vegetable oil in a skillet
large enough to hold a tortilla over medium-high heat. When hot but not
smoking, add a tortilla and cook, turning once, until golden brown and crisp
on both sides, 1 to 2 minutes per side. Add more oil to the pan as necessary.
Drain on paper towels.
Charred Tortillas
If you have a gas stove, turn as many burners as you have free to high. Put
the tortillas directly on the flame and cook, carefully turning with tongs,
until they’re lightly charred around the edges on both sides, 30 seconds to a
minute per side. This will keep you busy, so pay attention.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Crisp Seasoned Pita
There’s something about pita that begs to be cooked over an open
flame until lightly charred. The classic Middle Eastern topping is
za’atar, a mixture of thyme, sumac, toasted sesame seeds,
marjoram, oregano, and salt that you can buy at Middle Eastern or
spice stores.

Ingredients
Four 6- to 8-inch pitas
4 teaspoons olive oil
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Drizzle the pitas with olive oil (about ½ teaspoon per side) and rub
them all over with your fingers. Sprinkle salt and pepper over all
and if broiling spread them out on a baking sheet.
2. Grill or broil the pitas, turning once, until browned (even slightly
charred) on both sides, 2 to 5 minutes total.
3. Stack the pitas and cut into halves or wedges if you like, wrap in a
towel, and serve warm.
VARIATIONS
8 Ways to Season Pita
Sprinkle a pinch over each along with the salt and pepper:
1. Cumin
2. Curry powder
3. Smoked paprika
4. Chili powder
5. Chopped fresh (or dried) rosemary or oregano
6. Sesame seeds
7. Fresh or dried thyme
8. Za’atar

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 8

Bruschetta
Good bread, toasted and rubbed with fresh garlic, then showered in
olive oil. Stop there and you’ll be happy, or see the list that follows
for other toppings.

Ingredients
1 loaf any rustic unsliced bread (about 1 pound)
2 garlic cloves
¼ cup olive oil, or more to taste
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Cut the bread into slices about 1 inch thick. If broiling, put them on a
rimmed baking sheet.
Peel and halve 2 garlic cloves.
2. Grill or broil the bread, turning once, until golden on both sides but
still soft in places, 2 to 5 minutes total.
3. Rub the tops of the bread with the cut side of the garlic.
4. Spread them out and drizzle ¼ cup olive oil over all; sprinkle with salt
and pepper and add more olive oil if you like. Serve warm.
Additions
10 Easy Bruschetta Toppings
Top each slice of bread with a tablespoon or 2 of the following:
1. Grated Parmesan cheese
2. Chopped fresh tomatoes with chopped fresh basil
3. Mashed white beans (with salt and pepper)
4. Canned tuna (with salt and pepper)
5. Ricotta, sliced mozzarella, or crumbled feta cheese
6. Pesto
7. Olive tapenade
8. Hummus

9. Tomato Salsa
10. Smashed Peas

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Couscous
Plain couscous is a cook’s—and eater’s—dream: It’s almost as easy
as boiling water, takes just over 5 minutes, requires almost no
watching, and is delicious with a wide variety of main dishes. For
the whole wheat and Israeli versions, see the Variations.

Ingredients
1 cup couscous
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 cup couscous in a medium saucepan; add 1½ cups water and a
big pinch of salt.
2. Bring just to a boil, cover, and remove from the heat. Let it steep for
about 5 minutes; fluff with a fork, taste and add more salt if you like,
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Whole Wheat Couscous
Use whole wheat couscous instead of white; let it steep for about 10
minutes.
Israeli Couscous
Chewy and more pastalike; also known as pearl couscous. Use Israeli
couscous along with 2 cups water. When the water boils, reduce the heat so
it bubbles gently but steadily and cook, stirring occasionally until the water
almost evaporates and the couscous is barely tender, 2 to 5 minutes or more.
(The cooking time varies a lot depending on the size and brand, so taste it a
couple times.) Then cover, let sit, and fluff as directed.
Seasoning Couscous
Anything you can stir into cooked rice you can also stir into cooked
couscous. See the list 11 Ways to Flavor Cooked Grains for ideas.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Green Salad
The side that goes with more dishes than any other. Add other
ingredients as you have the time and inclination; see the list below
for options. For information about how to rinse, dry, and store
greens, see Salad Greens. I usually use sherry vinegar, but any will
work.

Ingredients
1 large head romaine lettuce
⅓ cup olive oil
2 tablespoons any vinegar or lemon juice
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Trim the lettuce and tear the leaves into bite-sized pieces (you should
have about 6 cups).
1. Put the leaves in a large bowl, drizzle with ⅓ cup olive oil and 2
tablespoons vinegar, and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
2. Toss gently, lifting from the bottom to coat with dressing. Taste and
adjust the seasoning, then serve right away.
VARIATIONS
Green Salad with Sesame-Soy Dressing
Substitute 3 tablespoons vegetable oil and 2 tablespoons sesame oil for
olive oil and use rice vinegar.
12 Other Greens to Use (Alone or in Combination)
1. Iceberg lettuce
2. Boston lettuce
3. Green or red leaf lettuce
4. Spinach
5. Arugula
6. Endive
7. Radicchio
8. Watercress
9. Frisée
10. Dandelion greens

11. Beet greens
12. Escarole

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chopped Salad
Basically any vegetable that you would eat raw is fair game here,
but use the ingredient list as a guideline for making the most
versatile salad ever while cleaning
out your produce drawer.

Ingredients
1 medium head romaine lettuce
1 large carrot
2 celery stalks
1 small cucumber
1 medium red bell pepper
1 small red onion
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 tablespoon sherry or red wine vinegar
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Trim and chop the lettuce; put it in a large bowl.
Trim and peel the carrot. Trim the celery. Peel the cucumber; cut it in
half lengthwise and scoop out the seeds with a spoon.
Core and seed the bell pepper. Trim and peel the onion.
Chop the vegetables, adding them to the bowl as you go.
1. Drizzle the salad with 3 tablespoons olive oil, 1 tablespoon vinegar,
and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
2. Toss gently, lifting from the bottom to coat with dressing. Taste and
adjust the seasoning and serve right away.
10 Ways to Turn Chopped Salad into a Meal
Add about 2 cups of the following (alone or in combination):
1. Cold pasta, soba, udon, or rice noodles
2. Chopped or sliced cooked meat, chicken, seafood, or tofu
3. Canned tuna
4. Cooked or canned beans
5. Edamame, lima beans, peas (thawed if frozen)
6. Fresh or frozen corn kernels
7. Chopped peanuts or other nuts (you’ll need only 1 cup)
8. Chopped hard-boiled eggs
9. Fresh or toasted Bread Crumbs
10. Cooked grains, like rice, bulgur, or quinoa

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tomato Salad
This combination—juicy, ripe tomatoes with basil and olive oil—is
an absolute no-brainer. But salt the tomatoes and they’ll be even
better.

Ingredients
5 or 6 medium ripe tomatoes (2 pounds)
Salt
1 bunch fresh basil
3 tablespoons olive oil
Pepper

Prep | Cook
Core the tomatoes and cut into wedges or large chunks.
1. Put the tomatoes in a large bowl; sprinkle with salt.
Strip about ½ cup basil leaves from the stems and tear them into the
bowl.
2. Add 3 tablespoons olive oil and lots of pepper; toss. Taste and adjust
the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Tomato Salad with Olive Oil and Yogurt
Substitute ¼ cup chopped fresh parsley for basil. Add 3 tablespoons plain
yogurt.
Tomato Salad with Sesame and Soy
An excellent combination. Don’t salt the tomatoes in Step 1. Substitute ¼
cup chopped scallions or shallots for the basil and 1 tablespoon sesame oil
and 2 tablespoons soy sauce for the olive oil. Taste, then add salt and
pepper.
Jícama Salad with Chiles
Substitute 1 pound peeled and grated jícama for the tomatoes, chopped
fresh chiles or red chile flakes to taste for the basil, and 1 tablespoon toasted
sesame oil and the juice of 2 limes for the olive oil.
Grape Salad with Mint
Instead of the tomatoes, use 1½ pounds red or green seedless grapes;
substitute ¼ cup chopped fresh mint for the basil. Add 1 tablespoon red or
white wine vinegar.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Carrot Salad with Raisins
Add cumin to the classic American picnic salad to give it a
Moroccan twist.

Ingredients
½ cup raisins
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons cider vinegar
1 teaspoon cumin
Salt and pepper
4 to 6 large carrots (1½ pounds)

Prep | Cook
1. Put ½ cup raisins, 3 tablespoons olive oil, 2 tablespoons cider vinegar,
1 teaspoon cumin, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper in a large bowl.
Trim and peel the carrots; slice them into thin coins by hand or
machine, or grate them.
2. Add the carrots to the bowl and toss. Taste and adjust the seasoning
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Carrot Salad with Olives and Rosemary
Substitute ½ cup chopped olives for the raisins, sherry or red wine vinegar
for the cider vinegar, and 1 teaspoon minced fresh rosemary for the cumin.
Carrot Salad with Soy Sauce and Scallions
Use ½ cup chopped scallions in place of the raisins and 1 tablespoon each
sesame oil, vegetable oil, and soy sauce instead of olive oil. Use rice
vinegar instead of cider vinegar. Garnish with toasted sesame seeds if you
like.
Carrot Salad with Cilantro and Lime
Use ¼ cup hulled pumpkin seeds instead of the raisins and the juice of 1
lime in place of vinegar. Add 1 teaspoon chili powder and ½ cup chopped
fresh cilantro to the dressing.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cucumber Salad
It never hurts to dress cucumbers up a bit. If you have time to make
these before you start the main dish, the result is a quick, fresh
pickle.

Ingredients
3 medium cucumbers (1 to 1½ pounds)
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons sherry vinegar or red wine vinegar
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Trim the cucumbers, peel if necessary, cut them in half lengthwise, and
scoop out the seeds with a spoon. Cut them into small chunks or slices
and put them in a large bowl.
1. Add 3 tablespoons olive oil, 2 tablespoons vinegar, and a sprinkle of
salt and pepper and toss. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Cucumber Salad with Soy Sauce and Mirin
Substitute soy sauce for the olive oil and mirin for the vinegar.
Cucumber Salad with Dijon Mayo
Replace the olive oil with mayonnaise and the vinegar with Dijon mustard.
Cucumber Salad with Hot Sauce and Lime Juice
Use mayonnaise instead of olive oil and the juice of 1 lime instead of
vinegar; add a few dashes of your favorite hot sauce (Sriracha is great here).
Cucumber Salad with Sour Cream and Dill
Substitute sour cream for the olive oil and ¼ cup chopped fresh dill for the
vinegar.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
If you have Vinaigrette in the fridge, use it instead of making the dressing
as described in Step 1.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cucumber Raita
This classic Indian yogurt sauce is a cooling accompaniment to all
sorts of spicy dishes, whether they feature chicken, meat, seafood,
vegetables, legumes, or rice.

Ingredients
2 medium cucumbers
1 garlic clove
1 lemon
1½ cups yogurt
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Trim the cucumbers, peel if necessary, cut them in half lengthwise, and
scoop out the seeds with a spoon. Chop the cucumbers into small or
large pieces, depending on how chunky you want the sauce. Add them
to a medium bowl.
Peel and mince 1 garlic clove; add it to the bowl.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into the bowl.
1. Add 1½ cups yogurt and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl. Stir
to combine. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve right away or
refrigerate for up to 1 day.
VARIATIONS
8 Other Vegetable Raitas
Use the following alone or in combination ( about 3 cups):
1. Tomatoes
2. Bell peppers
3. Grated carrots
4. Grated beets
5. Grated celery root
6. Daikon or other radish
7. Fennel
8. Tomatillos
5 Ways to Flavor Raita

Stir in any of the following (alone or in combination):
1. Up to ½ cup chopped fresh parsley, cilantro, or mint
2. Up to 1 teaspoon cumin, curry powder, chili powder, or cinnamon
3. Up to ½ cup chopped pistachios
4. Hot sauce to taste
5. 2 teaspoons minced fresh hot chile or ginger

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fennel Salad
Thinly sliced fennel dressed in citrus juice, olive oil, salt, and
pepper is one of my favorite salads, and shaved Parmesan adds just
the right richness. Celery is equally good this way; see the first
Variation.

Ingredients
1 large or 2 small fennel bulbs (1 pound)
1 lemon
3 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Trim the fennel, saving a few of the fronds for garnish. Thinly slice the
fennel by hand or machine and put it in a large bowl.
Grate the lemon zest and add the zest to the bowl; cut the fruit in half
and squeeze in the juice.
1. Add 3 tablespoons olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper and toss.
Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Celery Salad
Substitute 1 pound celery, thinly sliced, for the fennel or use a combination.
Fennel Salad with Olives
Use an orange instead of the lemon. Add ½ cup chopped green or black
olives.
Fennel Salad with Capers and Dill
Substitute mayonnaise for the olive oil. Add 2 tablespoons capers and ¼
cup chopped fresh dill.
Fennel Salad with Caraway Seeds
Use 2 tablespoons cider vinegar instead of the lemon zest and juice. Add 2
teaspoons caraway seeds.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
If you have Vinaigrette in your fridge, use it instead of making the dressing
as described in Step 1, omitting the lemon.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Jícama and Radish Salad
Jícama and radish have similar textures, both crisp with a slight
burst of juice, but the mild jícama benefits from the spicy edge of
radish. If you have only one or the other, make this anyway. A
crumble of feta or queso fresco is a bonus here.

Ingredients
2 medium jícama (1 pound)
4 to 6 radishes (8 ounces)
2 limes
1 teaspoon honey
½ teaspoon chili powder
Salt
1 bunch fresh cilantro

Prep | Cook
Peel and quarter the jícama. Trim and halve the radishes. Slice them both
thinly by hand or machine and put them in a large bowl.
Halve the limes and squeeze the juice into the bowl.
1. Add 1 teaspoon honey, ½ teaspoon chili powder, and a sprinkle of salt.
Chop ½ cup cilantro and add it to the bowl.
2. Toss the salad well to distribute the honey and chili powder. Taste and
adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Jícama and Radish Salad with Dried Cranberries and Cinnamon
Substitute 1 orange for the limes, ¼ teaspoon cinnamon for the chili
powder, and mint for the cilantro. Add ½ cup dried cranberries.
Daikon Salad with Fish Sauce, Lime, and Peanuts
Instead of the jícama and radishes, use 1½ pounds daikon. Omit the chili
powder and add ½ cup chopped peanuts and 2 teaspoons fish sauce.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Ginger-Orange Bean Sprouts
The only way to cook bean sprouts so that they don’t lose their
crunch—their best feature—is very quickly. They get a flash of
heat and no more.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 inch fresh ginger
1 pound bean sprouts (about 4 cups)
Salt and pepper
1 orange
1 tablespoon soy sauce
2 teaspoons sesame oil

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over high heat.
Peel and mince 1 inch fresh ginger.
2. Add the ginger to the skillet and cook, stirring until fragrant, about 30
seconds.
3. Add the bean sprouts and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Toss to coat in
the oil; cook, stirring occasionally until they barely begin to soften, 1
to 2 minutes.
Halve the orange.
4. Squeeze the orange juice into the skillet; add 1 tablespoon soy sauce
and 2 teaspoons sesame oil; turn off the heat and toss.
5. Taste and adjust the seasoning, adding more salt or soy sauce if
necessary, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Olive Oil and Rosemary Bean Sprouts
Omit the soy sauce and sesame oil. Substitute olive for vegetable oil, 1
tablespoon minced garlic for the ginger, and a lemon for the orange. Add 1
teaspoon chopped fresh rosemary with the lemon juice.
Scallion-Miso Bean Sprouts
Use 3 chopped scallions in place of the orange and 1 tablespoon miso paste
thinned with a small splash of water instead of soy sauce.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Avocado with Lemon and Salt
Not long ago avocados were exotic; now they’re commonplace.
But there’s nothing common about how delicious and beautifully
textured they are.

Ingredients
2 medium avocados (about 1 pound)
Salt
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
Halve and pit the avocados; scoop out the flesh in one piece, thinly slice,
and fan the slices out on a plate. Sprinkle with salt.
Halve the lemon.
1. Squeeze the lemon juice over the avocado slices and serve.
VARIATIONS
Avocado with Lime and Chili Salt
Substitute lime for lemon and mix a little chili powder into the salt before
sprinkling.
Avocado with Rice Vinegar and Peanuts
Use 2 teaspoons rice vinegar instead of lemon juice. Garnish with 2
tablespoons finely chopped peanuts.
Avocado with Hot Sauce and Cilantro
Replace lemon with lime. Garnish with hot sauce to taste and some chopped
fresh cilantro.
Avocado with Soy Sauce and Sesame Seeds
Substitute 2 tablespoons soy sauce for the lemon juice and 1 tablespoon
sesame seeds for the salt.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pick-a-Fruit Salad
Limiting the types of fruits you use cuts down on prep time,
although of course you can go to town if you like. See the list that
follows for additional seasoning options.

Ingredients
1 medium pineapple (or 1½ pounds peaches or nectarines, apples,
pears, bananas, fresh figs, kiwi, apricots, or melon)
2 cups strawberries (or any other berries)
1 lemon
Salt or sugar as you like

Prep | Cook
Cut the top and bottom off the pineapple; stand it upright and slice
around the outside to remove the skin.
Still cutting from top to bottom, slice around the core; you’ll have 3 or 4
large pieces. Discard the core, chop the flesh, and put it in a large
bowl. (Or trim, peel, and cut the other fruit as necessary.)
Hull 2 cups strawberries. Cut them into quarters if they’re big or into
halves if they’re small; add them to the bowl.
Halve the lemon and squeeze the juice into the bowl.
1. Gently stir the fruit, sprinkle with salt or sugar, taste and adjust the
seasoning, and serve.
10 More Ways to Flavor Fruit Salad
Add any of the following in addition to or instead of the lemon:
1. Lime juice
2. ¼ cup chopped fresh basil or mint
3. Up to 2 teaspoons brown sugar, honey, or maple syrup
4. ¼ cup chopped toasted nuts or shredded coconut
5. 2 tablespoons lemon or orange liqueur
6. 2 teaspoons poppy seeds
7. Pepper
8. 2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
9. Minced fresh chile to taste
10. ½ teaspoon vanilla extract

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Caprese Salad
Witness one of the most popular combinations of our time; then use
this recipe as a model.

Ingredients
1 small head romaine
4 or 5 medium ripe tomatoes (1½ pounds)
8 ounces fresh mozzarella cheese
1 bunch fresh basil
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar

Prep | Cook
Trim the lettuce, pull off the whole leaves, and lay them on a platter to
form a bed.
Core the tomatoes; slice crosswise into ½-inch rounds.
Cut 8 ounces fresh mozzarella crosswise into slices about the same
thickness.
Strip about ½ cup basil leaves from the stems.
1. Alternating, overlap the tomato slices, mozzarella slices, and basil
leaves on top of the lettuce.
2. Sprinkle with salt and lots of pepper; drizzle with 2 tablespoons olive
oil and 2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar and serve.
VARIATIONS
Peach, Blue Cheese, and Tarragon Salad
Substitute 2 pounds peaches for the tomatoes, crumbled blue cheese for the
mozzarella, 2 tablespoons fresh tarragon for the basil, and red wine vinegar
for balsamic.
Watermelon, Feta, and Mint Salad
Use 2 pounds watermelon instead of the tomatoes, crumbled feta for the
mozzarella, fresh mint for the basil, and lime juice for the balsamic.
Plum, Manchego, and Parsley Salad
Substitute 2 pounds plums for the tomatoes, shaved manchego cheese for
the mozzarella, parsley for the basil, and sherry vinegar for balsamic.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Coleslaw
Choose a slightly pliable cabbage—like Napa or Savoy—for a
crisp-tender slaw. Use everyday red or green cabbage when you
want more crunch.

Ingredients
1 large lemon, plus more as needed
¼ cup mayonnaise
2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more as needed
Salt and pepper
4 scallions
1 small head any cabbage (1 pound)
2 large carrots

Prep | Cook
Halve the lemon and squeeze the juice into a large bowl.
1. Add ¼ cup mayonnaise and 2 tablespoons olive oil and sprinkle
generously with salt and pepper. Whisk well to combine.
Trim and slice the scallions; add them to the bowl.
Trim, core, and quarter the cabbage. Trim and peel the carrots.
Shred the cabbage and carrots in a food processor with a grating disk
or by hand with a knife or box grater; transfer to the bowl.
2. Stir the vegetables into the dressing. Taste and adjust the seasoning,
adding more lemon juice or olive oil if needed, and serve immediately
or refrigerate for up to a day.
VARIATIONS
Soy Slaw
Substitute 1 tablespoon each sesame oil and vegetable oil for the olive oil
and add 2 tablespoons soy sauce. Garnish with sesame seeds.
Tahini Slaw
Replace 2 tablespoons of the mayonnaise with 2 tablespoons tahini. Add 1
teaspoon cumin if you like.
No-Mayo Slaw
Omit the mayonnaise and increase the olive oil to ⅓ cup. Substitute 2
tablespoons red wine vinegar for the lemon juice.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN

Mayonnaise

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sautéed Greens with Garlic
The same drill works with any greens. The only thing that varies is
the cooking time: Sturdier leaves—like kale—take longer to soften
than tender leaves like spinach.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
1½ pounds spinach, kale, collards, chard, or broccoli rabe
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Trim and chop the greens, keeping any thick stems separate (discard
any thick spinach stems).
2. Raise the heat to medium-high. Add any chopped stems to the skillet
and cook until they begin to soften, 3 or 4 minutes. Add the leaves, a
handful at a time if necessary to fit them in, and sprinkle with salt and
pepper.
3. Cook until they’re just wilted, 2 to 3 minutes for spinach, 3 or 4
minutes for chard and broccoli rabe, 4 or 5 minutes for kale and
collards.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves; add them to the skillet as soon as
you’re done.
4. When the greens are wilted, taste and adjust the seasoning and serve
hot or at room temperature.
VARIATIONS
4 Ways to Flavor Greens
Add any of the following along with or instead of the garlic:
1. Minced fresh hot chile or red chile flakes to taste
2. 2 teaspoons sesame oil (use vegetable oil instead of olive oil)
3. ½ cup grated Parmesan cheese
4. ½ cup chopped cooked bacon, sausage, or ham

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Seared Broccoli or Cauliflower
A screaming-hot pan works wonders on florets of broccoli or
cauliflower, which crisp and brown as they soften. (Broccoli rabe
works too and cooks even faster.)

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
1 medium head broccoli or cauliflower (1 to 1½ pounds)
2 garlic cloves
½ teaspoon red chile flakes (optional)
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Trim the broccoli or cauliflower; break or chop into small florets.
2. Add the broccoli or cauliflower to the skillet and raise the heat to high.
Cook undisturbed until the florets brown, 3 to 5 minutes.
Peel and mince the garlic.
3. When the florets are brown on the bottom, turn and sear on the other
side, another 2 or 3 minutes.
4. Add the garlic to the skillet along with ½ teaspoon red chile flakes if
you’re using them and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring or
shaking the pan occasionally until the broccoli or cauliflower is nearly
tender and the garlic is fragrant, 1 or 2 minutes.
5. Add ¾ cup water and scrape any browned bits off the bottom of the
skillet, then lower the heat to medium.
6. Cook, stirring occasionally until the broccoli or cauliflower is fully
tender and the liquid bubbles away, 2 to 4 minutes. Taste and adjust the
seasoning and serve hot, warm, or at room temperature.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Two-Step Broccoli
Broccoli and cheddar is a classic of the microwave age—and still a
great dish if you make it yourself (see the variation). But I’ve
always preferred this vegetable with Parmesan. And yes, you can
still use the microwave!

Ingredients
1 large head broccoli (1½ pounds)
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated)
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Trim the broccoli; break or chop into small florets.
2. Put the broccoli in a microwave-safe dish, add 2 tablespoons water,
and cover. Cook on high, checking once or twice, until it’s barely
tender, 3 to 5 minutes.
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese.
3. When the broccoli is tender, transfer it to a broiler-safe pan, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and top with the Parmesan. Broil until the cheese
bubbles and browns, just a minute or 2. Serve hot or at room
temperature.
VARIATIONS
Broccoli and Cheddar
Substitute cheddar for the Parmesan.
Broccoli and Toasted Almonds
Use ½ cup chopped almonds instead of the cheese in Step 3; broil until they
darken but don’t burn.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stir-Fried Bok Choy
A two-for-one side dish. You get the crunchy white stems, which
get a head start in the skillet while you prepare everything else, and
the tender green leaves, which finish quickly.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 large head bok choy (1½ pounds)
2 garlic cloves
1 fresh hot green chile (like Thai)
Salt and pepper
1 lime
1 tablespoon soy sauce, plus more to taste

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Trim the bok choy; cut (or pull) the leaves from the stems. Thinly slice
the stems.
2. Add the stems to the skillet and raise the heat to medium-high. Cook,
stirring occasionally until they start to soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
Cut the leaves into wide ribbons.
Peel 2 garlic cloves and trim the chile; mince both together.
3. Add the leaves, garlic, chile, a little salt, and some pepper to the
skillet. Cook, stirring occasionally until the leaves wilt and the stems
are nearly tender but still have some crunch, 3 or 4 minutes.
Halve the lime.
4. Squeeze the lime juice into the pan with 1 tablespoon soy sauce and
stir. Taste and adjust the seasoning; add more soy sauce if you like and
serve.
VARIATIONS
Stir-Fried Bok Choy with Olives and Lemon
Omit the soy sauce.
Substitute olive oil for the vegetable oil, ¼ cup chopped olives for the chile,
and a lemon for the lime.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fajita Peppers and Onions
The sizzle of fajitas making their way to your table on a scorching-
hot cast-iron plate is about as enticing a sound as you’ll hear in a
restaurant, and it’s easy to replicate at home.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
2 medium onions
3 medium bell peppers (any color)
2 teaspoons cumin
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Trim, peel, halve, and slice the onions; add them to the skillet.
Core, seed, and slice the peppers; add them to the skillet.
2. Raise the heat to high and cook, stirring frequently, until the vegetables
are as tender and brown as you like, 5 to 10 minutes.
3. Sprinkle with the cumin and some salt and pepper and cook, stirring,
for a minute. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Fajita Poblanos and Scallions
For the peppers, use 1 pound poblano chiles. Instead of the onion, trim 2
bunches scallions and cut into 2-inch pieces.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Asparagus Gratin
Crisp-tender vegetables topped with a crunchy, savory Parmesan-
laced crust. For a fast vegetable dish, this cannot be beat.

Ingredients
1 large bunch or 2 medium bunches asparagus (1½ to 2 pounds)
2 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper
3 thick slices any rustic bread (a little stale is fine)
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated; optional)

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Trim the asparagus.
2. Put the asparagus on a rimmed baking sheet, toss with 2 tablespoons
olive oil, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Broil until lightly browned
on the top side, 4 or 5 minutes.
Chop 3 slices bread into cubes. Transfer to a food processor and pulse
until they become coarse crumbs. (You should have about 1½ cups.)
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese if you’re using it.
3. When the tops of the asparagus are brown, turn them, sprinkle with the
bread crumbs and Parmesan, and broil until the thickest parts can be
pierced with a knife and the bread crumbs and cheese are golden and
crisp, 4 or 5 minutes more. Serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Eggplant Gratin
Use eggplant instead of asparagus. Don’t bother to peel it. If the eggplant is
large, cut it crosswise into slices less than 1 inch thick; if you’re using the
long slender kind, split them in half lengthwise. You’ll need to turn them at
least once during cooking in Steps 2 and 3.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tomatoes with Fried Bread Crumbs
Fried Green Tomatoes meets A Year in Provence: This spin on
tomates provençales tops raw slices of tomato with crisp bread
crumbs fried in a skillet. With the southern-hospitality-sized
portions you might have leftovers, which is fine since they’re good
cold too.

Ingredients
¼ cup olive oil, plus more for garnish
4 thick slices any rustic bread (a little stale is fine)
Salt and pepper
5 or 6 medium ripe tomatoes (2 pounds)

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large skillet over low heat.
Chop 4 slices bread into cubes. Transfer to a food processor and pulse
into coarse crumbs. (You should have about 2 cups.)
2. Raise the heat to medium-high. Add the bread crumbs to the skillet,
sprinkle with salt and pepper, and stir gently to coat in the oil. Cook,
stirring frequently and adjusting the heat to avoid burning, until the
crumbs are golden and crisp, 5 to 7 minutes. Shake the pan every
minute or so to keep the crumbs from burning.
Core the tomatoes; slice crosswise into rounds ¼ to ½ inch thick. Lay
the tomatoes on a platter and sprinkle with salt.
3. When the bread crumbs are crisp, sprinkle over the tomatoes, drizzle
with a little more olive oil, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Tomatoes with Parsley Bread Crumbs
Just before topping the tomatoes, stir ½ cup chopped fresh parsley into the
crumbs.
Tomatoes with Parmesan Bread Crumbs
Stir ½ cup grated Parmesan cheese into the crumbs before topping the
tomatoes.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Broiled Cherry Tomatoes
Run ripe cherry tomatoes under the broiler to char them lightly and
concentrate their sweetness—nothing short of amazing.

Ingredients
1½ pounds cherry tomatoes
2 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Rinse and dry the tomatoes.
2. Put the tomatoes on a rimmed baking sheet. Add 2 tablespoons olive
oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper and toss.
3. Broil, shaking the pan occasionally, until the tomatoes are charred in
spots and just starting to burst, 4 to 6 minutes. Let them cool for a
minute or 2 before serving, drizzled with any pan juices.
VARIATIONS
5 Ways to Flavor Broiled Tomatoes
Add any of the following when the tomatoes come out of the broiler:
1. ¼ cup chopped fresh parsley, cilantro, basil, or mint
2. 1 teaspoon chopped fresh rosemary, thyme, or oregano
3. 1 teaspoon minced garlic
4. ¼ cup cream
5. ¼ cup grated Parmesan or crumbled feta, blue cheese, or goat cheese

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Mexican Street Corn
A fantastic street food, usually served on a stick. But at home
there’s no need for that.

Ingredients
4 ears fresh corn
1 lime
2 tablespoons mayonnaise
¼ teaspoon chili powder, or more to taste
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Prepare a grill or turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the
heat.
Husk the corn. If broiling, put it on a rimmed baking sheet.
Halve the lime.
2. Grill or broil the corn, turning as necessary, until all the sides are
charred in places, 5 to 8 minutes total.
Squeeze the lime juice into a small bowl and add 2 tablespoons
mayonnaise, ¼ teaspoon chili powder, and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper. Stir to combine, taste, and adjust the seasoning, adding more
chili powder if you like.
3. When the corn is done, remove it from the grill or broiler and spread
each ear all over with some of the mayonnaise mixture. Serve hot.
VARIATIONS
Mexican Street Corn with Cheese
After spreading the mayonnaise mixture on the corn, sprinkle the ears all
over with crumbled cotija cheese or queso fresco.
Mediterranean Corn
Substitute lemon for the lime, olive oil for the mayonnaise, and red chile
flakes for the chili powder. If you like, garnish with a sprinkle of grated
Parmesan.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Succotash
This winning combination takes advantage of two of the best
frozen foods: corn and lima beans. When you have both handy, this
dish comes together in no time.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons butter
1 medium red bell pepper
1½ cups frozen corn kernels
1 cup frozen lima beans
Salt and pepper
2 scallions

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons butter in a medium skillet over medium heat.
Core, seed, and chop the pepper; add it to the skillet.
2. Cook the pepper, stirring once or twice until it begins to soften, 2 or 3
minutes.
3. Add 1½ cups corn and 1 cup lima beans and sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally until both are hot all the way
through, 3 to 4 minutes.
Trim and chop the scallions; add them to the pan and stir.
4. When the succotash is hot, taste and adjust the seasoning and serve hot
or at room temperature.
VARIATIONS
Edamame Succotash
Substitute 2 tablespoons vegetable oil and 1 tablespoon sesame oil for the
butter and frozen edamame for the lima beans.
Panfried Corn and Onions
Use 3 cups corn kernels and skip the scallions. Use 1 large onion instead of
the bell pepper; add it to the skillet once the butter melts in Step 1. Cook,
stirring occasionally, until golden, 5 to 10 minutes; then add the corn.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
For extra speed, skip the bell pepper and scallions.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Peas with Bacon and Onion
A quick warming with cooked bacon and onions keeps frozen peas
firm and vibrant green while turning them into an elegant, delicious
side.

Ingredients
1 tablespoon olive oil
4 slices bacon
1 medium onion
3 cups frozen peas
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 tablespoon olive oil in a medium skillet over medium heat.
Chop 4 slices bacon; add them to the skillet.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion; add it to the skillet.
2. Cook, stirring occasionally until the bacon is crisp and the onion is soft
and brown, 5 to 10 minutes.
3. Stir in 3 cups peas and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring
occasionally until the peas are hot all the way through, 3 or 4 minutes.
Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Peas with Prosciutto and Mint
Increase the olive oil to 2 tablespoons. Substitute thin prosciutto slices for
the bacon and use red onion instead of yellow. Stir in ¼ cup chopped fresh
mint just before serving.
Peas with Parmesan
Omit the bacon and increase the olive oil to 2 tablespoons. Cook the onion
by itself; then add the peas. Stir in up to ½ cup grated Parmesan cheese just
before serving.
Peas with Ginger
Skip the bacon and use 2 tablespoons butter instead of the olive oil. Mince 1
inch fresh ginger and add it to the butter once it’s melted in Step 1. Cook
and stir until fragrant, just a minute or 2; then stir in the peas.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Smashed Peas
Warmed in stock with some butter until soft, then mashed up a bit,
these bright and tasty peas are nothing like the dreary gray mush of
the past.

Ingredients
¾ cup chicken or vegetable stock
2 tablespoons butter
3 cups frozen peas
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¾ cup stock, 2 tablespoons butter, 3 cups peas, and a sprinkle of
salt and pepper in a medium saucepan over medium-high heat.
2. Bring to a boil and cook, stirring occasionally until some of the liquid
evaporates and the peas heat through and become tender, 3 to 4
minutes.
3. Mash the peas with a potato masher or fork; leave them chunky if you
like or keep mashing for a smoother consistency. Taste and adjust the
seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Smashed Curried Peas
Substitute coconut milk for stock. In Step 1, cook 1 tablespoon curry
powder in the butter for 30 seconds or so before adding the other
ingredients.
Smashed Tomato Peas
Perfect for when you have a little leftover Tomato Sauce. Instead of the
stock, use ½ cup tomato sauce mixed with ¼ cup water.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Creamed Spinach
Cooking spinach directly in cream is a bit unorthodox, but here
efficiency tastes great.

Ingredients
¾ cup cream
2 tablespoons butter
¼ teaspoon nutmeg, or to taste
Salt and pepper
2 medium bunches spinach (1½ to 2 pounds)

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¾ cup cream, 2 tablespoons butter, ¼ teaspoon nutmeg, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper in a medium saucepan over medium heat.
Trim off any thick stems from the spinach and chop the leaves.
2. Add the spinach to the pot, a handful at a time until it all fits.
3. Cook, stirring occasionally until the spinach is completely wilted and
tender and the cream has reduced and thickened to the consistency you
like, 5 to 10 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Long-Cooked Buttery Spinach
As rich as with the cream but with more spinach flavor. Omit the cream and
nutmeg. Put lots of butter (an entire stick wouldn’t be too much) in a large
skillet over medium-low heat. When it’s melted, add the spinach and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the spinach is
completely wilted and tender, 10 to 15 minutes.
Tahini Creamed Spinach
Substitute ½ cup tahini and ¼ cup water for the cream, olive oil for the
butter, and 1 teaspoon cumin for the nutmeg.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chile-Cumin Black Beans
Warming the cumin in oil before adding the beans maximizes its
flavor.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 teaspoons cumin
2 garlic cloves
1 fresh hot green chile (like jalapeño)
3 cups cooked or canned black beans (one-and-a-half 15-ounce cans)
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil and 2 teaspoons cumin in a large skillet
over medium heat.
Peel 2 garlic cloves; trim the chile. Mince them together and add them
to the skillet.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
2. Let the cumin, garlic, and chile sizzle in the oil until the mixture is
fragrant and the garlic turns light brown, 1 or 2 minutes.
3. Add the beans and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, stirring
occasionally until the beans are warmed all the way through, 2 or 3
minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Sesame-Soy Black Beans
Omit the cumin; go light on the salt. Swap 1 tablespoon each sesame oil and
vegetable oil for the olive oil. Add 1 tablespoon soy sauce when you add
the beans.
Black Beans with Tomato and Feta
Add 1 cup halved cherry tomatoes when you add the garlic and chile.
Garnish with ¼ cup crumbled feta cheese.
Lentils with Smoked Paprika and Garlic
Substitute smoked paprika for the cumin, ½ teaspoon red chile flakes for
the fresh chile, and lentils for the black beans.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Refried Beans
Refried beans are traditionally cooked in lard, but oil works just
fine. That said, if you happen to have any lard or bacon drippings
in your fridge or freezer, now’s the time to use it.

Ingredients
⅓ cup vegetable oil
2 cups cooked or canned pinto, black, or pink beans (one 15-ounce can)
1 small yellow onion
½ teaspoon cumin
½ teaspoon chili powder
¼ teaspoon cayenne
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put ⅓ cup vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat.
If you’re using canned beans, rinse and drain them.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the oil is hot, add the beans and cook, mashing them with a
potato masher until they’re partly broken up.
3. Add the onion, ½ teaspoon cumin, ½ teaspoon chili powder, ¼
teaspoon cayenne, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper. Cook, continuing
to mash, until the beans are mostly broken down and the onion is
lightly cooked, 3 to 5 minutes.
4. If the mixture is too thick, stir in a splash of bean cooking liquid or
water until it’s the consistency that you like. Taste and adjust the
seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Refried White Beans with Rosemary
Substitute olive oil for the vegetable oil and use white beans. Substitute 2
teaspoons minced fresh rosemary for the cumin, chili powder, and cayenne.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans
Chili Powder

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Hummus
If you use canned chickpeas, you can make hummus yourself in
less time than it would take to go to a store and buy it, and the
results are infinitely better.

Ingredients
2 garlic cloves
1 lemon
2 cups cooked or canned chickpeas (one 15-ounce can)
½ cup tahini
¼ cup olive oil, plus more as needed
1 tablespoon cumin or paprika
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
Peel and chop 2 garlic cloves. Put them in a food processor or blender.
Halve the lemon; squeeze the juice into the machine.
If you’re using canned chickpeas, rinse and drain them.
1. Add the chickpeas, ½ cup tahini, ¼ cup olive oil, 1 tablespoon cumin
or paprika, and a sprinkle of salt and pepper to the food processor or
blender.
2. Let the machine run, adding water, chickpea cooking liquid, or olive
oil as necessary until the purée is as smooth as you like. Taste and
adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Roasted Red Pepper Hummus
Add 2 roasted red peppers to the food processor before puréeing.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Cooked Beans

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Scallion Pancakes
Certainly a bit more work than plain rice, but crisp, chewy, tender,
flaky, and addictive, especially with a quick dipping sauce.
Fantastic with stir-fries.

Ingredients
1 egg
¾ cup flour, plus more as needed
3 tablespoons soy sauce
½ teaspoon sesame oil
Vegetable oil for frying
6 scallions
1 tablespoon mirin or 1½ teaspoons honey with 1½ teaspoons water

Prep | Cook
1. Combine the egg, ½ cup water, ¾ cup flour, 1 tablespoon soy sauce,
and ½ teaspoon sesame oil in a large bowl. Whisk until smooth. The
mixture should have the consistency of thin pancake batter; if it
doesn’t, add water or flour as necessary.
2. Put a thin film of vegetable oil in a large skillet (preferably nonstick)
over medium heat.
Trim and chop the scallions.
3. Stir the scallions into the batter.
4. When the oil is hot, pour half of the batter into the skillet and spread it
into a thin layer with a spatula.
5. Cook, undisturbed, until the edges crisp and the batter sets, 2 to 4
minutes; adjust the heat so the pancake sizzles but doesn’t burn.
Whisk together 2 tablespoons soy sauce and 1 tablespoon mirin (or 1½
teaspoons honey mixed with 1½ teaspoons water) in a small bowl.
6. Flip the pancake with a broad spatula and cook the other side for
another minute or 2. Transfer to a cutting board. Repeat with the
remaining batter, adding more oil to the pan if necessary. Cut the
pancakes into wedges and serve with the dipping sauce.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

White Rice
What is there to say about a pot of rice other than that it’s among
the most useful dishes in the history of civilization? It’s also a
blank canvas; see the list that follows for stir-ins.

Ingredients
1½ cups long-grain white rice
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1½ cups rice in a medium saucepan; add a big pinch of salt and
water to cover by an inch. Bring to a boil, then adjust the heat so the
mixture bubbles steadily but not vigorously; cover.
2. Cook, undisturbed, until small craters appear on the surface, 10 to 15
minutes. Tip the pot to see if any liquid remains. If so, cover and keep
cooking until the rice is dry, checking every minute or 2. If the rice is
done but not all the water has boiled off, drain off the water and return
the rice to the pan.
3. Turn off the heat and keep the pan covered. The rice will stay warm for
another 10 to 15 minutes. Fluff with a fork and serve.
VARIATIONS
Quick Brown Rice
Use short-grain brown rice. In Step 2, cook for 20 to 25 minutes.
7 Stir-Ins
Before fluffing the rice, add any of the following:
1. 1 or more tablespoons butter or olive oil
2. 1 tablespoon chopped fresh herbs
3. ½ cup grated or crumbled cheese
4. 1 cup cooked beans, peas, or lentils
5. ½ cup chopped scallions
6. ½ cup tomato sauce or salsa
7. ½ to 1 teaspoon ground spices

TECHNIQUE

Seasoning Sides
I’ve compiled key seasonings and their best uses in a single table here. Use
this as your go-to guide. If you keep some or most of these on hand, you’ll
be able to customize your sides so you’ll never find them boring.
What to Add
When to Add It
CHOPPED FRESH
MILD HERBS
Like parsley, cilantro, basil, dill, and mint.
To keep these herbs fresh and vibrant, add
them to cooked dishes only for the last
few seconds of cooking or even after
they’re done.
CHOPPED FRESH
STRONG HERBS
Like rosemary, thyme, sage, and oregano.
Unlike milder herbs, heat helps bring out
the flavor in these oilier herbs. Mix with a
little oil or butter and spread on breads
before warming in the oven or add to
cooked greens, vegetables, beans, and
starches anytime during cooking. If you
want to flavor salads or raw vegetables,
mix them into the dressing.
DRIED HERBS AND
SPICES
These are strong, so start with about one-
third of what you’d use fresh. Cook and
use them as you would fresh, except you
probably won’t use them much for
garnishing.

CITRUS ZEST
Immediately perks up hot or cold dishes,
but it’s powerful, so be judicious. Make a
little zest a part of dressings, add it to
sautéed greens, vegetables, and beans as
they cook, or simply toss with (almost)
anything before serving.
BUTTER AND OIL
Butter is best with hot foods; oil is more
versatile for drizzling on salads or cold
dishes. Use either on cooked greens,
vegetables, beans, or starches. Add right
after cooking so the residual heat melts the
butter or warms the oil, and toss to coat.
VINEGAR, SOY
SAUCE, FISH SAUCE,
AND HOT SAUCE
All of these pack a punch. Include them in
dressings; add to sautéed greens,
vegetables, and beans as they cook; or
simply use them as condiments and drizzle
them over anything hot or cold before
serving.
MINCED GARLIC,
GINGER, AND CHILES
For salads or raw vegetables, mix small
amounts into the dressing. For sautéed
greens, vegetables, and beans, add them to
the skillet either at the beginning if you’re
cooking them gently or for the last few
minutes if you’re afraid they’ll burn; you
can use more in these instances. For
starches, add them for the last few minutes
of cooking so they soften with some heat.

CHOPPED TOMATOES,
ONIONS, AND
SCALLIONS
Add them toward the end of the cooking
to keep their flavor and texture fresh. Or
use them as a garnish (onion should be
chopped finely).
NUTS, SEEDS, AND
DRIED FRUIT
Toasting nuts and seeds in oil or a dry
skillet intensifies their flavor, but you can
also keep them raw. Dried fruit can be
added raw or after steeping in warm liquid
until it plumps. Either way, toss into
almost any dish before serving.
CHOPPED OLIVES
AND CAPERS, AND
MASHED ANCHOVIES
You can use these cured foods as is, but a
little heat infuses their flavor into the dish
(especially true for anchovies). Add them
to dressings, to sautéed greens, vegetables,
and beans during cooking, or stir them
into starches immediately after cooking.
Mashed together with a little olive oil, any
will make a great condiment to spread on
bread.
PREPARED SAUCES
AND CONDIMENTS
See Pesto, Tomato Sauce, Fresh Salsa,
Smooth Cooked Salsa, Olive Tapenade,
and Hummus. All are versatile
companions for all kinds of sides. Spread
them on any bread; add some to dressings;
stir into sautéed greens, vegetables, and
beans during cooking; or stir into starches
with a fork immediately after cooking. Or
garnish with a spoonful before serving.

PARMESAN CHEESE
Rich, nutty, and incredibly versatile.
Shave or grate over salads and raw
vegetables and it will stay intact, or grate
and stir into cooked dishes while they’re
still warm and it will become buttery and
creamy.
COOKED AND
CRUMBLED BACON,
SAUSAGE, OR OTHER
CHOPPED CURED
MEAT
I’m a big fan of using pork as a garnish
instead of a main component. Full-
flavored, already cooked, smoked or cured
meats (like ham, salami, or prosciutto) can
be added to salads before serving, to
sautéed greens, vegetables, and beans for
the last few minutes of cooking, and to
starches just before serving.
 
Seasoning During Cooking
When you’re cooking, you have two choices: You can add seasonings while
cooking aromatics or heating oil or at the end of cooking while the dish is
hottest, right before serving. The residual heat in the food improves the
flavor of pretty much anything you add and infuses it into the dish. If you
want the sharpest flavor of a seasoning, wait to add it as a garnish just
before serving.
Seasoning to Taste
As with salt and pepper, the most accurate seasoning is done to taste. For
some ingredients, like strong herbs, dried spices, and citrus zest, a little
goes a long way. For others, like fresh mild herbs, there’s really no limit to
how much you might want to use. My suggestion: Add a little at a time,

taste, and add more if it’s not enough. You can always keep adding, but you
can’t take it away.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Rice Pilaf
Cook rice in fat with some other ingredients, add liquid and
seasonings, and you end up with something magical; you’ll never
buy boxed pilaf again.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons butter or olive oil
1 medium onion
1½ cups long-grain white rice
Salt and pepper
1 tablespoon curry, chili, or five-spice powder; or large pinch saffron
(optional)
2½ cups any stock or water
Several sprigs fresh parsley for garnish

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter or olive oil in a large skillet over medium-
high heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the butter is sizzling or the oil is hot, add the onion and cook,
stirring occasionally until it starts to soften, 3 to 5 minutes.
3. Add 1½ cups rice, turn the heat down to medium, and cook, stirring
frequently until the rice is glossy and starting to color slightly, 3 to 5
minutes.
4. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and add the spices if you’re using them.
Add 2½ cups stock or water and bring to a boil. Adjust the heat so the
mixture bubbles steadily. Stir, cover, and cook undisturbed until small
craters appear, 10 to 15 minutes. Tip the pot to see if any liquid
remains. If so, cover and keep cooking until the rice is dry, checking
every minute or 2.
Strip the parsley leaves from several sprigs and chop.
5. Turn off the heat and keep covered. The rice will stay warm for
another 10 to 15 minutes. Add the parsley and 1 tablespoon butter or
olive oil, fluff with a fork, and serve.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Quinoa
Despite the good press it’s been getting, high-protein, high-fiber
quinoa is still way underused. This tiny grain has wonderful grassy
flavor and a texture that pops like caviar. It also gets you some of
the nuttiness of brown rice but cooks in half the time.

Ingredients
1½ cups quinoa
Salt and pepper
2 tablespoons olive oil or butter

Prep | Cook
Rinse and drain 1½ cups quinoa.
1. Put the quinoa in a medium saucepan; add a big pinch of salt, a
sprinkle of pepper, and water to cover by about an inch. Bring to a
boil, then adjust the heat so it bubbles gently.
2. Cover and cook undisturbed until small craters appear, 15 to 20
minutes. Tip the pan to see if any liquid remains. If so, cover and keep
cooking until the quinoa is dry, checking every minute.
3. Turn off the heat and keep the pan covered. The quinoa will stay warm
for another 10 to 15 minutes. Add 2 tablespoons olive oil or butter,
fluff with a fork, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Quinoa Cooked in Stock
Substitute chicken, vegetable, beef, or fish stock for some or all of the
water.
Red Wine and Rosemary Quinoa
Substitute 1 cup red wine for 1 cup water and add up to 1 tablespoon
minced fresh rosemary when you add the liquid.
Seasoning Quinoa
Anything you can stir into cooked rice you can also stir into cooked quinoa.
See the list 7 Stir-Ins for ideas.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Bulgur with Lemon and Parsley
Since bulgur is partially cooked cracked whole wheat, all you need
to do is pour boiling water over it and go back to doing other prep.

Ingredients
1 cup bulgur (common medium grind is best here)
Salt
1 lemon
1 bunch fresh parsley
¼ cup olive oil
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Bring 2½ cups water to a boil.
2. Put 1 cup bulgur in a large bowl with a large pinch of salt. Pour the
boiling water over all and cover with a plate. Finely ground bulgur will
take 10 to 15 minutes to become tender, medium 15 to 20, and coarse
20 to 25.
Grate the lemon zest, then cut the fruit in half.
Chop ½ cup parsley.
3. When the bulgur is tender, pour it into a strainer and press out any
excess water with a spoon; return it to the bowl.
4. Stir in the lemon zest, parsley, ¼ cup olive oil, and a sprinkle of salt
and pepper; squeeze in the lemon juice. Taste and adjust the seasoning
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Bulgur with Corn
Substitute lime zest and juice for the lemon and cilantro for the parsley; add
1 cup corn kernels (thawed frozen kernels are fine) along with the rest of
the ingredients in Step 4.
Bulgur with Dried Cranberries and Orange
Substitute orange zest and juice for the lemon and mint for the parsley; add
½ cup dried cranberries in Step 4.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Creamy Polenta
Serve polenta soft and creamy or make it ahead of the meal (see the
Variation).

Ingredients
½ cup milk
Salt
1 cup medium cornmeal
4 ounces Parmesan cheese (1 cup grated; optional)
1 tablespoon butter or olive oil, or more to taste
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put ½ cup milk, 2 cups water, and a big pinch of salt in a medium
saucepan and bring to a boil.
2. When the liquid comes to a boil, add 1 cup cornmeal in a steady
stream, whisking constantly to prevent lumps. Adjust the heat so the
mixture simmers and cook, whisking frequently until the mixture is
creamy and the grains are soft, 10 to 15 minutes. If the mixture
becomes too thick, whisk in more water or milk (unless you intend to
cook it a second time, as in the Variation, in which case you want it
thick).
Grate 1 cup Parmesan cheese if you’re using it.
3. When the polenta is done, stir in 1 tablespoon butter or olive oil, the
Parmesan, and lots of pepper. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve
immediately.
VARIATIONS
Grilled, Broiled, or Panfried Polenta
Use the butter or oil to grease a rimmed baking sheet. Make sure the cooked
polenta is thick. Pour the cooked polenta into the prepared pan and let it
cool until firm; it will likely firm up in as little as 10 minutes but will be
easier to handle if you can wait longer. Cut the polenta into slices, brush
them with more olive oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and grill, broil, or
panfry, turning once, until brown on both sides.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pasta, Plain and Simple
A warm bowl of pasta is about as comforting as it gets. Like rice, it
can always be served under something saucy. (See the list below
for more seasoning ideas.)

Ingredients
Salt
1 pound any pasta
2 tablespoons olive oil or butter, or more to taste
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
2. When the water boils, add the pasta and stir occasionally. Start tasting
after 5 minutes.
3. When the pasta is tender but not mushy, drain it. Return the pasta to
the pot, stir in 2 tablespoons olive oil or butter, and add a sprinkle of
salt and pepper. Serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Buttered Egg Noodles
Use any egg noodles instead of the pasta and toss with butter while still
warm.
5 Ways to Flavor Plain Pasta
Stir in any of the following along with the olive oil or butter:
1. 1 to 2 tablespoons minced fresh rosemary, thyme, oregano, or sage
2. ½ cup chopped fresh parsley or basil
3. 1 teaspoon grated lemon zest
4. Up to 1 cup grated Parmesan cheese
5. 1 cup chopped fresh tomatoes

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sesame Noodles
Everyone loves sesame noodles—they’re packed with flavor and
just as good cold as hot.

Ingredients
Salt
4 scallions
12 ounces soba or udon noodles
¼ cup soy sauce
2 tablespoons sesame oil
1 tablespoon peanut oil

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a stockpot of water to a boil and salt it.
Trim and chop the scallions.
2. When the water boils, add the noodles and stir occasionally. Start
tasting after 3 minutes.
3. When the noodles are tender but not mushy, drain them. Return the
noodles to the pot and stir in the scallions, ¼ cup soy sauce, 2
tablespoons sesame oil, and 1 tablespoon peanut oil. Serve hot or
warm.
VARIATIONS
Cold Sesame Noodles
After draining the noodles, rinse them under cold water until completely
cool and drain well. Transfer the noodles and the remaining ingredients to a
big bowl for tossing. You can keep the cold sesame noodles at room
temperature, covered, for up to a few hours or refrigerate them.
Noodles with Curry and Coconut Milk
Use ½ cup chopped fresh cilantro instead of the scallions and ¼ cup
coconut milk instead of the oils. Add 1 teaspoon curry powder along with
the soy sauce and coconut milk.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fire and Ice Noodles
Since you don’t need much water to steep glass noodles—also
known as mung bean threads—this bracing and spicy dish comes
together more quickly than pasta. You can even make it up to
several hours ahead and serve straight from the fridge.

Ingredients
Salt
1 large cucumber
4 ounces glass noodles
1 tablespoon any Asian red chile sauce (like Sriracha), or more to taste
1 tablespoon peanut oil
1 teaspoon fish or soy sauce, or more to taste

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil and salt it.
Trim the cucumber, peel if necessary, cut it in half lengthwise, and
scoop out the seeds with a spoon.
Grate the cucumber; put it in a strainer and press out as much liquid as
possible. Put the dried cucumber in a large bowl in the freezer to
chill quickly.
2. When the water boils, add the noodles, cover, and remove from the
heat. Steep until tender but not mushy, 10 to 15 minutes.
3. Meanwhile, add 1 tablespoon (or more) chile sauce to the cucumbers
along with 1 tablespoon peanut oil, 1 teaspoon fish or soy sauce, and a
sprinkle of salt. Stir until they’re coated with dressing and return them
to the freezer.
4. Drain the noodles, rinse them under cold water until cool, and drain
well. Cut the noodles with scissors or a knife right in the strainer so the
strands are manageable.
5. Add the noodles to the cucumber mixture and toss to combine. Taste
and adjust the seasoning, adding more fish or soy sauce if you like, and
serve.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Panfried Rice Noodles
When you can’t decide between a soft side dish like noodles and a
crisp one like scallion pancakes, my shortcut method—browning
only one side—gives you both textures.

Ingredients
Salt
12 ounces rice vermicelli
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
Soy sauce for drizzling

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil and salt it. When the water
comes to a boil, add the noodles, stir once or twice, turn off the heat,
and let them steep until they’re not quite fully tender, 3 to 5 minutes.
2. Put a medium skillet (preferably nonstick) over medium heat.
3. When the noodles are done, drain well, shaking off as much excess
water as you can. Toss with 2 tablespoons vegetable oil.
4. When the skillet is hot, add 1 tablespoon oil and swirl. Then spread the
noodles out in it as evenly as possible.
5. Cook undisturbed until the bottom side is golden and crisp, 5 to 10
minutes. Slide the noodles out onto a cutting board or large plate, cut
into wedges, drizzle with soy sauce, and serve.
VARIATIONS
Panfried Pasta
Use angel hair pasta instead of the rice noodles and olive oil instead of
vegetable oil. Boil the noodles in a stockpot of salted water until not quite
fully tender; start tasting after 3 minutes.
Panfried Udon
Substitute udon noodles for the rice noodles. Boil the noodles in a stockpot
of salted water until not quite fully tender; start tasting after 3 minutes.

SPEED  
  SERVES 8

Skillet Stuffing
I’ve never understood why we don’t eat this simple combination of
bread, butter, and vegetables more often. With this quick-broil
method, there’s no excuse not to.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 small onion
Salt and pepper
1 loaf rustic bread or corn bread (about 1 pound)
4 celery stalks
3 sprigs fresh sage
2 cups chicken or vegetable stock

Prep | Cook
Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
1. Put 4 tablespoons butter in a large ovenproof skillet over medium heat.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion.
2. When the butter foams, add the onion and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
Cook, stirring occasionally until the onion softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Tear the bread into chunks and pulse it into coarse crumbs in a food
processor or cut it into small cubes by hand (or crumble the corn
bread). You’ll end up with 8 to 10 cups.
Trim and chop the celery.
3. When the onion is soft, add the bread, sprinkle with salt and pepper,
and toss gently to coat the bread in the butter.
4. Add the celery and cook, stirring occasionally until the bread begins to
color and the celery softens, 3 to 5 minutes.
Strip the sage leaves from 3 sprigs and chop.
5. Stir the sage into the skillet along with 2 cups stock; toss gently to coat
the bread in the stock, pressing the bread into the skillet as it softens.
Transfer the skillet to the broiler and cook, watching to make sure it
doesn’t burn, until the top is golden and crisp, 2 to 5 minutes. Serve
hot or warm.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Cucumbers with Peanut Vinaigrette
Cooking fast doesn’t mean compromising on taste and texture.
Salting cucumbers, however briefly, works like magic to ensure
firm texture and concentrated flavor.

Ingredients
3 medium cucumbers (1 to 1½ pounds)
1 teaspoon salt, plus more if needed
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
2 tablespoons sesame oil
2 tablespoons rice vinegar
2 tablespoons peanut butter

Prep | Cook
Trim the cucumbers, peel if necessary, cut them in half lengthwise, and
scoop out the seeds with a spoon. Cut them into small chunks or slices
and put them in a colander.
Sprinkle with 1 teaspoon salt, toss to coat, and let sit as long as you can:
10 to 25 minutes.
1. Combine 2 tablespoons each vegetable oil, sesame oil, rice vinegar,
and peanut butter in a large bowl. Whisk to combine, adding a small
splash of water to make the dressing pourable.
2. Pat the cucumbers dry with paper towels, add them to the bowl with
the dressing, and toss. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
Carrots with Curry Vinaigrette
Substitute carrots for the cucumbers, ⅓ cup olive oil for the vegetable and
sesame oils, sherry or red wine vinegar for the rice vinegar, and 1 teaspoon
curry powder for the peanut butter.
Salted Cabbage with Sesame Vinaigrette
Substitute shredded cabbage for the cucumbers, ⅓ cup olive oil for the
vegetable and sesame oils, the juice of 1 lemon for the rice vinegar, and
tahini for the peanut butter. Add pepper.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Tender Vegetables
Boiled vegetables never go out of style. Nothing could be more
basic and reliably delicious.

Ingredients
Salt
2 pounds broccoli (or other vegetables; see the list that follows)
2 tablespoons butter or olive oil
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil and salt it.
Trim the broccoli or other vegetables; cut as needed into pieces.
2. When the water boils, add the broccoli or other vegetables. Cook until
just tender when pierced, 5 to 10 minutes.
3. Drain the vegetables; return them to the pot.
4. Add 2 tablespoons butter or olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper;
stir to coat the vegetables. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve
hot, at room temperature, or chilled.
VARIATIONS
Timing for 10 Other Vegetables
1. Any peas (3 minutes)
2. Spinach (3 minutes)
3. Green beans (4 to 6 minutes)
4. Asparagus (4 to 6 minutes)
5. Cauliflower florets (10 to 12 minutes)
6. Kale or collards (10 minutes)
7. Sweet potato (15 to 20 minutes)
8. Potato cubes (25 to 30 minutes)
9. Winter squash (25 to 30 minutes)
10. Root vegetables (25 to 30 minutes)

Steamed Tender Vegetables
Fill the pot with only 2 inches of water and bring to a boil. Add the
vegetables as directed; adjust the heat so the water bubbles steadily, cover
the pot, and steam the vegetables until tender.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Simmered Squash
Bite-sized pieces of winter squash braise quickly to become tender
and brightly colored, with a sweet-and-earthy taste that goes with
most main dishes.

Ingredients
3 cups chicken or vegetable stock or water
Salt
3 garlic cloves
1 medium butternut squash (1½ pounds)
2 tablespoons olive oil
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 cups stock or water in a large pot over medium-high heat. If you
are using water, add a large pinch of salt.
Peel and smash 3 garlic cloves; add them to the pot.
Cut the squash in half crosswise; trim and peel it, and scoop the seeds
out with a spoon.
Cut the squash into 1-inch chunks, adding it to the pot as you go.
2. Stir the squash, cover, and cook until the pieces are tender but not
falling apart, 4 to 8 minutes.
3. Fish out the garlic if you like and transfer the squash mixture to a
serving bowl with a slotted spoon.
4. Add 2 tablespoons olive oil and a splash of the cooking liquid. Toss,
taste, and add salt as needed and lots of pepper; serve.
VARIATIONS
Simmered Squash in Coconut Milk
Substitute 2 cups coconut milk for 2 cups of the stock or water and
vegetable oil for olive. If you like, add a fresh hot chile, trimmed and
halved, along with the garlic.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chicken Stock
Vegetable Stock

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Garlicky Mushrooms
Mushrooms sautéed with garlic are irresistible alone or over any
kind of noodles or rice.

Ingredients
¼ cup olive oil
1½ pounds button, cremini, or shiitake mushrooms
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves
1 bunch fresh parsley
¼ cup dry white wine or water

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¼ cup olive oil in a large skillet over medium-low heat.
Trim and slice the mushrooms. (If you’re using shiitakes, discard the
stems.) Add them to the skillet as you work.
2. Sprinkle the mushrooms with salt and pepper and raise the heat to
medium. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the mushrooms are tender
and the pan is beginning to dry out, 10 to 15 minutes.
Peel and mince 2 garlic cloves.
Chop ¼ cup parsley.
3. When the pan is dry, add ¼ cup wine or water and scrape any browned
bits off the bottom. Let most of the liquid bubble away, then stir in the
garlic and parsley and cook for another minute. Taste and adjust the
seasoning and serve at any temperature.
VARIATIONS
Garlicky Fresh and Dried Mushrooms
Takes more time but works well with longer-cooking main dishes. Soak
about ½ cup dried porcini mushrooms in hot water to cover until soft, 15 to
20 minutes. Lift the mushrooms out, saving the soaking liquid but being
careful to leave the dirt behind. Chop the porcini and cook them along with
the fresh mushrooms. Add some of the soaking liquid instead of or along
with the wine.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Stuffed Portobellos
Yes, they’re a good proxy for meat, but they’re also just good.
Period.

Ingredients
4 large portobello mushrooms
1 small shallot
4 sprigs fresh thyme or 1 teaspoon dried
⅓ cup olive oil
Salt and pepper
2 medium tomatoes
4 ounces feta cheese (1 cup crumbled)

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Trim the stems from the mushrooms; rinse and pat dry. Put them top
side up on a rimmed baking sheet.
Trim, peel, and mince the shallot; put it in a small mixing bowl.
If you’re using fresh thyme, strip the leaves from 4 sprigs and chop
them. Add them (or 1 teaspoon dried thyme) to the bowl.
Add ⅓ cup olive oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper and stir.
2. Brush the tops of the mushrooms with half of the oil mixture and broil
until they begin to brown, 5 to 8 minutes.
Core and chop the tomatoes.
3. When the mushrooms are brown on top, flip them, brush with the
remaining oil mixture, and cook until the second side is brown, another
5 to 8 minutes.
Put the tomatoes in the mixing bowl you used for the oil mixture;
crumble 1 cup feta, add, and toss.
4. Spoon the tomato and feta mixture into the mushrooms and broil until
the cheese is hot and slightly melted, 1 or 2 minutes. Serve hot or at
room temperature.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Brussels Sprouts with Bacon
Adding a little water lets you cook Brussels sprouts whole and
keeps them vibrant green. Reduces chopping time too.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons olive oil
6 slices bacon
1½ pounds Brussels sprouts
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Chop 6 slices bacon; add them to the skillet.
Trim the Brussels sprouts.
2. Cook the bacon, stirring occasionally, until it releases some fat and
crisps in places, 3 to 5 minutes.
3. Add the Brussels sprouts to the partially cooked bacon, along with a
sprinkle of salt and pepper and ½ cup water.
4. Cover and cook, checking once or twice and adding small amounts of
water as needed, until the Brussels sprouts are a little shy of tender, 6
to 10 minutes, depending on their size.
5. Remove the cover and raise the heat to high. Cook, resisting the urge
to stir too much, until the liquid evaporates and the Brussels sprouts
become brown and crisp in places. Taste and adjust the seasoning and
serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Brussels Sprouts with Chorizo
Substitute 4 ounces fresh Mexican chorizo for the bacon.
Brussels Sprouts with Sausage
Use 4 ounces chopped hot or sweet Italian sausage instead of bacon.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Crunchy Okra
Talk about a quick and easy preparation of a classic southern
ingredient. The intermittent char gives the okra a deeper flavor and
reduces sliminess, so if you’ve found okra a turnoff before, you
might give this method a try.

Ingredients
1½ pounds okra
3 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 500ºF.
Trim the okra.
2. Put the okra on a rimmed baking sheet; toss with 3 tablespoons olive
oil and a sprinkle of salt and pepper.
3. Roast, shaking the pan occasionally until the okra is browned in spots
and tender, 5 to 10 minutes. Serve hot, warm, or at room temperature.
VARIATIONS
Fried Okra
Put an inch or 2 of vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat. If the
okra is small, cut it in half lengthwise; if it’s big, cut it crosswise on a
diagonal into thick slices. Dip the okra in buttermilk, then in a mixture of
cornmeal, a pinch of cayenne, and salt and pepper. When the oil is hot (a
pinch of the cornmeal mixture should sizzle immediately but not burn), fry
the okra until golden and crisp, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer them to paper
towels with a slotted spoon and sprinkle immediately with salt and pepper.
If you’re cooking in batches, keep them warm in a 200ºF oven while you
fry the rest.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Ripe Plantains
Ripe plantains are soft and sweet. But watch ’em: Once they
brown, they can burn easily.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
3 large or 4 medium ripe (yellow-black or black) plantains
2 limes
¼ teaspoon chili powder
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large skillet over medium heat.
Trim both ends from the plantains, cut them crosswise into 3 sections,
score the peels with a knife, and strip away the skins. Cut each
section crosswise into 1-inch pieces.
2. Add the plantains to the skillet and cook, turning as necessary and
adjusting the heat so they don’t burn, until they are deep golden and
very tender, 10 to 15 minutes.
Halve the limes.
3. When the plantains are ready, sprinkle with ¼ teaspoon chili powder
and some salt and squeeze the limes over all. Serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Ripe Plantains with Cinnamon and Cumin
Substitute ¼ teaspoon cinnamon and ¼ teaspoon cumin for the chili
powder.
Ripe Plantains with Smoked Paprika
Substitute olive oil for vegetable, 2 teaspoons sherry vinegar for the lime
juice, and smoked paprika for the chili powder.
NOTES
MAKE YOUR OWN
Chili Powder

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Skin-On Mashed Potatoes
Mashed potatoes don’t take much longer than it does to prep and
cook the potatoes, so leaving the skins on and slicing them thinly
puts you well ahead of the game.

Ingredients
Salt
4 to 6 medium russet or Yukon Gold potatoes (2 pounds)
4 or more garlic cloves
½ cup milk, plus more as needed
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
Pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Fill a large pot with about an inch of water; add a big pinch of salt and
turn the heat to high.
Scrub the potatoes, halve them lengthwise, and cut them into thin
slices, dropping them into the pot as you go.
Peel 4 (or more) garlic cloves; add them to the pot.
2. Once you’ve added the potatoes and garlic to the pot, cover and cook
(letting the water boil the whole time) until the potatoes are tender and
just breaking apart, 15 to 20 minutes.
3. Drain the potatoes well and return them to the pot.
4. Add ½ cup milk, 4 tablespoons butter, and some salt and pepper. Mash
with a potato masher or fork, adding more milk if needed. Taste and
adjust the seasoning and serve.
VARIATIONS
5 More Ways to Flavor Mashed Potatoes
Stir in any of the following in Step 4:
1. 1 or more tablespoons Dijon or coarsely ground mustard
2. ½ cup chopped fresh parsley, basil, or dill
3. 1 tablespoon chopped fresh oregano, rosemary, thyme, or a mixture
4. 1 cup grated Parmesan, cheddar, Gruyère, or other melting cheese
5. ½ cup cream or buttermilk instead of the milk

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

German-Style Potato Salad
I have nothing against mayonnaise, but this is my favorite kind of
potato salad. Dressed with olive oil, vinegar, and Dijon while still
warm, the potatoes absorb loads of flavor.

Ingredients
2 pounds new or fingerling potatoes
Salt
1 bunch fresh parsley
1 medium red onion
½ cup olive oil
3 tablespoons red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard Pepper

Prep | Cook
Scrub the potatoes and cut them in half.
1. Put the potatoes in a medium pot with water to cover. Add a big pinch
of salt and turn the heat to high.
2. Cook until the potatoes are just tender, 10 to 15 minutes.
Chop ½ cup parsley and put it in a large mixing bowl.
Trim, peel, and chop the onion. Add it to the bowl.
3. Add ½ cup olive oil, 3 tablespoons vinegar, 1 tablespoon Dijon, and a
sprinkle of salt and pepper to the bowl. Stir to combine, taste, and
adjust the seasoning.
4. When the potatoes are just tender, drain them well and add them to the
bowl. Toss to combine. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve warm.
VARIATIONS
Chipotle Potato Salad
Substitute cilantro for the parsley, 3 scallions for the onion, the juice of 1
lime for the vinegar, and 2 chopped chipotle chiles in adobo with some of
their sauce for the Dijon.
Tahini-Lemon Potato Salad
Use the juice of 1 lemon instead of vinegar and ¼ cup tahini instead of
Dijon.
Classic Potato Salad
Swap mayonnaise for olive oil. Add chopped celery and red bell pepper if
you like.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

French Fries
Conventional wisdom says you have to fry French fries twice. That
does work beautifully (see the Variation), but there’s another, easier
way. Bonus: I learned this from my mother.

Ingredients
Vegetable oil for deep frying
2 pounds starchy (“baking”) potatoes
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put at least 1½ to 2 inches of oil in a deep pot over medium-high heat.
Scrub the potatoes and cut them into whatever frylike shape you want.
Lay out some paper towels for the cooked fries.
2. Put the fries in the pot and cook undisturbed while the oil comes to a
boil. (Don’t leave the pot unattended.)
3. Continue to cook, stirring occasionally and adjusting the heat so the oil
bubbles enthusiastically, until the fries are golden and crisp, a total of
20 to 25 minutes from the time you put them in the pot. Drain the fries
on the paper towels, immediately sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
serve hot.
VARIATIONS
Double-Fried French Fries
You have the advantage here of doing the first stage ahead of time. Heat the
oil to 300ºF, then add the potatoes and fry for 5 to 10 minutes, depending on
how thick they are. Drain and let them cool completely. Raise the oil
temperature to 350ºF and cook the potatoes until golden and crisp, just a
few minutes more.
Sweet Potato Fries
Substitute sweet potatoes for regular potatoes. They will be tender and start
to burn faster, so watch them.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sautéed Sweet Potatoes
This is one of my favorite ways to cook sweet potatoes, even
without the time savings. I’ve served these at Thanksgiving with
great success.

Ingredients
3 tablespoons olive oil
2½ pounds sweet potatoes
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Put 3 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over medium-low heat.
Peel the sweet potatoes; shred them in a food processor with a grating
disk or by hand with a box grater.
2. Put the sweet potatoes in the skillet, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
raise the heat to medium-high.
3. Cook, stirring occasionally until they begin to brown, 8 to 10 minutes.
Continue to cook, stirring a bit more frequently until they are tender
but not mushy, 2 or 3 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning and
serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Garlic and Sage
Cook 3 whole garlic cloves and a handful of fresh sage leaves in the oil
while you grate the sweet potatoes.
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Chipotle and Lime
Add 1 or 2 (or more!) chopped chipotle chiles in adobo, to taste, to the
skillet along with the sweet potatoes. Squeeze the juice of 1 lime over the
sweet potatoes before serving.
Sautéed Sweet Potatoes with Ginger and Soy
Cook 1 inch fresh ginger, minced, in the oil while you grate the sweet
potatoes. Drizzle at least 2 tablespoons soy sauce over the sweet potatoes
before serving.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Crisp Roasted Potatoes
With a couple of easy tricks, you can roast potatoes in less than 45
minutes. And the tricks aren’t complicated: It’s just a matter of
using your oven and broiler to their greatest effect.

Ingredients
2 pounds any potatoes
3 tablespoons olive oil
Salt and pepper

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 500ºF.
Scrub the potatoes (don’t bother to peel) and halve them. Cut each half
into ½-inch-thick half-moons. Put them on a rimmed baking sheet as
you go.
2. Toss the potatoes with 3 tablespoons oil and a sprinkle of salt and
pepper; spread them out in an even layer.
3. Transfer them to the oven (whether it’s fully heated or not) and cook
undisturbed until the potatoes are tender in the middle and golden in
spots on the bottom, 25 to 30 minutes.
4. Turn on the broiler; put the rack 4 inches from the heat. Transfer the
potatoes to the broiler and cook, rotating the baking sheet as necessary,
until the tops are brown and crisp, 3 to 5 minutes. Serve hot or warm.
VARIATIONS
4 Ways to Season the Potatoes
Toss any of the following with the cooked potatoes:
1. 1 teaspoon any dried spices
2. ¼ cup chopped fresh parsley, cilantro, basil, dill, or chives
3. 1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary, thyme, oregano, or sage
4. 1 teaspoon grated citrus zest

Dessert
Caramelized Honey-Orange Bananas
Fruity Shaved Ice
Broiled Peaches with Brown Sugar
Watermelon Soup with Fresh Herbs
Fruit Sorbet
Black and White Milkshakes
Orange Cream Sundaes
Almond Cookie Dough
Chocolate Chip Cookie Squares
Molasses Whoopie Pies
Salted Chocolate Peanut Butter Balls
Coconut Oatmeal Cookies
Chocolate-Covered Pretzels
Molten Chocolate Cake
Chocolate-Orange Pudding
Individual Tiramisus
Chocolate Custard Soup

Pumpkin Mousse
Lemon S’mores
Skillet Fruit Crisp
Berry Fool
Sautéed Apple Crunch
Pecan-Bourbon Brownies
Chocolate Peanut Brittle
Chocolate Chunk Banana Cupcakes
Peach Cobbler Under the Broiler
Apple Crumble Under the Broiler
Key Lime Crumble

Dessert
No matter how simple, dessert is always festive; it
keeps guests lingering and chatting—and children
from dining and dashing.
There are a lot of ways to satisfy a sweet tooth,
and they needn’t be elaborate or time-consuming.
Often the simplest things do the trick, and this
chapter shows how just a little effort can turn out
desserts that are welcome, impressive, and delicious.
And desserts need not rely on baking. In fact, the
majority of the recipes in this chapter don’t involve
the oven at all, exploring a range of cold and no-cook
dishes and quick desserts made on the stovetop or
under the broiler. (Of course if you’re really short on
time, prepare a fruit bowl. An apple or a clementine
enjoyed over coffee can be as satisfying as a
chocolate cake.)
Those recipes that do involve baking have been
reconceived to streamline processes. Chocolate chip

cookies are baked as bars—saving the step of shaping
individual mounds of dough—and taste even better
hot out of the oven.
You may be tempted to skip the sweets—or to
buy something from your local bakery. But if you
give yourself 15 minutes to half an hour to make your
own, you’ll be glad you made the effort.

Chapter Highlights
Baking Ingredients  What you need to stock your baking pantry. Dessert
Staples.
Sweet, Sweet Sauce  A homemade sauce can turn any dessert into a
special treat. Dessert Sauces.
Quick Cake  The most versatile cakes you’ve ever made. Cake Without a
Mix.
Broiled Desserts  Classic desserts that can be made under the broiler in no
time. Peach Cobbler Under the Broiler, Apple Crumble Under the Broiler,
Skillet Fruit Crisp, Sautéed Apple Crunch).
No-Bake Cookies  Skip the oven and go for the dough; it’s a favorite
anyway. Almond Cookie Dough, Salted Chocolate Peanut Butter Balls.
Wonderful Whipped Cream  It’s fast and luxurious, not only as a topping
but also as the base for simple desserts. Berry Fool, Individual Tiramisus.
Liquid Dessert  Desserts you can sip with a straw or slurp with a spoon.
Watermelon Soup with Fresh Herbs, Black and White Milkshakes.
Easy Electric  Even if you rarely bake, a hand-held electric mixer will
save you a ton of time and hassle—in fact, it might get you to bake more
often.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Caramelized Honey-Orange Bananas
Decadent—and almost no work. Honey and orange juice add
complexity; an optional splash of rum (see the Variation) takes the
dish to the limit.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
¼ cup packed brown sugar
2 tablespoons honey
¼ cup orange juice
4 ripe bananas

Prep | Cook
1. Put 4 tablespoons butter, ¼ cup packed brown sugar, 2 tablespoons
honey, and ¼ cup orange juice in a medium skillet over medium heat.
Cook, stirring frequently, until the mixture begins to thicken and
darken, about 10 minutes.
Peel and slice the bananas.
2. Add the bananas and cook until warm and coated with caramelized
sauce. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Caramelized Maple-Rum Bananas
Instead of the honey, use 3 tablespoons maple syrup. In place of the orange
juice, use 3 tablespoons rum.
Caramelized Chile-Lime Bananas
Use ¼ cup lime juice instead of the orange juice and add 1 teaspoon chili
powder.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fruity Shaved Ice
All it takes to make delicious shaved ice is a food processor with a
grating attachment and a bag of frozen fruit. Serve it in bowls or, if
you really want to be authentic, in little paper cups.

Ingredients
1 pound frozen fruit (any combination)
½ lemon
¼ cup sugar, plus more as needed

Prep | Cook
1. Turn on the food processor fitted with the grating disk. Push the fruit
through the feed tube a few pieces at a time. Transfer to a mixing
bowl.
Squeeze the lemon half into a small bowl and add ¼ cup sugar. Stir to
dissolve.
2. Add the mixture to the shaved fruit ice and stir gently to combine.
Taste and add more sugar if necessary. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
5 Frozen Fruits to Use for Shaved Ice
1. Strawberries
2. Raspberries
3. Pineapple
4. Mangoes
5. Peaches or nectarines
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Start with fresh fruit. You can use fruits not usually found frozen, like
melons and pears. Cut into chunks if necessary to fit through the feed tube
and freeze the finished ice mixture overnight.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Broiled Peaches with Brown Sugar
Broiling peaches with a bit of butter and sugar caramelizes their
natural sugars and beautifully chars the tops. That space where the
pit used to be is just begging for vanilla ice cream.

Ingredients
4 ripe peaches
2 tablespoons butter
¼ cup packed brown sugar

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 4 inches from the heat.
Halve the peaches and remove the pits.
Chop 2 tablespoons butter into bits and put them in a small mixing
bowl.
2. Add ¼ cup packed brown sugar to the butter and mix them together
with your fingers. Put the peaches cut side up on a rimmed baking
sheet and sprinkle them with the sugar mixture.
3. Broil until the tops are lightly charred, 2 to 5 minutes. Serve warm.
VARIATIONS
5 Other Fruits to Broil
1. Apples
2. Pears
3. Apricots
4. Grapefruit
5. Pineapple (cut into rings)
Additions to the Butter and Sugar Mixture
1. 2 tablespoons chopped nuts
2. ½ teaspoon cinnamon, cardamom, cloves, or nutmeg
3. 1 tablespoon chopped candied ginger

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Watermelon Soup with Fresh Herbs
Drink this refreshing purée for breakfast and it’s a smoothie; eat it
with a spoon for dessert and it’s a slightly sweet and bright-tasting
soup.

Ingredients
2 pounds seedless watermelon
1 lemon
3 tablespoons honey
Several sprigs fresh basil or mint for garnish

Prep | Cook
Peel the watermelon and cut the flesh into rough chunks; put them in a
blender.
Halve the lemon and squeeze the juice into the blender.
1. Add 3 tablespoons honey to the blender. Blend, adding a small splash
of water if necessary to get the machine going, until the watermelon is
liquefied.
Strip the basil or mint leaves from several sprigs and chop.
2. Taste the purée and adjust the seasoning. Put the purée in the freezer
for 10 minutes to chill.
3. Pour into 4 bowls or glasses, garnish with the herbs, and serve.
VARIATIONS
5 Other Fruits to Make into Soup
1. Cantaloupe
2. Peaches
3. Cherries
4. Strawberries
5. Mangoes
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Skip freezing the purée and pour into bowls directly after puréeing.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Fruit Sorbet
A revelation: The method is easy, and the result is better than most
store-bought sorbets.

Ingredients
1 pound any frozen berries, stone fruit, or other frozen fruit
½ cup yogurt, crème fraîche, or silken tofu
¼ cup sugar

Prep | Cook
1. In a food processor, combine the fruit, ½ cup yogurt, crème fraîche, or
tofu, ¼ cup sugar, and 1 or 2 tablespoons water.
2. Process, stopping to scrape down the sides as necessary, until just
puréed and creamy. If the fruit does not break down completely, add
water through the feed tube, 1 tablespoon at a time. Be careful not to
overprocess or the sorbet will liquefy. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Chocolate-Fruit Sorbet
Add ½ cup chopped chocolate to the mixture before processing.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the sorbet harden in the freezer and allow 10 to 15 minutes for it to
soften before serving.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Black and White Milkshakes
A diner classic. Only for this version I put the vanilla on the bottom
and chocolate on the top for a fancier presentation.

Ingredients
1 pint vanilla ice cream
1 cup milk
½ cup chocolate syrup

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 cup vanilla ice cream and ½ cup milk in a blender. Blend until
thick and smooth, then pour the shake into 4 glasses, filling them
halfway.
2. Add 1 cup ice cream, ½ cup milk, and ½ cup chocolate syrup to the
blender. Blend as before. Pour the chocolate shake on top of the vanilla
and serve.
VARIATIONS
Black and White Mocha Milkshakes
Add 3 tablespoons brewed espresso along with the chocolate syrup in Step
2.
Salty Chocolate Shakes
Use chocolate ice cream instead of vanilla, skip the chocolate syrup, and
add a teaspoon of salt (or to taste). Blend everything all at once.
Spicy Chocolate Shakes
Replace the vanilla ice cream with chocolate, skip the chocolate syrup, and
add a pinch of cayenne. Blend everything all at once.
Boozy Black and White Milkshakes
Add 1 or more tablespoons rum or bourbon along with the chocolate syrup
in Step 2.
Fruit Milkshakes
Substitute 1 cup fresh or frozen fruit for the chocolate syrup. Blend
everything all at once.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Orange Cream Sundaes
A simple orange syrup poured over vanilla cream re-creates the
tangy-on-creamy flavor of the retro Creamsicle. Other
combinations work too—see the Variations.

Ingredients
1 quart vanilla ice cream
2 cups orange juice
½ cup sugar

Prep | Cook
Take the ice cream out of the freezer to soften.
1. Put 2 cups orange juice and ½ cup sugar in a large skillet over high
heat. Cook, stirring occasionally until the mixture is reduced by half
and thickens into a syrup, 10 to 15 minutes. Transfer to a dish and put
it in the freezer to cool, about 10 minutes.
2. Scoop 1 cup vanilla ice cream into each of 4 bowls and drizzle the
orange syrup over the top.
VARIATIONS
Applejack Sundaes
Replace the orange juice with apple cider and add 2 tablespoons bourbon.
Reduce the sugar by ¼ cup.
Cranberry-Port Sundaes
Great for fall. Omit the orange juice. Add 2 cups cranberries, ½ cup port
wine, and the zest of a lemon to the skillet along with the sugar, bring to a
boil, then let bubble gently but steadily until the cranberries break apart and
thicken the sauce, 15 to 20 minutes. Taste and add more sugar if necessary.
Serve warm over the ice cream.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
If you don’t mind some melted ice cream, don’t bother to chill the syrup.

SPEED  
  MAKES 24 COOKIES

Almond Cookie Dough
Some people like raw cookie dough better than the finished
cookies, so why fight it?

Ingredients
1 cup almonds
¾ cup dried apricots
¼ cup sugar
½ teaspoon vanilla extract
2 tablespoons butter
¼ cup flour
⅛ teaspoon salt
½ cup powdered sugar
1 lemon

Prep | Cook
1. In a food processor, combine 1 cup almonds, ¾ cup dried apricots, ¼
cup sugar, ½ teaspoon vanilla, 2 tablespoons butter, ¼ cup flour, ⅛
teaspoon salt, and 1 tablespoon water. Process until the mixture forms
a stiff, chunky dough. If necessary, add more water, a tablespoon at a
time, until the dough comes together.
2. Pinch off rounded-tablespoon-size pieces of the dough, roll them into
balls, and put them on a baking sheet or the counter; press your thumb
into the center of each to make an indentation.
3. Put ½ cup powdered sugar in a small bowl.
Halve the lemon.
4. Squeeze 2 teaspoons of the juice into the bowl and whisk to form a
glaze. Fill each indentation in the dough and serve.
VARIATIONS
Chocolate Cookie Dough
Use ½ cup chopped chocolate or chocolate chips instead of the apricots.
Coconut Cookie Dough
Add ½ cup shredded unsweetened coconut along with the other ingredients
in Step 1 and use lime juice instead of lemon.

INGREDIENT

Dessert Staples
A dessert is only as good as its ingredients. This is
especially true here, where recipes are pared down to
their essentials. Here’s what an ideal dessert pantry
contains.
Ingredient
Description
BUTTER
Opt for unsalted, which is typically fresher
than salted, has a sweet, creamy taste, and
lets you control the amount of salt in a
dish. If you do buy salted butter, you can
leave out the salt that is often called for in
recipes.
FLOUR
Use unbleached all-purpose flour for
baking.
GRANULATED SUGAR
All recipes here calling for sugar refer to
granulated, the most common type.
BROWN SUGAR
White sugar with molasses added,
resulting in deeper flavor and added
moisture. Dark brown sugar has more
molasses than light, thus its more intense
flavor and darker color, but you can use
them interchangeably. To keep brown
sugar from hardening after you open the
box, wrap the sugar tightly in a plastic bag
and store in the fridge.

POWDERED SUGAR
Also known as confectioners’ sugar, icing
sugar, and 10x sugar, this is regular sugar
ground into a powder and mixed with a
little cornstarch so that it doesn’t cake and
clump. It’s perfect for dusting over
desserts: Put some in a mesh strainer, hold
it over the dessert, and tap on the sides.
CHOCOLATE
From darkest and most bitter to lightest
and sweetest: unsweetened, bittersweet,
semisweet, dark, and milk. Chocolate bars
for baking typically note their percentage
of cacao on the package; the higher the
number, the darker the chocolate (meaning
less sugar). This book calls for bittersweet
and semisweet. White chocolate is not
technically chocolate since it doesn’t
contain any cocoa solids.
COCOA POWDER
Like powdered sugar, sprinkle it over
desserts for a fancy touch.
FLOUR
Use unbleached all-purpose flour for
baking.
BAKING POWDER AND
BAKING SODA
These leavening agents produce carbon
dioxide in baked goods, causing them to
rise.
EGGS
Essential for both sweet and savory
cooking; read all about them in Eggs in a
Nutshell.

FROZEN FRUIT
If you keep frozen fruit in the house, a
smoothie or sorbet is easy to make.
HEAVY CREAM
Essential for whipped cream (obviously)
and also caramel and butterscotch sauces.
NUTS
In most baking, walnuts, almonds,
hazelnuts, and pecans are most common,
but peanuts, pistachios, and pine nuts are
also excellent.
DRIED FRUIT
Small pieces are perfect for stirring into
cookie dough; you can dip whole dried
fruits like apricots or mangoes in melted
chocolate for a bittersweet treat.
SHREDDED
UNSWEETENED
COCONUT
Stir it into cookie dough, add it to crisp or
crumble toppings, or toast it in a skillet
until lightly browned and sprinkle it on
top of ice cream.
ROLLED OATS
A must not only for oatmeal cookies but
also for crisp and crumble toppings.
Whatever you don’t use for dessert you
can eat for breakfast.
PHYLLO DOUGH
These finicky sheets of dough are usually
part of time-consuming, labor-intensive
recipes, but I simply cut them into shreds
and bake them until golden and crisp. The
result is a crisp, easy topping for cooked
fruit (see Sautéed Apple Crunch) or ice
cream.

HONEY AND MAPLE
SYRUP
Use them as alternative sweeteners to
sugar or just stir them into yogurt,
whipped cream, or mascarpone cheese and
use as a topping for fresh fruit.
VANILLA EXTRACT
Vanilla not only makes chocolate taste
better (go figure), but it’s that hidden
ingredient that rounds out the flavor of all
sorts of doughs and batters. Plus, you’ll
want it on hand for pancakes and French
toast.
BAKING SPICES
The seasonings for pumpkin pie—
cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves, and ginger—
are also useful in cookies, sautéed fruit,
other pies, crumbles, and crisps.

SPEED  
  MAKES 9 SQUARES

Chocolate Chip Cookie Squares
The fastest way to have warm chocolate chip cookies from scratch
is to bake them as bars.

Ingredients
1 stick unsalted butter, plus more for greasing the pan
1 cup flour, plus more for the pan
¼ cup plus 2 tablespoons granulated sugar
¼ cup plus 2 tablespoons packed brown sugar
1 egg
¼ teaspoon baking soda
¼ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
4 ounces semisweet or bittersweet chocolate

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 375ºF. Grease a 9-inch square baking pan with butter,
then sprinkle with flour and shake out the excess.
Put 1 stick butter in a large microwave-safe bowl and microwave it for
a few seconds to soften it.
2. Add to the butter ¼ cup plus 2 tablespoons granulated sugar and ¼ cup
plus 2 tablespoons packed brown sugar. Beat with an electric mixer
until creamy, then crack in the egg and beat until well blended.
3. Add 1 cup flour, ¼ teaspoon baking soda, ¼ teaspoon salt, and 1
teaspoon vanilla. Beat just to combine.
Chop 4 ounces chocolate; stir it into the dough.
4. Scrape the dough into the prepared pan and press it into a thin, even
layer. Bake until the edges are golden brown and a toothpick inserted
into the center comes out relatively clean but not dry, with a few
crumbs clinging to it, 10 to 12 minutes.
5. Let cool for 5 minutes, then cut into squares. Serve warm.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Molasses Whoopie Pies
So much like real whoopie pies that I have to fill them with cream
cheese frosting.

Ingredients
1½ sticks unsalted butter
4 ounces cream cheese
¼ cup packed brown sugar
¼ cup molasses
1 egg
1½ cups flour
1 teaspoon baking soda
¼ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon cinnamon
¼ teaspoon ginger
1½ teaspoons vanilla extract
1½ cups powdered sugar

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 400ºF.
Cut up 1 stick butter, put it in a large microwave-safe bowl, and soften
it in the microwave for just a few seconds. Put ½ stick butter and 4
ounces cream cheese in a medium bowl.
2. Add ¼ cup packed brown sugar to the softened butter. Beat with an
electric mixer until creamed and fluffy, then add ¼ cup molasses and
beat until combined. Crack in the egg and beat until well blended.
3. Add 1½ cups flour, 1 teaspoon baking soda, ¼ teaspoon salt, ½
teaspoon cinnamon, ¼ teaspoon ginger, and 1 teaspoon vanilla. Beat
gently until the dough is just combined and soft enough to handle.
4. Scoop 16 rounded-tablespoon-sized balls onto an ungreased baking
sheet; press with your fingers to evenly flatten a little. They won’t
spread as they bake.
5. Bake until puffed and set but not browned, 7 or 8 minutes. Transfer to
a rack to cool for 5 minutes.
Beat the butter and cream cheese with an electric mixer until fully
creamed, about 1 minute. Add 1½ cups powdered sugar and ½
teaspoon vanilla. Beat until creamy.
6. Spread a dollop on the bottom sides of 8 cookies and sandwich a
second cookie on top.

SPEED  
  MAKES 36 BALLS

Salted Chocolate Peanut Butter Balls
Like a Reese’s peanut butter cup rolled into a ball, these no-bake
morsels just need a little blast of cold air from the freezer to firm
up.

Ingredients
2 tablespoons butter
4 ounces semisweet or bittersweet chocolate
1 cup peanut butter
1 cup powdered sugar, plus more as needed
Salt (the flaky kind is best here)

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a medium microwave-safe bowl.
Chop 4 ounces chocolate; add it to the bowl.
2. Microwave the mixture, checking and stirring occasionally until the
butter and chocolate melt, a minute or 2.
3. Add 1 cup peanut butter and stir until it’s evenly incorporated. Blend
in 1 cup powdered sugar and stir until the mixture is smooth.
4. Put a piece of wax or parchment paper on a rimmed baking sheet. Use
2 teaspoons to drop 1-inch balls of dough onto the sheet. Sprinkle the
tops with a little salt.
5. Put the baking sheet in the freezer and freeze just until the balls firm
up a bit, 10 to 15 minutes. Serve.
VARIATIONS
Chocolate Almond Butter Balls
Use almond butter instead of peanut butter.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Before freezing, roll each ball in finely chopped peanuts or grated
unsweetened coconut.

SPEED  
  MAKES 36 TO 48 COOKIES

Coconut Oatmeal Cookies
One of the simplest of all cookies, here with coconut.

Ingredients
1 stick unsalted butter
½ cup granulated sugar
½ cup packed brown sugar
2 eggs
1½ cups flour
1 cup rolled oats
1 cup shredded unsweetened coconut
½ teaspoon cinnamon
2 teaspoons baking powder
Salt
½ cup milk
½ teaspoon vanilla or almond extract

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 375ºF.
Put 1 stick butter in a large microwave-safe mixing bowl and
microwave it for a few seconds to soften it.
2. Add ½ cup granulated sugar and ½ cup packed brown sugar to the
butter. Beat with an electric mixer until creamy, then crack in the eggs,
one at a time, and beat until well blended.
3. Add 1½ cups flour, 1 cup rolled oats, 1 cup shredded coconut, ½
teaspoon cinnamon, 2 teaspoons baking powder, a pinch of salt, ½ cup
milk, and ½ teaspoon vanilla or almond extract. Beat just to combine.
4. Drop tablespoon-size mounds of dough 3 inches apart on ungreased
baking sheets. Bake until lightly browned, 12 to 15 minutes. Let cool
for a few minutes and serve warm.
VARIATIONS
Nutty Coconut Oatmeal Cookies
Add in ½ cup any nut butter in Step 2 and ½ cup chopped walnuts or pecans
in Step 3.
Dried Fruit Oatmeal Cookies
Add 1 cup dried cranberries, blueberries, chopped dried apricots, chopped
dates, or raisins in Step 3.
NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
Let the cookies cool completely on a rack after they come out of the oven.

MASTER RECIPE

Cake Without a Mix
Homemade mini pound cakes are festive, delicious,
and easy to vary. Plus, they love to be loaded up with
toppings—think whipped cream, frosting, fruit, or
chocolate sauce. They keep for several days, and if
you bake them as cupcakes, you can have your cake
in less than half the usual time. This recipe makes 12
cupcakes.
Classic Pound Cupcakes
1
Cream the Butter and Sugar
Heat the oven to 375°F and grease 12 muffin cups (in one or more tins)
with butter or line them with paper cups. Soften—without melting— 2
sticks butter on low in the microwave (unless it’s soft already). Put the
butter and 1 cup sugar in a large bowl. Beat with an electric mixer until
creamy.
2
Add the Yolks
Separate 5 eggs, letting the whites fall into a clean mixing bowl, and
add the yolks to the creamed butter and sugar. Add 2 teaspoons vanilla
extract to the yolks and beat until well blended.
3
Add the Dry Ingredients
Add 2 cups flour, 1½ teaspoons baking powder, and a pinch of salt to
the bowl; mix by hand until just combined.

4
Beat the Whites
Using clean beaters and a clean bowl, beat the egg whites until they
hold soft peaks. Fold half of them into the batter with a rubber spatula
until streaks no longer appear, then gently fold in the remaining egg
whites the same way.
5
Bake
Pour the batter into the prepared muffin tins, filling each cup three-
quarters full. Bake for 12 to 15 minutes, until the cupcakes are puffed
and golden and a toothpick inserted into the center comes out with just
a few crumbs clinging to it. Transfer the pan (or pans) to a cooling
rack; turn out the cupcakes as soon as they’re cool enough to handle,
10 minutes or so.
6
Add Toppings
Top the cupcakes (or any of the variations) with powdered sugar or
whipped cream or drizzle with any of the following sauces: Chocolate
Sauce; Creamy Caramel Sauce; Butterscotch Sauce; Raw Fruit Sauce;
Vanilla Custard Sauce.
Citrus Pound Cupcakes  Reduce the vanilla to 1 teaspoon. Add the zest
and juice of 1 lemon or lime (or ½ orange) to the yolk mixture in Step 2.
Spice Pound Cupcakes  Add ½ teaspoon each cinnamon, allspice, and
ginger and ¼ teaspoon each nutmeg and cloves with the dry ingredients.
Chocolate Pound Cupcakes  Add ½ cup cocoa powder with the dry
ingredients. If you like, add 1 cup chocolate chips to the batter after folding
in the egg whites.
Almond Pound Cupcakes  Reduce the vanilla to 1 teaspoon and add 1
teaspoon pure almond extract.

Poppy Pound Cupcakes  Add ¼ cup poppy seeds with the dry ingredients.
(This is especially nice with the lemon juice and zest from the first
variation.)
Ginger Pound Cupcakes  Add 1 teaspoon ground ginger with the dry
ingredients and fold in 1 tablespoon minced crystallized ginger after folding
in the egg whites.
Polenta Pound Cupcakes  Substitute 1 cup cornmeal for 1 cup of the
flour.
Yogurt Pound Cupcakes  Even more moist: Substitute ¾ cup yogurt for
half of the butter.
Nutty Pound Cupcakes  Substitute 1 cup any finely ground nut meal or
nut flour for half of the flour.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Chocolate-Covered Pretzels
Melt, dip, freeze, and devour.

Ingredients
12 ounces bittersweet, semisweet, or white chocolate
4 cups large, thin salted pretzel twists

Prep | Cook
1. Put an inch or so of water in a small saucepan and bring it to a boil.
Chop 12 ounces chocolate.
2. Put the chocolate in a bowl that you can set over the saucepan without
the bottom touching the water. Adjust the heat so the water simmers
and set the bowl on top.
3. Melt the chocolate, stirring frequently until it’s completely smooth.
Turn off the heat.
Line a rimmed baking sheet with wax paper or foil.
4. When the chocolate is melted, dip in the pretzels, one at a time, but
quickly, tapping to shake off any excess chocolate, and put them on the
rack. When done, put the sheet in the freezer until the chocolate
hardens, 10 to 15 minutes.
VARIATIONS
5 Other Things to Dip in Melted Chocolate
1. Fresh fruit
2. Dried fruit
3. Cookies
4. Graham crackers
5. Angel food or pound cake
NOTES
EVEN FASTER

Put the melted chocolate in a bowl, scatter the pretzels around it, and let
everyone dip and eat right away. Messy but fun.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Molten Chocolate Cake
A four-star dessert that bakes in less than 10 minutes.

Ingredients
1 stick unsalted butter, plus more for greasing the pan
4 ounces bittersweet or semisweet chocolate
4 eggs
¼ cup sugar
2 teaspoons flour, plus more for dusting the pan

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 450ºF.
Put 1 stick butter in a medium bowl and melt it in the microwave.
Chop 4 ounces chocolate.
2. Add the chocolate to the melted butter and stir until it’s melted.
3. In a separate bowl, crack in 2 eggs. Separate 2 more eggs and add the
yolks (discard the whites or refrigerate and save for another use). Add
¼ cup sugar and beat or whisk the mixture until it’s light and thick,
about 1 minute. Add the egg mixture and 2 teaspoons flour to the
chocolate mixture and beat to combine.
4. Butter four 4-ounce ramekins and dust them with flour. Tap to shake
out the excess flour and divide the batter among them.
5. When the oven is hot, bake the cakes until they are slightly puffy and
the tops are barely set, 7 to 9 minutes. They should still jiggle when
you shake them. After a minute, put a plate over each ramekin and
invert the ramekin onto the plate. Wait 10 seconds and remove the
ramekin from each cake. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Molten White Chocolate Cake
Use white chocolate.
Mexican Molten Chocolate Cake
Add ½ teaspoon cinnamon and ½ teaspoon cayenne along with the flour in
Step 3.

MASTER RECIPE

Dessert Sauces
A homemade sauce can instantly turn an everyday—
and even store-bought—dessert into a special treat.
The sauces here come together in a flash and can be
made in advance to use over the course of a few days.
Chocolate Sauce
1
Melt Chocolate with Butter
In a small saucepan, combine 4 ounces chopped semisweet or
bittersweet chocolate, 4 tablespoons (½  stick) butter, ¼ cup sugar, ¼
cup water, and a pinch of salt. Cook over very low heat until the
chocolate melts and the mixture is smooth.
2
Add Vanilla
Stir in 1 teaspoon vanilla extract and serve immediately, keep warm
over hot water or refrigerate for up to a week; rewarm before using.
Vanilla Custard Sauce
1
Heat Milk
Put 2 cups milk in a small saucepan over medium heat until it steams.
Let it cool for 5 minutes.
2
Cook the Custard
Once the milk has cooled somewhat, separate 4 eggs and add the yolks
(discard the whites or save for another use) and ½ cup sugar and whisk

to combine. Cook over medium heat, whisking pretty constantly, until
the mixture thickens and coats the back of a spoon (175° to 180°F on a
quick-read thermometer).
3
Strain and Cool
Pass the sauce through a strainer into a bowl and let it cool slightly.
Then stir in 1 teaspoon vanilla extract and serve warm or cold or
refrigerate for up to 3 days.
Creamy Caramel Sauce
1
Dissolve the Sugar
Combine 2 cups sugar, 1 cup cream, and 2 tablespoons butter in a
broad saucepan or deep skillet over medium-low heat. Cook, swirling
the pan occasionally until the sugar dissolves, 3 to 5 minutes.
2
Darken the Sugar
Continue to cook until the sugar darkens to a caramel color and the
temperature reaches 245°F on a candy thermometer, about 15 minutes.
Add more cream if the sauce is too thick. Serve immediately or
refrigerate for up to a week; rewarm before using.
Butterscotch Sauce
1
Melt Butter in Cream
Put ¾ cup cream and 6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter, cut into pieces, in a
small saucepan over medium-low heat. Cook, stirring occasionally
until the butter melts.
2
Add Sugar

Stir in ¾ cup brown sugar and a pinch of salt. Cook, stirring frequently
until the mixture is thick and shiny, 5 to 10 minutes. Taste and add
more sugar if you like. Serve immediately or refrigerate for up to a
week; rewarm before using.
Raw Fruit Sauce
1
Prep the Fruit
Trim, pit, and chop soft fruits—like peaches, nectarines, cherries, and
mangoes—as needed to get 2 cups.
2
Purée
Put the fruit in a blender and blend, adding a splash of water if
necessary to get the machine going. If you’re using raspberries or
blackberries and prefer a smooth purée, pour it through a strainer to
remove the seeds.
3
Sweeten
Stir in powdered sugar to taste; thin the sauce to your desired
consistency with water or orange or lemon juice. Serve immediately or
refrigerate for up to 2 days.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Chocolate-Orange Pudding
Using silken tofu is the easiest and fastest way to make, well,
silken pudding.

Ingredients
¾ cup sugar
8 ounces bittersweet or semisweet chocolate, plus 1 ounce for garnish
1 orange
14 to 16 ounces silken tofu
1 teaspoon vanilla extract

Prep | Cook
1. Put ¾ cup water and ¾ cup sugar in a small saucepan and bring it to a
boil. After it boils, stir it so the sugar crystals dissolve, then remove
from the heat.
Chop 8 ounces chocolate.
2. Put the chocolate in a bowl that you can set over the saucepan without
the bottom touching the water. Adjust the heat so the water simmers
and set the bowl on top. Stir the chocolate frequently until it’s melted
and completely smooth.
Grate 1 tablespoon orange zest (refrigerate the fruit for another use).
3. In a blender, combine the melted chocolate, the sugar syrup from the
saucepan, the silken tofu, orange zest, and 1 teaspoon vanilla. Blend,
stopping as necessary to scrape down the sides, until the mixture is
completely smooth.
4. Divide the mixture among ramekins or servings bowls and freeze them
until the pudding firms up a bit, 15 to 20 minutes. To serve, shave 1
ounce chocolate over the tops using a vegetable peeler.
VARIATIONS
Chocolate-Banana Pudding
Replace the orange zest with 1 ripe banana.
White Chocolate–Orange Pudding
Use white chocolate instead of dark.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Individual Tiramisus
Quick tiramisus assembled right in the serving bowls. For a boozy
version, see the Variations.

Ingredients
Instant coffee or espresso powder
20 ladyfingers
1 cup cream
½ cup mascarpone cheese
1 cup powdered sugar
Cocoa powder for dusting

Prep | Cook
1. Brew 1 cup instant coffee or espresso. Dip 20 ladyfingers in the coffee
and lay them in the bottom of 4 shallow bowls.
2. Beat 1 cup cream in a medium bowl using an electric mixer until it
holds soft peaks.
3. Put ½ cup mascarpone and 1 cup powdered sugar in a separate bowl.
Beat with the electric mixer until the sugar is fully incorporated; start
slow so it doesn’t fly everywhere.
4. Gently fold the mascarpone mixture into the whipped cream and
spread it on top of the ladyfingers. Dust some cocoa powder over the
top and serve.
VARIATIONS
Boozy Individual Tiramisus
Add 2 tablespoons crème de cacao, crème de menthe, or Marsala to the
coffee.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Chocolate Custard Soup
The classic custard sauce crème anglaise makes a delicious dessert
soup. If you’re having a party, serve this in shot glasses.

Ingredients
3 ounces bittersweet or semisweet chocolate
2 cups milk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
½ cup sugar
4 eggs

Prep | Cook
Chop 3 ounces chocolate.
1. Combine 2 cups milk, 1 teaspoon vanilla, ½ cup sugar, and the
chocolate in a small saucepan. Separate the eggs and add the yolks
(discard the whites or refrigerate them and save for another use); whisk
well.
2. Cook over medium heat, whisking constantly until the mixture
thickens enough to coat the back of a spoon. Don’t let it boil.
3. Pour the custard into small bowls and serve as a soup.
VARIATIONS
Vanilla Custard Soup
Omit the chocolate.
Chocolate-Almond Custard Soup
Add 1 teaspoon almond extract in Step 1.
7 Ways to Garnish Chocolate Custard Soup
1. Shaved chocolate
2. Berries or chopped fruit
3. Chopped fresh mint
4. Grated orange zest
5. Chopped nuts
6. Crumbled cake, cookies, or graham crackers
7. Whipped cream

NOTES
IF YOU HAVE MORE TIME
If you prefer, cool the soup in the refrigerator and serve it chilled.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Pumpkin Mousse
Few desserts this decadent are also this fast. You could eat it right
away if you wanted, but a quick chill in the freezer firms it up
perfectly.

Ingredients
½ cup cream
4 tablespoons sugar
3 eggs
One 15-ounce can pumpkin
½ teaspoon cinnamon
¼ teaspoon nutmeg
¼ teaspoon cloves
¼ teaspoon cardamom

Prep | Cook
1. Put ½ cup cream and 2 tablespoons sugar in a medium bowl. Using an
electric mixer, beat the cream until it holds soft peaks.
2. Separate the eggs and add the whites and 2 tablespoons sugar to a
clean medium bowl (discard the yolks or refrigerate and save for
another use). Wash and dry the beaters and beat the egg whites until
they hold soft peaks.
3. Add the pumpkin, ½ teaspoon cinnamon, ¼ teaspoon nutmeg, ¼
teaspoon cloves, and ¼ teaspoon cardamom to the egg whites. Gently
fold them in with a rubber spatula. Fold in the whipped cream just
enough so no streaks of white remain.
4. Spoon the mousse into ramekins or small bowls and freeze for 15
minutes to chill before serving.
VARIATIONS
Chocolate Mousse
Instead of the pumpkin and spices, heat 4 ounces chopped chocolate and 2
tablespoons butter in a bowl set over simmering water until almost
completely melted; then remove from the heat and stir until smooth. Fold
the whipped egg whites into the chocolate, then fold in the whipped cream.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Lemon S’mores
Marshmallows and chocolate aren’t the only foods worth piling on
graham crackers.

Ingredients
Ice cubes
2 lemons
1½ tablespoons cornstarch
1 cup milk
½ cup sugar
2 eggs
1 stick butter
8 large graham crackers
½ cup shredded unsweetened coconut

Prep | Cook
Put a medium metal bowl in the refrigerator. Place a couple handfuls of
ice in a larger bowl and set aside.
Halve the lemons; squeeze the juice of 3 halves into a small saucepan
(refrigerate the remaining half for another use).
1. Whisk 1½ tablespoons cornstarch into the juice until dissolved. Add 1
cup milk and ½ cup sugar. Separate the eggs, add the yolks (discard
the whites or refrigerate them and save for another use), and whisk
well. Add a stick of butter to the pan.
2. Cook over medium heat, whisking until the butter melts. Switch to a
rubber spatula and stir until the mixture starts to thicken, after about 6
minutes. Continue cooking for another 5 minutes.
3. Pour the hot curd through a mesh strainer into the chilled bowl from
the refrigerator. Add some cold water to the bowl of ice and cradle the
medium bowl inside it. Stir the curd for 5 minutes to cool. Let sit in the
water bath for another 5 minutes to thicken.
4. Spoon the thickened lemon curd onto 8 graham crackers and sprinkle
with ½ cup shredded coconut. Serve immediately.
VARIATIONS
Mounds Bar S’mores
Skip the lemon curd. Melt 8 ounces dark chocolate, drizzle it over the
graham crackers, and sprinkle with the coconut.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Skillet Fruit Crisp
The essence of a crisp—sweet, tender fruit and a crunchy buttery
topping—done quickly on the stovetop. Soft fruit cooks faster, but
you can use firm fruit like apples: Just sauté them a bit longer, but
it won’t take much more time.

Ingredients
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter
2 pounds peaches, bananas, berries, or any combination
½ cup walnuts or pecans
1 lemon
½ cup rolled oats
¼ cup shredded unsweetened coconut
⅓ cup packed brown sugar
½ teaspoon cinnamon
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. Put 1 tablespoon butter in a large skillet over medium heat.
If you’re using stone fruits, pit and slice them; if using bananas, peel
and slice.
2. Add the fruit to the skillet and cook, stirring occasionally until soft, 5
or 6 minutes. Add the berries for the last few minutes of cooking or, if
using all berries, cook for a little less time, 3 or 4 minutes.
3. Put 5 tablespoons butter in another large skillet over medium heat.
Chop ½ cup nuts.
Grate 1 teaspoon lemon zest (refrigerate the fruit for another use).
4. When the butter is melted, add the nuts, lemon zest, ½ cup rolled oats,
¼ cup shredded coconut, ⅓ cup packed brown sugar, ½ teaspoon
cinnamon, and a pinch of salt; toss to coat. Cook, stirring frequently,
until the topping is golden and crisp, 6 to 8 minutes.
5. When the fruit is soft, divide it among bowls. Scatter the topping over
the fruit and serve.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Berry Fool
Adjust the ingredients a bit to make this summery treat creamier,
sweeter, or fruitier.

Ingredients
2 to 3 cups raspberries or blackberries
½ cup plus 1 tablespoon sugar
1 cup cream

Prep | Cook
1. Put about two-thirds of the berries in a small bowl and toss with ¼ cup
sugar.
2. Pour 1 cup cream into a medium bowl; add 1 tablespoon sugar. Using
an electric mixer, beat the cream until it holds soft peaks.
3. Save a few of the remaining berries for garnish. Put the rest in a
blender with ¼ cup sugar. Purée. Pass the purée through a mesh
strainer into the whipped cream, pressing it through with a spoon or
rubber spatula.
4. Beat the purée into the cream, then add the sugared berries with their
liquid and fold them in with a rubber spatula. Garnish with the
remaining berries and serve.
VARIATIONS
Peach Fool
Instead of the berries, use 6 to 8 peaches (1½ pounds). Peel and slice them,
then divide and prepare as described in the recipe.
NOTES
EVEN FASTER
Don’t bother straining the seeds out of the purée before folding it into the
whipped cream.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Sautéed Apple Crunch
Crisp, buttery phyllo dough can be as convenient as it is frustrating.
Instead of wrestling with fragile layers of dough, slice the lot into
shreds for a crunchy topping.

Ingredients
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
12 sheets phyllo dough
½ cup walnuts
1½ pounds firm, crisp apples, like Golden Delicious
½ cup packed brown sugar
½ teaspoon cinnamon

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 375ºF.
Put 4 tablespoons butter in a small microwave-safe bowl and melt it in
the microwave.
Stack 12 phyllo sheets on top of each other and cut them into shreds;
put them on a rimmed baking sheet.
Chop ½ cup walnuts; add them to the baking sheet.
2. Drizzle the melted butter over the phyllo and nuts; toss to coat. Bake
(it’s okay if the oven’s not fully heated), tossing occasionally until the
phyllo is golden and crisp, 20 to 25 minutes.
Core and slice the apples.
3. Put 4 tablespoons butter in a large, deep skillet over medium heat.
When the butter is melted, add the apples and stir; turn the heat to low,
cover, and cook for 10 minutes.
4. Add ½ cup packed brown sugar and ½ teaspoon cinnamon and raise
the heat to medium. Cook, stirring frequently until the apples are
tender and glazed, 10 minutes more.
5. Transfer the apples to a large, shallow serving dish. When the phyllo is
crisp, scatter it and the nuts over the apples and serve.

SPEED  
  SERVES 6

Pecan-Bourbon Brownies
Crunchy, gooey, boozy, and quick.

Ingredients
1 stick butter, plus more for greasing the pan
3 ounces unsweetened chocolate
1 cup pecans
1 cup sugar
2 eggs
½ cup flour
Salt
½ teaspoon vanilla extract
2 tablespoons bourbon

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 350ºF.
Grease an 8- or 9-inch square baking pan with butter.
Chop 3 ounces chocolate.
2. Put 1 stick butter and the chocolate in a small saucepan over very low
heat. Cook, stirring occasionally until the chocolate is just melted.
Remove it from the heat and continue to stir until the mixture is
smooth.
Chop 1 cup pecans.
3. Transfer the chocolate mixture to a medium bowl and stir in 1 cup
sugar. With a whisk or an electric mixer, beat in the eggs, one at a
time. Gently stir in ½ cup flour, a pinch of salt, ½ teaspoon vanilla, 2
tablespoons bourbon, and the pecans.
4. Pour the batter into the prepared pan and bake until just barely set in
the middle, 20 to 25 minutes. A toothpick inserted into the center
should come out moist but not wet.
5. Let the brownies cool just long enough so that you can slice them, 5 to
10 minutes. Cut and serve warm.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4 TO 6

Chocolate Peanut Brittle
Peanut brittle has a reputation for being tricky and painstaking.
This recipe clears its name.

Ingredients
2 cups sugar
1 tablespoon butter
2 cups roasted unsalted peanuts
Pinch of salt
4 ounces bittersweet or semisweet chocolate

Prep | Cook
1. Put 2 cups sugar and ⅓ cup water in a small saucepan over medium
heat and stir gently just to wet the sugar. Cook without stirring,
swirling the pan occasionally until the sugar dissolves and starts to
color, 10 to 15 minutes. Do not stir.
Grease a rimmed baking sheet with 1 tablespoon butter.
2. Continue to cook and swirl carefully until the caramel turns deep
golden but not dark brown or smoking, another 5 to 10 minutes.
Remove from the heat. Stir in 2 cups peanuts and a pinch of salt and
immediately spread the mixture onto the baking sheet.
3. Pour an inch of water into a small saucepan and bring it to a boil over
high heat.
Chop 4 ounces chocolate.
4. Put the chocolate in a bowl that you can set over the saucepan without
the bottom touching the water. Adjust the heat so the water simmers
and set the bowl on top.
5. Melt the chocolate, stirring frequently until it’s smooth.
6. When the peanut brittle is slightly firm but not yet hard, drizzle the
melted chocolate on top. Refrigerate until the chocolate is firm, 10 to
15 minutes. Break the brittle into pieces and serve.

SPEED  
   MAKES 12 CUPCAKES

Chocolate Chunk Banana Cupcakes
An irresistible crust gives way to an oozing middle. The key to
success is a very hot oven.

Ingredients
1 stick butter, plus more for greasing the pan
2 cups flour
½ teaspoon salt
1½ teaspoons baking powder
¾ cup sugar
2 eggs
3 very ripe bananas
5 ounces semisweet or bittersweet chocolate
1 teaspoon vanilla extract

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 400ºF. Grease a 12-cup muffin tin with butter.
2. In a large bowl, combine 2 cups flour, ½ teaspoon salt, 1½ teaspoons
baking powder, and ¾ cup sugar.
3. Cut up 1 stick butter and put in a medium bowl; beat with an electric
mixer until creamy. Crack in the eggs. Peel the bananas and add them
to the bowl, mashing them up as you drop them in. Beat until well
combined.
Chop 5 ounces chocolate.
4. Add the banana mixture to the dry ingredients and beat gently to
combine. Fold in the chopped chocolate and 1 teaspoon vanilla.
5. Scoop the batter into the muffin cups so they are three-quarters full.
Bake until the cupcakes are slightly crusty on the outside but still soft
in the middle (the tops should leave an indent when pressed with your
finger), 15 to 20 minutes. Serve warm.
VARIATIONS
Praline Banana Cupcakes
Toss ½ cup chopped walnuts or pecans with ½ cup brown sugar; sprinkle on
top of the cupcakes before baking.
Banana-Rum Cupcakes
Add 1 tablespoon rum along with the vanilla in Step 4.

SPEED  
  SERVES 6

Peach Cobbler Under the Broiler
Much faster than the original and with extra caramelization thanks
to the broiler.

Ingredients
1 stick butter, plus more for greasing the pan
2 pounds fresh or frozen peaches
½ cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar
½ cup flour
½ teaspoon baking powder
Pinch of salt
1 egg
½ teaspoon vanilla extract

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Grease a broiler-safe 9 × 13-inch pan with butter.
Pit and slice the peaches if using fresh.
2. Spread the peaches in a somewhat single layer in the pan. Sprinkle
with 2 tablespoons sugar. Broil until the peaches begin to soften and
caramelize, 6 minutes.
Cut 1 stick butter into small cubes.
3. In a food processor, combine ½ cup flour, ½ cup sugar, ½ teaspoon
baking powder, and a pinch of salt. Pulse a few times to mix. Add the
butter and process until the mixture is well blended, about 10 seconds.
4. Crack in the egg and add ½ teaspoon vanilla. Process until the egg is
just combined.
5. Drop tablespoons of the batter onto the peaches. If you have an
adjustable broiler, reduce the heat to low; otherwise, cover the cobbler
with aluminum foil to prevent burning. Broil until the biscuit topping
is cooked through and the peaches have softened slightly and
caramelized in places, 8 to 12 minutes.
6. If you’ve covered the top and the biscuit hasn’t browned, remove the
foil and broil until the top is golden. Serve hot or warm.

SPEED  
  SERVES 6

Apple Crumble Under the Broiler
Close to instant gratification.

Ingredients
1 stick cold butter, plus more for greasing the pan
2 pounds apples
½ lemon
1 teaspoon cinnamon
1 cup flour
½ cup packed brown sugar
1 teaspoon baking powder
Salt

Prep | Cook
1. Turn the broiler to high; put the rack 6 inches from the heat.
Grease a broiler-safe 9 × 13-inch pan with butter.
Core and slice the apples; put them in the pan. Squeeze the lemon juice
over the apples.
2. Sprinkle 1 teaspoon cinnamon over the apples and toss to coat. Put the
pan under the broiler and cook, stirring occasionally to give the apples
a chance to start softening, 10 minutes or more.
Cut 1 stick butter into small cubes; put them in a medium bowl.
3. Add to the bowl 1 cup flour, ½ cup packed brown sugar, 1 teaspoon
baking powder, and a sprinkle of salt. Rub the mixture together with
your fingers, combining the ingredients and incorporating the butter
until it becomes crumbly.
4. Remove the apples from the broiler, make sure they are in an even
layer, and sprinkle the crumble over the top. Turn the broiler to low. If
your broiler doesn’t have a low setting, move the pan a few inches
farther away from the heat.
5. Broil until the topping is golden and crisp, 10 to 15 minutes. Serve hot
or warm.

SPEED  
  SERVES 4

Key Lime Crumble
A deconstructed take on the pie—buttery graham crackers
crumbled on rich custard.

Ingredients
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
12 graham crackers
One 14-ounce can sweetened condensed milk
4 eggs
3 limes

Prep | Cook
1. Heat the oven to 350ºF.
Put 4 tablespoons butter in a medium microwave-safe bowl and melt in
the microwave.
Put 12 graham crackers in a food processor and pulse a few times until
crumbly. (Or crush them with your hands.)
2. Add the cracker crumbs to the melted butter and toss to coat.
3. Put the condensed milk in a medium bowl. Separate the eggs and add
the yolks to the bowl (discard the whites or refrigerate for another use).
Using an electric mixer, beat until well combined.
Halve the limes.
4. Squeeze in the lime juice one half at a time, beating as you go, until
the mixture thickens slightly. Pour it into 4 ramekins or 1 pie plate and
sprinkle with the graham cracker crumbs.
5. Bake until the crumbs are golden and the filling is just firm, 15 to 20
minutes. Remove and cool on a rack for 10 minutes before serving.
Serve with a spoon.
VARIATIONS
Orange Pie with Gingersnap Crumble
Swap 1 or 2 oranges for the limes (about ⅓ cups juice) and 2 cups crumbled
gingersnaps for the graham crackers.

Index
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
A
Adobo-style
canned chipotles in adobo
chicken and sweet potato
curried chicken and potatoes
Aïoli
curry
lemon
lemon-soy
lemon-tarragon
saffron
smoked paprika, 9.1, 10.1
Almond(s)
broccoli and
-brown sugar crunch, broiled grapefruit with
cookie dough
in maple-almond grits
salad
arugula with apricots, manchego, and
charred Brussels sprouts with ricotta salata and
green bean, with caramelized onions and
puffed rice, with dates and
spiced, sautéed with bacon

stew, green bean, with tomatoes, olives, and
and strawberry smoothie
Almond butter
and apple sandwich
chocolate, balls
toast with strawberries and
Almond extract, 15.1, 15.2
Anaheim peppers
Ancho chiles
Anchovies
cauliflower stewed with
pasta with garlic and
seasoning with
Andouille
black-eyed pea and Southern greens soup with
rice bowl with
Appetizers. See also Sides
about
bagel chips
broiled radishes with olive oil and lemon
broiled radishes with soy
chicken satay, skewerless
cocktail meatballs, master recipe
crab toast
crisps
edamame with chili salt
endive spears
goat cheese truffles
Greek pita pizzas
green beans with onion dip

ham-wrapped apples
hard-boiled eggs with curry mayo
hard-boiled eggs with Dijon mayo
no-cook skewers
nuts, roasted
nuts, spiced
panfried olives
peel-and-eat shrimp
pinzimonio
pizza wedges
prosciutto-wrapped
cantaloupe
pears
tomatoes
quesadillas with pico de gallo
raw veggies with romesco
rosemary popcorn
tortillas rojas
warm-pickled
bell peppers
carrots
cucumber spears
zucchini
Apple(s)
about
prep shortcuts
storing
types of
and almond butter sandwich
bacon-crusted chicken with

and bananas, sautéed, with honey-yogurt sauce
bulgur and fennel salad with
butternut squash soup with bacon and
caramelized
charred Brussels sprout salad with
crumble, broiled
-ginger smoothie
ham and Gruyère sandwich, broiled, with
ham-wrapped
and honey-mustard baguette
mustard-glazed fish with
pork chops, seared, with onions and
potato rösti with apple sauce
pumpkin soup with pumpkin seeds and
and sauerkraut salad, with pork
sautéed, breakfast patties with
spinach with walnuts, goat cheese, and
tacos, crisp pork and
toast with walnut butter and
turkey salad sandwich with sage and
Apple cider
in applejack sundaes
-braised turkey and squash
in Dijon-garlic-cider roasted chicken and carrots
Applejack sundaes
Apricot(s)
arugula with Marcona almonds, manchego, and
-cardamom muesli
chicken and cauliflower curry with
-cinnamon couscous

dried, puffed wheat salad with pistachios and
Arborio rice
Arroz con pollo
Artichokes
about
pasta with bread crumbs, lemon, and
Arugula
about
with apricots, Marcona almonds, and manchego
and egg salad sandwich
with eggs, fried, and shaved Parmesan
farro and white beans with Parmesan and
and fried fennel
and jícama fry salad with creamy lime sauce
and pea frittata
with scallops, seared, and orange dressing
Asian greens, hot and sour soup with tofu and
Asian noodles
Asparagus
about, 1.1, 2.1
and beef, stir-fried, with scallions and ginger
chipotle-marinated flank steak and
creamy soup with rustic mint pesto
gratin
hot and sour beef with
and kale Caesar salad
lemony, with sole
orzo risotto with eggs and
pasta with ricotta and
and poached chicken with lemon aïoli

polenta with chicken and
and salmon with toasted bread crumbs
and scallops with toasted bread crumbs
and soy-lemon edamame
Avocado(es)
about
chicken, bacon, and tomato wrap with
chipotle-avocado spread
green bean salad with fresh tuna and
green bean salad with tofu and
in green gazpacho
with hot sauce and cilantro
with lemon and salt
with lime and chili salt
with rice vinegar and peanuts
in salsa
soup with crab and corn
with soy sauce and sesame seeds
tuna sandwich with cilantro and
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
B
Baby back ribs, BBQ
Bacon
about, 2.1, 14.1
in BBQ pinto beans with fried eggs

in BLT salad with rosemary-mayo dressing
braised cabbage, kimchi, and
Brussels sprouts with
chicken, avocado, and tomato wrap with
chicken, tomato, and blue cheese wrap with
-crusted chicken with apples
curried rice, beans, and broccoli with
in fast feijoada
green beans, quick-stewed, with
johnnycakes
maple syrup
in maple-bacon breakfast bruschetta
panfried
soft-shell crabs with leeks and
trout with Brussels sprouts and
trout with leeks and
peas with onion and
risotto-style pasta with mushrooms and
seafood chowder with
soup
butternut squash, with apples and
egg drop and
egg drop and, toast in
egg drop and, with greens
pancetta in carbonara soup
sweet potato, with pears and
tomato and peach gazpacho with
spiced nuts sautéed with
in steakhouse salad
in vinaigrettes

white beans with greens, garlic, and
Bagel chips
homemade
with prosciutto, tomato, and ricotta
with smoked salmon
Baguettes
about
apple and honey-mustard
fennel and garlic butter
goat cheese, peach, and pecan
jícama and chile mayo
radish and herb butter
ricotta and olive
Baked
chicken tenders
crab cakes
eggs
Baking powder, 1.1, 15.1
Baking soda, 1.1, 15.1
Banana(s)
and apples, sautéed, with honey-yogurt sauce
caramelized
-chocolate chip pancakes
in chocolate chunk banana cupcakes
chocolate-banana pudding
-coconut pancakes
in maple-banana breakfast bruschetta
and peanut butter sandwich with honey and raisins
praline banana cupcakes
-rum cupcakes

Bangers and mash
Bánh mì
Barbecue (BBQ)
baby back ribs
bacon pinto beans with fried eggs
black-eyed pea and sweet potato burgers
cauliflower tikka with boiled eggs
chicken
blackened, sandwich with pickled cucumbers
collard-wrapped
sandwich with peach chutney
-spiced cutlets with pinto beans and ham
thighs with crisp cabbage and red onion
chopped pork and slaw sandwich
fish, Malaysian-style
-glazed ham steaks with collards
lima beans with collards
skillet meat loaf
sweet potato and black-eyed pea burgers
tofu and cauliflower
Barbecue sauce
Chinese-style
chipotle
Dijon
ginger-hoisin
maple-Dijon
master recipe
Barley, pearled, 6.1, 6.2
Basil
in bubbling caprese

in cantaloupe and basil smoothie
and chicken meatballs
endive spears with
noodles with chicken, peppers, and
rice with tomatoes, scrambled eggs, and
scrambled eggs with prosciutto and
tomato sauce with chiles and
tomato-basil sauce
in vinaigrette
Basmati rice
about
cooking times
pilaf, recipe-free
Bass, striped. See Striped bass
Bay scallops, pasta with tomatoes and
BBQ. See Barbecue (BBQ)
Bean(s). See also specific types of beans
about
braising with
dried vs. canned
flavoring
freezing
soaking
storing, 1.1, 8.1
substituting ingredients
thickening with
chipotle chicken and dumplings with
master recipe
in pasta e fagioli
refried

on toast
Bean curd. See Tofu
Bean sprouts
ginger-orange
hot and sour soup with
jook with beef and
noodles with beef and
with olive oil and rosemary
scallion-miso
sole with sesame
Thai coconut soup with
Thai peanut chicken with crisp cabbage and
Bean threads
Beef. See also Steak; Veal
about
cuts of meat
homemade cold cuts, master recipe
stock, master recipe
in Big T’s meat sauce sub
burger, better
and butter bean chili
in cabbage, unstuffed, with ground meat
carbonnade with mushrooms
chipotle rice and corn with
and eggplant, curry-braised
hot and sour, with asparagus
jook with bean sprouts and
kebabs, with mushrooms and spicy peanut sauce
kebabs, with onions and mustard-rosemary sauce
kimchi and snow pea salad with

meatballs
and bulgur, with chipotle tomato sauce
chipotle
and spaghetti with tomato sauce
teriyaki
noodles
with bean sprouts and
with celery and
with cilantro-scallion pesto and
with onions, mint, and
spaghetti and drop meatballs with tomato sauce
pan-roasted tenderloin with chile sweet potatoes
pan-roasted tenderloin with potatoes
and potatoes, curry-braised
in Reuben sandwich
sesame, and broccoli
skillet meat loaf
sloppy Joes
soup
hot and sour, with
and kimchi, with rice
Korean-style beef, with rice
in pho, slow with meat
and red cabbage
Thai coconut, with
stew
stir-fried
and asparagus, with scallions and ginger
and broccoli, with scallions and ginger
caramel, with green beans

caramel, with peppers
with skillet kimchi
stroganoff
tenderloin, pan-roasted, with chile sweet potatoes
tenderloin, pan-roasted, with potatoes
teriyaki, udon with
Beer
about
-braised black beans and corn with chorizo
-braised black beans with chicken and corn
-braised pinto beans with chiles and sour cream
braised pork with cabbage and
in green beans, quick-stewed, with bacon
in maple-chile-beer roasted chicken and peppers
Beet(s)
gratin with toasted nuts
rösti with pear sauce
salad
and cabbage
and carrot, with olives, mint, and lemon
and carrot, with toasted cashews
in three Bs pasta
Belgian endive. See Endive
Bell pepper(s)
about
and beef, caramel stir-fried
with chicken, basil, and noodles
in chicken, maple-chile-beer roasted, and peppers
and chicken, poached, with smoked paprika aïoli
and chicken, with black bean mole

and chicken, with pumpkin seed mole
crab and egg salad with
eggs and steak with onions and
fajita onions and
in lamb, cumin, with green peppers
and pinto beans in buttery tomato sauce
with pork, cilantro, and noodles
pork paprikash with
queso fundido, sweet pepper
in sausage and pepper salad with mustard dressing
and sausage sub
and sausage sub with melted mozzarella
sautéed, breakfast patties with
stir-fried lamb with cumin and
stir-fried lamb with curry and
warm-pickled
Berry fool
Big T’s meat sauce sub
Biscuits, drop
Black and white milkshakes
Black bean(s)
beer-braised, with chicken and corn
beer-braised, with chorizo and corn
burgers, smoky, with carrots
burrito, with chicken
burrito, with steak and salsa
and cabbage gratin with tortilla crumbs and Jack
and cabbage salad with sour cream and cilantro
chile-cumin
chili, tofu and

in chipotle chicken and dumplings with beans
chipotle, with fried eggs
with chorizo, greens, and garlic
and corn salad with garlic chicken
and corn salad with shrimp
in fast feijoada
hot and sour, with bok choy
and lamb chili
mole, chicken and peppers with
pasta with chorizo, red onions, and
pork stew with collards and
sauce, stir-fried chicken and broccoli with
sauce, stir-fried chicken and cauliflower with
sesame-soy
soup, smoky
soup, spicy
stir-fried pork with onions and
stuffed poblanos with cheese and
and three-bean and sweet potato salad, warm
with tomato and feta
in tomato salsa
and veggie fajita salad
Black pepper
about
scallops and broccoli
shrimp and broccoli
squid and bok choy
Blackened
catfish or fish fillets with green beans
chicken sandwich, BBQ, with pickled cucumbers

chicken sandwich with pickled red onions
Black-eyed pea(s)
in hoppin’ John with collards
soup, andouille, Southern greens, and
and sweet potato burgers
and tofu chili with collards
“Blooming” ground spices
BLT
salad with rosemary-mayo dressing
wrap, chipotle
Blue cheese
in Buffalo shrimp
chicken and chard gratin with walnuts and
chicken, bacon, and tomato wrap with
and chicken sausage over sautéed kale
endive spears with olives and
endive with fried eggs and
leek soup with
pasta with
peach and tarragon salad with
skillet meat loaf
slaw, Buffalo shrimp with
in three Bs pasta
watercress with peaches, pecans, and
in yogurt-blue cheese sauce
Blue Ocean Institute
Blueberry(ies)
maple syrup
toast with cashew butter and
and tofu smoothie

Boiled
eggs with cauliflower tikka
eggs with celery root rémoulade
peel-and-eat shrimp
Bok choy
black beans, hot and sour, with
chicken, Chinese-style poached, and
chicken, hot and sour, with
grilled or broiled, seared scallops with
hot and sour, with mussels
pancake with soy dipping sauce
and pork meat loaf
pork meatballs, five-spice, with
rice with scrambled eggs, scallions and
soup
hot and sour, with pork and
miso, with tofu, soba, and
peanut, Chinese-style, with tofu and
squid, black pepper
stir-fried
sweet and sour, salmon with
tuna sandwich, seared, with soy mayo and
Bolognese-style
skillet shepherd’s pie
spaghetti
Bonito flakes
in dashi
in miso soup
Boozy
black and white milkshakes

pecan-bourbon brownies
tiramisu
Boston (butter) lettuce
about
in BLT salad with rosemary-mayo dressing
in steak, lettuce, and herb wrap
Bourbon
in applejack sundaes
in boozy black and white milkshakes
in pecan-bourbon brownies
Braising
about
with beans
glazing and
beer-braised
black beans with chicken and corn
black beans with chorizo and corn
pinto beans with chiles and sour cream
cabbage, kimchi, and bacon
cabbage, sauerkraut, and ham
chicken and leeks, braised and glazed
curry-braised beef and eggplant
curry-braised beef and potatoes
lamb, Moroccan, with couscous and olives
lentils
with chicken
with pork chops
and potatoes
with salmon
meat, recipe-free

pork
with cabbage and beer
with cabbage and wine
with celery and wine
Moroccan-style, with couscous and grapes
Provençal, and fennel
recipe-free
sausage, browned, and endive
tofu with tomatoes
veal
with edamame
with garlic and white beans
with peas
vegetables, heartier
wine-braised turkey
wine-braised white beans with cherry tomatoes and Parmesan
Bratwurst
in cabbage soup with smoked sausage
and onion sub
Bread. See also Toasted bread
about
croutons for salads, 2.1, 2.2
storing
types of
and charred chicken, with hero fixings
garlic
Middle Eastern chicken and bread salad
in tomato and bread soup
with eggplant
with hearty greens

with white beans
with zucchini
warm buttery
Bread crumbs
fish fillets or steaks and toasted
fried, 5.1, 14.1
master recipe
Parmesan
parsley
pasta with artichokes, lemon, and
pasta with fennel and
salmon with asparagus and toasted
scallops with asparagus and toasted
Breaded
baked potato and crab cakes
chicken breasts with pan sauce
Breakfast
about
eggs
fruit, grains, toast, and cereal
meats
pancakes and waffles
prosciutto and drop biscuits
scrambles, recipe-free
smoothies
Brie and turkey sandwich, broiled, with tomatoes
Brioche
Broccoli
about
beef, sesame, and

and beef, stir-fried, with scallions and ginger
charred, yellow lentils with
and cheddar
chicken soup with rice and
chicken, stir-fried, with black bean sauce and
chicken, stir-fried, with tomato-soy sauce and
couscous gratin with onions, cheddar, and
lemony lima beans with
and pork, stir-fried, with scallions and ginger
rice, beans, and
scallops, black pepper and
scrambled, with Parmesan and lemon
scrambled, with soy sauce and lime
seared
shrimp, black pepper and
tabbouleh with charred tomato and lemon
and toasted almonds
tofu, braised, with tomatoes and
two-step
warm pickled salad
Broccoli rabe
chicken and ricotta sausage over
and chicken gratin
pancake with ricotta dipping sauce
pasta with ricotta and
pork meatballs, mustard-herb, with
and sausage sub
steamed, with shrimp
stewed with tons of garlic
and turkey hero

Broiled(ing)
about
apple crumble
beef, kimchi and snow pea salad with
chicken
about
breasts
homemade cold cuts, master recipe
split whole, and vegetables
eggs
fish, 9.1, 9.2
grains
grapefruit
peaches, 15.1, 15.2
polenta
pork
curry-rubbed tenderloin with mango salsa
jerk with pineapple
paprika-rubbed tenderloin with peach and tomato salsa
paprikash with red peppers
pork tenderloin, master recipe
sauerkraut and apple salad with
souvlaki with zucchini
spice-rubbed tenderloin with pineapple salsa
sandwiches
cheese
ham and Gruyère with apples
prosciutto and mozzarella, with melon
salami and provolone sandwich with roasted red pepper
turkey and Brie, with tomatoes

vegetables
bok choy with seared scallops
caprese, bubbling
cherry tomatoes
eggplant
radishes
romaine with seared scallops
with white bean dressing
Broths
about
coconut curry
creamy tomato
curry
lemongrass
miso
soy, 9.1, 10.1
spicy tomato
Brown butter
dumplings, ricotta, with spinach and
roasted spaghetti squash with walnuts and
Brown lentils
Brown rice
parcooking
quick
stir-ins for
Brown sugar
about
broiled grapefruit with
broiled peaches with
pecan with bacon and

Brownies, pecan-bourbon
Bruschetta
breakfast
as a side
Brussels sprouts
about
with bacon
charred salad
chicken, braised and glazed, with
and chicken wings, hot, with yogurt-blue cheese sauce
with chorizo
glazed, with Vietnamese flavors
pork chops, seared, with
with sausage
in three Bs pasta
trout, panfried, with bacon and
Buffalo cauliflower
Buffalo shrimp
Buffalo tofu sandwich
Bulgur
about, 2.1, 6.1, 6.2
balsamic, lamb chops with
and beef meatballs in tomato sauce
and chicken meatballs in tomato sauce
with corn
with dried cranberries and orange
and lamb meatballs in tomato sauce
with lemon and parsley
lemony, with zucchini, olives, and ricotta salata
pilaf, fish kebabs over

pilaf, recipe-free
salad
apple and fennel salad with
apple and fennel salad with crisp ham and
broccoli tabbouleh with tomatoes and lemon
cauliflower tabbouleh with tomato and lime
fennel and radish tabbouleh with tomato and lime
warm tabbouleh with mussels
warm tabbouleh with tuna
smoky
with eggplant, dates, and feta
with eggplant, dried tomatoes, and feta
with eggplant, roasted red peppers, and manchego
Burgers
better beef
black bean and carrot, smoky
black-eyed pea and sweet potato
cheeseburgers
lamb and red onion
pork and scallion
turkey
white bean and zucchini
Burritos
breakfast
chicken and black bean
shrimp and white bean
steak and black bean
Butter(y)
about
as dessert staple

seasoning with
spreading
storing
bread, warm
brown butter, dumplings, ricotta, with spinach and
brown butter, roasted spaghetti squash with walnuts and
crab salad sandwich
egg noodles
garlic
grits
herb
-poached halibut or fish fillets with peas
ricotta dumplings with spinach and
spinach, long-cooked
tomato sauce
Butter bean and beef chili
Butter (Boston) lettuce
about
in BLT salad with rosemary-mayo dressing
in steak, lettuce, and herb wrap
Butternut squash
about, 1.1, 4.1
au gratin with toasted nuts
butternut purée, pork tenderloin with
risotto-style pasta with ham and
salad
raw, with warm edamame
raw, with warm red beans
sautéed, with warm edamame
simmered

soup with apples and bacon
Butterscotch sauce
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
C
Cabbage(s)
about
grilling
prep shortcuts
storing
BBQ chicken thighs with crisp red onion and
and black bean gratin with tortilla crumbs and Jack
braised pork with beer and
braised pork with wine and
braised, with kimchi and bacon
braised, with sauerkraut and ham
and chicken stew
and corned beef gratin with lima beans
edamame with chicken and
herby chicken thighs with crisp fennel and
kimchi style, with white beans and pork
and lima bean gratin with rye crumbs
with pork, edamame, and miso
and red beans in buttery tomato sauce
rice with scrambled eggs, scallions, and cabbage
salad

and beet, with rye croutons, yogurt, and dill
and black bean, with sour cream and cilantro
coleslaw
hot and sour, with salmon
with pork, crisp, and tahini-lemon dressing
with sesame vinaigrette
with tofu, crisp, and coconut-lime dressing
with tofu, crisp, and peanut-lime dressing
sauerkraut, preparing
soup, beef and red
soup with smoked sausage
Thai peanut chicken with crisp bean sprouts and
unstuffed
unstuffed, with ground meat
-wrapped miso chicken
Cacio e pepe (cheese and pepper)
Caesar salad
asparagus and kale
classic
Cakes
master recipe
Mexican molten white chocolate
molten chocolate
molten white chocolate
Canned beans
Canned tomatoes, 1.1, 4.1, 5.1
Canned tuna
Cannellini beans
in fast cassoulet
in pasta e fagioli

soup, sausage, kale, and
Cantaloupe
and basil smoothie
in prosciutto and mozzarella sandwich, broiled, with melon
prosciutto-wrapped
Caper(s)
about
chicken cutlets with lemon and
fennel salad with dill and
and mustard dressing
pasta with tuna and
tuna sandwich with fennel, lemon, and
veal scallopini with lemon and
Caprese salad
Caramel sauce, creamy
Caramelized apples
Caramelized bananas
Caramelized nuts
Caramelized onions
Caraway seeds
cabbage and chicken stew with
fennel salad with
Carbonara soup
Carbonnade, beef, with mushrooms
Cardamom
in apricot-cardamom muesli, 12.1, 12.2
in pineapple-cardamom couscous
Carnitas
pork and corn
pork and onion

pork, Moroccan-style, and onion
Carrot(s)
about
and black bean burgers, smoky
chickpeas, curried, stir-fried, with chicken and
chickpeas, curried, stir-fried, with potatoes and
glazed, sole with
and lamb sauté with mustard and miso
miso lamb chops with
miso-glazed fish fillets and
and poached chicken with lemon-soy aïoli
roasted chicken and
roasted whole fish with lime and
salad
and beet, with olives, mint, and lemon
and beet, with toasted cashews
and chickpea, with warm cumin oil
with cilantro and lime
with curry vinaigrette
with olives and rosemary
with raisins
shredded
soy sauce and scallions
soup, ginger, with crisp ham
soup, Thai coconut, with
tofu, stir-fried, with soy and mustard
warm-pickled
Cashew(s)
beet and carrot salad with
miso-cashew chicken tenders

spiced, sautéed with bacon
in spinach-cashew sauce
warm kale with scallions, soy currants or raisins, and
Cashew butter
in cold cashew noodles
toast with blueberries and
Casseroles, recipe-free
Cassoulet
chickpea and chorizo gratin
fast
feijoada, fast
white bean and ham gratin
white bean and smoked fish gratin
Catfish
blackened, with green beans
Dijon, with green beans
miso-glazed, and mushrooms
Cauliflower
about, 1.1, 1.2
Buffalo
chicken, stir-fried, with black bean sauce and
chickpea and couscous stew with
curry and chicken, with apricots
curry and chicken, with tomatoes
pasta with spicy curried
“polenta” with mushrooms
salad
tabbouleh with tomato and lemon
warm pickled, with prosciutto
warm pickled, with roasted red peppers

seared
and shrimp with rustic romesco
and squid with rustic romesco
stewed with anchovies
tikka, with boiled eggs
toasted, with red lentils
tofu, BBQ, and
tofu, chipotle-orange, and
tofu, Manchurian, and
tofu, Moroccan-spiced, with tomatoes
Celery
braised pork with wine and
noodles with beef and
noodles with tofu and
roasted chicken and
salad
smoked salmon and egg salad with
and tofu salad, pressed, with sesame-chile vinaigrette
Celery root
and crab cakes
gratin with toasted nuts
hash, prosciutto and
pork tenderloin, pan-roasted, with
rémoulade
chicken and
crab and
with hard-boiled eggs
shrimp and, 2.1, 9.1
tuna and
soup, creamy, with rustic cilantro pesto

wine-braised turkey and
Cellophane noodles
Cereal bars, no-bake fruit and
Challah
Charcoal grilling
Chard
and chicken gratin
and chicken meat loaf
chorizo meatballs with
garlicky, seared steak with
orzo risotto, with ricotta and
soup, merguez, chickpea, and
stir-fried chicken with citrus and
Charred
Brussels sprouts
chicken
and crusty bread with hero fixings
and pita with gyro fixings
and tortillas with taco fixings
tortillas
Cheat-a-little pizza, master recipe
Cheddar
broccoli and
on cheesy tortillas
couscous gratin with onions, broccoli, and
crisps
in honey-cheddar grits with sage
in jalapeño-cheddar johnnycakes
waffles with bacon maple syrup
Cheese(s)

blue. See Blue cheese
Brie and turkey sandwich, broiled, with tomatoes
broiled cheese sandwich
in bubbling caprese
cacio e pepe
in cheeseburgers
feta. See Feta
fontina and lemon zest, turkey and spinach hero with
goat cheese. See Goat cheese
Gorgonzola. See Gorgonzola cheese
Gruyère. See Gruyère
Jack. See Jack cheese
lasagna, three-cheese
mac and cheese
manchego. See Manchego
Mexican
Mexican street corn with
mozzarella. See Mozzarella
Parmesan. See Parmesan cheese
and pepper
provolone and salami sandwich, broiled, with roasted red pepper
ricotta. See Ricotta
ricotta salata. See Ricotta salata
stuffed poblanos with black beans and
stuffed poblanos with corn and
Swiss cheese in Reuben sandwich
tortillas, cheesy
Cheeseburgers
Cherry tomato(es)
in avocado soup with crab and corn

black beans with feta and
broccoli tabbouleh with tomato and lemon
broiled
cauliflower tabbouleh with tomato and lemon
cobbler
curried crab salad with coconut and
fennel and radish tabbouleh with tomato and lime
fish fillets or steaks with toasted bread crumbs and
kale with pine nuts, Parmesan, and
mustard-marinated flank steak and
pasta with eggs and
pasta with pesto and
soy-marinated flank steak and
steamed clams with chorizo and
and tofu, pressed, with soy vinaigrette
wine-braised white beans with Parmesan and
Chicken
about
broiling and bubbling
butterflying
checking for doneness
chopping
cooking faster
homemade cold cuts, master recipe
marinades and rubs
piecing out
prep shortcuts
rigging faster steamers
rubbing garlic on
stock, master recipe

substituting ingredients
substituting tofu for
types of
bacon-crusted, with apples
BBQ thighs with crisp cabbage and red onion
beer-braised black beans with corn and
and blue cheese sausage over sautéed kale
braised lentils with
breasts, broiled
with avocado salsa
with peach salsa
with peas and Parmesan
with pineapple salsa
with watermelon salsa
in broth with vegetables and noodles
in cabbage, unstuffed, with ground meat
cabbage-wrapped miso
and cauliflower curry with apricots
and cauliflower curry with tomatoes
chickpeas, curried, stir-fried, with carrots and
and chile fundido
chile-rubbed, with corn and scallions
collard-wrapped
couscous paella with zucchini and
with creamed onions
with creamed spinach
Cubano
curried and mushrooms
curried, and potatoes, adobo-style
curry-rubbed stir-fried, with corn and red onion

cutlets
BBQ-spiced, with pinto beans and ham
breaded, with pan sauce
with lemon and capers
Moroccan-spiced, with chickpeas and dried fruit
smoked paprika-spiced, with white beans and dried tomatoes
and vegetables with chimichurri
edamame with cabbage and
and eggplant green curry
and feta sausage over sautéed spinach
five-spice, and scallions
fried
gratin, broccoli rabe and
gratin, chard and
and green beans
herby thighs with crisp cabbage and fennel
hot and sour, with bok choy
jerk, and onions
kebabs over seasoned bulgur
and leeks, braised and glazed
lemon-pepper, and onions
maple-chicken-apple sausage over sautéed collards
Marsala with lots of mushrooms
masa and rajas with
meat loaf with chard
meat loaf with spinach
meatballs
and basil
and bulgur, with Provençal tomato sauce
and spaghetti with tomato sauce

miso
rice and snow peas with
sandwich with pineapple chutney
soup with udon, snow peas, and
noodle(s)
with cilantro-scallion pesto and
with cold cashew
with cold peanut
with cold sesame
and egg noodles with peas
with peppers, basil, and
soup, bone-in
and sweet potatoes in curry broth
udon with teriyaki
oven-fried, with roasted corn
packages
with potatoes
with tomato
with tomato and feta
paprikash
Parmesan, fastest
pasta
with eggplant, balsamic, and
fideos with tomatoes, rosemary, and
with leeks, wine, and
meatballs and spaghetti, with tomato sauce
with mushrooms, wine, and
in three Bs pasta
and peppers with black bean mole
and peppers with pumpkin seed mole

pesto-crusted, with eggplant
poached
with asparagus and lemon aïoli
with carrots and lemon-soy aïoli
Chinese-style, and bok choy
with red peppers and smoked paprika aïoli
with snap peas and curry aïoli
polenta with asparagus and
pozole and
prosciutto-crusted, with endive
prosciutto-crusted, with kale
puttanesca-crusted, with fennel
rice
jook with snow peas and
and snow peas with
and thighs
with vegetables and
and wings
and ricotta sausage over broccoli rabe
roasted
roasted, master recipe
and roasted red pepper skillet bake
salad
and bread, Middle Eastern
and celery root rémoulade
corn and black bean, with
corn and edamame, with
and cucumber, with dill vinaigrette
curried
jícama slaw with

and pear, with mustard vinaigrette
sandwich
and spinach
and tomato
and tortilla
zucchini slaw with
sandwich
bacon, avocado, and tomato wrap with
bacon, tomato, and blue cheese wrap with
BBQ, blackened, with pickled cucumbers
BBQ, with peach chutney
and black bean burrito
blackened, with pickled red onions
charred
chicken melt
chicken salad
Greek wrap
with mango chutney
Parmesan sub
with pineapple chutney
and watermelon tacos
satay, skewerless
with scallion-peanut sauce
sesame, and snow peas
soup
arroz con pollo
broken wonton, with
chicken noodle, bone-in
and egg noodles with peas
homemade ramen

hot and sour, with
spicy peanut, with collards and
spicy peanut, with spinach and
tamale
Thai coconut, with
tortilla
with udon, snow peas, and
with vegetables and rice
with spinach-cashew sauce
stew
and dumplings
and dumplings with beans
and dumplings with peas
and mushroom
Provençal
Provençal, and fennel
Provençal, creamy
Provençal, with goat cheese
quick-stewed green beans with
in white chili
stir-fried
with broccoli and black bean sauce
with broccoli and tomato-soy sauce
with cauliflower and orange-black bean sauce
with chard and citrus
with collards and dried chiles
with kale
stroganoff
and sweet potato adobo
tapenade-crusted, with eggplant

tenders, baked
chipotle
crisp
miso-cashew
mustard-pretzel
peanut-coconut
sesame
Thai peanut, with crisp cabbage and bean sprouts
thighs and pozole
thighs and rice
tortilla scramble
and vegetable pancakes, Korean-style
white-cut, with noodles
whole, split, and vegetables
wings and rice
wings, cumin, and eggplant with yogurt-tahini sauce
wings, hot, and Brussels sprouts with yogurt-blue cheese sauce
wings, za’atar, and eggplant with yogurt-harissa sauce
za’atar, and onions
Chickpea(s)
chicken cutlets, Moroccan-spiced, with dried fruit and
and chorizo gratin
chorizo, homemade Spanish-style, with
curried
lamb stew, with tomatoes and
stir-fried, with chicken and carrots
stir-fried, with potatoes and carrots
on toast
in curried rice, beans, and hearty greens
hummus

hummus and vegetable pita pockets
lemony, with kale
quinoa pilaf with dried fruit and
salad
and carrot, with warm cumin oil
and cucumber, with tahini and parsley
and warm greens and potato salad
in warm three-bean potato salad
soups and stews
cod or thick fillet stew
and couscous stew, with cauliflower
and couscous stew, with Moroccan spices
lamb stew, with tomatoes and
merguez, chickpea, and chard soup
in pasta e fagioli, Spanish-style
stir-fried
with chicken and carrots
with potatoes and carrots
with sweet potatoes
tahini, with fried eggs
Chile(s)
about
prep shortcuts
seasoning with
storing
substituting ingredients
toasting
beer-braised pinto beans with sour cream and
black beans with cumin and
and chicken fundido

dried, stir-fried chicken with collards and
dried, Thai
gazpacho, spicy green, with lime and
jícama salad with
and lentil stew
in maple-chile-beer roasted chicken and peppers
in mayonnaise
panfried olives with mint and
-rubbed chicken with corn and scallions
stir-fried pork and broccoli with
sweet potatoes, pan-roasted beef tenderloin with
tomato sauce with basil and
Chile de árbol
Chile oil
about
noodles with snow peas and
noodles with spinach and
Chili
beef and butter bean
lamb and black bean
smoky tofu and black bean
tofu and black-eyed peas, with collards
tofu and white bean
white
white bean
Chili powder
in chile-lime bananas, caramelized
in edamame with chili salt
master recipe
Chili salt

avocado with
edamame with
Chimichurri
chicken cutlets and vegetables with
fried eggs with
pork chops and vegetables with
steak and vegetables with
Chinese egg noodle(s)
about
in noodles with chicken and cilantro-scallion pesto
soup
in stir-fried noodles with beef and bean sprouts
in stir-fried noodles with beef and celery
in stir-fried noodles with tofu and celery
Chinese-style
barbecue sauce
couscous helper
poached chicken and bok choy
sesame chicken
sloppy Joes
soup
bone-in chicken noodle
broken wonton
peanut, with tofu and bok choy
Chipotle(s)
about
in adobo
in barbecue sauce
description of
-avocado spread

beef meatballs
black beans with fried eggs
BLT wrap with
broiled, chicken breasts with watermelon salsa
chicken and dumplings with beans
chicken tenders
clams, creamy rice with
-marinated flank steak and asparagus
-orange tofu and cauliflower
potato salad
rice and corn with beef
rice with corn and pinto beans
sautéed sweet potatoes with lime and
skillet meat loaf
tikka, cauliflower, with boiled eggs
in tofu salad with pepitas and raisins
tofu sandwich with red onions and
in tomato sauce
Chips, fish and. See Fish, and chips
Chirashi
Chive
and egg breakfast bruschetta
pesto, rustic
Chocolate
almond butter balls
-banana pudding
cake, molten
chunk banana cupcakes
cookie dough
-covered pretzels

custard sauce
as dessert staple
-fruit sorbet
melted, as dipping sauce
milkshakes
mousse
-orange pudding
peanut brittle
pecan-bourbon brownies
pound cupcakes
salted, peanut butter balls
in sauces
white chocolate molten cake
white chocolate-orange pudding
Chocolate chip(s)
in banana-chocolate chip pancakes
cookie squares
Chop-and-drop soups
Chopped
Greek salad
salad
Chorizo
beer-braised black beans and corn with
black beans with greens, garlic, and
breakfast burritos, with sweet potatoes and
breakfast patties with sautéed peppers
Brussels sprouts with
and chickpea gratin
flautas, potato and
hash, potato and

homemade Spanish-style, with chickpeas
homemade, with pinto beans
kidney beans with kale and
masa and rajas with
meatballs with chard
no-cook skewers
panfried trout with red onions and
pasta
fideos with tomatoes, white beans, and
with red onions, black beans, and
with scallops, potatoes, and
spaghetti with chorizo tomato sauce
rice bowl with pineapple and
scrambled eggs with parsley and
smoked paprika in
Spanish dip sandwich with
spinach soup and
steamed clams with cherry tomatoes and
Chowder(s)
clam
clam, Manhattan
mussel
seafood
seafood, Manhattan
seafood, with bacon
shrimp and corn
smoked salmon
Chutney
mango
peach

pineapple
Ciabatta
Cilantro
about, 1.1, 1.2
avocado with hot sauce and
black bean and cabbage salad with sour cream and
carrot salad with lime and
deep-fried tofu with pistachio sauce and
noodles with pork, peppers, and
pesto, rustic
shrimp, stir-fried, with shitakes, eggs, and
tuna sandwich with avocado and
Cinnamon
in apricot-cinnamon couscous
jícama and radish salad with dried cranberries and
-orange French toast
ripe plantains with cumin and
Citrus. See also Lemon(s); Lime(s); Orange(s)
citrus cycle
prep shortcuts
Clam(s)
about
prying open
saving liquid from
swapping with mussels
chowder
chowder, seafood
linguine with
in red clam sauce
rice, creamy, with

spaghetti with tomato sauce and
steamed
with chorizo and cherry tomatoes
with tarragon and cream
Thai-style, with spinach
Clove(s)
in ginger-clove muesli
in orange-clove couscous
Cobb sandwich, open-face
Cobbler, broiled peach
Cocktail meatballs, master recipe
Cocoa powder, as dessert staple
Coconut
about
in banana-coconut pancakes
cookie dough
crunch, broiled grapefruit with
oatmeal cookies
in peanut-coconut chicken tenders
Coconut milk
about
butternut squash simmered in
in coconut curry
in coconut curry broth
in coconut soup, Thai
coconut-curried fried chicken
in coconut-lime dressing
in coconutty tomato sauce
fish steaks poached in
in marinades

noodles with curry and
in shrimp simmered in dal
in spinach-cashew sauce
Cod
caramel-cooked
and chickpea stew
and fava bean stew
and white bean stew
Cold cuts, homemade, master recipe
Coleslaw. See Slaw
Collard greens
in andouille, black-eyed pea, and Southern greens soup
BBQ lima beans with
ham steaks, BBQ-glazed, with
ham steaks, maple-glazed, with
hoppin’ John with
jambalaya with
peanut soup, spicy, with chicken and
pork stew with black beans and
in salmon with gingery greens
sautéed, maple-chicken-apple sausage over
stewed with smoked pork
stir-fried chicken with dried chiles and
tofu and black-eyed pea chili
warm, with peaches and ham
-wrapped chicken
Condiments. See also specific condiments
master recipe
seasoning techniques with
storing

Cookie dough
Cookies and bar cookies
chocolate chip squares
coconut oatmeal
dried fruit oatmeal
nutty coconut oatmeal
pecan-bourbon brownies
Coriander, in rubs
Corn
about, 1.1, 4.1
avocado soup with crab and
beer-braised black beans with chicken and
beer-braised black beans with chorizo and
bulgur with
chile-rubbed chicken with scallions and
cobbler, cherry tomato, with
creamed, salmon with
curry-rubbed chicken with red onion and
fideos with squid, tomatoes, and
masa harina
Mediterranean-style
Mexican street
panfried with onions
pan-seared
and poblanos
and pork
and shrimp
and steak
in piquante amarilla
and pork carnitas

rice
and chipotle rice with beef
and chipotle rice with pinto beans
and tomato rice with shrimp
roasted, oven-fried chicken with
roasted, oven-fried pork chops with
salad
and black bean, with garlic chicken
and black bean, with shrimp
and edamame, with ginger chicken
and white bean, with garlic chicken
in salsa
and sausage pan broil
and scallop pan broil
and shrimp chowder
stir-fried pork with scallions and
stuffed poblanos with cheese and
in succotash
tortillas
waffles with blueberry maple syrup
Corned beef cabbage gratin with lima beans
Cornmeal
about
cooking times
description of
storing
fried chicken
pancakes, chicken and vegetable, Korean-style
in polenta
with chicken and asparagus

with sausage and fennel
with sausage and mushrooms
shrimp over
Cornstarch, thickening with
Cotija cheese
Couscous
about
cooking times
description of
seasoning
balsamic, lamb chops with
breakfast
apricot-cinnamon
cranberry-ginger
orange-clove
pineapple-cardamom
tomato-garlic
and chickpea stew
gratin
with leeks and Gruyère
with mushrooms and Parmesan
with onions, broccoli, and cheddar
with poblanos and Jack cheese
helper
Israeli
lamb, Moroccan, with olives and
paella with chicken and fennel
paella with chicken and zucchini
in pasta e fagioli, Greek-style
plain

pomegranate, lamb chops with
pork, curried, with spinach and
pork, Moroccan-style, with grapes and
salad, with fennel, oranges, and olives
soy-ginger, lamb chops with
whole wheat
Crab
cakes, baked
with celery root
with potatoes
with sweet potatoes
pasta with tomatoes and
salad
and celery root rémoulade
curried, with coconut and cherry tomatoes
and egg, with bell pepper
sandwich. crab salad
soft-shell, panfried, with bacon and leeks
soup
avocado, with corn and
avocado, with daikon and
gumbo
toast
Cracked wheat
about
cooking times
pilaf, recipe-free
Cranberry(ies)
dried, bulgur with orange and
dried, jícama and radish salad with cinnamon and

-ginger couscous
-port sundaes
Cream cheese, scrambled eggs with smoked salmon, dill, and
Creamed
corn
onions
peas
spinach, 9.1, 10.1, 14.1
Crème anglaise
Creole crab salad sandwich
Crisps (cheese)
Crisps (sweet), skillet fruit
Croque Monsieur
Croutons
beet and cabbage salad with
in Caesar salad
master recipe
tomato and strawberry panzanella
Crumble
broiled apple
gingersnap, orange pie with
key lime
Cubano chicken
Cucumber(s)
about
gazpacho with crisp prosciutto
in green gazpacho
Malaysian-style BBQ fish with
with peanut vinaigrette
ribbons, striped bass and

salad
and chicken, with dill vinaigrette
and chickpea, with tahini and parsley
with Dijon mayo
and edamame, with warm ginger dressing
with hot sauce and lime juice
lobster and egg, with tarragon and
with peanut vinaigrette
and salmon, with caper and mustard dressing
and salmon, with ginger-peanut dressing
shrimp and egg, with tarragon and
with sour cream and dill
with soy sauce and mirin
and tofu, pressed, with hoisin vinaigrette
and white bean, with yogurt and dill
in salsa
sandwich
in egg salad sandwich with lots of vegetables
in hummus and vegetable pita pockets
pickled, BBQ blackened chicken, with
tofu, with hoisin mayo and
tuna pita with feta and
warm-pickled, spears
Cumin (seeds)
black beans with chiles and
in cumin lamb with green peppers
in cumin oil, warm, chickpea and carrot salad with
in cumin wings and eggplant with yogurt-tahini sauce
ripe plantains with cinnamon and
in rubs

stir-fried lamb and green peppers with
stir-fried lamb and leeks with
Cupcakes
banana-rum
chocolate chunk banana
pound, master recipe
praline banana
Currants
balsamic, raw kale salad with pine nuts and
balsamic, warm kale salad with pine nuts and
soy, warm kale salad with cashews, scallions, and
Curry (powder)
aïoli
-braised beef and eggplant
-braised beef and potatoes
broth
chicken
breasts with pineapple salsa
with coconut milk
and mushrooms
and potatoes, adobo-style
and rice
salad
salad sandwich with grapes
stir-fried, with corn and red onion
and vegetable soup with rice
chickpea(s)
stew with lamb and tomatoes
stir-fried, with chicken and carrots
stir-fried, with potatoes and carrots

on toast
coconut curry, mussel and vegetable pan roast with
crab salad with coconut and cherry tomatoes
on crab toast
creamed spinach, seared chicken with
egg salad sandwich with lots of vegetables
lamb, stir-fried, and green peppers with
master recipes
in mayonnaise
noodles with coconut milk and
pork meatballs
pork with couscous and spinach
rice, beans, and hearty greens
-rubbed pork tenderloin with mango salsa
in rubs
salad dressing
shrimp salad roll
in smashed peas
tartar sauce
tofu
and cabbage with coconut-lime dressing
with pecans and golden raisins
with tomatoes and peas
in vinaigrettes
yogurt sauce
Custard sauce
chocolate
chocolate-almond
vanilla, 15.1, 15.2

A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
D
Daikon
and crab, avocado soup with
salad with fish sauce, lime, and peanuts
shrimp poke with peanuts and
tuna poke with peanuts and
Dal
salmon simmered in
shrimp simmered in
Dandelion greens
Dashi
master recipe
in miso soup
Dates
bulgur, smoky, with eggplant, feta, and
puffed rice salad with almonds and
Deep-fried tofu
with peanut sauce and scallions
with pistachio sauce and cilantro
Dessert(s)
about
apple crumble, broiled
berry fool
broiled apple crumble
broiled peach cobbler
broiled peaches with brown sugar

cakes
chocolate chip cookie squares
chocolate chunk banana cupcakes
cookies and bars, 15.1, 15.2, 15.3
crumbles
cupcakes
fruit. See Fruit
milkshakes
mousse
puddings
sauces, master recipe
sorbet
staple ingredients
sundaes
tiramisu
Dijon mustard. See Mustard
Dill
about
beet and cabbage salad with yogurt and
in bone-in chicken noodle soup
chicken stew with
cucumber salad with sour cream and
fennel salad with capers and
pasta with pesto and
scrambled eggs with smoked salmon and
scrambled eggs with smoked trout and
tuna and egg salad, with radishes and
in vinaigrettes
white bean and cucumber salad with yogurt and
Dipping sauces (savory)

for fried tofu
Italian
ricotta
soy
Spanish
for steak, lettuce, and herb wraps
tomato
Dipping sauces (sweet)
Double-fried French fries
Dressing(s). See also Vinaigrette(s)
about
Caesar salad
caper and mustard
coconut-lime
curry
ginger
ginger, warm
ginger-peanut
mustard
orange
paprika, warm
Parmesan
peanut-lime
peanut-soy
rosemary-mayo
Russian
sesame-oil
tahini
tahini-lemon
warm

white bean
Dried beans, 1.1, 8.1
Dried chiles
stir-fried chicken with collards and
Thai
toasting
Dried cranberries
bulgur with orange and
jícama and radish salad with cinnamon and
Dried fruit
about
as dessert staple
seasoning with
substituting ingredients
chicken cutlets, Moroccan-spiced, with chickpeas and
dried apricots, puffed wheat salad with pistachios and
in food processor
lamb and rice with
in muesli
no-bake fruit and cereal bars
oatmeal cookies
quinoa pilaf with chickpeas and
Dried lentils
Dried mushrooms
Dried tomatoes
about
bulgur, smoky, with eggplant, feta, and
chicken cutlets, smoked paprika-spiced, with white beans and
pasta with tuna and
puffed rice salad with olives and

in tomato sauce
Drop biscuits, prosciutto and
Duck
breast, seared, with fruit sauce
in fast cassoulet
Dumplings
and chicken, and beans
chicken stew and
and chicken, with peas
pork stew and
ricotta, with spinach and brown butter
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
E
Edamame
with chicken and cabbage
with chili salt
and corn salad with ginger chicken
and cucumber salad with warm ginger dressing
microwaved
noodles with tofu, chile oil, and
with pork, cabbage, and miso
pork, stir-fried, with scallions and
soy-lemon, and asparagus
succotash
on toast with sesame oil and scallions

veal, braised, with
warm, raw butternut squash salad with
warm, sautéed butternut squash with
Egg(s)
about
buying
checking for freshness
cooking, 7.1, 12.1, 12.2
cracking
as dessert staple
labels
poaching, 2.1, 5.1
runny yolks
scrambling for a crowd
storing, 1.1, 12.1
turning into flower petals
baked
boiled
cauliflower tikka with
with celery root rémoulade
with curry mayo
with Dijon mayo
breakfast burritos
broiled
and chive breakfast bruschetta
Florentine
in French toast, roasting pan
in French toast, tortilla
fried
arugula salad with shaved Parmesan and

BBQ bacon pinto beans
with chimichurri
with chipotle black beans
endive salad with blue cheese and
with mushrooms and leeks
with mushrooms and poblanos
with pesto
with romesco
spinach salad with feta and
with tahini chickpeas
with tomatoes and leeks
with white beans and zucchini
frittata
omelet for two
pasta
with cherry tomatoes and
with greens and
with mushrooms and
poached
eggs Florentine
in fennel
lemony lima beans with spinach and
in mushrooms
orzo risotto with asparagus and
in poblanos and cream
in tomato sauce
warm escarole and white bean salad with
salad
and crab, with bell pepper
hard-boiled, and celery root rémoulade

and lobster, with cucumber and tarragon
and shrimp, with cucumber and tarragon
and smoked salmon, with celery
and tuna, with radishes and dill
sandwich
egg salad and arugula
egg salad with lots of vegetables
egg salad with lots of vegetables, classic
egg salad with lots of vegetables, curried
scrambled
with chorizo and parsley
feta and spinach
goat cheese and spinach
with ham and tarragon
Parmesan and kale
with prosciutto and basil
rice with bok choy, scallions, and
rice with cabbage, scallions, and
rice with tomatoes, basil, and
ricotta and spinach
with smoked salmon and dill
with smoked trout and dill
stir-fried shrimp with shitakes, cilantro, and
stir-fried shrimp with tomato, basil, and
stir-fried shrimp with tomato, scallions, and
tortilla scramble
and shrimp with tomatoes
soup
carbonara soup
chicken ramen, homemade

egg drop
and steak with mushrooms and onion
and steak with peppers and onion
sukiyaki
in tortilla, Spanish
Egg noodles
buttered
with chicken and peas
Egg roll wrappers
about
in three-cheese lasagna
Eggplant
and beef, curry-braised
broiled
and tomato salad, with peanut-soy dressing
and zucchini salad. with mustard dressing
and zucchini salad, with tahini dressing
bulgur, smoky
chicken, pesto-crusted, with
chicken, tapenade-crusted, with
and chicken wings, cumin, with yogurt-tahini sauce
and chicken wings, za’atar, with yogurt-harissa sauce
gratin
green curry, with chicken
Parmesan, fastest
and Parmesan sandwich
pasta with chicken, balsamic, and
pasta with tomato sauce and
steaks with tomato-garlic sauce
tomato and bread soup with

Enchiladas
pork and sweet potato
steak and potato
Endive
about
with fried eggs and blue cheese
olive oil-poached halibut or fish fillets with
prosciutto-crusted chicken with
and radicchio with bacon vinaigrette
sausage, browned and braised, with
spears
with basil
with blue cheese and black olives
with olives
with prosciutto
Escarole
about
and Italian sausage soup
warm
in greens and chickpea potato salad
and white bean salad with poached eggs
and white bean salad with squid
white beans with prosciutto and
Espresso in black and white mocha milkshake
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z

F
Fajita
peppers and onions
salad, steak
salad, veggie
Farro
about, 6.1, 6.2
pilaf, recipe-free
and white beans
with arugula and Parmesan
Greek-style
with tomato and fennel
with tuna
Fast kitchen
faster is better
freezer staples
fridge staples
interchangeable
key tools
pantry staples
prep shortcuts
setup for speed
shopping for speed
strategies for
Fast Rachel sandwich
Fattoush
Middle Eastern chicken and bread salad
pita, warm, with feta
pita, warm, with shrimp

zucchini
Fava bean(s)
and cod or fish fillet stew
in pasta e fagioli, Greek-style
soup, minty
Feijoada, fast
Fennel
about
cobbler, cherry tomato, with olives and
couscous paella with chicken and
eggs poached in
farro with white beans, tomato, and
fried, Parmesan
fried, with arugula
and garlic butter baguette
herby chicken thighs with crisp cabbage and
lamb, Moroccan and
pasta
with bread crumbs, lemon and
with bread crumbs, lemon, and
risotto-style, with sausage and
with white beans, stock, and
polenta with sausage and
Provençal braised pork and
Provençal chicken and fennel
Provençal tomato soup with
puttanesca-crusted chicken with
roasted chicken and
roasted whole fish with orange and
salad

bulgur and apple, with
with capers and dill
with caraway seeds
couscous and orange, with olives and
with olives
and radish tabbouleh with tomato and lime
sautéed, breakfast patties with
seared pork chops and
striped bass or thick fillets and
tuna sandwich with capers, lemon, and
Fermented black beans
Feta
black beans with tomatoes and
bulgur, smoky, with eggplant, dates, and
bulgur, smoky, with eggplant, dried tomatoes, and
and chicken packages with tomatoes
and chicken sausage over sautéed spinach
eggs, scrambled, with spinach and
fattoush, warm pita, with
in hummus and vegetable pita pockets
and lamb meatballs with kale
Mexican cheeses and
pasta
with kale, olives, and feta
in pasta e fagioli, Greek-style
in three Bs pasta
ziti with olives and feta, 5.1, 5.2
spinach with fried eggs and
tomato salad with strawberries, balsamic, and
tomato salad with watermelon, balsamic, and

tuna pita with cucumbers and
and watermelon salad with mint
Fideos
with chicken, tomatoes, and rosemary
with chorizo, tomatoes, and white beans
with shrimp, tomatoes, and peas
with squid, tomatoes, and corn
Fig(s)
Brussels sprout salad with walnuts and
and Gorgonzola pizza wedges
Fire and ice noodles
Fish. See also Seafood
about
cooking
fillets and steaks
marinades and rubs
oily
roasting whole
serving whole fish
substituting ingredients
sushi grade
and chips
with curried yogurt sauce
with smoked paprika aïoli
with tartar sauce
with vinegar-shallot sauce
fillet(s)
with balsamic radicchio
blackened, with green beans
butter-poached, with peas

and cherry tomatoes with toasted bread crumbs
and chickpea stew
and cucumber ribbons
Dijon, with green beans
and fava bean stew
and fennel
with glazed carrots
hoisin-glazed, and shitakes
hoisin-glazed, with radishes
with lemony asparagus
Malaysian-style BBQ, with cucumber
Malaysian-style BBQ, with watermelon
miso-glazed, and carrots
miso-glazed, and mushrooms
mustard-glazed, with apples
olive oil-poached, with endive
poached, in creamy tomato broth
sandwich
with sesame bean sprouts
teriyaki-glazed, and sweet potatoes
with tomato salsa, 9.1, 9.2
and white bean stew
and zucchini ribbons
and zucchini with toasted bread crumbs
grilled or broiled, with fresh salsa, 9.1, 9.2
jambalaya des herbes with
kebabs over bulgur pilaf
oily, 9.1, 9.1
Provençal tomato soup with fennel and
roasted, whole, with carrots and lime

roasted, whole, with fennel and orange
smoked, and white bean gratin
steaks
broiled, with picante amarilla
broiled, with picante rojo
broiled, with picante verde
broiled, with warm tapenade
and cherry tomatoes with toasted bread crumbs
hoisin-glazed, with radishes
Malaysian-style BBQ, with cucumber
Malaysian-style BBQ, with watermelon
mustard-glazed, with apples
poached in coconut milk
poached, in creamy tomato broth
poached in soy broth
and zucchini with toasted bread crumbs
steamed, recipe-free
stock, in miso soup
stock, master recipe
Fish flakes
in dashi
in miso soup
Fish sauce
daikon salad with lime, peanuts, and
seasoning with
storing
substituting ingredients
Five-spice powder
in chicken and scallions
master recipe

in pork meatballs with bok choy
Flank steak
chipotle-marinated, and asparagus
mustard-marinated, and cherry tomatoes
soy-marinated, and cherry tomatoes
soy-marinated, and green beans
Flatbread, vegetable, with kale and white bean stew
Flautas
potato and chorizo
sweet potato
Florentine, eggs
Flour
as dessert staple
storing
Focaccia
Foil packages
Fondue. See Queso fundido
Fontina and lemon zest, turkey and spinach hero with
Fool
berry
peach
Freezer staples
French bread scramble
French fries
French toast
roasting pan
tortilla
Fresno peppers
Fridge staples
Fried

bread crumbs, 5.1, 14.1
celery root tempura
chicken
eggs. See Egg(s), fried
fennel and arugula
okra
onions, curried lentils and rice with
rice
tofu
tortillas
Frisée
about
in fried eggs and blue cheese
Frittata
pea and arugula
pinto bean and poblano
white bean and spinach
Frozen beans
Frozen fruit
as dessert staple
in fruit sorbet
in fruity shaved ice
Frozen vegetable soup
Fruit. See also Dried fruit; specific fruits
about
citrus cycle
prep shortcuts
storing
and cereal bars, no-bake
fruity shaved ice

milkshakes
pick-a-fruit salad
raw sauce
salad and toast
in sauces
skillet crisp
sorbet
with yogurt and graham cracker parfait
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
G
Garbanzo beans. See Chickpea(s)
Garlic
about
prep shortcuts
seasoning with
storing
black beans with chorizo, greens, and
bread
broccoli rabe stewed with tons of
croutons
in Dijon-garlic-cider roasted chicken and carrots
in garlic butter
in garlic chicken
garlicky chard, seared steak with
in garlicky mushrooms

garlicky spinach, pan-seared halibut with
garlicky stewed greens and tomatoes, salmon with
garlicky watercress, pan-seared halibut with
greens sautéed with
kidney beans with ham, greens, and
lentils with smoked paprika and
pasta with anchovies and
-rosemary chicken and vegetable pancakes
in rosemary-garlic oil
sautéed sweet potatoes with sage and
tomato sauce with lots of
in tomato-garlic couscous
in tomato-garlic sauce
veal, braised, with white beans and
white beans with bacon, greens, and
white beans with sausage, greens, and
Gas grilling
Gazpacho
cucumber, with crisp prosciutto
with goat cheese
grapefruit
green
green, spicy, with chile and lime
melon, with crisp prosciutto
tomato and peach, with crisp bacon
German-style potato salad
Ginger
about, 1.1, 1.2
in apple-ginger smoothie
carrot soup with crisp ham and

chicken, corn and edamame salad with
-clove muesli
in cranberry-ginger couscous
gingered chicken, broken wonton soup with
gingery creamed corn, salmon with
gingery greens, salmon with
gingery tofu and green beans
-hoisin barbecue sauce
in honey-ginger-soy roasted chicken and celery
maple syrup
in maple-ginger oatmeal with caramelized walnuts
-orange bean sprouts
peas with
pound cupcakes
roasted nuts with soy, honey, and
in salad dressings
ginger
ginger, warm
ginger-peanut
sautéed sweet potatoes with soy and
-scallion snow peas, pan-seared tuna with
seasoning with
in soy-ginger couscous, lamb chops with
soy-orange grits with
stir-fried beef and asparagus with scallions and
stir-fried beef and broccoli with scallions and
Gingersnap crumble, orange pie with
Glass noodles
Glazing(ed)
about

BBQ-glazed ham steaks with collards
and braised chicken and leeks
Brussels sprouts with Vietnamese flavors
carrots, sole with
harissa glaze, skillet lamb meat loaf with
hoisin-glazed fish with radishes
hoisin-glazed fish fillets and shitakes
honey-mustard-glazed ham steaks with kale
maple-glazed ham steaks with collards
miso-glazed catfish or fish fillets and mushrooms
miso-glazed fish fillets and carrots
mustard-glazed fish with apples
soy-brown sugar
teriyaki-glazed fish fillets and sweet potatoes
Goat cheese
eggs, scrambled, with spinach and
gazpacho with
peach and pecan baguette and
Provençal chicken with
spinach with apples, walnuts, and
truffles
Golden raisins, curried tofu salad with pecan and
Gorgonzola cheese
charred Brussels sprout salad, with walnuts and
and fig pizza wedges
roasted spaghetti squash and hazelnuts and
in steakhouse salad
Graham crackers
in key lime crumble
in lemon s’mores

parfait with fruit, yogurt, and
Grains
about
broiling
description of
storing, 1.1, 1.2
bulgur. See Bulgur
cornmeal. See Cornmeal
couscous. See Couscous
cracked wheat. See Cracked wheat
farro. See Farro
grits, shrimp over
masa and rajas
master recipe
millet. See Millet
pearled barley, 6.1, 6.2
pilaf, recipe-free
polenta. See Polenta
quinoa. See Quinoa
rolled oats. See Rolled oats
Granola
about
fruit and cereal bars, no-bake
Grape(s)
chicken salad sandwich with curry and
chicken salad sandwich with rosemary and
in green gazpacho
Moroccan-style pork with couscous and
salad with mint
Grapefruit

broiled
with almond-brown sugar crunch
with coconut crunch
with pecan-honey crunch
with soy-brown sugar glaze
brûlée
gazpacho
Gratin
asparagus
black bean and cabbage, with tortilla crumbs and Jack
chicken and broccoli rabe
chicken and chard
chickpea and chorizo
corned beef and cabbage, with lima beans
couscous
with leeks and Gruyère
with mushrooms and Parmesan
with onions, broccoli, and cheddar
with poblanos and Jack cheese
eggplant
lima bean and cabbage, with rye crumbs
quinoa, with leeks and Gruyère
recipe-free
white bean and ham
white bean and smoked fish
Greek salad
chopped
with orzo and shrimp
with orzo and squid
Greek-style

chicken wrap
farro and white beans
pasta e fagioli
pita pizza
pork souvlaki with zucchini
skillet spanakopita
Green bean(s)
about
caramel stir-fried beef and
caramel stir-fried pork and
catfish or fish fillets, blackened, with
catfish or fish fillets, Dijon, with
and chicken
hoppin’ John with ham and
with onion dip
salad
with caramelized onions and toasted almonds
in three-bean potato salad
with tofu and avocado
with tuna and avocado
with tuna and mango
and scallop pan broil
soy-marinated flank steak and
stew
lamb, with tomatoes and
quick-, with bacon
quick-, with chicken
quick-, with ham
quick-, with sausage
quick-, with shrimp

with tomatoes, olives, and almonds
tofu, stir-fried, and
Green curry, eggplant
Green lentils
Green smoothie
Green-leaf lettuce
Greens. See also specific salad greens
about
cooking
description of
flavoring
grilling
substituting ingredients
washing
black beans with chorizo, garlic, and
breakfast patties with pork and
creamy sauces
curried rice, beans, and
gingery, salmon with
kidney beans with ham, garlic, and
pasta with eggs and
sautéed, with garlic
soup
andouille, black-eyed pea, and Southern greens
bacon and egg drop, with
hot and sour, with tofu and
tomato and bread, with
and tomatoes, stewed, with salmon
warm, with chickpeas and potatoes
warm, with orzo and steak

white beans with bacon, garlic, and
white beans with sausage, garlic, and
Grilling. See Broil(ed)ing
Grits
buttery, classic
honey-cheddar, with sage
maple-almond
Parmesan, with rosemary
shrimp over
soy-orange, with ginger
topping
Grouper, roasted
Gruyère
in chicken melt
gratin, couscous, with leeks and
gratin, quinoa, with leeks and
and ham sandwich with apples, broiled
turkey and kale hero with
Guajillo chile
Gumbo(s)
crab
no-okra
sausage
shrimp
tofu
Gyro fixings, charred chicken and pita with
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z

H
Habanero peppers
Haddock, roasted
Halibut
about
butter-poached, with peas
olive oil-poached, with endive
pan-seared, with garlicky spinach
pan-seared, with garlicky watercress
Ham
about
BBQ-glazed steaks with collards
braised cabbage with sauerkraut and
bulgur, apple, and fennel salad with
chicken cutlets, Moroccan-spiced, with pinto beans and
collards, warm, with peaches and
hash, smoky two-potato and
honey-mustard-glazed steaks with kale
hoppin’ John with green beans and
kidney beans with greens, garlic, and
maple-glazed steaks with collards
no-cook skewers
prosciutto
crisp, cucumber gazpacho with
crisp, melon gazpacho with
-crusted chicken with endive
-crusted chicken with kale
curried rice, beans, and broccoli with
and mozzarella sandwich, broiled, with melon

warm pickled cauliflower salad with
white beans with escarole and
risotto-style pasta with squash and
sandwich, and Gruyère with apples, broiled
scrambled eggs with tarragon and
soup
ginger carrot, with
lentil, with
pea, minty, with
pea, sweet, with
split pea, with
stewed green beans with
and white bean gratin
-wrapped apples
Hamburger buns
Haricots verts. See Green bean(s)
Harissa
in glaze
shrimp
in yogurt-harissa sauce
Hash
celery root and prosciutto
potato and chorizo
sweet potato and tofu
two-potato and ham
Hazelnuts, roasted spaghetti squash and Gorgonzola and
Head lettuce
Herb(s)
about
prep shortcuts

seasoning with
storing, 1.1, 1.2
in bone-in chicken noodle soup
in bubbling caprese
butter
in chimichurri sauce
croutons, herbed
herb-rubbed chicken breasts with peas and Parmesan
in herby chicken thighs with crisp cabbage and fennel
in jambalaya
lentil soup with
in mustard-herb pork meatballs with broccoli rabe
-rubbed leg of lamb with chopped Greek salad
steak wrap with lettuce and
tartar sauce, herby
in tomato sauce
watermelon soup with fresh
Hoisin
in barbecue sauce
in ginger-hoisin barbecue sauce
-glazed fish fillets and shitakes
-glazed fish with radishes
in mayonnaise
in vinaigrettes
Hominy
Honey
about, 1.1, 15.1
-cheddar grits with sage
in honey-ginger-soy roasted chicken and celery
-lemon oatmeal with caramelized pine nuts

-mustard spread
-mustard-glazed ham steaks with kale
-orange bananas, caramelized
peanut butter and banana sandwich, with raisins and
pecan-honey crunch, broiled grapefruit with
in ricotta-honey breakfast bruschetta
roasted nuts with ginger, soy, and
-walnut johnnycakes
-yogurt sauce, sautéed apples and bananas with
Hoppin’ John
with collards
with green beans and ham
Portuguese style
Horseradish mayo, warm
Hot and sour
beef with asparagus
black beans and bok choy
chicken with bok choy
salad, bok choy with mussels
salad, cabbage with salmon
soup
with Asian greens and tofu
with bean sprouts and beef
with bok choy and pork
with Napa cabbage and chicken
Hot sauce
avocado with cilantro and
cucumber salad with lime juice and
in hot wings and Brussels sprouts with yogurt-blue cheese sauce
seasoning with

Hummus
basic recipe
roasted red pepper
and vegetable pita pockets
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
I
Ice cream. See Sundaes
Iceberg lettuce, 2.1, 2.2
Interchangeable ingredients
Israeli couscous
Italian sausage
and escarole soup
homemade, with white beans
polenta
with chicken and asparagus
with fennel and
with mushrooms and
soup with cannellini and kale
soup with escarole
Italian-style
breakfast burritos
breakfast patties with sautéed fennel
bulgur pilaf, fish kebabs over
couscous helper
dip sandwich

steak, lettuce, and herb wrap
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
J
Jack cheese
black bean and cabbage gratin with tortilla crumbs and
on cheesy tortillas
couscous gratin with poblanos and
Mexican cheeses and
and salsa pizza wedges
stuffed poblanos with black beans and
stuffed poblanos with corn and
Jalapeño peppers
about
in jalapeño-cheddar johnnycakes
in jalapeño-scallion johnnycakes
Jam or jelly
-filled tortilla French toast
jelly and peanut oatmeal
Jambalaya
with collards
des herbes
des herbes with fish
des herbes with shrimp
Japanese noodles
Jasmine rice

cooking times
description of
Jerk
chicken and onions
pork with pineapple
Jícama
about
and chile mayo baguette
salad
and arugula fry, with lime sauce
with chiles
slaw with chopped spicy chicken
Johnnycakes
bacon
honey-walnut
jalapeño-cheddar
jalapeño-scallion
Parmesan
Jook
with beef and bean sprouts
brown rice, with chicken and snow peas
with chicken and snow peas
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
K
Kale

about
chicken and blue cheese sausage over sautéed
chickpeas, lemony, with
eggs, scrambled, with Parmesan and
ham steaks, honey-mustard-glazed, with
kidney beans with chorizo and
lamb and feta meatballs with
pasta with feta, olives, and
pasta with lima beans and
pork stew with white beans and
prosciutto-crusted chicken with
salad
and asparagus Caesar
raw, with pine nuts and balsamic currants
raw, with tomatoes, pine nuts, and Parmesan
warm, with cashews, scallions, and soy currants or raisins
warm, with pine nuts and balsamic currants
in salmon with gingery greens
and scallop pan broil
soup, sausage, cannellini, and
stir-fried chicken and
and turkey hero with Gruyère
and white bean stew with vegetable flatbread
and white beans, stewed, with Parmesan toast
Kebabs
beef and mushroom, with spicy peanut sauce
beef and onion, with mustard-rosemary sauce
chicken, over seasoned bulgur
fish, over bulgur pilaf
Kelp (kombi)

in dashi
in miso soup
Key lime crumble
Kidney beans
with chorizo and kale
with ham, greens, and garlic
in warm three-bean potato salad
Kielbasa
in cabbage soup with smoked sausage
in fast feijoada
Kimchi
about
and beef soup with rice
braised cabbage, bacon, and
skillet, stir-fried beef with
and snow pea salad with beef
-style, white beans with pork and cabbage
Kohlrabi, tuna poke with cashews and
Kombi (kelp)
in dashi
in miso soup
Korean-style
beef soup with rice
chicken and vegetable pancakes
fried chicken
pork soup with rice
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z

L
Lamb
about, 11.1, 11.2
and black bean chili
in cabbage, unstuffed, with ground meat
and carrot sauté with mustard and miso
chops
with balsamic bulgur
with balsamic couscous
Dijon, with parsnips
miso, with carrots
miso, with sweet potatoes
with pomegranate couscous
with soy-ginger couscous
cumin, with green peppers
herb-rubbed, with chopped Greek salad
leg, herb-rubbed, with chopped Greek salad
leg, Moroccan spice-rubbed, with shredded carrot salad
meatballs
and bulgur, in tomato sauce
and feta, with kale
and rosemary, with yogurt sauce
and spaghetti with tomato sauce
Moroccan, and fennel
Moroccan, with couscous and olives
and red onion burger
and rice with dried fruit
and rice with green olives
skillet meat loaf with harissa glaze

skillet shepherd’s pie with quinoa crust
stew with root vegetables
stew with tomatoes
stir-fried
with green peppers and cumin
with green peppers and curry
with leeks and cumin
and sweet potato fundido
zucchini slaw with crisp ground
Lasagna
recipe-free
three-cheese
tortilla
Leek(s)
and chicken, braised and glazed
eggs fried with mushrooms and
eggs fried with tomatoes and
gratin, couscous, with Gruyère and
gratin, quinoa, with Gruyère and
lamb, stir-fried, with cumin and
panfried soft-shell crabs with bacon and
panfried trout with bacon and
pasta with chicken, wine and
soup with blue cheese
Legumes, cooking
Lemon(s)
about, 1.1, 2.1
in aïoli, 3.1, 10.1
avocado with
broccoli, scrambled, with Parmesan and

in bulgur, lemony, with zucchini, olives, and ricotta salata
bulgur with parsley and
chicken cutlets with capers and
chickpeas, lemony, with kale
citrus cycle and
in citrus pound cupcakes
in honey-lemon oatmeal with caramelized pine nuts
lemon s’mores
lemony asparagus, sole with
lentil soup with
in lima beans
with broccoli and
with spinach and eggs
on toast with rosemary
-pepper chicken and onions
in pesto
radishes, broiled, with olive oil and
-ricotta pancakes
roasted nuts with smoked paprika and
in salad(s)
beet and carrot salad with
broccoli tabbouleh with tomato and
cauliflower tabbouleh with tomato and
in salad dressing
in sandwiches
tomato and broccoli rabe hero with mozzarella and
tuna, with fennel, capers, and
turkey and spinach hero with fontina and
in seared steak with lemon spinach
in soy-lemon edamame and asparagus

stir-fried bok choy with olives and
in stir-fried chicken with chard and citrus
in tahini-lemon potato salad
veal scallopini with capers and
white bean soup with rosemary and
Lemongrass
in broth
substituting ingredients
Lentil(s)
about
and chicken, braised
and pork chops, braised
and potatoes, tomato-braised
red, with toasted cauliflower
and rice with fried onions
and salmon, braised
salmon simmered in
shrimp simmered in dal
with smoked paprika and garlic
soups and stews
and beef stew with dried mushrooms
and chile stew
lentil soup
and mushroom stew
yellow, with charred broccoli
Lettuce
about
steak wrap with herbs and
Lima bean(s)
BBQ, with collards

in beef chili
and cabbage gratin with rye crumbs
corned beef and cabbage gratin with
lemony, with broccoli
lemony, with spinach and eggs
limy, and poblanos
pasta with kale and
in succotash
on toast with lemon and rosemary
warm, with raw zucchini salad
Lime(s)
about, 1.1, 2.1
avocado with chili salt and
broccoli, scrambled, with soy sauce and
carrot salad with cilantro and
in chile-lime bananas, caramelized
in citrus pound cupcakes
cucumber salad with hot sauce and
daikon salad with fish sauce, peanuts, and
gazpacho, spicy green, with chile and
in key lime crumble
in lima beans and poblanos
in mango-lime breakfast bruschetta
roasted whole fish with carrots and
in salad dressings
sauce, creamy
sautéed sweet potatoes with chipotle and
tabbouleh, fennel and radish, with tomato and
Linguiça in fast feijoada
Linguine with clams

Lobster and egg salad, with cucumber and tarragon
Long-grain rice, 6.1, 6.2
Loose-leaf greens
Lyonnaise sandwich, open-face
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
M
Mac and cheese
Mackerel, Mediterranean, with mint
Mako, cooking
Malaysian-style BBQ fish
Manchego
arugula with apricots, almonds, and
bulgur, smoky, with eggplant, roasted red peppers, and
plum and parsley salad with
in Spanish dip sandwich
stuffed poblanos with black beans and
stuffed poblanos with corn and
Manchurian tofu and cauliflower
Mango(es)
about
in chutney
-lime breakfast bruschetta
in salsa
tuna and green bean salad with
Manhattan chowder

Maple syrup
about, 1.1, 15.1
-almond grits
bacon
-bacon breakfast bruschetta
-banana breakfast bruschetta
blueberry
ginger
-ginger oatmeal with caramelized walnuts
in maple-chicken-apple sausage over sautéed collards
in maple-chile-beer roasted chicken and peppers
in maple-Dijon barbecue sauce
in maple-glazed ham steaks with collards
in maple-rum bananas, caramelized
-orange oatmeal with caramelized pecans
Marcona almonds, arugula with apricots, manchego, and
Marinades, seasoning combinations
Marsala
chicken
veal
Masa and rajas
Masa harina
about
in masa and rajas
Mascarpone, pasta with
Master recipes
beans
cakes without a mix
cheat-a-little pizza
cocktail meatballs

condiments
croutons
dessert sauces
grains
make-ahead
rice
roast chicken
roasted vegetables
spice blends
stocks
tomato sauce
vinaigrettes
Mayonnaise. See also Aïoli
chile
chipotle
curry
Dijon, 3.1, 13.1, 14.1
hoisin
horseradish, warm
master recipe
in rosemary-mayo dressing
soy
tarragon, 3.1, 3.2
tomato-paprika
variations for flavoring
Meat. See also Beef; Lamb; Pork
about
marinades and rubs
prep shortcuts
resting

smoked
substituting cuts of
braising, recipe-free
cabbage, unstuffed, with
with cold cashew noodles
with cold peanut noodles
with cold sesame noodles
pho variations
Meat loaf
chicken and chard
chicken and spinach
pork and bok choy
shaping
skillet
turkey and spinach
Meatballs
beef and bulgur, with tomato sauce
beef and spaghetti with tomato sauce
chicken and bulgur, with tomato sauce
chicken and spaghetti with tomato sauce
chorizo, with chard
cocktail, master recipe
lamb and bulgur, in tomato sauce
lamb and feta, with kale
lamb and spaghetti with tomato sauce
pork and spaghetti with tomato sauce
pork, five-spice, with bok choy
pork, mustard-herb, with broccoli rabe
turkey and spaghetti with tomato sauce
Mediterranean-style

corn
mackerel with mint
Medium-grain rice, 6.1, 6.2
Melon. See also Watermelon
about
gazpacho with crisp prosciutto
prosciutto and mozzarella sandwich, broiled, with
Merguez, chickpea, and chard soup
Mesclun
Mexican cheeses
Mexican-style
bone-in chicken noodle soup
chicken and chard gratin
Mexican street corn
molten chocolate cake
steak, lettuce, and herb wrap
tortilla French toast
Middle Eastern
breakfast bruschetta
chicken and bread salad
Milkshakes
Millet
about, 6.1, 6.2
pilaf, recipe-free
Mint
beet and carrot salad with
in fava bean soup, minty
grape salad with
mackerel, Mediterranean, with
in minty pea soup with crisp ham

noodles with beef, onions, and
panfried olives with chiles and
peas with prosciutto and
pesto, rustic
watermelon and feta salad with
Mirepoix tomato sauce
Mirin, cucumber salad with soy sauce and
Miso
about, 4.1, 11.1
cabbage-wrapped chicken
-cashew chicken tenders
chicken sandwich with pineapple chutney
-glazed catfish or fish fillets and mushrooms
-glazed fish fillets and carrots
lamb and carrot sauté with mustard and
lamb chops, pan-seared, with carrots
lamb chops, pan-seared, with sweet potatoes
in miso broth
in miso rice with snow peas and chicken
pork with cabbage, edamame, and
in scallion-miso bean sprouts
skillet meat loaf
soup
with chicken, udon, and snow peas
with scallops, soba, and spinach
with shrimp, soba, and spinach
with tofu, soba, and, bok choy
Molasses
waffles with ginger maple syrup
whoopie pies

Mole
black bean
pumpkin seed
Molten chocolate cake
Monkfish, cooking
Monterey Bay Aquarium
Moroccan-spiced (-style)
chicken cutlets with chickpeas and dried fruit
lamb and fennel
lamb with couscous and olives
lamb with shredded carrot salad
pork and onion carnitas
pork with couscous and grapes
sloppy Joes
tofu with tomatoes and cauliflower
turkey and spinach meat loaf
Mounds bar s’mores
Mousse
chocolate
pumpkin
Mozzarella
in caprese, bubbling
Mexican cheeses and
quinoa puttanesca with
sandwich
in Italian dip
melted, sausage and pepper sub with
and prosciutto, broiled, with melon
tomato and broccoli rabe hero, with lemon zest and
in turkey and broccoli rabe hero

stuffed poblanos with white beans and
in three-cheese lasagna
in tomato and strawberry panzanella
Muesli
apricot-cardamom
fruit and cereal bars, no-bake
ginger-clove
loaded
Multigrain bread
Mung bean noodles, 5.1, 14.1
Mushroom(s)
beef carbonnade with
and beef kebabs with spicy peanut sauce
catfish, miso-glazed, and
chicken, curried, and
chicken Marsala with
couscous gratin with Parmesan and
eggs and steak with onions
eggs fried with leeks and
eggs fried with poblanos and
eggs poached in
in eggs sukiyaki
fish fillets, hoisin-glazed, and
fish fillets, miso-glazed, and
garlicky
in pan sauce
pasta
with chicken, wine, and
with eggs and
risotto-style, with bacon and

spaghetti Bolognese with
“polenta,” cauliflower, with
polenta with sausage and
portobellos, stuffed
potatoes, mashed, with
risotto, three-stir
saag, spinach and
shrimp, stir-fried, with eggs, cilantro, and
stew
and chicken
and lentil
lentil and beef, with
stuffed portobellos
tomato sauce with
and veal sauté with mustard and cream
Mussel(s)
about
saving liquid from
substituting ingredients
swapping with clams
chowder
chowder, seafood
hot and sour bok choy with
linguine with
pan roast, with vegetables and coconut curry
pan roast, with vegetables and saffron aïoli
pan roast, with vegetables and tomato broth
prying open
tabbouleh, warm, with
Mustard

in barbecue sauce
in chicken and green beans
in Dijon catfish with green beans
in Dijon lamb chops with parsnips
Dijon mayo, cucumber salad with
Dijon mayo, hard-boiled eggs with
Dijon mayo, tofu sandwich with pickles and
in Dijon-garlic-cider roasted chicken and carrots
-glazed fish with apples
-herb pork meatballs with broccoli rabe
in honey-mustard baguette
in honey-mustard-glazed ham steaks with kale
lamb and carrot sauté with miso and
lentil soup with
in lentils and potatoes, tomato-and-Dijon-braised
in maple-Dijon barbecue sauce
-marinated flank steak and cherry tomatoes
-pretzel chicken tenders
-rosemary sauce
in rubs
in salad dressings
in seared steak with mustard spinach
tofu, stir-fried, and carrots with soy and
tuna melt with pickles and
tuna sandwich with pickles and
veal and mushroom sauté with cream and
in vinaigrettes
Mustard greens
in andouille, black-eyed pea, and Southern greens soup
in Thai sticky rice with pork and

A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
N
Napa cabbage, hot and sour soup with
Niçoise style
tuna salad
tuna sandwich, seared
Noodles
about
Asian
in broth with chicken and vegetables
chicken noodle soup
and chicken with peas
Chinese egg noodles. See Chinese egg noodle(s)
cold cashew
cold peanut
cold sesame, 5.1, 14.1
with curry and coconut milk
egg noodles, buttered
fideos. See Fideos
fire and ice
lasagna, three-cheese
one-pot
with pork. See Pork, noodles
ramen
rice noodles. See Rice noodles
soba. See Soba
udon. See Udon

white-cut chicken with
Nut(s). See also specific nuts
about
as dessert staple
seasoning with
storing
substituting ingredients
toasting, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1
caramelized
in goat cheese truffles
making nut butters from
nutty coconut oatmeal cookies
pound cupcakes
roasted
with ginger, soy, and honey
with smoked paprika and lemon
sweet and salty, Thai style
spiced, sautéed with bacon
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
O
Oatmeal
honey-lemon, with caramelized pine nuts
maple-ginger, with caramelized walnuts
maple-orange, with caramelized pecans
peanut and jelly

with soy sauce and scallions
Oats, rolled. See Rolled oats
Oily fish, 9.1, 9.2
Okra
crunchy
fried
in gumbo
and red beans in buttery tomato sauce
Olive oil
about
infusing
in marinades
storing
bean sprouts with rosemary and
pasta and
for pinzimonio
poaching in
radishes, broiled, with lemon and
in rosemary-garlic oil
in Spanish tortilla
tomato salad with yogurt and
in warm cumin oil
Olives
about
bulgur, lemony, with zucchini, ricotta salata, and
carrot salad with rosemary and
cobbler, cherry tomato, with fennel and
endive spears with
endive spears with blue cheese and
fennel salad with

green bean stew with tomatoes, almonds, and
lamb and rice with
lamb, Moroccan, with couscous and
no-cook skewers
panfried
pan-seared tuna with tomatoes and
pasta with kale, feta, and
pitting
in rubs
salad
beet and carrot, with
couscous, fennel, and orange, with
in fresh tuna, Niçoise style
puffed rice, with dried tomatoes and
sandwich
chicken salad, with thyme and
in fresh tuna, seared, Niçoise style
and ricotta baguette
tuna, with
stir-fried bok choy with lemon and
in tomato-olive sauce
ziti with feta and, 5.1, 5.2
Omelet for two
One-pot noodles
Onion(s)
about
prep shortcuts
seasoning with
storing
in arroz con pollo

and beef kebabs with mustard-rosemary sauce
and bratwurst sub
caramelized, green bean salad with toasted almonds and
caramelized, snow pea salad with toasted peanuts and
charred, steak sandwich with
chicken, braised and glazed, with soy and
chicken, jerk, and
chicken, lemon-pepper and
chicken, za’atar, and
chive pesto, rustic
couscous gratin with broccoli, cheddar, and
creamed, with seared chicken
eggs and steak with mushrooms and
eggs and steak with peppers and
fajita peppers and
fried, curried lentils and rice with
noodles with beef, mint, and
onion dip, green beans with
panfried with corn
peas with bacon and
and pork carnitas
pork chops, seared, with apples and
pork, stir-fried, with black beans and
red. See Red onion(s)
shallots in vinaigrettes
soup, American
in Spanish tortilla
Open-face sandwiches
about
Cobb

Lyonnaise
Orange(s)
about
citrus cycle
in marinades
storing
bulgur with dried cranberries and
in caramel stir-fried pork and green beans
in chipotle-orange tofu and cauliflower
chocolate-orange pudding
in cinnamon-orange French toast
-clove couscous
couscous and fennel salad with olives and
in ginger-orange bean sprouts
in honey-orange bananas, caramelized
in maple-orange oatmeal with caramelized pecans
in orange cream sundaes
in orange pie with gingersnap crumble
in orange-black bean sauce
-ricotta pancakes
roasted whole fish with fennel and
rösti, sweet potato, with orange sauce
in salad dressing
smoothie
in soy-orange grits with ginger
in stir-fried chicken with chard and citrus
white chocolate-orange pudding
Orzo
risotto-style, with asparagus and eggs
risotto-style, with chard and ricotta

salad
Greek, with shrimp and
Greek, with squid and
green, with steak and
Oven-fried
chicken with roasted corn
pork chops with roasted corn
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
P
Pa jun
Packages
chicken and potato
chicken and tomato
chicken, tomato, and feta
foil
parchment
Paella
about
couscous, with chicken and fennel
couscous, with chicken and zucchini
shrimp and tomato
squid and tomato
Pan broil
sausage and corn
scallop and corn

scallop and green bean
scallop and kale
Pan roast
beef tenderloin with chile sweet potatoes
beef tenderloin with potatoes
mussel and vegetable
pork tenderloin with celery root
shrimp and vegetable, with saffron aïoli
Pan sauce
balsamic
breaded chicken cutlets with
flavoring
mushroom
vegetable
Pancakes
about
banana-chocolate chip
banana-coconut
beet rösti with pear sauce
bok choy, with soy dipping sauce
broccoli rabe, with ricotta dipping sauce
chicken and vegetable, Korean-style
ingredients to stir into
leaving lumps
lemon-ricotta
orange-ricotta
potato rösti with apple sauce
scallion
sweet potato rösti with orange sauce
Pancetta in carbonara soup

Panfried
corn and onions
olives
pasta
polenta
rice noodles
soft-shell crabs with bacon and leeks
trout
udon
Pan-seared
corn
and poblanos
and pork
and shrimp
and steak
halibut
lamb chops, miso, with carrots
tuna with ginger-scallion snow peas
Pantry staples
Panzanella
shrimp
tomato and strawberry
Paprika. See also Smoked paprika
in chicken paprikash
chicken stew with
in pork paprikash
-rubbed pork tenderloin with peach and tomato salsa
in warm dressing
Paprikash
chicken

pork
Parchment packages
Parfaits
flavor variations
fruit, yogurt, and graham cracker
warm fruit, yogurt, and graham cracker
Parmesan cheese
about
seasoning with
shaving
storing
arugula with fried eggs and
bread crumbs
broccoli, scrambled, with lemon and
chicken breasts, herb-rubbed, with peas and
chicken, fastest
and chicken sub
couscous gratin with mushrooms and
crisps
eggplant, fastest
and eggplant sub
eggs, scrambled, with kale and
farro and white beans with arugula and
fennel fries
grits with rosemary
johnnycakes
kale with tomatoes, pine nuts, and
mashed potatoes, pork tenderloin with
Mexican cheeses and
in pasta e fagioli

peas with
in rosemary-Parmesan crisps
in rosemary-Parmesan French toast
in salad dressings
in three-cheese lasagna
-topped toast
white beans on toast with sage and
wine-braised white beans with cherry tomatoes and
Parsley
about
bread crumbs
bulgur with lemon and
chickpea and cucumber salad with tahini and
in pesto
plum and manchego salad with
in rubs
scrambled eggs with chorizo and
Parsnip(s)
about
Dijon lamb chops with
soup, creamy, with parsley pesto
Pasilla chiles
Pasta
about
cooking times
salting water
stand-ins for fresh pasta
storing
with artichokes, bread crumbs, and lemon
with asparagus and ricotta

with bay scallops and tomatoes
with broccoli rabe and ricotta
cacio e pepe
carbonara
in carbonara soup
with cauliflower and tomato sauce
with cherry tomatoes and eggs
with chicken. See Chicken, pasta
chorizo in. See Chorizo, pasta
with chorizo, red onions, and black beans
with crab and tomatoes
dumplings, ricotta, with spinach and brown butter
with eggplant and tomato sauce
with eggs. See Egg(s), pasta
with fennel. See Fennel, pasta
with feta. See Feta, pasta
fideos. See Fideos
with greens and eggs
with kale and ricotta
with kale, lima beans, and stock
linguine with clams
mac and cheese
mushrooms in. See Mushroom(s), pasta
olive oil and
orzo. See Orzo
panfried
pasta e fagioli
with pesto
plain and simple
recipe-free

with red onions, black beans, and stock
with ricotta. See Ricotta, pasta
risotto style. See Risotto-style pasta
with sausage. See Sausage(s), pasta
with scallops and potatoes
with scallops and tomatoes
with shrimp. See Shrimp, pasta
spaghetti. See Spaghetti
with spinach. See Spinach, in pasta
with squid and tomatoes
squid, fideos with tomatoes, corn, and
three Bs
with tomatoes. See Tomato(es), pasta
with tuna and dried tomatoes
ziti, broiled
ziti with olives and feta, 5.1, 5.1
Pea(s)
about
and arugula frittata
butter-poached halibut or fish fillets with
chicken and dumplings with
chicken and egg noodles with
chicken breasts, herb-rubbed, with Parmesan and
creamed, salmon with
fideos with shrimp, tomatoes, and
pork, stir-fried, with shallots and
smashed
soup
chicken, with rice and
minty, with crisp ham

split pea
sweet, with crisp ham
tofu, curried, with tomatoes and
veal, braised, with
veal scallopini with white wine and
veal, stir-fried, with shallots and
Peach(es)
broiled, with brown sugar
in chutney
cobbler under the broiler
fool
goat cheese and pecan baguette and
-raspberry smoothie
salad
with blue cheese and tarragon
and chicken, with tarragon vinaigrette
warm collards with ham and
watercress with pecans, blue cheese, and
in salsa, 10.1, 11.1
tacos, crisp pork and
toast with pecan butter and
and tomato gazpacho with crisp bacon
Peanut(s)
avocado with rice vinegar and
daikon salad with fish sauce, lime, and
and jelly oatmeal
in scallion-peanut sauce
soup
Chinese-style, with tofu and bok choy
spicy curried, with chicken and spinach

spicy, with chicken and collards
spiced, sautéed with bacon
toasted
tofu, deep-fried, with scallions and peanut sauce
tuna poke with daikon and
in vinaigrettes
Peanut brittle, chocolate
Peanut butter
about
balls, salted chocolate
in cold peanut noodles
in peanut-coconut chicken tenders
in rubs
in salad dressings
ginger-peanut
peanut-lime
peanut-soy
sandwich
and banana, with honey and raisins
and pickle
and tomato, with soy sauce
in spicy peanut sauce
in Thai peanut chicken with crisp cabbage and bean sprouts
Pear(s)
about
prep shortcuts
storing
substituting ingredients
beet rösti with pear sauce
charred Brussels sprout salad with

and chicken salad, with mustard vinaigrette
prosciutto-wrapped
sweet potato soup with bacon and
Pearled barley, 6.1, 6.2
Peas
with bacon and onion
with ginger
with Parmesan
with prosciutto and mint
Pecan(s)
-bourbon brownies
caramelized, in maple-orange oatmeal
goat cheese and peach baguette with
-honey crunch, broiled grapefruit with
oven-fried chicken with roasted corn
sautéed with bacon and brown sugar
tofu salad, curried, with golden raisins and
watercress with peaches, blue cheese, and
Pecan butter, toast with peaches and
Peel-and-eat shrimp
Pepitas and raisins, chipotle tofu salad with
Peppers, hot
about
chiles and limes, gazpacho, spicy green, with
chiles in mayonnaise
poblanos. See Poblanos
roasted
Pernil-style pork loin with plantains
Pesto
about

chive, rustic
cilantro, rustic
cilantro-scallion
-crusted chicken with eggplant
fried eggs with
lemon
mint, rustic
parsley
pasta with
pizza wedges
spinach
Pho
fast
meat and seafood variations
slow, with meat
vegetable variations
Phyllo dough
about
in sautéed apple crunch
spanakopita, classic
spanakopita, skillet
Picante amarilla
Picante rojo
Picante verde
Pickle(s)
and peanut butter sandwich
tofu sandwich with Dijon mayo and
tuna melt with mustard and
tuna sandwich with mustard and
Pickled vegetables

in appetizers
warm-pickled bell peppers
warm-pickled carrots
warm-pickled cucumber spears
warm-pickled zucchini
in salads
warm broccoli
warm cauliflower, with prosciutto
warm cauliflower, with roasted red peppers
in sandwiches
bánh mì
BBQ blackened chicken with cucumbers
blackened chicken with red onions
Pico de gallo, quesadillas with
Pie crust, quinoa, for skillet shepherd’s pie
Pilaf
about
dried fruit and nut combos
fish kebabs over bulgur
lamb and rice with dried fruit
lamb and rice with green olives
pork and rice with pinto beans
recipe-free
rice
Pimentón (smoked paprika)
Piña colada smoothie
Pine nuts
caramelized, in honey-lemon oatmeal
kale salad
raw, with balsamic currants and

raw, with tomatoes, Parmesan, and
warm, with balsamic currants and
toasting, 2.1, 4.1
Pineapple
about
-cardamom couscous
in chutney
jerk pork with
in piquante amarilla
rice bowl with chorizo and
in salsa, 10.1, 11.1
Pinto beans
BBQ bacon, with fried eggs
beer-braised, with chiles and sour cream
chicken cutlets, BBQ-spiced, with ham and
in chipotle chicken and dumplings with beans
chipotle rice with corn and
chorizo, homemade, with
in pasta e fagioli
and peppers in buttery tomato sauce
and poblano frittata
pork and rice with
smoky, on toast
and tomatoes, stewed, with cheesy tortillas
in warm three-bean and sweet potato salad
Pinzimonio
Piquante verde
Pistachios
pistachio sauce, deep-fried tofu with cilantro and
puffed wheat salad with dried apricots and

Pita pockets
about
chicken
BBQ, with peach chutney
charred, with gyro fixings
curried, with mango chutney
miso, with pineapple chutney
crisp seasoned
fattoush, warm, with feta
fattoush, warm, with shrimp
Greek pizza
hummus and vegetable
scramble
tuna, with cucumbers and feta
Pizza
cheat-a-little
Greek pita
with kale and white bean stew
master recipe
pizza wedges
fig and Gorgonzola
pesto
salsa and Jack
topping variations
Plantains
with cinnamon and cumin
pernil-style pork loin with
with smoked paprika
Plum, manchego, and parsley salad
Poached

chicken
eggs. See Egg(s), poached
fish fillets or steaks
halibut
salmon salad, 2.1, 2.2
scallop salad
shrimp salad
steamed vs.
Poblanos
about
couscous gratin with Jack cheese and
eggs fried with mushrooms and
eggs poached in cream and
in lentil and chile stew
lima beans, limy, and
in masa and rajas
pan-seared corn and
and pinto bean frittata
stuffed
with black beans and cheese
with corn and cheese
with white beans and mozzarella
Poke
shrimp, with radishes and peanuts
tuna, with daikon and peanuts
tuna, with kohlrabi and cashews
Polenta
broiled or grilled
cauliflower, with mushrooms
with chicken and asparagus

creamy
panfried
pound cupcakes
with sausage and fennel
with sausage and mushrooms
shrimp over
Pomegranate couscous, lamb chops with
Popcorn
Poppy seeds in poppy pound cupcakes
Porchetta-style pork loin with parsnips
Pork. See also Bacon; Ham; Sausage
about
boneless vs. bone-in chops
cuts of meat
fast roasting
BBQ baby back ribs
braising
with beer
Moroccan-style
with wine
breakfast patties
broiled jerk, with pineapple
broiled, paprikash with red peppers
cabbage, shredded, with tahini-lemon dressing and
in cabbage, unstuffed, with ground meat
carnitas
chops
braised lentils with
in fast feijoada
oven-fried, with roasted corn

and pozole
seared, with apples and onions
seared, with Brussels sprouts
seared, with fennel
and vegetables with chimichurri
collard greens stewed with
and corn, pan-seared
curried, with couscous and spinach
with edamame, cabbage, and miso
homemade cold cuts, master recipe
meat loaf with bok choy
meatballs
curry
five-spice, with bok choy
mustard-herb, with broccoli rabe
and spaghetti with tomato sauce
Swedish
noodles
with chile oil, snow peas, and
with peppers, cilantro, and
udon with teriyaki
pan-roasted tenderloin with celery root
paprikash with red peppers
pernil-style loin with plantains
porchetta-style loin with parsnips
pozole and, chops
and rice with pinto beans
sandwich(es)
in bánh mì
BBQ chopped, and slaw sandwich

in Big T’s meat sauce sub
crisp
sloppy Joes, Chinese-style
and scallion burger
skillet meat loaf
in skillet shepherd’s pie with quinoa crust
soup
hot and sour, with bok choy and
Korean-style, with rice
in pho, slow with meat
tamale soup
souvlaki with zucchini
spaghetti and drop meatballs with tomato sauce
stew
basic recipe
with black beans and collards
and dumplings
Provençal braised, and fennel
white bean chili
with white beans and kale
stir-fried
and broccoli with chiles
with corn and scallions
with edamame and scallions
with onions and black beans
orange caramel, with green beans
with peas and shallots
with skillet sauerkraut
stroganoff
and sweet potato enchiladas

tenderloin
with butternut purée
grilled or broiled, sauerkraut and apple salad with
homemade cold cuts, master recipe
pan-roasted, with celery root
with Parmesan mashed potatoes
spice-rubbed with pineapple salsa
with sweet potato purée
in Thai sticky rice with meaty vegetable sauce
in Thai sticky rice with mustard greens and
with white beans and cabbage, kimchi style
Port wine in cranberry-port sundaes
Potato(es). See also Sweet potato(es)
about
bangers and mash
and beef, curry-braised
and beef tenderloin, pan-roasted
and chicken, curried, adobo-style
and chicken packages
chickpeas, curried, stir-fried, with carrots and
and crab cakes
crust, roasted salmon with
French fries
hash, chorizo and
hash, smoky two-potato and ham
and lentils, tomato-braised
Parmesan mashed, pork tenderloin with
pasta with scallops and
roasted, crisp
salad

chipotle
classic
German-style
tahini-lemon
warm, three-bean and
warm, with greens with chickpeas and
skin-on mashed
soup with rustic chive pesto
in Spanish tortilla
and steak enchiladas
vegetable main dishes
flautas, chorizo and
mashed, with mushrooms
rösti with apple sauce
saag, spinach and
Poultry. See Chicken; Turkey
Pound cupcakes, master recipe
Pozole
and chicken thighs
and pork chops
Praline banana cupcakes
Pressed tofu. See Tofu, pressed
Pretzels, chocolate-covered
Prosciutto
bagel chips with tomato, ricotta, and
crisp, cucumber gazpacho with
crisp, melon gazpacho with
-crusted chicken with endive
-crusted chicken with kale
curried rice, beans, and broccoli with

and drop biscuits
endive spears with
hash, celery root and
and mozzarella sandwich, broiled, with melon
peas with mint and
scrambled eggs with basil and
warm pickled cauliflower salad with
white beans with escarole and
-wrapped cantaloupe
-wrapped pears
-wrapped tomatoes
Provençal
chicken
pork and fennel
tomato sauce
tomato soup with fennel
Provolone and salami sandwich with roasted red pepper, broiled
Puddings
chocolate-banana
chocolate-orange
white chocolate-orange
Puffed
rice salad
with dates and almonds
with dried tomatoes and olives
red beans and
wheat salad, with dried apricots and pistachios
Pumpkin mousse
Pumpkin seed(s)
in chipotle tofu salad with raisins

mole, chicken and peppers with
pumpkin soup with apples and
Pumpkin soup with apples and pumpkin seeds
Purée(s)
butternut
sweet potato
Puttanesca
-crusted chicken with fennel
eggplant, with tomato sauce
quinoa, with mozzarella
quinoa, with ricotta
tomato sauce, master recipe
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
Q
Quesadillas with pico de gallo
Queso fresco
substitutions for
tomato salad with tomatillos and
Queso fundido
chicken and chile
lamb and sweet potato
sweet pepper
Queso Oaxaca
Quinoa
about

cooked in stock
cooking times
description of
seasoning
crust, for skillet shepherd’s pie
gratin with leeks and Gruyère
pilaf, recipe-free
pilaf with chickpeas and dried fruit
puttanesca with mozzarella
puttanesca with ricotta
wine and rosemary
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
R
Radicchio
about
and endive with bacon vinaigrette
sole with balsamic
in steakhouse salad
Radish(es)
about
avocado soup with crab and daikon
broiled, with olive oil and lemon
broiled, with soy
and herb butter baguette
hoisin-glazed fish with

poke, shrimp, with peanuts and
poke, tuna, with peanuts and daikon
salad
daikon, with fish sauce, lime, and peanuts
fennel tabbouleh with tomato and lime and radishes
jícama and radish
tuna and egg, with dill and radishes
Raisins
carrot salad with
kale, warm, with cashews, scallions and soy
peanut butter and banana sandwich, with honey and
tofu salad, chipotle, with pepitas and
tofu salad, curried, with pecans and
Raita, cucumber
Ramen
about, 4.1, 5.1
chicken, homemade
no-cook toppers
Raspberries in peach-raspberry smoothie
Ravioli soup, broken
Raw fruit sauce
Recipe-free
about
braised meat
breakfast scrambles
pasta
pilaf
salads
soups
steamed fish

stir-fry
Red beans
butternut squash salad, raw, with warm
and cabbage in buttery tomato sauce
and okra in buttery tomato sauce
puffed rice salad and
Red cabbage and beef soup
Red chile flakes
about
in sesame-chile vinaigrette
Red clam sauce
Red lentils
about
with toasted cauliflower
Red onion(s)
BBQ chicken thighs with crisp cabbage and
chicken sandwich with pickled
curry-rubbed chicken with corn and
and lamb burger
panfried trout with chorizo and
pasta with chorizo, black beans, and
tofu sandwich with chipotle mayo and
Red peppers
and poached chicken with smoked paprika aïoli
pork paprikash with
roasted
bulgur, smoky, with eggplant, manchego, and
cauliflower salad, warm pickled, with
and chicken, skillet bake
and chickpea salad with warm paprika dressing

hummus and
salami and provolone sandwich, broiled, with
and tomato sauce
Red smoothie
Red-leaf lettuce
Rémoulade, celery root
Reuben sandwich
Ribs, baby back, BBQ
Rice
about
cooking, 4.1, 6.1
flavoring
making rice cakes
parcooking
stir-ins for
storing
substituting
types of
in arroz con pollo
with bok choy, scrambled eggs, and scallions
with cabbage, scrambled eggs, and scallions
with chicken. See Chicken, rice
with clams, creamy Chinese
with corn. See Corn, rice
curried, beans, and hearty greens
curried chicken and
fried
in hoppin’ John with collards
in jambalaya des herbes
jook with beef and bean sprouts

jook with chicken and snow peas
Korean-style beef soup with
Korean-style pork soup with
and lamb with dried fruit
and lamb with green olives
and lentils with fried onions
master recipe
miso, and snow peas with chicken
in paella
pilaf
pilaf, recipe-free
and pork with pinto beans
puffed. See Puffed, rice salad
rice, beans, and broccoli
rice bowl
and salmon cakes with cucumber salsa
sesame seeds in fried rice
with shrimp. See Shrimp, rice
Thai sticky, with meaty vegetable sauce
Thai sticky, with pork and mustard greens
in three-stir risotto
with tomatoes. See Tomato(es), rice
and trout cakes with cucumber salsa
white
and wings
Rice noodles
about
in noodles
with beef, onions, and mint
with chicken, peppers, and basil

with pork, peppers, and cilantro
and sweet potatoes in curry broth
panfried
Rice sticks, 5.1, 5.2
Rice vinegar, avocado with peanuts and
Ricotta
bagel chips with prosciutto, tomato, and
and chicken sausage over broccoli rabe
in dipping sauce
eggs, scrambled, with spinach and
-honey breakfast bruschetta
in lemon-ricotta pancakes
and olive baguette
in orange-ricotta pancakes
pasta
with broccoli rabe and
dumplings with spinach and brown butter
orzo risotto, with chard and
with ricotta
in three-cheese lasagna
pie, deconstructed, with spinach, tomatoes, and
quinoa puttanesca with
Ricotta salata
bulgur, lemony, with zucchini, olives, and
charred broccoli salad with almonds and
Mexican cheeses and
Risotto rices, 6.1, 6.2
Risotto-style pasta
with fennel and sausage
with mushrooms and bacon

orzo with asparagus and eggs
orzo with chard and ricotta
squash and ham
Roasted
beef tenderloin
chicken
chicken, master recipe
corn
nuts
potatoes, crisp
red peppers. See Red peppers, roasted
seafood
spaghetti squash
tofu with sesame drizzle
turkey
vegetables, master recipe
Roasting pan French toast
Rolled oats, 6.1, 6.2, 15.1
Romaine
about
in green salad
grilled or broiled, seared scallops with
in steakhouse salad
Romesco
fried eggs with
raw veggies with
rustic, shrimp and cauliflower with
rustic, squid and cauliflower with
Root vegetables. See also specific root vegetables
raw

stew with
storing
Rosemary
about, 1.1, 7.1
bean sprouts with olive oil and
carrot salad with olives and
chicken salad sandwich with grapes and
-garlic oil
garlic-rosemary chicken and vegetable pancakes
grits, Parmesan, with
and lamb meatballs with yogurt sauce
lima beans on toast with lemon and
in mustard-rosemary sauce
-Parmesan crisps
-Parmesan French toast
popcorn
quinoa with wine and
refried white beans with
in salad dressing
white bean soup with lemon and
Rub-in-ades, seasoning combinations
Rum
in banana-rum cupcakes
in boozy black and white milkshakes
in maple-rum bananas, caramelized
Russian dressing
Rye bread
about
beet and cabbage, with rye croutons, yogurt, and dill
lima bean and cabbage gratin with rye crumbs

in Reuben sandwich
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
S
Saag
mushroom and spinach
potato and spinach
tofu and spinach
Saffron aïoli
Sage
brown butter, ricotta dumplings with spinach and
honey-cheddar grits with
in sage sausage stuffing
sautéed sweet potatoes with garlic and
turkey salad sandwich with apples and
white beans on toast with Parmesan and
Saimin
Salad(s)
with almonds. See Almond(s), salad
arugula with apricots, Marcona almonds, and manchego
arugula with fried eggs and shaved Parmesan
asparagus and kale Caesar salad
bacon steakhouse salad
beet. See Beet(s), salad
BLT, with rosemary-mayo dressing
bok choy, hot and sour, with mussels

broccoli rabe, steamed, with shrimp
broccoli tabbouleh with charred tomato and lemon
broccoli, warm pickled
Brussels sprouts
bulgur. See Bulgur, salad
butternut squash. See Butternut squash, salad
cabbage. See Cabbage(s), salad
caprese
carrot. See Carrot(s), salad
cauliflower. See Cauliflower, salad
celery
chicken. See Chicken, salad
chickpea. See Chickpea(s), salad
chopped
classic Caesar
collards, warm, with peaches and ham
corn. See Corn, salad
couscous, fennel, and orange with olives
crab. See Crab, salad
cucumber. See Cucumber(s), salad
daikon with fish sauce, lime, and peanuts
edamame and cucumber, with warm ginger dressing
eggplant. See Eggplant, broiled
eggs. See Egg(s), salad
endive and radicchio with bacon vinaigrette
endive with fried eggs and blue cheese
escarole. See Escarole, warm
fattoush
fennel. See Fennel, salad
fish and white bean, with tomato vinaigrette

fruit, 12.1, 14.1
grape, with mint
Greek. See Greek salad
green
green bean, with caramelized onions and toasted almonds
greens, warm, chickpea, potato, and
greens, warm, with orzo and steak
hot and sour, bok choy with mussels
hot and sour, cabbage with salmon
jícama. See Jícama, salad
kale. See Kale, salad
lobster and egg, with cucumber and tarragon
orzo. See Orzo, salad
with peaches. See Peach(es), salad
pick-a-fruit
pickled vegetables in. See Pickled vegetables, in salads
pine nuts in. See Pine nuts
plum, manchego, and parsley
puffed rice. See Puffed, rice salad
puffed wheat, with dried apricots and pistachios
recipe-free
salmon. See Salmon, salad
sauerkraut and apple salad with pork
sausage and pepper salad with mustard dressing
scallops. See Scallop(s), salad
shrimp. See Shrimp, salad
slaw. See Slaw
snow pea and kimchi salad with beef
snow pea, with soy-caramelized onions and toasted peanuts
spinach. See Spinach, salad

steak. See Steak, salad
three-bean and potato, warm
three-bean and sweet potato, warm
tofu. See Tofu, salad
tomato. See Tomato(es), salad
tuna. See Tuna, salad
vegetables, broiled, with white bean dressing
veggie fajita
watercress with peaches, pecans, and blue cheese
watermelon, feta, and mint
white bean. See White bean(s), salad
zucchini. See Zucchini, salad
Salad dressings. See Dressing(s)
Salad greens. See Greens
Salade Lyonnaise
Salami
no-cook skewers
and provolone sandwich with roasted red pepper, broiled
Salmon
about, 9.1, 9.2
and asparagus with toasted bread crumbs
braised lentils with
with creamed peas
with creamed spinach
with fresh salsa
with garlicky stewed greens and tomatoes
with gingery creamed corn
with gingery greens
and rice cakes with cucumber salsa
roasted, with potato crust

salad
hot and sour cabbage with
poached, and cucumber salad, with caper and mustard dressing
poached, and cucumber salad, with ginger-peanut dressing
poached, with herby tartar sauce
smoked salmon and egg salad with celery
sandwich
with chipotle-avocado spread
with peanut vinaigrette
with tarragon mayo
simmered in dal
smoked salmon
bagel chips with
chowder
and dill, scrambled eggs with
and egg salad with celery
with sweet and sour bok choy
Salmorejo
Salsa
avocado
corn
cucumber
fresh
and Jack pizza wedges
mango
peach
peach and tomato
pineapple, 10.1, 11.1
smooth cooked
tomatillo

tomato. See Tomato salsa
tortillas rojas
watermelon
Salty(ed)
chocolate milkshake
chocolate peanut butter balls
and sweet, roasted nuts, Thai style
Sandwiches
about
almond butter and apple
baguettes
apple and honey-mustard
fennel and garlic butter
goat cheese, peach, and pecan
jícama and chile mayo
radish and herb butter
ricotta and olive
bánh mì
BLT wrap, chipotle
broiled cheese
Buffalo tofu
burgers
better beef
black bean and carrot, smoky
black-eyed pea and sweet potato
cheeseburgers
lamb and red onion
pork and scallion
turkey
white bean and zucchini

chicken. See Chicken, sandwich
Cobb, open-face
crab. See Crab, sandwich
egg. See Egg(s), sandwich
Fast Rachel
fish fillet
ham and Gruyère with apples, broiled
hero
charred chicken with hero fixings
tomato and broccoli rabe
turkey
homemade cold cuts
Italian dip
Lyonnaise, open-face
making multiple
mozzarella in. See Mozzarella, sandwich
open-face
peanut butter. See Peanut butter, sandwich
pickled vegetables in, See Pickled vegetables
pita pockets. See Pita pockets
pizza, cheat-a-little
pork. See Pork, sandwich
prosciutto and mozzarella, broiled, with melon
Reuben
salami and provolone sandwich with roasted red peppers, broiled
salmon. See Salmon, sandwich
sausage. See Sausage(s), sandwich
scallop roll with lemon-tarragon aïoli
shrimp. See Shrimp, sandwich
sloppy Joes

Spanish dip
spreading butter
steak. See Steak, sandwich
subs
bánh mì
Big T’s meat sauce
bratwurst and onion
chicken Parmesan
eggplant Parmesan
sausage and broccoli rabe
sausage and pepper
vegetarian sauce
tofu. See Tofu, sandwich
tomato. See Tomato(es), sandwich
turkey. See Turkey, sandwich
with vegetables. See Vegetable(s), sandwich
Saran, Suvir
Satay, chicken
Sauces
barbecue. See Barbecue sauce
black bean
chimichurri
coconut-spinach-cashew
creamy green
curried yogurt sauce
dessert
dipping. See Dipping sauces
fruit
mustard cream
mustard miso

mustard soy
mustard-rosemary
orange-black bean
pan
peanut
peanut, spicy
pistachio
red clam
scallion-peanut
seasoning with
soy-based. See Soy (sauce)
spinach-cashew
tartar
tomatillo
tomato. See Tomato sauce
tomato-soy
tomato-yogurt
vinegar-shallot
yogurt-blue cheese sauce
yogurt-harissa sauce
yogurt-tahini sauce
Sauerkraut
braised cabbage with ham and
salad with apple and pork
in sandwich, Reuben
skillet, stir-fried pork with
Sausage(s). See also Chorizo; Italian sausage
about, 11.1, 14.1
bangers and mash
breakfast patties

browned and braised, with endive
Brussels sprouts with
in cabbage, unstuffed, with ground meat
chicken and blue cheese, over sautéed kale
chicken and feta, over sautéed spinach
chicken and ricotta, over broccoli rabe
and corn pan broil
maple-chicken-apple, over sautéed collards
pasta
with broccoli rabe, ricotta, and
with fennel and, white beans, and
risotto-style, with fennel and
ziti with
polenta with fennel and
polenta with mushrooms and
rice bowl with
in sage sausage stuffing
salad with mustard dressing, pepper and
sandwich
bratwurst and onion sub
and broccoli rabe sub
and pepper sub
and pepper sub with melted mozzarella
soup
andouille, black-eyed pea, and Southern greens
bratwurst in cabbage, with smoked sausage
cabbage, with smoked
cannellini, kale, and
gumbo
merguez, chickpea, and chard

stewed green beans with
in three-stir risotto
white beans with greens, garlic, and
Sautéed
apple crunch
apples, breakfast patties with
butternut squash with warm edamame
collards, maple-chicken-apple sausage over
fennel, breakfast patties with
greens with garlic
kale, chicken and blue cheese sausage over
nuts with bacon
peppers, breakfast patties with
spinach, chicken and feta sausage over
sweet potatoes
Savoy cabbage
Scallion(s)
about
carrot salad with soy sauce and
charred, steak sandwich with soy mayo and
chicken, chile-rubbed, with corn and
chicken, five-spice, and
in cilantro-scallion pesto
edamame on toast with sesame oil and
ginger-scallion snow peas, pan-seared tuna with
in jalapeño-scallion johnnycakes
kale, warm, with cashews, soy currants or raisins, and
-miso bean sprouts
oatmeal with soy sauce and
pancakes

-peanut sauce
and pork burger
rice with cabbage, scrambled eggs, and
seasoning with
stir-fried
beef and asparagus with ginger and
beef and broccoli with ginger and
pork with corn and
pork with edamame and
shrimp with tomato, eggs, and
tofu, deep-fried, with peanut sauce and
Scallop(s)
about, 1.1, 9.1
with asparagus and toasted bread crumbs
black pepper, and broccoli
caramel-cooked
pan broil
with corn
with green beans
with kale
pasta with potatoes and
pasta with tomatoes and
roll, with lemon-tarragon aïoli
salad
poached, with herby tartar sauce
seared, with arugula and orange dressing
seared, with grilled or broiled bok choy
seared, with grilled or broiled romaine
scampi, smoky
seared

with arugula and orange dressing
with grilled or broiled bok choy
with grilled or broiled romaine
in tomato sauce with basil and chiles
in tomato-basil sauce
soup, miso, with soba, spinach, and
Scallopini, veal
Scampi
smoky scallop
smoky shrimp
smoky squid
Scissors, chopping with
Scotch bonnet peppers
Scrambles
broccoli, with Parmesan and lemon
broccoli, with soy sauce and lime
eggs. See Egg(s), scrambled
recipe-free
Sea greens
in dashi, 4.1, 4.2
in miso soup
Seafood. See also Fish
about
cooking
fish fillets and steaks
marinades and rubs
steamed
sustainable seafood, 6.1, 9.1
chowder
chowder, Manhattan

chowder with bacon
pho variations
steamed clams
steamed fish, recipe-free
steamed salmon
Seared
broccoli
cauliflower
chicken
corn
duck breast with fruit sauce
halibut
lamb chops. See Pan-seared lamb chops
pork chops
scallops
shrimp
squid
steak
striped bass or thick fillets
tofu
tuna
Seasoning combinations
Serrano peppers
Sesame oil
black beans with soy and
edamame on toast with scallions and
noodles with
in roasted tofu with sesame drizzle
in sesame vinaigrette
in sesame-chile vinaigrette

in sesame-oil dressing
sole with sesame bean sprouts
tomato salad with soy and
Sesame seeds
avocado with soy sauce and
in fried rice
in sesame beef and broccoli
in sesame chicken and snow peas
in sesame-chile vinaigrette
Shallots
about
panfried olives with thyme and
stir-fried pork with peas and
stir-fried veal with peas and
in vinaigrettes
vinegar-shallot sauce
Shaved ice, fruity
Shellfish. See also specific types of shellfish
cooking
saving liquid from
Shepherd’s pie, skillet, with quinoa crust
Shishito peppers
Shitakes
hoisin-glazed fish fillets and
shrimp, stir-fried, with eggs, cilantro, and
Short-grain rice, 6.1, 6.2
Shrimp
about, 9.1, 9.2
black pepper, and broccoli
with blue cheese slaw

Buffalo
caramel-cooked
and celery root rémoulade, 2.1, 9.1
fattoush, warm pita, with
harissa
kebabs over tomato bulgur
with noodles
cold cashew
cold peanut
cold sesame
and sweet potatoes in curry broth
over grits
pan roast, with vegetables and saffron aïoli
pan-seared corn and
pasta
fideos with tomatoes, peas, and
with potatoes and
with tomatoes and
peel-and-eat
poke with radishes and peanuts
rice
jambalaya des herbes with
in three-stir risotto
and tomato paella
tomato rice and corn with
salad
broccoli rabe, steamed, with
and celery root rémoulade
corn and black bean, with
and egg salad, with cucumber and tarragon

Greek, with orzo and
panzanella
poached, with curried tartar sauce
poached, with herby tartar sauce
zucchini slaw with chopped spicy
sandwich
bánh mì
burrito with white beans and corn salsa
salad roll, curried
salad roll, Sriracha
salad roll with tomato-paprika mayo
scampi, smoky
seared, in tomato sauce
simmered in dal
smoky eggs with tomatoes and
soup
and corn chowder
gumbo
miso, with soba, spinach, and
Provençal tomato, with fennel and
wonton, broken, with
stewed green beans with
stir-fried
and cauliflower with rustic romesco
with shitakes, eggs, and cilantro
with tomato, eggs, and basil
with tomato, eggs, and scallions
tempura, celery root, with
Shucking corn
Sides

about
asparagus gratin
avocado
bean sprouts
black beans
broccoli
broiled cherry tomatoes
bruschetta
Brussels sprouts
bulgur
butternut squash, simmered
cabbage, salted, with sesame vinaigrette
caprese salad
carrot salad, 14.1, 14.2
celery salad
chopped salad
coleslaw
corn
couscous
crisp seasoned pita
cucumber raita
cucumber salad, 14.1, 14.2
daikon salad
edamame succotash
egg noodles, buttered
eggplant gratin
fajita peppers and onions
fennel salad
flour tortillas, warm
garlic bread

garlicky mushrooms
grape salad with mint
green salad
greens sautéed with garlic
hummus
jícama and radish salad
jícama salad with chiles
lentils with smoked paprika and garlic
mushrooms, garlicky
mushrooms, stuffed
noodles
okra, crunchy
okra, fried
panfried
pasta
rice noodles
udon
pasta, plain and simple
peach, blue cheese, and tarragon salad
peas
pick-a-fruit salad
plum, manchego, and parsley salad
polenta
portobellos, stuffed
potato(es)
crisp roasted
French fries
salad
skin-on mashed
quinoa

rice, brown
rice pilaf
rice, white
ripe plantains
scallion pancakes
seared broccoli
seared cauliflower
skillet stuffing
slaw, no-mayo
slaw, soy
slaw, tahini
spinach, creamed
stir-fried bok choy
stuffed portobellos
succotash
sweet potato fries
sweet potatoes, sautéed
tomato salad
tomatoes with bread crumbs
vegetables, tender
watermelon, feta, and mint salad
Silken tofu
Simmered butternut squash
Simmered in dal
salmon
shrimp
Singapore-style noodles with chicken, peppers, and basil
Skillet. See also Seared; Stir-fried
chicken and roasted red pepper bake
edamame with chicken and cabbage

edamame with pork, cabbage, and miso
fruit crisp
kimchi, stir-fried beef with
kimchi style, white beans with pork and cabbage
meat loaf
panfried soft-shell crabs with bacon and leeks
panfried trout
sauerkraut, stir-fried pork with
shepherd’s pie with quinoa crust
spanakopita
stuffing
white beans with pork and cabbage, kimchi style
Slaw
and BBQ chopped pork sandwich
blue cheese, Buffalo shrimp with
coleslaw
in Fast Rachel sandwich
jícama, with chopped spicy chicken
no-mayo
soy
tahini
zucchini, with chopped spicy chicken
zucchini, with chopped spicy shrimp
zucchini, with crisp ground lamb
Sloppy Joes
Smoked fish and white bean gratin
Smoked paprika
about
in aïoli, 9.1, 10.1
lentils with garlic and

ripe plantains with
roasted nuts with lemon and
in rubs
-spiced chicken cutlets with white beans and dried tomatoes
Smoked salmon
bagel chips with
chowder
and dill, scrambled eggs with
and egg salad with celery
Smoked sausage, cabbage soup with
Smoked trout, scrambled eggs with dill and
Smoky black bean
burgers with carrots
soup
Smoky bulgur
with eggplant, dates, and feta
with eggplant, dried tomatoes, and feta
with eggplant, roasted red peppers, and manchego
Smoky eggs and shrimp with tomatoes
Smoky lamb and sweet potato fundido
Smoky pinto beans on toast
Smoky scallop scampi
Smoky shrimp scampi
Smoky squid scampi
Smoky steak and potato enchiladas
Smoky tofu and black bean chili
Smoky two-potato and ham hash
Smoothies
S’mores
Snap peas

about
and poached chicken with curry aïoli
Snow pea(s)
about
ginger-scallion, pan-seared tuna with
jook with chicken and
and kimchi salad with beef
and miso rice with chicken
miso soup with chicken, udon, and
noodles with chile oil and
salad with soy-caramelized onions and toasted peanuts
sesame chicken and
Thai coconut soup with
tofu, stir-fried, and
Soba
miso soup
with scallops, spinach, and
with shrimp, spinach, and
with tofu, bok choy, and
in noodles with chile oil
and edamame
and snow peas
and spinach
Sole
with balsamic radicchio
with glazed carrots
with lemony asparagus
with sesame bean sprouts
Sorbet
Soup(s)

about
asparagus, creamy, with rustic mint pesto
avocado, with crab and corn
avocado, with crab and daikon
with bacon. See Bacon, soup
beef. See Beef, soup
black bean
butternut squash, with apples and bacon
cabbage, with smoked sausage
carbonara
carrot, ginger, with crisp ham
carrot, Thai coconut, with
celery root, creamy, with rustic cilantro pesto
chicken. See Chicken, soup
Chinese-style. See Chinese-style, soup
chop-and-drop
chowders. See Chowder(s)
with crab. See Crab, soup
dessert
egg drop. See Egg(s), soup
eggs sukiyaki
escarole and Italian sausage
fava bean, minty
gazpacho. See Gazpacho
with greens. See Greens, soup
gumbo. See Gumbo(s)
with ham. See Ham, soup
hot and sour. See Hot and sour, soup
lentil
miso. See Miso, soup

parsnip, creamy, with parsley pesto
pasta e fagioli
with peanuts. See Peanut(s), soup
with peas. See Pea(s), soup
pho, fast
with pork. See Pork, soup
potato, creamy, with rustic chive pesto
pumpkin, with apples and pumpkin seeds
ravioli soup, broken
recipe-free
red cabbage and beef
sausage. See Sausage(s), soup
shrimp. See Shrimp, soup
with spinach. See Spinach, soup
stocks, master recipes
sweet potato, with pears and bacon
Thai coconut soup
with tofu. See Tofu, soup
with tomatoes. See Tomato(es), soup
vegetable, frozen
with vegetables. See Vegetable(s), soup
watermelon, with fresh herbs
white bean, tomato and bread, with
white bean, with rosemary and lemon
wonton. See Wonton soup(s)
zucchini, tomato and bread, with
Sour cream
about
beer-braised pinto beans with chiles and
black bean and cabbage salad with cilantro and

cucumber salad with dill and
Southern long-grain rice
Soy (sauce)
about
in marinades
storing
types of
broth, 9.1, 10.1
-brown sugar glaze, broiled grapefruit with
caramel stir-fried beef and peppers
-caramelized onions
currants or raisins
in dipping sauce
-ginger couscous, lamb chops with
in honey-ginger-soy roasted chicken and celery
-lemon edamame and asparagus
in lemon-soy aïoli
-marinated flank steak and cherry tomatoes
-marinated flank steak and green beans
in mayonnaise
-orange grits with ginger
in peanut-soy dressing
seasoning with
in slaw
-spiked crab salad sandwich
in tomato-soy sauce
in vinaigrette
Soybeans. See Edamame
Spaghetti
with fresh tomato sauce

and meatballs with tomato sauce
with nearly instant Bolognese
in pasta e fagioli, Spanish-style
Spaghetti squash, roasted
with brown butter and walnuts
with hazelnuts and Gorgonzola
with rosemary-garlic oil and walnuts
Spanakopita
classic
skillet
Spanish paella rice
Spanish-style
chorizo, homemade, with chickpeas
chorizo on skewers, no-cook
dip sandwich
pasta e fagioli
Spanish tortilla
steakhouse salad
Spice(s)
about
“blooming” ground
as dessert staple
seasoning with
storing
croutons
Moroccan
nuts with bacon
pound cupcakes
-rubbed pork with pineapple salsa
spice blends, master recipe

in spicy chocolate milkshake
Spinach
about
-cashew sauce
chicken and feta sausage over sautéed
and chicken meat loaf
clams, steamed, with
creamed
creamed, chicken with
creamed, salmon with
creamy, seared steak with
in eggs Florentine
eggs, scrambled, with feta and
eggs, scrambled, with goat cheese and
eggs, scrambled, with ricotta and
in eggs sukiyaki
garlicky, pan-seared halibut with
hero, turkey and, with fontina and lemon zest
in jambalaya
lemon, seared steak with
lima beans, lemony, with eggs and
mustard, seared steak with
in pasta and noodles
with greens and eggs
noodles with chile oil and
with ricotta and
ricotta dumplings with brown butter and
pesto
pie, deconstructed, with tomato, ricotta, and
pork, curried, with couscous and

saag
mushroom and
potato and
tofu and
salad
with apples, walnuts, and goat cheese
and chicken salad, with curry dressing
and chicken salad, with Parmesan dressing
with fried eggs and feta
soup
in bacon and egg drop
and chorizo
miso, with scallops, soba, and
miso, with shrimp, soba, and
peanut, spicy curried, with chicken and
in tortilla lasagna
and turkey meat loaf
and white bean frittata
Split pea soup
Spring rain noodles
Squash
au gratin with toasted nuts
cider-braised turkey and
Squid
black pepper, and bok choy
and cauliflower, stir-fried, with rustic romesco
fideos with tomatoes, corn, and
pasta with tomatoes and
salad, Greek, with orzo and
salad, warm escarole and white bean, with

scampi, smoky
seared, in tomato sauce
soup, Provençal tomato, with fennel and
soup, Thai coconut, with
timing doneness
and tomato paella
Sriracha shrimp salad roll
Staple ingredients
freezer staples
fridge staples
interchangeable
pantry staples
shopping for speed
Steak (beef)
flank
chipotle-marinated and asparagus
mustard-marinated and cherry tomatoes
soy-marinated and cherry tomatoes
soy-marinated and green beans
pan-seared corn and
and potato enchiladas
salad
bacon steakhouse
green, with orzo and
Spanish steakhouse
steak fajita
steakhouse
sandwich
and black bean burrito with fresh salsa
with charred onions

with charred scallions and soy mayo
Italian-style wrap with lettuce and herbs
Mexican-style wrap with lettuce and herbs
tacos with lots of options
Thai-style wrap with lettuce and herbs
with warm horseradish mayo
seared
with creamy spinach
with garlicky chard
with lemon spinach
with mustard spinach
and vegetables with chimichurri
Steak (fish). See Fish, steaks
Steak (ham)
BBQ-glazed, with collards
honey-mustard-glazed with kale
maple-glazed, with collards
Steamed
broccoli rabe with shrimp
chicken
clams
fish, recipe-free
poached eggs
salmon
tender vegetables
Steaming racks, rigging
Stews. See also Braising; Chili
broccoli rabe with garlic
chicken
and dumplings

and mushroom
Provençal
quick-stewed green beans with
in white chili
chickpea and couscous
cod or fish fillets
and chickpea
and fava bean
and white bean
collard greens with smoked pork
eggs sukiyaki
green beans
with bacon
with chicken
with ham
with sausage
with shrimp
with tomatoes, olives, and almonds
kale and white bean, with vegetable flatbread
lamb, with tomatoes
lentil and mushroom
mushroom and chicken
pork
basic recipe
with black beans and collards
and dumplings
Provençal, and fennel
in white bean chili
with white beans and kale
saag

mushroom and spinach
potato and spinach
tofu and spinach
stewed greens and tomatoes, salmon with
vegetables, heartier braised
white beans
chili
and cod
and kale, stewed, with Parmesan toast
and kale, with vegetable flatbread
and tomatoes, stewed, with Parmesan toast
Sticky rice, 6.1, 6.2
Stir-fry
about
beef
and broccoli with scallions and ginger
caramel
with skillet kimchi
bok choy
chicken
and broccoli with black bean sauce
and broccoli with tomato-soy sauce
with collards and dried chiles
with corn and red onion
with edamame
and kale
chickpeas, curried
lamb and green peppers
noodles with beef and celery
noodles with tofu and celery

pork
and broccoli with chiles
caramel, with green beans
with edamame, 8.1, 11.1
with skillet sauerkraut
and white beans, with cabbage, kimchi style
recipe-free
shrimp
and cauliflower with rustic romesco
with shitakes, eggs, and cilantro
with tomato, eggs, and basil
with tomato, eggs, and scallions
squid and cauliflower with rustic romesco
tofu and green beans
veal with shallots and peas
Stocks
about
cooking in
storing
substituting ingredients
beef
chicken
dashi, 4.1, 4.2
fish
master recipes
quinoa cooked in
vegetable
Stone fruit, prep shortcuts
Stove, eating around
Strawberry(ies)

and almond smoothie
toast with almond butter and
tomato and strawberry panzanella
tomato salad with feta, balsamic, and
Striped bass
about
and cucumber ribbons
and fennel
and zucchini ribbons
Stroganoff
beef
chicken
pork
Stuffing
flavoring variations
sage sausage
skillet
Substituting ingredients
Succotash
Sugar, 1.1, 15.1
Sukiyaki, eggs
Sundaes
Sushi grade fish
Sustainable seafood, 6.1, 9.1
Swedish meatballs
Sweet and sour bok choy, salmon with
Sweet peppers. See Bell pepper(s)
Sweet potato(es)
about
beef tenderloin, pan-roasted, with

and black-eyed pea burgers, BBQ
breakfast burritos, with chorizo and
and chicken adobo
chickpeas, spicy, stir-fried with
and crab cakes
and fish fillets, teriyaki-glazed
flautas
fries
hash
lamb chops, miso, with
and lamb fundido
and pork enchiladas
purée, with pork tenderloin
rösti with orange sauce
sautéed
soup with pears and bacon
warm three-bean salad and
Swiss cheese in Reuben sandwich
Swordfish
about
broiled
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
T
Tabbouleh
broccoli, with charred tomato and lemon

cauliflower, with charred tomato and lemon
fennel and radish, with charred tomato and lime
warm, with mussels
warm, with tuna
Tacos
about
charred chicken and tortillas with taco fixings
chicken, crisp, and watermelon
filling variations
pork, crisp, and apple
pork, crisp, and peach
pork, crisp, and watermelon
steak, with lots of options
Tahini
chickpea and cucumber salad with parsley and
chickpeas with fried eggs
in cold sesame noodles
creamed spinach
-lemon potato salad
in peanut vinaigrette
in salad dressing
in sesame chicken tenders
in slaw
in yogurt-tahini sauce
Tamale(s)
masa harina in
soup, chicken
soup, pork
Tapas on skewers, no-cook
Tapenade

-crusted chicken with eggplant
warm, broiled swordfish or fish steaks with
Tarka
Tarragon
about
clams, steamed, with cream and
lemon-tarragon aïoli
lobster and egg salad with cucumber and
in mayonnaise, 3.1, 3.2
peach and blue cheese salad with
scrambled eggs with ham and
shrimp and egg salad with cucumber and
shrimp simmered in lentils with
in vinaigrettes
Tartar sauce
curried
fish and chips with
herby
Tempura, celery root
Tenderloin
beef, pan-roasted, with chile sweet potatoes
beef, pan-roasted, with potatoes
pork
about
with butternut purée
grilled or broiled, sauerkraut and apple salad with
homemade cold cuts, master recipe
pan-roasted, with celery root
with Parmesan mashed potatoes
spice-rubbed with pineapple salsa

with sweet potato purée
Teriyaki
beef cocktail meatballs
beef, udon with
chicken, udon with
-glazed fish fillets and shitakes
pork, udon with
tofu, udon with
Thai peppers
Thai-style
coconut lentils, shrimp simmered in
coconut soup
curry-braised beef and eggplant
peanut chicken with crisp cabbage and bean sprouts
roasted nuts, sweet and salty
steak, lettuce, and herb wrap
steamed clams with spinach
sticky rice with meaty vegetable sauce
sticky rice with pork and mustard greens
vinaigrette
Thin ribbons
Three-bean salad
warm, with potatoes
warm, with sweet potatoes
Thyme
chicken salad sandwich with olives and
panfried olives with shallots and
Tikka, cauliflower, with boiled eggs
Time-texture continuum
Tiramisu

Toasted bread
for bread salad
breakfast
for sandwiches
Toasted nuts
beet gratin with
broccoli and
celery root gratin with
squash au gratin with
Tofu
about
marinades and rubs
nonstick cookware
pressing
seasoning
storing
substituting for chicken
types of
BBQ, and cauliflower
braised
with tomatoes and broccoli
with tomatoes and cauliflower
with tomatoes and peas
chili
with black beans
with black-eyed peas and collards
with white beans
chipotle-orange, and cauliflower
deep-fried, with peanut sauce and scallions
deep-fried, with pistachio sauce and cilantro

in eggs sukiyaki
hash, sweet potato and
Manchurian, and cauliflower
noodles
with celery and
with chile oil, edamame, and
cold cashew, with
cold peanut, with
cold sesame, with
udon with teriyaki
pressed
and celery salad with sesame-chile vinaigrette
and cucumber salad with hoisin vinaigrette
and tomato salad with soy vinaigrette
roasted, with sesame drizzle
saag, spinach and
salad
chipotle, with pepitas and raisins
crisp, with cabbage and coconut-lime dressing
crisp, with cabbage and peanut-lime dressing
curried, and cabbage with coconut-lime dressing
curried, with pecans and golden raisins
green bean, with avocado and
pressed, and celery salad with sesame-chile vinaigrette
pressed, and cucumber salad with hoisin vinaigrette
pressed, and tomato salad with soy vinaigrette
sandwich
Buffalo
with cucumber and hoisin mayo
with pickles and Dijon mayo

with red onions and chipotle mayo
seared
smoothie, blueberry and
soup
gumbo
hot and sour, with Asian greens and
miso, with soba, bok choy, and
peanut, Chinese-style, with bok choy and
stir-fried, and green beans
Tomatillo(s)
in salsas
in sauces
tomato salad with queso fresco and
Tomato(es). See also Cherry tomato(es)
about
canned, 1.1, 4.1, 5.1
prep shortcuts
seasoning with
substituting ingredients
types of
-braised lentils and potatoes
with bread crumbs
bulgur, shrimp kebabs over
and chicken packages
in dipping sauce
dried. See Dried tomatoes
fideos with
-garlic couscous
pasta with seafood and
pie, deconstructed, with spinach, ricotta, and

prosciutto-wrapped
salad
in BLT salad with rosemary-mayo dressing
broccoli tabbouleh with lemon and
and broiled eggplant, with peanut-soy dressing
cauliflower tabbouleh with lemon and
and chicken, with basic vinaigrette
and chicken, with Parmesan dressing
crab, curried, with coconut and
fennel and radish tabbouleh with lime and
kale with pine nuts, Parmesan, and
with olive oil and yogurt
with sesame and soy
with strawberries, feta, and balsamic
and strawberry panzanella
and tofu, pressed, with soy vinaigrette
with tomatillos and queso fresco
with watermelon, feta, and balsamic
sandwich
and broccoli rabe hero with mozzarella and lemon zest
chicken, bacon, and avocado wrap with
chicken, bacon, and blue cheese wrap with
turkey and Brie, broiled, with
and seafood paella
with shrimp
soup
and bread
peach gazpacho with crisp bacon and
Provençal, with fennel
stew

and beans
green bean, with olives, almonds, and
and greens, stewed, with salmon
lamb, with
tofu, braised, with
in tomato-paprika mayo
in vinaigrettes
Tomato paste
in rubs
seasoning with
storing
in tomato broth
in tomato rice with corn and shrimp
Tomato salsa
burrito with
fish fillets or steaks with, 9.1, 9.2
master recipe
with peaches
picante rojo
salmon with
Tomato sauce
about
with basil
buttery
chipotle
coconutty
eggs poached in
fresh
-garlic
lamb and bulgur meatballs in

with lots of garlic
master recipe
pasta with spicy eggplant and
Provençal
puttanesca
smashed peas and
spaghetti with
tomato-soy
with wine
-yogurt
Tortilla(s)
black bean and cabbage gratin with tortilla crumbs and Jack
charred
and charred chicken, with taco fixings
cheesy
and chicken salad
flautas, potato and chorizo
flautas, sweet potato
French toast
fried
lasagna
masa harina in
microwaved
scramble
soup, chicken
Spanish
warm flour
Tortillas rojas
Trout
panfried

with bacon and Brussels sprouts
with bacon and leeks
with chorizo and red onions
and rice cakes, with cucumber salsa
smoked, scrambled eggs with dill and
Truffles, goat cheese
Tuna
about, 6.1, 9.1
farro with white beans and
pan-seared, with ginger-scallion snow peas
pasta with dried tomatoes and
poke
with daikon and peanuts
with kohlrabi and
with kohlrabi and cashews
salad
and celery root rémoulade
and egg, with radishes and dill
and green beans, with avocado and
and green beans, with mango and
Niçoise style
sandwich
with avocado and cilantro
with cucumbers and feta
with fennel, capers, and lemon
melt with pickles and mustard
with olives
with pickles and mustard
seared, Niçoise
seared, with bok choy and soy mayo

tabbouleh, warm, with
Turkey
about
in cabbage, unstuffed, with ground meat
homemade cold cuts, master recipe
meat loaf with spinach
meatballs and spaghetti with tomato sauce
roasted, with sage sausage stuffing
sandwich
with Brie and tomatoes, broiled
and broccoli rabe hero
burgers
and kale hero with Gruyère
salad, with apples and sage
and spinach hero with fontina and lemon zest
wine-braised
Turnip greens in andouille, black-eyed pea, and Southern greens soup
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
U
Udon
about
miso soup with chicken, snow peas, and
in noodles
with chicken and cilantro-scallion pesto
with chile oil and edamame

with chile oil and snow peas
with chile oil and spinach
panfried
with teriyaki beef
with teriyaki chicken
with teriyaki pork
with teriyaki tofu
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
V
Vanilla custard sauce, 15.1, 15.2
Vanilla extract
Veal
about
braised
with edamame
with garlic and white beans
with peas
Marsala
and mushroom sauté with mustard and cream
scaloppini with lemon and capers
scaloppini with peas and white wine
stir-fried, with shallots and peas
Vegetable(s). See also Salad(s); specific vegetables
about
cooking in one pot

marinades and rubs
prep shortcuts
salting
storing
braised, heartier
caprese, bubbling
charred. See Charred vegetables
and chicken cutlets, with chimichurri
and chicken pancakes, Korean-style
and chicken, split whole
cobbler, cherry tomato
fattoush
noodles
in broth with chicken and vegetables
cold cashew, with vegetables
cold peanut, with vegetables
cold sesame, with vegetables
pan roast
with mussels and coconut curry
with mussels and saffron aïoli
with mussels and tomato broth
with shrimp and saffron aïoli
pan sauce
pickled. See Pickled vegetables
and pork chops, with chimichurri
queso fundido, sweet pepper
raw, in pinzimonio
raw, with romesco
roasted, master recipe
root, 2.1, 3.1

sandwich
egg salad, classic, with lots of
egg salad, curried, with lots of
egg salad, with lots of
and hummus pita pockets
skillet spanakopita
soup
and chicken, with rice
frozen
frozen, creamy
stock, master recipe
and steak, with chimichurri
tender
tortilla lasagna
tortilla, Spanish
Vegetarian
couscous helper
vegetarian sauce sub
Vietnamese-style
bánh mì
Brussels sprouts, glazed, with Vietnamese flavors
caramel-cooked
cod
scallops
shrimp
stir-fried beef and green beans
stir-fried beef and peppers
stir-fried pork and green beans
pho, fast
Vinaigrette(s)

about
additions to
bacon
basil
curry
dill
hoisin
marinating in, 2.1, 2.2
master recipe
mustard
peanut
sesame
sesame-chile
shallots in
soy
tarragon
Thai
tomato
warm
Vinegar
about
-shallot sauce
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
W
Waffles

cheddar, with bacon maple syrup
corn, with blueberry maple syrup
molasses, with ginger maple syrup
Walnut(s)
caramelized, in maple-ginger oatmeal
charred Brussels sprout salad with figs and
charred Brussels sprout salad, with Gorgonzola and
chicken and chard gratin with blue cheese and
in honey-walnut johnnycakes
roasted spaghetti squash with brown butter and
roasted spaghetti squash with rosemary-garlic oil and
spinach with apples, goat cheese, and
Walnut butter, toast with apples and
Watercress
about
garlicky, pan-seared halibut with
with peaches, pecans, and blue cheese
Watermelon
gazpacho, melon with crisp prosciutto
Malaysian-style BBQ fish with
salad with feta and mint
in salsa
soup with fresh herbs
tacos, crisp chicken and
tacos, crisp pork and
tomato salad with feta, balsamic, and
Wheat
cracked. See Cracked wheat
puffed, with dried apricots and pistachios
in wheaty oven-fried chicken with roasted corn

White bean(s)
with bacon, greens, and garlic
chicken cutlets, smoked paprika-spiced, with dried tomatoes
chili
chili, tofu and
and farro
with arugula and Parmesan
Greek-style
with tomato and fennel
with tuna
fideos with chorizo, tomatoes, and
and ham gratin
with Italian sausage
pasta with fennel and
with pork and cabbage, kimchi style
with prosciutto and escarole
refried, with rosemary
in rice, beans, and broccoli
salad
and corn salad with garlic chicken
and cucumber salad with yogurt and dill
and fish salad with tomato vinaigrette
and warm escarole salad with poached eggs
and warm escarole salad with squid
in salad dressing
with sausage, greens, and garlic
and shrimp burrito with corn salsa
and smoked fish gratin
soups and stews
chili

cod or fish fillet stew
and kale stew with vegetable flatbread
and kale, stewed, with Parmesan toast
pork stew with kale and
soup with rosemary and lemon
tomato and bread soup with
and tomatoes, stewed, with Parmesan toast
and spinach frittata
stuffed poblanos with mozzarella and
on toast with Parmesan and sage
veal, braised, with garlic and
wine-braised, with cherry tomatoes and Parmesan
and zucchini burgers
and zucchini with fried eggs
White chili
White chocolate
molten cake
-orange pudding
White rice
Whole wheat
bread
couscous
Whoopie pies, molasses
Wine
braised pork with cabbage and
braised pork with celery and
-braised turkey
-braised white beans with cherry tomatoes and Parmesan
in cauliflower “polenta” with mushrooms
in cranberry-port sundaes

linguine with clams, cream, and
in marinades
pasta with chicken, mushrooms, and
quinoa with rosemary and
tomato sauce with
veal scallopini with peas and
Woks
Wonton skins
Wonton soup, broken
Wraps
about
BLT, chipotle
chicken, bacon, avocado, and tomato
chicken, bacon, tomato, and blue cheese
chicken, Greek
Italian-style steak, lettuce, and herb
Mexican-style steak, lettuce, and herb
Thai-style steak, lettuce, and herb
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
Y
Yellow lentils with charred broccoli
Yogurt
about
flavoring
storing

varieties of
beet and cabbage salad with dill and
in fruit, yogurt, and graham cracker parfait
pound cupcakes
in rubs
in sauces
curried yogurt
honey-yogurt
tomato-yogurt
yogurt
yogurt raita
yogurt-blue cheese
yogurt-harissa sauce
yogurt-tahini
tomato salad with olive oil and
white bean and cucumber salad with dill and
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P |
Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z
Z
Za’atar
about
chicken and onions
chicken wings and eggplant with yogurt-harissa sauce
Ziti
broiled
with olives and feta, 5.1, 5.2

Zucchini
bulgur, lemony, with olives, ricotta salata, and
burgers, white bean, and
couscous paella with chicken and
fish fillets or steaks with toasted bread crumbs and
pork souvlaki with
ribbons, striped bass and
salad
and broiled eggplant
fattoush
raw, with warm lima beans
slaw with chopped spicy chicken
slaw with chopped spicy shrimp
slaw with crisp ground lamb
soup, tomato and bread, with
stew. chicken and
warm-pickled
and white bean burgers
and white beans with fried eggs

Converting Measurements
Essential Conversions

VOLUME TO VOLUME
3 teaspoons
1 tablespoon
4 tablespoons
¼ cup
5 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon
⅓ cup
4 ounces
½ cup
8 ounces
1 cup
1 cup
½ pint
2 pints
1 quart
4 quarts
1 gallon

VOLUME TO WEIGHT
¼ cup liquid or fat
2 ounces
½ cup liquid or fat
4 ounces
1 cup liquid or fat
8 ounces
2 cups liquid or fat
1 pound
1 cup sugar
7 ounces
1 cup flour
5 ounces
Metric Approximations

MEASUREMENTS
¼ teaspoon
1.25 milliliters
½ teaspoon
2.5 milliliters
1 teaspoon
5 milliliters
1 tablespoon
15 milliliters
1 fluid ounce
30 milliliters
¼ cup
60 milliliters
⅓ cup
80 milliliters
½ cup
120 milliliters
1 cup
240 milliliters
1 pint (2 cups)
480 milliliters
1 quart (4 cups)
960 milliliters (0.96 liters)
1 gallon (4 quarts)
3.84 liters
1 ounce (weight)
28 grams
¼ pound (4 ounces)
114 grams
1 pound (16 ounces)
454 grams
2.2 pounds
1 kilogram (1,000 grams)
1 inch
2.5 centimeters

OVEN TEMPERATURES
Description
°Fahrenheit
°Celsius
Cool
200
90
Very slow
250
120
Slow
300–325
150–160
Moderately slow
325–350
160–180
Moderate
350–375
180–190
Moderately hot
375–400
190–200
Hot
400–450
200–230
Very hot
450–500
230–260

