HOW TO BUILD A DECK  
 
 
 
Introduction 
Few home improvements can match a wood 
deck for usefulness, beauty and enhanced 
value to a home. For adults, decks offer 
outdoor living space for entertaining, sun 
bathing and dining. For children, they 
provide an excellent outdoor play area.  
But the best news about a deck is that it is an 
ideal home improvement construction project 
for the average handyman or woman. Design 
is straightforward. No advanced carpentry 
skills or sophisticated tools are needed. If 
you can hammer a nail, saw on a straight 
line, and read a level, then building a deck 
should present no major problems.  
 
What's more, the use of pressure-treated lumber helps assure that your 
project will be virtually maintenance-free and will provide enjoyment for 
decades to come. You won't even have to paint or stain the wood, unless you 
want to. Left unfinished, it weathers to a rustic gray. It is a good idea to seal 
the deck periodically to prevent the wood from checking, however.  
There's enough information in this article to help you design and build an 
attractive wood deck.  
Tools 
Building a deck is easier and usually better done when proper tools are used. 
Certain property and construction conditions may necessitate special tools, 
but the following list will suffice for most deck projects:  
• 
circular saw  
• 
power drill  
• 
tape measure  
• 
hammer  
• 
chalk line  
• 
level  
• 
combination square  
• 
framing square  
• 
hand saw  
For safety,the following are recommended:  
• 
gloves  

• 
goggles  
• 
dust mask  
 
 
Preliminary Planning 
The location and design of your deck should be influenced by several factors:  
• 
*Anticipated use (private sunbathing, large parties, family relaxation, outdoor 
cooking)  
• 
*Air currents (allow flow of gentle breezes, block out prevailing winds)  
• 
*Existing structure (should be compatible)  
• 
*Sunlight (desire sun or shade)  
• 
*Privacy (screen certain areas, avoid street noise, landscaping)  
• 
*View (emphasizes a good view, mask a poor one)  
• 
*Safety (children or grandchildren, senior citizens)  
• 
*Access to home (adjoin kitchen, living room or bedroom)  
• 
*Terrain (elevated deck, ground level, split level)  
• 
*Other personal needs and preferences  
Decks originally gained popularity as a way of adding outdoor living space on hillside 
lots. However, many decks today are built on level ground where they offer firm, dry 
footing close to the home.  
Decks can be built just inches high or elevated will above the ground. They may be 
freestanding or attached to the home or other building. They can even be built in a 
second-story above a garage, carport, or other roofed structure.  
It's important; of course, to make certain the deck does not seal access to any utility or 
drainage lines. If you aren't sure of the location or depth of buried electric, telephone, 
gas, water or sewer lines, it's a good idea to ask your utilities.  
Keep in mind how you intend to use your deck. Will it accommodate benches, lounge 
chairs, perhaps a table for outdoor dining? How many people will be using the deck at 
any given time? These are elements which must be considered in planning for proper 
size and design.  
Once you have decided on the basic size, shape and location of your deck, check local 
building codes. You may find that there are restrictions as to height and size within 
your sub-division or community. A construction permit will probably be needed, but 
don't apply for one until you've finalized your planning.  
Don't order any lumber or start work until you're sure that your plans meet local 
requirements. The information provided here should meet any local codes, but you 
will need to check to see if there are any particular requirements in your town.  

Construction tips 
Here are some additional suggestions that may help you in building your deck.  
o Always nail a thinner member to a thicker member.  
o Drive nails at a slight angle toward each other for greater holding power.  
o When toenailing, stagger opposing nails so they pass each other.  
o Nails and other hardware should be hot-dipped zinc-coated (galvanized) or 
equally well-protected material. Otherwise, weather may cause them to rust, 
leaving streaks on your deck.  
o For maximum holding power, use ring- or spiral-shank nails. They can help 
reduce warping of lumber.  
o To reduce splitting, when nailing close the the edge of a board, drill a pilot 
hole about three quarters the diameter of the nail. For dense or brittle wood, 
blunt the points by striking them carefully with a hammer. Blunt nails cut 
through; sharp ones pry apart.  
o Place nails no close to the edge than about half the board thickness and no 
closer to the end than the thickness of the board. When nailing closer to the 
edge, pre-drill holes.  
o Use 16d nails on nominal two-inch decking. Use two at each joint with 2 x 4's 
laid flat; use three for 2 x 6's laid flat.  
o Mill ends may not be square. Resquare and trim the ends. Take this step into 
consideration when figuring lengths and finished deck size. IT is a good idea 
to leave all the deck boards slightly longer than the finished size and cut them 
all to the final dimension after they are all nailed down.  
o With lag screws, use flat washer under head.  
o Use washers under nut and head of machine bolts and just under nut of 
carriage bolts.  
o Wear gloves to help avoid splinters.  
o Tops of upright structurals and joist ends should be beveled to a 30 to 45 
degree angle for drainage to minimize moisture (see fig. 18, page 11). While 
pressure-treated wood resists end rot, it remains subject to splitting, checking 
and chipping caused by moisture-induced swelling and subsequent shrinkage, 
therefore sealing the deck is a good idea to protect the surface.  
o When staining wood, follow the manufacturers' instructions. Wood should be 
dry for best results.  
o Remember, you are about to do finish work, not rough framing. The results 
will be visible for years to come. There is no substitute for good construction 
techniques and workmanship. (This is not intended to scare you, just remind 
you.)  
DESIGN 
Decks consist of six parts: footings, posts, beams, joists, decking and railing. In 
planning for these you have three basic considerations: function, structural stability, 
and appearance.  

The aesthetics of your deck will probably be most noticeable in your choice of railing 
and decking, but the location of posts and beams can have a major effect on the 
appearance of a raised deck.  
In almost every instance, your choice lies between several small pieces of lumber or 
comparatively fewer large ones. A railing, for example, may be held by 2 x 4 posts 
spaced every 16 inches or less, or it may have 4 x 4 posts capped by a 2 x 6 spaced as 
far apart as eight feet. (Note: a 2 x 4 isn't always 2" x 4". Actual size of finished dry 
lumber is typically 1/2 inch smaller than the nomimal size.  
Your best guide at this stage is to look at various deck plans and inspect decks 
completed by friends and neighbors to help decide what you like best.  
Choosing decking lumber presents similar alternatives. A popular choice is 2-inch 
thick lumber in widths of 4 or 6 inches. These can be alternated to make more 
interesting patterns. There is also 5/4 decking, which has rounded (bullnosed) edges to 
give the deck boards a more finished, softer look.  
Develop your own design using the tables and information that follow. Clicking on 
the table reference will bring you to the table page. There will be an easy return link 
back to here on the table page. Take a look at the Tables 1 through 5. The figures 
given are for maximum spans using pressure-treated wood. Inferior grade wood will 
not safely span the distances in these tables. More on how to use the tables will follow 
below.  
The design and construction information presented here is for normal usage. If special 
loading conditions are anticipated or unusual circumstances exist, consult a competent 
designer.  
SUPPORTING A DECK 
Elevated decks have generally been supported by 4x4 and 6x6 solid timber posts. 
Under a properly designed deck, these can provide very satisfactory support. Deck 
posts support the deck above, they are its foundation. The first consideration, then, 
should be the ability of a post to support the structure and the people on it.  
ACCESSORIES AND CONNECTORS 
Some of the special connectors and accessories that you should be familiar with are:  
• 
Lag screws  
• 
Expansion bolt (for bolting into the cement foundation, if necessary)  
• 
Carriage bolt  
• 
spiral nails  
• 
ring shank nails  
• 
joist hangers  
• 
post fasteners (to fasten a wooden post to a cement footer)  
Make sure all connectors, nails, screws, bolts and related hardware are hot-dipped 
zinc-coated or otherwise rustproof. Remember, pressurized wood will remain in 

serviceable condition long after ordinary nails and connectors have been weakened by 
corrosion. Rust will also cause unsightly stains. The same conditions that cause 
untreated wood to rot also cause metal to rust.  
USE THESE TABLES TO HELP PLAN YOUR DECK 
Let's say that your deck will extend eight feet from the house and be 14 ft. long. If it is 
to be just above ground level, there's little need for a railing. However, higher decks 
call for a sturdy railing.  
Table 1 shows the appropriate beam size. For example, the distance between the 
house and the beam is 8 ft. Using (2)2x12's as your beam members allows a span of 7 
ft. between posts, a convenient figure for a deck 14 ft. long. A beam can be built up 
from two small pieces either nailed together or placed a few inches apart on either 
side of a post. Be sure you have a post under any joints in your beams.  
To calculate the size post needed, multiply the beam spacing (eight ft.) by the post 
spacing (7 ft.). This gives you the load area-56 square feet. Table 2 shows that for a 
load area less than 72 sq. ft. and a post height under 6 ft, a 4 x 4 post is adequate.  
Decking in this example will be a 2 x 6 boards, laid flat. Table 3 shows the safe spans 
for the decking.  
Now refer to Table 4. As in our example, your joists must span the 8 ft. between the 
house and the outer beam. That can be achieved with 2 x 8 joists spaced 24 inches 
apart. To avoid any springiness in your deck, however, you should design with joists 
16 inches apart.  
If a railing is desired, refer to Table 5 to determine proper post sizes and spacing 
requirements. Be sure to check your local code here since the space between balusters 
is usually specified to be sure the small heads of children can not get stuck between 
them.  
Estimating 
After deciding the type, shape and size of deck you'll build, the next step is to 
estimate the materials you'll need. If you use a ready-made design, and the materials 
list is provided, this work is already done for you. But if you design your own deck, or 
use a variation from a standard plan, you'll have to estimate material requirements. In 
estimating, it's better to overestimate since you can always use any excess material in 
other projects, such as benches or planter boxes. There is nothing worse than running 
out of material and dashing off to the lumber yard before they close (hopefully) right 
in the middle of the project. (On the other hand, you may just looking for a break!)  
First, draw a simple sketch of the deck; decking, rails, footings, posts and beams. 
Sketch the deck to scale, perhaps ¼" per foot. To save money, stick to standard 
lumber sizes and lengths to the fullest extent possible. For example, deck boards are 
usually stocked 2 x 4, 2,x 6, or 5/4 x 6 inch and 8, 10, 12,14 and 16 foot lengths. I 
usually keep a sale flier from the lumber yard handy to be sure I know what sizes of 

lumber stock. For the decking, calculate using actual dimensions (5 ½ for a 6 in 
boards) and don't allow for spacing between boards. (More on that later, but I 
recommend little or no gap between the boards).  
 
We present the second part of this article with step by step instructions in How 
To Build A Deck Part 2.  
Table 1 Minimum Beam Sizes  
 
Return to How to build a deck  
Table 2 Minimum Post 
sizes 
 
 
 
Load Area (sq. 
ft)= 
Height  
beam spacing x 
post spacing 
(ft) 
 
48 
72 
96
up to 6  
4x4 
4x4 
6x6
up to 8  
6x6 
6x6 
6x6
Vertical loads figured as 
concentric along axis. 
No Lateral loads considered 
 
 
Table 3 Recommended Spans for 
spaced deck boards  
 
 
 
 
 
Spans in Inches 
 
 
Laid Flat 
 
 
 
Laid on Edge 
5/4x4 
5/4x6 
 
2x4 
2x6 
 
 
2x4 
16 
16/24**  
16 
16/24**  
 
48 
**Although 24 inches is a safe span, undesirable  
 
 
deflection or springiness may occurr. 
 
 
Return to How to build a deck  

Table 4 Maximum allowable  
 
 spans for deck joists 
Joist size 
Joist 
spacing 
(inches) 
16 
24 
 
 
 
 
2x6 
 
9'-9" 
7'-11" 
2x8 
 
12'-10" 10'-6" 
2x10 
 
16'-5" 13'-4" 
 
Table 5 Railings  
 
Distance 
Post  
 
Cap 
between  
size 
 
size 
posts 
 
(inches) 
(inches) 
 
 
 
2' to 3' 
2x4 
 
2x4 
3' to 4' 
2x4, 4x4 
2x4, 2x6 
4' to 6' 
2x6, 4x4 
2x6 
Side rails can be nominal 1" or 2" 
lumber of varying widths 
 
Tables are based on lumber with 1200 psi bearing stress 
rating and a live load of 40 psf. 
 

STEP-BY STEP METHOD OF DECK CONSTRUCTION  
 
 
 
Step 1 
Mark off the deck area using s
and "batterboards" making sure 
that it is square. Batter
boards hammered in to th
just outside the corners of where
the deck will be. See Fig 1. The 
string will help you visualize the 
size and appearance of the 
finished deck and will also serve 
as a guide for excavation and post 
placement. But trust me, it will 
always look smaller this way tha
when it is done.  
tring 
boards are 
e ground 
 
n 
 
SQUARING WITH STRING  
1. Attach string to house and/or batterboards to make sure its level.  
2. Use a felt tip marker to mark the string 3' from the corner in one 
direction and 4' from the corner in other direction.  
3. When the diagonal connecting these 2 points is 5', you have a right 
triangle and the angle at the corner will be 90°. 
Note: To obtain the 5' measurement, move the string attached to batter board 
to the left or right until correct.  
 

Step 2 
Prepare the site. With a spade or sod cutter, r
sod to a depth of 2 or 3 ". Uncover an area 
approximately 2 ft. larger than the planned deck. It's 
unlikely that grass would be able to grow in the 
shadow of your deck, so you might as well transfer 
the sod to a bare spot in your yard where it would b
useful. To prevent weeds and unwanted vege
from growing up through the deck, spread a sh
polyethylene film over the area. You'll have to slit 
this to embed posts in the ground. After the posts 
have been installed, cover the sheet with gravel, 
pebbles or wood chips.  
emove 
e 
tation 
eet of 
Step 3 
A ledger/header board is the next step if you are 
attaching your deck to an existing structure.  
The placement of the ledger/header determines the level of the deck floor, so 
be sure it is positioned at the correct height and is horizontal.  
When fastening ledger/header boards to wood, the ledger should be held 
securely with bolts through the wall or lag screws. Use aluminum flashing to 
keep water from getting behind your ledger board. This should tuck up under 
your siding and bend down over the ledger, then down the face of the ledger 
board. Where aluminum or vinyl siding is in place, carefully cut siding away 
from house so that ledger/header board can be secured directly to the house. 
You may be able to use the bottom edge pieces of the siding above the deck 
to refinsh the lower edge, so save these if possible. See figure 2. I will 
assume the joists are hung from the ledger and not resting on it, but be sure 
you account for the height of your deck boards when figuring the placement 
of the ledger. (Typically just 1 ½ inches down from the final height of the 
deck.)  

 
 
 
 
Step 4 
Locate and dig holes for footings. In normal soil the holes should be a minimum of 24 
to 36 inches deep, although the actual depth will depend on the height of the column 
and the depth of the frost line. Posts should go deeper than the frost line to avoid 
heaving during freeze and thaw cycles. Again, this is usually specified by code when 
the deck is attached to the house.  
If you have many holes to dig and/or have difficult soil to dig in, you should rent a 
power posthole digger. These can be operated by one person, and certainly make the 
digging go MUCH faster. Typically to rent one will cost about $50 for a day.  

You can use pressure treated wood in the 
ground for your footings as follows. Fill the 
bottom of the hole with 6 inches of gravel and 
place a wood footer plate (2" x 6", or 2" x 8" 
cut off) on top of the gravel. Upright posts can 
then be positioned on this base (Fig. 3). Fill th
posthole with alternating layers of 4 to 5 
inched of gravel and earth. Tamp each layer 
until the hole is filled and post is plumb and 
solid. If concrete collars are used, taper the tops downward and away from t
post for drainage. Posts can also be set in concrete. Or my preferred meth
uses a concrete footing to just above the ground level. Fill the post hole 
completely with concretet and use a section of "sono tube" (a heavy 
cardboard tube, 8 inches in diameter) to finish off the hole at ground level. 
Make sure you have already purchased the hardware to attach the posts to the 
concrete so you can set the bolts in the concrete while it is wet.  
For a complete article on preparing your footings see 
e 
he 
od, 
Post Holes (another article on 
this site).  
 
When setting the posts directly in the holes, make sure they are plumb and in 
alignment with one another. Use a carpenter's level to check for vertical alignment 
(Fig. 4).  

 
One advantage of using the concrete footings and the wood attached to them above 
ground, is the leveling and exact location can be set later, when the beams are 
positioned. It allows for some adjusting later (a little, but that is all you are usually 
looking for.)  
 
 
Step 5 
Secure beams to posts. Using a string and level, find the desired deck floor height on 
the posts. Or extend a long straight 2 by 4 from the ledger board to the posts and 
placing a level on the board, determine the post height. By subtracting the thickness of 
the joist (use the actual dimension not the nominal one), you will have determined the 
correct height for securing the top of the beam to the post. Carefully mark all 4 sides 
of the posts. Beams can rest on top of the post, or be fastened to the side. You may cut 
all posts except those serving as railing supports at this time. Fasten the beam to the 
post, keeping post and beam flush. Or set the beam atop the post nailing it down to the 
post.  
Step 6 
Attach joists. Joists are attached to the house with joist hangers and/or supported by a 
ledger board. Joists are placed on 16" or 24" centers, and attached to the beams and 
ribbon joist. Joists can be attached to the beams using joist hangers, or rest on the 
beam. If the joists are to extend over a beam, do not extend them more than 1/3 of 
their length.  
Step 7 
Install deck boards using hot-dipped zinc-coated 16-penny nails.  
Seperate boards using a small finishing nail as a spacer or set boards right up against 
each other. If pressure treated wood came dry, a space would be necessary for some 

expansion may take place when it gets wet. However, it typically 
is quite wet and will always shrink. I have found that when placed 
tight against each other they will shrink leaving an adequate gap. 
If you leave to large a gap while they are still wet, the gap may get 
quite large .  
Your deck surface is an important part of your project, and the 
most visible. Make it simple with the boards set to end on the 
joists. If you could not get decking long enough to span your d
stagger the butt end joints so they do not all end along the same 
joist.  
eck, 
You can trim your deck after nailing to assure a straight line (see Fig. 5). Do not allow 
an overhang exceeding 1 ½". For a more finished appearance, cut boards flush to the 
joist and add a fascia board.  
 
If a board is slightly humped, install it with the bark s
up when possible to minimize cupping. The weight of 
people and objects on the deck, and of the board itse
will tend to flatten it. A curved board can also be used; 
use a board to pry it to the desired position and nail 
securely.  
ide 
lf, 
 
 
 
Step 8 
Install posts for railing. These can be a continuation of the posts which support the 
deck, or railing posts may be bolted to the outside joist or joist extensions.  
Notice in Fig. 6 how the main posts continue up from the actual deck floor level and 
by doing so provide a good sturdy post. Intermittent posts or spacer posts can by used 

between the main support posts. The top railing member can be easily nailed to the 
side of the main posts at desired height. Posts can then be cut off. Spacer post height 
can be determined and added for additional support and appearance. Railing cap of 
suitable size can now be added as well as additional rails. More railing ideas are 
illustrated below.  
 
 
 

The 
safety and beauty of your deck are enhanced by its railings. They can be plain or very 
elaborate, offering as much opportunity for individual preference as a fence.  
Benches can be integrated into the railing on one or all sides. Bench seats should be at 
least 15" wide and 15" to 18" above the deck floor.  
Privacy screens can enhance the beauty of your deck, as well as offering you privacy. 
They can also be used effectively under an elevated deck to create a storage facility or 
hide an unsightly hillside.  
Step 9 
Construct steps. Measure the vertical rise and decide upon the best riser size for each 
step. This will determine the number of steps needed. The adjecent table shows some 

recommended ratios of tread length and riser height. Multiply the number of steps by 
the tread length to find the overall run of the stairs.  
Using 2 x 4 or 2 x 6 boards for treads will reduce cupping problems common with 
wider boards.  
It is also possible to purchase precut steps at certain lumberyards. A call ahead might 
eliminate some of the more difficult angle cutting you need to do.  
Good Luck!  
 
 
 

