DIY garden projects  
How to build a Raised Formal Pool  
It is very simple to construct, however it may be necessary for 
you to get some professional assistance in cutting the timber 
sleepers.  
The pond is a simple rectangle measuring roughly 8x4 and about 
12 deep.  
I have used sleepers as they provide an instant wall. However if 
you possess simple bricklaying skills then the side walls can be 
constructed form brick or concrete block, thus there is no limit to 
the size of your pond.  
  
Materials you will need  
Pond liner (amount depends on size of pond)  
Fabric pond insulation  
3 x Railway sleepers 8 x 8  
Coach bolts or Heavy duty L brackets 
Sand  
Timber or slabs for coping  
Rake Spirit level  
Lump hammer  
Short length of PVC - 1 pipe to provide an overflow.  
  
Step by step Instructions - Step 1  
Step 1  
Once you have chosen the site for your pond, roughly level the 
site with a rake. A few shovelfulls of stonedust or coarse sand can 
be added to the site to ensure an even base for the sleepers to 
rest on.  
Place your first full sleeper in position, then once you are satisfied 
that the position is correct, using a spirit level ensure the sleeper 
is level horizontally.  
Cut one sleeper in half and use these two halves as the ends of 
your pool, using the same method for levelling.  
Secure the sleepers together using coach bolts or heavy duty L 

brackets. Place the final full sleeper to create your side wall.  
Use a carpenters right angle to ensure that the internal angles 
are as close to 90 degrees as possible. Finally cut a small 
channel, approximately an inch wide to allow the overflow pipe to 
sit neatly in the sleeper (see diagram 1).  
Tip - Use stonedust to pack underneath the sleeper to ensure that 
it is level. 
 
Step 2  
Place the sand in the bottom of your sleeper frame to ensure a level base to your 
pond (2-3 should be sufficient).  
Now line the internal walls of your pond with the fabric insulation. This will 
prevent any rough edges puncturing the liner.  
Tip - Use a heavy duty stapler to secure the fabric to the sleepers. 
 
Step 3 
The size of your pond liner is dependant on the length and depth of your sleeper.  
Your liner should be:  
Length of liner Length of your pond + (depth x 2)  
Width of liner Width of pond + (depth x 2)  
Place the liner centrally on top of your sleeper frame, and hold in place with a few 
round stones.  
Now you can begin to fill the pond using a hose pipe. As the weight of the water 
lowers the liner into the sleeper frame, gradually firm the liner into place, making 
neat folds in the corners.  
Allow the pond to fill to the desired level.  
Tip - It would be wise to allow an extra foot or so on both the width and the 
length of the liner, to allow for any mistakes when positioning the liner.  

 
Step 4  
Once you are satisfied that your liner is sitting neatly inside your frame, place 
your overflow pipe in its recess and trim off any excess liner on the external 
edges of your frame.  
You can now place your coping on top of the exposed liner. Slabs, timber, decking 
boards or even crazy paving make an ideal coping.  
The type of coping used is dependant on the width of your sleeper and indeed 
your personal preference.  
Not only does the coping hide the exposed liner, but also provides an effective 
finishing touch (See diagram 2).  
Tip - If you are using cement to bed slabs or crazy paving, avoid dropping any 
excess cement into the pond as this may affect any plant or fish life.  
 
Step 5  
You can now give yourself a pat on the back. The hard work is all over.  
All that is left is to add any aquatic plants, if required, or to install a fountain. So 
now, relax and enjoy your new water feature.  
Tip - The cable for a fountain can be run through the overflow pipe to avoid any 
unsightly cables showing. 
 

