Garden Pond 
HOW TO CONSTRUCT A SIMPLE GARDEN POND 
 
Tools  
Spade or shovel 
Concrete mixer, or wheel barrow for smaller ponds 
Garden hose with spray nozzle 
Bucket and hose water level or carpenters level 
 
Materials  
500 gauge polythene sheet (enough to line your size pond and extend at least 150mm 
beyond the perimeter of the pond comfortably). 
Fine builders mix and cement (a pond of 5 square metres will need .3 cubic metres of builders 
mix and one and a half 40kg bags of cement). 
An array of flat stones (enough to go neatly around the edge of the pond). 
A can of spray paint for marking pond perimeter. 
 
 
 
 
Instructions  
1 Mark out your desired shape of the pond with a can of spray paint. 
 
A Helpful Note from Ted about Extreme Conditions 
For those of us in the Great White North [Canada], where temperatures vary greatly, the 
pond - especially if being used for fish and plants should be at a depth of 900mm with a 
shelf area for some species of plants at approximately 300mm from the top. Although in 
Canada, this will not stop the pond from becoming a large ice cube, it will prevent broiled 
fish in the summer from excessive heat. Again, in northern climes, one would have to add 
wire mesh to keep the pond together. A far better solution would be to use the heavy 
rubberised liners that are available for fish ponds, eliminating the need for cement. As for 
the pump - if you are adding one for aeration or a decorative waterfall, that will do the trick. 
Ted L   Stratford, PE  
 
AnotherNote:  

In some places, pools deeper than 400mm need to be fenced and need a permit. Check 
with your local Authority.  
 
 
2 Check the ground height along your marked line about every 600mm. You want these 
points level with each other. You can do this by using our bucket and hose water level 
method. For instructions on how to make and use a bucket and hose water level see next 
pages. 
Using a spade level out the marked line, following around the perimeter of the pond. Dig 
about 200mm wide and 50mm below existing ground level at the lowest point.  
 
 
 
This is now the shelf around the perimeter of the pond and is where the flat stones will be 
placed once the concrete has been poured.  
 
 
 
3 Dig the pond out from the pond shelf, sloping gradually down to the centre (saucer shaped) 
to a maximum depth of 400mm. If the pond has the capability of a water depth greater than 
400mm (16 inches) then it is required to be fenced in accordance with the Fencing of 
Swimming Pools Act 1987. (New Zealand)  
 
Lay the polythene on the bottom of the pond and up over the pond shelf leaving at least 
150mm spill past the pond edge.  
 
 
 
4 Lay the flat stones temporarily around the shelf of the pond to ensure they fit in place and 
that you have enough. Remove them out of the way about 300 - 400mm from the shelf edge, 
until the concrete is poured.  
 
 
 
5 CONCRETE  In a concrete mixer, (or wheel barrow for small pond) mix four parts fine 
builders mix, to one part of cement. Pour enough clean water to the mix, to make a fairly stiff 
mixture. If the mixture is too dry add more water. If the mixture it too wet, add more builders 
mix and cement to the same ratio as above.  
 
Spread the concrete over the entire polythene liner starting at the bottom of the pond, and 
finishing up at the pond shelf. The concrete should be at least 50mm thick. Use a block of 
wood for a trowel, as the edges on a conventional trowel are too sharp and likely to pierce the 
polythene liner.  
 
 
 
6 Lay the flat stones around the edge of the pond shelf, pushing them slightly into the 
concrete.  

 
A large overhanging flat stone, strategically placed, can provide shade for fish, but be sure it 
is fixed firmly in place, and capable of taking any weight which might be placed on it later.  
 
 
 
7 After a couple of hours (more or less depending on the weather or temperature) the 
concrete should be stiff enough to allow the pond to be filled with water. 
When filling, place an old sheet, piece of polythene or similar in the pond, so the flow of water 
does not scour the concrete. 
 
After filling remove the sheet, and leave the pond to set for about a week. After the week is 
up, empty and refill the pond three or four times to reduce alkaline level. 
 
water level 
HOW TO MAKE AND USE A BUCKET AND HOSE WATER LEVEL 
 
 
 
Material Requirements 
 
You will need a standard plastic bucket and 12 metres of 6 mm nylex clear plastic 
tube. (Both items can be purchased from any major building suppliers, and should 
cost under $20).  
Instructions 
 
1. Drill a hole in the bucket 50mm up from the bottom. The hole size should be 
slightly smaller than the plastic tube.  
 
2. Slice one end of the plastic tube about 50mm down. Fig 1 This enables the tube 
to be threaded into the slightly smaller hole in the bucket. Fig 2  
 
3. Pull the tube from the inside of the bucket until tight. Fig 3  
 
 
 
 

 
How to use 
a bucket and hose water-level 
 
 
 
Place the bucket on a saw stool or chair and fill to the top with water.  
The height of the bucket does not matter.  
Let the hose loose on the ground until water is running out freely and all the air 
bubbles have come through.  
 
 
Method 1  
This method is good for profiles, high decks, high retaining walls, etc.  
 
Pick up the end of the hose and hold it against Post (A). Fig 4  
Mark the post where the water line shows in the hose.  
This becomes the datum line (not the known required height).  
 
Mark the datum height on the house, post (B), and post (C) in the same way.  
You now have a level datum line on all four objects, but you want to trim the top of 
the posts to the same height as the known required height on the house. Shown in 
Fig 4 
 
You do not need the water level any more.  
Simply measure up from the datum height marked on the house to the known 
required height, also marked on the house. Transfer this measurement to posts (A), 
(B) and (C), measuring up from the datum height marked on each post.  
 
You now have a level line from the known required height on the house, through to 
post (A), (B) and (C).  
 
 
Method 2  
This method is good for low profiles, low decks, low retaining walls, for finding level 
heights for ponds and pools, ground contours, etc.  
 

 
 
Pick up the end of the hose and hold in against a piece of rod held upright on area 
(A). Fig 5  
 
Mark a pencil line on the rod where the water line shows in the hose.  
 
Walk down the hill and do the same over area (B).  
 
You will now have two pencil marks on the rod. Whatever the distance measures 
between the two marks, is also the distance area (A) will need to be dug down to be 
level with area (B).  
 

