HOW THINGS WORK
T H E  P H Y S I C S  O F  E V E R Y D AY  L I F E
L O U I S  A .  B L O O M F I E L D
S I X T H  E D I T I O N


6
How 
Things 
Work
THE PHYSICS OF EVERYDAY LIFE
Louis A. Bloomfi eld
The University of Virginia
TH
EDITION

VP & DIRECTOR: 
Petra Recter
EXECUTIVE EDITOR: 
Jessica Fiorillo
DEVELOPMENT EDITOR: 
Jennifer Yee
ASSISTANT DEVELOPMENT EDITOR: 
Mallory Fryc
EXECUTIVE MARKETING MANAGER: 
Christine Kushner
ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, PRODUCT DELIVERY: 
Kevin Holm 
SENIOR PRODUCTION EDITOR: 
Sandra Dumas
PRODUCT DESIGNER: 
Geraldine Osnato
SENIOR PHOTO EDITOR: 
Billy Ray 
DESIGN DIRECTOR: 
Harry Nolan
COVER AND TEXT DESIGNER: 
Thomas Nery
This book was set in 10/12 Times Roman by Aptara Corporation. Book and cover were printed and bound by Quad Graphics/Versailles.
The book is printed on acid-free paper.
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. has been a valued source of knowledge and understanding for more than 200 years, helping people 
around the world meet their needs and fulfi ll their aspirations. Our company is built on a foundation of principles that include responsibility to 
the communities we serve and where we live and work. In 2008, we launched a Corporate Citizenship Initiative, a global effort to address the 
environmental, social, economic, and ethical challenges we face in our business. Among the issues we are addressing are carbon impact, paper 
specifi cations and procurement, ethical conduct within our business and among our vendors, and community and charitable support. For more 
information, please visit our website: www.wiley.com/go/citizenship.
Copyright © 2016, 2013, 2010, 2006, 1997. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either 
the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, website www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the 
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, website 
www.wiley.com/go/-permissions.
Evaluation copies are provided to qualifi ed academics and professionals for review purposes only, for use in their courses during the next academic year. 
These copies are licensed and may not be sold or transferred to a third party. Upon completion of the review period, please return the evaluation copy to 
Wiley. Return instructions and a free-of-charge return shipping label are available at www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel. If you have chosen to adopt this book 
for use in your course, please accept this book as your complimentary desk copy. Outside of the United States, please contact your local representative.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Bloomfi eld, Louis, author.
Title: How things work : the physics of everyday life / Louis A. Bloomfi eld, 
 The University of Virginia.
Description: Sixth edition. | Hoboken, NJ : John Wiley & Sons, Inc., [2015] | 
 ?2016 | Includes index.
Identifi ers: LCCN 2015033708| ISBN 9781119013846 (loose-leaf : alk. paper) | 
 ISBN 1119013844 (loose-leaf: alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Physics—Textbooks.
Classifi cation: LCC QC21.3 .B56 2015 | DDC 530—dc23 LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015033708
ISBN  978-1119-01384-6 (Binder Version)
The inside back cover will contain printing identifi cation and country of origin if omitted from this page. In addition, if the ISBN on the back 
cover differs from the ISBN on this page, the one on the back cover is correct.
Printed in the United States of America
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
To Karen for being such a wonderful friend and companion,
to Aaron, Elana, and Rich for being everything a father could want,
to Max and Rosie for being so cheerful and attentive,
and to the students of the University of Virginia for making teaching, research, and writing fun.

Foreword
 I
n today’s world we are surrounded by science and by 
the technology that has grown out of that science. For 
most of us, this is making the world increasingly mys-
terious and somewhat ominous as technology becomes 
ever more powerful. For instance, we are confronted by 
many global environmental questions such as the dan-
gers of greenhouse gases and the best choices of energy 
sources. These are questions that are fundamentally tech-
nical in nature and there is a bewildering variety of claims 
and counterclaims as to what is “the truth” on these and 
similar important scientifi c issues. For many people, the 
reaction is to throw up their hands in hopeless frustration 
and accept that the modern world is impossible to under-
stand and one can only huddle in helpless ignorance at the 
mercy of its mysterious and inexplicable behavior.
 
In fact, much of the world around us and the technol-
ogy of our everyday lives is governed by a few basic 
physics principles, and once these principles are under-
stood, the world and the vast array of technology in our 
lives become understandable and predictable. How does 
your microwave oven heat up food? Why is your radio 
reception bad in some places and not others? And why 
can birds happily land on a high-voltage electrical wire? 
The answers to questions like these are obvious once you 
know the relevant physics. Unfortunately, you are not 
likely to learn that from a standard physics course or 
physics textbook. There is a large body of research show-
ing that, instead of providing this improved understanding of 
everyday life, most introductory physics courses are 
doing quite the opposite. In spite of the best intentions of 
the teachers, most students are “learning” that physics is 
abstract, uninteresting, and unrelated to the world around 
them.
 
How Things Work is a dramatic step toward changing 
that by presenting physics in a new way. Instead of start-
ing out with abstract principles that leave the reader with 
the idea that physics is about artifi cial and uninteresting 
ideas, Lou Bloomfi eld starts out talking about real objects 
and devices that we encounter in our everyday lives. He 
then shows how these seemingly magical devices can be 
understood in terms of the basic physics principles that 
govern their behavior. This is much the way that most 
physics was discovered in the fi rst place: people asked 
why the world around them behaved as it did and as a 
result discovered the principles that explained and pre-
dicted what they observed.
 
I have been using this book in my classes for several 
years, and I continue to be impressed with how Lou can 
take seemingly highly complex devices and strip away 
the complexity to show how at their heart are simple 
physics ideas. Once these ideas are understood, they can 
be used to understand the behavior of many devices we 
encounter in our daily lives, and often even fi x things that 
before had seemed impossibly complex. In the process of 
teaching from this book, I have increased my own under-
standing of the physics behind much of the world around 
me. In fact, after consulting How Things Work, I have had 
the confi dence to confront both plumbers and aircondi-
tioner repairmen to tell them (correctly as it turned out) 
that their diagnosis did not make sense and they needed to 
do something different to solve my plumbing and AC 
problems. Now I am regularly amused at the misconcep-
tions some trained physicists have about some of the 
physics they encounter in their daily lives, such as how a 
microwave oven works and why it can be made out of 
metal walls, but putting aluminum foil in it is bad. It has 
convinced me that we need to take the approach used in 
this book in far more of our science texts.
 
Of course, the most important impact is on the stu-
dents in my classes that use this book. These are typically 
nonscience students majoring in fi elds such as fi lm 
studies, classics, English, business, etc. They often come 
to physics with considerable trepidation. It is inspiring to 
see many of them discover to their surprise that physics is 
very different from what they thought—that physics can 
actually be interesting and useful and makes the world a 
much less mysterious and more understandable place. I 
remember many examples of seeing this in action: the 
student who, after learning how both speakers and TVs 
work, was suddenly able to understand that it was not 
magic that putting his large speaker next to the TV dis-
torted the picture but in fact it was just physics, and now 
he knew just how to fi x it; the young woman scuba diver 
who, after learning about light and color, suddenly interrupted 
class to announce that now she understood why it was 
that you could tell how deep you were by seeing what 
color lobsters appeared; or the students who announced 
that suddenly it made sense that the showers on the fi rst 
fl oor of the dorm worked better than those on the second 
fl oor. In addition, of course everyone is excited to learn 
how a microwave oven works and why there are these 
strange rules as to what you can and cannot put in it. 
 v

vi 
Foreword
These examples are particularly inspiring to a teacher, 
because they tell you that the students are not just learn-
ing the material presented in class but they are then able 
to apply that understanding to new situations in a useful 
way, something that happens far too seldom in science 
courses.
 
Whether a curious layperson, a trained physicist, or a 
beginning physics student, most everyone will fi nd this 
book an interesting and enlightening read and will go 
away comforted in that the world is not so strange and 
inexplicable after all.
Carl Wieman
Nobel Laureate in Physics 2001
CASE/Carnegie US University Professor 

 
C H A P T E R  1  
THE LAWS OF MOTION, PART 1 
1
Active Learning Experiment: Removing a Tablecloth from a Table 1
Chapter Itinerary 2
1.1 Skating 2
(inertia, coasting, vector quantities, position, velocity, force, acceleration, mass, 
net force, Newton’s fi rst and second laws, inertial frames of reference, units)
1.2 Falling Balls 12
(gravity, weight, constant acceleration, projectile motion, vector components)
1.3 Ramps 21
(support forces, Newton’s third law, energy, work, conservation of energy, 
kinetic and potential energies, gravitational potential energy, ramps, mechanical 
advantage)
Epilogue for Chapter 1 31 / Explanation: Removing a Tablecloth 
from a Table 31 / Chapter Summary and Important Laws and 
Equations 31
 
C H A P T E R  2  
THE LAWS OF MOTION, PART 2 
33
Active Learning Experiment: A Spinning Pie Dish 33
Chapter Itinerary 34
2.1 Seesaws 34
(rotational inertia; angular velocity; torque; angular acceleration; rotational mass; 
net torque; Newton’s fi rst, second, and third laws of rotation; centers of mass and 
gravity; levers; balance)
2.2 Wheels 48
(friction, traction, ordered and thermal energies, wheels, bearings, kinetic energy, 
power, rotational work)
2.3 Bumper Cars 59
(momentum, impulse, conservation of momentum, angular momentum, angular 
impulse, conservation of angular momentum, gradients, potential energy, 
acceleration, and forces)
Epilogue for Chapter 2 70 / Explanation: A Spinning Pie Dish 70 / 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 70
Contents
 vii

viii 
Content
 
C H A P T E R  3  
MECHANICAL OBJECTS PART 1 
72
Active Learning Experiment: Swinging Water Overhead 72
Chapter Itinerary 73
3.1 Spring Scales 73
(equilibrium, stable equilibrium, restoring force, Hooke’s law, elastic potential 
energy, oscillation, calibration)
3.2 Ball Sports: Bouncing 79
(collisions, energy transfers, elastic and inelastic collisions, vibration)
3.3 Carousels and Roller Coasters 86
(uniform circular motion, feeling of acceleration, apparent weight, centripetal 
acceleration)
Epilogue for Chapter 3 94 / Explanation: Swinging Water Overhead 94 / 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 95
 
C H A P T E R  4  
MECHANICAL OBJECTS PART 2 
96
Active Learning Experiment: High-Flying Balls 96
Chapter Itinerary 97
4.1 Bicycles 97
(stable, neutral, and unstable equilibriums; static and dynamic stability; 
precession)
4.2 Rockets and Space Travel 104
(reaction forces, law of universal gravitation, elliptical orbits, escape velocity, 
Kepler’s laws, speed of light, special and general relativity, equivalence principle)
Epilogue for Chapter 4 117 / Explanation: High-Flying Balls 117 / 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 117
 
C H A P T E R  5  
FLUIDS 
119
Active Learning Experiment: A Cartesian Diver 119
Chapter Itinerary 120
5.1 Balloons 120
(pressure, density, temperature, thermal motion, absolute zero, Archimedes’ 
principle, buoyant force, ideal gas law)
5.2 Water Distribution 131
(hydrostatics, Pascal’s principle, hydraulics, hydrodynamics, steady state fl ow, 
streamlines, pressure potential energy, Bernoulli’s equation)
Epilogue for Chapter 5 140 / Explanation: A Cartesian Diver 140 / 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 141

Content ix
 
C H A P T E R  6  
FLUIDS AND MOTION 
142
Active Learning Experiment: A Vortex Cannon 142
Chapter Itinerary 143
6.1 Garden Watering 143
(viscous forces, Poiseuille’s law, laminar and turbulent fl ows, speed and pressure 
in a fl uid, Reynolds number, chaos, momentum in a fl uid)
6.2 Ball Sports: Air 153
(aerodynamics, aerodynamic lift and drag, viscous drag, pressure drag, boundary 
layers, stalls, Magnus and wake defl ection forces)
6.3 Airplanes 161
(airfoils, streamlining, lifting wings, angle of attack, induced drag, stalled wings, 
thrust)
Epilogue for Chapter 6 171 / Explanation: A Vortex Cannon 171 / 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 171
 
C H A P T E R  7  
HEAT AND PHASE TRANSITIONS 
173
Active Learning Experiment: A Ruler Thermometer 173
Chapter Itinerary 174
7.1 Woodstoves 174
(thermal energy, heat, temperature, thermal equilibrium, chemical bonds and 
reactions, conduction, thermal conductivity, convection, radiation, heat capacity)
7.2 Water, Steam, and Ice 184
(phases of matter, phase transitions, melting, freezing, condensation, evaporation, 
relative humidity, latent heats of melting and evaporation, sublimation, deposition, 
boiling, nucleation, superheating)
7.3 Clothing, Insulation, and Climate 192
(thermal conductivity, electromagnetic spectrum, light, blackbody spectrum, 
emissivity, Stefan-Boltzmann law, thermal expansion, greenhouse effect)
Epilogue for Chapter 7 205 / Explanation: A Ruler Thermometer 206 / 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 206
 
C H A P T E R  8  
THERMODYNAMICS 
208
Active Learning Experiment: Making Fog in a Bottle 208
Chapter Itinerary 209
8.1 Air Conditioners 209
(laws of thermodynamics, temperature, heat, entropy, heat pumps and thermodynamic 
effi ciency)

x 
Content
8.2 Automobiles 219
(heat engines and thermodynamic effi ciency)
Epilogue for Chapter 8 228 / Explanation: Making Fog in a Bottle 228 / 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 228
 
C H A P T E R  9  
RESONANCE AND MECHANICAL WAVES 
230
Active Learning Experiment: A Singing Wineglass 230
Chapter Itinerary 231
9.1 Clocks 231
(time and space, natural resonance, harmonic oscillators, simple harmonic motion, 
frequency, period, amplitude)
9.2 Musical Instruments 241
(sound; music; vibrations in strings, air, and surfaces; fundamental and higher-order 
modes; harmonic and nonharmonic overtones; sympathetic vibration; standing and 
traveling waves; transverse and longitudinal waves; velocity and wavelength in 
mechanical waves; superposition; Doppler effect)
9.3 The Sea 254
(tidal forces; surface waves; dispersion, refraction, refl ection, and interference in 
mechanical waves)
Epilogue for Chapter 9 263 / Explanation: A Singing Wineglass 263 / 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 264
 
C H A P T E R  1 0  
ELECTRICITY 
266
Active Learning Experiment: Moving Water without Touching It 266
Chapter Itinerary 267
10.1 Static Electricity 267
(electric charge, electrostatic forces, Coulomb’s law, electrostatic potential 
energy, voltage, charging by contact, electric polarization, electrical conductors 
and insulators)
10.2 Xerographic Copiers 276
(electric fi elds and voltage gradients, electric fi elds inside and outside conductors, 
discharges, charging by induction, capacitors)
10.3 Flashlights 287
(electric current; electric circuits; direction of current fl ow; electrical resistance; 
voltage drops; voltage rises; relationship among current, voltage, and power; Ohm’s 
law; resistors; series and parallel circuits)
Epilogue for Chapter 10 299 / Explanation: Moving Water without 
Touching It 300 / Chapter Summary and Important Laws and 
Equations 301

Content xi
 
C H A P T E R  1 1  
MAGNETISM AND ELECTRODYNAMICS 
302
Active Learning Experiment: A Nail and Wire Electromagnet 302
Chapter Itinerary 303
11.1 Household Magnets 303
(magnetic pole, magnetostatic forces, Coulomb’s law for magnetism, ferromagnetism, 
magnetic polarization, magnetic domains, magnetic materials, magnetic fi elds, 
magnetic fl ux lines, relationship between currents and magnetic fi elds)
11.2 Electric Power Distribution 313
(direct and alternating currents, superconductivity, transformers, induction, 
magnetic fi eld energy, relationship between changing magnetic fi elds and electric 
fi elds, Lenz’s law, inductors, induced emf, electrical safety, generators, motors)
Epilogue for Chapter 11 329 / Explanation: A Nail and Wire 
Electromagnet 330 / Chapter Summary and Important Laws and 
Equations 330
 
C H A P T E R  1 2  
ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 
332
Active Learning Experiment: A Disc in the Microwave Oven 332
Chapter Itinerary 333
12.1 Radio 333
(relationship between changing electric fi elds and magnetic fi elds, electric fi eld 
energy, tank circuits, antennas, electromagnetic waves, speed of light, wave 
polarization, amplitude modulation, frequency modulation, bandwidth)
12.2 Microwave Ovens 343
(speed, frequency, and wavelength in electromagnetic waves; polar and nonpolar 
molecules; Lorentz force; cyclotron motion)
Epilogue for Chapter 12 351 / Explanation: A Disc in the Microwave 
Oven 351 / Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 351
 
C H A P T E R  1 3  
LIGHT 
353
Active Learning Experiment: Splitting the Colors of Sunlight 353
Chapter Itinerary 354
13.1 Sunlight 354
(light, Rayleigh scattering, index of refraction, impedance, refraction, refl ection, 
dispersion, and interference in electromagnetic waves, polarized refl ection)
13.2 Discharge Lamps 363
(color vision, primary colors of light and pigment, illumination, gas discharges, 
quantum physics, wave-particle duality, atomic orbitals, Pauli exclusion principle, 

xii 
Content
atomic structure, periodic chart, radiative transitions, Planck’s constant, atomic 
fl uorescence, radiation trapping)
13.3 LEDs and Lasers 377
(levels in solids; band structure; Fermi level; metals, insulators, and semiconductors; 
photoconductors; p-n junction; diodes; light-emitting diodes; incoherent and coherent 
light; spontaneous and stimulated emission; population inversion; laser amplifi cation 
and oscillation; laser safety)
Epilogue for Chapter 13 390 / Explanation: Splitting the Colors of 
Sunlight 390 / Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 391
 
C H A P T E R  1 4  
OPTICS AND ELECTRONICS 
392
Active Learning Experiment: Magnifying Glass Camera 392
Chapter Itinerary 393
14.1 Cameras 393
(refracting optics, converging lenses, real images, focus, focal lengths, f-numbers, 
the lens equation, diverging lenses, virtual images, light sensors, vision and vision 
correction)
14.2 Optical Recording and Communication 403
(analog vs. digital representations, decimal and binary representations, diffraction, 
diffraction limit, plane and circular polarization, total internal refl ection)
14.3 Audio Players 413
(transistors, MOSFETs, bits and bytes, logic elements, amplifi ers, feedback)
Epilogue for Chapter 14 422 / Explanation: Magnifying Glass Camera 422 / 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 423
 
C H A P T E R  1 5  
MODERN PHYSICS 
425
Active Learning Experiment: Radiation-Damaged Paper 425
Chapter Itinerary 425
15.1 Nuclear Weapons 426
(nuclear structure, Heisenberg uncertainty principle, quantum tunneling, radioactivity, 
half-life, fi ssion, chain reaction, isotopes, alpha decay, fusion, transmutation of 
elements, radioactive fallout)
15.2 Nuclear Reactors 438
(controlling nuclear fi ssion, delayed neutrons, thermal fi ssion reactors, moderators, 
boiling water and pressurized water reactors, fast fi ssion reactors, nuclear reactor 
safety and accidents, inertial confi nement and magnetic confi nement fusion)
15.3 Medical Imaging and Radiation 448
(X-rays, X-ray fl uorescence, Bremsstrahlung, photoelectric effect, Compton scattering, 
antimatter, gamma rays, beta decay, fundamental forces, particle accelerators, 
magnetic resonance)

Content xiii
Epilogue for Chapter 15 458 / Explanation: Radiation-Damaged Paper 458 / 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 459
 
A P P E N D I C E S  
 
460
A Vectors 460
B Units, Conversion of Units 462
Glossary 465
Index 481

Preface
 P
hysics is a remarkably practical science. Not only 
does it explain how things work or why they don’t, 
it also offers great insight into how to create, im-
prove, and repair those things. Because of that funda-
mental relationship between physics and real objects, 
introductory physics books are essentially users’ manuals 
for the world in which we live.
 
Like users’ manuals, however, introductory physics 
books are most accessible when they’re based on real-
world examples. Both users’ manuals and physics texts 
tend to go unread when they’re written like reference 
works, organized by abstract technical issues, indifferent 
to relevance, and lacking in useful examples. For practi-
cal guidance, most readers turn to “how to” books and 
tutorials instead; they prefer the “case-study” approach.
 
How Things Work is an introduction to physics and 
science that starts with whole objects and looks inside 
them to see what makes them work. It follows the case-
study method, exploring physics concepts on a need-to-
know basis in the context of everyday objects. More than 
just an academic volume, this book is intended to be 
interesting, relevant, and useful to non-science students.
 
Most physics texts develop the principles of physics 
fi rst and present real-life examples of these principles 
reluctantly if at all. That approach is abstract and inacces-
sible, providing few conceptual footholds for students as 
they struggle to understand unfamiliar principles. After 
all, the comforts of experience and intuition lie in the 
examples, not in the principles. While a methodical and 
logical development of scientifi c principles can be satis-
fying to the seasoned scientist, it’s alien to someone who 
doesn’t even recognize the language being used.
 
In contrast, How Things Work brings science to the 
reader rather than the reverse. It conveys an understand-
ing and appreciation for physics by fi nding physics 
concepts and principles within the familiar objects of 
everyday experience. Because its structure is defi ned by 
real-life examples, this book necessarily discusses con-
cepts as they’re needed and then revisits them whenever 
they reappear in other objects. What better way is there to 
show the universality of the natural laws?
 
I wrote this book to be read, not merely referred to. It 
has always been for nonscientists and I designed it with 
them in mind. In the seventeen years I have been teaching 
How Things Work, many of my thousands of students have 
been surprised at their own interest in the physics of 
everyday life, have asked insightful questions, have exper-
imented on their own, and have found themselves explain-
ing to friends and family how things in their world work.
Changes in the Sixth Edition
Content Changes
•  Video fi gures. If a picture is worth a thousand words, 
a video is worth a thousand pictures. That’s particu-
larly true for this book because so much of physics 
is about how things evolve with time. Most students 
consider themselves visual learners—they need to 
see what happens in order to understand it. Given 
that requirement, still images are so 20th century.
In this edition, I have replaced many of the 
static fi gures with video fi gures, using the tools of 
modern 3D animation and video editing. In print, 
those video fi gures are distilled into motionless 
images but online, they move and talk. Whenever 
possible and practical, the video fi gures are quant-
itatively accurate in both time and space. They’re 
not just cartoons; they’re careful models of the real 
world.
•  Rewriting and editing. Despite teaching How 
Things Work for almost 25 years, I am still learn-
ing how to explain the physics of everyday life. 
I continue to discover clearer approaches, better 
analogies, and more effective techniques for con-
veying understanding and avoiding misconceptions. 
For this edition, I have examined every word of the 
book, editing and rewriting it to make sure that it is 
doing the best job possible.
•  Improved discussions of many physics concepts. 
No one book can or should cover all of physics, but 
whatever physics is included should be presented 
carefully enough to be worthwhile. In this edition, I 
have refi ned the discussions of many physics issues 
and added some new ones. Look for improved cov-
erage of concepts such as orbits, magnetic induc-
tion, and antennas, to name just a few.
xiv

The Goals of This Book
As they read this book, students should:
1. Begin to see science in everyday life. Science is 
everywhere; we need only open our eyes to see it. We’re 
surrounded by things that can be understood in terms of 
science, much of which is within a student’s reach. Seeing 
science doesn’t mean that when viewing an oil painting 
they should note only the selective refl ection of incident 
light waves by organic and inorganic molecules. Rather, 
they should realize that there’s a beauty to science that 
complements aesthetic beauty. They can learn to look at 
a glorious red sunset and appreciate both its appearance 
and why it exists.
2. Learn that science isn’t frightening. The increas-
ing technological complexity of our world has instilled 
within most people a signifi cant fear of science. As the 
gulf widens between those who create technology and 
those who use it, their ability to understand one another 
and communicate diminishes. The average person no 
longer tinkers with anything and many modern devices 
are simply disposable, being too complicated to modify 
or repair. To combat the anxiety that accompanies unfa-
miliarity, this book shows students that most objects can 
be examined and understood, and that the science behind 
them isn’t scary after all. The more we understand how 
others think, the better off we’ll all be.
3. Learn to think logically in order to solve problems. 
Because the universe obeys a system of well-defi ned 
rules, it permits a logical understanding of its behaviors. 
Like mathematics and computer science, physics is a fi eld 
of study where logic reigns supreme. Having learned a 
handful of simple rules, students can combine them logic-
ally to obtain more complicated rules and be certain that 
those new rules are true. So the study of physical systems 
is a good place to practice logical thinking.
4. Develop and expand their physical intuition. When 
you’re exiting from a highway, you don’t have to consider 
velocity, acceleration, and inertia to know that you should 
brake gradually—you already have physical intuition that 
tells you the consequences of doing otherwise. Such phys-
ical intuition is essential in everyday life, but it ordinarily 
takes time and experience to acquire. This book aims to 
broaden a student’s physical intuition to situations they 
normally avoidor have yet to encounter. That is, after all, 
one of the purposes of reading and scholarship: to learn 
from other people’s experiences.
5. Learn how things work. As this book explores the 
objects of everyday life, it gradually uncovers most of the 
physical laws that govern the universe. It reveals those 
laws as they were originally discovered: while trying to 
understand real objects. As they read this book and learn 
these laws, students should begin to see the similarities 
between objects, shared mechanisms, and recurring 
themes that are reused by nature or by people. This book 
reminds students of these connections and is ordered so 
that later objects build on their understanding of concepts 
encountered earlier.
6. Begin to understand that the universe is predict-
able rather than magical. One of the foundations of sci-
ence is that effects have causes and don’t simply occur 
willy-nilly. Whatever happens, we can look backward in 
time to fi nd what caused it. We can also predict the future 
to some extent, based on insight acquired from the past 
and on knowledge of the present. And where predictabil-
ity is limited, we can understand those limitations. What 
distinguishes the physical sciences and mathematics from 
other fi elds is that there are often absolute answers, free 
from inconsistency, contraindication, or paradox. Once 
students understand how the physical laws govern the 
universe, they can start to appreciate that perhaps the 
most magical aspect of our universe is that it is not magic; 
that it is orderly, structured, and understandable.
7. Obtain a perspective on the history of science and 
technology. None of the objects that this book examines 
appeared suddenly and spontaneously in the workshop of 
a single individual who was oblivious to what had been 
done before. These objects were developed in the context 
of history by people who were generally aware of what 
they were doing and usually familiar with any similar ob-
jects that already existed. Nearly everything is discovered 
or developed when related activities make their discov-
eries or developments inevitable and timely. To establish 
that historical context, this book describes some of the 
history behind the objects it discusses.
Visual Media
Because this book is about real things, its videos, illustra-
tions, and photographs are about real things, too. When-
ever possible, these visual materials are built around 
familiar objects so that the concepts they are meant to 
convey become associated with objects students already 
know. Many students are visual learners—if they see it, 
they can learn it. By superimposing the abstract concepts 
of physics onto simple realistic visuals, this book attempts 
to connect physics with everyday life. That idea is partic-
ularly evident at the opening of each section, where the 
object examined in that section appears in a carefully 
rendered drawing. This drawing provides students with 
something concrete to keep in mind as they encounter 
the more abstract physical concepts that appear in that 
section. By lowering the boundaries between what the 
Preface xv

xvi 
Preface
students see in the book and what they see in their envi-
ronment, the rich visual media associated with this book 
makes science a part of their world.
Features
This printed book contains 40 sections, each of which 
discusses how something works. The sections are grouped 
together in 15 chapters according to the major physical 
themes developed. In addition to the discussion itself, the 
sections and chapters include a number of features 
intended to strengthen the educational value of this book. 
Among these features are:
•  Chapter introductions, experiments, and itinerar-
ies. Each of the 15 chapters begins with a brief intro-
duction to the principal theme underlying that chapter. 
It then presents an experiment that students can do 
with household items to observe fi rsthand some of 
the issues associated with that physical theme. Lastly, 
it presents a general itinerary for the chapter, identi-
fying some of the physical issues that will come up as 
the objects in the chapter are discussed.
•  Section introductions, questions, and experi-
ments. Each of the 40 sections explains how some-
thing works. Often that something is a specifi c ob-
ject or group of objects, but it is sometimes more 
general. A section begins by introducing the ob-
ject and then asks a number of questions about it, 
questions that might occur to students as they think 
about the object and that are answered by the sec-
tion. Lastly, it suggests some simple experiments 
that students can do to observe some of the physical 
concepts that are involved in the object.
•  Check your understanding and check your fi g-
ures. Sections are divided into a number of brief 
segments, each of which ends with a “Check Your 
Understanding” question. These questions apply the 
physics of the preceding segment to new situations 
and are followed by answers and explanations. 
Segments that introduce important equations also 
end with a “Check Your Figures” question. These 
questions show how the equations can be applied 
and are also followed by answers and explanations.
•  Chapter epilogue and explanation of experi-
ment. Each chapter ends with an epilogue that re-
minds the students of how the objects they stud-
ied in that chapter fi t within the chapter’s physical 
theme. Following the epilogue is a brief explana-
tion of the experiment suggested at the beginning 
of the chapter, using physical concepts that were 
developed in the intervening sections.
•  Chapter summary and laws and equations. The 
sections covered in each chapter are summarized 
briefl y at the end of the chapter, with an emphasis 
on how the objects work. These summaries are fol-
lowed by a restatement of the important physical 
laws and equations encountered within the chapter.
•  Chapter exercises and problems. Following the 
chapter summary material is a collection of ques-
tions dealing with the physics concepts in that 
chapter. Exercises ask the students to apply those 
concepts to new situations. Problems ask the stu-
dents to apply the equations in that chapter and to 
obtain quantitative results.
•  Three-way approach to the equation of physics. 
The laws and equations of physics are the ground-
work on which everything else is built. But because 
each student responds differently to the equations, 
this book presents them carefully and in context. 
Rather than making one size fi t all, these equations 
are presented in three different forms. The fi rst is a 
word equation, identifying each physical quantity 
by name to avoid any ambiguities. The second is a 
symbolic equation, using the standard format and 
notation. The third is a sentence that conveys the 
meaning of the equation in simple terms and often 
by example. Each student is likely to fi nd one of 
these three forms more comfortable, meaningful, 
and memorable than the others.
•  Glossary. The key physics terms are assembled into 
a glossary at the end of the book. Each glossary term 
is also marked in bold in the text when it fi rst ap-
pears together with its contextual defi nition.
•  Historical, technical, and biographical asides. To 
show how issues discussed in this book fi t into the 
real world of people, places, and things, a number 
of brief asides have been placed in the margins of 
the text. An appropriate time at which to read a par-
ticular aside is marked in the text by a color-coded 
mark such as 
.
Organization
The 40 sections that make up this book are ordered so that 
they follow a familiar path through physics: mechanics, 
heat and thermodynamics, resonance and mechanical 
waves, electricity and magnetism, light, optics, and elec-
tronics, and modern physics. Because there are too many 
topics here to cover in a single semester, the book is 
designed to allow shortcuts through the material. In gen-
eral, the fi nal sections in each chapter and the fi nal chapters 
in each of the main groups mentioned above can be omitted 

Preface xvii
without serious impact on the material that follows. The 
only exceptions to that rule are the fi rst two chapters, which 
should be covered in their entirety as the introduction to 
any course taught from this book. The book also divides 
neatly in half so that it can be used for two independent 
one-semester courses—the fi rst covering Chapters 1–9 and 
the second covering Chapters 1, 2, and 10–15. That two-
course approach is the one I use myself. A detailed guide to 
shortcuts appears on the instructor’s website.
WileyPlus Learning Space 
With Orion 
Within WileyPLUS Learning Space, instructors can orga-
nize learning activities, manage student collaboration, 
and customize their course. Students can collaborate and 
have meaningful discussions on concepts they are learn-
ing. ORION provides students with a personal, adaptive 
learning experience so they can build their profi ciency on 
concepts and use their study time most effectively. 
ORION helps students learn by learning about them and 
providing them with a personalized experience that helps 
them to pace themselves through the course based on 
their ongoing performance and level of understanding.
 
The WileyPLUS Learning Space course includes the 
following:
•  Online book with extensive video fi gures and an-
notation. Although this book aims to be complete 
and self-contained, its pages can certainly benefi t 
from additional explanations, answers to open ques-
tions, discussions of fi gures and equations, and real-
life demonstrations of objects, ideas, and concepts. 
Using the web, I can provide all of those features. 
The online version of this book is annotated with 
hundreds, even thousands of short videos that bring 
it to life and enhance its ability to teach.
•  Computer simulations of the book’s objects. One 
of the best ways to learn how a violin or nuclear 
reactor works is to experiment with it, but that’s not 
always practical or safe. Computer simulations are 
the next best thing and the student website includes 
many simulations of the book’s objects. Associated 
with each simulation is a sequence of interactive ques-
tions that turn it into a virtual laboratory experiment. 
In keeping with the How Things Work concept, the 
student is then able to explore the concepts of physics 
in the context of everyday objects themselves.
•  Interactive exercises and problems. Homework 
is most valuable when it’s accompanied by feed-
back and guidance. By providing that assistance im-
mediately, along with links to videos, simulations, 
the online book, and even additional questions, the 
website transforms homework from mere assess-
ment into a tutorial learning experience.
For more information, go to: www.wileypluslearningspace. 
com.
Instructor Companion Website
A broad spectrum of ancillaries are available to support 
instructors:
•  Test Bank (Word) – Includes over 800 multiple 
choice, short answer, and fi ll-in-the-blank questions.
•  Lecture PowerPoints highlight topics to help rein-
force students’ grasp of essential concepts.
•  Image PowerPoints contain text images and fi gures, 
allowing instructors to customize their presentations 
and providing additional support for quizzes and 
exams.
•  Solutions to Selected Exercises and Problems
•  Additional Web Chapters - Materials Science and 
Chemical Physics
To see a complete listing of these ancillaries, or to gain 
access to them upon adoption and purchase, please visit:
www.wiley.com/college/sc/bloomfi eld
Acknowledgments
Many people have contributed to this book in one way or another and I am enormously 
grateful for their help. First among them are my editors, Jessica Fiorillo and Stuart Johnson, 
who together have guided this project and supported me for twenty years. Jennifer Yee has 
been amazingly generous with her time and attention in helping me develop this sixth 
edition, and Sandra Dumas and Jackie Henry have done a fantastic job of shepherding 
it through production. I’m delighted to have had Thomas Nery working on the graphic 
design, and Billy Ray working on the photographs. The online component that accompan-
ies the print book would not have been possible or even conceivable without the help of 
John Duval and Mallory Fryc. And none of this could have happened without the support, 

xviii 
Preface
guidance, and encouragement of Christine Kushner, Geraldine Osnato, and Petra Recter. 
To my numerous other friends and collaborators at John Wiley, many thanks.
I continue to enjoy tremendous assistance from colleagues here and elsewhere who 
have supported the How Things Work concept, discussed it with me, and often taught the 
course themselves. They are now too many to list, but I appreciate them all. I am particu-
larly grateful, however, to my colleagues in AMO physics at Virginia, Tom Gallagher, Bob 
Jones, Olivier Pfi ster, and Cass Sackett, for more than making up for my reduced scientifi c 
accomplishments while working on this project, and to Carl Weiman for his vision of phys-
ics education as outlined in the foreword to this book. I must also thank our talented lecture-
demonstration group, Al Tobias, Max Bychkov, Mike Timmins, Nikolay Sandev, and 
Roger Staton, for help to bring physics to life in my class and in the videos for this book.
Of course, the best way to discover how students learn science is to teach it. I am ever 
so grateful to the students of the University of Virginia for being such eager, enthusiastic, 
and interactive participants in this long educational experiment. It has been a delight and a 
privilege to get to know so many of them as individuals and their infl uence on this enter-
prise has been immeasurable. 
Lastly, this book has benefi ted more than most from the constructive criticism of a 
number of talented reviewers. Their candid, insightful comments were sometimes painful 
to read or hear, but they invariably improved the book. Not only did their reviews help me 
to present the material more effectively, but they taught me some interesting physics as 
well. My deepest thanks to all of these fi ne people:
Brian DeMarco, 
University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign
Dennis Duke, 
Florida State University
Donald R. Francesschetti, 
University of Memphis
Alejandro Garcia, 
San Jose State University
Richard Gelderman, 
Western Kentucky University
Robert B. Hallock, 
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Mark James, 
Northern Arizona University
Tim Kidd, 
University of Northern Iowa
Judah Levine, 
University of Colorado, Boulder
Darryl J. Ozimek, 
Duquesne University
Michael Roth, 
University of Northern Iowa
Anna Solomey, 
Wichita State University
Bonnie Wylo, 
Eastern Michigan University
The real test of this book, and of any course taught from it, is its impact on students’ lives 
long after their classroom days are done. Theirs’ is a time both exciting and perilous; one 
in which physics will play an increasingly important and multifaceted role. It is my sincere 
hope that their encounter with this book will leave those students better prepared for what 
lies ahead and will help them make the world a better place in the years to come.
Louis A. Bloomfi eld
Charlottesville, Virginia
bloomfi eld@virginia.edu

 1
1
The Laws of Motion
T
he aim of this book is to broaden your perspectives on familiar objects and situations by 
helping you understand the science that makes them work. Instead of ignoring that science 
or taking it for granted, we’ll seek it out in the world around us, in the objects we encounter 
every day. As we do so, we’ll discover that seemingly “magical” objects and effects are quite under-
standable once we know a few of the physical concepts that make them possible. In short, we’ll 
learn about physics—the study of the material world and the rules that govern its behavior.
 
To help us get started, this fi rst pair of chapters will do two main things: introduce the lan-
guage of physics, which we’ll be using throughout the book, and present the basic laws of motion 
on which everything else will rest. In later chapters, we’ll examine objects that are interesting and 
important, both in their own right and because of the scientifi c issues they raise. Most of these 
objects, as we’ll see, involve many different aspects of physics and thus bring variety to each sec-
tion and chapter. These fi rst two chapters are special, though, because they must provide an orderly 
introduction to the discipline of physics itself.
Removing a Tablecloth from a Table
One famous “magical” effect allows a tablecloth to be 
removed from a set table without breaking the dishes. The 
person performing this stunt pulls the tablecloth sideways 
in one lightning-fast motion. The smooth, slippery table-
cloth slides out from under the dishes, leaving them 
behind and nearly unaffected.
 
With some practice, you too can do this stunt. Choose 
a slick, unhemmed tablecloth, one with no fl aws that 
might catch on the dishes. A supple fabric such as silk 
helps because you can then pull the cloth slightly down-
ward at the edge of the table. When you get up the nerve to 
try—with unbreakable dishes, of course—make sure that 
you pull suddenly and swiftly, so as to minimize the time 
it takes for the cloth to slide out from under the dishes. 
Leaving a little slack in the cloth at fi rst helps you get 
your hands up to speed before the cloth snaps taut and 
begins to slide off the table. Don’t make the mistake of 
starting slowly or you’ll decorate the fl oor.
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
PART 1
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

2 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
Chapter Itinerary
To examine these concepts, we’ll look carefully at three kinds of 
everyday activities and objects: (1) skating, (2) falling balls, and 
(3) ramps. In Skating, we see how objects move when nothing 
pushes on them. In Falling Balls, we fi nd out how that movement 
can be infl uenced by gravity. In Ramps, we explore mechanical 
advantage and how gradual inclines make it possible to lift heavy 
objects without pushing very hard. For a more complete preview of 
what we examine in this chapter, fl ip ahead to the Chapter Sum-
mary and Important Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.
 
These activities may seem mundane, but understanding 
them in terms of basic physical laws requires considerable 
thought. These two introductory chapters will be like climbing 
up the edge of a high plateau: the ascent won’t be easy, and our 
destination will be hidden from view. However, once we arrive at 
the top, with the language and basic concepts of physics in 
place, we’ll be able to explain a broad variety of objects with 
only a small amount of additional effort. And so we begin the 
ascent.
 
Give the tablecloth a yank and watch what happens. 
With luck, the table will remain set. If it doesn’t, try 
again, but this time go faster or change the types of dishes 
or the way you pull the cloth.
 
If you don’t have a suitable tablecloth, or any 
dishes you care to risk, there are many similar experi-
ments you can try. Put several coins on a sheet of paper 
and whisk that sheet out from under them. Or stack sev-
eral books on a table and use a stiff ruler to knock out 
the bottom one. Especially impressive is balancing a 
short eraserless pencil on top of a wooden embroidery 
hoop that is itself balanced on the open mouth of a 
glass bottle. If you yank the ring away quickly enough, 
the pencil will be left behind and will drop right into 
the bottle.
 
The purpose of this experiment is addressed in a sim-
ple question: Why do the dishes stay put as you remove 
the tablecloth? We’ll return to that question at the end of 
this chapter. In the meantime, we’ll explore some of the 
physics concepts that allow us to answer it.
SECTION 1.1
understand the fi rst few laws of motion. We’ll leave sloping 
surfaces for the section on ramps and won’t have time to teach 
you how to do spins or win a race. Nonetheless, our exploration 
of skating will get us well on the way to an understanding of the 
fundamental principles that govern all movement and thereby 
prepare us for many of the objects we’ll examine in the rest of 
this book.
Questions to Think About: What do we mean by “movement”? 
What makes skaters move, and once they’re moving, what 
keeps them in motion? What does it take to stop a moving 
skater or turn that skater in another direction?
Experiments to Do: A visit to the ice or roller rink would be 
ideal, but even a skateboard or a chair with wheels will suffi ce. 
Get yourself moving forward on a level surface and then let 
yourself coast. Why do you keep moving? Is anything pushing 
you forward? Does your direction ever reverse as you coast? 
How could you describe the details of your motion to someone 
on your cell phone? How would you measure your speed?
 
Before you run into a wall or tree, slow yourself to a 
stop. What was it that slowed you down? Were you still coast-
ing as you stopped? Did anything push on you as you slowed 
yourself?
 
Get yourself moving again. What caused you to speed up? 
How quickly can you pick up speed, and what do you do differ-
ently to speed up quickly? Now turn to one side or the other. 
Did anything push on you as you turned? What happened to 
your speed? What happened to your direction of travel?
Like many sports, skating is trickier than it appears. If you’re a 
fi rst-time skater, you’re likely to fi nd yourself getting up repeat-
edly from the ground or ice, and it will take some practice 
before you can glide smoothly forward or come gracefully to a 
stop. But whether you’re wearing ice skates or roller skates, the 
physics of your motion is surprisingly simple. When you’re on a 
level surface with your skates pointing forward, you coast!
 
Coasting is one of the most basic concepts in physics and 
our starting point in this book. Joining it in this section will be 
starting, stopping, and turning, which together will help us 
Skating
Inner boot
Upper shell
Boot
Heel stop
Backstay
Boot
Heel
Stanchion
Blade
Edge
Tongue
Sole
Toe pick
Wheel
Truck
Axle
Buckle
Lace

Skating 3
Gliding Forward: Inertia and Coasting
While you’re putting on your skates, let’s take a moment to think about what happens to a 
person who has nothing pushing on her at all. When she’s completely free of outside infl u-
ences (Fig. 1.1.1), free of pushes and pulls, does she stand still? Does she move? Does she 
speed up? Does she slow down? In short, what does she do?
 
The correct answer to that apparently simple question eluded people for thousands of 
years; even Aristotle, perhaps the most learned philosopher of the classical world, was 
mistaken about it (see 1 ). What makes this question so tricky is that objects on Earth are 
never truly free of outside infl uences; instead, they all push on, rub against, or interact with 
one another in some way.
 
As a result, it took the remarkable Italian astronomer, mathematician, and physicist 
Galileo Galilei many years of careful observation and logical analysis to answer that 
question 2 . The solution he came up with, like the question itself, is simple: if the person 
is stationary, she will remain stationary; if she is moving in some particular direction, she 
will continue moving in that direction at a steady pace, following a straight-line path. 
This property of steady motion in the absence of any outside infl uence is called inertia 
(Fig 1.1.2).
1  Aristotle (Greek 
philosopher, 384–322 bc) 
theorized that objects’ 
velocities were proportional 
to the forces exerted on 
them. While this theory 
correctly predicted the 
behavior of a sliding object, 
it incorrectly predicted that 
heavier objects should fall 
faster than lighter objects. 
Nonetheless, Aristotle’s 
theory was respected for a 
long time, in part because 
fi nding the simpler and 
more complete theory was 
hard and in part because the 
scientifi c method of 
relating theory and observa-
tion took time to develop.
2  While a professor 
in Pisa, Galileo Galilei 
(Italian scientist, 
1564–1642) was obliged to 
teach the natural philo-
sophy of Aristotle. 
Troubled with the confl ict 
between Aristotle’s theory 
and observations of the 
world around him, Galileo 
devised experiments that 
measured the speeds at 
which objects fall and 
determined that all falling 
objects fall at the same rate.
INERTIA
A body in motion tends to remain in motion; a body at rest tends to remain at rest.
 
The main reason that Aristotle failed to discover inertia, and why we often overlook 
inertia ourselves, is friction. When you slide across the fl oor in your shoes, friction quickly 
slows you to a stop and masks your inertia. To make inertia more obvious, we must get rid 
of friction. That’s why you’re wearing skates.
 
Skates almost completely eliminate friction, at least in one direction, so that you can 
glide effortlessly across the ice or roller rink and experience your own inertia. For simplicity, 
imagine that your skates are perfect and experience no friction at all as you glide. Also, for 
this and the next couple of sections, let’s forget not only about friction but also about air 
resistance. Since the air is calm and you’re not moving too fast, air resistance isn’t all that 
important to skating anyway.
 
Now that you’re ready to skate, we’ll begin to examine fi ve important physical quanti-
ties relating to motion and look at their relationships to one another. These quantities are 
position, velocity, mass, acceleration, and force.
 
Let’s start by describing where you are. At any particular moment, you’re located at 
a position—that is, at a specifi c point in space. Whenever we report your position, it’s 
always as a distance and direction from some reference point, how many meters north 
of the refreshment stand or how many kilometers west of Cleveland. For our discussion 
of skating, we’ll choose as our reference point the bench you used while putting on your 
skates.
 
Position is an example of a vector quantity. A vector quantity consists of both a mag-
nitude and a direction; the magnitude tells you how much of the quantity there is, while 
the direction tells you which way the quantity is pointing. Vector quantities are common in 
nature. When you encounter one, pay attention to the direction part; if you’re looking for 
buried treasure 30 paces from the old tree but forget that it’s due east of that tree, you’ll 
have a lot of digging ahead of you.
 
You’re on your feet and beginning to skate. Once you’re moving, your position is 
changing, which brings us to our second vector quantity—velocity. Velocity measures the 
Fig. 1.1.1 This skater 
glides without any horizontal 
infl uences. If she’s 
stationary, she’ll tend to 
remain stationary; if she’s 
moving, she’ll tend to 
continue moving.
Courtesy of Lou Bloomfi eld

4 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
rate at which your position is changing with time. Its magnitude is your speed, the distance 
you travel in a certain amount of time,
speed = distance
time ,
and its direction is the direction in which you’re heading.
 
For example, if you move 2 meters (6.6 feet) west in 1 second, then your velocity is 2 
meters per second (6.6 feet per second) toward the west. If you maintain that velocity, your 
position moves 20 meters west in 10 seconds, 200 meters west in 100 seconds, and so on. 
Even when you’re motionless, you still have a velocity—zero. A velocity of zero is special, 
however, because it has no direction.
 
When you’re gliding freely, however, with nothing pushing you horizontally, your 
velocity is particularly easy to describe. Since you travel at a steady speed along a straight-
line path, your velocity is constant—it never changes. In a word, you coast. And if you 
happen to be at rest with nothing pushing you horizontally, you remain at rest. Your veloc-
ity is constantly zero.
 
Thanks to your skates, we can now restate the previous description of inertia in terms 
of velocity: an object that is not subject to any outside infl uences moves at a constant veloc-
ity, covering equal distances in equal times along a straight-line path. This statement is 
frequently identifi ed as Newton’s fi rst law of motion, after its discoverer, the English 
mathematician and physicist Sir Isaac Newton 3 . The outside infl uences referred to in this 
law are called forces, a technical term for pushes and pulls. An object that moves in accor-
dance with Newton’s fi rst law is said to be inertial.
3  In 1664, while Sir Isaac 
Newton (English scientist 
and mathematician, 
1642–1727) was a student 
at Cambridge University, 
the university was forced 
to close for 18 months 
because of the plague. 
Newton retreated to the 
country, where he 
discovered the laws of 
motion and gravitation 
and invented the 
mathematical basis 
of calculus. These 
discoveries, along with his 
observation that celestial 
objects such as the moon 
obey the same simple 
physical laws as terrestrial 
objects such as an apple (a 
new idea for the time), are 
recorded in his Philosophiæ 
Naturalis Principia 
Mathematica, fi rst 
published in 1687. This 
book is perhaps the most 
important and infl uential 
scientifi c and mathematical 
work of all time.
NEWTON’S FIRST LAW OF MOTION
An object that is not subject to any outside forces moves at a constant velocity, covering 
equal distances in equal times along a straight-line path.
INTUITION ALERT: Coasting
Intuition says that when nothing pushes on an object, that object slows to a stop; you must push 
it to keep it going.
Physics says that when nothing pushes on an object, that object coasts at constant velocity.
Resolution: Objects usually experience hidden forces, such as friction or air resistance, that tend 
to slow them down. Eliminating those hidden forces is diffi cult, so that you rarely see the full 
coasting behavior of force-free objects.
Check Your Understanding #1: A Puck on Ice
Why does a moving hockey puck continue to slide across an ice rink even though no one is pushing 
on it?
Answer: The puck coasts across the ice because it has inertia.
Why: A hockey puck resting on the surface of wet ice is almost completely free of horizontal infl u-
ences. If someone pushes on the puck, so that it begins to travel with a horizontal velocity across the 
ice, inertia will ensure that the puck continues to slide at constant velocity.
Fig. 1.1.2 These 
baseballs are in deep 
space and free from 
outside infl uences. Each 
ball moves according to 
inertia alone, following 
a straight-line path at a 
steady pace.

Skating 5
The Alternative to Coasting: Acceleration
As you glide forward with nothing pushing you horizontally, what prevents your speed and direc-
tion from changing? The answer is your mass. Mass is the measure of your inertia, your resis-
tance to changes in velocity. Almost everything in the universe has mass. Mass has no direction, 
so it’s not a vector quantity. It is a scalar quantity—that is, a quantity that has only an amount.
 
Because you have mass, your velocity will change only if something pushes on you—
that is, only if you experience a force. You’ll keep moving steadily in a straight path until 
something exerts a force on you to stop you or send you in another direction. Force is our 
third vector quantity, having both a magnitude and a direction. After all, a push to the right 
is different from a push to the left.
 
When something pushes on you, your velocity changes; in other words, you acceler-
ate. Acceleration, our fourth vector quantity, measures the rate at which your velocity is 
changing with time (Fig. 1.1.3). Any change in your velocity is acceleration, whether you’re 
speeding up, slowing down, or turning. If either your speed or direction of travel is chang-
ing, you’re accelerating!
 
Like any vector quantity, acceleration has a magnitude and a direction. To see how 
these two parts of acceleration work, imagine that you’re at the starting line of a speed-
skating race, waiting for it to begin. The starting buzzer sounds, and you’re off! You dig your 
skates into the surface beneath you and begin to accelerate—your speed increases and you 
cover ground more and more quickly. The magnitude of your acceleration depends on how 
hard the skating surface pushes you forward. If it’s a long race and you’re not in a hurry, 
you take your time getting up to full speed. The surface pushes you forward gently and the 
magnitude of your acceleration is small. Your velocity changes slowly. However, if the race 
is a sprint and you need to reach top speed as quickly as possible, you spring forward hard 
and the surface exerts an enormous forward force on you. The magnitude of your accelera-
tion is large, and your velocity changes rapidly. In this case, you can actually feel your 
inertia opposing your efforts to pick up speed.
 
Acceleration has more than just a magnitude, though. When you start the race, you also 
select a direction for your acceleration—the direction toward which your velocity is shifting 
with time. This acceleration is in the same direction as the force causing it. If you obtain a for-
ward force from the surface, you’ll accelerate forward—your velocity will shift more and more 
forward. If you obtain a sideways force from the surface, the other racers will have to jump out 
of your way as you careen into the wall. They’ll laugh all the way to the fi nish line at your failure 
to recognize the importance of direction in the defi nitions of force and acceleration.
 
Once you’re going fast enough, you can stop fi ghting inertia and begin to glide. You 
coast forward at a constant velocity. Now inertia is helping you; it keeps you moving 
Fig. 1.1.3 A rightward force is causing 
this baseball to accelerate toward the 
right. Its velocity is increasing toward 
the right so that it travels farther with 
each passing second.

6 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
steadily along even though nothing is pushing you forward. (Recall that we’re neglecting 
friction and air resistance. In reality, those effects push you backward and gradually slow 
you down as you glide.)
 
Even when you’re not trying to speed up or slow down, you can still accelerate. As you 
steer your skates or go over a bump, you experience sideways or up–down forces that 
change your direction of travel and thus cause you to accelerate.
 
Finally the race is over, and you skid to a stop. You’re accelerating again, but this time 
in the backward direction—opposite your forward velocity. Although we often call this 
process deceleration, it’s just a special type of acceleration. Your forward velocity gradu-
ally diminishes until you come to rest.
 
To help you recognize acceleration, here are some accelerating objects:
1. A runner who’s leaping forward at the start of a race—the runner’s velocity is 
changing from zero to forward, so the runner is accelerating forward.
2. 
A bicycle that’s stopping at a crosswalk—its velocity is changing from forward to 
zero, so it’s accelerating backward (that is, it’s decelerating).
3. 
An elevator that’s just starting upward from the fi rst fl oor to the fi fth fl oor—its 
velocity is changing from zero to upward, so it’s accelerating upward.
4. An elevator that’s stopping at the fi fth fl oor after coming from the fi rst fl oor—its 
velocity is changing from upward to zero, so it’s accelerating downward.
5. A car that’s beginning to shift left to pass another car—its velocity is changing 
from forward to left-forward, so it’s accelerating mostly leftward.
6. 
An airplane that’s just beginning its descent—its velocity is changing from level-
forward to descending-forward, so it’s accelerating almost directly downward.
7. Children riding a carousel around in a circle—while their speeds are constant, 
their directions of travel are always changing. We’ll discuss the directions in 
which they’re accelerating in Section 3.3.
Here are some objects that are not accelerating:
1. 
A parked car—its velocity is always zero.
2. A car traveling straight forward on a level road at a steady speed—there is no 
change in its speed or direction of travel.
3. 
A bicycle that’s climbing up a smooth, straight hill at a steady speed—there is no 
change in its speed or direction of travel.
4. An elevator that’s moving straight upward at a steady pace, halfway between the 
fi rst fl oor and the fi fth fl oor—there is no change in its speed or direction of travel.
 
Seeing acceleration isn’t as easy as seeing position or velocity. You can determine a 
skater’s position in a single glance and her velocity by comparing her positions in two 
separate glances. To observe her acceleration, however, you need at least three glances 
because you are looking for how her velocity is changing with time. If her speed isn’t 
steady or her path isn’t straight, then she’s accelerating.
Check Your Understanding #2: Changing Trains
Trains spend much of their time coasting along at constant velocity. When does a train accelerate 
forward? backward? leftward? downward?
Answer: The train accelerates forward when it starts out from a station, backward when it arrives at 
the next station, to the left when it turns left, and downward when it begins its descent out of the 
mountains.
Why: Whenever the train changes its speed or its direction of travel, it is accelerating. When it speeds 
up on leaving a station, it is accelerating forward (more forward-directed speed). When it slows down 
at the next station, it is accelerating backward (more backward-directed speed or, equivalently, less 
forward-directed speed). When it turns left, it is accelerating to the left (more leftward-directed 
speed). When it begins to descend, it is accelerating downward (more downward-directed speed).

Skating 7
How Forces Affect Skaters
Your friends skate over to congratulate you after the race, patting you on the back and giv-
ing you high-fi ves. They’re exerting forces on you, so you accelerate—but how much do 
you accelerate and in which direction?
 
First, although each of your friends is exerting a separate force on you, you can’t accel-
erate in response to each force individually. After all, you have only one acceleration. 
Instead, you accelerate in response to the net force you experience—the sum of all the 
individual forces being exerted on you. Drawing this distinction between individual forces 
and net force is important whenever an object is experiencing several forces at once. For 
simplicity now, however, let’s wait until you have only one friend left on the ice. When that 
friend fi nally pats you on the back, you experience only that one force, so it is the net force 
on you and it causes you to accelerate.
 
Your acceleration depends on the strength of that net force: the stronger the net force, 
the more you accelerate. However, your acceleration also depends on your mass: the more 
massive you are, the less you accelerate. For example, it’s easier to change your velocity 
before you eat Thanksgiving dinner than afterward.
 
There is a simple relationship among the net force exerted on you, your mass, and your 
acceleration. Your acceleration is equal to the net force exerted on you divided by your 
mass or, as a word equation,
 
acceleration = net force
mass
. 
(1.1.1)
Your acceleration, as we’ve seen, is in the same direction as the net force on you.
 
This relationship was deduced by Newton from his observations of motion and is 
referred to as Newton’s second law of motion. Structuring the relationship this way sen-
sibly distinguishes the causes (net force and mass) from their effect (acceleration). How-
ever, it has become customary to rearrange this equation to eliminate the division. The 
relationship then takes its traditional form, which can be written in a word equation:
 
net force = mass · acceleration 
(1.1.2)
in symbols:
Fnet = m · a,
and in everyday language:
Throwing a baseball is much easier than throwing a bowling ball (Fig. 1.1.4).
Remember that in Eq. 1.1.2 the direction of the acceleration is the same as the direction of 
the net force.
 
Because it’s an equation, the two sides of Eq. 1.1.1 are equal. Your acceleration equals 
the net force on you divided by your mass. Since your mass is constant unless you visit the 
snack bar, Eq. 1.1.1 indicates that an increase in the net force on you is accompanied by a 
NEWTON’S SECOND LAW OF MOTION
The net force exerted on an object is equal to that object’s mass times its acceleration. 
The acceleration is in the same direction as the net force.
Fig. 1.1.4 A baseball 
accelerates easily because 
of its small mass. A 
bowling ball has a large 
mass and is harder to 
accelerate.
© Asia Images Group/Getty Images, Inc.
© Kent C. Horner/Getty Images, Inc.

8 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
corresponding increase in your acceleration. That way, as the right side of the equation 
increases, the left side increases to keep the two sides equal. Thus the harder your friend 
pushes on you, the more rapidly your velocity changes in the direction of that push.
 
We can also compare the effects of equal forces on two different masses, for example, 
you and the former sumo wrestler to your left. I’ll assume, for the sake of argument, that 
you’re the less massive of the two. Equation 1.1.1 indicates that an increase in mass must 
be accompanied by a corresponding decrease in acceleration. Sure enough, your velocity 
changes more rapidly than the velocity of the sumo wrestler when the two of you are sub-
jected to identical forces (Fig. 1.1.5).
 
So far we’ve explored fi ve principles:
1. 
Your position indicates exactly where you’re located.
2. 
Your velocity measures the rate at which your position is changing with time.
3. Your acceleration measures the rate at which your velocity is changing with time.
4. 
To accelerate, you must experience a net force.
5. 
The greater your mass, the less acceleration you experience for a given net force.
 
We’ve also encountered fi ve important physical quantities—mass, force, acceleration, 
velocity, and position—as well as some of the rules that relate them to one another. Much 
of the groundwork of physics rests on these fi ve quantities and on their interrelationships.
 
Skating certainly depends on these quantities. We can now see that, in the absence of 
any horizontal forces, you either remain stationary or coast along at a constant velocity. To 
start, stop, or turn, something must push you horizontally and that something is the ice or 
pavement. We haven’t talked about how you obtain horizontal forces from the ice or pave-
ment, and we’ll leave that problem for later sections. As you skate, however, you should be 
aware of these forces and notice how they change your speed, direction of travel, or both. 
Learn to watch yourself accelerate.
Fig. 1.1.5 A baseball, bowling ball, and fi le 
cabinet have different masses and accelerate quite 
differently in response to equal rightward forces. 
Arrows representing the accelerations and velocities 
of the bowling ball and fi le cabinet are magnifi ed to 
make them visible.
Check Your Understanding #3: Hard to Stop
It’s much easier to stop a bicycle traveling toward you at 5 kilometers per hour (3 miles per hour) 
than an automobile traveling toward you at the same velocity. What accounts for this difference?
Answer: An automobile has a much greater mass than a bicycle.
Why: To stop a moving vehicle, you must exert a force on it in the direction opposite its velocity. The 
vehicle will then accelerate backward so that it eventually comes to rest. If the vehicle is heading 
toward you, you must push it away from you. The more mass the vehicle has, the less it will acceler-
ate in response to a certain force and the longer you will have to push on it to stop it completely. 
Although it’s easy to stop a bicycle by hand, stopping even a slowly moving automobile by hand 
requires a large force exerted for a substantial amount of time.

Skating 9
Several Skaters: Frames of Reference
While skating alone is peaceful, it’s usually more fun with other skaters around. That way, 
you have people to talk to and an audience for your athleticism and artistry.
 
However, with several skaters coasting on the ice at once, there’s a question of per-
spective. As you glide steadily past a friend, the two of you see the world somewhat differ-
ently. From your perspective, you are motionless and your friend is moving. From your 
friend’s perspective, though, your friend is motionless and you are moving. Who is right?
 
It turns out that you’re both right and that physics has a way of accommodating this 
apparent paradox. Each of you is observing the world from a different inertial frame of 
reference, the viewpoint of an inertial object—an object that is not accelerating and that 
moves according to Newton’s fi rst law. One of the remarkable discoveries of Galileo and 
Newton is that the laws of physics work perfectly in any inertial frame of reference (Fig. 1.1.6). 
From an inertial frame, everything you see in the world around you obeys the laws of 
motion that we’re in the process of exploring. Although you may fi nd it odd to think of 
scenery as moving, your inertial frame of reference is as good as any and in your frame you 
are at rest amid the moving landscape.
Check Your Figures #1: At the Bowling Alley
Bowling balls come in various masses. Suppose that you try bowling with two different balls, one with 
twice the mass of the other. If you push on them with equal forces, which one will accelerate faster 
and how much faster?
Answer: The less massive ball will accelerate twice as rapidly.
Why: Equation 1.1.1 shows that an object’s acceleration is inversely proportional to its mass:
acceleration = force
mass.
If you push on both bowling balls with equal forces, then their accelerations will depend only on their 
masses. Doubling the mass on the right side of this equation halves the acceleration on the left side. 
That means that the more massive ball will accelerate only half as quickly as the other ball.
Fig. 1.1.6 Two skaters 
who are moving relative 
to one another, but 
not accelerating, have 
different inertial frames of 
reference. Although each 
skater will have a different 
coordinate system in 
which to measure physical 
quantities, the laws of 
physics will correctly 
describe what that skater 
observes from his own 
inertial frame of reference.

10 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
 
Since both you and your friend are coasting, each of you views the world from an 
inertial frame of reference and sees the surrounding objects moving in perfect accordance 
with the laws of motion. Some objects travel at constant velocity, while others accelerate in 
response to forces. However, because the two of you are observing those objects from dif-
ferent inertial frames, you will disagree on the particular values of some of the physical 
quantities you might measure.
 
In the present case, you see yourself as motionless because you view the world from 
your own inertial frame. In that frame, your friend is coasting westward at 2 meters per sec-
ond (2 m/s, which is roughly 6.6 feet per second, or 6.6 ft/s). However, your friend sees things 
differently. In your friend’s inertial frame, your friend is motionless and you are coasting 
eastward at 2 m/s. As long as the two of you don’t try to compare the positions or velocities 
of the objects you observe, or certain physical quantities derived from those values, there will 
be no disagreements and no inconsistencies. However, if you forget to watch where you’re 
going and crash into a wall, don’t expect your friend to sympathize when you claim that you 
were motionless and that the moving wall ran into you. That’s not how your friend saw it.
 
Each time we examine an object in this book, we’ll pick a specifi c inertial frame of 
reference from which to view that object. We’ll normally select an inertial frame that makes 
the object and its motions appear as simple as possible and then stick with that frame con-
sistently. The best choice of inertial frame will usually be so obvious that we’ll adopt it 
without even a moment’s thought. On occasion, however, we’ll have to pick the frame 
carefully and deliberately. Finally, although there are formal methods for working with two 
or more inertial frames at once, I’ll leave that for another book.
Measure for Measure: The Importance of Units
If you went to the grocery store and asked for “6 of sugar,” the clerk wouldn’t know how 
much sugar to give you. The number 6 wouldn’t be enough information; you need to spec-
ify which units—cups, pounds, cubes, or tons—you have in mind. This need to specify 
units applies to almost all physical quantities—velocity, force, mass, and so on—and has 
led our society to develop units that everyone agrees on, also known as standard units.
 
For example, when you say that a skater’s speed is 20 miles per hour, you have chosen 
miles per hour as the standard unit of speed and you’re asserting that the skater is moving 
20 times that fast. You can report the skater’s speed as a multiple of any standard unit of 
speed—feet per second, yards per day, or inches per century, to name only a few—and you 
can always fi nd a simple relationship to convert from one unit of speed to another. For 
example, to convert the skater’s speed from miles per hour to kilometers per hour, you 
multiply it by 1.609 kilometers/mile:
20 mi
h · 1.609 km
1 mi
= 32.2 km
h .
 
Many of the common units in the United States come from the old English system of 
units, which most of the world has abandoned in favor of SI units (Systéme Internationale 
Check Your Understanding #4: Two Views
You are standing on the sidewalk, watching a train coast eastward at constant velocity. Your friend is 
riding in that train. In her inertial frame of reference, the sweater in her lap is motionless. Describe 
the sweater’s motion in your inertial frame of reference.
Answer: The sweater is coasting eastward at constant velocity.
Why: Although both of you agree that the sweater is not accelerating and that it is moving according 
to Newton’s fi rst law, you disagree on its specifi c velocity. She sees the sweater at rest, while you see 
it coasting eastward at constant velocity. Your viewpoints are equally valid.

Skating 11
d’Unités). The continued use of English units in the United States often makes life diffi cult. 
If you have to triple a cake recipe that calls for ¾ cup of milk, you must work hard to cal-
culate that you need 2¼ cups. Then you go to buy 2¼ cups of milk, which is slightly more 
than half a quart, but end up buying 2 pints instead. You now have 14 ounces of milk more 
than you need—but is that 14 fl uid ounces or 14 ounces of weight? And so it goes.
 
The SI system has two important characteristics that distinguish it from the English 
system and make it easier to use. In the SI system:
1. 
Different units for the same physical quantity are related by factors of 10.
2. Most of the units are constructed out of a few basic units: the meter, the kilogram, 
and the second.
 
Let’s start with the fi rst characteristic: different units for the same physical quantity are 
related by factors of 10. When measuring volume, 1000 milliliters is exactly 1 liter and 1000 
liters is exactly 1 cubic meter (1 meter3). When measuring mass, 1000 grams is exactly 
1 kilogram and 1000 kilograms is exactly 1 metric ton. Because of this consistent relation-
ship, enlarging a recipe that’s based on the SI system is as simple as multiplying a few 
numbers. You never have to think about converting pints into quarts, teaspoons into table-
spoons, or ounces into pounds. Instead, if you want to triple a recipe that calls for 500 milli-
liters of sugar, you just multiply the recipe by 3 to obtain 1500 milliliters of sugar. Since 
1000 milliliters is 1 liter, you’ll need 1.5 liters of sugar. Converting milliliters to liters is as 
simple as multiplying by 0.001 liter/milliliter. (See Appendix B, online, for more 
conversion factors.)
 
SI units remain somewhat mysterious to many U.S. residents, even though some of the 
basic units are slowly appearing on our grocery shelves and highways. As a result, although 
the SI system really is more sensible than the old English system, developing a feel for 
some SI units is still diffi cult. How many of us know our heights in meters (the SI unit of 
length) or our masses in kilograms (the SI unit of mass)? If your car is traveling 200 kilo-
meters per hour and you pass a police car, are you in trouble? Yes, because 200 kilometers 
per hour is about 125 miles per hour. Actually, the hour is not an SI unit—the SI unit of 
time is the second—but the hour remains customary for describing long periods of time. 
Thus the kilometer per hour is a unit that is half SI (the kilometer part) and half customary 
(the hour part).
 
The second characteristic of the SI system is its relatively small number of basic units. 
So far, we’ve noted the SI units of mass (the kilogram, abbreviated kg), length (the meter, 
abbreviated m), and time (the second, abbreviated s). One kilogram is about the mass of a 
liter of water; 1 meter is about the length of a long stride; 1 second is about the time it takes 
to say “one banana.” From these three basic units, we can create several others, such as the 
SI units of velocity (the meter per second, abbreviated m/s) and acceleration (the meter 
per second squared, abbreviated m/s2). One meter per second is a healthy walking speed; 
1 meter per second2 is about the acceleration of an elevator after the door closes and it 
begins to move upward. This conviction that many units are best constructed out of other, 
more basic units dramatically simplifi es the SI system; the English system doesn’t usually 
suffer from such sensibility.
 
The SI unit of force is also constructed out of the basic units of mass, length, and time. 
If we choose a 1-kilogram object and ask just how much force is needed to make that object 
accelerate at 1 meter per second2, we defi ne a specifi c amount of force. Since 1 kilogram is 
the SI unit of mass and 1 meter per second2 is the SI unit of acceleration, it’s only reason-
able to let the force that causes this acceleration be the SI unit of force, the kilogram-meter 
per second2. Since this composite unit sounds unwieldy but is very important, it has been 
given its own name: the newton (abbreviated N)—after, of course, Sir Isaac, whose second 
law defi nes the relationship among mass, length, and time that the unit expresses. Conveniently, 
1 newton is about the weight of a small apple; that is, if you hold that apple steady in your 
hand, you’ll feel a downward force of about 1 newton.

12 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
 
Because a complete transition to the SI system will take generations, this book uses 
both unit systems whenever possible. Although I will emphasize the SI system, English and 
customary units may give you a better intuitive feel for a particular physical quantity. A 
bullet train traveling “67 meters per second” doesn’t mean much to most of us, whereas one 
moving “150 miles per hour” (150 mph) or “240 kilometers per hour” (240 km/h) should 
elicit our well-deserved respect.
Check Your Understanding #5: Going for a Walk
If you’re walking at a pace of 1 m per second, how many miles will you travel in an hour?
Answer: About 2.24 miles.
Why: There are many different units in this example, so we must do some converting. First, an hour 
is 3600 s, so in an hour of walking at 1 m per second you will have walked 3600 m. Second, a mile 
is about 1609 m, so each time you travel 1609 m you have traveled 1 mile. By walking 3600 m, you 
have completed 2 miles and are about one-quarter of the way into your third mile.
Quantity 
SI Unit 
English Unit 
SI → English 
English → SI
Position 
meter (m) 
foot (ft) 
1 m 
= 3.2808 ft 
1 ft 
= 0.30480 m
Velocity 
meter per second (m/s) 
foot per second (ft/s) 
1 m/s = 3.2808 ft/s 
1 ft/s = 0.30480 m/s
Acceleration 
meter per second2 (m/s2) 
foot per second2 (ft/s2) 
1 m/s2 = 3.2808 ft/s2 
1 ft/s2 = 0.30480 m/s2
Force 
newton (N) 
pound-force (lbf)† 
1 N 
= 0.22481 lbf 
1 lbf = 4.4482 N
Mass 
kilogram (kg) 
pound-mass (lbm)† 
1 kg 
= 2.2046 lbm 
1 lbm = 0.45359 kg
† The English units of force and mass are both called the pound. To distinguish these two units, it has become standard practice to identify them 
explicitly as pound-mass and pound-force.
SECTION 1.2 
Falling Balls
we’ll start simply by exploring gravity and its effects on motion 
in the context of falling objects.
Questions to Think About: What do we mean by “falling,” 
and why do balls fall? Which falls faster, a heavy ball or a light 
ball? Can a ball that’s heading upward still be falling? How 
does gravity affect a ball that’s thrown sideways?
Experiments to Do: A few seconds with a baseball will help 
you see some of the behaviors that we’ll be exploring. Toss the 
ball into the air to various heights, catching it in your hand as 
it returns. Have a friend time the fl ight of the ball. As you toss 
the ball higher, how much more time does it spend in the air? 
How does it feel coming back to your hands? Is there any dif-
ference in the impact it makes? Which takes the ball longer: 
rising from your hand to its peak height or returning from its 
peak height back to your hand?
 
Now drop two different balls—a baseball, say, and a golf 
ball. If you drop them simultaneously, without pushing either 
one up or down, does one ball strike the ground fi rst or do they 
arrive together? Now throw one ball horizontally while dropping 
the second. If they both leave your hands at the same time and 
the fi rst one’s initial motion is truly horizontal, which one 
reaches the ground fi rst?
We’ve all dropped balls from our hands or seen them arc grace-
fully through the air after being thrown. These motions are sim-
plicity itself and, not surprisingly, they’re governed by only a 
few universal rules. We encountered several of those rules in 
the previous section, but we’re about to examine our fi rst 
important type of force—gravity. Like Newton, who reportedly 
began his investigations after seeing an apple fall from a tree, 

Falling Balls 13
Weight and Gravity
Like everything else around us, a ball has a weight. For example, a golf ball weighs about 
0.45 N (0.10 lbf)—but what is weight? Evidently it’s a force, since both the newton (N) and 
the pound-force (lbf) are units of force. To understand what weight is, however—and, in 
particular, where it comes from—we need to look at gravity.
 
Gravity is a physical phenomenon that produces attractive forces between every pair 
of objects in the universe. In our daily lives, however, the only object massive enough and 
near enough to have obvious gravitational effects on us is our planet, Earth. Gravity weak-
ens with distance; the moon and sun are so far away that we notice their gravities only 
through such subtle effects as the ocean tides.
 
Earth’s gravity exerts a downward force on any object near its surface. That object is 
attracted directly toward the center of Earth with a force we call the object’s weight (Fig. 1.2.1). 
Remarkably enough, this weight is exactly proportional to the object’s mass—if one ball has 
twice the mass of another ball, it also has twice the weight. Such a relationship between weight 
and mass is astonishing because weight and mass are very different attributes: weight is how 
hard gravity pulls on a ball, and mass is how diffi cult that ball is to accelerate. Because of this 
proportionality, a ball that’s heavy is also hard to shake back and forth!
 
An object’s weight is also proportional to the local strength of gravity, which is mea-
sured by a downward vector called the acceleration due to gravity—an odd name that I’ll 
explain shortly. At the surface of Earth, the acceleration due to gravity is about 9.8 N/kg 
(1.0 lbf/lbm). That value means that a mass of 1 kilogram has a weight of 9.8 newtons and 
that a mass of 1 pound-mass has a weight of 1 pound-force.
 
More generally, an object’s weight is equal to its mass times the acceleration due to 
gravity, which can be written as a word equation:
 
weight = mass · acceleration due to gravity, 
(1.2.1)
in symbols:
w = m · g,
and in everyday language:
You can lose weight either by reducing your mass or by going someplace, like a 
small planet, where the gravity is weaker.
 
But why acceleration due to gravity? What acceleration do we mean? To answer that 
question, let’s consider what happens to a ball when you drop it.
 
If the only force on the ball is its weight, the ball accelerates downward; in other words, 
it falls. Although a ball moving through Earth’s atmosphere encounters additional forces due 
to the air, let’s ignore those forces for the time being. Doing so costs us only a little in terms 
of accuracy—the air’s forces on the ball are negligible as long as the ball is dense and its 
speed relatively small—and allows us to focus exclusively on the effects of gravity.
 
How much does the falling ball accelerate? According to Eq. 1.1.1, the ball’s accelera-
tion is equal to the net force exerted on it divided by its mass. Because the ball is falling, 
however, the only force on it is its own weight. That weight, according to Eq. 1.2.1, is equal 
to the ball’s mass times the acceleration due to gravity. Using a little algebra, we get
 falling ball’s acceleration = ball’s weight
ball’s mass
 = ball’s mass · acceleration due to gravity
ball’s mass
 = acceleration due to gravity.
Fig. 1.2.1 A dropped 
baseball experiences only 
its weight—the force due 
to gravity. It accelerates 
downward.

14 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
As you can see, the falling ball’s acceleration is equal to the acceleration due to gravity. 
Thus, acceleration due to gravity really is an acceleration after all: it’s the acceleration of a 
freely falling object. Moreover, the units of acceleration due to gravity can be transformed 
easily from those relating weight to mass, 9.8 N/kg (1.0 lbf/lbm), into those describing the 
acceleration of free fall, 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2).
 
Thus a ball falling near Earth’s surface experiences a downward acceleration of 
9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2), regardless of its mass (Fig. 1.2.2). This downward acceleration is sub-
stantially more than that of an elevator starting its descent. When you drop a ball, it picks 
up speed very quickly in the downward direction.
 
Because all falling objects at Earth’s surface accelerate downward at exactly the same 
rate, a billiard ball and a bowling ball dropped simultaneously from the same height will 
reach the ground together. (Remember that we’re not considering forces due to the air yet.) 
Although the bowling ball weighs more than the billiard ball, it also has more mass; so 
while the bowling ball experiences a larger downward force, its larger mass ensures that its 
downward acceleration is equal to that of the lighter and less massive billiard ball.
Check Your Understanding #1: Weight and Mass
Out in deep space, far from any celestial object that exerts signifi cant gravity, would an astronaut 
weigh anything? Would that astronaut have a mass?
Answer: The astronaut would have zero weight but would still have a normal mass.
Why: Weight is a measure of the force exerted on the astronaut by gravity. Far from Earth or any other 
large object, the astronaut would experience virtually no gravitational force and would have zero 
weight. But mass is a measure of inertia and doesn’t depend at all on gravity. Even in deep space, it 
would be much harder to accelerate a school bus than to accelerate a baseball because the school 
bus has more mass than the baseball.
Check Your Figures #1: Weighing In on the Moon
You’re in your spacecraft on the surface of the moon. Before getting into your suit, you weigh yourself 
and fi nd that your moon weight is almost exactly one-sixth your Earth weight. What is the moon’s 
acceleration due to gravity?
Answer: It is about 1.6 m/s2 (5.3 ft/s2).
Why: You can rearrange Eq. 1.2.1 to show that the acceleration due to gravity is proportional to an 
object’s weight:
acceleration due to gravity = weight
mass .
Your mass doesn’t change in going to the moon, so any change in your weight must be due to a 
change in the acceleration due to gravity. Since your moon weight is one-sixth of your Earth weight, 
the moon’s acceleration due to gravity must be one-sixth that of Earth, or about 1.6 m/s2.
Fig. 1.2.2 A baseball (left) and a golf ball (right) 
both accelerate downward at the acceleration due to 
gravity. Their differences in weight and mass perfectly 
compensate for one another.

Falling Balls 15
The Velocity of a Falling Ball
We’re now ready to examine the motion of a falling ball near Earth’s surface. A falling 
ball is one that has only its weight, the force due to gravity, acting on it and gravity, as 
we’ve seen, causes any falling object to accelerate downward at a constant rate. How-
ever, we’re usually less interested in the falling object’s acceleration than we are in its 
position and velocity. Where will the object be in 3 s, and what will its velocity be 
then? When you’re trying to summon up the courage to jump off the high dive, you 
want to know how long it’ll take you to reach the water and how fast you’ll be going 
when you hit.
 
The fi rst step in answering these questions is to look at how a ball’s velocity is related 
to the time you’ve been watching it fall. To do that, you’ll need to know the ball’s initial 
velocity—that is, its speed and direction at the moment you start watching it. If you drop 
the ball from rest, its initial velocity is zero.
 
You can then describe the ball’s present velocity in terms of its initial velocity, its 
acceleration, and the time that has passed since you started watching it. Because a constant 
acceleration causes the ball’s velocity to change by the same amount each second, the ball’s 
present velocity differs from its initial velocity by the acceleration times the time that 
you’ve been watching it. We can relate these quantities as a word equation:
 
present velocity = initial velocity + acceleration · time, 
(1.2.2)
in symbols:
vf = vi + a · t,
and in everyday language:
A stone dropped from rest descends faster with each passing second, but you can 
give it a boost by throwing it downward instead of just letting go.
 
For a ball falling from rest, the initial velocity is zero, the acceleration is downward at 
9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2), and the time you’ve been watching it is simply the time since it started 
to drop (Fig. 1.2.3). After 1 s, the ball has a downward velocity of 9.8 m/s (32 ft/s). After 
2 s, the ball has a downward velocity of 19.6 m/s (64 ft/s). After 3 s, its downward velocity 
is 29.4 m/s (96 ft/s), and so on.
 
Because a ball falls in a three-dimensional world, Eq. 1.2.2 is a relationship among 
vector quantities. When a ball is dropped from rest, however, its motion is strictly vertical 
and all of those vector quantities point either up or down. In that special case of motion 
along a vertical line, we can represent vector quantities that point up by ordinary positive 
values and vector quantities that point down by ordinary negative values. The acceleration 
due to gravity is then −9.8 m/s2, and a ball that has been falling from rest for 2 s has a 
velocity of −19.6 m/s. As we’ll see later in this section, those simplifi ed values are actually 
the upward components of the ball’s acceleration and velocity.
Check Your Understanding #2: Half a Fall
You drop a marble from rest, and after 1 s, its velocity is 9.8 m/s (32 ft/s) in the downward direction. 
What was its velocity after only 0.5 s of falling?
Answer: 4.9 m/s (16 ft/s) in the downward direction.
Why: A freely falling object accelerates downward at a steady rate. Its velocity changes by 9.8 m/s 
(16 ft/s) in the downward direction each and every second. In half a second, the marble’s velocity 
changes by only half that amount, or 4.9 m/s (16 ft/s).

16 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
Fig. 1.2.3 The moment you let go of a ball that was resting in your hand, it begins to fall. Its 
weight causes it to accelerate downward. After 1 s, it has fallen 4.9 m and has a velocity of 9.8 m/s 
downward. After 2 s, it has fallen 19.6 m and has a velocity of 19.6 m/s downward, and so on. As the 
ball continues to accelerate downward, its velocity continues to increase downward. Negative values for 
the position and velocity are meant to indicate downward movement caused by a negative or downward 
acceleration.
Check Your Figures #2: The High Dive
If it takes you about 1.4 s to reach the water from the 10-m (32-ft) diving platform, how fast are you 
going just before you enter the water?
Answer: About 14 m/s (45 ft/s, 50 km/h, or 31 mph).
Why: The downward acceleration due to gravity is 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2). You fall for 1.4 s, during which 
time your velocity increases steadily in the downward direction. Since you start with zero velocity, 
Eq. 1.2.2 gives a fi nal velocity of
final velocity = 9.8 m/s2 · 1.4 s = 13.72 m/s.
Since the time of the fall is given only to two digits of accuracy (1.4 s could really be 1.403 s or 
1.385 s), we shouldn’t claim that our calculated fi nal velocity is accurate to four digits. We should 
round the value to 14 m/s (45 ft/s).
The Position of a Falling Ball
The ball’s velocity continues to increase as it falls, but where exactly is the ball located? To 
answer that question, you need to know the ball’s initial position—that is, where it was 
when you started to watch it fall. If you dropped the ball from rest, the initial position was 
your hand and you can defi ne that spot as 0.
 
You can then describe the ball’s present position in terms of its initial position, its 
initial velocity, its acceleration, and the time that has passed since you started watching it. 
However, because the ball’s velocity is changing, you can’t simply multiply its present 
velocity by the time that it’s been falling to determine how much the ball’s present position 
differs from its initial position. Instead, you must use the ball’s average velocity during the 
whole period you’ve been watching it. Since the ball’s velocity has been changing uni-
formly from its initial velocity to its present velocity, the ball’s average velocity is exactly 
halfway in between the two individual velocities:
average velocity = initial velocity + 1
2 · acceleration · time.

Falling Balls 17
The ball’s present position differs from its initial position by this average velocity times the 
time that you’ve been watching it. We can relate these quantities as a word equation:
 present position=initial position+initial velocity · time+ 1
2 · acceleration· time2, (1.2.3)
in symbols:
xf = xi + vi · t + 1
2 · a · t2,
and in everyday language:
The longer a stone has been falling, the more its height diminishes with each 
passing second. However, it won’t overtake a stone that was dropped next to it at 
an earlier time or dropped from beneath it at the same time.
 
For a ball falling from rest, the initial velocity is zero, the acceleration is downward at 
9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2), and the time you’ve been watching it is simply the time since it started 
to drop (Fig. 1.2.3). After 1 s, the ball has fallen 4.9 m (16 ft). After 2 s, it has fallen a total 
of 19.6 m (64 ft). After 3 s, it has fallen a total of 44.1 m (145 ft), and so on.
 
Equations 1.2.2 and 1.2.3 depend on the defi nition of acceleration as the measure of 
how quickly velocity changes and the defi nition of velocity as the measure of how quickly 
position changes. Because the acceleration of a falling ball doesn’t change with time, the 
two equations can be derived using algebra. In more complicated situations, however, 
where an object’s acceleration changes with time, predicting position and velocity usually 
requires the use of calculus. Calculus is the mathematics of change, invented by Newton to 
address just these sorts of problems.
 
We’ve been discussing what happens to a falling ball, but we could have chosen 
another object instead. Everything falls the same way; heavy or light, large or small, all 
objects take the same amount of time to fall a given distance, as long as they’re dense 
enough to be unaffected by the air. If there were no air, this statement would be exactly true 
for any object; a feather and a lead brick would plummet downward together if you dropped 
them simultaneously.
 
Now that we’ve explored acceleration due to gravity, we can see why a ball dropped 
from a tall ladder is more dangerous than the same ball dropped from a short stool. The 
farther the ball has to fall, the longer it takes to reach the ground and the more time it has 
to accelerate. During its long fall from the tall ladder, the ball acquires a large downward 
velocity and becomes very hard to stop. If you try to catch it, you’ll have to exert a very 
large upward force on it to accelerate it upward and bring it to rest quickly. Exerting that 
large upward force may hurt your hand.
 
The same notion holds if you’re the falling object. If you leap off a tall ladder, a sub-
stantial amount of time will pass before you reach the ground. By the time you arrive, 
you’ll have acquired considerable downward velocity. The ground will then accelerate you 
upward and bring you to rest with a very large and unpleasant upward force. (For an inter-
esting and less painful application of long falls, see 4 .)
Check Your Understanding #3: Half a Fall Again
You drop a marble from rest, and after 1 s, it has fallen downward a distance of 4.9 m (16 ft). How 
far had it fallen after only 0.5 s?
Answer: It had fallen about 1.2 m (4 ft).
Why: While a freely falling object’s velocity changes steadily in the downward direction, its change in 
height is more complicated. When you drop the marble from rest, it starts its descent slowly but picks 
up speed and covers the downward distance faster and faster. In the fi rst 0.5 s, it travels only a 
quarter of the distance it travels in the fi rst 1 s, or about 1.2 m (4 ft).
4  In 1782, William 
Watts, a plumber from 
Bristol, England, patented 
a technique for forming 
perfectly spherical, 
seamless lead shot for use 
in guns. His idea was to 
pour molten lead through 
a sieve suspended high 
above a pool of water. The 
lead droplets cool in the 
air as they fall, solidifying 
into perfect spheres before 
reaching the water. Shot 
towers based on this idea 
soon appeared throughout 
Europe and eventually in 
the United States. 
Nowadays, iron shot has 
all but replaced environ-
mentally dangerous lead 
shot. Iron shot is cast, 
rather than dropped, 
because the longer cooling 
time needed to solidify 
molten iron would require 
impractically tall shot 
towers.

18 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
Check Your Figures #3: Extreme Physics
You’re planning to construct a bungee-jumping amusement at the local shopping center. If you want 
your customers to have a 5-s free-fall experience, how tall will you need to build the tower from which 
they’ll jump? (Don’t worry about the extra height needed to stop people after the bungee pulls taut.)
Answer: The tower should be about 122 m (402 ft or as high as a 40-story building).
Why: As they fall, the jumpers will travel downward at ever increasing speeds. Since the jumpers start 
from rest and fall downward for 5 s, we can use Eq. 1.2.3 to determine how far they will fall:
 final height = initial height −1
2 · 9.8 m/s2 · (5 s)2
 = initial height −122.5 m.
The downward acceleration is indicated here by the negative change in height. At the end of 5 s, the 
jumpers will have fallen more than 122 m (402 ft) and will be traveling downward at about 50 m/s 
(160 ft/s). The tower will need additional height to slow the jumpers down and begin bouncing them 
back upward. Clearly, a 5-s free fall is pretty unrealistic. Try for a 2- or 3-s free fall instead.
Tossing the Ball Upward
If the only force acting on an object is its weight, then the object is falling. So far, we’ve 
explored this principle only as it pertains to balls dropped from rest. However, a thrown ball 
is falling, too; once it leaves your hand, it’s subject only to its weight and it accelerates 
downward at 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2).
 
Equation 1.2.2 still describes how the ball’s velocity depends on the fall time, but now the 
initial velocity isn’t zero. If you toss the ball straight up in the air, it leaves your hand with a 
large upward velocity (Fig. 1.2.4). As soon as you let go of the ball, it begins to accelerate 
downward. If the ball’s initial upward velocity is 29.4 m/s (96 ft/s), then after 1 s its upward 
velocity is 19.6 m/s (64 ft/s). After another second, its upward velocity is only 9.8 m/s (32 ft/s). 
After a third second, the ball momentarily comes to a complete stop with a velocity of zero. It 
then descends from this peak height, falling just as it did when you dropped it from rest.
 
The ball’s fl ight before and after its peak is symmetrical. It travels upward quickly at 
fi rst, since it has a large upward velocity. As its upward velocity diminishes, it travels more 
and more slowly until it comes to a stop. It then begins to descend, slowly at fi rst and then 
faster and faster as it continues its constant downward acceleration. The time the ball takes 
to rise from its initial position in your hand to its peak height is exactly equal to the time it 
takes to descend back down from that peak to your hand. Equation 1.2.3 indicates how the 
position of the ball depends on the fall time, with the initial velocity being the upward 
velocity of the ball as it leaves your hand.
Fig. 1.2.4 The moment you let go of a ball 
thrown straight upward, it begins to accelerate 
downward at 9.8 m/s2. The ball rises but its 
upward velocity diminishes steadily until it 
momentarily comes to a stop. It then descends 
with its downward velocity increasing steadily. In 
this example, the ball rises for 3 s and comes to 
rest. It then descends for 3 s before returning to 
your hand in a very symmetrical fl ight.

Falling Balls 19
 
The larger the initial upward velocity of the ball, the longer it rises and the higher it 
goes before its velocity is reduced to zero. It then descends for the same amount of time it 
spent rising. The higher the ball goes before it begins to descend, the longer it takes to 
return to the ground and the faster it’s traveling when it arrives. That’s why catching a high 
fl y ball with your bare hands stings so much: the ball is traveling very, very fast when it hits 
your hands, and a large force is required to bring the ball to rest quickly.
Check Your Understanding #4: A Toss-Up
You toss a coin straight up, and it rises well above your head. At the moment the coin reaches its 
peak height, what is its velocity? Is that velocity constant or changing with time? Is the coin’s accel-
eration constant or changing with time?
Answer: The coin’s velocity is momentarily zero at its peak, but that velocity is changing with time. 
The coin’s acceleration, however, is constant—the acceleration due to gravity.
Why: Once the coin leaves your hand, it’s a falling object and constantly accelerates downward at the 
acceleration due to gravity. Because it begins its fall traveling upward, it rises at a gradually decreas-
ing speed, is momentarily motionless at its peak, and then descends at a gradually increasing speed.
How a Thrown Ball Moves: Projectile Motion
What happens if you don’t toss the ball exactly straight up? Suppose you throw the ball 
upward at some angle. The ball still rises to a peak height and then descends, but it also 
travels away from you horizontally so that it strikes the ground at some distance from 
your feet. How much does this horizontal travel complicate the motion of a falling ball?
 
The answer is not very much. One of the beautiful simplifi cations of physics is that 
you can often treat an object’s vertical motion independently of its horizontal motion. This 
technique involves separating the vector quantities—acceleration, velocity, and position—
into components, those portions of the quantities that lie along specifi c directions (Fig. 1.2.5). 
For example, the upward component of an object’s position is that object’s altitude.
 
A ball’s altitude, however, is only part of its position; you still need to know where it 
is in relation to your right or left and to your front or back. In fact, you can specify its posi-
tion (or any other vector quantity) in terms of three components along three directions that 
are perpendicular to one another. This means that you can completely specify the ball’s 
position by its distance to your right, its distance in front of you, and its altitude above you. 
If it’s to your left, behind you, or below you, the corresponding components have negative 
values. For example, the ball might be 3 m to your right, −3 m in front of you (which is 
3 m behind you), and 2 m above you.
 
When you drop the ball from rest or toss it straight up, its motion is entirely vertical and 
only the upward components of its position, velocity, and acceleration are important. When 
the falling ball is also moving horizontally, however, you’ll need to pay attention to the 
rightward and forward components of those vector quantities. Throwing the ball forward 
helps because it eliminates any rightward components of the motion. The ball then arcs 
forward with a position specifi ed at each moment by its altitude (its upward component) and 
its distance downfi eld (its forward component).
 
Although Eqs. 1.2.2 and 1.2.3 were introduced to describe a ball’s vertical motion, they 
also describe its horizontal motion. More generally, they relate three vector quantities—
the ball’s position, velocity, and constant acceleration—to one another and describe how 
the ball’s position and velocity change with time when that ball undergoes constant accel-
eration in any direction. Of course, since we’re concerned now with falling balls, the rele-
vant constant acceleration is the downward acceleration due to gravity.
 
These equations also apply to the components of the ball’s position, velocity, and con-
stant acceleration. If you add the words upward component of in front of each vector quantity 
Fig. 1.2.5 Even if the 
ball has a velocity that 
is neither purely vertical 
nor purely horizontal, its 
velocity may nonetheless 
be viewed as having an 
upward component and a 
downfi eld component. Part 
of its total velocity acts to 
move this ball upward, and 
part of its total velocity acts 
to move this ball downfi eld.

20 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
in Eqs. 1.2.2 and 1.2.3, the equations correctly describe the ball’s vertical motion. Now it’s 
time to add the words forward component of to those equations so that they describe the ball’s 
horizontal motion.
 
Once you’ve thrown the ball forward and are no longer touching it, its motion can be 
broken into two parts: its upward motion and its forward motion (Fig. 1.2.5). Part of the 
ball’s initial velocity is in the upward direction, and that upward component of velocity 
determines the object’s ascent and descent. Part of the ball’s initial velocity is in the forward 
direction, and that forward component of velocity determines the ball’s progress downfi eld.
 
Because the ball is accelerating straight downward, the forward component of its 
acceleration is zero and the forward component of its velocity thus remains constant. The 
ball travels downfi eld at a steady rate throughout its fl ight (Fig. 1.2.6). Overall, the upward 
component of the ball’s initial velocity determines how high the ball goes and how long it 
stays aloft before striking the ground, while the forward component of the initial velocity 
determines how quickly the ball travels downfi eld during its time aloft (Fig. 1.2.7).
 
Just before the ball hits the ground it still has its original forward component of 
velocity, but its upward component of velocity is now negative—the ball is moving 
downward. The total velocity of the ball is composed of these two components. The ball 
starts with its velocity directed up and forward, and fi nishes with its velocity directed 
down and forward.
 
If you want a ball or shot put to hit the ground as far from your feet as possible, you 
should keep it aloft for a long time and give it a sizable forward component of velocity; in 
other words, you must achieve a good balance between the upward and forward components 
of velocity (Fig. 1.2.8). These components of velocity together determine the ball’s fl ight 
path, its trajectory. If you throw the ball straight up, it will stay aloft for a long time but will 
not travel downfi eld at all (and you will need to wear a helmet). If you throw the ball directly 
forward, it will travel downfi eld quickly but hit the ground almost immediately.
 
Neglecting air resistance and the altitude difference between your throwing arm and 
the ground that the ball will eventually hit, your best choice is to throw the ball forward 
at an angle of 45° above horizontal. At that angle, the initial upward component of veloc-
ity will be the same as the initial forward component of velocity. The ball will stay aloft 
for a reasonably long time and will make good use of that time to move downfi eld. Other 
angles won’t make such good use of the initial speed to move the ball downfi eld. 
(A discussion of how to determine the upward and forward components of velocity 
appears in Appendix A, online.)
Fig. 1.2.6 This golf ball 
drifts steadily to the right 
after being thrown because 
gravity affects only the 
ball’s upward component 
of velocity.
Fig. 1.2.7 If you throw a 
ball upward, at an angle, part 
of the initial velocity will be 
in the upward direction and 
part will be in the downfi eld 
direction. The vertical and 
horizontal motions will take 
place independently of one 
another. The ball will rise 
and fall just as it did in Figs. 
1.2.3 and 1.2.4; at the 
same time, however, it will 
move downfi eld. Because 
there is no horizontal 
component of acceleration 
(gravity acts only in the 
vertical direction), the 
downfi eld component of 
velocity remains constant 
during the ball’s 6-s trip.

Ramps 21
 
These same ideas apply to two baseballs, one dropped from a cliff and the other thrown 
directly forward from that same cliff. If both leave your hands at the same time, they will 
both hit the ground below at the same time (Fig. 1.2.9). The fact that the second ball has an 
initial forward velocity doesn’t affect the time it takes to descend to the ground because the 
horizontal and vertical motions are independent. Of course, the ball thrown directly for-
ward will strike the ground far from the base of the cliff, while the dropped ball will land 
directly below your hand.
Fig. 1.2.8 If you want the ball to hit the ground as far 
from your feet as possible, given a certain initial speed, 
throw the ball at 45° above horizontal. Halfway between 
horizontal and vertical, such a throw gives the ball equal 
initial upward and downfi eld components of velocity. The 
ball then stays aloft for a relatively long time and makes 
good use of that fl ight time to travel downfi eld.
Height (m)
60
40
20
00
50
45°
Distance downﬁeld (m)
100
150
200
Fig. 1.2.9 When these 
two balls were dropped, 
they accelerated downward 
at the constant rate of 
9.8 m/s2 and their 
velocities increased 
steadily in the downward 
direction. Even though 
one of them was initially 
moving to the right, they 
descended together.
© Richard Megna/Fundamental 
Photographs
Check Your Understanding #5: Aim High
Why must a sharpshooter or an archer aim somewhat above her target? Why can’t she simply aim 
directly at the bull’s-eye to hit it?
Answer: The bullet or arrow will fall in fl ight, so she must compensate for its loss of height.
Why: To hit the bull’s-eye, the sharpshooter or archer must aim above the bull’s-eye because the 
projectile will fall in fl ight. Even if the target is higher or lower than the sharpshooter, the projectile 
will fall below the point at which she is aiming. The longer the bullet or arrow is in fl ight, the more it 
will fall and the higher she must aim. As the distance to the target increases, the fl ight time increases 
and her aim must move upward.
SECTION 1.3 
Ramps
In the previous section, we looked at what happens to an 
object experiencing only a single force, its weight. But what 
happens to objects that experience two or more forces at the 
same time? Imagine, for example, an object resting on the 
fl oor. That object experiences both its downward weight and 
an upward force from the fl oor. If the fl oor is level, the object 
doesn’t accelerate; but if the fl oor is tilted, so that it forms a 
ramp, the object accelerates downhill. In this section, we’ll 
examine the motion of objects traveling along ramps. In addi-
tion to making sports such as skateboarding and skiing more 
fun, ramps are common tools that help us lift and move heavy 
objects.
Questions to Think About: How does a ramp make it 
possible for one person to lift a very heavy object? Why is 
lowering a heavy object so much easier than raising it? 
What changes about that object as you raise it? Why is a 
steep hill so much scarier to ski or sled down than a more 
gradual slope? Why is the steeper hill so much harder to 
bicycle up?
Hand
truck
Ramp

22 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
A Piano on the Sidewalk
Imagine that you have a friend who’s a talented but undiscovered pianist. She’s renting a 
new apartment, and because she can’t afford professional movers (Fig. 1.3.1), she’s asked 
you to help her move her baby grand. Fortunately, her new apartment is only on the second 
fl oor. The two of you still face a diffi cult challenge, however: how do you get that heavy 
piano up there? More important, how do you keep it from falling on you during the move?
 
The problem is that you can’t push upward hard enough to lift the entire piano at once. 
One solution to this problem, of course, would be to break the piano into pieces and carry 
them up one by one. This method has obvious drawbacks—your friend isn’t expecting a 
fi rewood delivery. A better solution would be to fi nd something else to help you push 
upward, and one of your best choices is the simple machine known as a ramp.
 
Throughout the ages, ramps, also known as inclined planes, have made tasks like 
piano-moving possible. Because ramps can exert the enormous upward forces needed to lift 
stone and steel, they’ve been essential building equipment since the days of the pyramids. To 
see how ramps provide these lifting forces, we’ll continue to explore the example of the 
piano, looking fi rst at the force that the piano experiences when it touches a surface. For the 
time being, we’ll continue to ignore friction and forces due to the air; they will needlessly 
complicate our discussion. Besides, as long as the piano is on wheels, friction is negligible.
 
With the piano resting on the sidewalk outside the apartment, you make a startling 
discovery: the piano is not falling. Has gravity disappeared? The answer to that question 
would be painfully obvious if your foot were underneath one of the piano’s wheels. No, the 
piano’s weight is still all there. But something is happening at the surface of the sidewalk 
to keep the piano from falling. Let’s take a careful look at the situation.
 
To begin with, the piano is clearly pushing down hard on the sidewalk. That’s why 
you’re keeping your toes out of the way. But the presence of a new downward force on the 
sidewalk doesn’t explain why the piano isn’t falling. Instead, we must look at the sidewalk’s 
response to the piano’s downward push: the sidewalk pushes upward on the piano! You can 
feel this response by leaning over and pushing down on the sidewalk with your hand—the 
sidewalk will push back. Those two forces, your downward push on the sidewalk and its 
upward push on your hand, are exactly equal in magnitude but opposite in direction.
 
This observation—that two things exert equal but opposite forces on one another, isn’t 
unique to sidewalks, pianos, or hands; in fact, it’s always true. If you push on any object, 
that object will push back on you with an equal amount of force in exactly the opposite 
direction. This rule—often expressed as “for every action, there is an equal but opposite 
reaction”—is known as Newton’s third law of motion, the last of his three laws.
© SSPL via/Getty Images, Inc.
Fig. 1.3.1 A ramp would 
make this move much 
easier.
affect your ability to stop the bottle from rolling downhill? Now 
try to push the bottle uphill with the pencil (1) when the table 
is slightly tilted and (2) when it is more sharply tilted. Which 
task requires more force? Why?
 
Evidently a gentle push is all that may be needed to 
raise a relatively heavy object if you use a ramp to help you. 
To understand why this feat is possible, we need to explore 
a handful of physical concepts and a few basic laws of 
motion.
Experiments to Do: Place an unbreakable water bottle on a 
level table or board. Hold the bottle steady for a second and 
then let go of it without pushing on it. Why does the bottle 
remain motionless?
 
Now, equip yourself with a pencil. Have a friend tilt the 
surface of the table or board slightly so that the bottle begins 
to roll downhill. Can you stop the bottle by pushing on it with 
the pencil? Place the bottle back on the table and have your 
friend tilt the table more sharply. Does the tilt of the table 
NEWTON’S THIRD LAW OF MOTION
For every force that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but oppo-
sitely directed force that the second object exerts on the fi rst object.

Ramps 23
SUMMARY OF NEWTON’S LAWS OF MOTION
1. An object that is not subject to any outside forces moves at a constant velocity, 
covering equal distances in equal times along a straight-line path.
2. The net force exerted on an object is equal to that object’s mass times its acceler-
ation. The acceleration is in the same direction as the force.
3. For every force that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but 
oppositely directed force that the second object exerts on the fi rst object.
 
The universality of this law is astounding. Whether an object is large or small, hard or 
soft, stationary or faster than a rocket, if you can push on it, it will push back on you with 
an equal but oppositely directed force.
 
In the present case, the sidewalk and piano push on one another with equal but oppo-
sitely directed forces. Of this pair of equal-but-opposite forces, only one force acts on the 
piano: the sidewalk’s upward push. This upward push on the piano is what keeps the piano 
from falling. We’ve solved the mystery.
INTUITION ALERT: Action and Reaction
Intuition says that, when you push an object that’s moving away from you, it pushes back more 
gently on you than you push on it and that, when you push an object that’s moving toward you, it 
pushes back harder on you than you push on it.
Physics says that when you push on an object, it always pushes back on you exactly as hard as 
you push on it.
Resolution: It’s diffi cult to push on an object that’s moving away from you, so you naturally push 
on it more gently than you expect. The gentle force it exerts on you is simply an equal but oppo-
sitely directed response to your gentle force on it. In contrast, it’s diffi cult not to push strongly on 
an object that’s moving toward you, so you naturally push on it harder than you expect. The strong 
force it exerts on you is again an equal but oppositely direct response to your strong force on it.
Check Your Understanding #1: Swinging
You are pushing a child on a playground swing. If you exert a 50-N (11-lbf) force on him as he is 
swinging away from you, how much force will he exert back on you?
Answer: He will exert 50 N (11 lbf) on you.
Why: Whenever you exert a 50-N force on an object, whether it’s moving or stationary, it will exert a 
50-N force back on you. There are no exceptions. If that object is a friend, it doesn’t matter whether 
she is stationary or moving or wearing roller skates or even sound asleep; she will push back with 
50 N of force. She has no choice in the matter. Similarly, if someone pushes on you, you will feel 
yourself pushing back. That’s how Newton’s third law works.
Looking for Support and Adding Up the Forces
Although we’ve fi gured out why the piano isn’t falling, we still don’t know what type of 
force the sidewalk is using to hold it up or why that upward force so perfectly balances the 
piano’s downward weight.
 
Let’s begin with the type of force. Since two objects can’t occupy the same space at the 
same time, their surfaces push apart whenever they’re in contact. They exert support forces 

24 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
on one another, each pushing the other directly away from its surface—the direction nor-
mal or perpendicular to its surface (see 5 ). Since the sidewalk is horizontal, the support 
force it exerts on the piano is vertical—straight up (Fig. 1.3.2).
 
How large is that support force? To answer this question, suppose the sidewalk’s sup-
port force were strong enough to make the piano accelerate upward. The piano would soon 
lift off the sidewalk, and as their surfaces stopped touching, the sidewalk’s support force on 
the piano would grow weaker. Alternatively, suppose the sidewalk’s support force was 
weak enough to let the piano accelerate downward. The piano would soon drop into the 
sidewalk, and as their surfaces overlapped more, the sidewalk’s support force on the piano 
would grow stronger.
 
Because of these behaviors, the sidewalk’s upward support force on the piano adjusts 
automatically until it exactly balances the piano’s downward weight and the piano acceler-
ates neither up nor down. When you sit on the piano during a break, the sidewalk’s upward 
support force quickly readjusts to balance your weight as well.
 
Another way to state that the upward support force on the piano exactly balances the 
piano’s downward weight is to say that the net force on the piano is zero, meaning that the 
sum of all the forces on the piano is zero. Objects often experience more than one force at 
a time, and it’s the net force, together with the object’s mass, that determines how it accel-
erates. When you and your friend push the piano in the same direction, your forces add up, 
assisting one another so that the piano accelerates in that direction (Fig. 1.3.3a). When the 
two of you push the piano in opposite directions, your forces oppose and at least partially 
cancel one another (Fig. 1.3.3b).
 
When the two of you push the piano at an angle with respect to one another, the net 
force points somewhere in between. For example, if you push the piano eastward while 
your friend pushes it northward, the net force will point to the northeast and the piano will 
accelerate in that direction (Fig. 1.3.3c). The precise angle of the net force and the piano’s 
subsequent acceleration depend on exactly how hard each person pushes. For most of the 
following discussion, we’ll need only a rough estimate of the net force’s magnitude and 
direction, and we’ll obtain that estimate using common sense.
 
Apart from direction, there’s one crucial difference between the force that gravity 
exerts on the piano and the support force that the sidewalk exerts on it. While the piano’s 
weight is dispersed throughout the piano, the sidewalk’s upward support force acts only on 
the piano’s wheels. Even when the net force on the piano is zero, having individual forces 
act on it at different locations can lead to considerable stress within the piano. If it weren’t 
built so well, the piano might lose a leg or two during the move.
(b)
(c)
(b)
(a)
Force 1
Force 2
Net force
Net force
Force 2
Force 1
Force 1
Force 1
Force 2
Force 2
Net force
Net force
Net force
Force 2
Force 1
Force 1
Force 2
Net force
Fig. 1.3.3 When several forces act simultaneously on an object, the object responds to the sum of the 
forces. This sum is called the net force, and it has both a magnitude and a direction. Here, as elsewhere 
in this book, the length of each force arrow indicates its magnitude. You can sum the forces graphically by 
arranging the force arrows in sequence, head to tail. The net force arrow then points from the tail of the fi rst 
arrow to the head of the last arrow. Some of the force arrows are shown displaced slightly for clarity, a shift 
that doesn’t affect the summing process.
Fig. 1.3.2 A piano 
resting on the sidewalk. 
The sidewalk exerts an 
upward support force that 
exactly balances the piano’s 
downward weight. The net 
force on the piano is zero, so 
the piano doesn’t accelerate.
5  Forces that are directed 
exactly away from 
surfaces are called 
normal forces, since the 
term normal is used by 
mathematicians to 
describe something that 
points exactly away from 
a surface—at a right angle 
or perpendicular to that 
surface.

Ramps 25
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Newton’s Third Law and Balanced Forces
Misconception: When you push on an object and it pushes back on you, those two equal-but-
opposite forces somehow cancel one another perfectly and therefore have no effect on either you 
or the object.
Resolution: The two forces described by Newton’s third law always act on two different things. 
Your push acts on the object, while the object’s push acts on you. Since the object accelerates in 
response to the net force it experiences—the sum of all the individual forces acting on it—it is 
affected only by your force on it, not by its force on you. If you are the only thing pushing on it, it 
will accelerate. If the object is the only thing pushing on you, you’ll accelerate, too!
What the Piano Needs: Energy
As you approach the task of lifting your friend’s piano into her apartment, you might begin 
to worry about safety. There is clearly a difference between the piano resting on the side-
walk and the piano suspended on a board just outside the second-fl oor apartment. After all, 
which one would you rather be sitting beneath? The elevated piano has something that the 
piano on the sidewalk doesn’t have: the ability to do things—to break the board, to produce 
motion, and to squash whatever is beneath it. This capacity to make things happen is called 
energy, and the process of making them happen is called work.
 
Energy and work are both important physical quantities, meaning that both are mea-
surable. For example, you can measure the amount of energy in the suspended piano and 
the amount of work the piano does when the board breaks and it falls to the sidewalk. As 
you may suspect, the physical defi nitions of energy and work are somewhat different from 
those of common English. Physical energy isn’t the exuberance of a child at the amuse-
ment park or what’s contained in a so-called “energy drink”; instead, it’s defi ned as the 
capacity to do work. Similarly, physical work doesn’t refer to activities at the offi ce or in 
the yard; instead, it refers to the process of transferring energy.
 
Energy is what’s transferred, and work does the transferring. The most important char-
acteristic of energy is that it’s conserved. In physics, a conserved quantity is one that can’t 
be created or destroyed but that can be transferred between objects or, in the case of energy, 
be converted from one form to another. Conserved quantities are very special in physics; 
there are only a few of them. An object that has energy can’t simply make that energy dis-
appear; it can only get rid of energy by giving it to another object, and it makes this transfer 
by doing work on that object.
 
The relationship between energy and work is analogous to the relationship between 
money and spending: money is what is transferred, and spending does the transferring. 
Sensible, law-abiding citizens don’t create or destroy money; instead, they transfer it 
among themselves through spending. Just as the most interesting aspect of money is spend-
ing it, so the most interesting aspect of energy is doing work with it. We can defi ne money 
as the capacity to spend, just as we defi ne energy as the capacity to do work.
Check Your Understanding #2: Riding the Elevator
As you ride upward in an elevator at a constant velocity, what two forces act on your body and what 
is the net force on you?
Answer: The two forces are your downward weight and an upward support force from the fl oor. They 
balance, so that the net force on you is zero.
Why: Whenever anything is moving with constant velocity, it’s not accelerating and thus has zero net 
force on it. Although the elevator is moving upward, the fact that you are not accelerating means that 
the car must exert an upward support force on you that exactly balances your weight. You experience 
zero net force.

26 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
 
So far we’ve been using a circular defi nition: work is the transfer of energy, and energy 
is the capacity to do work. But what is involved in doing work on an object? You do work 
on an object by exerting a force on it as it moves in the direction of that force. As you throw 
a ball, exerting a forward force on the ball as the ball moves forward, you do work on the 
ball; as you lift a rock, pushing the rock upward as it moves upward, you do work on the 
rock. In both cases, you transfer energy from yourself to an object by doing work on it.
 
This transferred energy is often apparent in the object. When you throw a ball, it 
picks up speed and undergoes an increase in kinetic energy, energy of motion that allows 
the ball to do work on whatever it hits. When you lift a rock, it shifts farther from Earth 
and undergoes an increase in gravitational potential energy, energy stored in the grav-
itational forces between the rock and Earth that allows the rock to do work on whatever 
it falls on. In general, potential energy is energy stored in the forces between or within 
objects.
 
Returning to the task at hand, it’s now apparent that raising the piano to the second-fl oor 
apartment is going to increase the piano’s gravitational potential energy by a substantial 
amount. Since energy is a conserved quantity, this additional energy must come from 
something else. Unfortunately, that something is you! To deliver the piano, you are going 
to have to provide it with the gravitational potential energy it needs by doing exactly that 
amount of work on it. As we’ll see, you can do that work the hard way by carrying it up a 
ladder or the easy way by pushing it up a ramp.
Check Your Understanding #3: No Shortage of Energy
Do any of these objects have energy they can spare: a compressed spring, an infl ated toy balloon, a 
stick of dynamite, and a falling ball?
Answer: Yes, they all do.
Why: Each of these four objects can easily do work on you and thereby give you some of its spare 
energy. It does this work by pushing on you as you move in the direction of that push.
Lifting the Piano: Doing Work
To do work on an object, you must push on it while it moves in the direction of your push. 
The work you do on it is the force you exert on it times the distance it travels along the 
direction of your force. We can express this relationship as a word equation:
 
work = force · distance, 
(1.3.1)
in symbols:
W = F · d,
and in everyday language:
If you’re not pushing or it’s not moving, then you’re not working.
This simple relationship assumes that your force is constant while you’re doing the work. 
If your force varies, the calculation of work will have to recognize that variation and may 
require the use of calculus.
 
Calculating the work you do is easy if the object moves exactly in the direction of 
your constant push; you simply multiply your force times the distance the object travels. 
However, if the object doesn’t move in the direction of your push, you must multiply your 

Ramps 27
force times the component of the object’s motion that lies along the direction of your 
force.
 
As long as the angle between your force and the object’s motion is small, you can often 
ignore this complication. However, as the angle becomes larger, the work you do on the 
object decreases. When the object moves at right angles to your force, the work you do on 
it drops to zero—it’s not moving along the direction of your force at all. And for angles 
larger than 90°, the object moves opposite your force and the work you do on it actually 
becomes negative!
 
Recalling that forces always come in equal but oppositely directed pairs, we can now 
explain why energy is conserved: whenever you do work on an object, that object simul-
taneously does an equal amount of negative work on you! After all, if you push an object 
and it moves along the direction of your force, then it pushes back on you and you move 
along the direction opposite its force. You do positive work on it, and it does negative 
work on you.
 
For example, when you lift the piano to judge its weight, you push it up as it moves up 
and thus do work on it. At the same time, the piano pushes your hand down but your hand 
moves up, so it does negative work on your hand. Overall, the piano’s energy increases by 
exactly the same amount that your energy decreases—a perfect transfer! The energy that 
you’re losing is mostly food energy, a form of chemical potential energy, and the energy the 
piano is gaining is mostly gravitational potential energy.
 
When you lower the piano after realizing that it’s too heavy to carry up a ladder, the 
process is reversed and the piano transfers energy back to you. Now the piano does work 
on you, and you do an equal amount of negative work on the piano. The piano is losing 
mostly gravitational potential energy, and you are gaining mostly thermal energy—a disor-
dered form of energy that we’ll examine in Section 2.2. Unlike a rubber band, your body 
just isn’t good at storing work done on it, so it simply gets hotter. Nonetheless, it’s usually 
easier to have work done on you than to do work on something else. That’s why it’s easier 
to lower objects than to lift them.
 
Finally, when you hold the piano motionless above the pavement, while waiting for 
your friend to reinstall the wheel that fell off, you and the piano do no work on one another. 
You are simply converting chemical potential energy from your last meal into thermal 
energy in your muscles and getting overheated, probably in more ways than one.
CONSERVED QUANTITY: ENERGY 
TRANSFERRED BY: WORK
Energy: The capacity to do work. Energy has no direction. It can be hidden as potential 
energy.
Kinetic energy: The form of energy contained in an object’s motion.
Potential energy: The form of energy stored in the forces between or within objects.
Work: The mechanical means for transferring energy; work = force · distance.
Check Your Understanding #4: Pitching
When you throw a baseball horizontally, you’re not pushing against gravity. Are you doing any work on 
the baseball?
Answer: Yes.
Why: Any time you exert a force on an object and the object moves in the direction of that force, you 
are doing work on the object. Since gravity doesn’t affect horizontal motion, the work you do on the 
baseball as you throw it ends up in the baseball as kinetic energy (energy of motion). As anyone who 
has been hit by a pitch can attest, a moving baseball has more energy than a stationary baseball.

28 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
Gravitational Potential Energy
How much work would you do on the piano while lifting it straight up a ladder to the apartment? 
Apart from a little extra shove to get the piano moving upward, lifting it would entail supporting 
the piano’s weight while it coasted upward at constant velocity from the sidewalk to the second 
fl oor. Since you would be pushing upward on the piano with a force equal in amount to its 
weight, the work you would do on it would be its weight times the distance you lifted it.
 
As the piano rises in this scenario, its gravitational potential energy increases by an 
amount equal to the work you do on it. If we agree that the piano has zero gravitational 
potential energy when it rests on the sidewalk, then the suspended piano’s gravitational 
potential energy is simply its weight times its height above the sidewalk. Since the piano’s 
weight is equal to its mass times the acceleration due to gravity, its gravitational potential 
energy is its mass times the acceleration due to gravity times its height above the sidewalk.
 
These ideas aren’t limited to pianos. You can determine the gravitational potential 
energy of any object by multiplying its mass times the acceleration due to gravity times its 
height above the level at which its gravitational potential energy is zero. This relationship 
can be expressed as a word equation:
 
gravitational potential energy = mass · acceleration due to gravity · height, 
(1.3.2)
in symbols:
U = m · g · h,
and in common language:
The higher it was, the harder it hit.
Of course, if you know the object’s weight, you can use it in place of the object’s mass 
times the acceleration due to gravity.
 
So what is the piano’s gravitational potential energy when it reaches the second fl oor? 
If it weighs 2000 N (450 lbf) and the second fl oor is 5 m (16 ft) above the sidewalk, you 
will have done 10,000 N · m (about 7200 ft · lbf) of work in lifting it up there, and the 
piano’s gravitational potential energy will thus be 10,000 N · m. The newton-meter is the 
SI unit of energy and work; it’s so important that it has its own name, the joule (abbreviated J). 
At the second fl oor, the piano’s gravitational potential energy is 10,000 J.
 
A few everyday examples should give you a feeling for how much energy a joule is. 
Lifting a liter bottle of water 10 centimeters (4 inches) upward requires about 1 J of work. 
Check Your Figures #1: Light Work, Heavy Work
You are moving books to a new shelf, 1.20 m (3.94 ft) above the old shelf. The books weigh 10.0 N 
(2.25 lbf) each, and you have 10 of them to move. How much work must you do on them as you move 
them? Does it matter how many you move at once?
Answer: It takes 120 N · m (88.6 ft · lbf), no matter how many you lift at once.
Why: To keep each book from accelerating downward, you must support its weight with an upward 
force of 10.0 N. You must then move it upward 1.20 m. The work you do pushing upward on the book 
as it moves upward is given by Eq. 1.3.1:
work = force · distance = 10.0 N · 1.20 m = 12.0 N · m.
It takes 12.0 N · m of work to lift each book, whether you lift it together with other books or all by 
itself. The total work you must do on all 10 books is 120 N · m.

Ramps 29
A 1500-watt hairdryer needs 1500 J every second to operate. Your body is able to extract 
about 2,000,000 J from a slice of cherry pie. When you’re bicycling or rowing hard, your 
body can do about 1000 J of work each second. A typical fl ashlight battery has about 
10,000 J of stored energy.
Quantity 
SI Unit 
English Unit 
SI → English 
English → SI
Energy 
joule (J) = newton-meter (N · m) 
foot-pound (ft · lbf) 
1 J = 0.73757 ft · lbf 
1 ft-lbf = 1.3558 J
Check Your Understanding #5: Mountain Biking
Bicycling to the top of a mountain is much harder than rolling back down to the bottom. At which 
place do you have the most gravitational potential energy?
Answer: You have the most at the top of the mountain.
Why: Bicycling up the mountain is hard because you must do work against the force of gravity. This 
work is stored as an increasing gravitational potential energy on your way uphill. Gravity then does 
work on you as you roll downhill and your gravitational potential energy decreases.
Lifting the Piano with a Ramp
Unfortunately, you probably can’t carry a grand piano up a ladder by yourself. You need a 
ramp, both to help you support the piano and to make it easier for you to raise the piano to 
the second fl oor.
 
Like the sidewalk, a ramp exerts a support force on the piano to prevent the piano from 
passing through its surface. However, since the ramp isn’t exactly horizontal, that support 
force isn’t exactly vertical (Fig. 1.3.4). The piano’s weight still points straight down, but 
since the ramp’s support force doesn’t point straight up, the two forces can’t balance one 
another. There is a nonzero net force on the piano.
 
This net force can’t point into or out of the ramp. If it did, the piano would accelerate 
into or out of the ramp and the two objects would soon either lose contact or travel through 
one another. Instead, the net force points exactly along the surface of the ramp—a direction 
tangent or parallel to the surface. More specifi cally, it points directly downhill, so the piano 
accelerates down the ramp!
 
However, because this net force is much smaller than the piano’s weight, the piano’s 
acceleration down the ramp is slower than if it were falling freely. This effect is familiar to 
anyone who has bicycled downhill or watched a cup slip slowly off a tilted table. Although 
gravity is still responsible, these objects accelerate more slowly than they would if falling 
and in the direction of the downward slope.
Check Your Figures #2: Watch Out Below
If you carry a U.S. penny (0.0025 kg) to the top of the Empire State Building (443.2 m, or 1453.7 ft), 
how much gravitational potential energy will it have?
Answer: About 11 J.
Why: The penny’s gravitational potential energy is given by Eq. 1.3.2:
 gravitational potential energy = 0.0025 kg · 9.8 N/kg · 443.2 m
 = 11 N · m = 11 J.
This 11-J increase in energy would be quite evident if you were to drop the penny. In principle, the 
penny could accelerate to very high speed (up to 340 km/h or 210 mph) and do lots of damage when 
it hit the ground. Fortunately, a falling penny actually tumbles through the air, which slows it to about 
40 km/h or 25 mph.
Fig. 1.3.4 When a piano is 
on a ramp, its weight and the 
ramp’s support force don’t 
cancel. Instead, they sum 
to a downhill ramp force. If 
no other forces act on the 
piano, the ramp force is its 
net force and it accelerates 
downhill.

30 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
 
Therein lies the beauty of the ramp. By putting the piano on a ramp, you let the ramp 
support most of the piano’s weight. The piano experiences only a small residual force, 
which I call a ramp force, pushing it downhill along the ramp. If you now push uphill on 
the piano with a force that exactly balances that downhill ramp force, the net force on the 
piano drops to zero and the piano stops accelerating. If you push uphill a little harder, the 
piano will accelerate up the ramp!
 
How does the ramp change the job of moving the piano? Suppose that you build a ramp 
50 m (164 ft) long that extends from the sidewalk to the apartment’s balcony, 5 m (16.4 ft) 
above the pavement. This ramp is sloped so that traveling 50 m uphill along its surface lifts 
the piano only 5 m upward (Fig. 1.3.5). Because of the ramp’s 10 to 1 ratio between distance 
traveled along its surface and altitude change, you can push the 2000-N (450-lbf) piano up 
it at constant velocity with a force of only 200 N (45 lbf). Most people can push that hard, 
so the moving job is now realistic. To reach the apartment, you must push the piano 50 m 
along this ramp with a force of 200 N so that you will do a total of 10,000 J of work.
 
By pushing the piano up the ramp, you’ve used physical principles to help you perform 
a task that would otherwise have been nearly impossible. You didn’t get something for 
nothing, however. The ramp is much longer than the ladder, and you have had to push the 
piano for a longer distance to raise it to the second fl oor. Of course, you have had to push 
with less force.
 
Remarkably, the amount of work you do in either case is 10,000 J. When you carry 
the piano up the ladder, the force you exert is large but the distance the piano travels in the 
direction of that force is small. When you push the piano up the ramp, the force is small 
but the distance is large. Either way, the fi nal result is the same: the piano ends up on the 
second fl oor with an additional 10,000 J of gravitational potential energy and you have 
done 10,000 J of work. Expressed graphically in an equation, this relationship appears as:
work = large force · small distance = small force · large distance.
 
In the absence of friction, the amount of work you do on the piano to get it to the sec-
ond fl oor doesn’t depend on how you raise it. No matter how you move that piano up to the 
second fl oor, its gravitational potential energy will increase by 10,000 J, so you’ll have to 
do 10,000 J of work on it. Even if you disassemble the piano into parts, carry them individ-
ually up the stairs, and reconstruct the piano in your friend’s living room, you will have 
done 10,000 J of work lifting the piano.
 
Unless you’re an experienced piano tuner, you’ll probably be better off sticking with 
the ramp. It offers an easy method for one person to lift a baby grand piano. The ramp 
provides mechanical advantage, the process whereby a mechanical device redistributes 
the amounts of force and distance that go into performing a specifi c amount of mechanical 
work. In moving the piano with the help of the ramp, you’ve performed a task that would 
normally require a large force over a small distance by supplying a small force over a large 
distance. You might wonder whether the ramp itself does any work on the piano; it doesn’t. 
Although the ramp exerts a support force on the piano and the piano moves along the 
ramp’s surface, this force and the distance traveled are at right angles to one another. The 
ramp does no work on the piano.
 
Mechanical advantage occurs in many situations involving ramps. For example, it 
appears when you ride a bicycle up a hill. Climbing a gradual hill takes far less uphill force 
than climbing a steep hill of the same height. Since your pedaling ultimately provides the 
uphill force, it’s much easier to climb the gradual hill than the steep one. Of course, you 
must travel a longer distance along the road as you climb the gradual hill than you do on 
the steep hill, so the work you do is the same in either case.
 
Ramps and inclined planes show up in many devices, where they reduce the forces 
needed to perform otherwise diffi cult tasks. They also change the character of certain activ-
ities. Skiing wouldn’t be very much fun if the only slopes available were horizontal or 
vertical. By choosing ski slopes of various grades, you can select the ramp forces that set 
2000 N
5 m
5 m
200 N
(a)
(b)
m
0 N
50 m
Fig. 1.3.5 To lift a piano 
weighing 2000 N, you can 
either (a) push it straight up 
or (b) push it along a ramp. 
To keep the piano moving 
at a constant velocity, 
you must make sure it 
experiences a net force of 
zero. If you lift it straight up 
the ladder in (a), you must 
exert an upward lifting force 
of 2000 N to balance the 
piano’s downward weight. 
If you push it up the ramp 
shown in (b), you will only 
have to push the piano 
uphill with a force of 200 N 
to give the piano a net force 
of zero.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 31
you in motion. Gentle slopes leave only small ramp forces and small accelerations; steep 
slopes produce large ramp forces and large accelerations.
 
Finally, our observation about mechanical advantage is this: mechanical advantage 
allows you to do the same work, but you must make a trade-off—you must choose whether 
you want a large force or a large distance. The product of the two parts, force times dis-
tance, remains the same.
Check Your Understanding #6: Access Ramps
Ramps for handicap entrances to buildings are often quite long and may even involve several sharp 
turns. A shorter, straighter ramp would seem much more convenient. What consideration leads the 
engineers designing these ramps to make them so long?
Answer: The engineers must limit the amount of force needed to propel a wheelchair steadily up the 
ramp. The steeper the ramp, the more force is required.
Why: A person traveling in a wheelchair on a level surface experiences little horizontal force and can 
move at constant velocity with very little effort. However, climbing a ramp at constant velocity requires 
a substantial uphill force equal in magnitude to the downhill force from gravity. The steeper the ramp, 
the more uphill force is needed to maintain constant velocity. A 12 to 1 grade (12 meter of ramp 
surface for each meter of rise in height) is the accepted limit to how steep such a long ramp can be.
Epilogue for Chapter 1
In this chapter we have examined three everyday things and explored the basic physical 
laws that govern their behaviors. In Skating, we looked at the concept of inertia and 
observed that objects accelerate only in response to forces. In Falling Balls, we introduced 
an important type of force—weight—and saw how weight causes unsupported objects to 
fall with equal downward accelerations.
 
In Ramps, we encountered another type of force—support force. We also saw how the 
work done in changing an object’s altitude doesn’t depend on how you raise the object, 
since work is actually the mechanical means for transferring energy from one object to 
another. Energy, we noted, is one of the conserved physical quantities that govern the 
motion of objects in our universe. The particular type of energy we studied in Ramps was 
gravitational potential energy, the potential energy associated with the force of gravity.
Explanation: Removing a Tablecloth from a Table
The dishes remain in place because of their inertia. As we’ve seen, an object in motion 
tends to remain in motion, while an object at rest tends to remain at rest.
 
Before you pull on the tablecloth, the dishes sit motionless on its surface, and they tend 
to remain that way. By sliding the tablecloth off the table as quickly and smoothly as pos-
sible, you ensure that whatever force the tablecloth exerts on each dish occurs only for a 
very short time. As a result, the dishes undergo only the tiniest changes in velocity and 
remain essentially stationary on the tabletop.
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Skating Works: When you’re gliding forward on frictionless skates, you experience no 
horizontal forces and move at a constant velocity. Inertia alone carries you forward. To change 
your velocity—to accelerate—something must exert a horizontal force on you. A forward force 
speeds you up, while a backward force slows you down. Since sideways forces change your 
direction of travel, they, too, make you accelerate.

32 
CHAPTER 1 The Laws of Motion
1. Newton’s fi rst law of motion: An object that is free from all 
outside forces travels at a constant velocity, covering equal dis-
tances in equal times along a straight-line path.
2. Newton’s second law of motion: An object’s acceleration is 
equal to the net force exerted on that object divided by the ob-
ject’s mass, or
 
net force = mass · acceleration. 
(1.1.2)
3. Relationship between mass and weight: An object’s weight is 
equal to its mass times the acceleration due to gravity, or
 
weight = mass · acceleration due to gravity. 
(1.2.1)
4. Velocity of an object experiencing constant acceleration: The 
object’s present velocity differs from its initial velocity by its 
acceleration times the time since it was at that initial velocity, or
present velocity = initial velocity
 
          + acceleration · time. 
(1.2.2)
5. Position of an object experiencing constant acceleration: The 
object’s present position differs from its initial position by its 
average velocity since it was at that initial position times the 
time since it was at that initial position, or
present position = initial position + initial velocity · time
 
         + 1
2 · acceleration · time2. 
(1.2.3)
6. Newton’s third law of motion: For every force that one object 
exerts on a second object, there is an equal but oppositely directed 
force that the second object exerts on the fi rst object.
7. Defi nition of work: The work done on an object is equal to the 
force exerted on that object times the distance that object travels 
in the direction of the force, or
 
work = force · distance. 
(1.3.1)
8. Gravitational potential energy: An object’s gravitational po-
tential energy is its mass times the acceleration due to gravity 
times its height above a zero level, or
gravitational potential energy = mass · acceleration
                                                     due to gravity · height. (1.3.2)
How Falling Balls Work: Any ball that’s subject only to its weight—the force due to gravity—
is a falling ball. It accelerates downward at a steady rate. Gravity affects only the ball’s ver-
tical motion, causing the ball’s vertical component of velocity to increase steadily in the 
downward direction. If the ball were initially moving horizontally, it would continue that 
horizontal motion and drift steadily downfi eld as it falls.
 
A falling ball that’s initially rising soon stops rising and begins to descend. The larger its 
initial upward component of velocity, the longer the ball rises and the greater its peak height. 
When the ball then begins to descend, the peak height determines how long it takes for the 
ball to reach the ground.
 
When you throw a ball, the vertical component of initial velocity determines how long the 
ball remains aloft. The horizontal component of initial velocity determines how quickly the 
ball moves downfi eld. A thrower intuitively chooses an initial speed and direction for a ball so 
that it moves just the right distance downfi eld by the time it descends to the desired height.
How Ramps Work: An object at rest on level ground experiences two forces: its downward 
weight and an upward support force from the ground that exactly balances that weight. The 
net force on the object is thus zero. If the ground is replaced with a ramp, however, the sup-
port force is no longer directly upward and the net force on the object isn’t zero. Instead, the 
net force points downhill along the ramp and is a ramp force that’s equal to the weight of the 
object multiplied by the ratio of the ramp’s rise to the ramp’s length. If a 10-m-long ramp 
rises 1 m in height, then this ratio is 1 m divided by 10 m, or 0.10. The ramp force downhill 
along this ramp is thus only 10% of the object’s weight.
 
To stop an object from accelerating down a ramp, you must balance the downhill ramp 
force by pushing equally hard uphill. In fact, if you exert more force up the ramp than it expe-
riences down the ramp, the object will begin to accelerate up the ramp.
 
It takes less force to push an object up a ramp than to lift it directly upward, but you must 
push that object a longer distance along the ramp. Overall, the work you do in raising the 
object from one height to another is the same, whether or not you use the ramp. However, the 
ramp gives you a mechanical advantage, allowing you to do work that would require an unre-
alistically large force by instead exerting a smaller force for a longer distance.

 33
2
The Laws of Motion
 I 
n the previous chapter, we saw how things move from place to place and encountered energy, an 
important conserved quantity. But motion doesn’t always involve a change of position, and energy 
isn’t nature’s only conserved quantity. In this chapter, we’ll take a look at a second type of 
motion—rotation—and at two other conserved quantities—momentum and angular momentum. 
Spinning objects are quite common, and we’ll do well to explore their laws of motion before pro-
ceeding much further. With those additional concepts under our belts, we’ll be ready to explore the 
physics behind a broad assortment of mechanical objects.
A Spinning Pie Dish
Spinning a dish on the top of a narrow post seems like a 
simple activity. But don’t let its uncomplicated appear-
ance deceive you: there are lots of physics involved in 
keeping the dish turning, in gradually slowing it down, 
and in preventing it from falling off the post.
 
An easy way to experiment with a spinning dish is to 
tape a pencil vertically to the edge of a table or chair so that 
its eraser projects several inches upward into the air. To avoid 
wobbling problems, the tape should hold the pencil rigidly in 
place, and the table or chair should be sturdy and stable.
 
Now prepare to balance a metal pie dish on the eraser 
before giving it a twist. If you don’t have a pie dish, you can 
use a Frisbee, a deep plastic plate, or a shallow plastic bowl 
instead. Be creative. You probably have something that will 
work; just don’t use Grandma’s heirloom porcelain unless 
you’re willing to face the possible consequences.
 
The fi rst thing you’ll need to do is to balance the dish 
on the eraser. Why is it easiest to balance the dish when 
it’s upside down? Now give the dish a gentle spin. What 
sort of infl uence do you have to exert on the dish to start 
it rotating? If the dish doesn’t wobble and the pencil 
remains stationary, the dish should spin for a while before 
coming to a stop. Once you’re no longer touching the 
dish, what keeps it turning? On the other hand, why 
doesn’t it keep turning forever?
 
Now fl ip the pencil over so that its sharp point pro-
jects upward. What will happen when you place the dish 
on that point? Will the dish still balance? When you spin 
the dish, will it turn for a longer or shorter time than on 
the bare eraser? If the dish is soft and the point digs into 
it, protect the dish’s bottom by taping a coin to it. How 
does this improved pivot affect the dish’s rotation? Can 
you prolong the spin by taping weights around the outer 
edge of the dish? Is there a way to get the dish spinning 
just by blowing on it? Can you relate this motion to that 
of a spinning skater or a bicycle wheel?
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
PART 2

34 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Chapter Itinerary
We’re going to explore the laws of rotational motion and two 
new conserved quantities in the context of three everyday 
objects: (1) seesaws, (2) wheels, and (3) bumper cars. In See-
saws, we look at twists and turns, and see how two children 
manage to rock a seesaw back and forth. In Wheels, we exam-
ine how friction affects motion and learn how wheels make a 
vehicle more mobile. In Bumper Cars, we learn the physics 
behind collisions and uncover some of the simple rules that 
govern what initially appear to be complicated motions. For a 
more complete preview of what we examine in this chapter, 
fl ip ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and 
Equations at the end of the chapter.
The Seesaw
Any child who has played on a seesaw with friends of different sizes knows that the toy 
works best for two children of roughly the same weight (Fig. 2.1.1a). Evenly matched 
riders balance each other, and this balance allows them to rock back and forth easily. In 
contrast, when a light child tries to play seesaw with a heavy child, the heavy child’s side 
of the seesaw drops rapidly and hits the ground with a thud (Fig. 2.1.1b). The light child is 
tossed into the air.
SECTION 2.1
mean by a balanced seesaw? Why does it matter just where the 
children sit on the seesaw? What must the children do to start 
the seesaw turning? To keep it turning? Who is doing work on 
whom as they rock back and forth?
Experiments to Do: To get a feel for how rotating objects work, 
fi nd a rigid ruler with a hole in its center—the kind that can be 
clipped into a three-ring binder. If you support the ruler by 
putting the tip of an upright pencil into the central hole, you’ll 
fi nd that the ruler exhibits rotational inertia; that is, it either 
remains stationary, at whatever orientation you choose, or 
rotates steadily about the central hole. (Eventually, the ruler 
comes to rest because of friction, a detail that we’ll continue 
to ignore for now.) Now, push on one end of the ruler. What 
happens? Try pushing the ruler’s end toward its central hole. 
What happens then? What is the most effective way to make 
the ruler spin?
 
Now lay the pencil on a table and place the ruler fl at on 
top of it so that the pencil and the ruler are at right angles, or 
perpendicular, to each other. If you center the ruler on the 
pencil, the ruler will balance. How is this balanced ruler similar 
to the freely turning, inertial ruler of the previous paragraph? 
What role does gravity play in balancing the ruler? Load the two 
ends of the ruler with coins or other small weights, trying as 
you do so to keep the ruler balanced. Try placing the coins at 
different positions relative to the pencil. Is there any way you 
can balance a light weight on one end with a heavy weight on 
the other end?
The ramp that we examined in Section 1.3 is only one tool that 
provides mechanical advantage. In this section, we’ll look at 
another such device: the type of lever known as a seesaw. 
Although seesaws move, their motion differs from that of the 
objects in Chapter 1. Seesaws don’t go anywhere; they rotate. 
In this section, we’ll revisit many of the laws of motion that we 
encountered previously, but this time we’ll see these laws in a 
new context—rotational motion.
Questions to Think About: A playground seesaw balances only 
when the children riding it are properly situated. What do we 
Seat
Handle
Seesaw
Pivot
Seesaws

Seesaws 35
There are several solutions to the heavy child-light child problem. Of course, two light 
children could try to balance one heavy child. But most children eventually fi gure out that 
if the heavy child sits closer to the seesaw’s pivot, the seesaw will balance (Fig. 2.1.1c). 
The children can then make the seesaw tip back and forth easily, just as it does when two 
evenly matched children ride at its ends. This is a pretty useful trick, and we’ll explore it 
later in this section. First, though, we’ll need to look carefully at the nature of rotational 
motion.
For simplicity, let’s ignore the mass and weight of the seesaw itself. There are then 
only three forces acting on the occupied seesaw shown in Fig. 2.1.1: two downward forces 
(the weights of the two children) and one upward force (the support force of the central 
pivot). Seeing those three forces, we may immediately think about net forces and begin to 
look for some overall acceleration of this toy and its riders. But we know that the seesaw 
remains where it is in the playground and isn’t likely to head off for Kalamazoo or the 
center of Earth anytime soon. Because the seesaw’s fi xed pivot always provides just enough 
upward and sideways force to keep the seesaw from accelerating as a whole, the seesaw 
always experiences zero net force and never leaves the playground. Overall movement of 
an object from one place to another is called translational motion. Although the seesaw 
never experiences translational motion, it can turn around the pivot, and thus it experiences 
a different kind of motion. Motion around a fi xed point (which prevents translation) is 
called rotational motion.
Rotational motion is what makes a seesaw interesting—the whole point of a seesaw is 
that it can rotate so that one child rises and the other descends. (You may not think of going 
up and down as rotating, but if the ground weren’t there, the seesaw would be able to rotate 
in a big circle.) But what causes the seesaw to rotate, and what observations can we make 
about the process of rotation?
To answer those questions, we’ll need to examine several new physical quantities 
associated with rotation and explore the laws of rotational motion that relate them to one 
another. We’ll do these things both by studying the workings of seesaws and other rotat-
ing objects and by looking for analogies between translational motion and rotational 
motion.
Imagine holding onto the seesaw in Fig. 2.1.1a to keep it level for a moment while the 
child on the left climbs off the seesaw. Now imagine letting go of the seesaw. As soon as 
you let go, the seesaw begins to rotate clockwise, and the child on the right descends 
toward the ground. The seesaw’s motion is fairly slow at fi rst, but it moves more and more 
quickly until that child strikes the ground with a teeth-rattling thump. We could describe 
the seesaw being twisted from rest in the following way:
“The seesaw starts out not rotating at all. When we release the seesaw, it 
begins to rotate clockwise. The seesaw’s rate of rotation increases continuously 
in the clockwise direction until the seesaw strikes the ground.”
This description sounds a lot like the description of a falling ball released from rest:
“The ball starts out not moving at all. When we release the ball, it begins 
to move downward. The ball’s rate of translation increases steadily in the 
downward direction until the ball strikes the ground.”
The statement about the seesaw involves rotational motion, while the statement about 
the ball involves translational motion. Their similarity isn’t a coincidence; the concepts and 
laws of rotational motion have many analogies in the concepts and laws of translational 
motion. The familiarity that we’ve acquired with translational motion will help us examine 
rotational motion.
Force from
the pivot
Weight
Weight
(a)
(b)
Force from 
the pivot
Weight
Weight
(c)
Force from
the pivot
Weight
Weight
Fig. 2.1.1 (a) When two 
children of equal weight 
sit at opposite ends of a 
seesaw, it balances. 
(b) When their weights 
are not equal, the heavy 
child descends. (c) If the 
heavy child moves closer to 
the pivot, the seesaw can 
balance.

36 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Check Your Understanding #1: Wheel of Fortune Cookies
The guests at a large table in a Chinese restaurant use a revolving tray, a lazy Susan, to share 
the food dishes. How does the motion of the lazy Susan differ from that of the passing dessert 
cart?
Answer: The lazy Susan undergoes rotational motion, while the dessert cart undergoes translational 
motion.
Why: The lazy Susan has a fi xed pivot at its center. This pivot never goes anywhere, no matter 
how you rotate the lazy Susan. In contrast, the dessert cart moves about the room and has no 
fi xed point. The server can rotate the dessert cart when necessary, but its principal motion is 
translational.
The Motion of a Dangling Seesaw
In the previous chapter we looked at the concept of translational inertia, which holds that a 
body in motion tends to stay in motion and a body at rest tends to stay at rest. This concept 
led us to Newton’s fi rst law of translational motion. Inserting the word translational here is 
a useful revision because we’re about to encounter the corresponding concepts associated 
with rotational motion. We’ll begin that encounter by observing a seesaw that’s free of 
outside rotational infl uences. We’ll then examine how the seesaw responds to outside infl u-
ences such as its pivot or a handful of young riders. Because of the similarities between 
rotational and translational motions, this section closely parallels our earlier examinations 
of skating and falling balls.
Let’s suppose that your local playground is installing a new seesaw and that this see-
saw is presently dangling from a rope (Fig. 2.1.2). The rope is attached to the middle of the 
seesaw, where it supports the seesaw’s weight but exerts no other infl uences on the seesaw. 
Most important, let’s suppose that the dangling seesaw can spin and pivot with complete 
freedom—nothing pushes on it or twists it—and that the rope doesn’t get tangled or in the 
way. This dangling seesaw is free to turn in any direction, even completely upside down. 
You, the observer, are standing motionless near the seesaw. When you look over at the 
seesaw, what does it do?
If the seesaw is stationary, then it will remain stationary. However, if it’s rotating, it 
will continue rotating at a steady pace about a fi xed line in space. What keeps the seesaw 
rotating? Its rotational inertia. A body that’s rotating tends to remain rotating; a body 
that’s not rotating tends to remain not rotating. That’s how our universe works.
To describe the seesaw’s rotational inertia and rotational motion more accurately, we’ll 
need to identify several physical quantities associated with rotational motion. The fi rst is 
the seesaw’s orientation. At any particular moment, the seesaw is oriented in a certain 
way—that is, it has an angular position. Angular position describes the seesaw’s orienta-
tion relative to some reference orientation; it can be specifi ed by determining how far the 
seesaw has rotated away from its reference orientation and the axis or line about which that 
rotation has occurred. The seesaw’s angular position is a vector quantity, pointing along the 
rotation axis with a magnitude equal to the rotation angle (Fig. 2.1.3). Because changes in 
orientation are usually more interesting than orientation itself, angular position is a rela-
tively little-used physical quantity.
The SI unit of angular position is the radian, the natural unit for angles. It’s a natural 
unit because it follows directly from geometry, not from an arbitrary human choice or con-
vention the way most units do. Geometry tells us that a circle of radius 1 has a circumfer-
ence of 2π. By letting arc lengths around that circle’s circumference specify angles, we are 
using radians. For example, there are 2π radians (or 360°) in a full circle and π/2 radians 
(or 90°) in a right angle. Since the radian is a natural unit, it is often omitted from calcula-
tions and derived units.
Fig. 2.1.2 A seesaw 
that’s dangling from a 
rope at its middle. Since 
nothing twists it, the 
seesaw rotates steadily 
about a fi xed line in space.
Axis of
rotation
Angle
of
rotation
Fig. 2.1.3 You can 
specify this seesaw’s 
angular position, relative 
to its horizontal reference 
orientation, as the axis 
about which it was rotated 
to reach its new orientation 
and the angle through 
which it was rotated.

Seesaws 37
If the seesaw is rotating, then its angular position is changing; this brings us to our fi rst 
important vector quantity of rotational motion—angular velocity. Angular velocity mea-
sures the rate at which the seesaw’s angular position is changing with time. Its magnitude 
is the seesaw’s angular speed, the angle through which the seesaw turns in a certain 
amount of time,
angular speed = change in angle
time
and its direction is the axis about which that rotation proceeds. The SI unit of angular 
velocity is the radian per second (abbreviated 1/s).
The seesaw’s axis of rotation is the line in space about which the seesaw is rotating. 
However, just knowing that line isn’t quite enough: Is the seesaw rotating clockwise or 
counterclockwise?
To resolve this ambiguity, we take advantage of the fact that any line has two direc-
tions to it. Once we have identifi ed the line about which the seesaw is rotating, we can 
look down that line at the seesaw from both directions. From one, the seesaw appears to 
be rotating clockwise; from the other, counterclockwise. By convention, we choose to 
view the seesaw from the direction in which it appears to be rotating clockwise and say 
that the seesaw’s rotation axis points away from our eye toward the seesaw. This conven-
tion is called the right-hand rule because if the fi ngers of your right hand are curling 
around the axis in the way the seesaw is rotating, then your thumb is pointing along the 
seesaw’s rotation axis (Fig. 2.1.4). (Even if you’re left-handed, this rule still requires your 
right hand, Fig. 2.1.5).
Remembering this convention isn’t as important as understanding why you must spec-
ify the direction when reporting a rotating object’s angular velocity. Just as translational 
velocity consists of a translational speed and a direction in which the translational motion 
occurs, so angular velocity consists of a rotational speed and a direction about which the 
rotational motion occurs.
We’re now prepared to describe the rotational motion of the dangling seesaw. Because 
of its freedom from outside infl uences and its rotational inertia, its angular velocity is con-
stant. If the seesaw is rotating, it keeps on rotating, always at the same angular speed, 
always about the same axis of rotation. If it is not rotating, however, its angular velocity is 
zero and remains zero.
As you might suspect, this observation isn’t unique to seesaws. It is Newton’s fi rst 
law of rotational motion, which states that a rigid object that is not wobbling and is not 
subject to any outside infl uences rotates at a constant angular velocity, turning equal 
amounts in equal times about a fi xed axis of rotation. The outside infl uences referred to in 
this law are called torques—a technical term for twists and spins. When you twist off the 
lid of a jar or spin a top with your fi ngers, you’re exerting a torque.
This law excludes objects that wobble or can change shape as they rotate because 
those objects have more complicated motions. They are covered instead by a more 
general principle—the conservation of angular momentum—that we’ll meet up with in 
Section 2.3.
Angular 
velocity
Fig. 2.1.4 This seesaw is 
spinning about the rotation 
axis shown. The direction 
of the seesaw’s angular 
velocity is defi ned by the 
right-hand rule.
Fig. 2.1.5 Right-hand 
rules were created to 
help us remember several 
physics conventions, 
such as the agreed-on 
direction of angular 
velocity. These rules start 
with a convention that 
we all fi nd extremely 
familiar, specifi cally which 
hand is your right hand, 
and use it to specify the 
conventions associated 
with physical laws. Even 
if you are left-handed, you 
still know which hand to 
call your right hand and 
therefore understand this 
convention. 
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
NEWTON’S FIRST LAW OF ROTATIONAL MOTION
A rigid object that is not wobbling and is not subject to any outside torques rotates at 
a constant angular velocity, turning equal amounts in equal times about a fi xed axis of 
rotation.

38 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
The Seesaw’s Center of Mass
Even without visiting the playground, you can fi nd many objects that are nearly free from 
torques: a baton thrown overhead by a baton twirler, for example, or a juggler’s club whirl-
ing through the air between two clowns. These motions, however, are complicated because 
those freely moving objects rotate and translate at the same time. The spinning baton trav-
els up and down, the turning club arcs through the air, and if the rope breaks, your seesaw 
will fall as it spins. How can we distinguish their translational motions from their rotational 
motions?
Once again, we can make use of a wonderful simplifi cation of physics. There’s a 
special point in or near a free object about which all of its mass is evenly distributed and 
about which it naturally spins—its center of mass. The axis of rotation passes right 
through this point so that, as the free object rotates, the center of mass doesn’t move 
unless the object has an overall translational velocity. The center of mass of a typical ball 
is at its geometrical center, while the center of mass of a less symmetrical object depends 
on how the mass of that object is distributed. You can begin to fi nd a small object’s center 
of mass by spinning it on a smooth table and looking for the fi xed point about which it 
spins (Fig. 2.1.6).
Center of mass allows us to separate an object’s translational motion from its rotational 
motion. As a juggler’s club arcs through space, its center of mass follows the simple path 
we discussed in Section 1.2 on falling balls (Fig. 2.1.7). At the same time, the club’s rota-
tional motion about its center of mass is that of an object that’s free of outside torques: if 
it’s not wobbling, it rotates with a constant angular velocity.
Many of the objects we’ll examine in this book translate and rotate simultaneously, 
and it’s worth remembering that we can often separate these two motions by paying atten-
tion to an object’s center of mass. For example, your seesaw has been designed with its 
center of mass located exactly where the pivot will go. As a result, the pivot will prevent 
any translational motion of the installed seesaw while permitting nearly free rotational 
motion of the seesaw, at least about one axis.
When examining rotational motion, we need to choose the pivot point or center of 
rotation, the point around which all the physical quantities of rotation are defi ned. For a 
free object, the natural pivot point is its center of mass. For a constrained object, the best 
pivot point may be determined by the constraints—a door, for example, pivots about its 
hinges. Since your installed seesaw will continue to pivot about its center of mass, that 
point will remain the best choice for the center of rotation.
Once we’ve chosen the pivot, however, we must calculate all the physical quantities of 
rotation about that pivot. Because it’s tedious to write about its hinges or about its center 
of mass every time I mention a physical quantity of rotation, I will often omit those phrases 
when the pivot point is obvious or already identifi ed.
Check Your Understanding #2: Going for a Spin
A rubber basketball fl oats in a swimming pool. It experiences zero torque, no matter which end of it 
is up. If you spin the basketball and then let go, how will it move?
Answer: It will continue to spin at a steady pace about a fi xed rotational axis (although friction with 
the water will gradually slow the ball’s rotation).
Why: Because the basketball is free of torques, the outside infl uences that affect rotational motion, 
it has a constant angular velocity. If you spin the basketball, it will continue to spin about whatever 
axis you chose. If you don’t spin the basketball, its angular velocity will be zero and it will remain 
stationary.
Center 
of mass
Rotation
Fig. 2.1.6 This club spins 
about its center of mass, 
which remains stationary.
Center 
of 
mass
Fig. 2.1.7 A juggler’s 
club that is traveling 
through space rotates 
about its center of mass as 
its center of mass travels in 
the simple arc associated 
with a falling object.

Seesaws 39
How the Seesaw Responds to Torques
The workers are eating lunch, so the seesaw is still hanging from the rope. Why can’t this 
dangling seesaw change its rotational speed or axis of rotation? Because it has rotational 
mass 1 . Rotational mass is the measure of an object’s rotational inertia, its resistance to 
changes in its angular velocity. An object’s rotational mass depends both on its ordinary 
mass and on how that mass is distributed within the object. The SI unit of rotational mass 
is the kilogram-meter2 (abbreviated kg · m2). Because the seesaw has rotational mass, its 
angular velocity will change only if something twists it or spins it. In other words, it must 
experience a torque.
Torque—our second important vector quantity of rotational motion—has both a mag-
nitude and a direction. The more torque you exert on the seesaw, the more rapidly its angu-
lar velocity changes. Depending on the direction of the torque, you can make the seesaw 
turn more rapidly or less rapidly or even make it rotate about a different axis. How do you 
determine the direction of a particular torque? One way is to imagine exerting this torque 
on a stationary ball fl oating in water (Fig. 2.1.8a,b). The ball will begin to rotate, acquiring 
a nonzero angular velocity (Fig. 2.1.8c). The direction of this angular velocity is that of the 
torque. The SI unit of torque is the newton-meter (abbreviated N · m).
The larger an object’s rotational mass, the more slowly its angular velocity changes in 
response to a specifi c torque (Fig. 2.1.9). You can easily spin a basketball with the tips of 
your fi ngers, but it’s much harder to spin a bowling ball. The bowling ball’s larger rotational 
mass comes about primarily because it has a greater ordinary mass than the basketball.
However, rotational mass also depends on an object’s shape, particularly on how far 
each portion of its ordinary mass is from the axis of rotation. The farther a portion of mass 
is from that axis, the more rapidly it must accelerate as the entire object undergoes angular 
acceleration and the more leverage it has with which to oppose that acceleration. We’ll 
examine levers shortly, but the consequence of these two effects of distance from the rota-
tion axis is that each portion of mass contributes to the object’s rotational mass in propor-
tion to the square of its distance from that axis. That’s why an object that has most of its 
mass located near the axis of rotation will have a much smaller rotational mass than an 
object of the same mass that has most of its mass located far from that axis. Thus a ball of 
pizza dough has a smaller rotational mass than the fi nished pizza. The bigger the pizza gets, 
the harder it is to start or stop spinning.
Because an object’s rotational mass depends on how far its mass is from the axis of 
rotation, its rotational mass may change when its axis of rotation changes, even if it’s 
rotating about its center of mass. For example, less torque is required to spin a tennis 
racket about its handle (Fig. 2.1.10a) than to fl ip the racket head-over-handle (Fig. 
2.1.10b). When you spin the tennis racket about its handle, the axis of rotation runs right 
through the handle so that most of the racket’s mass is fairly close to the axis and the 
Check Your Understanding #3: Tracking the High Dive
When a diver does a rigid, open somersault off a high diving board, his motion appears quite compli-
cated. Can this motion be described simply? How?
Answer: Yes. His center of mass falls smoothly, obeying the rules governing falling objects. As he 
falls, his body rotates at constant angular velocity about his center of mass.
Why: Like a thrown football or tossed baton, the diver is a rigid, rotating object. His motion can be 
separated into translational motion of his center of mass (it falls) and rotational motion about his 
center of mass (he rotates about it at constant angular velocity). While the diver may never think of 
his motion in these terms, he is aware intuitively of the need to handle both his rotational and trans-
lational motions carefully. Hitting the water with his chest because he mishandled his rotation isn’t 
much more fun than hitting the board because he mishandled his translation.
1  For clarity and 
simplicity, this book refers 
to the measure of an 
object’s rotational inertia 
as rotational mass. 
However, this quantity is 
known more formally as 
moment of inertia.
Angular
velocity
(a)
(b)
(c)
Torque
Fig. 2.1.8 If you start 
with a ball that’s not 
spinning (a) and twist it 
with a torque (b), the ball 
will acquire an angular 
velocity (c) that’s in the 
same direction as that 
torque.

40 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
rotational mass is small. When you fl ip the tennis racket head-over-handle, the axis of 
rotation runs across the handle so that both the head and the handle are far away from the 
axis and the rotational mass is large. The tennis racket’s rotational mass becomes even 
larger when you hold it in your hand and make it rotate about your shoulder rather than 
about its center of mass (Fig. 2.1.10c). 
When something exerts a torque on the dangling seesaw, its angular velocity changes; 
in other words, it undergoes angular acceleration, our third important vector quantity of 
rotational motion. Angular acceleration measures the rate at which the seesaw’s angular 
velocity is changing with time. It’s analogous to acceleration, which measures the rate at 
which an object’s translational velocity is changing with time. Just as with acceleration, 
angular acceleration involves both a magnitude and a direction. An object undergoes 
angular acceleration when its angular speed increases or decreases or when its angular 
velocity changes directions. The SI unit of angular acceleration is the radian per second2 
(abbreviated 1/s2).
If the seesaw is experiencing several torques at once, it can’t respond to them individ-
ually. Instead, it undergoes angular acceleration in response to the net torque it experi-
ences, the sum of all the individual torques being exerted on it.
There is a simple relationship between the net torque exerted on the seesaw, its rota-
tional mass, and its angular acceleration. The seesaw’s angular acceleration is equal to the 
net torque exerted on it divided by its rotational mass or, as a word equation, 
 
angular acceleration =
net torque
rotational mass. 
(2.1.1)
Fig. 2.1.9 Spinning a merry-go-
round is diffi cult because of its 
large rotational mass. Despite 
the large torque exerted by this 
boy, the merry-go-round’s angular 
velocity increases slowly. 
© Chris Harvey/Stone/Getty Images
Axis of 
rotation
Center
of mass
(a)
(b)
(c)
Axis of 
rotation
Axis of 
rotation
Center
of mass
Center
of mass
Fig. 2.1.10 A tennis 
racket’s rotational mass 
depends on the axis 
about which it rotates. Its 
rotational mass is small 
(a) when it rotates about its 
handle and large (b) when 
it rotates head-over-handle. 
(c) If you make it rotate 
about your shoulder, its 
rotational mass becomes 
even larger.

Seesaws 41
The seesaw’s angular acceleration, as we’ve seen, is in the same direction as the net torque 
exerted on it.
This relationship is Newton’s second law of rotational motion. Structuring the relation-
ship this way distinguishes the causes (net torque and rotational mass) from their effect (angular 
acceleration). Nonetheless, it has become customary to rearrange the relationship to eliminate 
the division. In its traditional form, the relationship can be written in a word equation: 
 
net torque = rotational mass · angular acceleration, 
(2.1.2)
in symbols:
𝝉net = I · 𝜶,
and in everyday language: 
Spinning a marble is much easier than spinning a merry-go-round.
It’s like Newton’s second law of translational motion (net force = mass · acceleration), 
except that net torque has replaced net force, rotational mass has replaced mass, and angu-
lar acceleration has replaced acceleration. This new law doesn’t apply to nonrigid or wob-
bling objects, however, because nonrigid objects can change their rotational masses and 
wobbling ones are affected by more than one rotational mass simultaneously (see the 
earlier discussion of tennis rackets). 
NEWTON’S SECOND LAW OF ROTATIONAL MOTION
The net torque exerted on a rigid object that is not wobbling is equal to that object’s 
rotational mass times its angular acceleration. The angular acceleration points in the 
same direction as the net torque.
Because it’s an equation, the two sides of Eq. 2.1.1 are equal. Any change in the net 
torque you exert on the seesaw must be accompanied by a proportional change in its 
angular acceleration. As a result, the harder you twist the seesaw, the more rapidly its 
angular velocity changes.
We can also compare the effects of a specifi c torque on two different rotational 
masses. Equation 2.1.1 indicates that a decrease in rotational mass must be accompanied 
by a corresponding increase in angular acceleration. If we replace the playground seesaw 
with one from a dollhouse, the rotational mass will decrease and the angular acceleration 
will increase. The angular velocity of the doll’s seesaw thus changes more rapidly than 
the angular velocity of a playground seesaw when the two experience identical net 
torques.
In summary: 
1. 
Your angular position indicates exactly how you’re oriented.
2. Your angular velocity measures the rate at which your angular position is changing 
with time.
3. Your angular acceleration measures the rate at which your angular velocity is 
changing with time.
4. 
For you to undergo angular acceleration, you must experience a net torque.
5. 
The more rotational mass you have, the less angular acceleration you experience 
for a given net torque.

42 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Forces and Torques
The workers have fi nally installed the seesaw. Because the pivot supporting the seesaw 
passes directly through the seesaw’s center of mass, the seesaw rotates about its own natu-
ral pivot. Moreover, the pivot supports the seesaw’s weight in a manner that leaves it free 
to obey Newton’s fi rst law of rotational motion. That is, when unoccupied and not infl u-
enced by anything else, the seesaw is either motionless or rotates with constant angular 
velocity about its pivot. 
To change the seesaw’s angular velocity, you have to exert a torque on it. But how 
do you actually exert a torque? To fi nd out, you put your hand on one end of the seesaw 
and push that end down (Fig. 2.1.11a). If the seesaw was motionless, it starts turning. If 
it was already turning, its rate of rotation changes. You have indeed exerted a torque on 
the seesaw. 
Check Your Understanding #4: The Merry-Go-Round
The merry-go-round is a popular playground toy (see Fig. 2.1.9). Already challenging to spin empty, 
a merry-go-round is even harder to start or stop when there are lots of children on it. Why is it so 
diffi cult to change a full merry-go-round’s angular velocity? 
Answer: The full merry-go-round has a huge rotational mass. 
Why: Starting or stopping a merry-go-round involves angular acceleration. As the pusher, you exert a 
torque on the merry-go-round, and it undergoes angular acceleration. This angular acceleration 
depends on the merry-go-round’s rotational mass, which in turn depends on how much mass it has 
and how far that mass is from the axis of rotation. With many children adding to the merry-go-round’s 
rotational mass, its angular acceleration tends to be small.
Check Your Figures #1: Hard to Turn
Automobile tires are normally hollow and fi lled with air. If they were made of solid rubber, their rota-
tional masses would be about 10 times as large. With the wheel lifted off the ground, how much more 
torque would an automobile have to exert on a solid tire to make it undergo the same angular accel-
eration as a hollow tire? 
Answer: It would need about 10 times as much torque. 
Why: To keep the angular acceleration in Eq. 2.1.1 unchanged while increasing the rotational mass 
by a factor of 10, the torque must also increase by a factor of 10. Solid tires are extremely diffi cult 
to spin or to stop from spinning, which is why automobiles use hollow tires.
Quantity 
SI Unit 
English Unit 
SI → English 
English → SI
Angular position 
radian (1) 
radian (1)
Angular velocity 
radian per second (1/s) 
radian per second (1/s)
Angular  
radian per 
radian per
acceleration 
second2 (1/s2) 
second2 (1/s2)
Torque 
newton-meter (N · m) 
foot-pound (ft · lbf) 
1 N · m = 0.73757 ft · lbf 
1 ft · lbf = 1.3558 N · m
Rotational mass 
kilogram- 
pound-foot2 (lbm · ft2) 
1 kg · m2 = 23.730 lbm · ft2 
1 lbm · ft2 =
 
meter2 (kg · m2) 
 
 
0.042140 kg · m2
Fig. 2.1.11 (a) When 
you push on the seesaw, 
perpendicular to the lever 
arm, you produce a torque 
on the seesaw. But when 
you (b) push at the pivot 
or (c) push parallel to the 
lever arm, you produce no 
torque.
Torque
No torque
No torque
Lever arm
Force
Force
Force
(a)
(b)
(c)
Lever arm
No lever arm
This summary of the physical quantities of rotational motion is analogous to the summary 
for translational motion in Section 1.1. Take a moment to compare the two. 

Seesaws 43
You started by exerting a force on the seesaw—you pushed on it—so forces and 
torques must be related somehow. Sure enough, a force can produce a torque and a torque 
can produce a force. To help us explore their relationship, let’s think of all the ways not to 
produce a torque by pushing on the seesaw.
What happens if you push on the seesaw exactly where the pivot passes through it 
(Fig. 2.1.11b)? Nothing happens—there is no angular acceleration. If you move a little 
away from the pivot, you can get the seesaw rotating, but you have to push hard. You do 
much better if you push on the end of the seesaw, where even a small force can start the 
seesaw rotating. The shortest distance and direction from the pivot to the place where you 
push on the seesaw is a vector quantity called the lever arm; in general, the longer the lever 
arm, the less force it takes to cause a particular angular acceleration. Our fi rst observation 
about producing a torque with a force is this: you obtain more torque by exerting that force 
farther from the pivot or axis of rotation. In other words, the torque is proportional to the 
length of the lever arm.
Another ineffective way to start the seesaw rotating is to push its end directly toward 
or away from the pivot (Fig. 2.1.11c). When your force is directed parallel to the lever 
arm, as it is in this case, it produces no torque on the seesaw. Our second observation 
about producing a torque with a force is that your force must have a component that is 
perpendicular to the lever arm and only that perpendicular component contributes to the 
torque.
We can summarize these two observations as follows: the torque produced by a force 
is equal to the lever arm times that force, where we include only the component of the 
force that is perpendicular to the lever arm. This relationship can be written as a word 
equation: 
 
torque = lever arm · force perpendicular to lever arm, 
(2.1.3)
in symbols:
𝜏= r · F⊥,
and in everyday language: 
When twisting an unyielding object, it helps to use a long wrench.
The directions of the force and lever arm also determine the direction of the torque. 
The three directions follow another right-hand rule (Fig. 2.1.12). If you point your right 
index fi nger in the direction of the lever arm and your bent middle fi gure in the direction of 
the force, then your thumb will point in the direction of the torque. Thus in Fig. 2.1.12a, the 
lever arm points to the right, the force points downward, and the resulting torque points into 
the page so that the seesaw undergoes angular acceleration in the clockwise direction. In 
Fig. 2.1.12b, the lever arm has reversed directions and so has the torque. 
Check Your Understanding #5: Cutting Up Cardboard
When you cut cardboard with a pair of scissors, it’s best to move the cardboard as close as possible 
to the scissors’ pivot. Explain. 
Answer: The closer the cardboard is to the pivot, the more force it must exert on the scissors to 
produce enough torque to keep the scissors from rotating closed. When the cardboard is unable to 
produce enough torque, the scissors cut through it. 
Why: When you place paper close to the pivot of a pair of scissors, you are requiring that paper to 
exert enormous forces on the scissors to keep them from rotating closed. Rotations are started and 
stopped by torques, and forces exerted close to the pivot exert relatively small torques. 
Torque
Lever arm
Force
Force Torque
(a)
(b)
Lever arm
Fig. 2.1.12 The torque 
on a seesaw obeys a right-
hand rule: if your index 
fi nger points along the 
lever arm and your middle 
fi nger points along the 
force, your thumb points 
along the torque.

44 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Balancing and Unbalancing the Seesaw
When a child sits on one end of your seesaw, the child’s weight produces a torque on the 
seesaw about its pivot. Gravity is ultimately responsible for that torque, so we’ll call it a 
gravitational torque. Because it depends on the lever arm (the vector from the pivot to the 
child), moving the child to the other end of the seesaw reverses the torque’s direction. 
What happens when two children are sitting on opposite ends of the seesaw? Each 
child’s weight produces a gravitational torque on the seesaw about its pivot, but those two 
torques have opposite directions and thus at least partially cancel. If the two children have 
equal weights and sit at equal distances from the pivot, the two gravitational torques cancel 
exactly—they sum to zero. The seesaw then experiences no overall gravitational torque 
about its pivot and it balances.
A balanced seesaw experiences no overall gravitational torque about its pivot. If 
nothing twists it, the balanced seesaw is inertial—the net torque on it is zero. When the 
children aren’t fi dgeting, the seesaw is rigid and wobble-free, so it rotates at constant 
angular velocity, in accordance with Newton’s fi rst law of rotational motion. If it’s 
motionless, it stays motionless. If it’s turning, it continues turning at a steady pace. 
Check Your Figures #2: A Few Loose Screws
You’re trying to remove some rusty screws from your refrigerator, using an adjustable wrench with a 
0.2-m (20-cm) handle. Although you push as hard as you can on the handle, you can’t produce 
enough torque to loosen one of the screws. You have a 1.0-m (100-cm) pipe that you can slip over 
the handle of the wrench to make the wrench effectively 1 m long. How much more torque will you 
then be able to exert on the screw? 
Answer: Five times as much torque as before. 
Why: The pipe increases the wrench’s lever arm by a factor of 5, from 0.2-m to 1.0 m. According to 
Eq. 2.1.3, the same force exerted fi ve times as far from the pivot will produce fi ve times as much 
torque about that pivot. Extending the handle of a lever-like tool is a common technique to increase 
the available torque, although it can be hazardous for both the tool and its user. Some tools that are 
designed for such extreme use come with removable handle extensions. 
Two children with different weights can also balance the seesaw, but they must sit at 
different distances from the pivot. According to Eq. 2.1.3, the gravitational torque a child 
exerts on the seesaw is proportional to that child’s distance from the pivot times that child’s 
weight. A heavier child must therefore sit closer to the pivot to balance a lighter child on 
the other end of the seesaw.
With two children riding it, the balanced seesaw has a considerable weight, yet that 
weight produces no torque on the seesaw about its pivot. That’s because the seesaw’s 
center of gravity, the effective location of the seesaw’s overall weight, is located at the 
pivot. Although gravity gives the children and the board their own individual weights, there 
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: A Balanced Object Is Motionless
Misconception: A balanced object is perfectly vertical or horizontal and doesn’t move. 
Resolution: A balanced object is experiencing zero gravitational torque about its pivot, but it may 
well be tilted or even rotating. In fact, if it is free of other torques, Newton’s fi rst law of rotational 
motion may apply to it. Only when an object’s balance is easily disturbed (for example, a pencil 
standing upright on its point or a pendulum hanging directly below its pivot) are orientation and 
motionlessness important and then only because any small rotation will give rise to a gravitational 
torque about its pivot and consequently to the loss of balance.

Seesaws 45
is a unique point—the seesaw’s center of gravity—about which all those individual weights 
are balanced and at which gravity effectively pulls down on the entire seesaw. With the 
seesaw’s center of gravity located at the pivot, gravity has no lever arm with which to 
produce a torque on the seesaw about the pivot.
Any object or system of objects has a center of gravity—the effective location of its 
overall weight. Although center of gravity (a gravitational concept) is different from center 
of mass (an inertial concept), the two conveniently coincide; the seesaw’s center of gravity 
and its center of mass are located at the same point. That coincidence stems from the pro-
portionality between an object’s weight and its mass near Earth’s surface (see Section 1.2). 
As two children ride the balanced seesaw, they’re inertial much of the time—
they’re either motionless or turning steadily in one direction or the other. But motion-
lessness is tedious, and a turning seesaw eventually touches the ground. Therefore, the 
children deliberately cause the seesaw to undergo angular acceleration so that it rocks 
back and forth.
They can cause this angular acceleration in two different ways. First, a boy can push 
on the ground with his feet so that the ground pushes back and thereby produces an addi-
tional torque on the seesaw. Although the seesaw remains balanced, that extra torque 
from the ground causes it to undergo angular acceleration. When the boy stops pushing 
on the ground, the ground’s torque vanishes and the seesaw resumes a constant angular 
velocity.
Second, they can change their lever arms and thereby unbalance the seesaw. For example, 
if one girl leans closer to the pivot, that girl’s lever arm decreases and so does her gravita-
tional torque. Since the children’s gravitational torques no longer sum to zero, the seesaw 
isn’t balanced—it experiences an overall torque due to gravity—and it undergoes angular 
acceleration. When the girl stops leaning so that the seesaw balances, its angular velocity 
becomes constant again. 
Check Your Understanding #6: Rocking the Boat
Loading a large container ship requires some care in balancing the cargo and fastening it down 
fi rmly. The effective pivot about which the ship can rotate in the water is located roughly along the 
centerline of the ship, from its bow to its stern. Why is improperly fastened-down cargo so dangerous 
on such a ship, possibly causing it to capsize during a storm? 
Answer: A substantial shift in the cargo’s position during a storm can unbalance the ship, giving rise 
to a gravitational torque that may cause the ship to rotate about the effective pivot. The ship may 
then capsize.
Why: Although most boats can compensate for some amount of cargo imbalance, shifting cargo can 
easily fl ip even a fairly stable boat. It happens frequently in real life, often with fatal consequences. 
Some boats, particularly canoes and racing shells, are notoriously sensitive to unbalanced loading 
and are easily fl ipped by careless or moving occupants.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Center of Mass Is Center of Gravity
Misconception: Center of mass and center of gravity are the same idea and can be used inter-
changeably. 
Resolution: Center of mass is an inertial concept: the effective location of an object’s mass as it 
translates and the natural pivot as it rotates. Center of gravity is a gravitational concept: the effec-
tive location of the object’s weight. Although these two centers coincide for objects near Earth’s 
surface, interchanging the terms is as incorrect as confusing mass and weight.

46 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Levers and Mechanical Advantage
While discussing how to balance a seesaw, it was helpful to view the board and its riders as 
a single rotating seesaw, subject to various gravitational and other torques, and undergoing 
angular acceleration when those torques don’t sum to zero. But we can also view the 
seesaw board individually as a lever that allows two children to do work on one another as 
it rotates. Most interestingly, that lever provides the mechanical advantage (see Section 1.3) 
necessary for a light child sitting far from the pivot to do the work of lifting a heavy child 
sitting near the pivot. 
When two children sit on a motionless horizontal seesaw board (Fig. 2.1.13), each 
child pushes down on the board with a force equal to that child’s weight. The force is 
directed perpendicular to the lever arm from the pivot to the force, so it produces a torque 
on the board about the pivot. If the children are properly situated on opposite sides of the 
board, their torques cancel and the seesaw board experiences zero net torque. The seesaw 
is balanced. 
If the board is rotating steadily near horizontal, the forces and angles get a little com-
plicated but the basic story doesn’t change. Both children still push down on the board and 
their torques still sum to zero. Now, however, the descending child does work on the board 
by pushing it downward as it moves downward, and the board does work on the rising child 
by pushing that child upward as the child moves upward. Because the seesaw is balanced, 
the work done on the board by the descending child is equal to the work done by the board 
on the rising child. In effect, the board transfers energy perfectly from the descending child 
to the rising child.
To see this effect, suppose two 5-year-olds, each weighing 200-N (45 lbf), are sitting at 
opposite ends of the seesaw (Fig. 2.1.13a). By exerting a 200-N downward force on the 
seesaw board, 2 m (6.6 ft) from its pivot, each child produces a torque of 400 N · m (300 ft · lbf) 
on the board (200 N · 2 m = 400 N · m). Since those torques are in opposite directions, they 
sum to zero.
Now suppose the seesaw rotates clockwise, so that the girl rises 1 m and the boy 
descends 1 m. Since the boy exerted a 200-N downward force on the board as the board 
moved downward 1 m, he did 200-N · 1 m = 200 J of work on the board. Simultaneously, 
the board exerted a 200-N upward force on the girl as the girl moved upward 1 m, so the 
board did 200 J of work on the girl. Overall, the board has transferred 200 J of energy from 
the boy to the girl.
Now let’s replace the 5-year-old girl with a 400-N (90-lbf) teenager (Fig. 2.1.13b). To 
balance the seesaw, she must sit halfway to the pivot. She exerts a 400-N downward 
force on the board, 1 m (3.3 ft) from its pivot, leaving the torque unchanged (400 N · 1 m = 
400 N · m). As before, the children’s torques are in opposite directions and sum to zero. 
This effect explains how a small boy at the end of the seesaw can balance a large girl nearer 
the pivot.
Again, the seesaw rotates clockwise, but now the girl rises only 0.5 m when the boy 
descends 1 m. As before, the boy did 200 J of work on the board. The board exerted a 400-N 
upward force on the girl as the girl moved upward 0.5 m, so the board did 400 N · 0.5 m = 200 J 
of work on the girl. Once again, the board has transferred 200 J of energy from the boy to 
the girl, even though the girl weighs more than the boy.
The seesaw’s mechanical advantage allows even the tiniest child sitting at its end to lift 
the heaviest adult sitting near its pivot. Because the child travels much farther than the 
adult, the child’s work on the seesaw equals the seesaw’s work on the adult. This effect—a 
small force exerted for a long distance on one part of a rotating system producing a large 
force exerted for a short distance elsewhere in that system—is an example of the mechanical 
advantage associated with levers. 
200 N
(a)
(b)
400 N
200 N
2 m
2 m
1 m
1 m
200 N
0.5 m 1 m
2 m
1 m
1 m
Fig. 2.1.13 When two 
children ride a balanced 
seesaw, the work the 
descending child does on 
the board is equal to the 
work the board does on 
the rising child. (a) When 
their weights are equal, 
those two works involve 
equal forces exerted over 
equal distance. (b) When 
one child is heavier than 
the other, those two works 
involve different forces 
exerted over different 
distances.

Seesaws 47
Children Support Each Other
While we’re thinking about the two children on a balanced seesaw as individual objects, 
using the seesaw board to exchange energy, we may notice something else about those 
children: they’re using the seesaw board to support one another. In other words, each child 
is using the board to exert a torque on the other child about the pivot, and that torque cancels 
the other child’s gravitational torque. For example, the boy in Fig. 2.1.13a experiences a 
clockwise torque due to gravity and a counterclockwise torque from the girl on the other 
end of the seesaw. Since those two torques sum to zero, the boy rotates at constant angular 
velocity about the pivot. Likewise, the boy exerts a torque on the girl so that she, too, 
rotates at constant angular velocity. 
Since the girl is exerting a torque on the boy and the boy is exerting a torque on the girl, 
you might wonder if those two torques are related. It should come as no great surprise that 
they are equal in amount but oppositely directed. Just as there is a Newton’s third law for 
translational motion, so there is a Newton’s third law of rotational motion: if one object 
exerts a torque on a second object, then the second object will exert an equal but oppositely 
directed torque on the fi rst object. The girl’s torque on the boy and the boy’s torque on the 
girl are a Newton’s third law pair. 
Check Your Understanding #7: Pulling Nails
Some hammers have a special claw designed to remove nails from wood. When you slide the claw 
under the nail’s head and rotate the hammer by pulling on its handle, the claw pulls the nail out of 
the wood. The hammer’s head contacts the wood to form a pivot that’s about 10 times closer to the 
nail than to the handle. The torque you exert on the hammer twists it in one direction, while the 
torque that the nail exerts on the hammer twists it in the opposite direction. The hammer isn’t 
undergoing any signifi cant angular acceleration, so the torques must nearly balance. If you’re exert-
ing a force of 100 N (22 lbf) on the hammer’s handle, how much force is the nail exerting on the 
hammer’s claw? 
Answer: The nail is exerting about 1000 N (220 lbf). 
Why: Since the nail is 10 times closer to the pivot, the nail must exert 10 times the force on the 
hammer to create the same magnitude of torque as you do pulling on the handle. As the nail pulls 
on the hammer, the hammer pulls on the nail. Although the wood exerts frictional forces on the nail 
to keep it from moving, the extracting force overwhelms this friction and the nail slides slowly out of 
the wood.
NEWTON’S THIRD LAW OF ROTATIONAL MOTION
For every torque that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but oppositely 
directed torque that the second object exerts on the fi rst object.
It’s worth noting that not all equal but oppositely directed torques are Newton’s third 
law pairs. On a balanced seesaw, each child experiences two torques that happen to be 
equal but oppositely directed: a torque due to gravity and a torque due to the other child. 
Those two torques form a matched pair because the seesaw is balanced, not because of 
Newton’s third law. In fact, if the seesaw weren’t balanced, those two torques would not 
be equal but oppositely directed and the children would both be undergoing angular 
acceleration. 

48 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Check Your Understanding #8: Turning on Ice
A light at your skating rink needs replacing, so you stand on the slippery ice and reach up overhead 
to unscrew the light. As you twist the light, you begin to rotate. What caused you to rotate? 
Answer: The light exerted a torque on you. 
Why: To unscrew the light, you must exert a torque on it. In accordance with Newton’s third law of 
rotational motion, that light exerts an equal but opposite torque on you. The ice is too slippery to 
exert a torque on you, so you undergo angular acceleration and begin to rotate. 
SECTION 2.2 
Wheels
Like ramps and levers, wheels are simple tools that make our 
lives easier. But a wheel’s main purpose isn’t mechanical 
advantage, it’s overcoming friction. Up until now, we’ve ignored 
friction, looking at the laws of motion as they apply only in 
idealized situations. However, our real world does have friction, 
and most objects in motion tend to slow down and stop because 
of it. One of our fi rst tasks in this section will therefore be to 
understand friction—though, for the time being, we’ll continue 
to neglect air resistance. 
Questions to Think About: If objects in motion tend to stay 
in motion, why is it so hard to drag a heavy box across the 
fl oor? If objects should accelerate downhill on a ramp, why 
won’t a plate slide off a slightly tilted table? What makes the 
Axle
Hub
Spoke
Iron rim
Brake
Axle
grease
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Newton’s Third Law or Not?
Misconception: Every pair of equal but oppositely directed forces or torques is associated with 
Newton’s third law. 
Resolution: Newton’s third law applies only to pairs of forces or torques that two objects exert on 
one another. In such cases only, the forces or torques must be equal but oppositely directed. Two 
forces or torques exerted on the same object are never a Newton’s third law pair and can have any 
values, including equal but oppositely directed.
SUMMARY OF NEWTON’S LAWS OF ROTATIONAL MOTION
1. A rigid object that is not wobbling and is not subject to any outside torques rotates 
at a constant angular velocity, turning equal amounts in equal times about a fi xed 
axis of rotation.
2. The net torque exerted on a rigid object that is not wobbling is equal to that object’s 
rotational mass times its angular acceleration. The angular acceleration points in 
the same direction as the torque.
3. For every torque that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but 
oppositely directed torque that the second object exerts on the fi rst object.
Note: These laws are the rotational analogs of the translational laws in Section 1.3.

Wheels 49
wheels of a cart rotate as you pull the cart forward? How does 
spinning its wheels propel a car forward? 
Experiments to Do: To observe the importance of wheels in 
eliminating friction, try sliding a book along a fl at table. Give 
the book a push and see how quickly it slows down and stops. 
Which way is friction pushing on the book? Does the force that 
friction exerts on the book depend on how fast the book is 
moving? Let the book come to a stop. Is friction still pushing 
on the book when it isn’t moving? If you push gently on the 
stationary book, what force does friction exert on it? 
 
Lay three or four round pencils on a table, parallel to one 
another and a few inches apart. Rest the book on top of the 
pencils and give the book a push in the direction that the pen-
cils can roll. Describe how the book now moves. What do you 
think has caused the difference? 
Moving a File Cabinet: Friction
When we imagined moving your friend’s piano into a new apartment back in Section 1.3, 
we neglected a familiar force—friction. Luckily for us, your friend’s piano had wheels on 
its legs, and wheels facilitate motion by reducing the effects of friction. We’ll focus on 
wheels in this section. First, though, to help us understand the relationship between wheels 
and friction, we’ll look at another item that needs to be moved—your friend’s fi le cabinet. 
The fi le cabinet is resting on a smooth and level hardwood fl oor; it’s full of sheet music 
and weighs about 1000 N (225 lbf). Despite its large mass, you know that it should acceler-
ate in response to a horizontal force, so you give it a gentle push toward the door. Nothing 
happens. Of course, the fi le cabinet accelerates in response to the net force it experiences, 
not to each individual force acting on it. Something else must be pushing on the fi le cabinet 
in just the right way to cancel your force and keep it from accelerating. Undaunted, you push 
harder and harder until fi nally, with a tremendous shove, you manage to get the fi le cabinet 
sliding across the fl oor. However, the cabinet moves slowly even though you continue to 
push on it. Something else is pushing on the fi le cabinet, trying to stop it from moving.
That something else is friction, a phenomenon that opposes the relative motion of two 
surfaces in contact with one another. Two surfaces that are in relative motion are traveling 
with different velocities so that a person standing still on one surface will observe the other 
surface as moving. In opposing relative motion, friction exerts forces on both surfaces in 
directions that tend to bring them to a single velocity.
For example, when the fi le cabinet slides by itself toward the left, the fl oor exerts a 
rightward frictional force on it (Fig. 2.2.1). The frictional force exerted on the fi le cabinet, 
toward the right, is in the direction opposite the fi le cabinet’s velocity, toward the left. 
Since the fi le cabinet’s acceleration is in the direction opposite its velocity, the fi le cabinet 
slows down and eventually comes to a stop. 
According to Newton’s third law of motion, an equal but oppositely directed force 
must be exerted by the fi le cabinet on the fl oor. Sure enough, the fi le cabinet does exert a 
leftward frictional force on the fl oor. However, the fl oor is rigidly attached to Earth, so it 
accelerates very little. The fi le cabinet does almost all the accelerating, and soon the two 
objects are traveling at the same velocity.
Fig. 2.2.1 A fi le cabinet sliding to the left 
across a sidewalk experiences a frictional 
force from the sidewalk to the right. Since 
that sliding frictional force is the net force 
on the fi le cabinet, the cabinet accelerates 
opposite its velocity and gradually slows to 
a stop.

50 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Frictional forces always oppose relative motion, but they vary in strength according to 
(1) how tightly the two surfaces are pressed against one another, (2) how slippery the sur-
faces are, and (3) whether the surfaces are actually moving relative to one another. First, the 
harder you press two surfaces together, the larger the frictional forces they experience. For 
example, an empty fi le cabinet slides more easily than a full one. Second, roughening the 
surfaces generally increases friction, while smoothing or lubricating them generally 
reduces it. Riding a toboggan down the driveway is much more interesting when the drive-
way is covered with snow or ice than when the driveway is bare asphalt. We’ll examine the 
third issue later on. 
Check Your Understanding #1: The One That Got Away
Your table at the restaurant isn’t level, and your water glass begins to slide slowly downhill toward 
the edge. Which way is friction exerting a force on it? 
Answer: Friction is pushing the glass uphill. 
Why: The glass is sliding downhill across the top of the stationary table. Since friction always opposes 
relative motion, it pushes the glass uphill, in the direction opposite its motion.
A Microscopic View of Friction
As the fi le cabinet slides by itself across the fl oor, it experiences a horizontal frictional 
force that gradually brings it to a stop. From where does this frictional force come? The 
obvious forces on the fi le cabinet are both vertical, not horizontal; the cabinet’s weight is 
downward, and the support force from the fl oor is upward. How can the fl oor exert a hori-
zontal force on the fi le cabinet? 
The answer lies in the fact that neither the bottom of the fi le cabinet nor the top of the 
fl oor is perfectly smooth. They both have microscopic hills and valleys of various sizes. The 
fi le cabinet is actually supported by thousands of tiny contact points, where the fi le cabinet 
directly touches the fl oor (Fig. 2.2.2). As the fi le cabinet slides, the microscopic projections 
on the bottom of the fi le cabinet pass through similar projections on the top of the fl oor. Each 
time two projections collide, they experience horizontal forces. These tiny forces oppose the 
relative motion and give rise to the overall frictional forces experienced by the fi le cabinet 
and fl oor. Because even an apparently smooth surface still has some microscopic surface 
structure, all surfaces experience friction as they rub across one another. 
Increasing the size or number of these microscopic projections by roughening the 
surfaces generally leads to more friction. If you put sandpaper on the bottom of the fi le 
cabinet, it would experience larger frictional forces as it slides across the fl oor. On the other 
hand, a microscopically smoother “nonstick” surface, like that used in modern cookware, 
would let the fi le cabinet slide more easily.
Increasing the number of contact points by squeezing the two surfaces more tightly 
together also leads to more friction. The microscopic projections simply collide more 
often. That’s why adding more sheet music to the fi le cabinet would make it harder to slide. 
Doubling the fi le cabinet’s weight would roughly double the number of contact points and 
make it about twice as hard to move across the fl oor. A useful rule of thumb is that the 
frictional forces between two fi rm surfaces are proportional to the forces pressing those 
two surfaces together.
Friction also causes wear when the colliding contact points break one another off. With 
time, this wear can remove large amounts of material so that even seemingly indestructible 
stone steps are gradually worn away by foot traffi c. The best way to reduce wear between 
two surfaces (other than to insert a lubricant between them) is to polish them so that they 
are extremely smooth. The smooth surfaces will still touch at contact points and experience 
friction as they slide across one another, but their contact points will be broad and round 
and will rarely break one another off during a collision. 
Microscopic
contact points
Fig. 2.2.2 Two surfaces 
that are pressed against 
one another actually touch 
only at specifi c contact 
points. When the surfaces 
slide across one another, 
these contact points 
collide, producing sliding 
friction and wear.

Wheels 51
Static Friction, Sliding Friction, and Traction
There are really two kinds of friction: sliding and static. When two surfaces are moving 
across one another, sliding friction acts to stop them from sliding. But even when those 
surfaces have the same velocity, static friction may act to keep them from starting to slide 
across one another in the fi rst place. 
You fi nd it particularly hard to start the fi le cabinet sliding across the fl oor. Contact 
points between the cabinet and fl oor have settled into one another, so a small push does 
nothing. Static friction always exerts a frictional force that exactly balances your push. 
Since the net force on the fi le cabinet is zero, it doesn’t accelerate.
However, the force that static friction can exert is limited. To get the fi le cabinet moving, 
you need to give it a mighty shove and thereby exert more horizontal force on it than static 
friction can exert in the other direction. The net force on the fi le cabinet is then no longer 
zero, and the fi le cabinet accelerates.
Once the fi le cabinet is moving, static friction is replaced by sliding friction. Because 
sliding friction acts to bring the fi le cabinet back to rest, you must push on the cabinet to 
keep it moving. With the fi le cabinet sliding across the fl oor, however, the contact points 
between the surfaces no longer have time to settle into one another, and they consequently 
experience weaker horizontal forces. That’s why the force of sliding friction is generally 
weaker than that of static friction and why it’s easier to keep the fi le cabinet moving than it 
is to get it started.
Both forms of friction are incorporated in the concept of traction, the largest amount 
of frictional force that the fi le cabinet can obtain from the fl oor at any given moment. When 
the cabinet is stationary, its traction is equal to the maximum amount of force that static 
friction can exert on it. Once it begins to slide across the fl oor, however, its traction reduces 
to the amount of force that sliding friction exerts.
While the fi le cabinet’s traction is a nuisance that you must overcome, the traction of 
your shoes on the fl oor is crucial. Unless you can push against the wall, your shoes are 
going to need enough traction to provide the horizontal force required to move the fi le 
cabinet. Let’s hope you’re wearing your basketball shoes!
There is another difference between static and sliding friction—sliding friction wastes 
energy. It converts useful, ordered energy, work or energy that can easily do work, into 
relatively useless thermal energy, a disordered energy that’s associated with temperature. 
Sliding friction makes things hotter by turning work into thermal energy.
We can observe work becoming thermal energy as you slide the fi le cabinet across the 
fl oor at constant velocity. Since the cabinet isn’t accelerating, you and the fl oor are pushing 
the cabinet equally hard in opposite directions. Because you’re pushing the cabinet forward 
as it moves forward, you’re doing (positive) work on the cabinet. Sliding friction from the 
fl oor, however, is pushing the cabinet backward as it moves forward, so sliding friction is 
doing negative work on the cabinet. Overall, sliding friction is removing energy from the 
cabinet just as fast as you’re adding it.
Where is your work going? The cabinet isn’t transferring your work to the fl oor 
because the fl oor can’t move and therefore can’t have work done on it. Alas, sliding friction 
Check Your Understanding #2: Weight and Friction
How much harder is it to slide a stack of two identical books across a table than it is to slide just one 
of those books? 
Answer: About twice as hard. 
Why: The frictional forces between the table and books are roughly proportional to the forces pressing 
them together. The book’s weight is what pushes them together. When you effectively double the 
book’s weight, by stacking a second book on top of it, you double the frictional forces between the 
table and the books. 

52 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
is grinding your work up into tiny fragments by way of countless collisions between the 
contact points on the two sliding surfaces. The fragments of your energy are distributed 
randomly among particles that make up those surfaces and thereby become thermal energy. 
The cabinet and fl oor are both becoming hotter.
In contrast, static friction doesn’t waste energy as thermal energy; it simply enables 
objects to do work on one another. For example, your efforts have made you thirsty, so you 
drink a glass of water. As you grip the sides of the glass with your fi ngers and lift it upward, 
each fi nger is exerting an upward static friction force on the glass. Since the glass moves 
upward as your fi ngers push it upward, your fi ngers are doing (positive) work on the glass. 
At the same time, the glass is exerting a downward static friction force on each of your 
fi ngers. Because each fi nger moves upward as the glass pushes it downward, the glass is 
doing negative work on your fi ngers. In this manner, static friction is transferring energy 
from you to the glass without wasting any of it as thermal energy. 
Check Your Understanding #3: Skidding to a Stop
Antilock brakes keep an automobile’s wheels from locking and skidding during a sudden stop. Apart 
from issues of steering, what is the advantage of preventing the wheels from skidding (sliding) on the 
pavement? 
Answer: If the wheels continue to turn, they experience static friction with the pavement. If they lock 
and begin to skid, they experience sliding friction. Since the traction provided by static friction is 
greater than that provided by sliding friction, the car will decelerate faster if the wheels don’t skid. 
Why: For a rapid stop, the car needs the maximum possible force in the direction opposite its veloc-
ity. The most effective way to obtain that stopping force from the road is with static friction between 
the turning wheels and the pavement. Sliding friction, the result of skidding tires, is less effective at 
stopping the car, wears out the tires, and diminishes the driver’s ability to steer the vehicle.
Friction and Energy
We’ve seen that sliding friction converts work into thermal energy, but what exactly is 
thermal energy? To answer that question, let’s fi rst reexamine energy in general. 
Energy is the capacity to do work, and it is transferred between objects by doing that 
work. As noted in Section 1.3, energy is a conserved physical quantity—it cannot be cre-
ated or destroyed; it can only be transferred between objects or converted from one form 
to another. To distinguish energy from two other conserved quantities we’ll encounter in 
the next section, you can think of energy as the conserved quantity of doing. With practice, 
you’ll be able to follow the fl ow of energy through a system just as an accountant follows 
the fl ow of money through a company.
Energy’s two basic forms are kinetic (energy contained in the motions of objects) and 
potential (energy stored in the forces between or within those objects). Each force has its 
own specifi c form of potential energy, some of which appear in Table 2.2.1.
The individual forms of energy are not conserved quantities; only total energy—the 
sum of all the individual forms—is conserved. For example, when you drop a ball from 
TABLE 2.2.1 Several Specifi c Forms and Examples of Potential Energy
Form of Potential Energy
Example
Gravitational potential energy
A bowling ball at the top of a hill
Elastic potential energy
A wound clock spring
Electrostatic potential energy
A cloud in a thunderstorm
Chemical potential energy
A fi recracker
Nuclear potential energy
Uranium

Wheels 53
rest, its gravitational potential energy decreases and its kinetic energy increases, but its 
total energy remains unchanged.
We measure energy in many common units: joules (J), calories, food Calories (also 
called kilocalories), and kilowatt-hours, to name only a few. All these units measure the 
same thing, and they differ from one another only by numerical conversion factors, some 
of which can be found in Appendix B. For example, 1 food Calorie is equal to 1000 calories 
or 4187 J. A jelly donut with about 250 food Calories thus contains about 1,000,000 J of 
energy. Since a joule is the same as a newton-meter, 1,000,000 J is the energy you’d use to 
lift your friend’s fi le cabinet into the second-fl oor apartment 200 times (1000 N times 5 m 
upward equals 5000 J of work per trip). No wonder eating donuts is hard on your physique!
Let’s return now to thermal energy. Thermal energy is actually a mixture of ordi-
nary kinetic and potential energies. But unlike the kinetic energy in a moving ball or the 
potential energy in an elevated piano, the kinetic and potential energies in thermal energy 
are contained entirely within those objects. Any object has internal energy, energy held 
entirely within that object by its individual particles and forces between those particles; 
thermal energy is the portion of internal energy that’s associated with temperature. Thermal 
energy makes every microscopic particle in the object jiggle randomly and independently; 
at any moment, each particle has its own tiny supply of potential and kinetic energies, and 
this dispersed and disordered energy is collectively referred to as thermal energy.
As you push the fi le cabinet across the fl oor, you do work on it, but it doesn’t pick up 
speed. Instead, sliding friction converts your work into thermal energy, and the cabinet and 
fl oor become hotter as the energy you transfer to them disperses among their particles. But 
although sliding friction easily turns work into thermal energy, there’s no easy way to turn 
thermal energy back into work. Disorder not only makes things harder to use, but it also is 
diffi cult to undo. When you drop your favorite coffee mug on the fl oor and it shatters into a 
thousand pieces, the cup is still all there; however, it’s disordered and thus much less useful. 
Just as dropping the pieces on the fl oor a second time isn’t likely to reassemble your cup, 
energy converted into thermal energy can’t easily be reassembled into useful, ordered energy. 
Check Your Understanding #4: Burning Rubber
If you push too hard on your car’s accelerator pedal when the traffi c light turns green, your wheels 
will slip and you’ll leave a black trail of rubber behind. Such a “jackrabbit start” can cause as much 
wear on your tires as 50 km (31 miles) of normal driving. Why is skidding so much more damaging 
to the tires than normal driving? 
Answer: Normal driving involves mostly static friction because the surfaces of the tires don’t slide 
across the pavement. Skidding involves sliding friction as the tire surfaces move independently of 
the pavement. Because it involves sliding friction, skidding creates thermal energy and damages the tires. 
Why: The expression “burning rubber” is an appropriate name for skidding during a jackrabbit start. 
Substantial thermal energy is produced, and a trail of hot rubber is left on the pavement behind the 
car. At drag races, the frictional heating that results from skidding at the start can be so severe that 
the tires actually catch on fi re.
Wheels
You’ve wrestled your friend’s fi le cabinet out the door of the old apartment and are now 
dragging it along the sidewalk. You’re doing work against sliding friction the whole way, 
producing large amounts of thermal energy in both the bottom of the cabinet and the sur-
face of the sidewalk. You’re also damaging both objects, since sliding friction is wearing 
out their surfaces. The four-drawer fi le cabinet may be down to three drawers by the time 
you arrive at the new apartment. 
Fortunately, there are mechanical systems that can help you move one object across 
another without sliding. The classic example is a roller (Fig. 2.2.3). If you place the fi le 
cabinet on rollers, those rollers will rotate as the fi le cabinet moves so that their surfaces 

54 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
never slide across the bottom of the cabinet or the top of the sidewalk. To see how the roll-
ers work, make a fi st with one hand and roll it across the palm of your other hand. The skin 
of one hand doesn’t slide across the skin of the other hand; since this silent motion doesn’t 
convert work into thermal energy, your skin remains cool. Now slide your two open palms 
across one another; this time, sliding friction warms your skin. 
Although the rollers don’t experience sliding friction, they can experience static fric-
tion. The top of each roller is touching the bottom of the cabinet, and the two surfaces move 
along together even when the fi le cabinet is accelerating because of static friction; they grip 
one another tightly until the roller’s rotation pulls them apart. A similar process takes place 
between the rollers and the top of the sidewalk; static friction can exert torques on the roll-
ers and cause them to rotate in the fi rst place. Again, you can illustrate this behavior with 
your hands. Try to drag your fi st across your open palm. Just before your fi st begins to 
slide, you’ll feel a torque on it. Static friction between the skins of your two hands, acting 
to prevent sliding, causes your fi st to begin rotating just like a roller.
Once you get the fi le cabinet moving on rollers, you can keep it rolling along the level 
sidewalk indefi nitely. Without any sliding friction, the cabinet doesn’t lose kinetic energy, 
so it continues at constant velocity without your having to push it. However, the rollers 
move out from under the fi le cabinet as it travels, and you frequently have to move a roller 
from the back of the cabinet to the front. In fact, you need at least three rollers to ensure 
that the fi le cabinet never falls to the ground when a roller pops out the back. Although the 
rollers have eliminated sliding friction, they’ve created another headache—one that makes 
the prospect of a long trip unappealing. Is there another device that can reduce sliding fric-
tion without requiring constant attention?
One alternative would be a four-wheeled cart. The simplest cart rests on fi xed poles or 
axles that pass through central holes or hubs in the four wheels (Fig. 2.2.4). The ground 
exerts upward support forces on the wheels, the wheels exert upward support forces on the 
axles, and the axles support the cart and its contents. As the cart moves forward, its wheels 
R
o
t
a
t
i
o
n
 
R
o
t
a
t
i
o
n
 
Cart’s velocity
Cart’s acceleration
Sliding friction
between axle and hub
Static friction
between rim and ground
Fig. 2.2.4 As this 
cart accelerates toward 
the left, its wheels roll 
counterclockwise. Although 
the wheel rims experience 
only static friction with the 
ground, the wheel hubs 
slide around the axles and 
convert the cart’s kinetic 
energy into thermal energy. 
To reduce this wasted 
energy, the cart has narrow 
axles that are lubricated 
with axle grease.
Fig. 2.2.3 (a) A fi le 
cabinet that’s supported on 
turning rollers experiences 
no sliding friction. 
(b) Since the top surface 
of a roller moves forward 
with the fi le cabinet, while 
its bottom surface stays 
behind with the sidewalk, 
the roller moves only half 
as fast as the fi le cabinet. 
As a result, the rollers are 
soon left behind.
(a)
(b)

Wheels 55
roll. Their bottom surfaces don’t slide or skid across the ground; instead, each wheel lowers 
a portion of its surface onto the sidewalk, leaves it there briefl y so that it may experience 
static friction, and then raises it back off the sidewalk, with a new portion of wheel surface 
taking its place. Because of the touch-and-release character of rolling, there is no sliding 
friction between the cart’s wheels and the ground. 
Unfortunately, as each wheel rotates, its hub slides across the stationary axle at its 
center. This sliding friction wastes energy and causes wear to both hub and axle. However, 
the narrow hub moves relatively slowly across the axle so that the work and wear done each 
second are small. Still, this sliding friction is undesirable and can be reduced signifi cantly 
by lubricating the hub and axle with axle grease.
A better solution is to insert rollers between the hub and axle (Fig. 2.2.5). The result is a 
roller bearing, a mechanical device that eliminates sliding friction between a hub and an axle. 
A complete bearing consists of two rings separated by rollers that keep those rings from rub-
bing against one another. In this case, the bearing’s inner ring is attached to the stationary 
axle, while its outer ring is attached to the spinning wheel hub. The nondriven wheels of 
an automobile are supported by roller bearings on essentially stationary axles. The non-
driven wheels of lighter vehicles, such as bicycles and wagons, are similarly supported on 
stationary axles, but their bearings use balls instead of rollers—ball bearings. When a vehicle 
with free wheels starts forward, static friction from the ground pushes backward on the bot-
toms of those free wheels to keep them from skidding forward. Those frictional forces also 
produce torques that cause the wheels to begin turning and they roll forward (Fig. 2.2.6a).
A car’s engine-powered or driven wheels are also supported by roller bearings, but these 
bearings act somewhat differently. Because the engine must be able to exert a torque on each 
driven wheel, those wheels are rigidly connected to their axles. As the engine spins these axles, 
the axles spin their wheels (Fig. 2.2.6b). A bearing prevents each spinning axle from rubbing 
against the car’s frame. This bearing’s outer ring is attached to the stationary car frame while 
its inner ring is attached to the spinning axle. When a vehicle begins to spin its driven wheels, 
static friction from the ground pushes forward on the bottoms of those driven wheels to keep 
them from skidding backward. Since those forward frictional forces are the only horizontal 
forces on the vehicle, the vehicle accelerates forward and the driven wheels roll forward.
Recognizing a good idea when you think of it, you load the fi le cabinet into the passenger 
seat of your red convertible sports car and start the engine. The car isn’t quite as responsive 
as usual because of the added mass, but it’s still able to accelerate respectably. In a few sec-
onds, you’re cruising down the road toward the new apartment and a very grateful friend. 
Fig. 2.2.5 In a roller 
bearing, the hub of the 
wheel doesn’t touch the 
axle directly. Instead, the 
two are separated by a set 
of rollers that turn with 
the hub. The bottom few 
rollers bear most of the 
load since the hub pushes 
up on them and they push 
up on the axle. As the 
wheel turns, the rollers 
recirculate, traveling up to 
the right and over the top 
of the axle before returning 
down to the left to bear 
the load once again. 
The rollers, wheel, and 
axle can experience only 
static friction, not sliding 
friction. In a ball bearing, 
the cylindrical rollers are 
replaced by spherical balls.
R
o
t
a
t
i
o
n
 
Fixed 
axle
Rotating 
hub
Rotating 
rollers
Fig. 2.2.6 (a) When my assistant pushes a cart forward and it accelerates forward, static friction from 
the ground pushes the wheel bottoms backward to prevent them from skidding. That same frictional 
force causes the wheels to roll forward. (b) When the engine of a go‐cart twists its wheels forward, 
static friction from the ground pushes the wheel bottoms forward to prevent them from skidding. That 
same frictional force causes the vehicle to accelerate forward.
(a)
(b)

56 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Power and Rotational Work
It’s a beautiful afternoon, and you thrill to the power of your car as it drives swiftly up a 
steep hill. In this situation, power means more than just a sense of exhilaration and free-
dom; power is also the physical quantity that measures the rate at which your car’s engine 
does work—the amount of work it does in a certain amount of time, or
power = work
time .
The SI unit of power is the joule per second, also called the watt (abbreviated W). 
Other units of power include Calories per hour and horsepower; like the units for energy, 
these units differ only by numerical factors, which are listed in Appendix B online. For 
example, 1 horsepower is equal to 745.7 W, so the engine of your 200-horsepower roadster 
can supply about 150,000 W of power. With you and the fi le cabinet on board, the car 
weighs about 15,000 N (3400 lbf), so the car engine can lift it about 10 m upward each 
second. No wonder it’s climbing the hill so easily!
Up to now, we’ve considered work only in the context of translation motion, where 
work involves force and distance. For example, you do work on the fi le cabinet by exerting 
a force on it as it moves a distance in the direction of that force. The car’s engine, however, 
does work on each of its powered wheels in the context of rotational motion, where work 
involves torque and angle. Specifi cally, the engine does work on a wheel by exerting a 
torque on the wheel as the wheel rotates through an angle in the direction of the torque.
To do work on an object via rotational motion, you must twist it as it rotates through 
an angle in the direction of your twist. The work you do on it is equal to the torque you 
exert on its times the angle through which it rotates in the direction of your torque, where 
that angle is measured in radians, the natural unit of angles. We can express this relation-
ship as a word equation: 
 
work = torque · angle(in radians) 
(2.2.1)
in symbols: 
W = 𝝉· 𝜽,
and in everyday language:
If you’re not twisting or it’s not turning, then you’re not working.
This simple relationship assumes that your torque is constant while you’re doing the work. 
If your torque varies, the calculation of work will have to recognize that variation and may 
require the use of calculus. 
Check Your Understanding #5: Jewel Movements
Many antique mechanical watches and clocks proudly proclaim that they have “jewel movements.” 
Gears in these timepieces turn on axles that are pointed at either end and are supported at those 
ends by very hard, polished gemstones. What is the advantage of having needlelike ends on an axle 
and supporting those needles with smooth, hard jewels? 
Answer: Because all the supporting forces are very close to the axis of rotation, the jewels exert 
almost zero torque on the axle. The axle turns remarkably freely. 
Why: Mechanical timepieces need almost ideal motion to keep accurate time. One of the best ways 
to allow a rotating object free movement is to support it exactly on the axis of rotation, where the 
support can’t exert torque on the object.

Wheels 57
As the engine does work on its wheels via rotational motion, those wheels do work on 
the car via translational motion. Because each wheel grips the pavement with static friction, 
its contact point with the ground can’t move. Instead, the rotating wheel pushes the axle and 
car forward as they move forward. So energy that fl ows into the wheels via rotational motion 
returns to the car via translational motion and keeps the car climbing steadily up the hill.
Like work itself, power can be supplied by translational motion or rotational motion. 
When you’re pushing the fi le cabinet across the fl oor, you’re using translational motion to 
supply power to it. Since translational work is force times distance (Eq. 1.3.1) and power 
is work divided by time, translational power is force times distance divided by time, or
power = force · velocity.
You can thus supply more power to the fi le cabinet either by pushing it harder or by having 
it move faster in the direction of your push. 
As your car drives up the hill, the car engine is using rotational motion to supply power 
to its wheels. Since rotational work is torque times angle, rotational power is torque times 
angle divided by time, or
power = torque · angular velocity.
The car can therefore supply more power to its wheels either by twisting them harder or by 
having them rotate faster in the direction of that twist. 
Check Your Understanding #6: Going Nowhere One Foot at a Time
You’re pedaling a stationary bicycle when your shoelace comes undone. While you retie the lace, you 
can pedal with only one foot and exert half as much torque on the pedals as before. The pedals are 
still turning just as quickly, so are you still exercising as hard? 
Answer: No. 
Why: By halving the torque you exert on the pedals, you halve the work that you do on those pedals 
each time they complete a rotation.
Kinetic Energy
As you near your destination, you begin thinking about the car’s brakes. They’re designed 
to stop the car by turning its kinetic energy into thermal energy. They’ll perform their task 
by rubbing stationary brake pads against spinning metal discs. Although you’re confi dent 
that those brakes are up to the task, just how much kinetic energy are they going to have to 
convert into thermal energy? 
One way to determine the car’s kinetic energy is to calculate the work its engine did on 
it while bringing it from rest to its current speed. The result of that calculation is that the 
Check Your Figures #1: We All Knead Energy
When your kitchen mixer is kneading a loaf of sourdough bread, it exerts a torque of 20 newton-
meters on its mixing blade, and that blade completes 500 rotations. How much energy does the 
mixer supply to its blade and the dough? 
Answer: It supplies about 63,000 joules. 
Why: According to Eq. 2.2.1, the energy that the mixer transfers to its blade is equal to the torque it 
exerts on the blade times the angle through which the blade turns. Since there are 2𝜋 radians per 
complete rotation, the blade turns approximately 3140 radians. The work that the mixer does is 
20 N-m times 3140, or about 63,000 J. 

58 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
moving car’s kinetic energy is equal to one-half its mass times the square of its speed. This 
relationship can be written as a word equation: 
 
kinetic energy = 1
2 · mass · speed2, 
(2.2.2)
in symbols: 
K = 1
2 · m · v2,
and in everyday language: 
Racing around at twice the speed takes four times the energy.
With you and the fi le cabinet on board, the sports car has a mass of about 1500 kg 
(3300 lbm). At a speed of 100 km/h (62 mph), it has over 575,000 J of kinetic energy. That 
enormous energy is four times what it would be at 50 km/h (31 mph), so put down your cell 
phone and drive carefully. The dramatic increase in kinetic energy that results from a modest 
increase in speed explains why high-speed crashes are far deadlier than those at lower 
speeds and why that police offi cer is checking out your car with a radar gun. Red cars get 
all the attention.
You’re traveling safely within the speed limit and exchange a polite wave with the offi -
cer. However, you soon pass another car that has been stopped for a ticket. The light on the 
nearby police car spins round and round, and rotating objects have kinetic energy, too. Like 
the kinetic energy of translational motion, the kinetic energy of rotational motion depends 
on inertia and speed; however, it’s the rotational inertia and rotational speed that matter. The 
light’s kinetic energy of rotational motion is equal to one-half its rotational mass times the 
square of its angular speed. This relationship can be written as a word equation: 
 
kinetic energy = 1
2 · rotational mass · angular speed2, 
(2.2.3)
in symbols: 
K = 1
2 · I · ω2,
and in everyday language: 
It takes a very energetic person to spin his wheels twice as fast.
With the ticket complete, the police car pulls out into traffi c with its light still spin-
ning. The light’s total kinetic energy is now the sum of two parts: translational kinetic 
energy and rotational kinetic energy. Its translational kinetic energy depends on the speed 
of the light’s center of mass, which is equal to the police car’s speed through traffi c. Its 
rotational kinetic energy depends on the angular speed at which the light turns about its 
center of mass.
As the police car disappears in the distance, it occurs to you that the spinning wheels 
of your car also have rotational kinetic energy that adds to the car’s substantial translational 
kinetic energy. Still, you trust your brakes. In a few minutes, you arrive at your destination 
and brake to a stop. Although you’re aware of the added mass because the car decelerates 
less quickly than usual, the brakes successfully transform the car’s kinetic energy into ther-
mal energy. You’ve reached your goal safely and are now a hero. 

Bumper Cars 59
Check Your Understanding #7: Throwing a Fastball
A typical grade school pitcher can throw a baseball at 80 km/h (50 mph), but only a few professional 
athletes have the extraordinary strength needed to throw a baseball at twice that speed. Why is it so 
much harder to throw the baseball only twice as fast? 
Answer: Doubling the speed of the baseball requires quadrupling the energy transferred to it by the 
pitcher. 
Why: To throw a 160-km/h (100-mph) fastball, a major league pitcher must put four times as much 
kinetic energy into both the ball and his arm as when pitching an 80-km/h slow ball. He also pitches 
the fastball in half the time needed to pitch the slow ball. Overall, he must do four times as much 
work throwing a fastball, and he must do that work in one-half the time. That means the pitcher 
produces eight times as much power while throwing a fastball as when throwing a slow ball. No 
wonder amateurs have trouble duplicating that feat. 
Check Your Figures #2: Blowing in the Wind
The air in a hurricane travels at 200 km/h (124 mph). How much more kinetic energy does 1 kg of 
this air have than 1 kg of air moving at only 20 km/h? 
Answer: It has 100 times as much kinetic energy. 
Why: Because kinetic energy is proportional to speed squared, the kilogram of air in the hurricane 
moves 10 times as fast but has 100 times as much kinetic energy as the slower moving air. This enor-
mous increase in energy is what makes a hurricane’s wind dangerous. The air’s terrifi c speed also brings 
large quantities of it to you quickly, so that the wind power arriving each second is overwhelming. 
Check Your Figures #3: Playing Around at the Playground
When children climb onto a playground merry-go-round, they increase its rotational inertia. If the 
children triple the merry-go-round’s rotational mass, how will they alter the kinetic energy it has when 
it spins at a certain angular speed? 
Answer: The children will triple the merry-go-round’s kinetic energy. 
Why: The kinetic energy of a spinning object is proportional to its rotational mass. Since the children 
triple the merry-go-round’s rotational mass, they triple its kinetic energy.
SECTION 2.3 
Bumper Cars
For a few minutes, drivers in this amusement park ride race 
madly about an oval track, deliberately crashing their vehicles 
into one another and laughing hysterically at the violent 
impacts. Jolts, jerks, and spins are half the fun, and it’s a won-
der that no one gets whiplash. Hidden in the excitement, 
though, are several important physics concepts that infl uence 
everything from tennis to billiards. 
Questions to Think About: Why does a stationary car begin 
rolling forward after being struck by a moving car? What 
aspects of motion are passed between cars as they collide? 
Why does your car jolt more when the car that hits it contains 
two big adults rather than one small child? What would hap-
pen if the bumper cars had hard steel bumpers rather than 
soft rubber ones? Why is your car often set spinning by colli-
sions, and what keeps it spinning? 
Experiments to Do: Place a coin on a smooth table and fl ick a 
second identical coin so that it slides along the table and 
While car crashes normally aren’t much fun outside of movies 
or television, there is one delightful exception—bumper cars. 
Power source grid
Steering wheel
Headlight
Bumper
Neutral power return
(the ﬂoor)
Riser
Contact
Shoulder
harness

60 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Coasting Forward: Linear Momentum
Bumper cars are small, electrically powered vehicles that can turn on a dime and are pro-
tected on all sides by rubber bumpers. Each car has only two controls: a pedal that activates 
its motor and a steering wheel that controls the direction in which the motor pushes the car. 
Since the car itself is so small, its occupants account for much of the car’s total mass and 
rotational mass. 
Imagine that you have just sat down in one of these cars and put on your safety strap. 
The other people also climb into their cars, usually one person per car, and the ride begins.
With your car free to move or turn, you quickly become aware of its translational and 
rotational inertias. The car’s translational inertia makes it hard to start or stop, and its rota-
tional inertia makes it diffi cult to spin or stop from spinning. While we’ve seen these two 
types of inertia before, let’s take another look at them and at how they affect your bumper car. 
This time, we’ll see that they’re associated with two new conserved quantities: linear momen-
tum and angular momentum. As promised, energy isn’t the only conserved quantity in nature!
When fast-moving bumper cars crash into one another, they exchange more than just 
energy. Energy is a scalar rather than vector quantity, so it’s directionless and can’t account 
for the fact that these cars seem to be exchanging some physical quantity that incorporates 
both speed and direction of travel. For example, if your car is hit squarely by a car speeding 
toward the right, then your car’s motion shifts rightward in response. What your car is 
receiving from the other car is a rightward-directed dose of a conserved vector quantity 
known as linear momentum.
Linear momentum, usually just called momentum, is the measure of an object’s 
translational impetus or tenacity—its determination to keep moving the way it’s currently 
moving. Roughly speaking, your car’s momentum indicates the effort it took to get the car 
moving with its present speed and direction of motion. To distinguish it from energy and 
angular momentum, you can think of momentum as the conserved quantity of moving.
The car’s momentum is equal to its mass times its velocity and can be written as a 
word equation: 
 
momentum = mass · velocity, 
(2.3.1)
in symbols: 
p = m · v,
and in everyday language: 
It’s hard to stop a fast-moving truck.
Note that momentum is a vector quantity and that it has the same direction as the velocity. 
As we might expect, the faster your car is moving or the more mass it has, the more momen-
tum it has in the direction of its velocity. The SI unit of momentum is the kilogram-meter 
per second (abbreviated kg · m/s). 
To physicists, conserved quantities are rare treasures that make it easier to understand 
otherwise complicated motions. Like all conserved quantities, momentum can’t be created 
or destroyed. It can only be transferred between objects. Momentum plays a very basic role 
in bumper cars; the whole point of crashing them into one another is to enjoy the momentum 
collision affect the coin that was originally moving? How does 
it affect the line of coins? What was transferred among the 
coins by the collision?
 
Now stand a coin on its edge and fl ick it so that it spins 
rapidly. Did you give it something that keeps it spinning? Why 
does the coin eventually stop spinning?
strikes the stationary coin squarely. What happens? Try this 
experiment again, but now use two coins with different 
masses. How is the collision different? Does it matter which 
coin you crash into the other? 
 
Now line up several identical coins so that they touch, and 
slide another coin into one end of this line. How does the 

Bumper Cars 61
transfers. During each collision, momentum shifts from one car to the other so that they 
abruptly change their speeds or directions or both. As long as these momentum transfers 
aren’t too jarring, everyone has a good time.
You’ve stopped your car, so it has zero velocity and zero momentum. To begin moving 
again, something must transfer momentum to your car. While you could press the pedal and 
let the motor gradually transfer momentum from the ground to your car, that’s not much 
fun. Instead, you let two grinning couch potatoes in an overloaded green car slam into you 
at breakneck speed (Fig. 2.3.1). 
The green car was heading westward, and in a few moments your car is moving west-
ward, too, while the green car has slowed signifi cantly. Before you recover from the jolt, 
your car pounds a child’s car westward and your car slows down abruptly. Finally, its 
impact with a wall stops the child’s car. Despite disapproving looks from the child’s par-
ents, there’s no harm done. Overall, westward momentum has fl owed from the spudmobile 
to your car, to the child’s car, and into the wall. No momentum has been created or 
destroyed; you’ve all simply enjoyed passing it along from car to car. 
Westward 
momentum
Momentum
transfer
Momentum
transfer
Wall
Child's car
Your car
Overloaded
green car
Momentum
transfer
Fig. 2.3.1 Your car is 
hit by a fast-moving, 
massive car with westward 
momentum. Much of that 
westward momentum is 
transferred to your car. 
You crash into a child’s 
car, transferring the 
westward momentum to 
it. It then crashes into 
the wall, transferring the 
westward momentum to 
the wall. Although that wall 
doesn’t appear to move, 
it and the Earth, to which 
it’s attached, actually 
accelerate westward a tiny 
amount as they receive the 
westward momentum.
Check Your Understanding #1: Stuck on the Ice
Suppose you’re stuck in the middle of a frozen lake, with a surface so slippery that you can’t get any 
traction. You take off a shoe and throw it toward the southern shore. You fi nd yourself coasting toward 
the northern shore and soon escape from the lake. Why did this scheme work? 
Answer: By transferring southward momentum to the shoe, you obtained northward momentum. 
Why: Initially, both you and your shoe have zero momentum. But when you throw the shoe southward, 
you give it southward momentum. Since the only source of that southward momentum is you, you 
must have lost southward momentum. A negative amount of southward momentum is actually north-
ward momentum, and thus you coast northward. Interestingly enough, the total momentum of you 
and the shoe hasn’t changed. It’s still zero, as it must be because momentum is conserved. It has 
simply been redistributed.
Check Your Figures #1: Follow That Train! 
The bad guys are getting away in a four-car train, and you’re trying to catch them. The train has a mass 
of 20,000 kg and it’s rolling forward at 22 m/s (80 km/h or 50 mph). What is the train’s momentum? 
Answer: The train’s momentum is 4400,000 kg · m/s, in the forward direction. 
Why: You can use Eq. 2.3.1 to calculate the train’s momentum from its mass and velocity:
 linear momentum = 20,000 kg · 22 m/s
 = 440,000 kg · m/s.
That momentum is in the same direction the train is moving, the forward direction.

62 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Exchanging Momentum in a Collision: Impulses
Momentum is transferred to a car by giving it an impulse, a force exerted on it for a certain 
amount of time. When the motor and fl oor push your bumper car forward for a few seconds, 
they give your car an impulse and transfer momentum to it. This impulse is the change in 
your car’s momentum and is equal to the force exerted on the car times the duration of that 
force. This relationship can be written as a word equation: 
 
impulse = force · time, 
(2.3.2)
in symbols: 
Δp = F · t,
and in everyday language: 
The harder and longer you push a bobsled forward at the start of a race, the 
more momentum it will have when it starts down the hill.
The more force or the longer that force is exerted, the larger the impulse and the more your 
bumper car’s momentum changes. Remember that an impulse, like momentum itself, is a 
vector quantity; it points in the same direction as the force. If your aim is off and the mis-
directed impulse you obtain from the fl oor sends you crashing into the wall, don’t say you 
hadn’t been warned! 
Different forces exerted for different amounts of time can transfer the same momen-
tum to a car: 
 
impulse = large force · short time
 
= small force · long time. 
(2.3.3)
Thus you can get your car moving with a certain forward momentum either by letting the 
motor and fl oor push it with a small forward force of long duration or by letting the collid-
ing green car push on it with a large forward force of short duration. 
Forces that colliding objects exert on one another as they exchange momentum are 
often called impact forces, and they explain why bumper cars have soft rubber bumpers. If 
the bumpers were hard steel, the collision between the green car and your car would last 
only an instant and would involve enormous impact forces. You’d be in need of a neck 
brace and the services of a personal injury lawyer. However, amusement parks don’t like 
lawsuits and sensibly limit the impact forces. To do this, they use rubber bumpers and 
rather slow-moving cars.
Nonetheless, you can get a pretty good jolt when you collide head-on with another car. 
Your two cars then start with oppositely directed momenta, and the collision roughly exchanges 
those momenta between cars. In almost no time, you go from heading forward to heading 
backward. The impulse that causes this reversal of motion is especially large because it not 
only stops your forward motion but also causes you to begin heading backward.
During the collision, you gave the other car more forward momentum than you had 
and ended up with less than zero forward momentum. A vector of negative magnitude is a 
vector of positive magnitude pointing in the opposite direction. In this case, your defi cit of 
forward momentum after the collision means that you have backward momentum.
Momentum is conserved because of Newton’s third law of motion. When the green car 
exerts a force on your car for a certain amount of time, your car exerts an equal but oppositely 
directed force on the green car for exactly the same time. Because of the equal but oppositely 
directed nature of the two forces, the cars receive impulses that are equal in amount but oppo-
site in direction. Since the momentum gained by one car is exactly equal to the momentum lost 
by the other car, we say that momentum is transferred from one car to the other.

Bumper Cars 63
The more mass a car has, the less its velocity changes as a consequence of a momen-
tum transfer. That’s why the green car doesn’t stop completely when it crashes into your 
car, whereas your car speeds up dramatically. Just a fraction of the green car’s forward 
momentum causes a large change in your car’s velocity. Like a bug being hit by an automo-
bile windshield, your bumper car does most of the accelerating. 
Check Your Understanding #2: Bowling Them Over
When a beanbag hits the wall, it transfers all its forward momentum to the wall and comes to a stop. 
When a rubber ball hits the wall, it transfers all its forward momentum, comes to a stop, and then 
rebounds. During the rebound, it transfers still more forward momentum to the wall. If you wanted 
to knock over a weighted bowling pin at the county fair, which would be the more effective projectile: 
the rubber ball or the beanbag, assuming they have identical masses and you throw them with identical 
velocities? 
Answer: The bouncy rubber ball would be more effective. 
Why: Either projectile will transfer all its original momentum to the bowling pin while coming to a 
stop. However, the bouncy rubber ball will bounce back and continue to exert a force on the bowling 
pin. The impulse (force · time) delivered by the rubber ball will be greater than that delivered by the 
beanbag because the ball will exert its forward force for a longer time (during stopping and rebounding). 
The ball will rebound with its momentum reversed, having transferred roughly twice its original 
momentum to the pin. 
Check Your Figures #2: Stop That Train!
The engine of the train you’re chasing (see Check Your Figures #1) has broken down, but it’s still 
rolling forward. To stop it, you grab onto the last car and begin to drag your boot heels on the ground. 
The backward force on the train is 200 N. How long will it take you to stop the train? 
Answer: It will take 2200 s, so kiss your boot heels goodbye! 
Why: To stop the train, you must give it a backward impulse that completely cancels its forward momen-
tum. Since its forward momentum is 440,000 kg · m/s, the backward impulse must be 440,000 kg · m/s. 
Since 200 N can also be written as 200 kg · m/s2, we can use Eq. 2.3.2 to fi nd the time: 
 time = 440,000 kg · m/s
200 kg · m/s2
 = 2200 s.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Momentum and Force
Misconception: A massive moving object carries a force with it—the “force of its momentum.” 
Resolution: Although the impulses that transfer momentum involve forces, momentum itself does 
not. A moving object carries only momentum, not force. Most important, a coasting object is free 
of any net force. However, when that object hits an obstacle, the two exchange momentum via 
impulses, and those impulses do involve forces.
CONSERVED QUANTITY: MOMENTUM 
TRANSFERRED BY: IMPULSE
Momentum: The measure of an object’s translational motion, its tendency to continue 
moving in a particular direction. Momentum is a vector quantity, meaning that it has 
a direction. It has no potential form and therefore cannot be hidden; momentum = 
mass · velocity.
Impulse: The mechanical means for transferring momentum; impulse = force · time.

64 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Spinning in Circles: Angular Momentum
When bumper cars are sent spinning during crashes, they are exchanging yet another con-
served quantity. Like momentum, it’s a conserved vector quantity, but now it’s associated 
with the angular speed and direction of rotation around a specifi c pivot. For example, when 
your car receives a glancing blow from a car that is circling it rapidly in a clockwise direc-
tion, your car acquires more clockwise rotation about its center of mass. What your car is 
receiving from the other car is a clockwise-directed dose of a conserved vector quantity 
known as angular momentum. 
Angular momentum is the measure of an object’s rotational impetus or tenacity, its 
determination to keep rotating the way it’s currently rotating. Simply put, your car’s angu-
lar momentum indicates the effort it took to get the car rotating with its present angular 
speed and axis of rotation. To distinguish it from energy and momentum, you can think of 
angular momentum as the conserved quantity of turning.
The car’s angular momentum is equal to its rotational mass times its angular velocity 
and can be written as a word equation: 
 
angular momentum = rotational mass · angular velocity, 
(2.3.4)
in symbols: 
L = I · 𝟂,
and in everyday language: 
It’s hard to stop a spinning carousel.
Note that angular momentum is a vector quantity and that it has the same direction as the 
angular velocity. The faster your car is spinning or the larger its rotational mass, the more 
angular momentum it has in the direction of its angular velocity. The SI unit of angular 
momentum is the kilogram-meter2 per second (abbreviated kg · m2/s). 
Angular momentum is another conserved quantity; it can’t be created or destroyed, 
only transferred between objects. For your car to begin spinning, something must transfer 
angular momentum to it, and your car will then continue to spin until it transfers this angu-
lar momentum elsewhere. To study angular momentum properly, however, we must pick 
the pivot about which all the spinning will occur. In the present situation, a good choice for 
this pivot is your car’s initial center of mass.
 Your bumper car is stationary again, so it has zero angular velocity and zero angu-
lar momentum. Suddenly, a purple car sweeps by and strikes your car a glancing blow 
(Fig. 2.3.2). Because the purple car was circling your car counterclockwise, it had coun-
terclockwise angular momentum about the pivot. Its impact transfers some of this angu-
lar momentum to your car, which begins spinning counterclockwise itself. Since it has 
given up some of its angular momentum, the purple car circles your car less rapidly. 
Your car gradually stops spinning as its wheels and friction transfer the angular momen-
tum to the ground and Earth. Overall, no angular momentum was created or destroyed 
during the collision. Instead, it was transferred from the purple car to your car to Earth. 
Check Your Understanding #3: Many Happy Returns
Satellites are often set spinning during launch to give them added stability. When astronauts visit 
these satellites years later, they fi nd them still spinning. Why don’t the satellites stop spinning? 
Answer: The satellites are unable to get rid of their angular momentum. 
Why: Because of their extreme isolation, orbiting satellites have nothing with which to exchange 
angular momentum. The angular momentum given to them at launch stays with them indefi nitely, so 
they continue to spin for decades.

Bumper Cars 65
Glancing Blows: Angular Impulses
Angular momentum is transferred to a bumper car by giving it an angular impulse, that is, 
a torque exerted on it for a certain amount of time. When the purple car hits your car and 
exerts a torque on it briefl y, it gives your car an angular impulse and transfers angular 
momentum to it. This angular impulse is the change in your car’s angular momentum and 
is equal to the torque exerted on your car times the duration of that torque. This relationship 
can be written as a word equation: 
 
angular impulse = torque · time, 
(2.3.5)
in symbols: 
ΔL = 𝝉· t,
and in everyday language: 
To get a merry-go-round spinning rapidly, you must twist it hard 
and for a long time.
The more torque is exerted or the longer that torque is exerted, the larger the angular 
impulse and the more your car’s angular momentum changes. Once again, an angular 
impulse is a vector quantity and points in the same direction as the torque. Had the purple 
car been circling your car clockwise when it struck the glancing blow, its angular impulse 
would have been in the opposite direction and you’d be spinning the other way. 
Your car
Purple car
Counterclockwise
angular momentum
Angular momentum
transfer
Pivot
(center of mass)
Fig. 2.3.2 Since the purple car is circling your car counterclockwise, it has counterclockwise angular 
momentum. When it hits your car, it transfers some of that angular momentum to your car. Because of 
this transfer, the purple car stops circling quickly as your car begins to spin counterclockwise.
Check Your Figures #3: Want to Go for a Spin? 
Spinning satellites are particularly stable. Suppose that the astronauts launching a particular satel-
lite decide to increase its angular velocity by a factor of 5. How will that change affect the satellite’s 
angular momentum? 
Answer: The angular momentum will increase by a factor of 5.
Why: Because the satellite’s angular momentum is proportional to its angular velocity, spinning it fi ve 
times faster will increase its angular momentum by that same factor.

66 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Different torques exerted for different amounts of time can transfer the same angular 
momentum to a car: 
 
angular impulse = large torque · short time
 
 = small torque · long time. 
(2.3.6)
Thus you can get your car spinning with a certain angular momentum either by letting 
the motor and fl oor twist it with a small torque of long duration or by letting the colliding 
purple car twist it with a large torque of short duration. As with linear momentum, sudden 
transfers of angular momentum can break things, so the cars are designed to limit their 
impact torques to reasonable levels. Even so, you may fi nd yourself reaching for the motion 
sickness bag after a few spinning collisions. 
Angular momentum is conserved because of Newton’s third law of rotational motion. 
When the purple car exerts a torque on your car for a certain amount of time, your car 
exerts an equal but oppositely directed torque on the purple car for exactly the same 
amount of time. Because of the equal but oppositely directed nature of the two torques, the 
cars receive angular impulses that are equal in amount but opposite in direction. Since the 
angular momentum gained by one car is exactly equal to the angular momentum lost by 
the other car, we say that angular momentum is transferred from one car to the other.
Because a car’s angular momentum depends on its rotational mass, two different cars 
may end up rotating at different angular velocities even though they have identical angular 
momenta. For example, when the purple car hits the overloaded green car and transfers 
angular momentum to it, the green car’s enormous rotational mass makes it spin relatively 
slowly. The same sort of behavior occurs with linear momentum, where a car’s mass affects 
how fast it travels when it’s given a certain amount of linear momentum. But while a 
bumper car can’t change its mass, it can change its rotational mass. If it does so while it’s 
spinning, its angular momentum won’t change, but its angular velocity will!
To see this change in angular velocity, consider the overloaded green car. Its two large 
occupants are disappointed with the ride because their huge mass and rotational mass 
prevent them from experiencing the intense jolts and spins that you’ve been enjoying. 
Suddenly they get a wonderful idea. As their car slowly spins, one of them climbs into the 
other’s lap and the two sit very close to the car’s center of mass. By rearranging the car’s 
mass this way, they have reduced the car’s overall rotational mass and the car actually 
begins to spin faster than before.
As the green car’s mass is being redistributed, it’s not a freely turning rigid object cov-
ered by Newton’s fi rst law of rotational motion. However, it is freely turning and thus covered 
by a more general and equally useful rule: an object that is not subject to any outside torques 
has constant angular momentum. As the car’s rotational mass becomes smaller, its angular 
velocity must increase to keep its angular momentum constant. That’s just what happens. 
This effect of changing one’s rotational mass explains how an ice skater can achieve an enor-
mous angular velocity by pulling herself into a thin, spinning object on ice (Fig. 2.3.3). 
CONSERVED QUANTITY:  
TRANSFERRED BY:  
ANGULAR MOMENTUM 
ANGULAR IMPULSE
Angular momentum: The measure of an object’s rotational motion, its tendency to continue 
spinning about a particular axis. Angular momentum is a vector quantity, meaning that 
it has a direction. It has no potential form and therefore cannot be hidden; angular 
momentum = rotational mass · angular velocity.
Angular impulse: The mechanical means for transferring angular momentum; angular 
impulse = torque · time.
Fig. 2.3.3 When skater 
Sarah Hecken pulls in 
her arms, she reduces her 
rotational mass. Since 
she is experiencing zero 
net torque, her angular 
momentum must remain 
constant and she begins to 
spin more rapidly.
© Brian Kersey/NewsCom

Bumper Cars 67
Check Your Figures #4: Spin Away! 
How much longer will it take the astronauts launching the satellite in Check Your Figures #3 to bring 
it to the faster angular velocity, if they use the initially planned torque? 
Answer: It will take them fi ve times as long. 
Why: To reach the new, faster angular velocity, the astronauts will need an angular impulse that’s fi ve 
times as large as originally planned. Since they will be using the same torque, they will have to exert 
that torque for fi ve times as long. 
Check Your Understanding #4: Spinning the Merry-Go-Round
A person who is initially motionless starts a merry-go-round spinning and then returns to being 
motionless. If angular momentum is truly conserved, what is the source of the angular momentum 
that the spinning merry-go-round now has? 
Answer: It came from the entire Earth. 
Why: Because the person stood on Earth as he started the merry-go-round spinning, he transferred 
angular momentum from Earth to the merry-go-round. The merry-go-round spins in one direction, 
and Earth’s rotation changes ever so slightly in the other direction. Because Earth is so huge and has 
such an enormous rotational mass, its slight change in rotation is undetectable. 
The Three Conserved Quantities
As you drive your bumper car around the oval track, its motion is governed in large 
part by three conserved quantities: energy, linear momentum, and angular momentum 
(Table 2.3.1). While you can exchange those quantities with Earth and the power company 
by steering your car or switching on its motor, most of the interesting exchanges involve 
collisions. 
Each time your car shoves another car forward, your car does work on that other car 
and transfers energy to it. Each time your car pushes another car northward, your car gives 
a northward impulse to that other car and transfers northward momentum to it. And each 
time your car twists another car clockwise about its center of mass, your car gives a clock-
wise angular impulse to the other car and transfers clockwise angular momentum to it. 
These exchanges of energy, momentum, and angular momentum are fast and furious and 
make for an exciting ride. 
TABLE 2.3.1 The Three Conserved Quantities of Motion and Their Transfer Mechanisms
Context
Conserved Quantity
Transfer Mechanism
Doing
Energy
Work
Moving
Linear momentum
Impulse
Turning
Angular momentum
Angular impulse
Quantity 
SI Unit 
English Unit 
SI → English 
English → SI
Momentum 
kilogram-meter per  
pound-foot per second 
1 kg · m/s = 
1 lbm · ft/s =
 
second (kg · m/s) 
(lbm · ft/s) 
7.2329 lbm · ft/s 
0.13826 kg · m/s
Angular 
kilogram-meter2 per  
pound-foot2 per second 
1 kg · m2/s = 
1 lbm · ft2/s =
momentum 
second (kg · m2/s) 
(lbm · ft2/s) 
23.730 lbm · ft2/s 
0.042140 kg · m2/s

68 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Check Your Understanding #5: Hitting the Wall
You’re backing out of a parking space and accidentally hit a concrete wall. The wall doesn’t move, 
and your car sustains some damage. Did your car transfer any energy or momentum to the wall? 
Answer: Your car transferred momentum but no energy. 
Why: To transfer momentum to the wall, your car must give it an impulse: it must push on the wall 
for an amount of time. It did so and thus transferred all its backward momentum to the wall. But to 
transfer energy to the wall, your car must do work on it: it must push on the wall as the wall moves 
in the direction of that push. The wall is immobile, however, so your car couldn’t do work on it. 
Instead, the car’s energy stayed in the car, where it caused damage.
Potential Energy, Acceleration, and Force
Shortly before the bumper car ride stops, you notice that the fl oor is somewhat uneven and 
that cars accelerate down whatever slopes they encounter. These accelerations often defl ect 
cars as they cross depressions or bumps, adding to the craziness of the ride. Depending on its 
initial velocity, a car that moves across a slope may change its speed, its direction, or both. 
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Acceleration and Velocity
Misconception: An object’s acceleration and velocity always point along the same line. 
Resolution: Although acceleration measures the rate at which velocity changes with time, those 
two quantities are independent at any given moment and may or may not point along the same 
line. When they are not aligned, the direction of the object’s velocity will shift over time toward 
the direction of its acceleration and the object’s path will bend.
We have seen this tendency to accelerate downhill before with ramps, but now let’s 
look at it in terms of potential energy. When a bumper car accelerates downhill, it also 
accelerates in the direction that reduces its potential energy as quickly as possible. That’s 
not a coincidence; there is a direct relationship between the car’s acceleration and how 
the car’s potential energy changes with position. That relationship, which we’re about to 
explore, will prove to be quite useful throughout this book.
Before elaborating further, however, I need to introduce a type of vector quantity 
known as a gradient. A gradient characterizes how some physical quantity changes grad-
ually with position. It points in the direction of fastest increase in its physical quantity, 
and its magnitude is the rate of that increase. To fi nd that rate, take a small step in the 
direction of fastest increase and divide the resulting increase by the length of the step.
For example, this  
  has a redness gradient. That gradient points 
toward the right because that’s the direction of fastest redness increase, and its magnitude 
is 100% per inch because the redness increases by 100% over a distance of 1 inch to the 
right. Similarly, this  
  has a blueness gradient that points to the left and has a mag-
nitude of 200% per inch.
A ramp has an altitude gradient; that is, the ramp’s altitude increases gradually along 
its surface from the bottom of the ramp to the top. That altitude gradient points uphill—in 
the direction of quickest altitude increase—and its magnitude is the increase in altitude 
caused by a small uphill step divided by the length of that step. The steeper the ramp, the 
larger its altitude gradient.
Last, a bumper car riding on a ramp has a potential energy gradient; that is, the car’s 
potential energy increases gradually as the car moves along the surface of the ramp from 
the bottom of the ramp to the top. This potential energy gradient, or simply potential 
gradient, points uphill—in the direction of quickest potential energy increase—and its 
magnitude is the increase in the car’s potential energy caused by a small uphill step divided 
by the length of that step. The steeper the ramp, the larger the car’s potential gradient.

Bumper Cars 69
Interestingly, the car’s potential gradient and its acceleration point in exactly opposite 
directions. The car’s potential gradient points in the direction that increases its potential 
energy as quickly as possible, whereas the bumper car accelerates in the direction that 
reduces its potential energy as quickly as possible.
That’s not a coincidence. Potential energies are energies stored in forces and pushing 
the bumper car in the direction of the potential gradient stores potential energy in a force 
that must be pushing the bumper car in the opposite direction. In fact, the negative of the 
car’s uphill potential gradient is the downhill force on the car. We can write this relation-
ship as a word equation: 
 
force = −potential gradient, 
(2.3.7)
in symbols: 
F = −Gradient (U),
and in everyday language:
An object accelerates in the direction that reduces its potential 
energy as quickly as possible,
where the force points in the direction of quickest potential energy decrease. 
A similar rule applies for rotational motion and torques. When there are multiple forms 
of potential energy, we must remember to sum them to obtain total potential energy, total 
potential gradient, and net force. These rules provide a useful way to determine how motion 
will proceed: which way a spring will leap, a chair will tip, or a bumper car will roll. We’ll 
use them frequently in this book. 
Check Your Understanding #6: Heading Down
When you pull a child back on a playground swing and let go, which way does that child accelerate? 
Answer: The child accelerates forward, in the direction that will reduce the child’s potential energy 
as quickly as possible. 
Why: The child has only one form of potential energy—gravitational potential energy. This gravita-
tional potential energy is lowest when the child is directly below the swing’s supporting bar. The child 
accelerates forward because that will put the child below the support as quickly as possible.
POTENTIAL ENERGY AND ACCELERATION
An object accelerates in the direction that reduces its total potential energy as quickly 
as possible.
Check Your Figures #5: Pumpkin Chucking 
You’ve constructed a catapult for a pumpkin-chucking contest. When you let go of the basket holding 
the pumpkin, the catapult will swing that basket forward and release 10,000 J of potential energy as 
it travels 1 m forward. What force must you exert on the basket to hold it in place prior to letting go? 
Answer: You must exert 10,000 N on the basket in the backward direction. 
Why: When you let go, the basket will accelerate forward—the direction that reduces its potential 
energy as quickly as possible. According to Eq. 2.3.7, since the basket acquires 10,000 J in travel-
ing backward 1 m, the forward force acting on the basket is: 
10,000 J
1 m
= 10,000 N.
To keep the basket stationary, you must exert a force of 10,000 N in the backward direction. 

70 
CHAPTER 2 The Laws of Motion
Epilogue for Chapter 2
In this chapter we have looked at rotating and colliding objects and have studied the phys-
ical laws that describe their motions. In Seesaws, we examined rotational inertia and saw 
how torques cause angular accelerations. We also noticed how useful it can be to separate 
an object’s rotational motion from its translational motion. In Wheels, we discussed another 
important type of force, friction, as well as a new type of energy, thermal energy, the energy 
associated with heat and temperature. In Bumper Cars, we introduced two more conserved 
physical quantities: momentum and angular momentum. As we’ll see, following the trans-
fers of energy, momentum, and angular momentum between objects often helps our under-
standing of how those objects work. 
Explanation: A Spinning Pie Dish
Because the balanced dish has rotational inertia, torques are required both to start it spinning 
and to stop it from doing so. When you twist the dish with your hand, the torque you exert 
gives the dish an angular impulse and sets it spinning with a certain amount of angular 
momentum. If the pivot were truly frictionless and there were no air resistance, the dish 
would spin indefi nitely because it would be unable to get rid of its angular momentum. 
However, friction in the pivot exerts a small but signifi cant torque that opposes the dish’s 
motion and gradually slows it down. As this frictional torque transfers angular momentum 
out of the dish and into the pencil, chair, and Earth, the dish turns more and more slowly 
until it fi nally comes to a stop. The sharper the pivot and the smaller the contact area between 
point and dish, the less frictional torque the dish experiences and the longer it spins.
Balancing the dish is easy as long as it’s upside-down. With its edge drooping down-
ward, the dish has relatively little gravitational potential energy and is surprisingly stable. If 
it begins to tip to one side, the dish’s average height rises and so does its gravitational poten-
tial energy. Since objects naturally accelerate in whatever direction lowers their potential 
energy as quickly as possible, the upside-down dish quickly tips back toward level after 
being disturbed. In contrast, an upright dish is virtually impossible to balance on a point 
because any tip will lower its gravitational potential energy and lead quickly to catastrophe. 
We’ll look at these stabilizing/destabilizing effects more carefully later on in this book. 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Seesaws Work: A seesaw is a rotating toy that works best when it’s almost perfectly 
balanced, meaning that it experiences no overall torque about its pivot due to gravity. The 
seesaw’s pivot usually passes through its center of gravity so that the seesaw balances when 
it’s not occupied. The riders arrange themselves so that their gravitational torques cancel one 
another and the occupied seesaw continues to balance. The seesaw then experiences zero 
net torque and zero angular acceleration, and it rotates with constant angular velocity. It 
either remains motionless or turns steadily in one direction or the other.
 
To make the seesaw tip back and forth, the riders briefl y upset its inertial motion. Often 
they do this by pushing against the ground with their feet to produce additional torques on the 
seesaw. The seesaw then experiences both a net torque and an angular acceleration. By rhyth-
mically changing the net torque on the seesaw, the riders cause it to rotate back and forth. 
How Wheels Work: Wheels facilitate motion by eliminating or reducing sliding friction 
between an object and a surface. The wheels convey the support forces needed to hold the 
object up but allow the object to move without sliding. As a cart with freely turning wheels 
moves along the surface, static friction between each wheel and the surface exerts a torque 
on that wheel and causes it to turn. However, rubbing may occur between the wheel’s hub 

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 71
and the axle, where sliding friction can waste energy and cause wear. To eliminate this sliding 
friction, roller or ball bearings are often used.
 
The torque that causes a powered wheel on a vehicle to turn comes from an engine by 
way of an axle. In this case, static friction between the outside of the wheel and the ground 
exerts a torque on the wheel that opposes the torque from the engine. This static frictional 
force also contributes to the net force on the vehicle and propels it.
 
Once supported on wheels and bearings, objects can move freely and can retain linear 
momentum, angular momentum, and energy for long periods of time. By eliminating sliding 
friction, wheels can also keep objects from converting ordered energy into thermal energy. 
Wheels allow vehicles to hold onto these conserved quantities for extended periods and make 
transportation far more practical. 
How Bumper Cars Work: Since they start from rest, bumper cars must obtain their initial 
momenta and angular momenta from the ground and their initial kinetic energies from the 
power company. They do this with the help of motors and wheels, which gradually transfer 
energy, momentum, and angular momentum into the cars.
 
Once the cars are moving, they can begin to exchange those conserved quantities by 
way of collisions. Each impact usually changes the cars’ speeds and directions of travel in 
a manner that may seem rather complicated. However, following the exchanges of momen-
tum, angular momentum, and energy often makes it easier to understand these collisions.
 
Cars containing massive riders respond weakly when collisions transfer momentum and 
angular momentum to them. That’s because their large masses and rotational masses mini-
mize their changes in velocity and angular velocity. Because of their small masses, children 
experience the wildest rides. 
1. Newton’s fi rst law of rotational motion: A rigid object that is 
not wobbling and is not subject to any outside torques rotates at 
a constant angular velocity, turning equal amounts in equal 
times about a fi xed axis of rotation.
2. Newton’s second law of rotational motion: The net torque 
exerted on an object is equal to that object’s rotational mass 
times its angular acceleration, or
  net torque = rotational mass · angular acceleration. (2.1.2)
 The angular acceleration points in the same direction as the torque. 
This law doesn’t apply to objects that are nonrigid or wobbling.
3. Relationship between force and torque: The torque produced 
by a force is equal to the lever arm times the component of that 
force perpendicular to the lever arm, or
torque = lever arm · force perpendicular to lever arm. 
(2.1.3)
4. Rotational defi nition of work: The work done on an object is 
equal to the torque exerted on that object times the angle (in 
radians) through which that object rotates in the direction of the 
torque, or
 
work = torque · angle (in radians). 
(2.2.1)
5. Kinetic energy: An object’s translational kinetic energy is 
one-half its mass times the square of its speed, or
 
kinetic energy = 1
2 · mass · speed2. 
(2.2.2)
 An object’s rotational kinetic energy is one-half its rotational 
mass times the square of its angular speed, or
kinetic energy = 1
2 · rotational mass · angular speed2. 
(2.2.3)
6. Linear momentum: An object’s linear momentum is its mass 
times its velocity, or
 
linear momentum = mass · velocity. 
(2.3.1)
7. Defi nition of impulse: The impulse given to an object is equal 
to the force exerted on that object times the length of time that 
force is exerted, or
 
impulse = force · time. 
(2.3.2)
8. Angular momentum: An object’s angular momentum is its 
rotational mass times its angular velocity, or
 
angular momentum = rotational mass · angular velocity.
 
(2.3.4)
9. Defi nition of angular impulse: The angular impulse given to 
an object is equal to the torque exerted on that object times the 
length of time that torque is exerted, or
 
angular impulse = torque · time. 
(2.3.5)
10. Newton’s third law of rotational motion: For every torque 
that one object exerts on a second object, there is an equal but 
oppositely directed torque that the second object exerts on the 
fi rst object.
11. Potential energy, acceleration, and force: An object experi-
ences a force and accelerates in the direction that reduces its 
total potential energy as quickly as possible. That force is equal 
but opposite to the potential gradient, or
 
force = −potential gradient. 
(2.3.7)

3
Mechanical Objects
Swinging Water Overhead
To examine some of the novel effects of acceleration, try 
experimenting with a bucket of water. If you’re careful, 
you can swing the bucket over your head and upside 
down without spilling a drop. In the process, you’ll be 
demonstrating a number of important physical concepts.
 
To do this experiment, you’ll need a bucket with a 
handle. (You might substitute some equivalent container; 
even a plastic cup will do in a pinch.) Fill the bucket 
partway full of water and then hold it by the handle so 
that it hangs down by your side.
 
Now swing the bucket backward about an eighth of a 
turn and bring it forward rapidly. In one smooth, fl uid 
motion, swing it forward, up, and over your head. Con-
tinue this motion all the way around behind you and then 
bring the bucket forward again. You’ll need to swing the 
bucket quickly to avoid getting wet. As you swing the 
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
PART 1
N
ow that we’ve surveyed the laws of motion, we can begin using those laws to explain the 
behaviors of everyday objects. But while we can already address some of the central features 
at work in a toy wagon, a weight machine, or a ski lift, we’re still missing a number of 
mechanical concepts that are important in the world around us. In this chapter, we look at some of 
those additional concepts.
 
One of the most important new concepts will be the feeling of acceleration. If we treat accel-
eration passively, it can be fairly uninteresting: we push on the cart, and the cart accelerates. If we 
think of it more actively, though—for example, if we envision ourselves on a roller coaster as it 
plummets down that fi rst big hill—then the experience of acceleration becomes much more intrigu-
ing. In fact, we might even need to hold on to our hats.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
72

Spring Scales 73
Chapter Itinerary
In this chapter, we examine three types of everyday objects: 
(1) spring scales, (2) ball sports: bouncing, and (3) carou-
sels and roller coasters. In Spring Scales, we review the rela-
tionship between mass and weight and explore how the dis-
tortion of a spring can be used to measure an object’s 
weight. In Ball Sports: Bouncing, we study how balls store 
and return energy and how their bouncing depends both on 
their own characteristics and on those of the objects they 
hit. And in Carousels and Roller Coasters, we look at how 
acceleration gives rise to gravity-like apparent forces that 
can make us scream with delight at the amusement park. 
For a more complete preview of what we examine in this 
chapter, skip ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important 
Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.
 
The concepts these objects illustrate can explain other 
phenomena as well. Almost any solid object, from a mattress 
to a diving board to a tire, behaves like a spring scale’s spring 
when you push on it. Bouncing balls offer a view of collisions 
that will help you comprehend what happens when two cars 
crash or when a hammer hits a nail. And the sensations asso-
ciated with acceleration that you experience on a roller coaster 
are also present when you ride in airplanes, on subways, or on 
swing sets. When it comes to the physics of everyday objects, 
there really is nothing new under the sun.
SECTION 3.1 
measure of an object’s inertia and, as we saw in Section 1.1, 
it doesn’t depend on the object’s environment or on gravity. 
A kilogram box of cookies always has a mass of 1 kilogram, no 
matter where in the universe you take it.
 
But mass is diffi cult to measure directly. Moreover, the 
very concept of mass is only about 300 years old. Conse-
quently, people began quantifying the material in an object by 
measuring its weight. Spring scales eventually became one of 
the simplest and most practical tools for accomplishing this 
task, and they are still found in bathrooms and grocery stores 
today. They really do contain springs, although these are nor-
mally hidden from view.
Questions to Think About: How is your weight related to your 
mass? If Earth’s gravity became twice as strong, how would 
your mass be affected? What about your weight? Does jumping 
up and down change either your mass or your weight? If you 
stand on a strong spring, how does your weight affect the 
shape of the spring? Why should there be a relationship 
between your weight and how much the spring bends?
Experiments to Do: Find a hanging spring scale of the type 
used in the produce section of a grocery store and watch the 
How much of you is there? From day to day, depending on how 
much you eat, the amount of you stays approximately the 
same. But how can you tell how much that is? The best measure 
of quantity is mass: kilograms of gold, grain, or you. Mass is the 
Spring Scales
bucket around and around, you’ll notice that the water 
stays in it even when it travels over your head and is 
upside down. Why doesn’t the water fall out?
 
You can carry this experiment a step further by swing-
ing the bucket at various speeds—that is, if you don’t mind 
getting wet. What will happen if you swing the bucket less 
rapidly or more rapidly? Is the pull stronger or weaker 
when you swing less rapidly? more rapidly? Is there any 
relationship between the upward pull you feel from the 
inverted bucket and the water’s tendency to remain inside?
 
You might vary this experiment in several ways. Try 
swinging a plastic cup held in your fi ngers, or try placing 
a full wine glass in the bucket and swinging the two 
objects together. In the latter case, you’ll fi nd that the wine 
will stay in the glass and the glass will stay at the bottom 
of the bucket, even when the bucket is upside down.
 
By the way, the hardest part of all these tricks is stop-
ping. To avoid a catastrophe, you’ll need to do the same 
thing you did to get started, only in reverse. Come to a 
smooth, gradual stop about an eighth of a turn in front of 
you, and then let the bucket loosely drop back to your 
side. If you stop moving the bucket too abruptly, the 
water, wine, or glass will spill or smash. Why do you sup-
pose that happens?
Needle
Supporting arm
Dial
End of
spring
Basket

74 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
Why You Must Stand Still on a Scale
When you stand on a bathroom scale, the scale doesn’t directly measure your weight. 
That’s because your weight is a force that Earth’s gravity exerts on you, not on the scale, so 
it affects the scale only indirectly. What the scale actually reports is how much upward 
force it exerts on you to keep you from falling. When you’re not falling or otherwise accel-
erating, the scale pushes you upward just as hard as your weight pulls you downward, so 
knowing the scale’s force on you is equivalent to knowing your weight.
 
That subtle difference between your weight and what the scale reports is important, 
however, because it makes the weighing process sensitive to acceleration. If you’re 
accelerating, the scale won’t report your true weight. For example, when you jump up 
and down on the scale, the scale’s reading varies wildly. You accelerate as you jump, so 
the two forces acting on you—your weight downward and the scale’s push upward—
don’t sum to zero. If you want an accurate measurement of your weight, therefore, you 
have to stand still.
 
Even when you stand still, weighing is not a perfect way to quantify the amount of 
material in your body. That’s because your weight depends on your environment. If you 
always weigh yourself in the same place, the readings will be pretty consistent, as long as 
you don’t routinely eat a dozen jelly doughnuts for lunch. But if you moved to the moon, 
where gravity is weaker, you’d weigh only about one-sixth as much as on Earth. Even a 
move elsewhere on Earth will affect your weight: Earth bulges outward slightly at the equa-
tor, and gravity there is about 0.5% weaker than at the poles. That change, together with a 
small acceleration effect due to Earth’s rotation, means that a scale will read 1.0% less 
when you move from the north pole to the equator. Obviously, moving south is not a useful 
weight-loss plan.
scale’s basket and weight indicator as you put objects in the 
basket. What happens to the basket as you fi ll it up? Can you 
fi nd a relationship between the basket’s height and the weight 
reported by the scale? If you drop something into the basket, 
instead of lowering it gently, how does the scale respond? Why 
does the weight indicator bounce back and forth rhythmically? 
What happens to the gravitational potential energy of the 
dropped item?
 
Now fi nd a spring bathroom scale—the short, fl at kind 
with a rotating dial. Stand on it. Why does it read your correct 
weight only when you are standing still? If you jump upward, 
how does the scale’s reading change? What about if you let 
yourself drop? Bounce up and down gently. How does the 
scale’s average reading compare with your normal weight? 
Does bouncing really change your weight? You can also 
change the scale’s reading by pushing on the fl oor, wall, or 
other nearby objects. Which way must you push to increase 
the scale’s reading? to decrease it? When you change the 
reading in these ways, are you actually changing your 
weight?
Check Your Understanding #1: Space Merchants
You’re opening a company that will export gourmet food from Earth to the moon. You want the 
 package labels to be accurate at either location. How should you label the amount of food in each 
package—by mass or by weight?
Answer: You should sell by mass—for example, by kilogram or pound-mass.
Why: If you label your product by weight, you are specifying the force that gravity exerts on it near 
Earth’s surface. When it’s exported to the moon, such a product will weigh just 1/6 as much, and your 
company may be fi ned for selling underweight groceries. If you label the packages according to their 
masses, that labeling will remain correct no matter where you ship the packages. Mass is the mea-
sure of inertia and depends only on the object, not on its environment.
Stretching a Spring
At the grocery store, you weigh a melon by placing it in the basket of a spring scale. Like 
a bathroom scale, the grocery store scale can’t measure the melon’s weight directly; 

Spring Scales 75
instead, it reports how much upward force it exerts on the melon. As long as the melon 
isn’t accelerating, the scale’s upward force on the melon is equal but opposite to the melon’s 
weight, so measuring one force is equivalent to measuring the other. But how does the 
spring scale determine how hard it’s pushing upward on the melon?
 
In keeping with its name, the spring scale uses a spring to push upward on the melon. 
The beauty of that arrangement is that a simple relationship exists between a spring’s length 
and the forces it’s exerting on its ends. The spring scale determines how much upward force 
it’s exerting on the melon by measuring the length of its spring.
 
The spring shown in Fig. 3.1.1 consists of a wire coil that pulls inward on its ends 
when it’s stretched and pushes outward on them when it’s compressed. When that spring is 
neither stretched nor compressed (Fig. 3.1.1a), it exerts no forces on its ends. If no other 
forces act on this relaxed spring, each end is in equilibrium—it experiences zero net force. 
As the phrase zero net force suggests, equilibrium occurs whenever the forces acting on an 
object sum to zero so that the object doesn’t accelerate. When you sit motionless in a chair, 
for example, you are in equilibrium. The relaxed spring is also at its equilibrium length, 
its natural length when you leave it alone. No matter how you distort this spring, it tries to 
return to this equilibrium length.
 
Let’s attach the left end of our spring to a wall (Fig. 3.1.1b) and its right end to a move-
able bar. When the bar isn’t pulling or pushing on the spring’s right end, that end is in 
equilibrium at a particular location–its equilibrium position. Since the spring’s right end 
naturally returns to this equilibrium position if the bar disturbs it and then lets go, the end 
is in a stable equilibrium.
 
What happens if the bar moves the spring’s right end to the right (Fig. 3.1.1c)? The 
stretched spring now exerts a leftward force on that end, trying to restore it to its original 
equilibrium position. Because the force that the spring exerts on its end acts to restore that 
end to equilibrium, we call it a restoring force. The spring actually exerts restoring forces 
on both of its ends, pulling them equally hard in opposite directions. Because the left end 
of the spring is held in place by the wall, however, we’ll focus our attention on its moveable 
right end and the restoring force on that end.
 
The farther the bar stretches the spring to the right, the stronger its restoring force on 
the right end becomes (Fig 3.1.1d). Remarkably, that restoring force is exactly proportional 
to how far the bar has stretched the spring.
 
If the bar changes directions and moves the spring’s right end to the left (Fig. 3.1.1e), 
the compressed spring exerts a rightward force on its right end. Nonetheless, that force is 
still a restoring force and it is still proportional to the spring’s distortion.
 
In general, whenever a spring is distorted away from its equilibrium length, it exerts a 
restoring force on its moveable end that is proportional to the distortion and points in the 
opposite direction. This observation is expressed in Hooke’s law, named after the English-
man Robert Hooke, who discovered it in the late seventeenth century. This law can be 
written in a word equation:
 
restoring force = −spring constant · distortion, 
(3.1.1)
in symbols:
F = −k · x,
and in everyday language:
 
The stiffer the spring and the farther you stretch it, the harder it pulls back.
Here the spring constant, k, is a measure of the spring’s stiffness. The larger the spring 
constant—that is, the fi rmer the spring—the larger the restoring force the spring exerts for 
Fig. 3.1.1 Five identical 
springs. The ends of spring 
(a) are free so that it can 
adopt its equilibrium 
length. The left ends of the 
other four springs are fi xed 
so that only their right 
ends can move. The right 
end of spring (b) remains 
at its equilibrium position, 
but springs (c, d, and e) 
are distorted and exert 
restoring forces on their 
ends that are proportional 
to how far their right ends 
have been distorted from 
their equilibrium positions.

76 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
 
Springs are distinguished by their stiffness, as measured by their spring constants. 
Some springs are soft and have small spring constants—for example, you need just one 
fi nger to compress the spring in your retractable ballpoint pen. Other springs, like the 
large ones that suspend an automobile chassis above the wheels, are fi rm and have 
large spring constants. But no matter the stiffness, nearly all simple springs obey 
Hooke’s law.
 
Hooke’s law is remarkably general and isn’t limited to the behavior of coil springs. 
Many objects respond to distortion with restoring forces that are proportional to how far 
you’ve distorted them away from their equilibrium lengths—or, in the case of some com-
plicated objects, their equilibrium shapes. Equilibrium shape is the shape an object adopts 
when it’s not subject to any outside forces. If you bend a tree branch, it will push back with 
a force proportional to how far it has been bent. If you pull on a rubber band, it will pull 
back with a force proportional to how far it has been stretched, up to a point. If you squeeze 
a mattress, it will push outward with a force proportional to how far it has been com-
pressed. If a heavy truck bends a bridge downward, the bridge will push upward with a 
force proportional to how far it has been bent (Fig. 3.1.2).
 
There is a limit to Hooke’s law, however. If you distort an object too far, it will usually 
begin to exert less force than Hooke’s law demands. This is because you will have 
exceeded the object’s elastic limit and will have deformed it permanently in the process. 
If you stretch a spring too far, it won’t return to its original equilibrium length when you 
release it; if you bend a tree branch too far, it will break. As long as you stay within the 
elastic limit, however, a great many things obey Hooke’s law—a rope, a ruler, a tabletop, 
and a trampoline.
 
Distorting a spring requires work. When you stretch a spring with your hand, pulling 
its ends apart as they move apart, you transfer some of your energy to the spring. The spring 
stores this energy as elastic potential energy. If you reverse the motion, the spring returns 
most of this energy to your hand; the remainder is converted to thermal energy by frictional 
effects inside the spring itself. Work is also required to compress, bend, or twist a spring. 
In short, a spring that is distorted away from its equilibrium shape always contains elastic 
potential energy.
HOOKE’S LAW
The restoring force exerted by an elastic object is proportional to how far it has been 
distorted from its equilibrium shape.
Restoring
force
Weight
Fig. 3.1.2 A steel bridge 
sags under the weight of 
a truck. The bridge bends 
downward until the upward 
restoring force it exerts on 
the truck exactly balances 
the truck’s weight.
a given distortion. The negative signs in these equations indicate that a restoring force 
always points in the direction opposite the distortion.

Spring Scales 77
How a Hanging Grocery Scale Measures Weight
Before you weigh another melon, let’s examine the grocery store scale. It contains a coil 
spring that’s responsible for the weighing process. One end of that spring is suspended 
from the ceiling, and the other end supports the weighing basket (Fig. 3.1.3). For the sake 
of simplicity, let’s suppose the spring and the basket have negligible weights and that the 
basket is effectively the bottom end of the spring. With the basket empty, the spring adopts 
its equilibrium length and the basket is in a position of stable equilibrium. If you shift the 
basket up or down and then let go of it, the spring will push it back to this position. When 
you place a melon in the basket, the melon’s weight pushes the basket downward and spoils 
its equilibrium. The basket starts descending and as it does, the spring stretches and begins 
to exert an upward force on the basket. The more the spring stretches, the greater this 
upward force so that eventually the spring is stretched just enough so that its upward restor-
ing force exactly supports the melon’s weight. The basket is now in a new stable equilib-
rium position—again experiencing zero net force.
 
The scale, then, uses Hooke’s law to determine the weight of the melon. When the 
basket has settled at its new equilibrium position, where the melon’s downward weight is 
exactly balanced by the spring’s upward restoring force, the amount the spring has stretched 
is an accurate measure of the melon’s weight.
 
The scales in Fig. 3.1.3 differ only in the way they measure how far the spring has 
stretched beyond its equilibrium length. In Fig. 3.1.3a, the scale uses a pointer attached 
to the end of the spring, while in Fig. 3.1.3b, the scale uses a rack and pinion gear system 
that converts the small linear motion of the stretching spring into a much more visible 
rotary motion of the dial needle. The rack is the series of evenly spaced teeth attached to 
the lower end of the spring; the pinion is the toothed wheel attached to the dial needle. 
As the spring stretches, the rack moves downward, and its teeth cause the pinion to 
rotate. The farther the rack moves, the more the pinion turns and the higher the weight 
reported by the needle.
 
Each of these spring scales reports a number for the weight of the melon you put in the 
basket. For that number to mean something, the scale has to be calibrated. Calibration is 
the process of comparing a local device or reference to a generally accepted standard to 
ensure accuracy. To calibrate a spring scale, the device or its reference components must be 
Check Your Figures #1: A Sinking Sensation
You’re hosting a party in your third-fl oor apartment. When the fi rst 10 guests begin standing in your 
living room, you notice that the fl oor has sagged 1 centimeter in the middle. How far will the fl oor sag 
when 20 guests are standing on it? when 100 guests are standing on it?
Answer: It will sag 2 centimeters and 10 centimeters (assuming that the fl oor doesn’t break).
Why: A fl oor, like most suspended surfaces, behaves like a spring. Your fl oor distorts 1 cm before it 
exerts an upward restoring force equal to the weight of 10 guests. It will thus distort 2 cm before 
supporting 20 guests and 10 cm before supporting 100 guests. While this distortion should be within 
the elastic limit of the fl oor beams, it may cause the plaster and paint to crack. If the beams break, 
the fl oor will collapse.
Check Your Understanding #2: Going Down Anyone?
As you watch people walk off the diving board at a pool, you notice that it bends downward by an 
amount proportional to each diver’s weight. Explain.
Answer: The diving board is behaving as a spring, bending downward in proportion to the weight of 
each diver.
Why: The heavier the diver, the more the board bends downward before exerting enough upward force 
on the diver to balance the diver’s weight.
Fig. 3.1.3 Two spring 
scales weighing melons. 
Each scale balances the 
melon’s downward weight 
with the upward force 
of a spring. The heavier 
the melon, the more the 
spring will stretch before it 
exerts enough upward force 
to balance the melon’s 
weight. The top scale has 
a pointer to indicate how 
far the spring has stretched 
and thus how much the 
melon weighs. The bottom 
scale has a rack and pinion 
gear that turns a needle 
on a dial. As the comblike 
rack moves up and down, 
it turns the toothed pinion 
gear.
(a)
(b)

78 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
compared against standard weights. Someone must put a standard weight in the basket and 
measure just how far the spring stretches. Each spring is different, although spring manu-
facturers try to make all their springs as identical as possible.
Check Your Understanding #3: Scaling Down
If you pull the basket of a hanging grocery store scale downward 1 cm, it reports a weight of 5 N 
(about 1.1 lbf) for the contents of its basket. If you pull the basket downward 3 cm, what weight will 
it report?
Answer: The scale will read 15 N (about 3.3 lbf).
Why: The scale’s dial is simply reporting the position of its basket. The dial is calibrated so that a 
1-cm drop in the basket indicates that the spring is pulling up on it with a force of 5 N. Since the 
spring’s restoring force is described by Hooke’s law, a 3-cm drop in the basket means that the spring 
is exerting an upward force of 15 N on the basket.
Bouncing Bathroom Scales
As we noted earlier, the most common type of bathroom scale is also a spring scale 
(Fig. 3.1.4). When you step on this kind of scale, you depress its surface and levers inside 
it pull on a hidden spring. That spring stretches until it exerts, through the levers, an upward 
force on you that is equal to your weight. At the same time, a rack and pinion mechanism 
(see Fig. 3.1.3b) inside the scale turns a wheel with numbers printed on it. When the wheel 
stops moving, you can read one of these numbers through a window in the scale. That 
number depends on how far the spring has stretched and has been calibrated so that it accu-
rately indicates your weight.
 
However, the wheel rocks briefl y back and forth around your actual weight before it 
settles down. The wheel moves because you’re bouncing up and down as the scale gradu-
ally gets rid of excess energy. When you fi rst step on the scale’s surface, its spring is not 
stretched and it isn’t pushing up on you at all. You begin to fall. As you descend, the spring 
stretches and the scale begins to push up on your feet. By the time you reach the equilib-
rium height, where the scale is exactly supporting your weight, you are traveling down-
ward quickly and coast right past that equilibrium. The scale begins to read more than 
your weight.
 
The scale now accelerates you upward. Your descent slows, and you soon begin to rise 
back toward equilibrium. Again you coast past equilibrium, but now the scale begins to 
read less than your weight. You are bouncing up and down because you have excess energy 
that is shifting back and forth between potential energy and kinetic energy. This bouncing 
continues until sliding friction in the scale has converted it all into thermal energy. Only 
then does the bouncing stop and the scale read your correct weight.
 
The bouncing that you experience about this stable equilibrium is a remarkable motion 
(Fig. 3.1.5), one that we’ll study in detail when we examine clocks in Chapter 9. You are 
effectively a mass supported by a spring, and your rhythmic rise and fall is that of a 
harmonic oscillator. Harmonic oscillators are so common and important in nature that 
Chapter 9 is devoted to them. The details can wait, but there are two features of your pres-
ent situation that I’ll point out now.
 
First, your total potential energy is at its minimum when you’re at the stable equilib-
rium. Even though both gravitational and elastic potentials are involved, their sum increases 
as you shift away from the equilibrium. Since an object always accelerates so as to reduce 
its total potential energy as quickly as possible, you always accelerate toward the stable 
equilibrium. Because the restoring force you experience increases as you move farther 
from the equilibrium, you reach your peak acceleration and potential energy at the moment 
when you are farthest from equilibrium and are turning around to head back toward that 
equilibrium.
Fig. 3.1.5 When you 
place a melon in the 
basket of a spring scale, 
the basket and melon 
bounce briefl y about their 
equilibrium position as the 
scale gradually removes 
their excess energy. Their 
rhythmic motion about 
the equilibrium position is 
that of a mass on a spring 
and is an example of a 
harmonic oscillator.
Fig. 3.1.4 When you step 
on this bathroom scale, its 
surface moves downward 
slightly and compresses 
a stiff spring. The extent 
of this compression is 
proportional to your weight, 
which is reported by the 
dial. Levers inside the 
scale make it insensitive to 
exactly where you stand.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Ball Sports: Bouncing 79
 
Second, your kinetic energy reaches its peak as you pass through the stable equilib-
rium. Having accelerated toward that equilibrium until the moment of arrival, you’re mov-
ing fast and coast right through it. But once you leave equilibrium, you begin to accelerate 
toward it again. That acceleration is backward, opposite your velocity, so you are deceler-
ating. Therefore, you reach your peak speed and kinetic energy at the moment you pass 
through equilibrium. As you bounce up and down, waiting for the scale to waste your 
excess energy, that energy transforms back and forth rhythmically between kinetic and 
potential forms.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Equilibrium and Motionlessness
Misconception: An object at equilibrium is always motionless.
Resolution: An object at equilibrium is not accelerating, but its velocity may not be zero. If it was 
moving when it reached equilibrium, it will coast through that equilibrium at constant velocity.
Check Your Understanding #4: Weighed Down
When you step on the surface of a spring bathroom scale, you can feel it move downward slightly. 
How is the distance that the scale’s surface moves downward when you step on it related to the 
weight it reports?
Answer: The distance the scale’s surface moves downward is proportional to the weight it reports.
Why: The scale’s spring is connected to its surface by levers so that as the surface moves downward, 
the spring distorts by a proportional amount. The spring’s distortion is reported on the dial. Thus the 
dial’s reading is proportional to the surface’s downward movement.
SECTION 3.2 
Questions to Think About: Is it possible for a ball to bounce 
higher than the height from which it was dropped? Where does 
a ball’s kinetic energy go as it bounces, and what happens to 
the energy that doesn’t reappear after the bounce? What hap-
pens when a ball bounces off a moving object, such as a base-
ball bat? What role does the baseball bat’s structure have in 
the bouncing process? Does it matter which part of a baseball 
bat hits the ball?
Experiments to Do: Drop a ball on a hard surface and watch it 
bounce. What happens to the ball’s shape during the bounce? 
Hold the ball in your hands and push its surface inward with 
your fi ngers. What is the relationship between the force it 
exerts on your fi ngers and how far inward you dent it? Denting 
the ball takes work. Why? How does the ball’s energy change 
as it dents? What happens to the ball’s energy as its shape 
returns to normal (to equilibrium)?
 
Drop the ball from various heights and see whether you 
can fi nd a simple relationship between the ball’s initial height 
and the height to which it rebounds. Now drop the ball on a 
soft surface, such as a pillow, or on a lively surface, such as an 
infl ated balloon. Why does the surface it hits change the way 
the ball bounces?
If you visit a toy or sporting goods store, you’ll fi nd many differ-
ent balls—almost a unique ball for every sport or ball game. 
These balls differ in more than just size and weight. Some are 
very hard, others very soft; some are smooth, others rough or 
ridged.
 
In this section we’ll focus primarily on another differ-
ence—their ability to bounce. A bouncy ball, for example, 
bounces extraordinarily well, while a foam rubber ball 
hardly bounces at all. Even balls that appear identical can 
be very different; a new tennis ball bounces much better 
than an old one. We’ll begin this section by exploring these 
differences.
Ball Sports: Bouncing
Rebounding ball
Jacks
Rigid surface

80 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
The Way the Ball Bounces
What would sports be like without balls? Basketball, baseball, tennis, golf, soccer, volleyball … 
the list of sports that depend on them is almost endless—and nearly all those ball sports involve 
bouncing. While most bounces are obvious, others are more subtle. When a baseball hits a bat 
or a player kicks a soccer ball, those balls are actually bouncing, albeit from moving objects. 
Why does a ball bounce, and how do its characteristics and circumstances affect its bounce?
 
We’ll start by looking at a ball’s shape. When nothing pushes on the ball, it adopts its 
equilibrium shape, typically a sphere. The term equilibrium shape, of course, is one we’ve 
seen already; the previous section used it to describe springs. That’s no coincidence, for 
balls and springs have some important similarities. Chief among those similarities is their 
ability to store and return energy. Both balls and springs store energy as you distort them 
away from their equilibrium shapes and release that stored energy when you let them return 
to their equilibrium shapes.
 
This energy storage and return is evident when a ball bounces off a hard surface. As those 
two objects collide (Fig. 3.2.1a), the ball’s surface distorts and its elastic potential energy 
increases. The energy responsible for that distortion is extracted from the kinetic energies of 
the colliding objects. As the two objects subsequently rebound (Fig. 3.2.1b), the ball’s surface 
returns toward its equilibrium and its elastic potential energy decreases. That return to equi-
librium releases energy that is added to the kinetic energies of the rebounding objects.
 
We’ll call the kinetic energy absorbed during the collision the collision energy and the 
kinetic energy released during the rebound the rebound energy. How do those two ener-
gies compare? Since energy is conserved and the two objects appear unchanged by the 
bounce, shouldn’t the rebound energy equal the collision energy?
 
In fact, the two energies would be equal except for one important detail: the two objects 
have changed. Their thermal energies have increased. As it distorts and then returns to 
equilibrium, the ball wastes some of the collision energy as thermal energy, so the rebound 
energy is always less than the collision energy (Fig. 3.2.2). While total energy is conserved 
during the bounce, individual forms of energy are not. No physical law prevents kinetic 
energy from becoming thermal energy, and it happens every bounce.
Collision
energy
(a)
Rebound
energy
(b)
Velocity
Velocity
Fig. 3.2.1 A bounce from 
a wall has two halves: 
(a) the collision and (b) the 
rebound. During the 
collision between the ball 
and the wall, some of their 
kinetic energy is 
transformed into other 
forms—an amount called 
the collision energy. During 
the rebound, some stored 
energy is released as 
kinetic energy—an amount 
called the rebound energy. 
The rebound energy is 
always less than the 
collision energy because 
some energy is lost as 
thermal energy. However, a 
lively ball wastes less 
energy than a dead one.
Fig. 3.2.2 When a tennis ball hits the 
fl oor, it dents inward to store energy and 
then rebounds somewhat more slowly than 
it arrived. These images show the ball’s 
position at 12 equally spaced times. Is the 
ball bouncing to the left or the right? How 
can you tell?
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Ball Sports: Bouncing 81
 
Some balls bounce better than others. A bouncy ball is often called “lively,” and a ball 
that doesn’t bounce well is said to be “dead.” A lively ball is extremely elastic—it converts 
most of the collision energy into elastic potential energy during the collision and converts 
most of that elastic potential energy into rebound energy during the rebound. A dead ball, 
on the other hand, is barely elastic at all—it converts most of the collision energy into ther-
mal energy during the collision and converts most of what’s left into thermal energy during 
the rebound.
 
The ratio of rebound energy to collision energy (Table 3.2.1) determines how high a 
ball will bounce when you drop it from rest onto a hard fl oor (Fig. 3.2.3). Before you drop 
it, the ball has only gravitational potential energy, which is proportional to its height above 
the fl oor (Eq. 1.3.2). That potential energy becomes kinetic energy as the ball falls and then 
collision energy when it collides with the fl oor. The ball’s rebound energy becomes kinetic 
energy as it rebounds from the fl oor and then gravitational potential energy as it rises. At its 
peak, the ball has only gravitational potential energy, which is again proportional to its 
height. The ratio of the ball’s rebound energy to its collision energy is therefore equal to the 
ratio of its fi nal height to its initial height.
 
For an ideally elastic ball, these ratios are 1.00; all the collision energy is returned as 
rebound energy and the ball rebounds to its initial height. Known as elastic collisions, such 
perfect bounces are common among the tiny atoms in a gas but are unattainable for ordi-
nary objects; there are just too many ways for any large item to divert or dissipate energy, 
including as thermal energy, sound, vibration, and light.
 
A real ball experiences inelastic collisions—it wastes some of the collision energy as 
thermal energy and rebounds to a lesser height. For example, a baseball’s rebound energy 
is only 0.30 times its collision energy, so it will rebound to only 30% of its original height 
(Fig. 3.2.3a). Without that dramatic energy loss during a bounce, baseball pitchers would 
need to wear armor.
TABLE 3.2.1 Approximate Energy Ratios and Speed Ratios for a Variety of Balls
Type of Ball
Rebound Energy
Collision Energy
Rebound Speed†
Collision Speed
Superball
0.81
0.90
Racquet ball
0.72
0.85
Golf ball
0.67
0.82
Basketball
0.64
0.80
Tennis ball
0.56
0.75
Steel ball bearing
0.42
0.65
Baseball
0.30
0.55
Foam rubber ball
0.09
0.30
“Unhappy” ball
0.01
0.10
Beanbag
0.002
0.04
†Known as the coeffi cient of restitution, this speed ratio can be squared to obtain the energy ratio.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Height (m)
Distance
Baseball
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Height (m)
Distance
Golf ball
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.2.3 (a) A baseball wastes 70% of the collision energy as thermal energy and bounces weakly. 
(b) In contrast, a golf ball wastes only 30% of the collision energy and bounces well.

82 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
 
While that energy ratio is useful, a ball is traditionally characterized by a speed ratio: 
its rebound speed divided by its collision speed. Here, the collision speed is how fast the 
two objects approach one another before the bounce, and the rebound speed is how fast 
those objects separate after the bounce. The speed ratio is known as the ball’s coeffi cient 
of restitution:
 
coefficient of restitution = rebound speed of ball
collision speed of ball 
(3.2.1)
(see Table 3.2.1). The larger a ball’s coeffi cient of restitution, the faster it rebounds from a 
surface for a given collision speed. For example, a basketball’s coeffi cient of restitution is 
0.80, so when it bounces off the backboard during a foul shoot, its rebound speed is only 
0.80 times its collision speed. That decrease in speed makes it easier for the ball to drop 
into the basket after it bounces than before it bounces.
 
Since a ball’s kinetic energy is proportional to the square of its speed, its energy ratio 
is simply the square of its speed ratio. Measuring those ratios is more than an academic 
exercise because most of the organizations that govern ball sports specify their balls’ coef-
fi cients of restitution. It’s a matter of fairness and safety. For example, baseballs could 
easily be made so lively that every game would be a home-run derby. Just think of all the 
asterisks.
 
Balls bounce best when they store energy through compression rather than through 
surface bending. That’s because most ball materials, such as leather or leather-like plastics, 
experience lots of wasteful internal friction during bending. Since solid balls involve com-
pression, they usually bounce well, whether they’re made of rubber, wood, plastic, or metal. 
Air-fi lled balls, however, bounce well only when properly infl ated. A normal basketball, 
which stores most of its energy in its compressed air, has a high coeffi cient of restitution. In 
contrast, an underinfl ated basketball, which experiences lots of surface bending during a 
collision, barely bounces at all. Similarly, a tennis ball bounces best when new; after a while, 
the compressed air inside leaks out and the ball’s coeffi cient of restitution drops.
Check Your Understanding #1: A Game of Marbles
As you head into the park to play a game of marbles with your friends, several of the glass marbles 
fall through a hole in your marble bag and bounce nicely on the granite walkway. How can a marble 
bounce?
Answer: When the marble collides with the hard granite surface, it dents inward and converts most 
of its kinetic energy into elastic potential energy. It then rebounds, converting this stored energy back 
into kinetic energy as it bounces from the surface.
Why: An elastic marble has a very high coeffi cient of restitution and bounces well from a hard 
surface.
How the Surface Affects the Bounce
Since the surface on which a ball bounces isn’t perfectly hard, that surface also contributes 
to the bouncing process. It distorts and stores energy when the ball hits it and returns some 
of this stored energy to the rebounding ball. Overall, the collision energy is shared between 
the ball and the surface, and each provides part of the rebound energy.
 
Just how the collision energy is distributed between the surface and ball depends on 
how stiff each one is. During the bounce, they push on one another with equal but oppo-
sitely directed forces. Since the forces denting them inward are equal, the work done in 
distorting each object is proportional to how far inward it dents. The object that dents far-
thest receives most of the collision energy.

Ball Sports: Bouncing 83
 
Since the ball usually distorts more than the surface it hits, most of the collision energy 
normally goes into the ball. You might expect the ball to provide most of the rebound 
energy, too. However, that’s not always true. Some lively elastic surfaces store collision 
energy very effi ciently and return almost all of it as rebound energy. Since a relatively dead 
ball wastes most of the collision energy it receives, a lively surface’s contribution to the 
rebound energy can be very important to the bounce.
 
For example, a lively racket is critical to the game of tennis because the racket’s 
strings provide much of the rebound energy as the ball bounces off the racket (Fig. 3.2.4). 
The strings are livelier than the ball, so increasing the fraction of collision energy that is 
invested in the strings actually speeds up the rebounding ball. That’s why a player who is 
willing to sacrifi ce aiming accuracy for greater ball speed will string his racket relatively 
loosely. The looser strings will receive more of the collision energy and return almost all 
of it as rebound energy.
 
Trampolines and springboards are even more extreme examples, with surfaces so lively 
that they can make people bounce. People, like beanbags, have coeffi cients of restitution 
near zero; when you land on a trampoline, it receives and stores most of the collision 
energy and then provides most of the rebound energy.
 
The stiffnesses of the ball and surface also determine how much force each object 
exerts on the other and thus how quickly the collision proceeds. When both objects are very 
hard, the forces involved are large and the acceleration is rapid. Thus a steel ball rebounds 
very quickly from a concrete fl oor because the two exert enormous forces on one another. 
If the ball or surface is relatively soft, the forces are weaker and the acceleration is slower.
 
What if the surface that a ball hits isn’t very massive? In that case, the surface may do 
part or all of the “bouncing.” During the bounce, the ball and the surface accelerate in 
opposite directions and share the rebound energy. Massive surfaces, such as fl oors and 
walls, accelerate little and receive almost none of the rebound energy. But when the surface 
a ball hits is not very massive, you may see it accelerate. For example, when a ball hits a 
lamp on the coffee table, the ball will do most of the accelerating, but the lamp is likely to 
fall over, too.
 
Similarly, when a baseball strikes a baseball bat, the ball and bat accelerate in opposite 
directions. The more massive the bat, the less it accelerates. To ensure that most of the 
rebound energy went to the baseball, the legendary hitters of the early twentieth century 
used massive bats. Such bats are no longer in vogue because they’re too diffi cult to swing. 
But in the early days of baseball, when pitchers were less skillful, massive bats drove many 
long home runs.
Fig. 3.2.4 When a 
tennis ball bounces from 
a moving racket, both 
the ball and racket dent 
inward. The ball and racket 
share the collision energy 
almost evenly.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Check Your Understanding #2: The Game Begins
You are playing the game of marbles on a soft dirt fi eld. The goal is to knock glass marbles out of a 
circle by hitting them with other marbles. You initially drop several marbles onto the ground inside 
the circle, and they hardly bounce at all. What prevents them from bouncing well here?
Answer: The soft dirt distorts more than the hard marble and receives most of the collision energy. It 
converts most of that energy into thermal energy so the marble rebounds weakly.
Why: While a marble bounces nicely on a hard surface, the dirt is soft and receives virtually all the 
collision energy when the hard marble hits it. The dirt distorts during the impact but stores little 
energy because it’s not very elastic. The marble doesn’t rebound much.
How a Moving Surface Affects the Bounce
When a moving ball hits a stationary bat, they bounce. When a moving bat hits a stationary 
ball, they still bounce. In fact, any time the bat and ball approach one another and collide, 
it’s a bounce and everything we’ve discussed about bouncing applies. The ball’s coeffi cient 
of restitution, for example, is still the ratio of the ball’s rebound speed to its collision speed. 

84 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
But when the bat is moving before or after the bounce, we clearly have to be careful what 
we mean by collision speed and rebound speed.
 
Collision speed is neither the speed of the ball nor the speed of the bat; it’s the speed 
at which those two objects approach one another before the bounce. Similarly, rebound 
speed is the speed at which the objects separate from one another after the bounce. Techni-
cally, both speeds stem from the difference between the bat’s velocity and the ball’s veloc-
ity. However, as long as each object is heading directly toward or away from the other 
object, collision and rebound speeds are relatively simple to calculate. When the bat and 
ball are heading in opposite directions, you add their speeds and when they’re heading in 
the same direction, you subtract their speeds.
 
That simple approach should be familiar from watching cars on the highway. When 
two cars are moving 60 mph in opposite directions on a narrow road, they are approaching 
one another at a hair-raising 120 mph. Let’s hope they don’t collide. When a car traveling 
60 mph comes up behind a second car traveling 55 mph in the same direction, however, 
they are approaching one another at a leisurely 5 mph. If they collide, it’ll be only a 
 fender-bender.
 
We can use these observations about speeds and bouncing to explain why the baseball 
you just hit is now traveling over the center fi elder’s head. Let’s suppose that, right before 
the collision (Fig. 3.2.5a), the pitched baseball was approaching home plate at 100 km/h 
(62 mph) and that, as you swung to meet the ball, your bat was moving toward the pitcher 
at 100 km/h. Since each object is moving toward the other, their collision speed is the sum 
of their individual speeds, or 200 km/h (124 mph).
 
The baseball’s coeffi cient of restitution is 0.55, so after the collision (Fig. 3.2.5b) their 
rebound speed was only 0.55 times their collision speed, or 110 km/h. The outgoing ball 
and the swinging bat separate from one another at 110 km/h. Since the bat is still moving 
toward the pitcher at 100 km/h, the ball must be traveling toward the pitcher even faster: at 
100 km/h plus 110 km/h or a total speed of 210 km/h (130 mph)! That’s why the baseball 
fl ies past everyone in the outfi eld and into the stands.
(a)
(b)
100 km/h
210 km/h
100 km/h
100 km/h
Fig. 3.2.5 (a) Before they collide, the bat and ball are approaching one another at an overall speed 
of 200 km/h. (b) After the collision, the two are separating from one another at a speed of 110 km/h. 
However, because the bat is moving toward the pitcher at 100 km/h, the outgoing ball is traveling at 
210 km/h in that same direction.
Check Your Understanding #3: Marble Frames of Reference
Two of you fl ick your marbles into the circle simultaneously from opposite sides of the circle, and 
they collide head-on. Each marble was traveling forward at 1 m/s (3.3 ft/s). How quickly were the two 
marbles approaching one another just before they hit?
Answer: They were approaching at 2 m/s (6.6 ft/s).
Why: The velocities reported in the question are those observed by people sitting still with respect to 
the circle. Since the marbles are heading toward one another, you must add their speeds to obtain 
the collision speed.

Ball Sports: Bouncing 85
Surfaces Also Bounce … and Twist and Bend
We’ve seen how a surface affects a ball when they bounce. Now let’s look at how the ball 
affects the surface. When you swing your bat into a pitched ball, the bat doesn’t continue 
on exactly as before. The ball pushes on the bat during the collision, and the bat responds 
in a number of interesting ways.
 
First, the ball’s impact force causes the bat to accelerate backward during the collision, 
so its speed toward the pitcher decreases slightly. Since the ball fi nishes its rebound from 
the slower-moving bat, the ball doesn’t bounce back toward the pitcher quite as fast it 
would if the bat had maintained its speed. Increasing the bat’s mass reduces this slowing 
effect, but it also makes the bat harder to swing.
 
Second, the ball’s impact force can also produce a torque on the bat about its center of 
mass, so that the bat undergoes angular acceleration (Fig. 3.2.6). Together, the bat’s accel-
eration and angular acceleration produce interesting effects on the bat’s handle. The bat’s 
acceleration tends to jerk its handle away from the pitcher, while its angular acceleration 
tends to jerk its handle toward the pitcher. The extent of these two opposing motions 
depends on just where the ball hits the bat. If the ball hits the bat’s center of percussion, 
the two motions cancel and the bat handle moves forward steadily (Fig. 3.2.6c). The smooth 
feel of such a collision explains why the center of percussion, located about 7 inches from 
the end of the bat, is known as a “sweet spot.”
 
Third, the ball’s impact often causes the bat to vibrate. Like a xylophone bar struck by 
a mallet (Fig. 3.2.7a), the bat bends back and forth rapidly with its ends and center moving 
in opposite directions (Fig. 3.2.7b). These vibrations sting your hands and can even break 
a wooden bat. However, near each end of the bat, there’s a point that doesn’t move when 
the bat vibrates—a vibrational node. When the ball hits the bat at its node, no vibration 
occurs. Instead, the bat emits a crisp, clear “crack” and the ball travels farther. Fortunately, 
the bat’s vibrational node and its center of percussion almost coincide, so you can hit the 
ball with both sweet spots at once.
 
As these handle motions and bending vibrations illustrate, the science and engineering 
of bats are surprisingly complicated. That’s why bat manufacturers are forever developing 
better, more potent ones. Multiwalled aluminum, titanium, and composite bats are the lat-
est examples. Each of these hollow bats has a thin outer wall that dents considerably on 
impact with the ball and therefore receives much of the collision energy. Because that wall 
is also highly elastic, nearly all this energy emerges as rebound energy as the wall returns 
to its equilibrium shape. As a bonus, the bat’s light outer wall and massive inner wall ensure 
that it retains very little energy in its vibrations following the bounce.
 
Unlike the hard surface of a wooden bat, which barely dents and thus barely partici-
pates in the energy storage process, one of these hi-tech bats acts as a trampoline—it stores 
and returns so much of the collision energy that it substantially increases the outgoing 
speed of the batted ball. You can fi nd equally hi-tech equipment at the golf shop or tennis 
store. We’re in an era in which scientifi c analysis and design are radically altering sports.
Check Your Understanding #4: Mass and Marbles
The marbles you’re playing with are not all the same size and mass. You notice that larger marbles 
are particularly effective at knocking other marbles out of the circle. You decide to use a 10-cm- 
diameter glass ball as a marble, expecting to clean out the entire circle. But when you fl ick it with 
your thumb, your thumb merely bounces off. Why doesn’t the glass ball move forward quickly?
Answer: The glass ball is so much more massive than your thumb that your thumb receives almost 
all the rebound energy. Your thumb bounces, not the glass ball.
Why: In any collision, it’s the least massive object that experiences the greatest acceleration and that 
receives the largest share of the rebound energy. The effect is similar to what would happen if you 
swung a light aluminum baseball bat at a pitched bowling ball. The bat would rebound wildly but the 
bowling ball would continue to travel toward the catcher. This same effect is true in automobile colli-
sions, where a massive sedan is much less disturbed than the tiny subcompact with which it collides.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Center of
percussion
Center of
mass
Fig. 3.2.6 When a 
ball hits a bat, the 
bat experiences both 
acceleration and angular 
acceleration. (a) If the ball 
hits near the bat’s center, 
the angular acceleration 
is small and the bat’s 
handle accelerates 
backward. (b) If the ball 
hits near the bat’s end, 
the angular acceleration is 
large and the bat’s handle 
accelerates forward. 
(c) But if the ball hits the 
bat’s center of percussion, 
the angular acceleration 
is just right to keep the 
handle from accelerating.

86 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
(b)
Antinode
Node
Antinode
Node
Antinode
Center of mass
Antinode
Antinode
Antinode
Node
Node
(a)
Center of mass
Fig. 3.2.7 (a) When struck by a mallet, a xylophone bar vibrates with its middle and ends moving 
back and forth in opposite directions. The parts that move farthest are antinodes, and the points that 
don’t move at all are nodes. (b) When struck by a ball, a baseball bat vibrates in a similar fashion. 
However, an impact at one of the bat’s nodes causes no vibration.
SECTION 3.3 
of highway, you can hardly tell the automobile is moving. When 
you close your eyes on a roller coaster, however, you have no 
trouble feeling every last turn in the track. It’s not the speed you 
feel, but the acceleration. What is often called motion sickness 
should really be called acceleration sickness.
Questions to Think About: How does your body feel its own 
weight? When you swing a bucket full of water around in a 
circle, as I asked you to do in the chapter opening, why does 
the bucket pull outward on you? Why can you swing that 
bucket completely over your head without spilling the water 
inside it? What keeps you from falling out of a roller coaster as 
it goes over the top of a loop-the-loop? Which car of a roller 
coaster should you sit in to experience the best ride?
Experiments to Do: To begin associating the familiar sensations 
of motion with the physics of acceleration, travel as a passenger 
in a vehicle that makes lots of turns and stops. Close your eyes 
and fi nd whether you can tell which way the vehicle is turning 
and when it’s starting or stopping. Which way do you feel pulled 
when the vehicle turns left? turns right? starts? stops? How is 
this sensation related to the direction of the vehicle’s accelera-
tion? Now during a time when the vehicle is traveling at con-
stant velocity on a level path, fi nd if you feel any sensations that 
tell you which way it’s heading. Try to convince yourself that it’s 
heading backward or sideways rather than forward. Which is 
easier to feel: your acceleration or your velocity?
As your sports car leaps forward at a green light, you’re pressed 
fi rmly back against your seat. It feels as though gravity were 
somehow pulling you down and backward at the same time. It’s 
not gravity pulling backward on you, though; it’s your own iner-
tia trying to prevent you from accelerating forward with the car.
 
When this happens, you’re experiencing the feeling of 
acceleration. We encounter this feeling many times each day, 
whether through turning in an automobile or riding up several 
fl oors in a fast elevator. Nowhere are the feelings of acceleration 
more acute than at the amusement park. We accelerate up, 
down, and around on the carousel, back and forth in the bumper 
cars, and left and right in the scrambler. The ultimate ride, of 
course, is the roller coaster, which is one big, wild experience 
of acceleration. When you close your eyes on a straight stretch 
Carousels and Roller Coasters
Roller coaster
Lift chain
Track support
structure
Track
Carousels and Acceleration
While roller coasters offer interesting visual effects, such as narrowly missing obstacles, 
and strange orientations, such as running upside down, the real thrill of roller coasters 

Carousels and Roller Coasters 87
comes from their accelerations. Plenty of other amusement park rides suspend you side-
ways or upside down so that you feel ordinary gravity pulling at you from unusual angles. 
But why pay for those when you can stand on your head for free? For a real thrill, you need 
acceleration to give you the weightless feeling you experience as a roller coaster dives over 
its fi rst big hill or the intense heaviness you feel as it whips you around a sharp corner. Why 
do accelerations give rise to these wonderful sensations, and why are they most extreme 
when you’re sitting in the last car of the roller coaster?
 
To answer those questions, we’ll need to take another look at acceleration. Although 
you may start your day at an amusement park by riding its biggest roller coaster, some of 
us might benefi t from a warm-up. Let’s start with a simpler ride, a carousel.
 
When you ride on a carousel, you travel in a circular path around a central pivot. 
That’s not the motion of an object that’s simply coasting forward and exhibiting inertia. If 
you were experiencing zero net force, you would travel in a straight line at a steady pace in 
accordance with Newton’s fi rst law. However, since your path is circular instead of straight, 
your direction of travel is changing; you are accelerating and must be experiencing a non-
zero net force.
 
Which way are you accelerating? Remarkably, you are always accelerating toward the 
center of the circle. To see why that’s so, let’s look down on a simple carousel that’s turning 
counterclockwise at a steady pace (Fig. 3.3.1). At fi rst, the boy riding the carousel is directly 
east of its central pivot and is moving northward (Fig. 3.3.1a). If nothing were pulling on 
the boy, he would continue northward and fl y off the carousel. Instead, he follows a circular 
path by accelerating toward the pivot—that is, toward the west. As a result, his velocity 
turns toward the northwest and he heads in that direction. To keep from fl ying off the 
 carousel, he must continue to accelerate toward the pivot, which is now southwest of him 
(Fig. 3.3.1b). His velocity turns toward the west, and he follows the circle in that direction. 
And so it goes (Fig. 3.3.1c).
 
The boy’s body is always trying to go in a straight line, but the carousel keeps pulling 
him inward so that he accelerates toward the central pivot. The boy is experiencing uni-
form circular motion. Uniform means that the boy is always moving at the same speed, 
although his direction keeps changing. Circular describes the path the boy follows as he 
moves, his trajectory.
 
Like any object undergoing uniform circular motion, the boy is always accelerating 
toward the center of the circle. An acceleration of this type, toward the center of a circle, 
is called a centripetal acceleration and is caused by a centrally directed force, a cen-
tripetal force. A centripetal force is not a new, independent type of force like gravity 
but the net result of whatever forces act on the object. Centripetal means “center-seek-
ing,” and a centripetal force pushes the object toward that center. The carousel uses 
support forces and friction to exert a centripetal force on the boy, and he experiences a 
centripetal acceleration. Amusement park rides often involve centripetal acceleration 
(Fig. 3.3.2).
 
The amount of acceleration the boy experiences depends on his speed and the radius 
of the carousel. The faster the boy is moving and the smaller the radius of his circular tra-
jectory, the more he accelerates. His acceleration is equal to the square of his speed divided 
by the radius of his path.
 
We can also determine the boy’s acceleration from the carousel’s angular speed and 
its radius. The faster the carousel turns and the larger the radius of the boy’s circular tra-
jectory, the more he accelerates. His acceleration is equal to the square of the carousel’s 
angular speed times the radius of his path. We can express these two relationships as word 
equations:
 
acceleration = speed2
radius = angular speed2 · radius, 
(3.3.1)
(a)
(b)
Velocity
Feeling
of accel-
eration
(c)
Velocity
Feeling
of accel-
eration
Velocity
Feeling
of accel-
eration
Force &
acceleration
Force &
acceleration
Force &
acceleration
B
o
y
’
s
 
p
a
t
h
B
o
y
’
s
 
p
a
t
h
B
o
y
’
s
 
p
a
t
h
N
W
E
S
Fig. 3.3.1 A boy riding on 
a turning carousel is always 
accelerating toward the 
central pivot. His velocity 
vector shows that he is 
moving in a circle, but his 
acceleration vector points 
toward the pivot. When he 
is heading north (a), he 
is accelerating toward the 
west. His velocity gradually 
changes direction until 
he is heading northwest 
(b), at which time he is 
accelerating toward the 
southwest. He turns further 
until he is heading west 
(c) and is then accelerating 
toward the south. (North is 
upward.)

88 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
in symbols:
a = v2
r = 𝜔2 · r,
and in everyday language:
 
Making a tight, high-speed turn involves lots of acceleration.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Centrifugal Force
Misconception: As you swing an object in a circle, that object is pulled outward by “centrifugal 
force.”
Resolution: If the object were free of forces, inertia would cause it to travel in a straight line. But 
because you are pulling the object inward, it accelerates inward and its path bends into a circle. 
Since you are exerting an inward force on the object, it is exerting an outward force on you, in 
accordance with Newton’s third law. However, that outward force acts on you, not on the object. 
There is no outward “centrifugal force” acting on the object itself.
Check Your Understanding #1: Banking on a Curve
Your racing car comes to a banked, left-hand turn, which it completes easily. Why is it essential that 
a racetrack turn be banked so that it slopes downhill toward the center of the turn?
Answer: A banked turn is needed so that the support force exerted by the racetrack on the car’s 
wheels can provide at least some of the centripetal force needed to accelerate the car around the 
turn.
Why: As a car and driver travel around a circular turn, they are accelerating toward the center of the 
track and require a huge centripetal force inward. On a level track, the only horizontal force available 
is static friction between the ground and the car’s tires. If static friction is unable to provide enough 
inward force, the car will skid off the track, following a straight-line path. This type of accident is 
typical of a highway curve on an icy day and is why designers bank the curves. The banks are ramps 
sloping down toward the center so that the horizontal component of the support force exerted by the 
track on the car’s wheels provides an additional, inward, centripetal force to help that car accelerate 
around the curve.
Fig. 3.3.2 The people on this ride travel in a circle, pushed inward by the wall behind them so that 
they accelerate toward the center of the circle.
©Andrew Scott, Brisbane, Australia/Getty Images

Carousels and Roller Coasters 89
The Experience of Acceleration
Nothing is more central to the laws of motion than the relationship between force and 
acceleration. Until now, we’ve looked at forces and noticed that they can cause accelera-
tions; now let’s take the opposite perspective, looking at accelerations and noticing that 
they require forces. For you to accelerate, something must push or pull on you. Just where 
and how that force is exerted on you determines what you feel when you accelerate.
 
The backward sensation you feel as your car accelerates forward is caused by your 
body’s inertia, its resistance to acceleration (Fig. 3.3.3). For you to accelerate forward with 
the car, something must push you forward; otherwise, inertia will keep you in steady 
motion as the accelerating car drives out from under you. Fortunately, your seat provides 
you with that forward push. But the seat can’t exert a force uniformly throughout your 
body. Instead, it pushes only on your back, and your back then pushes on your bones, tis-
sues, and internal organs to make them accelerate forward. Each piece of tissue or bone is 
responsible for the forward force needed to accelerate forward the tissue in front of it. A 
whole chain of forces, starting from your back and working forward toward your front, 
causes your entire body to accelerate forward.
 
Let’s compare this situation with what happens when you’re standing motionless on 
the fl oor. Since gravity exerts a downward force on you that’s distributed uniformly 
throughout your body, each part of your body has its own independent weight; these indi-
vidual weights, taken together, add up to your total weight. The fl oor, for its part, is exerting 
an upward support force on you that keeps you from accelerating downward through its 
surface. But the fl oor can’t exert a force uniformly throughout your body. Instead, it pushes 
only on your feet, and your feet then push on your bones, tissues, and internal organs to 
keep them from accelerating downward. Each piece of tissue or bone is responsible for the 
upward force needed to keep the tissue above it from accelerating downward. A whole 
chain of forces, starting from your feet and working upward toward your head, keeps your 
entire body from accelerating downward.
 
As you probably noticed, the two previous paragraphs are very similar—and so are the 
sensations of gravity and acceleration. When the ground is preventing you from falling, you 
feel “heavy”; your body senses all the internal forces needed to support its pieces so that 
they don’t accelerate, and you interpret these sensations as weight. When the car seat is 
causing you to accelerate forward, you also feel “heavy”; your body senses all the internal 
forces needed to accelerate its pieces forward, and you interpret these sensations as weight. 
This time you experience the weight-like sensation toward the back of the car.
 
Try as you may, you can’t distinguish the weight-like sensation that you experience as 
you accelerate from the weight sensation you experience due to gravity. And you’re not the 
only one fooled by acceleration. Even the most sophisticated laboratory instruments can’t 
Check Your Figures #1: Going for a Spin
Some children are riding on a playground carousel with a radius of 1.5 m (4.9 ft). The carousel turns 
once every 2 s. How quickly are the children accelerating?
Answer: They are accelerating about 15 m/s2 (50 ft/s2).
Why: Because the children are in uniform circular motion, their acceleration is given by Eq. 3.3.1. 
The carousel turns once every 2 s, so its angular velocity is 2π radians divided by 2 s. Omitting  radians 
because they’re the natural unit of angle, the carousel’s angular velocity is π 1/s. Since its radius is 
1.5 m, the children’s acceleration is
 
children’s acceleration = (π 1/s)2 · 1.5 m = 14.8 m/s2.
Since our measurements of the carousel’s radius and its turning time are accurate only to about 10%, 
our calculation of the children’s acceleration is accurate only to about 10%. We report it as 15 m/s2 
(50 ft/s2).
Acceleration
Feeling of
acceleration
Fig. 3.3.3 As you 
accelerate forward in a 
car, you sense a gravity-
like feeling of acceleration 
in the direction opposite 
to the acceleration. This 
feeling of acceleration is 
really the mass of your 
body resisting acceleration.

90 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
determine directly whether they are experiencing gravity or are accelerating. However, 
despite the convincing sensations, the backward heavy feeling in your gut as you accelerate 
forward is the result of inertia and is not due to a real backward force.
 
We’ll call this experience a feeling of acceleration. It always points in the direction 
opposite the acceleration that causes it, and its strength is proportional to that acceleration. 
When you turn your car to the left, you’re accelerating leftward and experience a rightward 
feeling of acceleration. The tighter your turn, the stronger that feeling of acceleration 
becomes. When you’re not driving and can safely close your eyes, you should be able to 
sense both the direction and amount of each acceleration you make.
 
So what does the boy on the spinning carousel feel? Since he is accelerating inward, 
toward the center of the circle, he experiences a feeling of acceleration outward, away 
from the center of the circle. Although the boy’s actual weight can’t change, his feeling of 
acceleration can have any strength. If the carousel is spinning fast enough, he can experi-
ence a feeling of acceleration that is much stronger than his weight. That’s why he’s hold-
ing on tight!
 
Since you often compare your feelings of acceleration to your feeling of weight, it is 
customary to measure feelings of acceleration in g’s, where 1 g (1 gravity) is equal to the 
feeling of your actual weight. In this context, it is also customary to measure acceleration 
in g’s, where 1 g is 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2), the acceleration due to gravity. These two defi nitions 
lead to a simple observation: a 1-g acceleration produces a 1-g feeling of acceleration in the 
opposite direction. For example, a 1-g inward acceleration on a playground carousel pro-
duces a 1-g outward feeling of acceleration. If you accelerate fi ve times that quickly, on the 
scrambler or on an airplane maneuvering sharply, your 5-g acceleration will produce a 5-g 
feeling of acceleration in the opposite direction.
 
As we’ve seen, you experience a backward feeling of acceleration when you accelerate 
forward in your car. However, you don’t experience this feeling of acceleration all by itself; 
you also experience the downward feeling of your weight. Together these two effects feel 
like an especially strong weight at an angle somewhere between straight down and the back 
of the car (Fig. 3.3.4a). We’ll call the combined feelings of weight and acceleration your 
apparent weight. The faster you accelerate forward, the stronger your apparent weight 
becomes and the more it points toward the back of the car (Fig. 3.3.4b).
 
You feel apparent weight because the seat is pushing on you, both to support your 
actual weight and to make you accelerate. In fact, your apparent weight is equal but oppo-
site to the real force that the seat is exerting on you. As you accelerate forward in your car, 
the seat pushes you upward and forward, and your apparent weight is downward and back-
ward (Fig. 3.3.4).
 
Like feeling of acceleration, apparent weight is customarily measured in g’s. When 
you slam the car’s accelerator pedal to the fl oor and accelerate forward rapidly, your appar-
ent weight may reach 2 g. The seat is then pushing you forward and upward with a force 
that’s twice as large as your actual weight, and you’re pushing back just as hard. No wonder 
you’re pressed tightly into the seat!
Feeling of
acceleration
Weight
Weight
Apparent
weight
Seat
force
Seat
force
Apparent
weight
(a)
Feeling of
acceleration
Acceleration
(b)
Acceleration
Fig. 3.3.4 (a) When you 
accelerate forward gently, 
the backward feeling of 
acceleration is small and 
your apparent weight 
is mostly downward. 
Your apparent weight 
is equal but opposite 
to the force your seat 
exerts on you. (b) When 
you accelerate forward 
quickly, you experience a 
strong backward feeling 
of acceleration and 
your apparent weight is 
backward and down.
Check Your Understanding #2: The Feel of a Tight Turn
You’re sitting in the passenger seat of a racing car that is moving rapidly along a level track. The track 
takes a sharp turn to the left, and you fi nd yourself thrown against the door to your right. What hori-
zontal forces are acting on you, and what feelings of acceleration do you experience?
Answer: The car seat and door are exerting a leftward force on you, causing you to accelerate leftward 
with the car. You also experience a rightward feeling of acceleration as your inertia acts to keep you 
from accelerating leftward.
Why: As the car turns left, it accelerates toward the left. The car seat and right door together exert a 
leftward force on you to prevent the car from driving out from under you. Because it has mass, your 
body resists this leftward acceleration. You feel your body trying to go in a straight line, which would 
carry it out the right door of the car as the car accelerates toward the left.

Carousels and Roller Coasters 91
Roller Coaster Acceleration
We’re now prepared to look at a roller coaster and understand what you feel when you go 
over hills (Fig. 3.3.5) and loop-the-loops (Fig. 3.3.6). Every time the roller coaster acceler-
ates, you experience a feeling of acceleration in the direction opposite your acceleration. 
That feeling of acceleration gives you an apparent weight that’s different from your actual 
weight.
 
As we saw with a car, rapid horizontal accelerations tip your apparent weight in the 
direction opposite your acceleration. A roller coaster, however, can do something a car 
normally can’t—it can accelerate downward! In that case, the feeling of acceleration you 
experience is upward and opposes your downward feeling of weight. The two feelings at 
least partially cancel, so that your apparent weight points weakly downward or perhaps, if 
the downward acceleration is fast enough, points upward.
 
There is one more possibility: if you accelerate downward at just the right rate, your 
upward feeling of acceleration will exactly cancel your downward feeling of weight. Your 
apparent weight will then be zero, and you’ll feel perfectly weightless. Since your feeling 
of weight is 1 g downward, perfect cancellation occurs when your feeling of acceleration 
is 1 g upward. You must be accelerating downward at 1 g; you must be in free fall!
 
When you’re falling, you feel perfectly weightless. Your apparent weight is zero, and 
nothing is supporting you. Because your hat and sunglasses are falling with you, nothing is 
supporting them, either. If they come off your head, they will hover around you as you all 
fall together.
 
Similarly, your internal organs don’t need to support one another as they fall, and the 
absence of internal support forces gives rise to the exhilarating sensation of free fall. Our 
bodies are very sensitive to even partial weightlessness, and this falling sensation is half the 
fun of a roller coaster. An astronaut falling freely in space has this disquieting weightless 
feeling for days on end. No wonder astronauts have such frequent troubles with motion (or, 
rather, acceleration) sickness.
 
Because a roller coaster is attached to a track, however, its rate of downward accelera-
tion can actually exceed that of a freely falling object. In those special situations, the track 
will be assisting gravity in pushing the roller coaster downward. As a rider, you’ll be pushed 
downward, too, and your apparent weight will point upward, as though the world had 
turned upside down!
Check Your Understanding #3: Drop Tower Panic
A drop tower is a terrifying amusement park ride in which you are strapped into a seat, lifted high in 
the air, and then dropped. While you’re in free fall, what is your apparent weight?
Answer: Your apparent weight is zero.
Why: As you fall freely, you are accelerating downward at 1 g, the full acceleration due to gravity. The 
1-g upward feeling of acceleration you experience exactly matches your downward weight, so that 
your apparent weight is zero. You feel perfectly weightless.
Roller Coaster Loop-the-Loops
Figure 3.3.7 shows a single-car roller coaster at various points along a simple track with 
one hill and one loop-the-loop. You are riding in the car, and your weight, feeling of accel-
eration, and apparent weight are indicated with arrows of varying lengths that show each 
vector quantity’s direction and magnitude. The longer the arrow, the greater the magnitude 
of the quantity that it represents.
 
At the top of the fi rst hill (Fig. 3.3.7a), the single-car roller coaster is almost stationary. 
You feel only your weight, straight down—nothing exciting yet. However, as soon as the 
car begins its descent, accelerating down the track, a feeling of acceleration appears 
Fig. 3.3.5 As this roller 
coaster plunges down 
the fi rst hill, its last car 
is pulled over the edge 
by the cars in front of it 
and its riders feel almost 
weightless.
© Harry DiOrio/The Image Works
© Charles V. Angelo/Photo 
Researchers/Getty Images, Inc.
Fig. 3.3.6 As it goes 
over the loop-the-loop, 
this roller coaster is 
accelerating rapidly toward 
the center of the circle. 
When it reaches the top of 
the loop, the track pushes 
the roller coaster downward 
and the riders feel pressed 
into their seats. If they 
close their eyes, they won’t 
even be able to tell that 
they’re upside down.

92 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
pointing up the track (Fig. 3.3.7b). Your feelings of weight and acceleration together give 
you an apparent weight that is much less than 1 g and points down and into the track. Most 
people fi nd this sudden reduction in apparent weight to be terrifying, so you’re welcome to 
scream!
 
On Earth, weightless feelings can’t last. They occur only during downward accelera-
tion and disappear as your car levels off near the bottom of the hill. By the time the car 
begins its rise into the loop-the-loop, it is traveling at maximum speed and has begun to 
accelerate upward (Fig. 3.3.7c). This upward acceleration of about 2 g creates a downward 
feeling of acceleration of about 2 g. Your apparent weight is about 3 g downward, and 
you’re pressed tightly into your seat.
 
As the car climbs the right side of the loop-the-loop against gravity, its speed decreases 
somewhat and its path bends inward, toward the center of the loop. Halfway up the right 
side, you’re accelerating inward and downward, so your feeling of acceleration is outward 
and upward (Fig. 3.3.7d). Your apparent weight is greater than 1 g outward, away from the 
center of the loop, and you’re still pressed into your seat (Fig. 3.3.8).
 
At the top of the loop-the-loop (Fig. 3.3.7e), the car’s path is still bending inward, 
toward the center of the loop. You’re accelerating downward, and your feeling of accelera-
tion points in the opposite direction—upward toward the sky. That upward feeling of accel-
eration is greater than your downward feeling of weight, so your apparent weight is upward 
(Fig. 3.3.6)!
 
Not only does the inverted car stay on its track, but you also remain pressed into your 
seat. Actually, the car is pushing downward on you to help gravity accelerate you around 
the loop. If your hat were to come off at the top of the loop, it would land in your seat, even 
though that seems to involve some sort of upward movement. In fact, the car is accelerating 
downward at more than 1 g, while your hat has only the 1-g downward acceleration of a 
freely falling object. Gravity and the track together push the car downward so fast that it 
overtakes the hat—your hat is falling, but the car is plummeting even faster.
(c)
(d)
(e)
Weight
Feeling of acceleration
Apparent weight
Stationary
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.3.7 A single-car 
roller coaster going over 
the fi rst hill and a loop-
the-loop. At each point 
along the track, the car 
experiences its weight, a 
feeling of acceleration due 
to its current acceleration, 
and an apparent weight 
that is the sum of those 
two. The apparent weight 
always points toward the 
track, and the car doesn’t 
fall off it.

Carousels and Roller Coasters 93
 
In truth, a typical loop-the-loop isn’t perfectly circular; it’s more sharply curved on 
top than on its sides or bottom. This varying radius curve, known as a clothoid, is cho-
sen for safety and comfort. By sharpening the curve only on top, the clothoid track 
maximizes the downward acceleration there while reducing the accelerations elsewhere 
on the track. High acceleration is important only when the roller coaster is upside 
down. Everywhere else, it simply makes the riders feel heavy and uncomfortable, par-
ticularly at the bottom of the loop where the coaster is traveling fastest and accelerating 
upward rapidly.
 
Most roller coaster tracks are designed so that their riders are always pressed into their 
seats, even when the cars go upside down. On loop-the-loops, for example, these tracks 
ensure that the riders are accelerating inward rapidly enough to remain seated securely. In 
principle, roller coasters that travel on such tracks don’t need seat belts to prevent their 
riders from falling out (although seat belts are comforting to the passengers and insurance 
companies). Their riders’ apparent weights are always directed toward the track, so the 
riders and their seats push against one another throughout the ride.
 
However, some roller coaster tracks use special cars and restraints that allow them to 
direct their riders’ apparent weights away from the track. At such moments, the cars must 
pull on their riders to keep them from popping out of their seats. These roller coasters can 
and do go upside down without the strong downward accelerations needed to press their 
riders into their seats. The riders are then hanging from their inverted cars, and if one of 
them loses a hat, it falls to the ground rather than into the car.
 
What about a roller coaster with more than one car? For the most part, the same rules 
apply. However, new forces now act on each car—forces exerted by the other cars in the 
train. The effects of these cars are most pronounced at the top of the fi rst and biggest hill. 
As the train disconnects from the lift chain and approaches the descent, it is rolling forward 
slowly and the fi rst cars are well over the crest of the hill before they pick up much speed 
(Fig. 3.3.9a). They’re pulling hard on the cars behind them, and those cars are pulling back, 
slowing their descent. By the time the train is moving fast, the fi rst car is well down the hill 
and the track is beginning to turn upward. The fi rst car’s riders experience mostly upward 
acceleration and downward feeling of acceleration. That’s why riders in the fi rst few cars 
of a roller coaster don’t feel much weightlessness.
© Digital Vision/Getty Images, Inc.
Fig. 3.3.8 The roller coaster pushes these riders inward as it travels around the loop-the-loop. The 
riders experience strong feelings of acceleration outward and can hardly tell that they’re upside down.

94 
CHAPTER 3 Mechanical Objects
 
In contrast, the last car is moving at high speed early in its descent. It undergoes a 
dramatic downward acceleration as it’s yanked over the crest of the fi rst hill by the cars in 
front of it (Fig. 3.3.9b). As a result, its riders experience large upward feelings of accelera-
tion and quite extreme weightlessness. In fact, the designers of the track must be careful not 
to make the downward acceleration too rapid or the roller coaster will fl ick the riders in the 
last car right out of their seats. Each time the last car crests a hill, it accelerates downhill in 
a way that no other car on the coaster can match.
 
Obviously, it does matter where you sit on a roller coaster. The fi rst seat offers the 
most exciting view, but it provides less than spectacular weightless feelings. The last car 
almost always offers the best weightless feelings. Probably the dullest seat in the roller 
coaster is the second; it offers a relatively tame ride and an unchanging view of the people 
in the front seat.
Check Your Understanding #4: Taking to the Air
Your racing car travels over a bump in the track and suddenly becomes airborne. What keeps you in 
the air? Has gravity disappeared?
Answer: Gravity is still present, but your inertia prevents you from following a rapid downturn in the 
surface you are traveling along.
Why: If the road you are traveling along suddenly turns downward, you must accelerate downward to 
stay in contact with its surface. The steeper and more abrupt the descent, the more downward accel-
eration you need. The only downward force you experience is your weight, which can cause a down-
ward acceleration of no more than 9.8 m/s2 (32 ft/s2). If the surface drops out from under you faster 
than that, you will become airborne. You will then be falling freely and accelerating downward as fast 
as gravity will permit. Eventually, you will fall to the surface. In many sports, including skiing, motor-
cycle racing, and skateboarding, a person traveling along an uneven surface becomes airborne after 
passing over a bump.
(b)
(a)
Weight
Feeling of acceleration
Apparent weight
Fig. 3.3.9 When a 
multicar roller coaster 
descends the fi rst hill, the 
ride experienced in the fi rst 
cars is different from that 
in the last cars. (a) The 
fi rst cars travel over the 
crest of the hill slowly and 
reach high speed only well 
down the hill. The cars 
behind them slow their 
descent. (b) The last cars 
are whipped over the top 
and are traveling very 
rapidly early on. The last 
cars accelerate downward 
dramatically as they go 
over the fi rst hill and their 
riders experience a strong 
feeling of weightlessness.
Epilogue for Chapter 3
In this chapter we have looked at the physical concepts involved in four types of simple 
machines. In Spring Scales, we explored the relationship between the force acting on a 
spring and its distortion, and we examined how this distortion can be used to measure an 
object’s weight. In Ball Sports: Bouncing, we examined the process of storing and releas-
ing kinetic energy during a collision. As we saw, both the ball and the object it hits contrib-
ute to the bounce.
 
In Carousels and Roller Coasters, we explored both the sensations we feel as we accel-
erate and why those sensations occur. We saw that circular motion involves a centrally 
directed acceleration that gives rise to an outwardly directed feeling of acceleration.
Explanation: Swinging Water Overhead
As you swing the bucket over your head, you are pulling downward on it and causing it 
to accelerate downward very rapidly. The water remains in the inverted bucket because 
the bucket is accelerating downward faster than gravity alone can accelerate the water. 
As the water tries to fall, the bucket overtakes the falling water. As a result, the water is 
pressed into the bottom of the bucket. The same effect occurs when you throw a book 
toward the fl oor by pushing it downward rapidly with your open palm. As the book tries 
to fall, your palm overtakes it, and it remains pressed into your palm because your hand 
is accelerating it downward faster than gravity. Finally, if you stop swinging the bucket 
too abruptly, the bucket’s contents will not decelerate with it. Instead, they will spill or 
smash.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 95
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Spring Scales Work: A spring scale measures an object’s weight by supporting that 
object with a spring. When the object is at rest, the spring’s upward force exactly balances 
the object’s downward weight; the scale then reports the upward restoring force its spring is 
exerting on the object. As Hooke’s law describes, that restoring force is proportional to the 
spring’s distortion, so the scale can determine it by measuring how far the spring has bent. 
This measurement is often done mechanically and is reported using a needle or dial.
How Bouncing Balls Work: A ball behaves like a spherical or oblong spring. It stores elastic 
potential energy as it distorts away from its equilibrium shape and releases some of that 
energy as it returns to normal. When a ball strikes a surface, some kinetic energy is removed 
from the ball and the surface, and is either stored within those objects as elastic potential 
energy or lost as thermal energy. As the objects rebound, some of the stored energy becomes 
kinetic energy again. The kinetic energy returned—the rebound energy—is always less than 
the kinetic energy initially removed from the objects—the collision energy. The missing en-
ergy has been converted into thermal energy.
How Carousels and Roller Coasters Work: A carousel uses centripetal acceleration to give 
each rider an outward feeling of acceleration. Combined with weight, this gravity-like sensa-
tion gives the rider an apparent weight that points downward and outward.
 
A roller coaster also uses rapid acceleration to create unusual apparent weights for its 
riders. Each time the coaster accelerates on a hill or turn, the rider experiences a feeling of 
acceleration in the direction opposite the acceleration. This feeling of acceleration, com-
bined with the rider’s weight, creates an apparent weight that varies dramatically in amount 
and direction throughout the ride. It’s this fl uctuating apparent weight, particularly its near 
approaches to zero, that make riding a roller coaster so exciting.
1. Hooke’s law: The restoring force exerted by an elastic object 
is proportional to how far it is from its equilibrium shape, or
restoring force = −spring constant · distortion. 
(3.1.1)
2. Acceleration of an object in uniform circular motion: An ob-
ject in uniform circular motion has a centripetal acceleration 
equal to the square of its speed divided by the radius of its cir-
cular trajectory, which is equal to the square of its angular speed 
times the radius of its circular trajectory, or
acceleration = speed2
radius = angular speed2 · radius. 
(3.3.1)

96
4
Mechanical Objects
High-Flying Balls
Among the physical issues that we discuss in this chapter 
are the reaction effects that push rockets forward. These 
reaction effects appear in an interesting way in a simple 
experiment that involves two different-size balls: a bas-
ketball and a tennis ball.
 
If you can’t fi nd a basketball and a tennis ball, any 
two lively balls of very different masses will do. Drop the 
balls separately and see how high they bounce. You’ll 
immediately notice that an individual ball can’t bounce 
higher than the point from which you dropped it. Such a 
rebound would give it more energy than it had originally. 
In fact, some of the ball’s energy will be lost to thermal 
energy, so it will not even reach its original height.
 
But what will happen when you stack the smaller 
ball on top of the larger ball and drop the two balls 
together? Think about the sequence of events that will 
occur, and then give it a try. Make sure that the small ball 
remains directly above the large ball as the two balls fall 
to the fl oor.
 
Why does the smaller ball rebound as it does? 
How does your choice of balls infl uence this effect? If 
you put the smaller ball on the bottom, will that change 
the outcome? What about dropping the pair of balls 
from a different height? Try the same experiment with 
balls of various sizes to gather more insight into what 
is happening.
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
PART 2
 N
o matter how sophisticated the machines around us appear, most are based in large part on 
the simple principles that we have already encountered. In this chapter, we take a look at two 
more fascinating machines and see what makes them tick. As we do, we’ll fi nd ourselves 
revisiting familiar issues and exploring a few new ones all the way to the frontiers of science and 
the cosmos.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Bicycles 97
Chapter Itinerary
The objects in this chapter combine many of the concepts we 
have discussed and add a few new ones of their own. These 
objects are (1) bicycles and (2) rockets. In Bicycles, we see how 
motion and clever design can make an apparently unstable vehi-
cle stable enough to ride easily, even without your hands on the 
handlebars. In Rockets and Space Travel, we look at the princi-
ple of action and reaction, and see how this basic idea makes it 
possible for spacecraft to leave Earth’s surface and even travel 
toward the stars. For a more complete preview of this chapter, 
turn ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and 
Equations at the end of the chapter.
 
This chapter revisits many ideas from the previous chap-
ters but it also introduces a variety of new concepts we can use. 
In Bicycles, we learn about dynamic stability and explore issues 
that waiters, water-skiers, and warehouse clerks must deal with 
all the time. We also encounter gyroscopes and their peculiar 
responses to torques. In Rockets and Space Travel, we see how 
gravity causes objects to orbit one another, giving rise to the 
intricate motions of the planets, moons, and comets. We also 
look at new physics that appears near the extremes of speed 
and gravity.
SECTION 4.1 
Questions to Think About: Why is a two-wheeled bicycle pref-
erable to the apparently more stable three-wheeled tricycle? 
Why do you lean a bicycle in the direction that you are turn-
ing? How is it possible to ride a bicycle without hands on the 
handlebar? How does pedaling a bicycle make it move for-
ward? Why does a bicycle have such a complicated drive sys-
tem between its pedals and its rear wheel?
Experiments to Do: If you know how to ride a bicycle, pay 
attention to its stability as you ride it. Notice how you lean 
the bicycle in the direction that you are turning and how the 
bicycle naturally steers into that turn as you begin to lean. 
This automatic steering is part of the bicycle’s self-stabilizing 
behavior. As you ride, observe how fast the pedals are turn-
ing and how hard you must push on the pedals to keep them 
turning at that rate. Go up and down some hills in various 
gears, and see how each gear choice affects the pedaling 
rate and the forces you must exert on the pedals. Why do you 
choose a certain gear for a certain situation? What pedaling 
rate do you fi nd most comfortable? What pedaling force feels 
best?
A bicycle is a wonderfully energy-effi cient, human-powered vehi-
cle. Its wheels allow its rider to coast forward easily on level sur-
faces and accelerate effortlessly down hills. Compare the easy 
motion of a bicycle to that of walking, which requires effort every 
step of the way. Bicycles are very simple machines, and most of 
their moving parts are quite visible: the pedals, sprockets, brakes, 
and steering mechanisms, to name a few. Their simplicity and 
visibility make bicycles relatively easy to fi x, even for a novice.
Bicycles
Rear brake
Seat
Stem
Handlebars
Extension
Shifter
Brake lever
Shock absorber
Front brake
Fork
Rim
Tire
Spoke
Pedal
Front 
derailleur
Crank
sprocket
Crank
Chain
Idler sprocket
Rear derailleur
Hub
Tricycles and Static Stability
Bicycles have a stability problem. With only two wheels to support them, stationary bicy-
cles tip over easily. Why then do we use two-wheeled bicycles for transportation?
 
We can begin to answer that question by looking at static stability, an object’s stabil-
ity at rest. To have static stability, an object needs a stable equilibrium—a concept we fi rst 
encountered in Section 3.1. Equilibrium means zero net force or torque, but near a stable 
equilibrium an object experiences restoring infl uences—forces and/or torques—that push 
it back toward that equilibrium. Aided by such infl uences, a statically stable object returns 
to its stable equilibrium after being displaced slightly.
 
A marble in a bowl exhibits static translational stability—when displaced from its 
equilibrium position at the bottom of the bowl, it experiences restoring forces that act to 
return it to the bottom of the bowl. In contrast, a stool exhibits static rotational stability—
when displaced from its upright equilibrium orientation it experiences restoring torques 

98 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
that act to return it to upright. The fact that bicycles don’t exhibit static translation stability 
is a good thing; a bicyclist doesn’t want to stay near one place. But bicycles don’t exhibit 
static rotational stability either. If you want a pedal-powered vehicle that has statically 
rotational stability, try a tricycle (Fig. 4.1.1).
 
An upright tricycle has static rotational stability because it experiences restoring torques 
following a tip (Fig. 4.1.2a). Rather than look for those torques directly, however, let’s take 
a much more general approach. Physicists are trained to look for the big-picture concepts 
hiding behind seemingly unrelated examples, and sometimes I just have to do it.
 
Recall that an object accelerates in whichever direction reduces its total potential 
energy as quickly as possible. In this case, the tricycle undergoes angular acceleration in 
whichever rotational direction reduces its total potential energy as quickly as possible. 
Since small tips always raise the tricycle’s center of gravity and thus increase its gravita-
tional potential energy, the tipped tricycle can reduce its total potential energy by rotating 
back to upright. The upright tricycle is thus in a stable rotational equilibrium—it will 
return spontaneously to that upright equilibrium after being tipped slightly. No wonder 
children love tricycles!
 
This relationship between static stability and total potential energy is universal. There 
is no need to look directly for the restoring infl uences, which may be complicated anyway. 
If an object’s total potential energy rises whenever it’s displaced, it’s in a stable equilibrium 
and will tend to return there following the displacement. That useful rule applies not only 
to static rotational stability and tricycles but also to static translational stability and every-
thing from canoes to bridge spans to decorative mobiles. If you want an object to be stable 
at rest, ensure that any small displacement increases its total potential energy.
Fig. 4.1.1 A tricycle 
is very stable when it’s 
standing still. However, it 
tips over easily during a 
high-speed turn because 
the rider can’t lean in the 
direction that the tricycle is 
turning. The rider must also 
pedal furiously to move at a 
reasonable speed.
Stable
equilibrium
Weight
Weight
Center
of
gravity
Center
of
gravity
Pivot
Torque
about pivot
After a
small push
Unstable
equilibrium
After a
small push
The bicycle
falls over
The tricycle returns
to its original position
(a)
(b)
Torque
about pivot
Pivot
Fig. 4.1.2 (a) A tricycle is in a stable rotational equilibrium. When it’s tipped, its center of gravity 
and gravitational potential energy rise and it experiences restoring forces that return it to upright. 
(b) A bicycle is in an unstable rotational equilibrium. Any tip causes it to fall.

Bicycles 99
 
That general observation underlies a simple rule of thumb: an object resting on a sur-
face is in a stable rotational equilibrium if a vertical line passing through its center of 
gravity also passes through the interior of its base of support—the polygon defi ned by its 
contact points with the ground. This rule follows from geometry: if a vertical line through 
the object’s center of gravity passes within its base of support, then tipping it always raises 
its center of gravity and increases its gravitational potential energy. Assuming that no other 
potential energies are signifi cant, the tipped object will undergo angular acceleration back 
toward its original orientation, making that orientation a stable rotational equilibrium. For 
example, a tricycle is in a stable rotational equilibrium when its center of gravity is above 
the interior of its triangular base of support (Fig. 4.1.3).
 
Geometry also sets the limits of the object’s static rotational stability. If the vertical 
line passing through its center of gravity also passes through the edge of its base of sup-
port, there are three possibilities. If its center of gravity is below the edge, the object is in 
a stable rotational equilibrium. If its center of gravity is exactly on the edge, the object is 
in a neutral equilibrium—it remains in rotational equilibrium even when you tip it about 
that edge.
 
If the object’s center of gravity is above the edge, however, it is in an unstable equi-
librium—that is, when displaced slightly in certain directions, the object will experience 
anti-restoring torques that cause angular acceleration away from equilibrium. Tipping the 
object in those directions lowers its center of gravity and decreases its gravitational poten-
tial energy, so it undergoes angular acceleration away from equilibrium and tips over. If the 
rider of a tricycle leans out so far that their combined center of gravity is located above the 
edge of the triangular base of support, they’ll be in an unstable equilibrium and in danger 
of tipping over.
 
Unlike a tricycle, a bicycle has no stable equilibrium (Fig. 4.1.2b). Its base of support 
is a line defi ned by its two wheels and a line has only an edge, no interior. Although the 
rider of a bicycle can achieve rotational equilibrium by locating their combined center of 
gravity above that edge, that equilibrium is unstable and the slightest displacement to the 
side will tip them over.
Center
of gravity
Base of
Support
Fig. 4.1.3 An upright 
tricycle is in a stable 
equilibrium because a 
vertical line through its 
center of gravity passes 
through the interior of the 
triangular base of support 
formed by its three contact 
points with the ground.
STABLE EQUILIBRIUM AND POTENTIAL ENERGY
An object is in a stable equilibrium when any small displacement increases its total 
potential energy.
UNSTABLE EQUILIBRIUM AND POTENTIAL ENERGY
An object’s equilibrium is unstable when a small displacement can decrease its total 
potential energy.
Check Your Understanding #1: Keeping Coffee in Its Place
Some travel mugs taper outward at the bottom so that they have very wide bases. Why does 
this shape make such a mug particularly stable and keep it from fl ipping over during the morning 
commute? 
Answer: The mug’s wide base ensures that its total potential energy will continue to increase as it 
tips, even if that tip becomes quite severe, so it will naturally return to its stable equilibrium. 
Why: A mug with a narrow base is stable, but only if it never tips very far. As soon as its center of 
gravity moves beyond its original base of support, over it will go. However, a mug with a wide base 
has a broad base of support and will recover even from severe tips. 

100 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
Bicycles and Dynamic Stability
Static rotational stability matters most to people who have diffi culty balancing. That’s why 
children learn to ride tricycles fi rst (Fig. 4.1.4a). But when a tricycle is moving, static rota-
tional stability doesn’t guarantee safety. If a child rolls down a steep hill and then makes a 
sudden sharp turn, he or she will probably fl ip over. What has gone wrong?
 
A moving tricycle stays upright only if the girl riding it avoids sudden accelerations, 
such as a left turn at high speed. To make such a turn, she steers the tricycle’s wheels so that 
friction with the pavement pushes the tricycle to the left (Fig. 4.1.4b). Frictional forces on 
the wheel accelerate the tricycle leftward, redirecting its speed so that it turns. Of course, 
the girl needs to turn, too, so the tricycle pushes her along with it. As long as the turn is 
slow, a gentle push is all that’s required and the tricycle and girl turn together safely.
 
If the turn is too abrupt, however, the girl doesn’t complete the turn along with the tri-
cycle. Instead, her body goes straight as the tricycle drives out from under her. Crash. As you 
can see, a tricycle has good static stability but poor dynamic stability, stability in motion.
 
The tricycle fl ips because it can’t handle the enormous torque that friction exerts on it 
during a sharp turn. Because the horizontal frictional force that turns the tricycle is exerted 
well below the tricycle and rider’s combined center of mass (Fig. 4.1.4b), it produces a 
torque about that center of mass. If this torque is small, the tricycle’s static rotational sta-
bility will provide enough restoring torque in the opposite direction to prevent any angular 
acceleration. If the turn is too sharp, the huge frictional torque will overwhelm the limited 
restoring torque and the tricycle and rider will fl ip over. During high-speed turns, the tricy-
cle is dynamically unstable.
 
Since the goal of a wheeled vehicle is to go somewhere, dynamic rotational stability is 
ultimately more important than static rotational stability. And while a bicycle lacks static 
stability, a moving bicycle is remarkably stable. Its dynamic stability is so good that it’s 
almost hard to tip over and can even be ridden without any hands on the handlebars. This 
feat is a popular daredevil stunt among children who haven’t yet realized how easy it is.
 
As British physicist David Jones discovered, the bicycle’s incredible dynamic stability 
results from its tendency to steer automatically in whatever direction it’s leaning. For exam-
ple, if the bicycle begins leaning to the left, the front wheel will automatically steer toward 
the left so as to return the bicycle to an upright position. Although a stationary bicycle falls 
over when it’s displaced from its unstable equilibrium, a forward-moving bicycle naturally 
drives under the combined center of mass and returns to that unstable equilibrium.
 
There are two physical mechanisms acting together to produce this automatic steering 
effect: one involving rotation and one involving potential energy. The fi rst is based on the 
wheels alone: they behave as gyroscopes. Because each wheel is spinning, it has angular 
momentum and tends to continue spinning at a constant angular speed about a fi xed axis in 
space. Since a wheel’s angular momentum can be changed only by a torque, it naturally 
tends to keep its upright orientation.
 
But angular momentum alone doesn’t prevent the bicycle from tipping over, any more 
than it prevents a tricycle from doing so. Instead, it prompts the bicycle to steer automati-
cally by way of gyroscopic precession, the pivoting of a gyroscope’s rotational axis caused 
by a torque exerted perpendicular to its angular momentum. When a bicycle is upright, the 
pavement’s upward support force points toward the front wheel’s center of mass and pro-
duces no torque on that wheel. But when the bicycle leans to the left, the pavement’s 
upward support force no longer points at the wheel’s center of mass and it therefore pro-
duces a torque on the wheel. That torque is perpendicular to the wheel’s angular momen-
tum, so the wheel precesses; its axis of rotation pivots toward the left and thereby steers the 
bicycle to safety!
 
Assisting gyroscopic precession in this automatic steering process is a second effect 
due to potential energy. Because of the shape and angle of the fork supporting its front 
wheel, a leaning bicycle can lower its center of gravity and reduce its total potential energy 
by steering its front wheel in the direction that the bicycle is leaning. When the bicycle 
Center 
of gravity
Center 
of mass
Friction’s
torque
Acceleration
(a)
(b)
Friction
Fig. 4.1.4 (a) A tricycle 
that is heading straight 
is stable because any tip 
causes its center of gravity 
to move upward. (b) During 
a fast left turn, however, 
the tricycle accelerates 
left and friction exerts a 
large leftward force on 
the wheels. This frictional 
force produces a torque 
about the tricycle and 
rider’s combined center of 
mass and can cause the 
tricycle to tip over.

Bicycles 101
leans to the left, its front wheel steers toward the left to reduce the bicycle’s total potential 
energy as quickly as possible. Once again the bicycle automatically steers in the direction 
that it’s leaning and avoids falling over. These self-correcting effects explain why a rider-
less bicycle stays up so long when you roll it forward or down a hill.
 
There is little a bicycle designer can do to change the gyroscopic effect, but the poten-
tial energy effect depends on fork shape and angle. To be stable, the front wheel must touch 
the ground behind the steering axis (Fig. 4.1.5). If the fork is fl awed, so that the wheel 
touches the ground ahead of the steering axis, the bicycle will steer the wrong way when it 
leans and be virtually unridable.
 
The front fork of a typical adult’s bicycle arcs forward so that the wheel touches the 
ground just behind the steering axis. This situation leaves the bicycle dynamically sta-
ble enough to ride yet highly maneuverable. In contrast, the front fork of a typical 
child’s bicycle is relatively straight so that the wheel touches the ground far behind the 
steering axis. The child’s bicycle is therefore more dynamically stable than the adult’s 
bicycle but also less easy to turn. That trade-off between dynamic stability and maneu-
verability is universal, appearing not only in pedal-powered vehicles but in cars, boats, 
and aircraft as well.
Steering axis touches
Wheel touches
Fig. 4.1.5 A bicycle 
is stable when moving 
forward, in part because 
its front wheel touches 
the ground behind the 
steering axis. As a result, 
the front wheel naturally 
steers in the direction that 
the bicycle is leaning and 
returns the bicycle to an 
upright position.
Check Your Understanding #2: Like a Rolling Coin
Standing a coin on edge is diffi cult, but a rolling coin stays upright easily. What effect is stabilizing 
the moving coin? 
Answer: The effect is gyroscopic precession. 
Why: On its edge, the coin has little or no static stability and tips over easily. But when it’s rolling 
forward quickly, the same gyroscopic precession effect that causes a bicycle to steer under its center 
of gravity also dynamically stabilizes the coin’s otherwise unstable equilibrium. 
Leaning While Turning
Why does a bicycle rider lean during a turn? The answer is that leaning can balance out the 
torque that friction exerts on him during the turn, the same frictional torque that fl ipped our 
unfortunate tricycle rider. With the proper lean, the bicyclist can safely complete even the 
sharpest turn.
 
As he rides along, the bicyclist tries to keep himself and the bicycle in rotational equi-
librium. Since they experience a frictional torque about their combined center of mass each 
time they turn, the bicyclist balances that torque by leaning them toward the inside of the 
turn. The pavement’s upward support force then produces a torque on them about their 
center of mass that opposes the frictional torque. When those two torques sum to zero, the 
bicyclist and bicycle are safely in rotational equilibrium.
 
These two opposing torques are both produced by pavement forces on the wheels, and 
their sum is the overall torque that the overall pavement force on the wheels produces. That 
overall torque drops to zero when the overall pavement force points directly toward the 
combined center of mass. As we saw in Section 2.1, a force exerted directly toward a pivot 
produces zero torque about that pivot. To stay in rotational equilibrium as he rides, the 
bicyclist always places the combined center of mass directly in line with the pavement’s 
overall force on the wheels.
 
For example, when the bicycle is heading straight, the rider can obtain zero net torque 
by keeping the bicycle upright. The pavement pushes the wheels straight upward, directly 
toward the combined center of mass (Fig. 4.1.6a). But when the bicycle is turning left, the 
rider must lean to the left to stay in rotational equilibrium. During the leftward turn, 
the pavement pushes the wheels upward and leftward (Fig. 4.1.6b). Leaning leftward the 
proper amount ensures that the pavement force points toward the combined center of mass 
and produces zero torque (Fig. 4.1.7).
(b)
Support force
Total
force
Friction
Acceleration
Center of
mass/gravity
(a)
Center of
mass/gravity
Support force
Fig. 4.1.6 (a) A bicycle 
that is heading straight is 
in rotational equilibrium 
when it’s perfectly upright. 
The support force from 
the road produces no 
torque about its center of 
mass. (b) A bicycle that is 
turning left is in rotational 
equilibrium when it’s tilted 
to the left. Together, the 
support and frictional 
forces from the road 
produce no torque about 
its center of mass.

102 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
 
After a while, leaning the bike while turning becomes so automatic, so habitual, that 
you don’t even think about it. You simply can’t ride a bicycle or motorcycle without leaning 
as you turn. Even if you turn one of these vehicles so sharply that it skids, leaning can still 
keep it safely in rotational equilibrium.
 
All this discussion of leaning during turns begs the question: How do you make the 
bicycle lean prior to a turn? Actually, you cause that lean unconsciously by steering the 
bicycle briefl y in the wrong direction—the direction opposite the turn itself! The bicycle 
then drives out from under you, and the two of you begin to lean in the desired manner. You 
then steer in the correct direction and remain in rotational equilibrium throughout the turn. 
When you’re ready to stop turning, you steer extra hard briefl y in the direction of the turn. 
The bicycle then drives under you, and the two of you return to upright. The turn is over.
 
Since only a statically unstable vehicle can lean, a statically stable one must rely on 
restoring torques to keep it near its rotational equilibrium. As we saw with tricycles, restor-
ing torques are limited, and a vehicle can tip out of its rotational equilibrium during rapid 
accelerations. A car, truck, or SUV will fl ip if it turns too sharply, and some are particularly 
prone to such catastrophes. The higher a vehicle’s center of mass and the narrower its base 
of support, the more limited its restoring torques and the more easily it fl ips during turns. 
SUVs are surprisingly vulnerable to such rollover accidents, and small trucks that have 
been boosted up to resemble tractor-trailer cabs are truly hazardous. Even some ordinary 
cars have been found unsafe in this regard.
Fig. 4.1.7 As they round 
a turn during a race, 
these cyclists lean toward 
the inside of the turn. 
This leaning prevents the 
pavement from producing 
torques on them and 
tipping them over.
© Bryn Lennon/Getty Images, Inc.
Check Your Understanding #3: Cutting Corners
Why does a skier lean in the direction of a turn during a downhill run? 
Answer: She leans into the turn to make sure that the force on her skis is directed toward her center 
of mass. 
Why: In many sports and situations a person must lean in the direction of a turn. Since a turn always 
involves horizontal acceleration and horizontal force, the person must shift her center of mass toward 
the inside of the turn. When she leans just the right amount, the net force on her feet points directly 
toward her center of mass and exerts no torque on her about her center of mass. She remains in 
rotational equilibrium and doesn’t tip over.
Pedaling Bicycles
So far, we have only discussed stability. Once we’ve settled on a bicycle as the most likely 
confi guration for a useful person-powered vehicle, we need to fi gure out how to person 
power it. The rider could push his feet on the ground, but that would be pretty inconvenient 
and even dangerous at high speeds. Instead, we use foot pedals to produce a torque on one 
of the wheels. But which wheel, and how do we produce that torque?
 
The original answer was to power the front wheel, using cranks attached directly to its 
axle. A crank is simply a lever that projects from the axle and produces a torque on that axle 
as you push its free end around in a circle. Each bicycle crank has a pedal installed on its 
free end so that you can use your foot to push on it. With its axle suspended in bearings, the 
front wheel turns as you pedal it. Friction between the turning wheel and the ground then 
pushes the bicycle forward.
 
This pedaling method is still used in children’s tricycles, but it has three drawbacks. 
First, pedaling the front wheel interferes with its other responsibility: steering. Second, you 
can’t take a break from pedaling; if the vehicle is moving, so are the pedals. Third, you can 
produce more than enough torque on the front wheel, but you often have trouble moving 
your legs quickly enough to keep up with the pedals. When you ride fast on level ground, 
you fi nd yourself pedaling furiously and feeling very little resistance from the pedals.
 
The frantic pedaling problem goes to the heart of all pedal-powered vehicles, vehicles 
that draw power from you, the rider. You provide that power by doing a certain amount of 

Bicycles 103
work on the pedals each second. Since work is equal to force times distance, you can do the 
same work on the pedals each second—that is, you can provide the same power to the 
vehicle—by pushing the pedals forward hard as they turn slowly or by pushing the pedals 
forward gently as they turn quickly. However, for reasons having to do with physiology 
more than physics, your legs are best at providing power when you are pushing the pedals 
forward medium hard as they turn medium fast.
 
Unfortunately, the pedals of an ordinary tricycle turn too quickly and too easily to 
make good use of your pedaling power. When the tricycle is moving fast on level ground, 
you can barely keep up with its pedals, let alone do work on them. The only time a tricycle 
makes good use of your capacity to supply power is when it’s going uphill at moderate 
speed; only then do the pedals turn medium fast and require that you push them forward 
medium hard.
 
An early solution to the frantic pedaling problem was to use a gigantic front wheel. In 
such a confi guration, one turn of the wheel would take you a considerable distance, so you 
no longer had to pedal furiously to go fast on a level road. At last you could reach your 
peak performance on level ground, pushing the pedals forward medium hard as they 
turned medium fast. The pennyfarthing of the mid-nineteenth century was this sort of 
bicycle (Fig. 4.1.8). But pedaling still interfered with steering and you couldn’t stop ped-
aling while the bicycle was moving. Furthermore, this bicycle had a new problem—you 
couldn’t push the pedals forward hard enough to keep its front wheel turning steadily on 
uphill stretches.
 
These problems were solved by removing the cranks from the front wheel’s axle and 
using an indirect drive scheme to convey power to the rear wheel (Fig. 4.1.9). Employing 
toothed sprockets and a chain loop, that indirect drive allowed the pedals and the wheels 
to turn at different rates. This change lets you use mechanical advantage to choose how 
you supply power to the bicycle: whether you exert large forces on slowly moving pedals 
or small forces on rapidly moving pedals or, ideally, medium forces on medium-fast-
moving pedals. Whether you’re zooming along a level road or grinding slowly up a steep 
hill, you can always fi nd a drive setting, or gear, that lets you comfortably supply your 
maximum power.
 
Finally, the nonstop pedaling problem was solved by incorporating a one-way drive or 
freewheel in the hub of the rear wheel. This freewheel (Fig. 4.1.10) allows the rear wheel 
to turn freely in one direction so that you can stop pedaling as you coast forward. A modern 
bicycle with these improvements appears in Fig. 4.1.11.
Fig. 4.1.8 The 
pennyfarthing used a large, 
directly driven front wheel 
to permit the rider to travel 
at a reasonable speed 
without having to pedal 
very rapidly. Its name came 
from its resemblance to 
two coins, the large English 
penny and the smaller 
farthing.
Crank
sprocket
Pedal
Idler
sprockets
Freewheel
sprocket
Tension
Pedaling
torque
Torque on
freewheel
Fig. 4.1.9 The drive system for a modern bicycle. Pedaling produces torque on the crank sprocket, 
which in turn produces tension in the top segment of the chain. That segment of chain produces 
torque on the freewheel sprocket, which conveys that torque to the bicycle’s rear wheel (not shown). 
The idler sprockets handle the extra chain.
Spring
Driver for
rear wheel
Pawl
Freewheel
sprocket
Fig. 4.1.10 The ratchet 
in a bicycle freewheel. If 
the relative rotation of the 
inner and outer parts is in 
the correct direction, the 
pawls transmit torque from 
the outer part to the inner 
part. If the relative rotation 
direction is reversed, the 
pawls compress the springs 
and skip along the teeth on 
the inside of the outer part. 
No torque is transmitted.

104 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
Fig. 4.1.11 A modern bicycle. 
The rear wheel is driven by a 
chain that allows the rider to 
vary the mechanical advantage 
between the pedals and the rear 
wheel. A freewheel in the hub 
of the rear wheel lets that wheel 
turn freely in one direction. This 
free motion allows the bicycle 
to coast forward, even when the 
pedals are stationary.
Check Your Understanding #4: Bigger Isn’t Always Better
Why is it so diffi cult to climb a hill on a pennyfarthing? 
Answer: Each turn of the huge wheel takes you a long distance up the hill and requires lots of work. 
To do this much work in a single turn of the pedals, you must push on the pedals very hard. 
Why: As you pedal a bicycle, you are doing work on the pedals; you push the pedals as they move in 
the direction of that push. If too much work is required, as is the case when you’re going uphill on a 
pennyfarthing, the force required becomes unbearable.
SECTION 4.2 
Despite the complexity of modern spacecraft, the rocket is 
one of the simplest of all machines. It’s based on the prin-
ciple that every action has a reaction. A rocket is propelled 
forward by pushing material out of its tail. As simple as 
rockets are, however, people have been developing better 
rockets for over 700 years. They’re used for such pursuits 
as space exploration, weaponry, rescue operations, and 
amusement.
Questions to Think About: What pushes a rocket forward? 
How can a rocket work in space, where there seems to be 
nothing to push against? Why do modern rockets have such 
fancy exhaust nozzles? What is the fastest speed that a rocket 
can reach? Why do satellites travel endlessly around Earth? 
What sort of path does a rocket take as it travels from planet 
to planet?
Experiments to Do: While an afternoon spent launching 
model rockets (available at hobby and toy stores) would be 
the best introduction to this section, a toy balloon will do 
just fi ne. Blow up the toy balloon and let it go. It will sail 
around the room. What pushes the balloon forward? Are the 
room’s air and walls involved in the propulsion, or is the 
balloon propelled by the very act of ejecting gas through its 
opening? How could you verify your answer to the previous 
question?
Rockets and Space Travel
Fairing
Payload
Second stage
Interstage
(covers engine)
First stage
Booster
Booster
Engines
Landing legs

Rockets and Space Travel 105
Rocket Propulsion
Among a rocket’s most impressive features are its ability to propel itself forward even in 
the complete isolation of space and its capacity to reach astonishing speeds using that pro-
pulsion. It somehow manages to push itself forward without any outside help and to use 
that forward push to accelerate seemingly without limits.
 
Of course, a rocket can’t really push itself forward, any more than you can lift your-
self up by your boots, and it can’t accelerate forever. In reality, it obtains a forward 
force, a thrust force, by pushing against its own limited store of fuel, and when that fuel 
runs out, it stops accelerating. To understand how a rocket obtains thrust from its fuel 
supply, let’s look at how Newton’s third law, the one describing action and reaction, 
applies to rockets.
 
Imagine that you’re standing in the middle of a frozen pond with zero velocity and no 
momentum. It’s a warm day and the wet ice is remarkably slippery. Try as you may, you 
can’t seem to get moving at all. How can you get off the ice?
 
Because of your inertia, the only way you can start moving is if something pushes on 
you. Sure, you could order a pizza and then push against the delivery truck when it arrives. 
Instead you remove a shoe and throw it as hard as you can toward the east side of the pond 
(Fig. 4.2.1). As you throw the shoe, you exert a force on it with your hand. The shoe accel-
erates and heads off across the ice.
 
What happens to you? You head off toward the west side of the pond! You’re moving 
because when you pushed the shoe toward the east side of the pond, it pushed you equally 
hard toward the west side of the pond. In the process, you transferred momentum to the 
shoe and it transferred momentum in the opposite direction to you. Momentum isn’t being 
created or destroyed, it’s only being redistributed. Even after you let go of the shoe, your 
combined momentum remains at zero. The shoe has as much momentum in one direction 
as you have in the other.
 
Of course, you are much more massive than the shoe, so you end up traveling slower 
than it does. Momentum is equal to mass times velocity, so the more massive the object, the 
less velocity it needs for the same amount of momentum. Still, you’ve achieved what you 
set out to do—you’re sliding slowly toward the west side of the pond.
 
Your fi nal speed is limited because you managed to transfer only a small amount of 
momentum to the shoe and thus received only a small amount of opposite momentum in 
return. If you’d been able to throw the shoe faster or if you’d thrown a whole display case 
of shoes, you’d have transferred more momentum and would be going faster.
 
Instead of throwing shoes, you’d have done better to throw very fast-moving gas 
molecules. Even at room temperature, the molecules in air are traveling about 1800 km/h 
(1100 mph). When gas molecules are heated to roughly 2800 ºC (5000 ºF), as they are in 
a liquid-fuel rocket engine, they move about three times that fast. If you throw something 
in one direction at that kind of speed, you receive quite a lot of momentum in the other 
direction.
 
That’s what a conventional rocket engine does. It uses a chemical reaction to create 
very hot exhaust gas from fuels contained entirely within the rocket itself. What started as 
chemical potential energy in those fuels becomes thermal energy during the reaction and 
then mostly directed kinetic energy as the hot gas rushes out of the rocket engine in a plume 
of incandescent exhaust.
 
The rocket engine exerts a tremendous backward force on the gas, accelerating that gas 
to exhaust velocities measured in kilometers per second or miles per second. The gas 
pushes forward equally hard on the rocket engine. Propelled by such rocket engines, space-
craft can reach astonishing heights and speeds (Fig. 4.2.2).
 
Achieving those amazing exhaust velocities requires carefully designed nozzles. If 
you’ve ever watched the launch of a large rocket, you’ve probably noticed the bell-shaped 
nozzles through which the exhaust fl ows (Fig. 4.2.3). Each nozzle allows the rocket to 
Man and shoe
(after throwing)
(b)
Shoe’s
velocity
Man and shoe
(stationary)
(a)
Man’s
velocity
Fig. 4.2.1 (a) A man who 
is holding a shoe while 
standing still on ice has 
zero momentum. (b) Once 
he has thrown the shoe to 
the right, the shoe has a 
momentum to the right and 
the man has a momentum 
to the left. The total 
momentum of the man and 
shoe is still zero. Because 
the man is much more 
massive than the shoe, the 
shoe moves much faster 
than the man.

106 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
obtain as much forward momentum as possible from its exhaust by directing that exhaust 
backward and accelerating it to the greatest possible speed. As we’ll see in Chapter 6, noz-
zles allow gases to convert their various internal energies into kinetic energy and are ideally 
suited for directing and accelerating gases. In the case of rocket exhaust, the most effective 
nozzle shape is a converging-diverging one, called a de Laval nozzle after its Swedish 
inventor, Carl Gustaf de Laval. 1
 
To understand fully why this complicated nozzle structure works so well for rocket 
engines, we’d need to examine the physics of fl owing gases up to and beyond the speed of 
sound. We’ll encounter some of these issues later in this book, but for now a brief summary 
will have to suffi ce.
 
Inside the rocket and before the de Laval nozzle, the hot exhaust gas is tightly packed 
and its pressure is enormous. Like the gas in a spray bottle, this exhaust gas accelerates 
rapidly through the nozzle toward the lower pressure environment outside. The narrowing 
throat of that nozzle aids its acceleration, up to a point. When the gas reaches the narrowest 
part of the nozzle, it’s traveling at the speed of sound and its characteristics begin to change 
dramatically. To coax the supersonic exhaust gas to accelerate still further, the nozzle stops 
narrowing and begins to widen. The tightly packed exhaust gas expands in volume as it 
fl ows through that widening bell and thereby prepares to enter the more open environment 
outside the nozzle.
 
Just how wide the diverging end of the de Laval nozzle must be to obtain the maximum 
thrust from its exhaust gas depends on the nozzle’s surroundings. Near sea level, the 
exhaust gas fl ows into ordinary air outside the nozzle and a relatively narrow de Laval 
nozzle works best. At high altitude or in space, the exhaust gas enters thinner air or nothing 
at all, so a wider de Laval nozzle is more ideal. Rockets typically make a compromise in 
their nozzle shapes so as to operate reasonably well in all environments.
 
By the time the gas reaches the end of the de Laval nozzle, it has converted most of its 
original energy into kinetic energy, with its velocity directed away from the nozzle. In fact, 
because the gas actually continues to burn even as it fl ows through the nozzle, its kinetic 
energy and speed keep rising until they reach fantastic levels. With the help of the de Laval 
nozzle, exhaust gas leaves the rocket’s engine at an exhaust velocity, or backward-directed 
fl ow speed, of between 10,000 and 16,000 km/h (6000 and 10,000 mph).
 
As it creates this plume of exhaust, the rocket pushes the gas backward and gives it 
backward momentum. The gas completes the momentum transfer by pushing the rocket 
forward. The very act of ejecting the exhaust is all that’s required to obtain forward thrust; 
Fig. 4.2.2 This 
spacecraft’s rocket engine 
pushes its fuel leftward in 
a plume of high-velocity 
exhaust and that fuel 
pushes the spacecraft 
rightward, action and 
reaction. As the spacecraft 
accelerates toward the 
right, its rightward velocity 
increases and the leftward 
velocity of its ejected fuel 
decreases. Throughout this 
propulsion process, the 
rocket’s total momentum 
remains unchanged; it 
was zero prior to launch, 
so it remains zero as the 
spacecraft and fuel push 
on each other.
Hot
gases
Unburned
fuel
Nozzle
Exhaust
plume
Fig. 4.2.3 A molecular 
picture of what happens in 
a chemical rocket engine. 
The engine burns its fuel 
in a confi ned chamber, 
and the exhaust gas fl ows 
out of a nozzle. The nozzle 
converts the random 
thermal motions of the 
exhaust-gas molecules into 
directed motion away from 
the rocket engine.
1 Swedish inventor and 
engineer Carl Gustaf de 
Laval’s (1845–1913) 
invention of the converging-
diverging nozzle predates 
the modern development 
of rockets by several 
decades. He invented this 
nozzle as a way to make 
steam turbines more 
effi cient and is credited 
with laying the foundation 
for all future turbine 
technology. De Laval is 
also known for his 
invention of the cream 
separator for milk.

Rockets and Space Travel 107
the rocket doesn’t need anything external to push and will operate perfectly well in empty 
space (see 2 ). When it pushes hard enough on its exhaust, the rocket not only can support 
its own weight, it can even accelerate upward.
2  On January 13, 1920, 
The New York Times ran 
an editorial attacking 
Robert Goddard for 
proposing that rockets 
could be used for travel in 
space. With modest 
fi nancial support from the 
Smithsonian Institution, 
Goddard was pioneering 
the development of 
liquid-fuel rockets. The 
editorial began: “That 
Professor Goddard, with 
his ‘chair’ in Clark 
College and the counten-
ancing of the Smithsonian 
Institution, does not know 
the relation of action to 
reaction, and of the need 
to have something better 
than a vacuum against 
which to react—to say 
that would be absurd. Of 
course he only seems to 
lack the knowledge ladled 
out daily in high schools.”
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Action and Reaction in Rockets
Misconception: A rocket needs some external object to react against to push itself forward. 
Resolution: While rocket propulsion does involve a pair of equal but opposite forces, action and 
reaction, the rocket is pushing its exhaust backward (action) and the exhaust is pushing the 
rocket forward (reaction). What this exhaust plume hits, if anything, makes no difference to the 
propulsion effect.
Check Your Understanding #1: A Rocket with a Head Start
When a missile is launched from beneath the wing of a fi ghter aircraft, what does it push against to 
accelerate forward? 
Answer: It pushes against its own exhaust, as do all rockets.
Why: While it may appear that the plume of exhaust beneath a ground-launched rocket is what lifts 
that rocket upward, the ground itself doesn’t contribute to the thrust. The very act of pushing the gas 
out the nozzle propels the rocket forward. 
The Ultimate Speed of a Spacecraft
At rest on the launchpad, a rocket consists principally of a spacecraft and a supply of fuel. 
Once the rocket’s engine begins to fi re, exhaust from the burned fuel accelerates backward 
and the spacecraft accelerates forward. The fuel is gradually consumed until eventually it 
runs out and the spacecraft coasts along on its own. Although weight and air resistance 
infl uence this story, let’s neglect both for now to see what determines the spacecraft’s 
eventual speed.
 
Remarkably, the ultimate speed of the spacecraft is not limited to the rocket’s exhaust 
speed. As long as the rocket keeps pushing exhaust backward, it will continue to accelerate 
forward. For the spacecraft to reach speeds in excess of its exhaust speed, however, the 
rocket must push the majority of its initial mass backward as exhaust. After all, the momen-
tum of the exhaust’s larger mass heading backward at the exhaust speed cancels the 
momentum of the spacecraft’s smaller mass heading forward at more than the exhaust 
speed. For a rocket that is 90% fuel and 10% spacecraft at launch, we might reasonably 
expect the spacecraft to end up traveling forward at nine times the exhaust speed.
 
Unfortunately, that simple analysis overestimates the spacecraft’s speed. Because the 
rocket accelerates forward while its engine is fi ring, only the fi rst portion of its exhaust trav-
els backward at the full exhaust speed (Fig. 4.2.2.). As the rocket picks up speed in the for-
ward direction, its exhaust moves less rapidly in the backward direction. When the rocket’s 
forward speed exceeds its exhaust speed, the exhaust actually ends up moving forward!
 
Despite this problem, a spacecraft can still travel forward faster than the exhaust speed; 
it just needs more fuel. If we neglect air resistance and weight, the spacecraft’s fi nal speed 
is given by the rocket equation:
 
spacecraft speed = exhaust speed · loge (
massspacecraft + massfuel
massspacecraft
). 
(4.2.1)
For a rocket that is 90% fuel and 10% spacecraft at launch, its spacecraft can reach 
2.3 times the speed of its exhaust gas. If it is more than 90% fuel, it can go even faster.

108 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
 
There’s a problem, however, with trying to burn up and eject a huge fraction of the 
rocket’s original mass as exhaust. It’s diffi cult to construct a rocket that is 99.99% fuel 
and 0.01% spacecraft. Instead, a space-bound rocket is typically a stack of several sep-
arate rocket stages, each stage much smaller than the previous stage. Once the fi rst 
stage has used up all its fuel, the whole stage is discarded and the next rocket stage 
begins to operate. In this manner, the rocket behaves as though it’s ejecting almost all 
its mass as rocket exhaust. With the help of several stages and lots of fuel, rockets can 
travel substantially faster than their exhaust velocities and reach Earth orbit or the solar 
system beyond.
Check Your Understanding #2: Not Everything Is Disposable
The space shuttle didn’t have the staged look of expendable rockets. How did it manage to eject most 
of its launch mass as exhaust? 
Answer: It was actually staged subtly. Its two solid-fuel boosters were effectively the fi rst stage, the 
external liquid-fuel tank was the second stage, and the orbiter itself was the third stage. 
Why: Although the space shuttle was not stacked one stage on the next like a Saturn or Delta rocket, 
it didn’t travel from ground to space as a single object. It discarded empty fuel containers as it 
accelerated upward. First to go were the two boosters, followed by the external fuel tank. The fi nal 
mass of the orbiter itself was much less than what left the launchpad. 
Orbiting Earth
If the spacecraft were heading straight up when it ran out of fuel, it would either fall back 
to the ground or leave Earth forever (more on that later). But if it were heading primarily 
horizontally when its engine turned off, it might fi nd itself circling Earth endlessly. With no 
atmosphere to affect it, the spacecraft follows a path determined only by inertia and gravity, 
and since the spacecraft’s weight causes it to accelerate toward the center of Earth, its 
trajectory can bend into a huge elliptical loop around Earth.
 
The spacecraft is following an orbit around Earth. An orbit is the path an object 
takes as it falls freely around a celestial object. Although the spacecraft accelerates 
directly toward Earth’s center at every moment, its huge horizontal speed prevents it 
from actually hitting Earth’s surface. Instead, Earth’s curved surface bends away from 
it so rapidly that the fast-moving spacecraft falls around Earth rather than into it 
(Fig. 4.2.4). To orbit Earth just above the atmosphere, a spacecraft must travel at the 
enormous horizontal speed of 7.9 km/s (about 17,800 mph) and will circle Earth once 
every 84 minutes.
 
The farther the spacecraft’s orbit is from Earth’s surface, however, the longer its 
orbital period, the time it takes to complete one orbit. That longer period is due in part to 
the increased distance the spacecraft must travel when completing a larger orbit, but it’s 
also due to an important characteristic of gravity: Earth’s gravity becomes weaker as 
distance from Earth’s center of mass increases.
 
Section 1.2 observed that an object’s weight is equal to its mass times 9.8 N/kg, the 
acceleration due to gravity. That relationship (Eq. 1.2.1), however, is only an approxima-
tion, valid for an object near Earth’s surface. As the object’s altitude increases, both the 
acceleration due to gravity and the object’s weight decrease—you truly weigh less on a 
mountaintop than you do in the valley nearby. Moreover, Eq. 1.2.1 completely ignores the 
fact that gravity attracts every object in the universe toward every other object in the 
universe (see 3 ).
 
To determine orbits around Earth and other celestial bodies, scientists and engineers 
use a more general formula that relates the gravitational forces between two objects to their 
masses and the distance separating them. These forces are equal to the gravitational con-
stant times the product of the two masses, divided by the square of the distance separating 
3 English physicist Henry 
Cavendish (1731–1810) 
proved that terrestrial 
objects do exert gravita-
tional forces on one 
another. His experiment, 
performed in 1798, 
measured the tiny forces 
that two metal spheres 
exert on one another, 
using a very sensitive 
torsion balance. Compar-
ing the forces between the 
two spheres with those 
between Earth and those 
same spheres (their 
weights), Cavendish 
was able to deduce the 
mass of Earth. In effect, 
Cavendish’s tabletop 
experiment allowed him 
to weigh the Earth.

Rockets and Space Travel 109
Fig. 4.2.4 (a) Newton’s drawing of a cannonball fi red horizontally from the top of a tall mountain. As 
the cannonball’s speed increases, it travels farther from the mountain before hitting Earth. (b) When 
the cannonball moves fast enough, the curved Earth drops away beneath it and it never hits Earth at 
all. (c) The cannonball then orbits Earth.
Velocity
Acceleration
Circular
orbit
(b)
(c)
(a)
them. This relationship, discovered by Newton and called the law of universal gravita-
tion, can be written as a word equation:
 
force = gravitational constant · mass1 · mass2
(distance between masses)2
, 
(4.2.2)
in symbols:
F = G · m1 · m2
r2
,
and in common language:
The pull of gravity is strongest between massive objects but diminishes rapidly 
as distance increases.
Note that the force on mass1 is directed toward mass2 and the force on mass2 is directed 
toward mass1. Those two forces are equal in magnitude but oppositely directed. The 
gravitational constant is a fundamental constant of nature, with a measured value of 
6.6720 × 10−11 N · m2/kg2.
THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION
Every object in the universe attracts every other object in the universe with a force 
equal to the gravitational constant times the product of the two masses, divided by the 
square of the distance separating the two objects.

110 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
Fig. 4.2.5 As a 
spacecraft’s total energy 
increases, its orbit evolves 
from circular (a) to 
elliptical (b) to parabolic 
(c), to hyperbolic (d). 
Circular and elliptical 
orbits are closed loops, 
so a spacecraft following 
one of those orbits does 
so repeatedly. Parabolic 
and hyperbolic orbits are 
open curves, so once a 
spacecraft following one of 
those orbits begins heading 
away from Earth, it never 
returns.
(a) Circular orbit
(b) Elliptical orbit
(c) Parabolic orbit
(d) Hyperbolic orbit
Velocity
Acceleration
 
This relationship describes any gravitational attraction, whether it’s between two 
planets or between Earth and you. The effective location of an object’s mass is its center 
of mass, so the distance used in Eq. 4.2.2 is the distance separating the two centers of 
mass. For a spacecraft orbiting Earth just above its atmosphere, that distance is roughly 
Earth’s radius of 6378 km (3964 miles). For a spacecraft far above the atmosphere, how-
ever, the distance is larger and the force of gravity is weaker; that spacecraft experiences 
a smaller acceleration due to gravity. To give it the additional time it needs for its path to 
bend around in a circle, the high-altitude spacecraft must travel more slowly than the 
low-altitude spacecraft. This reduced speed explains the long orbital periods of high-
altitude spacecraft.
 
At 35,900 km (22,300 miles) above Earth’s surface, the orbital period reaches 
24 hours. A satellite traveling eastward in such an orbit turns with the Earth and is said to 
be geosynchronous. If a geosynchronous satellite orbits Earth around the equator, it’s also 
geostationary—it always remains over the same spot on Earth’s equator. Such a fi xed 
orientation is useful for communications and weather satellites.
 
Not all orbits are circular (Fig. 4.2.5). The orbits of some spacecraft are elliptical, so 
their altitudes vary up and down once per orbit. At apogee, its greatest distance from Earth’s 
center, a spacecraft travels relatively slowly because it has converted some of its kinetic 
energy into gravitational potential energy. At perigee, its smallest distance from Earth’s 
center, the spacecraft travels relatively rapidly because it has converted some of its gravita-
tional potential energy into kinetic energy. Of course, the perigee should not bring the 
spacecraft into Earth’s atmosphere or it will crash.
 
The greater a spacecraft’s total energy, the farther its orbit extends from Earth. If the 
spacecraft has too much total energy, Earth’s gravity will be unable to bend its path into a 
closed loop and the spacecraft will coast off into interplanetary space. The spacecraft’s path 
near Earth is then a parabola or hyperbola. The spacecraft follows this parabolic or hyper-
bolic path only once and then drifts away from Earth forever.
 
A spacecraft usually enters parabolic or hyperbolic orbit by fi ring its rocket engine. It 
starts in an elliptical orbit around Earth and uses its rocket engine to increase its kinetic 
energy. The spacecraft then arcs away from Earth, and its kinetic energy gradually trans-
forms into gravitational potential energy. But Earth’s gravity becomes weaker with distance, 
and the spacecraft’s gravitational potential energy slowly approaches a maximum value 
even as its distance from Earth becomes infi nite. If the spacecraft has enough kinetic energy 
to reach this maximum gravitational potential energy, it will be able to escape  completely 

Rockets and Space Travel 111
Orbiting the Sun: Kepler’s Laws
Once it escapes from Earth’s gravity and again turns off its rocket engine, the spacecraft 
behaves like a tiny planet and orbits the sun. If you watch it patiently as it travels and com-
pare its orbital motion with the motions of the planets themselves, you may begin to notice 
three universal features of all these solar orbits. First recognized by German astronomer 
Johannes Kepler (1571–1630) through his careful analysis of the extensive observational 
data collected by Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, those three orbital behaviors are known 
as Kepler’s laws.
 
Kepler’s fi rst law is already rather familiar to us from our examination of Earth orbits. 
This law describes the shape of the spacecraft’s looping orbit around the sun; it’s an ellipse, 
with the sun at one focus of that ellipse (Fig. 4.2.6). An ellipse isn’t an arbitrary oval; it’s a 
planar curve with two foci and a rule stating that the sums of the distances between each 
point on the curve and the two foci are the same. In this case, one focus is occupied by the 
sun, and the other focus is usually empty. If you add the distance from the spacecraft to the 
from Earth’s gravity. If its kinetic energy approaches zero as it escapes, it’s in a parabolic 
orbit. If it retains excess kinetic energy after the escape, it’s in a hyperbolic orbit.
 
The speed that a spacecraft needs to escape from Earth’s gravity is called the escape 
velocity. This escape velocity depends on the spacecraft’s altitude and is about 11.2 km/s 
(25,000 mph) near Earth’s surface. A spacecraft traveling at more than the escape velocity 
follows a hyperbolic orbital path and heads off toward the other planets or beyond.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Astronauts and “Weightlessness”
Misconception: An astronaut orbiting Earth is too far from Earth to experience gravity and is truly 
weightless. 
Resolution: The astronaut is still so near Earth’s surface that he experiences almost his full Earth 
weight. He feels weightless only because he is in free fall.
Check Your Understanding #3: Speeding Up the Lunar Month
The moon orbits Earth every 27.3 days, at a distance of 384,400 km from Earth’s center of mass. 
For the moon to orbit in less time, how would its distance from Earth have to change? 
Answer: The distance between Earth and moon would have to decrease. 
Why: The moon behaves just like a spacecraft orbiting Earth at a distance of 384,400 km. Such a 
spacecraft would also have an orbital period of 27.3 days. To reduce this orbital period, the moon 
would have to move closer to Earth so that Earth’s gravity could bend its path more rapidly.
Check Your Figures #1: Attractive Cars
How much gravitational force does a 1000-kg automobile exert on an identical car located 
10 m away?
Answer: It exerts about 6.73 × 10−7 N.
Why: We use Eq. 4.2.2 to obtain the force:
 force = 6.6720 × 10−11 N · m2/kg2 · 1000 kg · 1000 kg
(10 m)2
 = 6.6720 × 10−7 N.
This force is roughly equal to the weight of a grain of sand. No wonder it’s hard to feel gravity from 
anything but the entire Earth.

112 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
sun and the distance from the spacecraft to the empty focus, that sum will remain constant 
as the spacecraft orbits the sun. A circular orbit around the sun is a particularly simple 
elliptical one; its two foci coincide and the sun occupies them both.
 
Kepler recognized that every object orbiting the sun follows such an elliptical path. The 
planets move along nearly circular ellipses, while the comets travel in highly elongated 
ones. Our spacecraft’s orbit may be circular or elongated, depending on its position and 
velocity at the time its engine stopped fi ring. To reach another planet, the spacecraft’s solar 
orbit and that of its destination planet must overlap and the two objects must reach that over-
lapping point at the same time. Traveling from planet to planet is clearly a tricky business.
 
Newton later recognized that these elliptical orbits are a direct consequence of the law 
of universal gravitation (Eq. 4.2.2) and its inverse square relationship between force and 
distance (force ∝ 1/distance2). Any other relationship between force and distance would 
yield curving paths that don’t close on themselves at all, let alone form ellipses. As you 
follow the spacecraft’s elliptical orbit around the sun, you are witnessing an elegant exhi-
bition of the law of universal gravitation.
Distance1
Distance 2
Sun
focus
Empty
focus
Spacecraft
Orbit
Velocity
Fig. 4.2.6 A spacecraft’s orbit around the 
sun is an ellipse, with one focus occupied by 
the sun and the other focus empty. The sum 
of distance1 and distance2 is the same for all 
points on this ellipse.
KEPLER’S FIRST LAW: ORBITS
All planets move in elliptical orbits, with the sun at one focus of the ellipse.
 
Kepler’s second law describes the area swept out by a line stretching from the sun to 
the spacecraft: that line sweeps out equal areas in equal times (Fig. 4.2.7). Regardless of 
how circular or elongated the spacecraft’s orbit is, or where the spacecraft is along that 
orbit, the area marked off each second by that moving line is always the same.
Orbital
area
Orbital
area
Velocity
Fig. 4.2.7 The orbiting spacecraft 
sweeps out the same orbital area each 
second, despite variations in its distance 
from the sun. This steady sweep is a 
result of the spacecraft’s constant angular 
momentum about the sun.

Rockets and Space Travel 113
 
Kepler’s third law describes the spacecraft’s orbital period around the sun: the 
square of its orbital period is proportional to the cube of its mean distance from the sun, 
that is, the average of its maximal and minimal distances from the sun (Fig. 4.2.8). This 
relationship can be derived from the law of universal gravitation (Eq. 4.2.2), the equa-
tions describing centripetal acceleration (for example, Eq. 3.3.1), and Newton’s second 
law (Eq. 1.1.2).
KEPLER’S SECOND LAW: AREAS
A line stretching from the sun to a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
KEPLER’S THIRD LAW: PERIODS
The square of a planet’s orbital period is proportional to the cube of that planet’s mean 
distance from the sun.
Check Your Understanding #4: Out of Round
Your spacecraft has just left Earth behind and is now orbiting the sun independently. Its elongated 
orbit has the same mean distance from the sun as Earth’s orbit, but its maximal distance from the 
sun is twice its minimal distance. Compare its speeds at the maximal and minimal distances from 
the sun. Will it ever meet up with Earth again? 
Answer: It is moving half as fast at its maximal distance from the sun as at its minimal distance, and 
it will meet Earth again in exactly 1 year.
Why: In accordance with Kepler’s fi rst law, the spacecraft is traveling in an elliptical orbit. Since 
Kepler’s second law requires it to sweep out area at a constant rate, the spacecraft must move half 
as fast when it is twice as far from the sun. Finally, because the spacecraft’s mean distance from the 
sun is the same as that of Earth, the two have the same orbital periods. They’ll both complete their 
orbits in one year and meet up at that time. 
Velocity
Maximal
distance
Minimal
distance
Fig. 4.2.8 The square of the spacecraft’s 
orbital period is proportional to the cube of its 
mean distance from the sun (the average of its 
maximal and minimal distances from the sun).
 
This observation demonstrates another physical law—conservation of angular momen-
tum. Since the sun’s gravity pulls the spacecraft directly toward the sun, it exerts no torque 
on the spacecraft and the spacecraft’s angular momentum about the sun is constant. 
Remarkably, the rate at which this line sweeps out area is proportional to the spacecraft’s 
angular momentum, so the steadiness of that sweep demonstrates the constancy of the 
spacecraft’s angular momentum about the sun.

114 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
Travel to the Stars: Special Relativity
Despite formidable challenges, it may one day be possible for human-crewed spacecraft to 
venture away from the solar system and travel to the stars. The distances involved are so 
vast that the only way to cover them in an astronaut’s lifetime would be to move at fantastic 
speeds, speeds comparable to that of light itself.
 
Should spacecraft one day be able to attain such enormous speeds, they’ll fi nd that the 
basic laws of motion, the Galilean and Newtonian laws that we have been learning up to 
this point, are incomplete. Although extremely accurate at ordinary speeds, those laws 
falter near the speed of light (exactly 299,792,458 m/s). They turn out to be low-speed 
approximations for the more accurate laws of motion developed by Einstein in 1905 ( 4 ). 
Built on the observation that light always travels at the same speed, regardless of an observ-
er’s inertial frame of reference, these relativistic laws of motion are accurate at any speed. 
They are part of Einstein’s special theory of relativity, the conceptual framework that 
describes space, time, and motion in the absence of gravity.
 
We saw in Section 1.1 that observers in different inertial frames of reference can dis-
agree on an object’s position and velocity. Special relativity recognizes that those observ-
ers can also disagree on the distance and time separating two events. More broadly, two 
inertial observers who are in relative motion perceive space and time somewhat differ-
ently. If they’re moving at ordinary speeds, that difference in perceptions is negligible and 
the Newtonian laws of motion are nearly perfect. But if they’re moving relative to one 
another at a substantial fraction of the speed of light, then they perceive space and time 
quite differently. In that case, the Newtonian approximations fail and the full laws of rel-
ativity are required.
 
Special relativity has many consequences for high-speed space travel, but we’ll con-
centrate on how relativity alters two familiar conserved quantities: momentum and energy. 
At low speeds, our spacecraft’s momentum takes its usual Newtonian value: mass times 
velocity (Eq. 2.3.1). But with increasing speed, a new relativistic factor enters the picture: 
(1 − speed2/light speed2)−1/2. Relativistic momentum is equal to the object’s mass times 
its velocity times that factor. This relationship can be written as a word equation:
 
relativistic momentum =
mass · velocity
√1 −speed2/light speed2, 
(4.2.3)
in symbols:
p =
m · v
√1 −v2/c2,
and in common language:
For a spacecraft to reach the speed of light, its momentum would have 
to be infi nite.
 
At ordinary speeds, the relativistic factor is so nearly equal to 1 that this relativistic 
relationship is beautifully approximated by the Newtonian one. However, as the space-
craft’s speed begins to approach that of light itself, the relativistic factor spoils the simple 
proportionality between momentum and velocity. Momentum then increases more rapidly 
than velocity. One result of this change is that it becomes impossible to reach the speed of 
light, let alone exceed it. Even if the spacecraft’s thrust increases its forward momentum at 
a steady rate, its speed will increase less and less quickly. It will approach—but never 
reach—the speed of light.
 
A similar change happens to the spacecraft’s energy as it approaches the speed of light. 
At low speeds, our isolated spacecraft’s kinetic energy takes its usual Newtonian value: 
4 In 1905, while Albert 
Einstein (German-born 
Swiss then American 
physicist, 1879–1955) 
was working as a patent 
examiner in Bern, he 
published four revolution-
ary papers in three 
different areas of physics. 
For the 26-year-old 
doctoral student from 
Germany, it was quite a 
banner year. Though 
Einstein is often portrayed 
as an elderly, wild-haired 
gentleman, his most 
important contributions to 
science were made when 
he was a vibrant young 
man who had married his 
fi rst wife only just two 
years earlier.

Rockets and Space Travel 115
half its mass times the square of its speed (Eq. 2.2.1). At high speeds, however, we must 
begin using relativistic energy. Relativistic energy is equal to the object’s mass times the 
square of the speed of light times the relativistic factor. This relationship can be written as 
a word equation:
 
relativistic energy =
mass · light speed2
√1 −velocity2/light speed2, 
(4.2.4)
in symbols:
E =
m · c2
√1 −v2/c2,
and in common language:
A spacecraft starts with a rest energy and its energy grows toward infi nity as its 
speed approaches the speed of light.
 
At ordinary speeds, the spacecraft’s relativistic energy can be approximated as:
relativistic energy ≃mass · light speed2 + 1
2 · mass · speed2.
The usual Newtonian kinetic energy appears at the right in this approximation, but to its left 
is a new energy that we’ve never seen before. Called the rest energy, it’s present even when 
the spacecraft is motionless. Because the rest energy is constant, it doesn’t affect low-speed 
motion and was overlooked in the Newtonian laws. However, this energy associated with 
mass itself (stated symbolically as E = mc2) does have consequences and is surely the most 
famous feature of the special theory of relativity.
 
The relativistic version of energy has two implications for our spacecraft. First, the 
spacecraft’s energy increases so quickly as it nears the speed of light that it can never reach 
that speed. Second, the spacecraft’s initial store of energy before launch is associated with 
its initial mass. That mass and energy are so closely related is something to which we’ll 
return in Chapter 15.
Check Your Understanding #5: Stellar Tugboats
A stellar tugboat is pulling forward on a spacecraft that is already traveling close to the speed of light. 
Although the tugboat is steadily increasing the spacecraft’s forward momentum, the spacecraft is 
speeding up less and less quickly. Why? 
Answer: Although the spacecraft’s forward momentum increases steadily, in accordance with the relativ-
istic relationship between momentum and velocity, the spacecraft’s velocity increases ever more slowly. 
Why: At ordinary speeds, a steady transfer of momentum to an object will yield a steady increase in 
its speed. Near the speed of light, however, the object’s increase in speed no longer keeps pace with 
its increase in momentum. 
Check Your Figures #2: The Real Speed Limit
A spacecraft passes your planetary base going half the speed of light. Using special equipment, you 
transfer exactly enough momentum to that spacecraft to double its forward momentum. How fast is 
it going now? 
Answer: It is going √4/7 times the speed of light.
Why: When the spacecraft is traveling at ½ the speed of light, Eq. 4.2.3 gives its forward momentum 
as √1/3 times its mass times the speed of light. Doubling that momentum and solving Eq. 4.2.3 for 
the velocity yields √4/7 times the speed of light.

116 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
Visiting the Stars: General Relativity
In its travels near stars and other massive celestial objects, our spacecraft is likely to 
encounter another surprise: the Newtonian view of gravity is also an approximation! Near 
extremely dense, massive objects, gravity is no longer accurately described by Newton’s 
law of universal gravitation. Instead, understanding gravity requires a new conceptual 
framework that Einstein fi rst presented in 1916, the general theory of relativity.
 
This new framework is based on the observation that you can’t distinguish between 
downward gravity and upward acceleration. As we found in Section 3.3, they feel exactly 
the same. For example, if you feel heavy as you stand inside a closed spacecraft, you can’t 
be sure whether you’re experiencing a weight due to downward gravity or a feeling of 
acceleration due to upward acceleration. In fact, the spacecraft’s scientifi c instruments 
can’t help you because they can’t distinguish the effects of gravity from those of-accelera-
tion either. No matter how hard you try, you can’t tell the difference.
 
At the heart of this problem is the concept of mass. Up to this point, we have seen mass 
play two apparently different roles that we can refer to as gravitational mass and inertial 
mass. When you’re experiencing a weight, your gravitational mass is acting together with 
gravity to make you feel heavy. When you’re experiencing a feeling of acceleration, your 
inertial mass is acting together with acceleration to make you feel heavy. However, in spite 
of their different roles, these two masses seem to be related. Without exception, an object 
that has a large inertial mass and is therefore diffi cult to shake back and forth also has a large 
gravitational mass and is therefore hard to support against gravity. In fact, the two masses 
seem to be the same. That observation led Einstein to propose the principle of equivalence, 
that these two masses, gravitational and inertial, are truly identical and therefore that no 
experiment you perform inside your spacecraft can distinguish between free fall and the 
absence of gravity. The general theory of relativity is based on this principle of equivalence.
 
As long as your spacecraft stays in regions of weak gravity, Newton’s law of universal 
gravitation will adequately describe its motion. At the extremes of gravity, however, the 
general theory of relativity is necessary. That theory describes a universe in which massive 
objects distort the structure of nearby space and time, and in which extreme masses pro-
duce extreme distortions. One of the most startling predictions of this theory is the exis-
tence of objects so radical in their gravitational warping of nearby space and time that they 
are black holes, spherical or nearly spherical surfaces from which not even light can 
escape. A number of black holes have been discovered, including an enormous one at the 
center of our galaxy. You might want to avoid them.
Check Your Figures #3: It Packs a Wallop
The speed of a 1-kg minispacecraft is √3/4 times the speed of light. What is its relativistic energy 
and what fraction of that energy is rest energy?
Answer: Its total energy is 1.8 × 1017 J, of which half is rest energy.
Why: For an object traveling at √3/4 times the speed of light, Eq. 4.2.4 gives a total energy of 2 
times its mass times the square of the speed of light. For a 1-kg object, that energy is 1.8 × 1017 J. 
Its rest energy is simply its mass times the square of the speed of light, or 9.0 × 1016 J. Both values 
of energy are astonishingly large.
Check Your Understanding #6: Rip-van-Twinkle
You awaken aboard your small spacecraft only to discover that you have been asleep for almost 20 
years and the crew has vanished. The windows are closed, and you have no idea where your space-
craft is located or what it is doing. You realize that you feel pulled toward the fl oor of the spacecraft. 
Are you experiencing weight or a feeling of acceleration? 
Answer: Trick question! You can’t possibly determine the answer!
Why: The central principle of general relativity is that no experiment you make inside your spacecraft 
can distinguish between the consequences of gravity and the consequences of acceleration. You’re 
simply going to have to look out the window to fi gure it out.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 117
Epilogue for Chapter 4
This chapter has discussed the physical concepts behind two types of machines. In Bicycles, we 
investigated the concept of dynamic stability, where an object that falls over when stationary 
becomes remarkably stable in motion. We also saw how the need for mechanical advantage 
between the pedals and the wheels led to the development of the modern multispeed bicycle.
 
In Rockets and Space Travel, we studied the ways in which reaction forces propel 
rockets forward. We found that a rocket’s ultimate speed is not limited by its exhaust veloc-
ity, allowing it to lift itself into orbit around Earth. We also learned that gravity weakens as 
the distance between two gravitating objects increases, making it possible for a spaceship 
to break free from Earth’s gravity and begin orbiting the sun. Finally, we took a brief look 
at the exotic physics a spacecraft would encounter if it approached the speed of light or 
passed through the extreme gravity near some celestial objects.
Explanation: High-Flying Balls
The top ball doesn’t bounce off the ground; it bounces off the bottom ball. The top ball 
actually completes its bounce as the bottom ball is heading upward. After colliding, the two 
balls push off one another in just the same way that a rocket pushes off its exhaust. The 
balls exchange momentum and energy as they push against one another, and the small top 
ball—which has less mass and accelerates much more easily than the bottom ball—ends up 
with a large upward momentum and more than its fair share of energy. It fl ies upward as 
though it were hit by a massive upward-moving bat. In fact, it has been hit by a massive 
upward-moving ball, and it rebounds at high speed.
 
If the small ball’s mass were really negligible compared to that of the large ball and the 
balls bounced without wasting any energy, then the small ball would rebound from the big ball 
traveling three times as fast as when it arrived. Its kinetic energy would be nine times as great 
as before, and it would rebound to nine times its original height. Of course, real balls aren’t 
perfect, so the tennis ball won’t bounce quite so high. Still, the effect is pretty impressive.
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Bicycles Work: While a stationary bicycle tips over easily, a moving bicycle is remark-
ably stable. It remains upright with the help of two stabilizing effects of motion: one due to 
gyroscopic precession and the other due to the shape and angle of the front fork. These 
effects work together to steer the bicycle in the direction that it’s leaning. Whenever it tips, 
it automatically drives under its center of gravity and returns to upright. Leaning is also an 
essential part of turns. By leaning his body and/or the bicycle properly during a turn, the 
bicyclist ensures that there is no overall torque on the bicycle and that it doesn’t tip over.
 
The rider powers the bicycle by pushing its pedals around in a circle. Since the rider can 
provide the most pedaling power when the pedals are turning at a moderate rate and he is 
pushing on them with moderate forces, a modern multispeed bicycle allows him to adjust the 
relative rotation rates of the pedals and the wheels. By choosing the right gear, the bicycle 
allows him to provide his peak power comfortably. 
How Rockets Work: A rocket obtains its thrust by ejecting gas from an engine in its tail. The 
rocket pushes on the gas, and the gas pushes back. This gas usually comes from burning 
chemical fuels contained entirely inside the rocket itself and is released from the rocket’s 
engine through a nozzle. A carefully designed nozzle permits the rocket to make effi cient use 
of the energy stored in the fuel by ensuring that gas leaves the rocket at the maximum pos-
sible speed. The rocket’s thrust is used to lift the rocket against the force of gravity and to 
accelerate it upward. Once in space, with its engine inactive, the rocket will orbit Earth or 
the sun, or it may travel off into interstellar space.

118 
CHAPTER 4 Mechanical Objects
1. Law of universal gravitation: Every object in the universe at-
tracts every other object in the universe with a force equal to the 
gravitational constant times the product of the two masses, di-
vided by the square of the distance separating the two objects, or
 
force = gravitational constant · mass1 · mass2
(distance between masses)2
. (4.2.2)
2. Kepler’s fi rst law: All planets move in elliptical orbits, with 
the sun at one focus of the ellipse.
3. Kepler’s second law: A line stretching from the sun to a 
planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
4. Kepler’s third law: The square of a planet’s orbital period 
is proportional to the cube of that planet’s mean distance from 
the sun.
5. Relativistic momentum: An object’s relativistic-momentum 
is equal to its mass times its velocity times the relativistic 
factor, or
relativistic momentum =
mass · velocity
√1 −speed2/light speed2. (4.2.3)
6. Relativistic energy: An object’s relativistic energy is equal to 
its mass times the square of the speed of light times the relativ-
istic factor, or
relativistic energy =
mass · light speed2
√1 −velocity2/light speed2. 
(4.2.4)

Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
5
Fluids
 S
o far all the everyday objects we’ve examined have been solids. However, since gases and 
liquids are also important parts of the world around us—as the air we breathe, the water we 
swim in, and even the blood we pump through our veins—we now turn to objects that, unlike 
solids, don’t have well-defi ned shapes. These objects are called fl uids, and the study of fl uid behav-
ior and motion is a broad fi eld, extending across the sciences and engineering. Fluid dynamics, 
often called hydrodynamics, is as important to an oil-well engineer as to an animal physiologist or 
a stellar astrophysicist. The tools used to analyze fl uids are somewhat more complicated than for 
solids because fl uids themselves are more complicated—it’s hard to exert a force directly on them, 
and even if we could, they usually don’t move as a single rigid object. In this chapter, we’ll look at 
some of the concepts and tools needed to understand their complex behaviors.
A Cartesian Diver
One of these concepts is buoyancy: an object immersed in 
a fl uid experiences an upward force from that fl uid. This 
buoyant force is what lifts a helium balloon into the sky 
and suspends a boat on the surface of water. How the object 
responds to buoyancy depends on the relative densities of 
the object and the fl uid surrounding it, where density is the 
ratio of mass to volume. As we’ll see in this chapter, an 
object that’s more dense than the surrounding fl uid sinks, 
while one that’s less dense than that fl uid fl oats.
 
To see the importance of density in determining 
whether an object sinks or fl oats, you can construct a sim-
ple toy called a Cartesian diver. This once-popular parlor 
gadget consists of a small air-fi lled vial fl oating in a 
sealed container of water. Normally, the air bubble inside 
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
 119

120 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
Chapter Itinerary
We’ll return to the diver at the end of the chapter. First, we 
examine two things from the world around us: (1) balloons and 
(2) water distribution. In Balloons, we explore how the concepts 
of pressure and buoyancy help explain how Earth’s atmosphere 
keeps hot-air and helium balloons from falling to the ground. In 
Water Distribution, we see both how pressure propels water 
through plumbing and the ways in which water can contain 
energy. For a more complete preview of this chapter, jump 
ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and 
 Equations at the end of the chapter.
 
The issues we’ll be looking at crop up frequently in our 
everyday experiences. Pressure plays an important role in aero-
sol cans, steam engines, fi recrackers, and even the weather; 
buoyancy supports ships on water and keeps oil above vinegar 
in a bottle of salad dressing. Just as important, these concepts 
lay the groundwork for Chapter 6, where we’ll examine objects 
in which motion affects the behavior of fl uids.
the vial keeps it fl oating at the surface of the water, but 
whenever you squeeze the container, the vial sinks.
 
To make a Cartesian diver, you’ll need only a plastic 
soda bottle and a small vial that’s open at one end. The 
vial can be made of almost anything—plastic, metal, or 
glass—as long as it’s dense enough to sink in water. Fill 
the plastic soda bottle with water and fl oat the vial in it 
upside down; air trapped inside the vial should keep the 
vial afl oat. Now slowly reduce the size of the air bubble 
inside the vial until the vial barely fl oats. You can make 
this adjustment by tipping the vial to let some of its air 
escape or by removing it from the bottle and pouring 
water into it. Once you have the vial fl oating only a few 
millimeters out of the water at the top of the soda bottle, 
cap the bottle and prepare to test your diver.
 
Before you squeeze the soda bottle, think about how 
squeezing it will affect the air bubble. Now squeeze the 
bottle gently and watch the air bubble. How does the bub-
ble’s size depend on how hard you squeeze the bottle? 
Why should the two be related? Squeeze the bottle hard 
enough that the vial sinks. Why is there a relationship 
between the size of the air bubble and the diver’s height in 
the water?
 
As you release the pressure on the bottle, the diver 
will fl oat back up to the surface. Why does the sunken 
diver suddenly become buoyant again? By carefully 
squeezing the bottle, you can even make the diver hover 
in the middle of the bottle. Try making the diver hover 
while your eyes are closed. Why is hovering so diffi cult to 
sustain? Why must you watch the diver to make it hover?
SECTION 5.1 
Because gravity gives every object near Earth’s surface a weight 
proportional to its mass, objects fall when you drop them. Why 
then does a helium-fi lled balloon—which, after all, is just 
another object with a mass and a weight—sail upward into the 
sky when you let go of it? Does the balloon have a negative 
mass and a negative weight, or are we forgetting something?
 
We’re forgetting air—specifi cally, the layer of air that sits 
atop Earth’s surface and is held in place by gravity. Since this 
air is diffi cult to see and moves out of our way so easily, we 
often forget that it’s there. But air sometimes makes itself 
noticeable. When you ride a bicycle, you feel its forces; when 
you blow up a beach ball, you see that it takes up space. And 
when you release a helium balloon, air lifts the balloon upward.
Questions to Think About: Since most objects fall to the 
ground through the atmosphere, why doesn’t the atmosphere 
itself fall downward? Why is the air “thinner” in the mountains 
than at sea level? If you suck all the air out of a plastic bag, 
what squeezes the bag into a thin sheet? Why does blowing air 
into the bag make it infl ate? What happens to the bag’s total 
mass when you fi ll it with air? with hot air? with helium? If you 
took a sturdy helium balloon to the moon, where there is no 
air, and then released it, which way would it move?
Balloons
Wind guard
Basket support cable
Basket
Burner
Panel
Webbing

Balloons 121
Air and Air Pressure
Hot-air and helium balloons don’t really defy gravity. In fact, they’re not even close to 
weightless. But even though these balloons may weigh hundreds of pounds, something 
supports their weight and holds them aloft—the surrounding air. To understand balloons, 
we must start by understanding air.
 
Like the objects we’ve already studied, air has weight and mass. If you don’t believe 
me, compare two identical scuba tanks, one freshly fi lled with air and the other empty. If 
you weigh each tank carefully, you’ll fi nd that the full tank is heavier than the empty tank—
an indication that air has weight. If you shake each tank, you’ll fi nd that the full tank is 
harder to accelerate than the empty tank—an indication that air has mass. So air really is 
like any other object … or almost.
 
What makes air different from our previous objects is that air has no fi xed shape or 
size. You can mold 1 kg of air into any form you like, and it can occupy a wide range of 
volumes. Air is compressible, that is, you can squeeze a certain mass of it into almost any 
space. For example, 1 kg of air could fi ll a single scuba tank or a whole basketball arena.
 
This fl exibility of size and shape originates in the microscopic nature of air. Air is a 
gas, a substance consisting of tiny, individual particles that travel around independently. 
These individual particles are atoms and molecules. An atom is the smallest portion of an 
element that retains all the chemical characteristics of that element; a molecule, an assem-
bly of two or more atoms, is the smallest portion of a chemical compound that retains all 
the characteristics of that compound. A molecule’s atoms are held together by chemical 
bonds, linkages formed by electromagnetic forces between the atoms.
 
Air particles are extremely small, less than 1 millionth of a millimeter in diameter. 
Most are nitrogen and oxygen molecules, but others include carbon dioxide, water, meth-
ane, and hydrogen molecules, and also argon, neon, helium, krypton, and xenon atoms. 
Those particular atoms, which don’t make strong chemical bonds and rarely form mole-
cules, are called inert gases because of their chemical inactivity.
 
Like tiny marbles, these air particles have sizes, masses, and weights. But, while mar-
bles quickly settle to the ground when you spill them from a bag, air particles don’t seem 
to fall at all. Why don’t they pile up on Earth’s surface?
 
The answer has to do with air’s thermal energy, the portion of air’s internal energy 
that’s associated with temperature. Air’s individual particles have such minuscule masses 
that, even at room temperature, they exhibit frenetic thermal motion (Fig. 5.1.1a); thermal 
energy keeps them moving, spinning, and ricocheting off one another at bullet-like speeds 
of roughly 500 m/s (1100 mph). Their frequent collisions prevent them from making much 
progress in any particular direction and, between collisions, they travel in nearly straight-
line paths because gravity doesn’t have time to make them fall very far. This vigorous 
thermal motion spreads the air particles apart, so they don’t accumulate on the ground. Real 
marbles, however, are too massive to exhibit noticeable thermal motion and fall to the 
ground in heaps.
 
Let’s ignore gravity for the moment and consider what happens in a truck tire contain-
ing 1 kg of room-temperature air. The air particles whiz around inside the tire, and each 
Experiments to Do: Pull on the string of a helium balloon to 
get a feel for how it behaves. If it pulls upward on your fi ngers, 
does that mean its weight (and mass) is negative? How would 
an object with a negative mass respond to a force? Shake the 
balloon and convince yourself that the balloon’s mass is posi-
tive. Do you think there are any objects with negative masses?
 
Since the balloon’s mass and weight are both positive, 
gravity must be pulling the balloon downward. But how can the 
stationary balloon pull upward on your fi nger? What other 
forces might be pushing the balloon upward? You can enhance 
these upward forces by partially submerging the balloon in a 
container of water. Where else do similar upward forces appear 
in everyday life?
 
Take the helium balloon for a ride in a car. Which way 
does the balloon move when you start suddenly? when you stop 
suddenly? Again, it seems as though the balloon’s mass is neg-
ative. What is pushing on the balloon to make it move in this 
counterintuitive way?
Fig. 5.1.1 (a) As air 
particles bounce off 
surfaces in this box, they 
exert pressure on those 
surfaces. (b) Packing the 
air particles more densely 
increases the number 
of particles that hit the 
surfaces each second and 
thus increases the air’s 
pressure. (c) Increasing 
the air’s temperature 
increases the speed of the 
air particles (show by the 
arrows) so that they hit the 
box’s surfaces harder and 
more frequently, and thus 
increases the air’s pressure.
(a)
(b)
(c)

122 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
time a particle bounces off a wall of the tire, it exerts a force on that wall. Although the 
individual forces are tiny, the number of particles is not, and together they produce a large 
average force. The size of this total force depends on the wall’s surface area; the larger its 
surface area, the more average force it experiences. To characterize the air, however, we 
don’t really need to know the wall’s surface area; instead, we can refer to the average force 
the air exerts on each unit of surface area, a quantity called pressure:
pressure =
force
surface area.
 
Pressure is measured in units of force per area. Since the SI unit of surface area is the 
meter2 (abbreviated m2 and often referred to as the square meter), the SI unit of pressure is 
the newton per meter2. This unit is also called the pascal (abbreviated Pa), after French 
mathematician and physicist Blaise Pascal. One pascal is a small pressure; the air around 
you has a pressure of about 100,000 Pa (2100 lbf/ft2 or 15 lbf/inch2), so it exerts a force of 
about 100,000 N on a 1-m2 surface. Since 100,000 N (22,500 lbf) is about the weight of a 
city bus, air pressure can exert enormous forces on large surfaces.
 
Besides pushing on the walls of the tire, air also pushes on any object immersed in it. 
Its particles bounce off the object’s surfaces, pushing them inward. As long as the object 
can withstand these compressive forces, the air won’t greatly affect it since the uniform air 
pressure ensures that the forces on all sides of the object cancel one another perfectly. A 
sheet of paper, for example, will experience zero net force because the forces exerted on its 
two sides will sum to zero.
 
Air particles also bounce off one another, so that air pressure exerts forces on air, too. 
A cube of air inserted into the tire experiences all of the inward forces that a cube of metal 
would experience. The air around the cube pushes inward on it, and the cube pushes out-
ward on the air around it. Since the net force on the cube of air is zero, the cube doesn’t 
accelerate.
Check Your Understanding #1: Getting a Grip on Suction
After you push a suction cup against a smooth wall, the elastic cup bends back and a small, empty 
space is created between the cup and the wall. What keeps the suction cup against the wall? 
Answer: Air pressure keeps it against the wall. 
Why: Because the space between the suction cup and the wall is empty, the pressure there is zero. 
Pressure of the surrounding air exerts large inward forces on the outsides of both the cup and the 
wall, squeezing them together. As long as there is no air between them to push outward, the cup and 
wall remain tightly attached. Once air leaks into the suction cup, it’s easily detached from the wall. 
Pressure, Density, and Temperature
Since air pressure is produced by bouncing air particles, it depends on how often, and how 
hard, those particles hit a particular region of surface. The more frequent or harder the 
impacts, the greater is the air pressure.
 
To increase the rate at which air particles hit a surface, we can pack them more tightly. 
Suppose we use an air pump to add another 1 kg of room-temperature air to the tire. Since that 
truck tire is sturdy and stiff, its volume doesn’t change signifi cantly as the number of air mol-
ecules inside it doubles. However, doubling the number of air particles in the same volume 
doubles the rate at which they hit each surface and therefore doubles the pressure (Fig. 5.1.1b). 
Air’s pressure is thus proportional to its density, that is, its mass per unit of volume:
density =
mass
volume.

Balloons 123
Since the SI unit of volume is the meter3 (abbreviated m3 and often referred to as the cubic 
meter), the SI unit of density is the kilogram per meter3 (abbreviated kg/m3). The air 
around you has a density of about 1.25 kg/m3 (0.078 lbm/ft3). Water, in contrast, has a 
much greater density of about 1000 kg/m3 (62.4 lbm/ft3).
 
We can also increase the rate at which air particles hit a surface by speeding them up 
(Fig. 5.1.1c). The hotter the air, the more thermal energy it contains and the faster its parti-
cles move. Thermal energy is a combination of internal kinetic energy in the particles’ 
random thermal motion and internal potential energy stored as part of that random ther-
mal motion. Since air particles are essentially independent, except during collisions, nearly 
all of air’s thermal energy is internal kinetic energy.
 
If we double the internal kinetic energy of the calm air in the tire, we double the aver-
age kinetic energy of each particle. Because a particle’s kinetic energy is proportional to 
the square of its speed, doubling its kinetic energy increases its speed by a factor of √2. 
As a result, each particle hits the surface √2 times as often and exerts √2 times as much 
average force when it hits. With each particle exerting √2 ?√2, or two times as much 
average force, the pressure doubles. Calm air’s pressure is thus proportional to the average 
kinetic energy of its particles. Even when air is moving as wind and has noninternal kinetic 
energy in its overall motion, its pressure is proportional to the average internal kinetic 
energy of its particles.
 
Temperature measures this average internal kinetic energy per particle; the hotter the 
air, the larger is the average internal kinetic energy per particle and the greater the air’s 
pressure. That’s why the tire’s air pressure increases on hot days and when it heats up dur-
ing highway driving.
 
The most convenient scales for relating air’s temperature to air’s pressure aren’t 
the common Celsius (°C) and Fahrenheit (°F) scales; instead, they are special abso-
lute temperature scales, in which the zero of the temperature scale is absolute zero, 
the temperature at which an object contains zero thermal energy. At absolute zero 
(−273.15 °C or −459.67 °F), air contains no internal kinetic energy at all and has no 
pressure. When you use an absolute temperature scale, air’s pressure is proportional to 
its temperature.
 
The SI scale of absolute temperature is the Kelvin scale (K). The Kelvin scale is 
identical to the Celsius scale, except that it’s shifted so that 0 K is equal to −273.15 °C. 
In addition to associating the zero of temperature with the zero of internal kinetic energy, 
the Kelvin scale avoids the need for negative temperatures. Room temperature is about 
293 K.
 
Since air pressure is proportional to both the air’s density and its absolute temperature, 
we can express the relationship among these quantities in the following way:
 
pressure ∝density · absolute temperature. 
(5.1.1)
This relationship is useful because it allows us to predict what will happen if we change 
the temperature or density of a specifi c gas, such as air. The relationship does have its 
limitations; in particular, it doesn’t work if we compare the pressures of two different 
gases, such as air and helium, which differ in their chemical compositions. To make such 
a comparison, we’ll need to improve on Eq. 5.1.1. We’ll do that later when we examine 
helium balloons.
 
Even in describing a specifi c gas, Eq. 5.1.1 has other shortcomings. The main problem 
is that real gas particles aren’t completely independent of one another. If the temperature 
drops too low, the particles begin to stick together to form a liquid and Eq. 5.1.1 becomes 
invalid. Despite its limitations, however, this simple relationship between pressure, density, 
and temperature will prove useful in understanding how hot-air balloons fl oat. It will help 
us understand the basic structure of Earth’s atmosphere, the origins of the upward force that 
keeps a hot-air balloon aloft, and the reason why hot air rises.
Fig. 5.1.1 (repeated)
(a) As air particles bounce 
off surfaces in this box, 
they exert pressure on 
those surfaces. (b) Packing 
the air particles more 
densely increases the 
number of particles that hit 
the surfaces each second 
and thus increases the air’s 
pressure. (c) Increasing 
the air’s temperature 
increases the speed of the 
air particles (show by the 
arrows) so that they hit the 
box’s surfaces harder and 
more frequently, and thus 
increases the air’s pressure.
(a)
(b)
(c)

124 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
Earth’s Atmosphere
Most of the mass of Earth’s atmosphere is contained in a layer less than 6 km (4 miles) 
thick. Since Earth is 12,700 km (7,900 miles) in diameter, this layer is relatively thin—so 
thin that, if Earth were the size of a basketball, it would be no thicker than a sheet of paper.
 
The atmosphere stays on Earth’s surface because of gravity. Every air particle, as 
we’ve seen, has a weight. Just as a marble thrown upward eventually falls back to the 
ground, so the particles of air keep returning toward Earth’s surface. Although the particles 
are moving too fast for gravity to affect their motions signifi cantly over the short term, 
gravity works slowly to keep them relatively near Earth’s surface. An air particle, like a 
rapidly moving marble, may appear to travel in a straight line at fi rst, but it will arc over and 
begin to fall downward eventually. Only the lightest and fastest moving particles in the 
atmosphere—hydrogen molecules and helium atoms—occasionally manage to escape 
from Earth’s gravity and drift off into interplanetary space.
 
While gravity pulls the atmosphere downward, air pressure pushes the atmosphere 
upward (Fig. 5.1.2a). As the air particles try to fall to Earth’s surface, their density increases 
and so does their pressure. It’s this air pressure that supports the atmosphere and prevents 
it from collapsing into a thin pile on the ground.
 
To understand how gravity and air pressure structure the atmosphere, picture a 1-m2 
column of the atmosphere as though it were a tall stack of 1-kg air blocks (Fig. 5.1.2b). 
These blocks support one another with air pressure to form a stack of about 10,000 blocks. 
The bottom block must support the weight of all the blocks above it and is tightly com-
pressed, with a height of about 0.8 m, a density of about 1.25 kg/m3, and a pressure of about 
100,000 Pa. A block farther up in the stack has less weight to support and is less tightly 
compressed. The higher in the stack you look, the lower the density of the air and the less 
the air pressure.
 
The atmosphere has essentially the same structure as this stack of blocks. The air near 
the ground supports the weight of several kilometers of air above it, giving it a density 
of about 1.25 kg/m3 and a pressure of about 100,000 Pa. At higher altitudes, however, the 
air’s density and pressure are reduced, since there is less atmosphere overhead and the 
air doesn’t have to support as much weight. High-altitude air is thus “thinner” than low-
altitude air.
Quantity 
SI Unit 
English Unit 
SI → English 
English → SI
Area 
meter2 (m2) 
foot2 (ft2) 
1 m2 = 10.764 ft2 
1 ft2 = 0.092903 m2
Volume 
meter3 (m3) 
foot3 (ft3) 
1 m3 = 35.315 ft3 
1 ft3 = 0.028317 m3
Pressure 
pascal (Pa) 
pound-force per foot2 (lbf/ft2) 
1 Pa = 0.020885 lbf/ft2 
1 lbf/ft2 = 47.880 Pa
Density 
kilogram per meter3  
pound-mass per foot3 
1 kg/m3 = 0.062428 
1 lbm/ft3 = 16.018 
 
(kg/m3) 
(lbm/ft3)† 
lbm/ft3 
kg/m3
Check Your Understanding #2: Snacks That Go Pop in the Night
If you remove a partially fi lled container of food from the refrigerator and allow it to warm to room 
temperature, the lid will often bow outward and may even pop off. What has happened? 
Answer: The pressure of the air trapped in the container increases as its temperature increases, 
causing the lid to bulge outward.
Why: Whenever a trapped quantity of gas changes temperature, it also changes volume or pres-
sure or both. In this case, warming the air trapped in the container causes its pressure to increase. 
The unbalanced pressures inside and outside the container cause the lid to bow outward or even 
to pop off.

Balloons 125
 
Since the atmosphere’s density and pressure increase gradually with distance in the 
downward direction, the atmosphere has a downward density gradient and a downward 
pressure gradient. As we’ll see shortly, that pressure gradient is what allows a balloon to 
fl oat. Whatever the altitude, however, the pressure of the surrounding air is always referred 
to as atmospheric pressure. The atmosphere also has a downward temperature gradient 
that makes ballooning chilly at high altitudes; you might want to bring coffee or hot choc-
olate. We’ll return to that temperature gradient in Section 7.3.
Check Your Understanding #3: Mountain Travel Is a Pain in the Ears
As you drive up and down in the mountains, you may feel a popping in your ears as air moves to 
equalize the pressures inside and outside your eardrum. What causes these pressure changes?
Answer: As you change altitude, the atmospheric pressure changes.
Why: The air inside your ears is trapped, so its temperature, density, and pressure are normally 
constant. As your altitude changes, the pressure outside your ear changes and your eardrum expe-
riences a net force. It bows inward or outward, muting the sounds you hear and causing some dis-
comfort. The pressure imbalance is relieved during swallowing, when air can fl ow into or out of your 
middle ear. 
The Lifting Force on a Balloon: Buoyancy
So far we’ve examined air, air pressure, and the atmosphere. While it may seem that we’ve 
avoided dealing with balloons, these topics really are involved in keeping hot-air and 
helium balloons aloft. As we’ve seen, the air in Earth’s atmosphere is a fl uid, a shapeless 
substance with mass and weight. This air has a pressure and exerts forces on the surfaces it 
touches; that pressure is greatest near the ground and decreases with increasing altitude. 
Air pressure and its variation with altitude allow air to lift hot-air and helium balloons 
through an effect known as buoyancy.
 
Buoyancy was fi rst described more than 2000 years ago by the Greek mathematician 
Archimedes (287–212 bc). Archimedes realized that an object partially or wholly immersed 
in a fl uid is acted on by an upward buoyant force equal to the weight of the fl uid it 
Fig. 5.1.2 (a) A model of Earth’s atmosphere, showing that a competition between gravity and thermal energy gives rise to the 
structure of Earth’s atmosphere, notably its increasing pressure, density, and temperature with decreasing altitude. (b) The air in a 
1-m2 column of atmosphere has a mass of about 10,000 kg. The bottom 1000 kg is the most tightly compressed because it supports 
the most weight above it. At higher altitudes, the air is less tightly compressed because it has less weight above it.
(a)
60
50
40
30
10
0
20
Altitude (km)
1 m
1000 kg
1000 kg
1000 kg
Density gradient
Pressure gradient
(b)

126 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
displaces. Archimedes’ principle is actually very general and applies to objects fl oating or 
submerged in any fl uid, including air, water, or oil. The buoyant force originates in the 
forces that a fl uid exerts on the surfaces of an object. We’ve seen that such forces can be 
quite large but tend to cancel one another. How then can pressure create a nonzero total 
force on an object, and why should that force be in the upward direction?
ARCHIMEDES’ PRINCIPLE
An object partially or wholly immersed in a fl uid is acted on by an upward buoyant 
force equal to the weight of the fl uid it displaces.
 
Without gravity, the forces would cancel each other perfectly because the pressure of 
a stationary fl uid would be uniform throughout. But gravity causes a stationary fl uid’s pres-
sure to increase with distance in the downward direction; the fl uid has a downward pressure 
gradient. When nothing is moving, the air pressure beneath an object is always greater than 
the air pressure above it. Thus air pushes upward on the object’s bottom more strongly than 
it pushes downward on the object’s top, and the object consequently experiences an upward 
overall force from the air—a buoyant force.
 
How large is the buoyant force on this object? It’s equal in magnitude to the weight of 
the fl uid that the object displaces. To understand this remarkable result, imagine replacing 
the object with a similarly shaped portion of the fl uid itself (Fig. 5.1.3a). Since the buoyant 
force is exerted by the surrounding fl uid, not the object, it doesn’t depend on the object’s 
composition. A balloon fi lled with helium will experience the same buoyant force as a 
similar balloon fi lled with water or lead or even air. So replacing the object with a similarly 
shaped portion of fl uid will leave the buoyant force on it unchanged.
 
However, a portion of fl uid suspended in more of the same fl uid doesn’t accelerate 
anywhere; it just sits there, so the net force on it is clearly zero. It has a downward weight, 
but that weight must be canceled by some upward force that can come only from the sur-
rounding fl uid. This upward force is the buoyant force, and it’s always equal in magnitude 
to the weight of the object-shaped portion of fl uid displaced by the object.
 
This buoyant principle explains why some objects fl oat while others sink. An object 
placed in a fl uid experiences two forces: its downward weight and an upward buoyant 
force. If its weight is more than the buoyant force, it will accelerate downward (Fig. 5.1.3b); 
if its weight is less than the buoyant force, it will accelerate upward (Fig. 5.1.3c). If the 
two forces are equal, it won’t accelerate at all and will maintain a constant velocity. If the 
balloon in this latter case starts motionless, it will remain motionless and will hover at a 
constant velocity of zero.
Buoyant
force
Weight
Buoyant
force
Weight
Buoyant
force
Weight
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5.1.3 (a) A portion 
of air immersed in that 
same air experiences an 
upward buoyant force equal 
to its weight and doesn’t 
accelerate. (b) An object 
that is heavier than the air 
it displaces sinks, while 
(c) another object that 
is lighter than the air it 
displaces fl oats.

Balloons 127
 
Whether an object will fl oat in a fl uid can also be viewed in terms of density. An object 
that has an average density greater than that of the surrounding fl uid sinks, while one that 
has a lesser average density fl oats. A water-fi lled balloon, for example, will sink in air 
because water and rubber are denser than air. If you double the volume of the balloon, you 
double both its weight and the buoyant force on it, so it still sinks. The total volume of an 
object is less important than how its density compares to that of the surrounding fl uid.
Check Your Understanding #4: Only Eyes above the Surface
Crocodiles sometimes swallow rocks, partly to aid their digestion but also to lower their heights in the 
water. To fl oat with only its eyes above the water’s surface, approximately what average density does 
a crocodile need? 
Answer: It needs an average density just slightly less than the density of water.
Why: The crocodile should weigh a little less than the water it displaces when fully immersed. That 
way, it will experience a net upward force and will rise to the water’s surface. Once its eyes are above 
the surface and not displacing water, the net force on the crocodile will drop to zero and it will hover. 
Since the crocodile’s mass is slightly less than an equal volum of water, its average density is slightly 
less than that of water. 
Check Your Figures #1: Why People Don’t Float in Air
If a person displaces 0.08 m3 (2.8 ft3) of air, what is the buoyant force he experiences? 
Answer: It is about 1 N (0.22 lbf).
Why: Air exerts a buoyant force on a person equal to the weight of the air he displaces. The density 
of air near sea level is about 1.25 kg/m3, so 0.08 m3 of air has a mass of about 0.1 kg (1.25 kg/m3 
times 0.08 m3) and a weight of about 1 N. So the upward buoyant force on him is about 1 N. This 
buoyant force due to the air is real and reduces the weight you read when you stand on a scale by 
about 0.125%.
Hot-Air Balloons
Since air is very light, with a density of only 1.25 kg/m3 (0.078 lbm/ft3), few objects fl oat 
in it. One of these rare objects is a balloon with a vacuum inside it. Assuming that the bal-
loon has a very thin outer shell or envelope, it will weigh almost nothing and have an aver-
age density near zero. Because its negligible weight is less than the upward buoyant force 
it experiences, the empty balloon will fl oat upward nicely.
 
Unfortunately, this empty balloon won’t last long. Because it’s surrounded by atmospheric-
pressure air, each square meter of its envelope will experience an inward force of 100,000 N. 
With nothing inside the balloon to support its envelope against this crushing force, it will 
smash fl at. A thick, rigid envelope might be able to withstand the pressure of the surrounding 
air, but then the balloon’s average density would be large and it would sink. So an empty 
balloon won’t work.
 
What will work is a balloon fi lled with something that exerts an outward pressure on 
the envelope equal to the inward pressure of the surrounding air. Then each portion of the 
envelope will experience zero net force and the balloon will not be crushed. We could fi ll 
the balloon with outside air, but that would make its average density too high. Instead, we 
need a gas that has the same pressure as the surrounding air but a lower density.
 
One gas that has a lower density at atmospheric pressure is hot air. Filling our balloon 
with hot air takes fewer particles than fi lling it with cold air, since each hot-air particle is 
moving faster and contributes more to the overall pressure than does a cold-air particle. A 
hot-air balloon contains fewer particles, has less mass, and weighs less than it would if it 
contained cold air (Fig. 5.1.4). Now we have a practical balloon with an average density 
less than that of the surrounding air. The buoyant force it experiences is larger than its 
weight, and up it goes.

128 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
 
Because the air pressure inside a hot-air balloon is the same as the air pressure outside 
the balloon, the air has no tendency to move in or out (an issue we will cover in the next 
section), and the balloon doesn’t need to be sealed (Fig. 5.1.5). A large propane burner, 
located beneath the balloon’s open end, heats the air that fi lls the envelope. The heated air 
expands to fi ll more volume at the same pressure and some of it fl ows out the balloon’s 
open bottom.
 
The hotter the air in the envelope, the lower its density and the less the balloon 
weighs. The balloon’s pilot controls the fl ame so that the balloon’s weight is very nearly 
equal to the buoyant force on the balloon. If the pilot raises the air’s temperature, parti-
cles leave the envelope, the balloon’s weight decreases, and the balloon rises. If the pilot 
allows the air to cool, particles enter the envelope, the balloon’s weight increases, and the 
balloon descends.
 
Even if the pilot heats the air until it is very hot, the balloon won’t rise upward forever. 
As the balloon ascends, the air becomes thinner and the pressure decreases both inside and 
outside the envelope. Although the balloon’s weight decreases as the air thins out, the buoy-
ant force on it decreases even more rapidly and it becomes less effective at lifting its cargo. 
When the air becomes too thin to lift the balloon any higher, the balloon reaches a fl ight 
ceiling above which it can’t rise. For each hot-air temperature, then, there is a cruising 
altitude at which the balloon will hover. When the balloon reaches that altitude, it’s in a 
stable equilibrium. If the balloon shifts downward for some reason, the net force on it will 
be upward; if it shifts upward, the net force on it will be downward.
 
Because a balloon’s fabric envelope ages quickly at high temperatures, the balloon’s 
air mustn’t be heated above about 120 °C (248 °F). Lower air temperatures prolong the life 
of the envelope, and a pilot usually tries to reduce the air temperature required by reducing 
the weight of the balloon’s cargo. If you want to bring yet another friend on board, you 
might have to leave the champagne behind.
Hot
air
Cold
air
Fig. 5.1.4 A cube of 
hot air contains fewer air 
particles than an equivalent 
cube of cold air at the 
same pressure. Since 
it weighs less than the 
cold air it displaces, the 
hot air inside the balloon 
experiences an upward 
buoyant force that is 
greater than its downward 
weight.
Fig. 5.1.5 The bottom of 
a hot-air balloon is open so 
that heated air can fl ow in 
and cold air can fl ow out. 
The heated air displaces 
more than its weight in 
cold air and makes the 
balloon lighter.
© Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Check Your Understanding #5: Ballooning Weather
Can a hot-air balloon lift more on a hot day or a cold day? 
Answer: It can lift more on a cold day. 
Why: On a cold day, the outside air is relatively dense and the buoyant force on a balloon is larger 
than it would be on a hot day. The hot air in the balloon will cool off more quickly on a cold day, but 
the balloon will be able to carry a heavier load. Airplanes also fl y better on cold days.

Balloons 129
Helium Balloons
Although the particles in hot and cold air are similar, there are fewer of them in each cubic 
meter of hot air than in each cubic meter of cold air. We call the number of particles per unit 
of volume the particle density,
particle density = particles
volume ,
and hot air has a smaller particle density than cold air (Fig. 5.1.4). Because they contain 
similar particles, hot air also has a smaller density than cold air and is lifted upward by the 
buoyant force.
 
There’s another way to make one gas fl oat in another: use a gas consisting of very light 
particles. Helium atoms, for example, are much lighter than air particles. When they have 
equal pressures and temperatures, helium gas and air also have equal particle densities. 
Since each helium atom weighs 14% as much as the average air particle, 1 m3 of helium 
weighs only 14% as much as 1 m3 of air. Thus a helium-fi lled balloon has only a fraction 
of the weight of the air it displaces, and the buoyant force carries it upward easily.
 
Why should air and helium have the same particle densities whenever their pressures 
and temperatures are equal? Because a gas particle’s contribution to the pressure doesn’t 
depend on its mass (or weight). At a particular temperature, each particle in a gas has the 
same average internal kinetic energy in its translational motion, regardless of its mass. 
Although a helium atom is much less massive than a typical air particle, the average helium 
atom moves much faster and bounces more often. As a result, lighter but faster-moving 
helium atoms are just as effective at creating pressure as heavier but slower-moving air 
particles.
 
Thus, if you allow the helium atoms inside a balloon to spread out until the pressures 
and temperatures inside and outside the balloon are equal, the particle densities inside and 
outside the balloon will also be equal (Fig. 5.1.6). Since the helium atoms inside the 
balloon are lighter than the air particles outside it, the balloon weighs less than the air it 
displaces, and it will be lifted upward by the buoyant force.
Helium
Air
Fig. 5.1.6 A cube of helium contains the same number of particles as a cube of air at the same 
pressure and temperature. Since each helium atom weighs much less than the average air particle, 
the helium inside the balloon experiences an upward buoyant force that is greater than its downward 
weight.

130 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
 
The pressure of a gas is proportional to the product of its particle density and its 
absolute temperature, as the following formula indicates:
 
pressure ∝particle density · absolute temperature. 
(5.1.2)
This proportionality holds regardless of the gas’s chemical composition. Our previous 
proportionality, Eq. 5.1.1, worked only as long as the gas’s composition didn’t change, so 
density and particle density remained proportional to one another. Now, however, we have 
a relationship with a wider applicability.
 
Equation 5.1.2, with an associated constant of proportionality, is called the ideal gas 
law. This law relates pressure, particle density, and absolute temperature for a gas in which 
the particles are perfectly independent. It’s also fairly accurate for real gases in which the 
particles do interact somewhat. The constant of proportionality is the Boltzmann constant, 
with a measured value of 1.381 × 10−23 Pa · m3/(particle · K). Using the Boltzmann constant, 
the ideal gas law can be written as a word equation:
 
pressure = Boltzmann constant · particle density · absolute temperature, (5.1.3)
in symbols:
p = k · ρparticle · T,
and in everyday language:
Don’t incinerate a spray can. A hot dense gas tends to burst its container.
THE IDEAL GAS LAW
The pressure of a gas is equal to the Boltzmann constant times the particle density 
times the absolute temperature.
 
Helium isn’t the only “lighter-than-air” gas. Hydrogen gas, which is half as dense as 
helium, is also used to make balloons fl oat. However, don’t expect hydrogen to lift twice as 
much weight as helium. A balloon’s lifting capacity is the difference between the upward 
buoyant force it experiences and its downward weight. Although the gas in a hydrogen bal-
loon weighs half that in a similar helium balloon, the balloons experience the same buoyant 
force. Thus the hydrogen balloon’s lifting capacity is only slightly more than that of the 
helium balloon. Hydrogen’s main advantage is that it’s cheap and plentiful, while helium is 
scarce (see 1 ). Hydrogen is also dangerously fl ammable, so it’s avoided in situations where 
safety is important. However, even helium-fi lled airships can have problems (see 2 ).
1  Helium gas is obtained 
as a by-product of natural 
gas production from 
underground reservoirs in 
the United States, where it 
formed through the 
gradual radioactive decay 
of uranium and other 
unstable elements. While 
some of this gas is saved 
for industrial and 
commercial use, much is 
simply released into the 
atmosphere. The only 
other source of helium is 
the atmosphere, where 
helium is present at a level 
of 5 parts per million. 
Once the underground 
stores are consumed, 
helium will become a 
relatively rare and 
expensive gas.
2  Even helium-fi lled 
airships were easily 
destroyed by bad weather. 
The Shenandoah, one of 
two U.S. airships based on 
German designs, was 
destroyed by air turbu-
lence on September 3, 
1925, near Ava, Ohio. 
Crowds from a local fair 
immediately poured over 
the wreckage, collecting 
souvenirs.
Check Your Understanding #6: What Not to Put in a Balloon
A carbon dioxide molecule is heavier than an average air particle. If you pour carbon dioxide gas from 
a cup, which way does it fl ow in air, up or down? 
Answer: It fl ows down. 
Why: Carbon dioxide, found in carbonated beverages, dry ice, and fi re extinguishers, is heavier than 
air because its molecules are heavier than air particles. The carbon dioxide you pour from the cup 
has the same pressure and temperature as the air around it and thus the same particle density. 
However, each carbon dioxide molecule weighs more, so the carbon dioxide is the denser gas (it has 
a higher mass density) and fl ows down in air. This tendency to fl ow along the fl oor makes carbon 
dioxide very good at extinguishing low-lying fl ames by depriving them of oxygen.

Water Distribution 131
Check Your Figures #2: Popped Out of the Refrigerator
When you take an air-fi lled plastic container out of the refrigerator, it warms from 2 °C to 25 °C. How 
much does the pressure of the air inside it change? 
Answer: It increases by 8.4%.
Why: To use Eq. 5.1.3 to determine the pressure change, we need temperatures measured on an 
absolute scale, such as the Kelvin scale. Since 0 °C is about 273 K, 2 °C is about 275 K and 25 °C 
is about 298 K. We can write Eq. 5.1.3 twice, once for each temperature: 
 pressure298 K = Boltzmann constant · particle density · 298 K,
 pressure275 K = Boltzmann constant · particle density · 275 K.
The particle density of the air in the container can’t change as it warms up because its volume is 
fi xed. Therefore we can divide the upper equation by the lower one and cancel out the Boltzmann 
constant and particle density on the right-hand side, giving: 
 pressure298 K
pressure275 K
= 298 K
275 K
 = 1.084.
The pressure in the container thus increases by a factor of almost 1.084, or about 8.4%. This elevated 
pressure will cause the container to emit a pop sound when you open it. 
SECTION 5.2 
and turbulence, and we’ll let the water fl ow steadily most of 
the time.
Questions to Think About: Why is the water pressure higher in 
the basement than it is in the attic? Why does a deep water 
well require a pump at the bottom? If a water tower is only a 
storage device, why is it so tall? Why do skyscrapers have com-
plicated plumbing systems that include reservoirs at various 
levels in the building? What causes water to fl ow up through a 
drinking straw to your mouth?
Experiments to Do: To see the effects of pressure and weight 
on water, try these simple experiments with a drinking straw. 
First, suck water up the straw from a glass to your mouth. Are 
you exerting an attractive force on the water, or is some other 
force pushing it upward toward your mouth? With the straw 
full of water, seal the top with your fi nger; keeping the seal 
tight, remove the straw from the glass. What happens to the 
water inside? What happens to the water when you release the 
seal? Now blow into one end of a straw full of water while 
sealing the far end with your fi nger. When you release the seal 
on the far end, what happens to the water? What forces are 
responsible for this effect?
Now that we’ve explored the behavior of objects in fl uids, let’s 
turn to the behavior of fl uids in objects. In this section, as we 
examine how plumbing distributes water, we’ll see that pres-
sure, density, and weight are just as important in plumbing as 
they are in ballooning. To keep things simple, we’ll focus on 
the causes of water’s motion through plumbing and leave the 
many complications of that motion itself for the next chapter. 
For the rest of this section, we’ll ignore friction-like effects 
Water Distribution
Reservoir
Water
tower
Meter
Meter
Meter
Water
tower
Pump
Pipe
Pump
Water Pressure
Water distribution systems require two things: plumbing and water pressure. Plumbing is 
what delivers the water, and water pressure is what starts that water fl owing. Water pressure 
is important because, like everything else, water has mass and accelerates only when 
pushed. If nothing pushed on the water when you opened a faucet, the water simply 

132 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
wouldn’t budge. Since the pushes that send water through pipes come principally from 
differences in water pressure, we need to look carefully at how this pressure is created and 
controlled.
 
We begin our study of water distribution by ignoring gravity. As we’ve seen with the 
atmosphere, gravity creates downward pressure gradients in stationary fl uids—their pres-
sures increase with depth and decrease with altitude. These downward pressure gradients 
complicate plumbing in hilly cities and skyscrapers. However, if all our plumbing is in a 
level region—for example, a single-story house in a very fl at city—our job is much simpler. 
With no signifi cant changes in height, the pressure gradients due to gravity produce negli-
gible effects. In fact, we can neglect gravity altogether.
 
In this simplifi ed situation, water accelerates only in response to unbalanced pressures. 
Just as unbalanced forces make a solid object accelerate, so too do unbalanced pressures 
make a fl uid accelerate. If the water pressure inside a pipe is uniform, then each portion of 
water feels no net force and doesn’t accelerate; it either remains stationary or coasts at 
constant velocity (Fig. 5.2.1a). If the pressure is out of balance, however, then each portion 
of water experiences a net force and accelerates toward the region of lowest pressure 
(Figs. 5.2.1b,c).
 
This acceleration doesn’t mean that the water will instantly begin moving toward the 
lowest pressure. Because of its inertia, water changes velocity gradually; it speeds up, 
slows down, or turns to the side, depending on where the lowest pressure is located. A 
complicated arrangement of high and low pressures can steer water through an intricate 
maze of pipes, and that is exactly how water reaches your home from the city pumping 
station. Every change in its velocity during its trip through the plumbing is caused by a 
pressure imbalance.
 
You can create a pressure imbalance in water simply by squeezing parts of it. The 
pressure in a squeezed portion will rise and it will accelerate toward lower pressures else-
where. Since this sort of pressure change isn’t caused by the water’s motion, it’s a static 
variation in pressure. The water’s motion can also affect its pressure and such dynamic 
variations in pressure can be complicated and fascinating. As we’ll see in the next chapter, 
they contribute to such diverse effects as the spray of a garden hose nozzle, the lift on an 
airplane’s wing, and the curve of a curve ball.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Water
Pressure
Pressure
Pressure
Pressure
Acceleration
Acceleration
Pressure
Pressure
Fig. 5.2.1 (a) If the water in a horizontal pipe 
is exposed to a uniform pressure, it will not 
accelerate. (b, c) If the pressure along the pipe is 
not uniform, however, the imbalance will create 
a net force on each portion of the water and the 
water will accelerate toward the side with the 
lower pressure.
Check Your Understanding #1: Under Pressure in the Garden
With the water faucet open and the nozzle at the end of your garden hose shut tightly, the hose is full 
of high-pressure water. Why doesn’t this water accelerate? 
Answer: The water pressure (force on a unit of surface area) inside the hose is uniform throughout, 
so the water experiences no net force and doesn’t accelerate. 
Why: In the absence of gravity, fl uids accelerate only when they experience pressure imbalances. 
Since water throughout the hose is at the same pressure, there is no pressure imbalance and no 
acceleration. When you open the nozzle, the pressure at that end of the hose drops and the water 
accelerates toward it. 

Water Distribution 133
Creating Water Pressure with Water Pumps
To start water fl owing through the plumbing in a level house or city, you need a water 
pump, a device that uses mechanical work to deliver pressurized water through a pipe. At 
its most basic level, a water pump squeezes a portion of water to raise its local pressure so 
that it accelerates toward regions of lower pressure. The pump continues to squeeze that 
water as it fl ows out through the plumbing.
 
To understand how a pump works, picture a sealed plastic soda bottle full of water. 
When you don’t squeeze the bottle, the pressure inside it is atmospheric and uniform 
(remember that we’re neglecting gravity). But when you squeeze the sides of the bottle and 
push inward on the water, the water responds by pushing outward on you—Newton’s third 
law—and it does this by increasing its pressure. The harder you push, the harder the water 
pushes back and the greater its pressure becomes.
 
Water, like all liquids, is incompressible; that is, it experiences almost no change in 
volume as its pressure increases. Although the bottle won’t get smaller as you squeeze, the 
water pressure inside it can increase substantially. It doesn’t take much force, exerted with 
your thumb on a small area of the bottle, to increase the pressure in the bottle from atmos-
pheric to twice that value or more.
 
The pressure increases uniformly throughout the water bottle, an observation known 
as Pascal’s principle: a change in the pressure of an enclosed incompressible fl uid is con-
veyed undiminished to every part of the fl uid and to the surfaces of its container. This uni-
form pressure rise leads to a large upward force on the bottle’s cap. If the cap were wider 
and had more surface area, the upward force on it might be large enough to blow it off the 
bottle. That effect is the basis for hydraulic systems and lifts, where pressure produced in 
an incompressible fl uid by a small force exerted on a small area of the fl uid’s container 
results in a large force exerted on a large area of the fl uid’s container (Fig. 5.2.2). It also 
explains why plastic drinking bottles usually have small caps and why wide-mouth plastic 
containers are better suited for candies, cookies, and nuts.
PASCAL’S PRINCIPLE
A change in the pressure of an enclosed incompressible fl uid is conveyed undimin-
ished to every part of the fl uid and to the surfaces of its container.
 
It’s time to remove the cap from the water bottle. Now when you squeeze the bottle 
and increase the local water pressure, the water can move. As its pressure increases inside 
the bottle, the water begins to accelerate toward the lower pressure outside the bottle’s open 
top and the result is a fountain. You are pumping water!
 
You are also doing work; as the water fl ows out of the bottle, your hands move inward. 
Since you are pushing inward on the water and the water is moving inward, you are doing 
work on the water. Pumps do work when they deliver pressurized water, and pressurized 
water carries with it the energy associated with that work.
 
Although a water bottle can act as a pump briefl y, it soon runs out of water. A more 
practical pump appears in Fig. 5.2.3. In this pump, a piston slides back and forth in the open 
end of a hollow cylinder, making a watertight seal. Pushing inward on that piston squeezes 
any water in the cylinder and increases the local water pressure. Water begins to fl ow.
 
In contrast to our simple bottle, this pump’s cylinder is easy to refi ll. The cylinder 
actually has two openings, each with a valve that permits water to fl ow in only one direc-
tion. Water can leave the cylinder only through the top opening and can enter only through 
the bottom opening. As you push the pump’s piston into the water-fi lled cylinder, the water 
pressure in the cylinder rises and water accelerates and fl ows out through the top valve. As 
you pull the pump’s piston out of the water-fi lled cylinder, the water pressure inside the 
Fluid
Small 
force
Large
force
Weight of an
automobile
Force from
your hands
Fig. 5.2.2 The force a 
pressurized fl uid exerts on 
a piston is proportional to 
the surface area of that 
piston. This fact underlies 
hydraulic systems, in which 
a small force exerted on a 
small piston pressurizes 
a trapped liquid so that it 
exerts a large force on a 
large piston. In this fi gure, 
your gentle downward 
push on the small piston 
is balanced by a gentle 
upward force exerted on 
that small piston by the 
pressurized fl uid. At the 
same time, the strong 
downward push of an 
automobile on the large 
piston is balanced by a 
strong upward force exerted 
on that large piston by 
the pressurized fl uid. If 
the small piston descends 
quickly at constant velocity, 
the large piston will rise 
slowly at constant velocity 
and you’ll be doing the 
work of lifting the heavy 
car a short distance by 
pushing the small piston 
down gently for a large 
distance. The hydraulic 
system is providing you 
with mechanical advantage 
and allowing you to raise 
something that’s too heavy 
for you to lift unaided.

134 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
cylinder drops and water accelerates and fl ows in through the bottom valve. In fact, as you 
withdraw the piston, the pressure inside the cylinder drops below atmospheric pressure, so 
even water in an open reservoir nearby will accelerate toward the partial vacuum in the 
cylinder and refi ll it.
Check Your Understanding #2: Working a Water Pump
Which normally requires more work: pulling the piston of a water pump out of the cylinder or pushing 
it back in? 
Answer: Pushing it back in usually requires more work. 
Why: When you pull the piston out of the cylinder, you are moving air out of the way and creating a 
partial vacuum inside the cylinder. This action requires a modest amount of work because the air 
doesn’t push terribly hard on the back of the piston and pressure from the water fl owing into the 
cylinder assists you. But as you push the piston back into the cylinder, you are pressurizing the water. 
Depending on the pressure of water in the outlet hose, the water in the cylinder may exert a very large 
force on the piston. In that case, you must do a great deal of work on the water as you push the 
piston inward and drive the water out of the cylinder.
Moving Water: Pressure and Energy
The pump of Fig. 5.2.3 can draw low-pressure water from a pond and fi ll a hose with high-
pressure water. If the nozzle at the other end of the hose is open, the water will accelerate 
toward lower pressure outside the nozzle and spray toward the garden with considerable 
kinetic energy. From where does this kinetic energy come?
 
The energy comes from you and the pump. As you push the piston into the cylinder, 
pressurizing the water and squeezing it out through the top valve, you’re doing work on the 
water—you’re exerting an inward force on the water, and the water is moving a distance in 
the direction of your force. The inward force you exert on the water is equal to the water 
pressure times the surface area of the piston, or
force = pressure · surface area,
and the distance the water moves is equal to the volume of water pumped divided by the 
surface area of the piston, or
distance =
volume
surface area.
Since work equals force times distance, the work you do pumping water is equal to the 
water pressure times the volume of water you pump, or
work = pressure · volume.
As you pump high-pressure water through the hose, high-speed water sprays out of its 
nozzle. Since water is incompressible, water enters and exits the hose at equal rates and the 
work you do pumping 1 liter of water into the hose becomes kinetic energy in 1 liter of 
water leaving the nozzle. That energy travels directly from the pump to the nozzle, and the 
water doesn’t actually store any of it along the way. Nonetheless, we can imagine that the 
water’s kinetic energy after it reaches the nozzle was stored in that water’s pressure before 
the nozzle. We create a useful fi ction—pressure potential energy. Water that’s under pres-
sure has a pressure potential energy equal to the water’s volume times its pressure.
 
Because pressure potential energy actually comes from the pump, it vanishes as soon 
as you break the link between the pressurized water and the pump that pressurizes it; you 
can’t save a bottle of high-pressure water and expect it to retain this potential energy. The 
(b)
High
pressure
Low
pressure
One-way
valve closed
High-
pressure
water
Water
ﬂows out
Piston moves
inward
High
pressure
Low
pressure
One-way
valve closed
(a)
Low-
pressure
water
Water
ﬂows in
Piston moves
outward
Fig. 5.2.3 Water is 
pumped from a region of 
low pressure to a region 
of high pressure by a 
reciprocating piston pump. 
(a) As the piston is drawn 
outward, water fl ows into 
the cylinder from the low-
pressure region. (b) As the 
piston is pushed inward, 
the inlet one-way valve 
closes and water is driven 
out of the cylinder and into 
the high-pressure region.

Water Distribution 135
concept of pressure potential energy is meaningful only if the water is fl owing steadily, so 
that water leaving the plumbing is replaced exactly by water from the pump or something 
equivalent. The ideal situation in which to use the concept of pressure potential energy is 
also the simplest type of water fl ow—fl ow in which nothing ever changes. In keeping with 
its constancy, this situation is known as steady-state fl ow.
 
In steady-state fl ow, a fl uid fl ows continuously and steadily through a stationary envi-
ronment. When you watch steady-state fl ow, you can’t detect the passage of time in either 
the fl uid or its environment, and a video of steady-state fl ow looks exactly like a still pho-
tograph. With small allowances for the inevitable imperfections of real life, water traveling 
steadily through plumbing in your home, a soft wind blowing smoothly across your 
motionless cheek, and a gentle current fl owing silently between the motionless banks of a 
lazy river are all cases of steady-state fl ow in fl uids.
 
Although pumps and other devices with moving components aren’t allowed in steady-
state fl ow, they can be connected to it so long as they operate steadily. For example, if you 
pump water as steadily as you can through a motionless hose and nozzle, the water will 
exhibit steady-state fl ow from where it enters the hose to well after it sprays out of the 
nozzle.
 
The beauty of steady-state fl ow is in how it handles energy along streamlines. A 
streamline is the path taken by a tiny portion of water in the fl ow, a portion that I refer to 
here as a “drop.” In steady-state fl ow, an endless series of identical drops travels that same 
unchanging streamline, like the cars of an infi nite train on a stationary track. In steady-state 
fl ow with no friction-like effects, a drop’s ordered energy remains constant as it travels 
along its streamline. Moreover, since all the drops along that streamline are identical, the 
ordered energy per drop is constant everywhere along that streamline. As we’ll soon see, 
those observations are surprisingly useful.
 
A drop’s ordered energy can take three different forms: kinetic energy, pressure poten-
tial energy, and gravitational potential energy. Since we’re still considering plumbing in a 
level region, we’ll omit gravitational potential energy for now. We’ve already seen that the 
drop’s pressure potential energy is equal to its pressure times its volume. The drop’s kinetic 
energy is given by Eq. 2.2.2 as one-half its mass times the square of its speed. Since a 
drop’s mass is its density times its volume, the drop’s ordered energy is
 
 ordered energy = pressure potential energy + kinetic energy
 
 = pressure · volume + 1
2 · density · volume · speed2
 
 = constant (along a streamline).
 
(5.2.1)
If we divide both sides of this expression by the drop’s volume, we can obtain another 
useful form of this relationship:
 
ordered energy
volume
= pressure potential energy
volume
+ kinetic energy
volume
 
     = pressure + 1
2 · density · speed2
 
    = constant (along a streamline). 
(5.2.2)
Equation 5.2.2 is called Bernoulli’s equation, after Swiss mathematician Daniel Bernoulli 3 , 
whose work led to its development, although Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler 
(1707–1783) actually completed it. It applies only to incompressible fl uids such as water 
and assumes no ordered energy is wasted by friction-like effects.
 
According to Eq. 5.2.2, water that’s in steady-state fl ow can exchange pressure for 
speed or speed for pressure as it fl ows along a streamline. As water accelerates out of a 
nozzle, for example, its pressure drops but its speed increases because it’s converting pres-
sure potential energy into kinetic energy. And as that moving water sprays against the car 
3  As a professor in 
Basel, Daniel Bernoulli 
(Swiss mathematician, 
1700–1782) taught not 
only physics but also 
botany, anatomy, and 
physiology. He correctly 
proposed that the pressure 
a gas exerts on the walls 
of its container results 
from the countless 
impacts of tiny particles 
that make up the gas. He 
also derived an important 
relationship among the 
pressure, motion, and 
height of a fl uid—
Bernoulli’s equation.

136 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
you’re washing, it slows down but its pressure increases because it’s converting kinetic 
energy back into pressure potential energy. In both cases, the water’s ordered energy is 
constant.
–30 m
–20 m
–10 m
0 m
Pressure = 400,000 Pa
Pressure = 100,000 Pa
Pressure = 200,000 Pa
Pressure = 300,000 Pa
Fig. 5.2.4 The pressure 
of stationary water in pipes 
increases with depth by 
about 10,000 Pa per meter 
of depth. The shape of the 
pipes doesn’t matter. For 
plumbing that’s open on 
top and connected near 
the bottom, as shown here, 
water will tend to fl ow 
until its height is uniform 
throughout the plumbing.
Check Your Understanding #3: How Does Your Garden Grow?
Water in your garden hose has considerable pressure and arcs several meters through the air as you 
water your plants. What is the water pressure in the falling water once it leaves the nozzle at the end 
of the hose? 
Answer: It is atmospheric pressure. 
Why: As the water accelerates out of the nozzle, its pressure drops. It is converting pressure potential 
energy into kinetic energy. The water pressure drops until it reaches the pressure of the surrounding 
air, which is atmospheric pressure.
Gravity and Water Pressure
Gravity creates a downward pressure gradient in water; the deeper the water, the more 
weight there is overhead and the greater the pressure. Since water is much denser than air, 
water pressure increases rapidly with depth. In a vertical pipe that’s open on top, the water’s 
surface is at atmospheric pressure (about 100,000 Pa). Only 10 m (33 feet) below the 
water’s surface, however, the pressure has already doubled to 200,000 Pa. At that modest 
depth, the water overhead weighs as much as the air overhead, even though the atmosphere 
is many kilometers thick.
 
The shape of the pipe doesn’t affect the relationship between pressure and depth. No 
matter how complicated the plumbing, the pressure of stationary water inside it increases 
with depth by 10,000 Pa per meter, or 10,000 Pa/m (Fig 5.2.4). This uniform downward 
pressure gradient creates an upward buoyant force on anything immersed in the water. In 
fact, that buoyant force is what supports the water itself (Fig. 5.2.5).
 
The dependence of water pressure on depth has a number of important implications for 
water distribution. First, water pressure at the bottom of a tall pipe is substantially higher 
than at the top of that same pipe. Consequently, if only a single pipe supplies water to a 
skyscraper, then the water pressure on the ground fl oor will be dangerously high while the 
pressure in the penthouse will be barely enough for a decent shower. Tall buildings must 
therefore handle water pressure very carefully; they can’t simply supply water to every 
fl oor directly from the same pipe.
 
Second, pressure in a city water main does more than just accelerate water out of a 
showerhead; it also supports water in the pipes of multistory buildings. Lifting water to the 
third fl oor against the downward force of gravity requires a large upward force, and that 
force is provided by water pressure. The higher you want to lift the water, the more water 
pressure you need at the bottom of the plumbing. Lifting the water also requires energy, 
which is often provided by a water pump.
 
Third, as water travels up and down the streets of a hilly city, its pressure varies with 
height. In the valleys the pressure can be very large, and at the tops of hills the pressure can 
be very small. Water mains in valleys must therefore be particularly strong to keep from 
bursting. The large pressure in a valley is quite useful because it helps push the water back 
uphill on the other side of the valley (Fig. 5.2.6). Nonetheless, a hilly city must have pump-
ing stations and other water-pressure-control systems located throughout to provide rea-
sonable water pressures to all the buildings, regardless of their altitudes.
 
Apart from those pressure-control systems, even a hilly city’s plumbing often involves 
steady-state fl ow and can be explained using a version of Bernoulli’s equation that includes 
gravity. Before we explore that topic, though, let’s take a look at the non-steady-state fl ow 
that occurs when water in an isolated section of plumbing has free surfaces that can move 
up or down so that you see things change with time.

Water Distribution 137
 
When all of those free surfaces are at atmospheric pressure, there are no pressure 
imbalances and the water accelerates only in response to gravity. The water’s only potential 
energy is gravitational and, like any object, it accelerates in the direction that lowers that 
gravitational potential as quickly as possible. If the water’s free surface is higher in one 
place than another, it can reduce its average height and, therefore, its gravitational potential 
energy by letting its highest water fi ll in its lowest valley. After some sloshing about, the 
water settles down in stable equilibrium with all its free surfaces smooth and level at a 
single uniform height. No matter how complicated the plumbing, water that is open to the 
air on top always “seeks its level.” The natural fl ow associated with this leveling effect is 
often used in water delivery (see 4 ).
 
Remarkably, the leveling effect works even when some of the water-fi lled plumbing is 
located above the water’s free surfaces. For example, water can seek its level between two 
open containers through an elevated pipe known as a siphon (Fig. 5.2.7). In such cases, the 
pressure of water in those elevated segments of plumbing is less than atmospheric pressure.
 
If you seal off part of the isolated plumbing and reduce the pressure above one of the 
water’s free surfaces, that surface will rise higher than all of the others. It will rise until the 
added pressure produced by the taller column of water replaces the missing pressure above 
the water’s free surface. The less pressure there is above that surface, the higher the water 
must rise to make up for the missing pressure. This effect lifts water in a drinking straw and 
allows it to travel between two open containers in a siphon.
 
However, removing all the air pressure above the water’s free surface inside a long 
straw or siphon will raise its height only about 10 m (33 feet) above the level of the water 
elsewhere in an open container. Even with no pressure above it, this 10-m column of ele-
vated water completely replaces the absent air pressure and thus prevents water in the rest 
of the plumbing from lifting it any higher. It’s therefore impossible to draw water from a 
deep well simply by lowering a pipe into that well and reducing the air pressure in the pipe; 
the water will rise no more than 10 m upward. Instead, a pump must be attached to the 
bottom of the pipe to pressurize the water and push it all the way to the top of the pipe.
Fig. 5.2.6 Los Angeles receives much of its water from 
Owens Valley, 300 km to the north. The water negotiates 
the mountains and valleys in between, driven by gravity 
alone. Giant pipes allow pressure to build during downhill 
stretches to push the water back uphill later on. Parts of 
the 1913 aqueduct support so much pressure that the 
steel pipe used in them has to be more than an inch thick.
© The Granger Collection, New York
Check Your Understanding #4: What’s the Water Pressure? 
If all the water to a 400-m-tall skyscraper were delivered from a single pipe, how much higher would 
the water pressure be on the ground fl oor than on the top fl oor? 
Answer: It would be about 4,000,000 Pa (40 atmospheres) higher. 
Why: The weight of water inside the pipe would create an enormous excess pressure near the bottom 
of the building. Water spraying from an open faucet on the fi rst fl oor at this enormous pressure could 
accelerate to 319 km/h (200 mph), as it does in some high-pressure jet washing and cutting machines. 
Weight
Pressure
Pressure
(a)
Acceleration
Weight
(b)
Water
Pressure
Pressure
Weight
(c)
Acceleration
Pressure
Pressure
Fig. 5.2.5 When a pipe 
is oriented vertically, 
gravity affects the motion 
of water in the pipe. (a) 
If the water’s pressure 
doesn’t change with depth, 
the water will accelerate 
downward (fall) because of 
its weight. (b) If the water’s 
pressure increases with 
depth by 10,000 Pa/m, 
the water won’t accelerate. 
(c) If the water’s pressure 
increases with depth by 
more than that amount, 
the water will accelerate 
upward.
4  The Romans used 
gravity to convey water 
to Rome from sources up 
to 90 km away. A very 
gradual slope in the 
aqueducts kept the water 
moving in spite of 
frictional effects that 
opposed the water’s 
progress. Poisoning from 
the lead pipes used in 
some of the aqueducts is 
blamed in part for the 
decay of the Roman 
Empire.

138 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
Moving Water Again: Gravity
As we’ve seen, it takes pressure and energy to lift water to the third fl oor of a building. We 
can now expand our description of fl uids undergoing steady-state fl ow to include gravity 
and gravitational potential energy.
 
A drop’s gravitational potential energy is given by Eq. 1.3.2 as its mass times the 
acceleration due to gravity times its height. The water’s gravitational potential energy per 
volume is thus its density times the acceleration due to gravity times its height.
 
If we include gravitational potential energy in Eq. 5.2.2 and recognize that, for fl uids 
in steady-state fl ow along a streamline, the energy per volume is constant, we obtain a 
relationship that can be written as a word equation:
 
ordered energy
volume
= pressure potential energy
volume
+ kinetic energy
volume
 
            + gravitational potential energy
volume
 
     = pressure + 1
2 · density · speed2
 
                                   + density · acceleration due to gravity · height
 
    = constant (along a streamline), 
(5.2.3)
in symbols:
p + 1
2 · ρ · v2 + ρ · g · h = constant (along a streamline),
and in everyday language:
When a stream of water speeds up in a nozzle or fl ows uphill in a pipe, 
its pressure drops.
 
This is a revised version of Bernoulli’s equation, one that includes gravity. It correctly 
describes steady-state fl ow in streamlines that change height. As before, it applies only 
to incompressible fl uids such as water and assumes no ordered energy is wasted by 
friction-like effects.
Pressure = 80,000 Pa
2 m
0 m
Pressure = 100,000 Pa
Fig. 5.2.7 The two open containers of water are 
connected by a siphon. This U-shaped tube permits water 
to fl ow until its level is equal in both containers. The 
sturdy tube permits the water pressure in the siphon to 
drop below atmospheric pressure.
BERNOULLI’S EQUATION
For an incompressible, frictionless fl uid in steady-state fl ow, the sum of its pressure 
potential energy, its kinetic energy, and its gravitational potential energy is constant 
along a streamline. Equation 5.2.3 expresses this law as a formula.

Water Distribution 139
Because energy is conserved, water that’s in steady-state fl ow can exchange the ener-
gies associated with its speed, pressure, and height for one another. Thus as water 
fl ows downward, its speed or pressure or both increase; if it falls from an open faucet, 
its speed increases; and if it descends steadily inside a uniform pipe, its pressure 
increases. The reverse happens as water fl ows upward. Water rising from a fountain 
loses speed as it ascends, while water rising steadily in a uniform pipe loses pressure 
on its way up.
 
This interchangeability of height, pressure, and speed makes it possible to pressurize 
plumbing by connecting a tall column of water to the pipes. That’s why cities, commu-
nities, and even individual buildings have water towers (Fig. 5.2.8). A water tower is 
built at a relatively high site within the region it serves. A pump fi lls the water tower 
with water, and then gravity maintains a constant high pressure throughout the plumb-
ing that connects to it (Fig. 5.2.9). The water is at atmospheric pressure at the top of 
the water tower, but the pressure is much higher at the bottom; at the base of a 50-m-high 
water tower, for example, the pressure is about 600,000 Pa, or six times atmospheric 
pressure.
 
In addition to providing a fairly steady pressure in the water mains, a water tower 
stores energy effi ciently and can deliver that energy quickly. When water is drawn out of 
the water tower, its gravitational potential energy at the top becomes pressure potential 
energy at the bottom. The water tower replaces a pump, supplying a steady fl ow of water at 
an almost constant high pressure. Unlike a pump, however, the water tower can supply this 
high-pressure water at an enormous rate. As long as the water level doesn’t drop too far, 
high-pressure water keeps fl owing.
Fig. 5.2.8 Many buildings in New York City have water towers on their roofs. These towers maintain 
water pressure in the plumbing and help in fi refi ghting.
© Steve Lewis/The Image Bank/Getty Images
Check Your Understanding #5: Water Power
A hydroelectric power plant extracts energy from water that has descended from an elevated reservoir 
in a pipe. In the reservoir, this energy takes the form of gravitational potential energy. Just before the 
power plant, what form does the energy take? 
Answer: It takes the form of pressure potential energy (and some kinetic energy). 
Why: As the water descends inside the pipe, its gravitational potential energy is converted into pres-
sure potential energy. The water reaching the power plant is under enormous pressure, and it’s this 
pressure that exerts the forces needed to turn the turbines that run the generators. Work is required 
to turn the turbines, so the water gives up much of its energy in the power plant. This energy leaves 
the power plant via the electric power lines. 
Air
Low-
pressure
water
High-
pressure
water
Pump
To
customers
From
reservoir
Fig. 5.2.9 A water tower 
uses the weight of water 
to create a large water 
pressure near the ground. 
The higher the tower, the 
greater the pressure near 
the ground. The water 
tower is able to maintain 
the water pressure 
passively and doesn’t 
require constant pumping. 
Even during periods of 
peak water consumption, 
it maintains a fairly steady 
pressure. When the water 
level in the water tower 
drops below a certain set 
point, a pump refi lls the 
tower.

140 
CHAPTER 5 Fluids
Epilogue for Chapter 5
In this chapter we have investigated some of the basic concepts associated with fl uids. 
In Balloons, we explored the concept of pressure and the way in which air pressure 
structures and supports Earth’s atmosphere. We saw that increased air pressure beneath 
an object produces an upward buoyant force on that object and that this buoyant force 
can fl oat objects, such as hot-air and helium balloons, that are less dense than the 
surrounding air.
 
In Water Distribution, we examined how water pressure causes water to accelerate 
through plumbing, from high pressure to low pressure. We then focused on ways to pro-
duce water pressure, either using pumps or using gravity. By studying the forms of energy 
in water, we were led to Bernoulli’s equation, which describes the interconversion of a 
fl uid’s ordered energy among pressure potential energy, kinetic energy, and gravitational 
potential energy. Although the most dramatic applications of Bernoulli’s equation are 
ahead of us, we’ve already used it to understand the changes in pressure and speed that 
accompany water’s movement up and down in pipes and in fountains.
Explanation: A Cartesian Diver
The diver fl oats because its average density—that is, the mass of the vial and its contents 
divided by the volume of space those two components occupy—is less than the density 
of water. Since the upward buoyant force on the diver exceeds its downward weight, the 
diver fl oats upward toward the top of the bottle. When the diver begins to stick out of the 
water, it displaces less water and more air and the buoyant force it experiences decreases. 
Eventually it experiences zero net force and fl oats without accelerating at the water’s 
surface.
 
When you squeeze the soda bottle, you increase the pressure inside it. Because water 
is incompressible, its density doesn’t change as the pressure goes up. However, the air 
Check Your Figures #1: Up or Out
If the water pressure at the entrance to a building is 1,000,000 Pa, how high can the water rise 
inside the building and how fast will it fl ow out of a faucet right at the entrance? (A liter of water 
inside a pipe has a mass of 1 kg.) 
Answer: It can rise about 100 m or emerge from the faucet at about 45 m/s (101 mph). 
Why: As the water fl ows through the pipe (a streamline), its pressure potential energy can become 
gravitational potential energy or kinetic energy. At the start, the water’s energy is all pressure poten-
tial energy so, from Eq. 5.2.3, the water’s energy per volume is 1,000,000 Pa. If the water fl ows up 
the pipe, that energy will become gravitational potential energy. We can rearrange Eq. 5.2.3 to fi nd 
the height it can reach: 
 height = energy
volume ·
1
density · acceleration due to gravity
 = 1,000,000 Pa ·
1
1000 kg/m3 · 9.8 m/s2 = 102 m.
If the water fl ows out of the faucet, that energy will become kinetic energy. We can also rearrange 
Eq. 5.2.3 to fi nd the speed it will attain:
 speed = B
energy
volume ·
2
density
 = B
2,000,000 Pa
1000 kg/m3
= 45 m/s.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 141
bubble inside the vial is compressed and takes up less space inside the vial. Water fl ows 
into the vial and increases the average density of the vial and its contents. When the average 
density of the diver fi nally exceeds the density of water, the diver sinks.
 
To keep the diver hovering in the water, you must adjust the water pressure until the 
diver’s average density is exactly that of water. This adjustment is impossible to make 
without looking at the diver. Even the slightest overpressure or underpressure will cause the 
diver to drift slowly down or up.
1. Archimedes’ principle: An object partially or wholly 
immersed in a fl uid is acted on by an upward buoyant force 
equal to the weight of the fl uid it displaces.
2. Ideal gas law: The pressure of a gas is equal to the Boltz-
mann constant times the particle density times the absolute 
temperature, or
 
pressure = Boltzmann constant · particle density
 
 · absolute temperature 
(5.1.3)
3. Pascal’s principle: A change in the pressure of an enclosed 
incompressible fl uid is conveyed undiminished to every part of 
the fl uid and to the surfaces of its container.
4. Bernoulli’s equation: For an incompressible fl uid in steady-
state fl ow, the sum of its pressure potential energy, its kinetic 
energy, and its gravitational potential energy is constant along a 
streamline, or
 ordered energy
volume
= pressure potential energy
volume
+ kinetic energy
volume
 
           + gravitational potential energy
volume
 
     = pressure + 1
2 · density · speed2
 
                      + density · acceleration due to gravity
 
         · height
 
 = constant (along a streamline). 
(5.2.3)
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Balloons Work: A hot-air balloon fl oats because its total weight (basket, envelope, and 
hot air) is less than that of the cooler air it displaces. By heating the air in the envelope with 
a fl ame, the pilot reduces its density. As the air warms up, fewer particles are needed to fi ll 
the envelope, the extra particles fl ow out of the envelope through the opening at its bottom, 
and the balloon becomes lighter.
 
A helium balloon also weighs less than the air it displaces. However, its lower weight is 
due to the lightness of the individual helium atoms, each of which weighs much less than 
the air particle it replaces. By fi lling a balloon with helium, the balloon’s weight is dramati-
cally reduced. Since the buoyant force exerted on the balloon by the surrounding air exceeds 
the balloon’s weight, the balloon accelerates upward.
How Water Distribution Works: Water distribution begins when a pump transfers low-pressure 
water from a reservoir to high-pressure plumbing. Along a level path, water accelerates 
toward regions of lower pressure, such as open hoses or showerheads. Pressure imbalances 
allow the water to negotiate bends in the pipes en route to its destination. During its travels, 
the water may rise or fall in height; as it does, its pressure changes, decreasing as the water 
moves upward and increasing as the water moves downward. In low-lying regions, where the 
water pressure may be too high to use directly, a pressure regulator may have to be added to 
the plumbing. In high-lying regions, where the water pressure may be too low to be practical, 
an additional pump may have to be employed to boost its pressure.

A Vortex Cannon
Fluids are real; they exist independently of any solids that 
might move through them. That notion is easy to accept 
in reference to water, since we can see that water doesn’t 
wait for a boat to pass before moving in interesting ways. 
Air is harder to visualize in this fashion because we sel-
dom see it by itself, apart from its effects on buildings or 
airplanes or our skin.
 
To begin seeing air as something tangible and to 
demonstrate the rich possibilities of motion available to 
it, build a vortex cannon, a device that sends rings of air 
sailing across a room. Although a serious vortex cannon 
is best constructed from a large drum or crate, you can 
make a simple one from an empty cardboard cereal box.
 
Seal the rectangular box on all edges with tape, and 
cut a circular hole 5 cm. (2 in.) in diameter in the center 
of one face. To use your cannon, just tap hard on the other 
face of the box. Rings of air will leap out of the hole and 
sail across the room at about 5 m/s (11 mph).
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
 F
luids are fascinating when they move. Stationary water and air may be essential to life, but 
they’re also fairly simple; only their pressures vary from place to place, and even these are 
determined primarily by gravity. Rushing rivers or gusts of wind, however, with their wonderful 
variety of simple and complicated behaviors, are much more exciting. The motions of fl uids aren’t 
just interesting; they’re also important, since our world is fi lled with objects and machines that work 
in whole or part because of the behaviors of moving fl uids. In this chapter, we look at a variety of 
situations in which fl uid motion contributes to the way things work.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
142
6
Fluids and Motion

Garden Watering 143
Chapter Itinerary
In particular, we explore (1) garden watering, (2) balls sports: 
air, and (3) airplanes. In Garden Watering, we look at how 
water’s pressure and speed vary as it fl ows through a faucet, a 
hose, and a nozzle. In Ball Sports: Air, we investigate the effects 
of air on the motions of balls. In Airplanes, we study the ways in 
which moving air supports and propels airplanes in fl ight. A 
more complete preview can be found in the Chapter Summary 
and Important Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.
 
This chapter continues to develop the concept of energy 
conservation along a streamline that was introduced in 
 Chapter 5. It also brings up several new types of forces that 
are present when fl uids move past one another or past solid 
objects. These ideas are present in a vast array of common-
place activities, from washing windows with a hose to pump-
ing water with a windmill.
 
Although you can’t see these rings, you can follow 
their motion by looking for their effects on objects they 
encounter. The rings can easily blow out candles or rustle 
light window drapes across a small room. If you have a 
friend blow some rings at you, you’ll feel exactly where 
they hit on your face or shirt.
 
To see these rings directly, fi ll the cereal box with 
smoke, mist, or dust. What do you think the rings will 
look like when they emerge from the hole? Will the 
smoke in each ring be stationary, or will it be swirling 
about the ring in some manner? How will the ring’s size 
and speed of travel depend on the size of the hole from 
which it emerges? Will it depend on how hard you tap the 
cereal box? Will the ring’s size and speed change in 
fl ight?
 
Now tap the box and watch the smoke rings. What 
motions do you see? Change the hole size and see how 
this change affects the rings and their motion. As you can 
see, the air can execute some very complicated move-
ments all by itself. In this chapter, we will examine how 
moving air, water, and other fl uids affect our everyday 
lives.
SECTION 6.1 
faucets, hoses, and nozzles—are simple and unsophisticated, 
the principles behind them are not. All three make elegant use 
of the laws of fl uid fl ow and will introduce us to several impor-
tant complications, notably friction-like effects and turbu-
lence, that we had previously chosen to ignore.
Questions to Think About: What determines the rate at 
which water fl ows through a hose? If honey ran through your 
hose instead of water, how would that affect the fl ow? Why 
does water make noise as you sprinkle your garden? Why 
does a nozzle make the water spray so fast and so far? 
Why do the pipes sometimes clank when you abruptly close 
the faucet?
Experiments to Do: Open a faucet gradually and watch the 
water begin to fl ow. What’s pushing the water out of the fau-
cet? What happens to the fl ow rate and speed of the water as 
you open the faucet further? Look below or behind the faucet 
and try to determine how the water enters and exits the faucet. 
When do you hear the water fl owing?
 
Attach a hose to the faucet. Does the water fl ow as 
quickly from the open end of the hose as it did from the 
faucet alone? Cover most of the hose end with your thumb 
and watch the water spray out into the air. Why does the 
Garden Watering
Nozzle
Hose
Spigot
Seat
Valve
Washer
Stem
Handle
Mounting bracket
Tending a fl ower garden often involves watering. While this 
once meant walking the garden’s paths with a watering can, 
modern plumbing has made such effort unnecessary. With a 
hose and nozzle attached to a faucet, you can do your job 
without leaving your lawn chair. Although the tools involved—

144 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
Water’s Viscosity
Having brought water to your home in the previous chapter, we’re already well on our way 
to watering your garden. However, to reach the garden, water must fi rst travel through a 
long stretch of hose that’s lying straight on level ground. Does the length of this hose have 
any effect on the water delivery process?
 
The answer is yes, longer hoses generally deliver less water. However, according to 
what we learned in Chapter 5, water should coast through a straight, level hose at a constant 
velocity and constant pressure, and the length of that hose shouldn’t matter. We evidently 
overlooked something important—friction. Moving water doesn’t slide freely through a 
stationary hose. In reality, it experiences frictional forces that oppose its motion relative to 
the hose.
 
This friction is unusual, though, because most of the water in the hose never actually 
touches the hose itself. If water deep inside the hose is going to experience any forces due 
to relative motion, then those forces are going to have to occur within the water. Water must 
exert frictional forces on itself!
 
Sure enough, water does experience internal frictional forces. They’re called viscous 
forces, forces that appear whenever one layer of a fl uid tries to slide across another layer of 
that fl uid. Viscous forces oppose relative motion, and you can observe their effects easily 
when you pour honey out of a jar. The honey at the jar’s surface is stuck there by chemical 
forces and remains stationary. But even honey that’s far from the walls can’t move easily; 
it experiences viscous forces as it tries to move relative to nearby honey. Since honey is a 
“thick,” or viscous, fl uid, viscous forces act quite effectively to keep all the honey moving 
with nearly the same velocity. Since the honey at the walls can’t move, viscous forces tend 
to prevent any of the honey from moving.
 
Water isn’t as thick as honey (Table 6.1.1), so it’s less resistant to relative motion. The 
measure of this resistance to relative motion within a fl uid is called viscosity, and water’s 
viscosity is less than that of honey. In fact, if you heat the water up, it will become even less 
viscous and thus fl ow more easily. Typical of most liquids, this decrease in viscosity with 
increasing temperature refl ects the molecular origins of viscous forces: the molecules in a 
liquid stick to one another, forming weak chemical bonds that require energy to break. In a 
hot liquid, the molecules have more thermal energy, so they break these bonds more easily 
to move past one another (see 1 ).
1  Your car’s engine is 
protected by motor oil 
with a carefully chosen 
viscosity. If that oil were 
too thin, it would fl ow out 
from between surfaces 
and wouldn’t keep them 
from rubbing against one 
another. If that oil were 
too thick, the engine 
would waste power 
moving its parts through 
the oil. Years ago, you had 
to change your motor oil 
for the season. Thick 
40-weight motor oil was 
used in summer because 
hot weather made it 
thinner; thin 10-weight oil 
was used in winter 
because cold weather 
made it thicker. Now, a 
modern multigrade oil 
maintains a nearly 
constant viscosity over a 
wide range of temperat-
ures and need not be 
changed with the seasons. 
This oil contains tiny 
molecular chains that ball 
up when cold but 
straighten out when hot. 
These chains thicken hot 
oil so that 10W-40 oil 
resembles 10-weight oil in 
winter and 40-weight oil 
in summer.
water travel so much farther when you almost stop its fl ow? 
Do you feel the water pressing against your thumb? Attach a 
nozzle to the hose and see how the fl ow rate affects the 
strength of the spray. Fill a bucket with the open hose and 
then again while using the nozzle. Which method fi lls the 
bucket faster?
TABLE 6.1.1 Approximate Viscosities of a Variety of Fluids
Fluid
Viscosity†
Helium (2 K)
0 Pa · s
Air (20 °C)
0.0000183 Pa · s
Water (20 °C)
0.00100 Pa · s
Olive oil (20 °C)
0.084 Pa · s
Shampoo (20 °C)
100 Pa · s
Honey (20 °C)
1000 Pa · s
Glass (540 °C)
1012 Pa · s
†The pascal-second (abbreviated Pa · s and synonymous with kg/m · s) is the SI unit of viscosity. Only the superfl uid 
portion of ultracold liquid helium exhibits zero viscosity.

Garden Watering 145
Flow in a Straight Hose: The Effect of Viscosity
Viscosity slows the fl ow of water through your hose. Chemical forces between the hose and 
the outermost layer of water hold that layer of water stationary, and this motionless layer 
exerts viscous forces on the layer of moving water inside it. As this second layer slows, it 
exerts viscous forces on yet another layer. Layer by layer, viscous forces hold back the 
moving water until even water at the center of the hose feels viscosity’s slowing effects 
(Fig. 6.1.1). Although water at the center of the hose moves faster than water in any other 
layer, it’s still affected by the stationary hose.
 
These viscous forces impede water delivery. Instead of coasting effortlessly through 
the straight, level hose, real water needs a pressure gradient to push it steadily forward. 
Like the fi le cabinet sliding on the sidewalk in Section 2.2, water must be pushed through 
the hose if it’s to maintain a continuous fl ow. Also like that fi le cabinet, the water becomes 
hotter as the work done pushing it forward is wasted and becomes thermal energy.
 
However, unlike the forces of ordinary sliding friction—which don’t depend on relative 
velocities—viscous forces become larger as the relative velocities within a fl uid increase. 
That’s because as two layers of water slide past one another faster, their molecules collide 
harder and more frequently. Since it experiences stronger viscous forces, fast-moving water 
wastes more energy per meter and needs a larger pressure gradient to keep it moving stead-
ily through a hose than does slow-moving water.
 
Because of viscous forces, the amount of water fl owing steadily through a hose has 
four properties:
1. It’s inversely proportional to the water’s viscosity. The more viscous the water, the 
more diffi culty it has fl owing through the hose.
2. It’s inversely proportional to the length of the hose. The longer the hose, the more 
opportunity viscous forces have to slow the water down.
3. It’s proportional to the pressure difference between the hose’s inlet and its outlet. 
This pressure difference determines the water’s pressure gradient and thus how 
hard the water is pushed forward through the hose.
4. It’s proportional to the fourth power of the diameter of the hose. Tripling the 
hose’s diameter provides the water with nine times as much room and also allows 
water near the hose’s center to move nine times faster.
We can turn these four proportional relationships into an equation by adding the correct 
numerical constant (π/128). The fi nal relationship is called Poiseuille’s law and can be 
written as a word equation:
 
volume = π · pressure difference · pipe diameter4
128 · pipe length · fluid viscosity
, 
(6.1.1)
Check Your Understanding #1: Keeping Warm on a Windy Day
A loosely woven wool sweater has many tiny air passages between the wool fi bers, yet it dramatically 
reduces the rate at which air fl ows through to your skin when you stand in a breeze. Why doesn’t air 
fl ow easily through the gaps between the fi bers? 
Answer: The air at the surfaces of the fi bers is stationary, and the air’s viscosity slows the motion of 
air in the vicinity of the fi bers. 
Why: Although air trying to pass through the gaps may not directly touch the fi bers, viscous forces 
tend to keep all the air moving together at the same velocity. As soon as some air is held up by a fi ber, 
the air nearby is slowed by viscous forces. The fi bers of a sweater are close enough together that 
viscous forces slow all the air trying to pass through the sweater. Imagine trying to pour honey 
through a sweater. 
Velocity
Fig. 6.1.1 The speed of 
water fl owing through a 
pipe is not constant across 
the pipe. The water near 
the walls is stationary, 
while the water at the 
center of the pipe moves 
the fastest. The differences 
in velocity are the result of 
viscous forces.

146 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
in symbols:
ΔV
Δt = π · Δp · D4
128 · L · 𝜂,
and in everyday language:
It’s hard to squeeze honey through a long, thin tube. 
POISEUILLE’S LAW
The volume of fl uid fl owing through a cylindrical pipe each second is equal to (𝜋/128) 
times the pressure difference (Δp) across that pipe times the pipe’s diameter to the 
fourth power, divided by the pipe’s length times the fl uid’s viscosity (ƞ).
 
It’s hardly surprising that the fl ow rate depends in this manner on the pressure differ-
ence, pipe length, and viscosity; we’ve all observed that low water pressure or a long hose 
lengthens the time needed to fi ll a bucket with water and that viscous syrup pours slowly 
from a bottle. However, the dependence of the fl ow rate on the fourth power of pipe diam-
eter is unexpected. Even a small change in the diameter of a hose signifi cantly changes the 
amount of water that hose delivers each second. The two most common garden hoses in the 
United States have diameters of 5
8 inch and 3
4 inch, and while these hoses differ by a seem-
ingly insignifi cant 20% or a factor of 1.2 in diameter, the 3
4-inch hose can carry about 1.24 
or two times as much water as the 5
8-inch hose (see 2  and 3 ).
 
We can also look at viscous forces in terms of ordered energy. By opposing the fl ow of 
water through a hose, viscous forces do negative work on it and reduce its ordered energy—
the energy considered in Bernoulli’s equation, which doesn’t include thermal energy. Just 
how much ordered energy the water retains depends on how fast it moves inside the hose. 
If you allow lots of water to leave the hose, water will move through it quickly and encoun-
ter large viscous forces. In the process, most of the water’s ordered energy will be wasted 
as thermal energy and the water will pour gently out of the end of the hose.
 
However, if you partially block the hose’s opening with your thumb and reduce the 
fl ow, water will travel slowly through the hose and encounter smaller viscous forces. As a 
result, the water will retain most of its ordered energy and will still be at high pressure 
when it reaches your thumb. This high-pressure water will then accelerate to enormous 
speed as it passes through the narrow opening and sprays out into the air.
 
We can now explain why water delivery systems normally use the widest pipes that are 
practical and affordable. In contrast to a narrow hose, wide pipes can carry large amounts of 
water while letting that water travel slowly, experience weak viscous forces, and waste little 
of its ordered energy. In such energy-effi cient water delivery systems, friction is insignifi cant 
and Bernoulli’s equation (Eq. 5.2.4) accurately predicts water’s properties throughout its trip.
2  To deliver large 
amounts of water at high 
pressure or velocity, fi re 
hoses must have large 
diameters. When fi lled 
with high-pressure water, 
these wide hoses become 
stiff and heavy, making 
them diffi cult to handle. 
Chemical additives that 
decrease water’s viscosity 
allow fi refi ghters to use 
narrower, lighter, and 
more fl exible hoses.
3  Very large diameter 
pipes are required to 
transport crude oil across 
the Alaskan wilderness. 
The distances are long, 
and the fl uid is viscous, 
although it is heated to 
lower its viscosity.
Check Your Understanding #2: Air Ducts
The long air ducts used to ventilate homes and businesses usually have very large diameters. These 
ducts are often visible near the ceilings of modern warehouse-style stores and restaurants as pipes 
roughly 0.5 m across. Why must the ducts be so large in diameter? 
Answer: Air’s viscosity slows its fl ow through ductwork. Moving large volumes of air rapidly without a 
large pressure difference between inlet and outlet requires a large diameter pipe. 
Why: The airfl ow through long ductwork is dominated by viscous forces. The volume of air moved 
through ductwork is often enormous, and the pressure difference between the inlet and outlet is 
normally only a fraction of an atmosphere. To allow the air to move quickly through the ducts, their 
diameters must be large. 

Garden Watering 147
Flow in a Bent Hose: Dynamic Pressure Variations
Let’s suppose that on reaching your garden the hose bends toward the right and the fl owing 
water bends with it. That water is accelerating as it turns, and as we observed in Chapter 5, 
water accelerates horizontally only in response to unbalanced pressures. Since the hose is 
motionless, the unbalanced pressures inside it must be caused by the water itself; the water 
is experiencing dynamic pressure variations.
 
To understand these dynamic pressure variations, let’s follow the streamlines as water 
traverses this bend. Although we’ve just introduced viscous forces, we’re going to ignore 
them here for clarity and simplicity. Viscous forces are certainly important in the long nar-
row hose; however, the bend is so short that viscous forces have little effect on what hap-
pens to the water passing through it.
 
Neglecting viscous forces, the water’s ordered energy is constant along each streamline 
and we can observe the interchanges of energy allowed by Bernoulli’s equation (Eq. 5.2.4). 
However, since the hose rests on level ground, water’s gravitational potential energy can’t vary 
and the only interchanges we’ll see are between pressure potential energy and kinetic energy.
 
Figure 6.1.2 shows the water’s steady-state fl ow pattern near the bend. We’re looking 
down on the hose in this calculated drawing and, as indicated by the black streamlines, 
water that is initially fl owing straight ahead arcs rightward at the bend and eventually con-
tinues directly toward the right.
 
Water approaches the bend through a straight section of hose in which its streamlines 
are straight and parallel. Water fl ows at constant velocity along these streamlines—the 
Check Your Figures #1: Old Plumbing
When your friend’s house was new, the kitchen faucet could deliver 0.50 liter per second (0.50 L/s). 
Over the years, mineral deposits have built up in the pipes and reduced their effective diameters by 
20%. How much water can the faucet deliver now? 
Answer: It can deliver about 0.20 L/s. 
Why: Water fl ow in pipes obeys Poiseuille’s law (Eq. 6.1.1) and is proportional to the pipe diameter 
to the fourth power. Reducing the diameter by 20%, a factor of 0.8, while leaving the pipe length, 
pressures, and viscosity unchanged, will reduce the volume fl ow rate by a factor of 0.84 or 0.41. The 
pipes now deliver about 0.20 L/s (0.50 L/s times 0.41). It clearly doesn’t take much mineral accu-
mulation to dramatically reduce the fl ow through a pipe. 
Low pressure
High speed
High pressure
Low speed
Hose
Fig. 6.1.2 Water in a bent hose 
experiences changes in speed and 
pressure. The black streamlines show 
the paths the water takes as it fl ows 
around the bend. The spacing between 
streamlines indicates fl ow speed (a 
wider space is a slower fl ow), and the 
background color indicates pressure 
(violet is higher pressure; red is lower 
pressure).

148 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
water’s direction is fi xed and it can’t change its speed. If it tried to speed up, it would leave 
a gap behind it; if it tried to slow down, it would cause a “traffi c jam.” The water’s pressure 
must be uniform throughout this straight section because it would accelerate if there were 
any differences in pressure.
 
The water’s constant velocity and uniform pressure are represented visually in 
Fig. 6.1.2. Local water velocities are revealed by the directions and separations of the 
streamlines. Water’s velocity always points along its streamline, and its speed is inversely 
proportional to the streamline spacing. Streamlines that become more widely spaced denote 
decreasing speed—water that slows down spreads out sideways and its streamlines sepa-
rate from one another. Streamlines that become more narrowly spaced denote increasing 
speed—water that speeds up stretches out along its path and its streamlines draw toward 
one another. Since the streamlines leading up to the bend are straight and evenly spaced, we 
know that water moves along each streamline at constant velocity.
 
Local water pressure is displayed in Fig. 6.1.2 as the colors of the rainbow. Colors 
toward the violet end of the spectrum denote higher pressures, while those toward the red 
end of the spectrum denote lower pressures. Since the straight section has a uniform blue-
green color, the water there has a uniform, moderate pressure.
 
Once the water starts bending toward the right, however, its velocities and pressures 
begin to vary. Since the water is accelerating toward the inside of the bend, there must be a 
pressure imbalance pushing it in that direction. Sure enough, the turning stream of water 
develops higher local pressure (violet) near the outside of the bend and lower local pressure 
near the inside of the bend (red). A similar pressure imbalance accompanies any bend in a 
fl uid’s path; the pressure is always higher on the outside of the bend than it is on the inside 
of that bend. After all, that pressure imbalance is what causes the fl uid fl ow to bend!
BENDS AND PRESSURE IMBALANCES
When the path of a fl uid in steady-state fl ow bends, the pressure on the outside of the 
bend is always higher than the pressure on the inside of the bend.
 
To keep the ordered energy constant along a streamline, each decrease in the water’s 
local pressure is accompanied by an increase in the water’s local speed, and the opposite is 
also true. Water arcing around the outside of the bend slows down (the streamline spacing 
widens) as its pressure rises, while the water arcing around the inside of the bend speeds up 
(the streamline spacing narrows) as its pressure drops.
 
As the hose straightens out beyond the bend, the water’s pressures and speeds return 
to what they were before the bend. Water from the outside of the bend speeds up and its 
pressure drops, while water from the inside of the bend slows down and its pressure rises. 
In the straight section following the bend, water’s velocity is once again constant along 
each streamline and its pressure is uniform.
 
Odd as these pressure and speed changes may seem, they are quite real and have real 
consequences. If your hose were clear and you could introduce thin threads of dye into 
the fl owing water, you’d see these dyed streamlines arc around the bend just as they do 
in Fig. 6.1.2. If the hose were weak and couldn’t tolerate excessive pressure, it would be 
most likely to burst on the outside of the bend, where the local water pressure is highest.
 
You might wonder which causes which: Does each pressure change cause a speed 
change, or does each speed change cause a pressure change? The answer is that they occur 
together and are equally entitled to be called cause and effect. Once the steady-state fl ow 
pattern has established itself, water following a particular streamline experiences rises and 
falls in pressure at the same time that it experiences decreases and increases in speed. The 
two effects—pressure changes and speed changes—simply go hand in hand.

Garden Watering 149
Check Your Understanding #3: Washing Your Shirt with a Spoon
You’re washing dishes when the stream of water falling from the kitchen faucet follows the curve of 
a spoon and sprays up onto your shirt. As the stream bent upward, where was its pressure greatest? 
Answer: Pressure was greatest at the surface of the spoon.
Why: The pressure in the stream of water must be higher on the outside of the bend—at the spoon’s 
surface—than on the inside of the bend.
Flow through a Nozzle: From Pressure to Speed
When water fi nally fl ows through the nozzle at the end of your hose, it exchanges its remain-
ing pressure potential energy for kinetic energy and sprays out into the garden. The nozzle’s 
narrowing channel initiates this energy transformation so that low-speed, high-pressure water 
entering the nozzle becomes fast-moving, atmospheric-pressure water leaving the nozzle.
 
Figure 6.1.3 shows that, as water passes through the nozzle, the narrowing channel 
herds all the streamlines together, so the water’s local speed increases. The water following 
each streamline is speeding up to squirt through the bottleneck without causing a backup. 
This increase in water’s local speed is accompanied by a decrease in water’s local pressure, 
as indicated by the color shift toward the red end of the spectrum.
 
By the time the water leaves the hose nozzle, its pressure has dropped all the way to 
atmospheric pressure and it has turned all its available pressure potential energy into 
kinetic energy. It emerges as a narrow stream of fast-moving water and arcs gracefully 
through the air. No wonder you can reach the farthest parts of your garden with water when 
you use a nozzle.
Medium pressure
Medium speed
Low pressure
High speed
Nozzle
Fig. 6.1.3 Water fl owing through a nozzle 
speeds up and its pressure drops. The 
narrowing spacing between streamlines 
indicates that the fl ow speed is increasing, 
while the color shift from violet toward red 
indicates that the pressure is dropping.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Speed and Pressure in Fluids
Misconception: A fast-moving fl uid always has a low pressure.
Resolution: The pressure of a specifi c portion of fl uid depends on its circumstances and can 
take any value, high or low. However, if a fl uid speeds up without descending as it fl ows along 
a streamline in steady-state fl ow, its pressure will decrease. In that special context, the faster 
moving fl uid has a lower pressure. 

150 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
The Onset of Turbulence
As you direct the stream of water at the plants in your garden, you notice two interest-
ing phenomena: fi rst, the stream pushes on any surface that slows it down, and second, 
it tends to break up into fragments as it fl ows around obstacles. The pushing effect is 
another Bernoulli result: when the stream collides with a surface and bends away, its 
pressure at the surface rises to cause the bend and that rising pressure pushes the 
 surface forward.
 
The breakup effect, however, is something new. In trying to go around the obstacle, 
the stream of water loses its orderly structure and disintegrates into a swirling, hissing 
froth. Actually, the hiss you hear is familiar; you heard it as you opened the faucet to start 
water fl owing through the hose. That faucet uses a movable stopper to control the fl ow of 
water into the hose; as you opened the faucet, you gradually removed this stopper from the 
water pipe to allow water to fl ow more freely into the hose and the faucet hissed. Whether 
water encounters a plant or a faucet stopper, there is something about high speeds and 
obstacles that upsets the smoothly fl owing fl uid.
 
Up until now, we’ve discussed only laminar fl ow, the smooth, silent fl ow that’s char-
acterized by simple streamlines. In laminar fl ow, adjacent regions of a fl uid always remain 
adjacent. For example, if you place two drops of dye near one another in a smoothly fl ow-
ing stream, they will remain close together indefi nitely as they follow streamlines in the 
laminar fl ow (Fig. 6.1.4, left). Laminar fl ow is the orderly result of viscous forces, which 
tend to bring adjacent portions of fl uid to the same velocity. When viscosity dominates a 
fl uid’s motion, the fl ow is usually laminar.
 
However, as the stream fl ows swiftly past rocks and obstacles, its streamlines break up 
into the eddies and churning “white water” that make rafting exciting (Fig. 6.1.4, right). 
The dye is quickly dispersed in this frenzied turbulence. The stream is experiencing 
 turbulent fl ow, a roiling, noisy fl ow in which adjacent regions of fl uid soon become sepa-
rated from one another as they move independently in unpredictable directions. Turbulent 
fl ow is the disorderly consequence of inertia, which tends to propel each portion of fl uid 
independently according to its own momentum. When inertia dominates a fl uid’s motion, 
the fl ow is usually turbulent.
Check Your Understanding #4: Cleaning House
As air rushes steadily into the narrow opening of a vacuum cleaner attachment, it accelerates to high 
speed and its pressure drops well below atmospheric pressure. From where does the air’s newfound 
kinetic energy come? 
Answer: Even at atmospheric pressure, air has pressure potential energy. As it accelerates toward 
even lower pressure in the attachment, air converts some of that pressure potential energy into 
kinetic energy. 
Why: Vacuum cleaners employ nozzles to get air moving very quickly. Fast-moving air rushing into the 
vacuum cleaner draws dust with it and cleans your home.
Fig. 6.1.4 Water fl ows 
slowly past rocks in the 
stream on the left, and its 
viscosity keeps it smooth 
and laminar. Water fl ows 
quickly past rocks in the 
stream on the right, and 
its inertia separates it into 
swirling, splashing pockets 
of turbulence.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Garden Watering 151
 
The plants and faucet stopper are evidently initiating turbulence in what had been 
laminar fl ows; fl ows that were dominated by viscous forces are suddenly dominated by 
inertia instead. Whether a fl ow is laminar or turbulent depends on several characteristics of 
the fl uid and its environment:
1. 
The fl uid’s viscosity. Viscous forces tend to keep nearby regions of fl uid moving 
together, so high viscosity favors laminar fl ow (Fig. 6.1.5).
2. 
The fl uid’s speed past a stationary obstacle. The faster the fl uid is moving, the 
more quickly two nearby regions of fl uid can become separated and the harder it 
is for viscous forces to keep them together.
3. The size of the obstacle the fl uid encounters. The larger the obstacle, the more 
likely that it will cause turbulence because viscous forces will be unable to keep 
the fl uid ordered over such a long distance.
4. 
The fl uid’s density. The denser the fl uid, the less it responds to viscous forces and 
the more likely it is to become turbulent.
 
Rather than keeping track of all four physical quantities independently, English mathe-
matician and engineer Osborne Reynolds (1842–1912) found that they could be combined 
into a single number that permits a comparison of seemingly different fl ows. The Reynolds 
number is defi ned as
 
Reynolds number = density · obstacle length · flow speed
viscosity
. 
(6.1.2)
 
The units on the right side of Eq. 6.1.2 cancel one another, so the Reynolds number is 
dimensionless; that is, it’s just a simple number, such as 10 or 25,000. As the Reynolds 
number increases, the fl ow goes from viscous-dominated to inertia-dominated and there-
fore from laminar to turbulent. In his experiments, Reynolds found that turbulence usually 
appears when the Reynolds number exceeds roughly 2300. You can observe this transition 
by moving a 1-cm-thick (0.4-in-thick) stick through still water. If you move the stick 
slowly, about 10 cm/s (4 in/s), the Reynolds number will be about 1000 and the fl ow around 
the stick will be laminar. But if you speed the stick up to about 50 cm/s (20 in/s), the Rey-
nolds number will rise to about 5000 and the fl ow will become turbulent.
Fig. 6.1.5 Honey’s large viscosity keeps it fl owing smoothly (laminar fl ow) when you pour it. Water’s 
small viscosity allows it to splash about (turbulent fl ow) in a fountain. In both cases, the effective 
obstacle length is the width of the fl owing fl uid, about 1 cm.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

152 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
 
One of the most common features of turbulent fl ows is the vortex, a swirling region of 
fl uid that moves in a circle around a central cavity. A vortex resembles a miniature tornado, 
with its cavity created by inertia as the fl uid spins. Vortices are easily visible behind a canoe 
paddle, in a mixing bowl, or in a cup of coffee stirred rapidly with a spoon. Once an object 
moves fast enough through a fl uid to create turbulence, these vortices begin to form. Each 
vortex builds up behind the object but is soon whisked away to form a wake of shed vorti-
ces, vortices that have broken free of the object that made them.
 
While laminar fl ow is fully predictable, turbulent fl ow exhibits chaotic behavior or 
chaos; you can no longer predict exactly where any particular drop of water will go. 
The study of chaos is a relatively new fi eld of science. Because a chaotic system, that 
is, a system exhibiting chaos, is exquisitely sensitive to initial conditions, even the 
slightest change in those conditions may produce profound changes in its situation 
later on.
 
Even when you can’t see turbulent water fl ow, you can usually hear it. The churning 
motion of turbulence converts some of the water’s ordered energy into thermal energy and 
sound. The turbulence near the faucet slightly reduces the water’s ordered energy as it 
enters the hose and therefore its speed as it emerges from the nozzle and sprays toward 
your garden.
 
A different sound occurs when you abruptly close the nozzle and stop the fl ow of 
water. Moving water has momentum, and stopping it suddenly requires an enormous back-
ward force. Since the slowing fl ow is not steady state, Bernoulli’s equation doesn’t apply 
and the pressure can surge to astronomical values near the front of the moving water. This 
pressure surge is what accelerates the water backward to slow it down and what leads to the 
loud “thump” sound you hear as the water stops. Known as water hammer, the surging 
pressure in front of stopping water jerks the nozzle, swells the hose, and may even rattle the 
pipes in your home.
Check Your Understanding #5: Urban Windstorms
On a windy day in a city with many tall buildings, leaves and papers can be seen swirling about in 
the air or on the sidewalks. What causes these whirling air currents? 
Answer: The air fl owing through the “canyons” created by the buildings becomes turbulent and forms 
vortices that swirl the leaves and papers. 
Why: Whether an object moves through a fl uid or a fl uid moves past an object, a Reynolds number is 
associated with the situation. When the Reynolds number becomes high enough that viscosity is 
unable to keep the fl uid fl owing in an orderly fashion, turbulence appears. In wind blowing through 
a big city, turbulence and its whirling vortices are everywhere. 
Check Your Figures #2: Wind on the Open Road
Is the fl ow of air around a convertible laminar or turbulent as the convertible cruises down the high-
way? (Air’s viscosity is given in Table 6.1.1.) 
Answer: Turbulent. 
Why: To calculate the Reynolds number for the airfl ow around the car, you need air’s viscosity from 
Table 6.1.1 (0.0000183 Pa ∙ s, or 0.0000183 kg/m ∙ s), air’s density from Section 4.1 (1.25 kg/m3), 
the car’s size (roughly 3 m), and its speed through the air (roughly 55 mph or 25 m/s). You can then 
calculate its approximate Reynolds number using Eq. 6.1.2: 
Reynolds number = 1.25 kg/m3 · 3 m · 25 m/s
0.0000183 kg/m · s
= 5.1 million.
The convertible’s Reynolds number is far above the threshold for turbulence (2300), so the air swirls 
chaotically around the vehicle. That explains why your hair fl ies around wildly. 

Ball Sports: Air 153
When a Ball Moves Slowly: Laminar Airfl ow
One of the fi rst things you might notice if you joined a new baseball franchise on the moon 
is that pitched balls reach home plate faster than back at home. Since the moon has no 
atmosphere, there is no air resistance to slow a ball down. In the previous section, we saw 
how objects affect moving fl uids. Now as we study aerodynamics, the science of air’s 
dynamic interactions, we’ll see how fl uids affect moving objects.
 
In air, a moving ball experiences aerodynamic forces—that is, forces exerted on it by 
the air because of their relative motion. These consist of drag forces that push the ball 
downwind and lift forces that push the ball to one side or the other (Fig. 6.2.1). We’ll begin 
our study of ball aerodynamics with drag forces, commonly called air resistance, and we’ll 
start with a slow-moving ball. The reason for starting slow is that at low speeds viscous 
forces are able to organize the air as it fl ows around the ball; viscosity dominates over iner-
tia, and the airfl ow around the slow-moving ball is laminar.
 
Figure 6.2.2 shows the pattern of laminar airfl ow around a slow-moving ball. Actually, 
the pattern is the same whether the ball moves slowly through the air or the air moves 
slowly past the ball. For simplicity, let’s move along with the ball and study the airfl ow 
from the ball’s inertial frame of reference. In that inertial frame, the ball appears stationary 
with the air fl owing past it.
 
The slow-moving air separates neatly around the front of the ball and comes back 
together behind it. It produces a wake, an air trail behind the ball, that’s smooth and free of 
turbulence. However, the air’s speed and pressure aren’t uniform all the way around the 
ball. The airfl ow bends several times as it travels around the ball and, as we saw in the 
previous section, such bends always involve pressure imbalances. Since the air pressure far 
from the ball is steadfastly atmospheric, those pressure imbalances are always caused by 
pressure variations near the ball’s surface. Whenever air bends away from the ball, so 
that the ball is on the outside of a bend, the pressure near the ball must be higher than 
atmospheric. Whenever the air bends toward the ball, so that the ball is on the inside of a 
bend, the pressure near the ball must be lower than atmospheric.
SECTION 6.2
wouldn’t have to worry about hooks or slices. In this section, we 
will investigate how air affects the fl ight of balls and other 
related objects.
Questions to Think About: Why can you throw a real baseball so 
much farther than a hollow plastic one? Why does a long fl y ball 
appear to drop straight down when you try to catch it in deep 
center fi eld? What kind of force could make a curveball curve? 
What makes a well-hit golf ball hang in the air before falling to 
the green? How can a knuckleball or spitball jitter about in fl ight?
Experiments to Do: To make air’s effects most apparent, you 
need a ball that weighs little but has lots of surface area. A beach 
ball is ideal, but a whiffl e ball or hollow plastic ball will also do 
nicely. See how far you can throw it. How does it stop? Does it 
slow down and lose height gradually, or does it stop rapidly and 
fall to the ground? Now make the ball spin as you throw it. Why 
does the ball curve in fl ight? Does a faster spin make the ball 
curve more or less? Which way is the ball spinning, and how is 
the spin related to the direction of its curve? Change the direc-
tion of spin. Which way does the ball curve now?
Much of the subtlety and nuance in games such as baseball 
and golf come from the way balls interact with air. If baseball 
were played on the moon, which has no air, the only pitches 
would be the fastball and the not-so-fastball. Moon golfers 
Ball Sports: Air
Turbulent 
wake
Spin
Lift
Drag
Drag
Lift
Airstream
Fig. 6.2.1 The two types 
of aerodynamic forces 
exerted on objects by air 
are drag and lift. Drag 
is exerted parallel to the 
onrushing airstream and 
slows the object’s motion 
through the air. Lift is 
exerted perpendicular to 
that airstream so that it 
pushes the object to one 
side or the other. Lift is not 
necessarily in the upward 
direction.

154 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
 
With that introduction, let’s examine the slow-moving airfl ow around the ball. Air 
heading toward the ball’s front bends away from it, so the pressure near the front of the ball 
must be higher than atmospheric. This rise in air pressure is accompanied by a decrease in 
airspeed, the air’s speed relative to the ball. Figure 6.2.2 indicates the pressure rise by a 
color shift toward the violet end of the spectrum and the decrease in airspeed by the widen-
ing separation of the streamlines.
 
The air rounding the ball’s sides bends toward it, so the pressure near those sides of the 
ball must be below atmospheric. This drop in air pressure is accompanied by an increase in 
airspeed. Figure 6.2.2 indicates the pressure drop by a color shift toward the red end of the 
spectrum and the increase in airspeed by the narrowing separation of the streamlines.
 
The laminar airfl ow continues around to the back of the ball and then trails off behind 
it. Since the departing air again bends away from the ball, the pressure near the back of the 
ball must be higher than atmospheric. As before, the shift toward violet in Figure 6.2.2 
indicates this pressure rise and the widening separation of the streamlines points out the 
accompanying decrease in airspeed.
 
It may seem strange that the air pressure can be different at different points on the ball, 
but that’s what happens in a fl owing stream of air. It’s particularly remarkable that low-
pressure air at the sides of the ball is able to fl ow around to the back of the ball, where the 
pressure is higher. This air is experiencing a pressure imbalance that pushes it backward, 
opposite its direction of travel. But a pressure imbalance causes acceleration, not velocity, 
and the low-pressure air fl owing past the sides of the ball has enough ordered energy and 
forward momentum to carry it all the way to the back of the ball. Although this air slows as 
it fl ows into the rising pressure, it manages to complete its journey.
 
The airfl ow around the ball is symmetrical, and the forces that air pressure exerts on 
the ball are also symmetrical. These pressure forces cancel one another perfectly, so the 
ball experiences no overall force due to pressure. Most important, the high pressure in 
front of the ball is balanced by the high pressure behind it. As a result of this symmetrical 
arrangement, the only aerodynamic force acting on the ball is viscous drag, the down-
stream frictional force caused by layers of viscous air sliding across the ball’s surface 
(see 4 ).
Low pressure
High speed
High pressure
Low speed
High pressure
Low speed
Fig. 6.2.2 The airfl ow around a slowly moving ball is laminar. Air slows down in front of and behind 
the ball (widely spaced streamlines), and its pressure increases (shifts toward the violet end of the 
spectrum). Air speeds up at the sides of the ball (narrowly spaced streamlines), and its pressure 
decreases (shifts toward the red end of the spectrum). However, the pressure forces on the ball balance 
one another perfectly, and it experiences no pressure drag. Only viscous drag is present to affect the ball.
4  When the airfl ow 
around an object is 
laminar, the pressure 
forces on it cancel 
perfectly and it experi-
ences no drag due to 
pressure imbalances—no 
pressure drag. The 
absence of pressure drag 
was a great puzzlement to 
early aerodynamicists, 
who knew that the airfl ow 
around dust is laminar and 
that it experiences a drag 
force. This mystery was 
named d’Alembert’s 
paradox, after Jean Le 
Rond d’Alembert 
(1717–1783), the French 
mathematician who fi rst 
recognized it. D’Alembert 
and his contemporaries 
didn’t know about the 
viscous drag force, which 
is what really slows dust’s 
motion through the air.

Ball Sports: Air 155
 
We’ll soon see that viscous drag is only a small fraction of the air resistance experi-
enced by sports balls. It is also the force that suspends dust in the air for hours and is an 
important issue for airplane wings. Moreover, it’s a force that we’ve encountered before: 
viscous drag slowed water in your garden hose in the previous section!
Check Your Understanding #1: Smooth Flow in a Stream
When water in a stream fl ows slowly past a small rock, the water in front of the rock slows down and 
its increased pressure lifts the water level slightly. The water level behind the rock also rises slightly. 
Explain. 
Answer: The slow fl ow of water around the rock is laminar, so its pressure is highest at the front and 
back of the rock. The increased pressure behind the rock lifts the water level there. 
Why: Laminar fl ow around an obstacle tends to create high-pressure regions at the front and back, 
and low-pressure regions on the sides. In the case of our small rock, the pressure differences are 
visible as changes in the water level. At the front and back of the rock, the relatively high pressures 
push the water level upward, while at the sides of the rock, the water level is depressed.
When a Ball Moves Fast: Turbulent Airfl ow
Balls don’t always experience laminar airfl ow. Turbulence is common, particularly in 
sports, and brings with it a new type of drag force. When the air fl owing around a ball is 
turbulent, the air pressure distribution is no longer symmetrical and the ball experiences 
pressure drag, the downstream force exerted by unbalanced pressures in the moving air. 
These unbalanced pressures exert an overall force on the ball that slows its motion 
through the air.
 
A ball can experience turbulent airfl ow and pressure drag when the Reynolds number 
exceeds about 2000. The Reynolds number, introduced in the previous section, combines 
the ball’s size and speed with the air’s density and viscosity to give an indication of whether 
the airfl ow is dominated by viscosity or inertia. At low Reynolds numbers, the air’s viscosity 
dominates over its inertia and the airfl ow is laminar. At high Reynolds numbers, however, 
air’s inertia dominates over its viscosity and the airfl ow tends to become turbulent. This 
turbulence, however, won’t start until something triggers it, and viscosity provides that 
trigger.
 
To understand viscosity’s role, we must look at the air near the ball’s surface. Even in 
a strong wind, viscous forces slow down a thin boundary layer of air near the ball’s 
 surface (Fig. 6.2.3). Discovered by Ludwig Prandtl 5  with help from Gustave Eiffel 
(Fig. 6.2.4), this boundary layer moves more slowly and has less ordered energy than the 
freely fl owing air farther from the surface.
 
As air fl ows toward the back of the ball, it travels through an adverse pressure gradi-
ent, a region of rising pressure that pushes backward on the air and causes it to decelerate. 
While the freely fl owing airstream outside the boundary layer has enough energy and for-
ward momentum to continue onward and reach the back of the ball on its own, air in the 
boundary layer does not. It needs a forward push.
 
At low Reynolds numbers, the entire airstream helps to push that boundary layer all 
the way to the back of the ball and the airfl ow remains laminar. At high Reynolds num-
bers, however, viscous forces between the freely fl owing airstream and the boundary 
layer are too weak to keep the boundary layer moving forward into the rising pressure 
behind the ball.
 
Without adequate help, the boundary layer eventually stalls; that is, it comes to a stop 
and thereby spoils steady-state fl ow. More horrible still, this stalled boundary layer air is 
pushed backward by the adverse pressure gradient and returns all the way to the ball’s 
sides. As it does, it cuts like a wedge between the ball and the freely fl owing airstream. The 
5  Among Ludwig 
Prandtl’s (German 
engineer, 1875–1953) 
many pivotal contribu-
tions to aerodynamic 
theory is the concept of 
boundary layers in fl uid 
motion. Prandtl was so 
engrossed in establishing 
Göttingen as the world’s 
foremost aerodynamic 
research facility that he 
did not have time to court 
a wife. Deciding he 
should be married, Prandtl 
wrote his former advisor’s 
wife, asking to marry one 
of her two daughters but 
not specifying which one. 
The family selected the 
eldest daughter, and the 
wedding took place.
Fig. 6.2.3 As air fl ows 
past a surface, a thin 
layer of it is slowed 
by viscous drag forces. 
This boundary layer is 
laminar at low Reynolds 
numbers and doesn’t 
become turbulent until the 
Reynolds number exceeds 
about 100,000.
Boundary layer
St
re
a
ml
in
e
Velo
citi
es

156 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
result is an aerodynamic catastrophe—the airstream separates from the ball, leaving a huge 
turbulent wake or air pocket behind the ball (Fig. 6.2.5).
 
Because of this turbulent wake, air no longer bends smoothly away from the back of 
the ball and there is no rise in pressure there. Instead, the pressure behind the ball is 
roughly atmospheric. The absence of a high-pressure region behind the ball spoils the 
symmetry of pressure forces on the ball, and those forces no longer cancel. The ball expe-
riences an overall pressure force downwind—the force of pressure drag. In effect, the ball 
is transferring forward momentum to the air in its turbulent wake and dragging that wake 
along with it.
 
Pressure drag slows the fl ight of almost any ball moving faster than a snail’s pace. The 
pressure drag force is roughly proportional to the cross-sectional area of the turbulent air 
pocket and to the square of the ball’s speed through the air. Area times speed is the volume 
of air the ball affects per second. The second factor of speed recognizes how much the air’s 
speed changes as the ball drags it along in its air pocket. For a ball moving at a moderate 
speed, the air pocket is about as wide as the ball and the ball experiences a large pressure 
drag force.
Low pressure
High speed
High pressure
Low speed
Turbulent
wake
Reversed ﬂow
Fig. 6.2.5 When a ball’s speed gives it a Reynolds number between about 2000 and 100,000, its 
laminar boundary layer stalls in the rising pressure behind the ball. The resulting reversed fl ow causes 
the main airfl ow to separate from the ball’s surface, leaving a large, turbulent wake. The average 
pressure behind the ball remains low, and the ball experiences a large pressure drag.
Check Your Understanding #2: Leaving No Trace
When your canoe coasts extremely slowly across the water of a still lake, it leaves almost no trail in 
the water behind it. When you paddle it swiftly through the water, however, the canoe leaves a swirl-
ing wake. Explain this difference. 
Answer: The slow-moving canoe experiences laminar fl ow in the water, while the fast-moving canoe 
experiences turbulent fl ow. 
Why: If the canoe’s speed is less than about 1 cm/s, its Reynolds number will be less than 2000 and 
the water fl ow around it will be laminar. The water will pass smoothly around the canoe’s sides and 
join back together behind it. However, when the canoe is moving fast enough that its Reynolds num-
ber exceeds 2000, the water fl ow becomes turbulent and the canoe leaves a churning wake in the 
water behind it. This wake produces pressure drag on the canoe and extracts energy from it. Anyone 
who has paddled a canoe knows that overcoming this pressure drag can be exhausting. 
Fig. 6.2.4 Early 
experiments in aerodynamics 
were performed by Gustave 
Eiffel (French engineer, 
1832–1923), who designed 
the tower that bears his 
name. In the 1890s, Eiffel 
dropped objects of various 
sizes and shapes from his 
tower and measured the drag 
that they experienced. His 
work was used by Prandtl 
to explain the reduction in 
drag that accompanies the 
appearance of turbulent 
boundary layers.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Ball Sports: Air 157
The Dimples on a Golf Ball
If this were the whole story, you would never hit a home run at a baseball game or a 
250-yard drive on the golf course. But inertia has yet another card to play.
 
At very high Reynolds numbers, the boundary layer itself becomes turbulent 
(Fig. 6.2.6). It loses its laminar streamlines and begins to mix rapidly within itself and with 
the freely fl owing airstream nearby. This mixing brings additional ordered energy and for-
ward momentum into the boundary layer and makes it both harder to stop and more resis-
tant to reversed fl ow. Although this turbulent boundary layer still stalls before reaching the 
back of the ball, the stalled air fl ows upstream only a short distance. The freely fl owing 
airstream still separates from the ball; however, that separation occurs far back on the ball 
and the resulting turbulent wake is relatively small (Fig. 6.2.7).
 
As a result of this smaller air pocket, the pressure drag is reduced from what it would 
be without the turbulent boundary layer. The effect of replacing the laminar boundary layer 
with a turbulent one is enormous; it’s the difference between a golf drive of 70 yards and 
one of 250 yards! The effects of the Reynolds number on the airfl ow around a ball are 
summarized in Table 6.2.1.
 
Delaying the airfl ow separation behind the back of the ball is so important to distance 
and speed that the balls of some sports are designed to encourage a turbulent boundary 
layer (Fig. 6.2.8). Rather than waiting for the Reynolds number to exceed 100,000, the 
point near which the boundary layer spontaneously becomes turbulent, these balls “trip” 
the boundary layer deliberately (Fig. 6.2.9). They introduce some impediment to laminar 
fl ow that causes the air near the ball’s surface to tumble about and become turbulent. The 
drop in pressure drag more than makes up for the small increase in viscous drag, which is 
why a golf ball has dimples. A tennis ball’s fuzz, however, evidently creates more drag than 
it eliminates; shaving a tennis ball would actually help it maintain its speed.
Low pressure
High speed
High pressure
Low speed
Turbulent
wake
Fig. 6.2.7 When a ball travels fast 
enough that its Reynolds number exceeds 
100,000, its boundary layer becomes 
turbulent. This turbulent layer travels 
much of the way around the back of the 
ball before it separates from the surface. 
The freely fl owing air follows it, and the 
two leave a relatively small turbulent 
wake. The ball experiences only a modest 
pressure drag.
TABLE 6.2.1 Effects of Reynolds Number on the Airfl ow around a Ball or Other Object
Reynolds Number
Boundary Layer
Type of Wake
Main Drag Force
<2000
Laminar
Small laminar
Viscous
2000–100,000
Laminar
Large turbulent
Pressure
>100,000
Turbulent
Small turbulent
Pressure
Boundary layer
  
St
re
a
ml
in
es
   
  
Ve
lo
ci
ti
es
Fig. 6.2.6 When the 
Reynolds number exceeds 
about 100,000, the 
boundary layer of air 
fl owing past a surface 
becomes turbulent. This 
whirling fl uid brings in 
extra ordered energy and 
forward momentum from 
the freely fl owing airstream 
and can travel deep into 
a region of increasing 
pressure.

158 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
 
How much does drag affect balls in various sports? For those that involve rapid move-
ments through air or water, the answer is quite a bit. Drag forces increase dramatically with 
speed; as soon as a turbulent wake and pressure drag appear, the drag force increases as the 
square of a ball’s speed. As a result, baseball pitches slow signifi cantly during their fl ights 
to home plate, and the faster they’re thrown, the more speed they lose. A 90-mph fastball 
loses about 8 mph en route, while a 70-mph curveball loses only about 6 mph.
 
A batted ball fares slightly better because it travels fast enough for the boundary layer 
around it to become turbulent, an effect that appears at around 160 km/h (100 mph). While 
the resulting reduction in drag explains why it’s possible to hit a home run, the presence of 
air drag still shortens the distance the ball travels by as much as 50%. Without air drag, a 
routine fl y ball would become an out-of-the-park home run. To compensate for air drag, the 
angle at which the ball should be hit for maximum distance isn’t the theoretical 45° above 
horizontal discussed in Section 1.2. Because of the ball’s tendency to lose downfi eld veloc-
ity, it should be hit at a slightly lower angle, about 35° above horizontal (Fig. 6.2.10).
 
Since the ball loses much of its horizontal component of velocity during its trip to the 
outfi eld, a long fl y ball tends to drop almost straight down as you catch it. Gravity causes it 
to move downward, but drag almost stops its horizontal motion away from home plate. 
Drag also limits the downward speed of a falling ball to about 160 km/h (100 mph). That’s 
the baseball’s terminal velocity, the downward velocity at which the upward drag force 
exactly balances its downward weight and it stops accelerating. Even if the ball is dropped 
from a plane, its velocity won’t exceed this value.
Fig. 6.2.8 Early golf balls were handmade of leather and stuffed with feathers. Golf became 
popular when cheap balls made of a hard rubber called gutta-percha became available. New, smooth 
“gutties” (top-left) didn’t travel very far, though; they fl ew better when they were nicked and worn. 
Manufacturers soon began to produce balls with various patterns of grooves (top-right) or bumps 
(bottom-left) on them, and those balls traveled dramatically farther than smooth ones. Modern golf 
balls (bottom-right) have dimples instead of grooves or bumps.
Boundary layer
St
re
a
ml
in
es
 
Fig. 6.2.9 The boundary 
layer can be made 
turbulent at Reynolds 
numbers below 100,000 
by “tripping” it with 
obstacles such as fuzz or 
dimples.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
60
40
20
0
50
100
150
200
0
Height (m)
Distance downﬁeld (m)
45°
35°
Fig. 6.2.10 Air drag slows the fl ight of a batted ball so 
that the ideal angle at which to hit it isn’t the theoretical 
45° of Fig. 1.2.7. An angle of roughly 35° above horizontal 
will achieve the maximum distance.

Ball Sports: Air 159
Curveballs and Knuckleballs
The drag forces on a ball push it downstream, parallel to the onrushing air. In some cases, 
though, the ball may also experience lift forces—forces that are exerted perpendicular to 
the airfl ow (Fig. 6.2.1). To experience drag, the ball only has to slow the airfl ow down; to 
experience lift, the ball must defl ect the airfl ow to one side or the other. Although its name 
implies an upward force, lift can also push the ball toward the side or even downward.
 
Curveballs and knuckleballs both use lift forces. In each of these famous baseball pitches, 
the ball defl ects the airstream toward one side and the ball accelerates toward the other. Again 
we have action and reaction—the air and the ball push off one another. Getting the air to push 
the ball sideways is no small trick. Explaining it isn’t easy either, but here we go.
 
A curveball is thrown by making the ball spin rapidly about an axis perpendicular to 
its direction of motion. The choice of this axis determines which way the ball curves. In 
Fig. 6.2.11, the ball is spinning clockwise, as viewed from above. With this choice of rota-
tion axis, the ball curves to the pitcher’s right because the ball experiences two lift forces 
to the right. One is the Magnus force, named after the German physicist H. G. Magnus 
(1802–1870) who discovered it. The other is a force we will call the wake defl ection force.
 
The Magnus force occurs because the spinning ball carries some of the viscous air around 
with it (Fig. 6.2.11a). The steady-state fl ow pattern that forms around this ball is asymmetric: 
the airstream that moves with the turning surface is much longer than the airstream that moves 
opposite that surface. Since the longer airstream bends mostly toward the baseball, the average 
pressure on that side of the ball must be below atmospheric. The shorter airstream bends 
mostly away from the ball, so the average pressure on that side of the ball must be above 
atmos pheric. Because the pressure forces on the ball’s sides don’t balance one another, the ball 
experiences the Magnus force toward the low-pressure side—the side turning toward the 
pitcher—and defl ects in that direction. The airfl ow defl ects in the opposite direction.
 
In laminar fl ow, the Magnus force is the only lift force acting on a spinning object. 
However, a pitched baseball has a turbulent wake behind it and is also acted on by the wake 
defl ection force. This force appears when the ball’s rapid rotation deforms the wake that 
develops behind it at high Reynolds numbers. When the ball isn’t spinning, the freely fl owing 
airstream separates from the ball approximately at its side and that separation is symmetri-
cal all the way around the ball’s middle (Fig. 6.2.5). However, when the ball is spinning 
(Fig. 6.2.11b), the moving surface pushes on the airstream with viscous forces. As a result, 
airstream separation is delayed on one side of the ball and hastened on the other. The over-
all wake of air behind the ball is thus defl ected to one side, and the ball experiences the 
wake defl ection force toward the opposite side—the side turning toward the pitcher. The 
wake defl ection force and the Magnus force both push the ball in the same direction.
 
Of these two forces, the wake defl ection force is probably the more important for a 
curveball, although the Magnus force is usually given all the credit. A skillful pitcher can 
make a baseball curve about 0.3 m (12 in) during its fl ight from the mound to home plate—
Check Your Understanding #3: Designing a Great Sports Car
As an automobile designer, your job is to minimize the aerodynamic drag experienced by the car on 
which you are working. Where should you try to locate the point at which the airfl ow separates from 
the car? 
Answer: The point should be located as far back on the car as possible. 
Why: As for all large, fast-moving objects in air, pressure drag is the main source of air resistance. 
You want to minimize this drag by keeping the air fl owing smoothly over the car until it leaves the 
rear around a small turbulent wake. The smaller the air pocket behind a car, the better. Aerodynam-
ically designed production cars leave a turbulent wake that is only about one-third as large in area as 
the thickest cross section of the car. Although there is still room for improvement, these cars experi-
ence far less drag than the boxy cars of earlier times.

160 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
the more spin, the more curve. The pitcher counts on this change in direction to confuse the 
batter. The pitcher can also choose the direction of the curve by selecting the axis of the 
ball’s rotation. The ball will always curve toward the side of the ball that is turning toward 
the pitcher. When thrown by a right-handed pitcher, a proper curveball curves down and to 
the left, a slider curves horizontally to the left, and a screwball curves down and to the right.
 
When the pitcher throws a ball with backspin, so that the top of the ball turns toward 
the pitcher, the ball experiences an upward lift force. In baseball this force isn’t strong 
enough to overcome gravity, but it does make the pitch hang in the air for an unusually long 
time and appear to “hop.” Not surprisingly, a fastball thrown with strong backspin is called 
a hanging fastball. A fastball thrown with relatively little spin falls naturally and is called a 
sinking fastball. In golf, where the club can give the ball enormous backspin, the ball really 
does lift itself upward so that it fl ies down the fairway like a glider.
 
There are, however, some interesting cases when a ball’s behavior stems from its lack 
of spin. In baseball, for example, a knuckleball is thrown by giving the ball almost no rota-
tion. The ball’s seams are then very important. As air passes over a seam, the fl ow is dis-
turbed so that the ball experiences a sideways aerodynamic force, a lift force. The ball 
fl utters about in a remarkably erratic manner. Releasing the ball without making it spin is 
diffi cult and requires great skill. Pitchers who are unable to throw a knuckleball legally 
sometimes resort to lubricating their fi ngers so that the ball slips out of their hands without 
spinning. Like its legal relative, this so-called spitball dithers about and is hard to hit. The 
same is true for a scuffed ball.
(b)
(a)
Rotation
Aerodynamic
forces
Wake deﬂection force
Magnus force
Rotation
Rotation
Wake
Fig. 6.2.11 A rapidly 
rotating baseball 
experiences two lift forces 
that cause it to curve in 
fl ight. (a) The Magnus 
force occurs because air 
fl owing around the ball in 
the direction of its rotation 
bends mostly toward it, 
while air fl owing opposite 
its rotation bends mostly 
away from it. (b) The wake 
defl ection force occurs 
because air fl owing around 
the ball in the direction 
of its rotation remains 
attached to the ball longer 
and the ball’s wake is 
defl ected.
Check Your Understanding #4: Center Court
One of the most diffi cult and effective strokes in tennis is the topspin lob, in which the top of the 
ball spins away from the player who hit it. Which way is the lift force on this ball directed? 
Answer: The lift force is directed downward, so the ball accelerates downward faster than it would by 
gravity alone. 
Why: A ball with topspin falls faster than it would without a spin. In tennis, the topspin strokes 
appear to dive downward once they cross the net. Their downward curve means that they can travel 
very fast and still remain inside the court and are thus very hard to return. 

Airplanes 161
Airplane Wings: Streamlining
By now you’ve probably realized that an airplane is supported in fl ight by an upward lift 
force on its wings and that this lift force comes from defl ecting the passing airfl ow down-
ward. Each wing is an airfoil, an aerodynamically engineered surface that’s designed to 
obtain particular lift and drag forces from the air fl owing past it. More specifi cally, each 
wing is shaped and oriented so that, during fl ight, the airstream fl owing over the wing bends 
downward toward its top surface while the airstream under the wing bends downward away 
from its bottom surface. These bends are associated with pressure changes near the wing 
itself and are responsible for the upward lift force that suspends the airplane in the sky.
 
However, to get a more complete understanding of how the wing develops this lift, let’s 
go for a fl ight. Imagine yourself in an airplane that has just begun rolling down the runway. 
From your perspective, air is beginning to fl ow past each of the airplane’s wings. When this 
moving air encounters the wing’s leading edge, it separates into two airstreams: one travel-
ing over the wing and the other under it (Fig. 6.3.1). These airstreams continue onward until 
they leave the wing’s trailing edge. Since the airplane’s nose is still on the ground, the wing 
is essentially horizontal and the airfl ow around it is simple and symmetrical.
 
Since the wing isn’t defl ecting the airfl ow yet, it’s experiencing no lift, only drag. 
However, while this drag pushes the airplane downwind, opposite its forward motion along 
SECTION 6.3
upside down? Why do most fast commercial aircraft employ jet 
engines and not propellers?
Experiments to Do: The best experiment for this section is to 
take a plane fl ight or at least to visit the airport and watch the 
planes.
 
As you sit in the plane during takeoff, feel the plane accel-
erating forward. If you’re on a commercial jet, notice that the 
slats and fl aps on the airplane’s wings are extended during 
takeoff, making the wings wider and more curved. How could 
this increased width and curvature help the plane take off? The 
pilot holds the plane on the ground until it reaches the proper 
speed, then quickly tips it upward into the air. An invisible 
vortex of air peels away from the trailing edge of the wing, and 
the plane lifts off the ground.
 
Once airborne, the airplane retracts its landing gear, slats, 
and fl aps. Watch the trailing edge of each wing as the plane 
turns or changes altitudes; you’ll see various surfaces there 
move up or down. Similar motions occur on the tail. How do 
these surfaces control the plane’s orientation?
 
Near its destination, the airplane prepares for landing. 
Again the slats and fl aps are extended. Watch as spoilers on 
the tops of the wings pop up and down noisily. How do these 
surfaces affect the drag force on the plane? The plane’s land-
ing gear extends, and it touches down on the runway. The pro-
pellers or jet engines abruptly begin to slow the airplane, 
assisted by the spoilers on the wings. Feel the plane accelerat-
ing backward. Another invisible vortex of air peels away from 
the trailing edge of the wing, rotating in the opposite direction 
from the fi rst vortex, and the fl ight is over.
Airplanes
We have now set the stage for the ultimate aerodynamic 
machines—airplanes. Freed from contact with the ground, air-
planes are affected only by aerodynamic forces and gravity, 
hopefully in that order. Despite their complex appearances, 
airplanes employ physical principles that we have already suc-
cessfully examined. This section revisits many familiar con-
cepts, but it also explores new territory. For example, you may 
have already fi gured out what type of aerodynamic force holds 
an airplane up, but what type of aerodynamic force keeps it 
moving forward?
Questions to Think About: Why are the wings of small, pro-
peller-driven aircraft relatively large and bowed compared to 
those of jets? Why does a commercial airplane extend slats 
and fl aps from its wings during takeoffs and landings? What 
pushes airplanes forward in fl ight? How can some airplanes fl y 
Fin
Rudder
Tail
Elevator
Horizontal stabilizer
Wing
Slat
Leading edge
Engine
mounting
pylon
Wingtip
extension
Fuselage
Turbofan
engine
Main
landing
gear
Nose landing gear
Weather radar
Door
Window
Nose
Windshield
Anticollision light
Antenna
Aileron
Trailing edge
Flap
Spoiler

162 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
the runway, the effect is weak. The wing produces almost no turbulent wake and thus expe-
riences almost no pressure drag. What little drag it does experience is mostly viscous drag, 
essentially surface friction with the passing air.
 
Although the wing’s near lack of air resistance should surprise you, you probably take 
it for granted. That’s because you’ve often observed that such “streamlined” objects cut 
through the air particularly well. Having a long, tapered tail allows the wing to avoid the 
fl ow separation and turbulent wake that occur behind an unstreamlined ball.
 
What makes the horizontal wing streamlined is the extremely gradual rise in air pres-
sure after its widest point. Although this gently rising pressure pushes the wing’s boundary 
layer backward, opposite the direction of fl ow, the force it exerts is so weak that the layer 
doesn’t stall. Driven onward by viscous forces from the freely fl owing airstream, the wing’s 
boundary layer manages to keep moving forward all the way to the wing’s trailing edge and 
never triggers fl ow separation. The wing produces almost no turbulent wake and experi-
ences almost no pressure drag.
Fig. 6.3.1 An airplane wing is a 
streamlined airfoil, and the airfl ow 
around it is laminar. This horizontal 
wing is symmetric, top and bottom, and 
the airfl ow splits evenly into airstreams 
above and below it. Since it doesn’t 
defl ect the airfl ow, it experiences no lift.
Check Your Understanding #1: Slicing through the Air
The fastest bicycles are those with fairings, streamlined shells that reduce air resistance dramati-
cally. How do those fairings work? 
Answer: A fairing delays airstream separation in the airfl ow around a bicycle and thereby reduces 
pressure drag. 
Why: Without a fairing, a bicycle racer must struggle against severe pressure drag. The sharply rising 
pressure gradients that follow wide parts of his body trigger fl ow separation, and he develops a huge 
turbulent wake. A fairing makes the vehicle streamlined; the gently rising pressure gradient following 
its widest part doesn’t trigger fl ow separation. 
Airplane Wings: Producing Lift
With so little air resistance, the airplane accelerates forward rapidly and soon reaches take-
off speed. The pilot then raises the airplane’s nose so that its wings are no longer horizontal, 
and they begin to experience upward lift forces. The airplane’s total lift soon exceeds its 
weight, and it begins to accelerate upward into the air. The airplane is fl ying!
 
Let’s take a closer look at the moment of takeoff. If you could see the airfl ow and were 
paying close attention, you’d notice a remarkable sequence of events that begins when the 
wings tilt upward.

Airplanes 163
 
At fi rst, the airfl ow around the tilted wings continues to travel horizontally on average, 
although it develops a peculiar shape (Fig. 6.3.2a). The two airstreams, one over the tilted wing 
and one under it, each bend twice—once up and once down. As we saw while studying balls, 
when an airstream bends toward the wing, the pressure near the wing is less than atmospheric 
and when an airstream bends away from the wing, the pressure near the wing is greater than 
atmospheric. Since each airstream bends equally toward and away from the wing, the average 
pressures above and below the wing are equal and the wing experiences no lift.
 
The lower airstream, however, is making a sharp bend around the wing’s trailing edge, 
essentially an upward kink. Air’s inertia makes such a kink unstable, and it soon blows 
away from the wing’s trailing edge as a swirling horizontal vortex of air (Fig. 6.3.2b). After 
shedding that vortex, the wing establishes a new, stable fl ow pattern in which both air-
streams glide smoothly away from the wing’s trailing edge (Fig. 6.3.2c), a situation named 
the Kutta condition after the German mathematician M. Wilhelm Kutta (1867–1944).
 
In this new pattern, the airstream fl owing over the wing is longer than the airstream 
fl owing under it and both airstreams bend downward (Fig. 6.3.3). The upper airstream bends 
primarily toward the wing, so the air’s pressure just above the wing is less than atmos pheric 
(a shift toward red) and its speed is increased (narrowly spaced streamlines). In contrast, the 
lower airstream bends primarily away from the wing, so the air’s pressure just below the 
wing is greater than atmospheric (a shift toward violet) and its speed is decreased (widely 
spaced streamlines). The air pressure is now higher under the wing than over it, so this new 
fl ow pattern produces upward lift. The air now supports your plane and up you go.
 
Another way to think about this lift is as a defl ection of the airfl ow. Air approaches the 
wing horizontally but leaves heading somewhat downward. To cause this defl ection, the 
wing must push the airfl ow downward. In reaction, the airfl ow pushes the wing upward and 
produces lift. In other words, the wing transfers downward momentum to the air and is left 
with upward momentum. These two explanations for lift—the Bernoullian view that lift is 
caused by a pressure difference above and below the wing, and the Newtonian view that lift 
is caused by a transfer of momentum to the air—are perfectly equivalent and equally valid.
 
However, the overall aerodynamic force on the wing isn’t quite perpendicular to the 
onrushing air; it tilts slightly downwind. The perpendicular component of this aerody-
namic force is lift, but the downwind component is a new type of drag force—induced 
drag. Induced drag is a consequence of energy conservation; in addition to transferring 
momentum to the passing air, the wing also transfers some energy to it. The air extracts 
that energy from the wing by pushing the wing downwind with induced drag and thereby 
doing negative work on it. Since induced drag is undesirable, the airplane minimizes it by 
using as much air mass as possible to obtain its lift. A larger mass of air carries away the 
Vortex
No lift
Shedding a vortex
Lift
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 6.3.2 (a) Although this wing’s leading edge has been tipped upward, giving it a positive angle 
of attack, the airfl ow around it is relatively symmetric and produces no lift. (b) The kink at the trailing 
edge of the wing is unstable and is blown away or shed as a horizontal vortex. (c) The resulting airfl ow 
is defl ected downward and the wing experiences an upward lift force.

164 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
airplane’s unwanted downward momentum while moving downward less quickly and 
with less kinetic energy. Since larger wings obtain their lift from larger air masses, they 
experience less induced drag.
 
Unfortunately, larger wings also have more surface area and experience more viscous 
drag, so bigger isn’t always better. Also, because wing shape and airspeed affect aerody-
namic forces, too, wings must be carefully matched to their airplanes. Small propeller air-
planes that move slowly through the air need relatively large, highly curved wings to sup-
port them. Those wings are often asymmetrical—more curved on top than on bottom to 
make maximum use of the limited, low-speed air they encounter each second. Commercial 
and military jets fl y faster and encounter far more high-speed air each second, so they can 
get by with relatively small, moderately curved wings.
 
Even at constant airspeed, a wing’s lift can be adjusted by varying its angle of attack, 
the angle at which it approaches the onrushing air. The larger the angle of attack, the more 
the two airstreams bend and the greater the wing’s lift. Because the wings are rigidly attached 
to the plane, the pilot has no choice but to tip the entire plane to adjust its lift. The pilot tips 
the nose of the plane upward to increase the lift and downward to reduce the lift. That’s why 
raising the plane’s nose during takeoff is what fi nally makes the plane leap up into the air.
 
Since lift depends so strongly on a wing’s angle of attack, some planes can be fl own 
upside down. As long as the inverted wing is tilted properly, it obtains upward lift and sup-
ports the plane. This feat is easiest when a plane’s wing has the same curvature, top and 
bottom. That’s why stunt fl iers who regularly fl y upside down often use sport aircraft that 
have symmetrical or nearly symmetrical wings.
 
When a plane is in level fl ight through calm air, the wing’s angle of attack is simply its 
angle above horizontal (Fig. 6.3.4a). As viewed from the plane’s inertial frame of reference, 
the air’s velocity is directed horizontally toward the plane and acts as a horizontal virtual 
wind as it approaches the wings. The angle of attack is measured relative to that virtual wind.
 
When the plane is not in level fl ight or when the air itself is moving up or down, how-
ever, the virtual wind is no longer horizontal. While descending or fl ying through rising air, 
the plane encounters a rising virtual wind—the onrushing air’s velocity is tilted upward (Fig. 
6.3.4b). The wing’s angle of attack, still measured relative to that virtual wind, is greater 
than its angle above horizontal and its lift increases. While ascending or fl ying through 
0°
10°
20°
Angle
of attack
Virtual
wind
(a) Horizontal virtual wind
0°
10°
20°
0°
10°
20°
(b) Rising virtual wind
(c) Descending virtual wind
Fig. 6.3.4 (a) When fl ying 
horizontally through calm 
air, an airplane’s wing 
encounters a horizontal 
virtual wind. The wing’s 
angle of attack is measured 
relative to that wind. 
(b) When fl ying through 
a rising virtual wind, the 
wing’s angle of attack 
is greater than its angle 
above horizontal. (c) When 
fl ying through a descending 
virtual wind, the wing’s 
angle of attack is less than 
its angle above horizontal.
Fig. 6.3.3 (a) This airplane wing is shaped and oriented so that both airstreams, over it and under 
it, bend downward. The wing experiences a large aerodynamic force that points upward and slightly 
downstream. The upward component of this force is lift. The downstream component is induced drag. 
(b) Smoke trails in a wind tunnel show the airfl ow past a wing.
Low pressure
High speed
High pressure
Low speed
Angle of attack
Lift
Induced drag
Aerodynamic force
(a)
(b)
© Omikron/SPL/Photo Researchers, Inc.

Airplanes 165
descending air, the plane encounters a descending virtual wind—the onrushing air’s velocity 
is tilted downward (Fig. 6.3.4c). The wing’s angle of attack is less than its angle above hor-
izontal and its lift decreases. When a plane fl ies through bad weather, with air that is moving 
alternately up and down, the rapid changes in virtual wind direction lead to fl uctuations in 
lift and exciting accelerations. No wonder there are air sickness bags in the seat pockets.
Check Your Understanding #2: Blowing in the Wind
The sail of a small sailboat bows forward and outward so that wind traveling around the sail’s outside 
surface bends toward the sail, while wind traveling across its inside surface bends away from the sail. 
How does this arrangement propel the sailboat across the water? 
Answer: The air traveling around the outside of the sail has a lower pressure than that traveling across 
the inside of the sail. The sail experiences a lift force that pushes it and the boat across the water. 
Why: Sails experience both lift and drag forces. The sail experiences an aerodynamic force that 
pushes it outward (lift) and slightly downwind (drag) just as an airplane wing experiences an aerody-
namic force upward (lift) and slightly downwind (drag). The sailboat’s keel, or centerboard, and its 
rudder provide additional forces so that the net force on the sailboat can be controlled and it can 
travel in a variety of directions. 
Lift Has Its Limits: Stalling a Wing
There’s a limit to how much lift the pilot can obtain by increasing the wing’s angle of attack 
because tilting the wing gradually transforms it from streamlined to blunt—that is, to hav-
ing a rapid rise in air pressure after its widest point. As we saw for balls, blunt objects 
generally experience airfl ow separation and pressure drag. Indeed, beyond a certain angle 
of attack, the airstream over the top of a wing separates from its surface and the wing stalls. 
This separation starts when air in the upper boundary layer is brought to a standstill by the 
rapidly rising pressure beyond the wing’s widest point. Once this boundary layer stalls, it 
shaves most of the airstream away from the wing’s upper surface.
 
The separated airstream over the top of the stalled wing leaves a billowing storm of 
turbulence beneath it (Fig. 6.3.5). This airstream separation is an aerodynamic catastrophe 
© Gary S. Settles and Jason Listak/Photo Researchers, Inc.
(a)
Angle of attack
High pressure
Low speed
Turbulent
wake
Lift
Pressure drag
Aerodynamic force
(b)
Fig. 6.3.5
(a) A wing stalls when the airstream over the top of the wing separates from its surface. 
A turbulent air pocket forms above the wing, making it much less effi cient. The wing’s lift decreases 
because the average pressure above the thickest part of the wing becomes higher, and the drag increases 
because the average pressure above the trailing edge becomes lower. (b) Smoke trails in a wind tunnel 
show that the air separates from the surface and becomes turbulent as it fl ows over a stalled wing.

166 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
for the airplane. Because the average pressure above the wing increases, the wing loses 
much of its lift. Also, the appearance of a turbulent wake heralds the arrival of severe pres-
sure drag. The plane slows dramatically and begins to fall.
 
To avoid stalling, pilots keep the angle of attack within a safe range. The possibility of 
stalling also limits the minimum speed at which the airplane will fl y. As the airplane slows 
down, the pilot must increase its angle of attack to maintain adequate lift. Below a certain 
speed, the airplane can’t obtain that lift without tilting its wings until they stall. It can no 
longer fl y.
 
To avoid stalling, a plane must never fl y slower than this minimum speed, particularly 
during landings and takeoffs. For a small, propeller-driven plane with highly curved wings, 
the minimum fl ight speed is so low that it’s rarely an issue. For a commercial jet, however, 
the minimum airspeed is about 220 km/h (140 mph). Airplanes taking off or landing this 
fast would require very long runways on which to build up or get rid of speed. Instead, 
commercial jets have wings that can change shape during fl ight. Slats move forward and 
down from the leading edges of the wings, and fl aps move back and down from the trailing 
edges (Fig. 6.3.6). With both slats and fl aps extended, the wing becomes larger and more 
curved, similar to the wings of a small propeller plane, and the minimum safe airspeed 
drops to a reasonable 150 km/h (95 mph). Vanes near the fl aps also emerge during landings 
to direct high-energy air from beneath the wings onto the fl aps. These jets of air keep the 
boundary layers moving downstream and help prevent stalling. (For another approach to 
stall prevention, see 6 ).
 
Once a commercial jet lands, flat panels on the top surfaces of its wings are tilted 
upward and cause the airflow to separate from the tops of the wings. The resulting 
turbulence created by these spoilers reduces the lift of the wings and increases their 
drag so the plane doesn’t accidentally start flying again. Even before landing, the 
spoilers are sometimes used to slow the plane and help it descend rapidly toward an 
airport.
 
In fl ight, a wing does more than just push the passing air downward; it also twists the 
air near its tip. Since the air pressure below the wing is greater than the air pressure above 
it, air tends to fl ow around the wing’s tip from bottom to top. The plane soon leaves this 
air behind, but not before the air has acquired lots of angular momentum and kinetic 
energy.
 
A swirling vortex thus emerges from each wingtip and trails behind the plane for sev-
eral kilometers, like an invisible tornado. You can occasionally see them behind a plane 
that’s landing or taking off in humid air. A wingtip vortex from a jumbo jet can fl ip over a 
small aircraft that fl ies through it or give passengers in a much larger plane an unexpected 
thrill. Entered from behind, one of these vortices feels like a horizontal blender; from the 
side, it feels like a speed hump that you might drive over in a car.
 
For safety, air traffi c controllers are careful to keep planes from fl ying through one 
another’s wakes and schedule them at least 90 seconds apart on runways. Many modern 
airplanes have vertical wingtip extensions that reduce these vortices, both to save energy 
and to diminish the hazard (Fig. 6.3.7).
Slat
Vane
Flap
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 6.3.6 At cruising 
speed, an airplane’s wings 
are moderately curved 
airfoils (a). During takeoffs 
(b) and landings (c), slats 
are extended from the 
leading edges and fl aps 
from the trailing edges. 
The airfoils become much 
more highly curved, 
generating more lift at low 
speeds. During landing, a 
vane is also extended for 
boundary layer control to 
prevent stalling.
6  Airplane designers can 
reduce the dangers of 
stalling by adding special 
boundary layer control 
devices to their aircraft. 
Narrow metal strips called 
vortex generators, which 
stick up from the surfaces 
of wings, introduce 
turbulence into the 
boundary layers over the 
wings. This turbulent fl ow 
allows higher-energy air 
to mix with the boundary 
layers so that they can 
continue forward into 
rising pressure. This 
process helps keep the 
airstreams attached to the 
surfaces.
Check Your Understanding #3: Stunt Flying
A pilot normally tips the plane’s nose upward to gain altitude. If the pilot tries to make the plane rise 
too quickly, the plane will suddenly begin to drop. What is happening? 
Answer: The plane’s wings are stalling. 
Why: Tipping the plane’s nose upward increases the wings’ angle of attack. While this action increases 
lift up to a point, it can also cause the airfl ow to separate from the top surface of the wing. The 
sudden reduction in lift and increase in drag that accompany stalling can cause the plane to drop. A 
stall during takeoff or landing is extremely dangerous. 

Airplanes 167
Propellers
For a plane to obtain lift, it needs airspeed; air must fl ow across its wings. And since drag 
forces push it downwind, a plane in level fl ight can’t maintain its airspeed unless something 
pushes it upwind. That’s why a plane has propellers or jet engines, to push the air backward 
so that the air pushes the plane forward—action and reaction.
 
A propeller is an assembly of rotating wings. Extending from its central hub are two 
or more blades that together form a sophisticated fan (Fig. 6.3.8). These blades have airfoil 
cross sections and are designed to create forward lift forces when the propeller turns and 
the blades move through the air.
 
As a propeller blade slices through the air, the airstreams bending around that blade 
experience pressure variations (Fig. 6.3.9). The forward airstream bends toward the blade’s 
front surface, so the pressure in front of the blade drops below atmospheric. The rearward 
airstream bends away from the blade’s rear surface, so the pressure behind the blade rises 
above atmospheric. The resulting pressure difference produces a forward force on the blade 
and propeller, a thrust force.
 
The propeller blades have all the features, good and bad, of airplane wings. Their 
thrust increases with size, front-surface curvature, pitch (that is, angle of attack), and 
airspeed; in other words, the larger the propeller, the faster it turns, and the more its 
blades are angled into the wind, the more thrust it produces. The blades themselves have 
a twisted shape to accommodate the variations in airspeed along their lengths, from hub 
to tip.
 
Like a wing, a propeller stalls when the airfl ow separates from the front surfaces of 
its blades; it suddenly becomes more of an air mixer than a propeller. This stalled-wing 
© Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Fig. 6.3.7 This vertical 
wingtip keeps air from fl owing 
around the end of the wing, a 
motion that would otherwise 
leave a powerful vortex in the 
air trailing behind the plane. 
Such wingtip vortices waste 
energy and are hazardous for 
other aircraft.
Engine
Thrust
Force
on air
Fig. 6.3.8 A propeller 
behaves like a rotating 
wing. As the propeller 
turns, its blades create lift 
in the forward direction. 
This lift pushes the 
propeller and the aircraft 
forward through the air, so 
it’s called thrust.
Front
Rear
Rotation
Fig. 6.3.9 As the propeller blade rotates, the fl ow of air around it 
creates a low pressure in front of it (left) and a high pressure behind 
it (right). The blade experiences a lift force that pushes the propeller 
and plane forward (toward the left). Induced drag tends to slow the 
rotation of the propeller.

168 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
behavior was the standard operating condition for air and marine propellers (see 7 ) before 
the work of Wilbur Wright in 1902 (see 8 ). The Wrights were among the fi rst people to 
study aerodynamics using a wind tunnel (Fig. 6.3.10), and their methodical and scientifi c 
approach to aeronautics allowed them to achieve the fi rst powered fl ight (Fig. 6.3.11). 
Since the Wrights’ work, propellers have experienced almost no pressure drag.
 
A propeller does, however, experience induced drag. As the propeller’s thrust pushes 
the plane through the air, induced drag extracts energy from the propeller. To keep the pro-
peller turning steadily, an engine must do work on the propeller. Propellers are driven by 
high-performance reciprocating (piston-based) engines, like those found in automobiles, or 
by the turbojet engines that we’ll discuss later.
 
Propellers aren’t perfect; they have three serious limitations. First, a propeller exerts a 
torque on the passing air, so that air exerts a torque on the propeller. This reaction torque 
can fl ip a small plane. To minimize torque problems, some planes use pairs of oppositely 
turning propellers and single-propeller planes usually locate their propellers in front so that 
the spinning air can return angular momentum to them while passing over their wings.
 
A second problem with a propeller is that its thrust diminishes as the plane’s forward 
speed increases. When the airplane is stationary, a propeller blade moves through motion-
less air (Fig. 6.3.12a). When the airplane is traveling fast, though, the air approaches that 
same propeller blade from the front of the plane (Fig. 6.3.12b). To retain its thrust at higher 
airspeeds, the propeller blade must increase its pitch—that is, its angle of attack. It must 
swivel forward to meet the onrushing air.
7  One of the principal 
sources of noise in 
submarines is the 
turbulence created by their 
propellers. To reduce this 
turbulence, the propellers 
of modern nuclear 
submarines are designed 
to avoid water fl ow 
separation and stalling.
8  In addition to achieving 
the fi rst self-propelled 
fl ight of an airplane in 
1903, Orville (1871–1948) 
and Wilbur (1867–1912) 
Wright (American 
aviators) were exception-
ally accomplished 
aerodynamicists. In 1902, 
Wilbur was the fi rst 
person to recognize that a 
propeller is actually a 
rotating wing. Propellers 
up until his time were 
little more than rotating 
paddles, more effective at 
stirring the air than 
propelling the plane. 
Wilbur’s aerodynamically 
redesigned propeller made 
fl ight possible and 
dominated aircraft design 
for a decade.
The Granger Collection, New York
Fig. 6.3.10 The Wright brothers were 
accomplished aerodynamicists, using 
this wind tunnel to study and perfect 
wings and propellers for their airplanes.
The Granger Collection, New York
Fig. 6.3.11 The era of 
powered fl ight began at 10:35 
a.m. on Dec. 17, 1903, when 
the Wright Flyer lifted Orville 
Wright into the air over Kitty 
Hawk, North Carolina. His 
brother Wilbur stands beside 
him in this unique photograph 
of that fi rst powered fl ight.

Airplanes 169
 
The third and most discouraging problem with propellers, especially in high-speed 
aircraft, is drag. To keep up with the onrushing air at high airspeeds, the propellers must 
turn at phenomenal rates. The tips of the blades must travel so fast that they exceed the 
speed of sound, the fastest speed at which a fl uid such as air can convey forces from one 
place to another. When the blade tip exceeds this speed, the air near the tip doesn’t  accelerate 
until the tip actually hits it. Instead of fl owing smoothly around the tip, the air forms a 
shock wave, a narrow region of high pressure and temperature caused by the supersonic 
impact, and the propeller stalls. That’s why propellers aren’t useful on high-speed aircraft.
Check Your Understanding #4: Circulating the Air
The only difference between a fan and a propeller is what moves—the air or the object. Which side 
of each fan blade experiences the lowest air pressure, the inlet or the outlet side? 
Answer: The inlet side of each fan blade experiences the lowest air pressure. 
Why: Air blowing toward you from a fan is like the air blown back by a propeller. The lowest pressures 
experienced by a propeller are on its forward surfaces. Similarly, the lowest pressures experienced by 
a fan are on its inlet side surfaces. This pressure imbalance pushes the fan away from you while the 
fan pushes the air toward you. 
Jet Engines
Unlike propellers, jet engines work well at high speeds. While a propeller tries to operate 
directly in the high-speed air approaching the plane, a jet engine fi rst slows this air down to 
a manageable speed. To achieve this change in speeds, the jet engine makes wonderful use 
of the energy transformations allowed by Bernoulli’s equation. Strictly speaking,  Bernoulli’s 
equation applies only to incompressible fl uids such as water. Nonetheless, it’s often usable 
for compressible fl uids such as air, especially when the speed and pressure variations are 
relatively small.
 
A turbojet engine is depicted in Fig. 6.3.13. During fl ight, air rushes into the engine’s 
inlet duct or diffuser at about 800 km/h (500 mph), the airspeed of the plane. Once inside 
that diffuser, the air slows down and its pressure increases, leaving its ordered energy 
unchanged. The air then passes through a series of fanlike compressor blades that push it 
deeper into the engine, doing work on it and increasing both its pressure and its ordered 
energy. By the time the air arrives at the combustion chamber, its pressure is many times 
atmospheric.
Diffuser
Combustion
chamber
Exhaust
jet
Nozzle
Air
inlet
Turbines
High-pressure
compressor
Low-pressure
compressor
Fuel
inlet
Fig. 6.3.13 The turbojet engine operates by compressing incoming air with a series of fanlike blades. 
Fuel is mixed with the high-pressure air, and the mixture is ignited. The high-energy, high-pressure air 
accelerates out the rear of the jet, does work on the turbines, and leaves at a greater speed than it had 
when it arrived. The engine has accelerated the air backward and experiences a thrust forward.
Low airspeed
High airspeed
(a)
Pitch
(b)
Pitch
Rotation
Rotation
Fig. 6.3.12 At low 
airspeeds (a), the propeller 
blade approaches nearly 
stationary air as it rotates. 
At high airspeeds (b), air 
rushes past the propeller, 
so the blade must swivel 
forward to meet it. The 
blade’s angle of attack is 
called its pitch.

170 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
 
Now fuel is added to the air, and the mixture is ignited. The pressure of this gaseous 
mixture doesn’t increase as it burns; instead, it expands to occupy more volume. Further-
more, combustion subdivides the fuel molecules into smaller pieces that, therefore, take up 
still more volume. This extremely hot, high-pressure exhaust gas pours out of the combus-
tion chamber through a wider channel than the one it entered.
 
The exhaust gas then streams through windmill-like turbine, doing work on that tur-
bine and thereby powering the compressor for the incoming air. After the turbine, the still 
high-pressure gas fi nally accelerates and expands through the engine’s outlet nozzle and 
emerges into the open sky at atmospheric pressure, moderately high temperature, and 
extraordinarily high speed.
 
Overall, the engine slows the air down, adds energy to it, and then lets it accelerate back 
to high speed. Because the engine has added energy to the air, the air leaves the engine trave-
ling faster than when it arrived. The air’s increased backward velocity means that the jet 
engine has pushed it backward and the air has reacted by exerting a forward thrust force on 
the jet engine. In other words, the airplane has obtained forward momentum by giving the 
departing air backward momentum.
 
The turbojet is less energy effi cient than it could be. Since it gives backward momen-
tum to a relatively small mass of air, that air ends up traveling overly fast and with exces-
sive kinetic energy. To make the engine more effi cient, it should give backward momentum 
to a larger mass of air.
 
The turbofan engine solves this problem by using a turbojet engine to spin a huge fan 
(Fig. 6.3.14). Since this fan is located in the engine’s inlet duct, the air’s speed decreases 
and its pressure increases before it enters the fan. The fan then does work on the air and 
further increases its pressure. While about 5% of this air then enters the turbojet engine, the 
vast majority of it accelerates out the back of the fan duct and emerges into the open sky at 
atmospheric pressure and increased speed. Overall, the fan has pushed the air backward 
and the air has pushed the fan forward, producing forward thrust.
 
Like a turbojet, the turbofan slows air down, adds energy to it, and then lets it accelerate 
back to high speed. However, because the turbofan engine moves more air than a turbojet 
engine, it gives that air less energy and uses less fuel. Because of their increased effi ciency, 
turbofans are used in all modern commercial jets. (For another type of jet engine, see 9 .)
9  Ramjets are jet engines 
that have no moving parts. 
Air that approaches the 
engine at supersonic 
speeds interacts with 
carefully tapered surfaces 
so that its own forward 
momentum compresses it 
to high density. The 
engine then adds fuel to 
this pressurized air, ignites 
the mixture, and allows 
the hot burned gas to 
expand out of a nozzle. 
The engine pushes this 
exhaust backward, and the 
exhaust propels the engine 
and airplane forward. 
Although the air enters the 
engine at supersonic 
speeds, it passes through 
the combustion chamber 
much more slowly. In a 
supersonic combustion 
ramjet, or “scramjet,” the 
fuel and air mixture fl ows 
through the combustion 
chamber at supersonic 
speeds. This motion 
makes it extremely 
diffi cult to keep the fuel 
burning because the fl ame 
tends to fl ow downstream 
and out of the engine. The 
fl ame can’t advance 
through the mixture faster 
than the speed of sound, 
so it won’t spread 
upstream fast enough to 
stay in the engine on its 
own.
Diffuser
Fan duct
Nozzle
Combustion
chamber
Exhaust
jet
Air
inlet
Fuel
inlet
Low-pressure
compressor
High-pressure
compressor
Fan
Turbines
Fig. 6.3.14 The turbofan engine adds a giant fan to the shaft of a normal turbojet engine. Most of 
the air passing through the fan bypasses the turbojet and returns directly to the airstream around the 
engine. Because the fan does work on this air, it leaves the engine at a higher speed than it had when 
it arrived. The air has transferred forward momentum to the engine and the plane.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 171
Epilogue for Chapter 6
In this chapter, we have looked at a number of objects that use moving fl uids to perform 
their tasks. In Garden Watering, we saw how water moves through openings and channels. 
We looked at the effects of viscosity and the importance of Bernoulli’s equation in describ-
ing the conversion of pressure potential energy into kinetic energy and vice versa. Two 
types of fl uid fl ow appeared: laminar and turbulent. While laminar fl ow is smooth and 
predictable, turbulent fl ow involves unpredictability and chaos, a common behavior in our 
complicated universe.
 
In the section on Ball Sports: Air, we examined the ways in which moving air exerts 
forces on larger objects, both in the downstream direction as drag and in a perpendicular 
direction as lift. We learned about two different types of drag forces and how these can be 
controlled or reduced by choosing the shapes or motions of the balls.
 
Finally, in Airplanes, we explored the aerodynamics of those remarkable machines. 
We saw how they use air to support and propel themselves. We also examined the limita-
tions of wings and saw what can go wrong if those limitations are exceeded. We studied 
propulsion in propeller planes and in jet aircraft, and saw that these systems involve 
 Bernoulli’s equation and the forward force that comes from pushing air backward.
Explanation: A Vortex Cannon
The vortex cannon creates ring vortices, tiny tornadoes that are bent into loops and so have 
no beginnings or ends. Air swirls forward in the middle of each ring and backward on its 
outer edge. This circular tornado structure is created when air fl ows through the hole of the 
vortex cannon. Air fl ows forward in the middle of the hole, while the hole’s edges create 
the backward fl ow around the outside of the ring. After it leaves the cannon, each ring vor-
tex crawls forward through the surrounding air until its kinetic energy has been exhausted 
and it slows to a stop. It fi nishes its existence swirling in place until viscous forces bring its 
moving air to rest.
Check Your Understanding #5: Energy and a Jet Engine
A jet engine somehow slows the air down, adds energy to it at low speed, and then returns the air to 
high speed. Why doesn’t slowing the air down waste lots of energy? 
Answer: As the air is slowed down, its pressure increases. The air’s ordered energy remains constant. 
Why: The remarkable result of Bernoulli’s effect is that you can slow the air down without squander-
ing its kinetic energy. That energy becomes pressure potential energy, and it passes through the jet 
engine in that form. As the air leaves the jet engine, its pressure potential energy becomes kinetic 
energy once again, so no energy is wasted. 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Garden Watering Works: As water fl ows through a hose, viscous forces in the hose limit 
its speed, particularly near the walls of the hose. Each time the hose bends, the water pres-
sure rises on the outside of the bend and drops on the inside of the bend. When the water 
reaches the nozzle, it accelerates through the narrow opening, increasing in speed and 
 decreasing in pressure until it emerges at atmospheric pressure and arcs gracefully into the 
garden. Whenever the water fl ows rapidly around obstacles, both in the garden and at the 
faucet leading the hose, the fl ow becomes turbulent and noisy.
How Balls and Air Work: A ball traveling through the air experiences two major types of 
aerodynamic force: drag and lift. For a nonspinning ball traveling very slowly, the only drag 

172 
CHAPTER 6 Fluids and Motion
force is viscous drag; it experiences no lift force. As the ball’s speed through the air in-
creases, a large turbulent wake appears behind the ball and the ball experiences pressure 
drag. At a still higher speed, the boundary layer of air near the ball’s surface becomes turbu-
lent and the size of the wake behind the ball shrinks. A ball with a turbulent boundary layer 
experiences less drag than one with a laminar boundary layer, which is why some balls are 
designed to encourage turbulent boundary layers.
 
Rotating balls experience lift forces. These forces occur because bending and defl ecting 
airstreams push asymmetrically on these balls. Lift forces can cause a ball to curve in fl ight 
or take surprisingly long to fall.
How Airplanes Work: An airplane is supported in fl ight by air passing across its wings. Air 
bending toward the top surface of a wing experiences a drop in pressure, while air bending 
away from the bottom surface of a wing experiences a rise in pressure. As a result of this 
pressure difference, the wing experiences an upward lift force. The airplane also experiences 
drag, which tends to slow it down. To keep the airplane moving forward, the plane employs 
propellers or jet engines. These devices push the air backward, and the air reacts by pushing 
them forward. A propeller works directly in the oncoming air, increasing the air’s energy and 
pushing it backward with rotating blades. A jet engine fi rst slows the air, then increases its 
energy by burning fuel in it, and fi nally lets it accelerate backward to high speed.
1. Poiseuille’s law: The volume of fl uid fl owing through a pipe 
each second is equal to (𝜋/128) times the pressure difference 
across that pipe times the pipe’s diameter to the fourth power, 
divided by the pipe’s length times the fl uid’s viscosity, or
volume = π · pressure difference · pipe diameter4
128 · pipe length · fluid viscosity
.   (6.1.1)
2. Bends and pressure imbalances: When the path of a fluid 
in steady-state flow bends, the pressure on the outside of the 
bend is always higher than the pressure on the inside of the 
bend.
3. Reynolds number: A measure of the relative importance of 
inertia and viscosity in the fl uid fl ow around an obstacle is given 
by the Reynolds number: 
 
density · obstacle length · flow speed
viscosity
. 
(6.1.2)

Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
 W
e can’t see all the motion that takes place around us. Some of it is hidden deep inside each 
object, where thermal energy keeps the individual atoms and molecules jiggling back and 
forth in an endless fl urry of activity. We’re usually aware of this thermal energy only because 
it determines an object’s temperature; the more thermal energy an object contains, the higher its 
temperature and the hotter it feels.
 
Nevertheless, thermal energy plays an important role in everyday life. In addition to moving 
from one place to another, thermal energy can transform a substance from a solid to a liquid to a 
gas. What you’re feeling when you touch a hot object is actually its thermal energy fl owing into your 
comparatively colder hand and raising the temperature of your skin. When thermal energy is fl owing 
in this manner, from a hotter object to a colder one, we call it heat. In this chapter, we examine 
temperature, heat, and the phases of matter to understand more about our hot and cold world.
A Ruler Thermometer
One effect that a change in temperature has on a typical 
object is to change its size. Although this size change is 
tiny and easily overlooked, you can use mechanical 
advantage to make it quite visible. Here’s how to make 
a size-change thermometer using only a clear plastic 
ruler, a pin, a small weight, a piece of stiff paper, and 
some tape.
 
Lay the plastic ruler along the edge of a table and 
tape one end of it securely to the table. Cut a thin strip of 
stiff paper, about 3 mm (0.1 in) wide and 15 cm (6 in) 
long, and push the pin carefully through one end of the 
strip. Use a dot of tape to stick the pin’s head to the paper. 
When you’re done, the paper strip should be securely 
attached to the pin so that as the pin turns, the strip turns. 
This strip is your thermometer’s pointer.
 
Now slide the pin under the free end of the ruler, and 
place the small weight above it. The weight is there to 
push the ruler and pin together so they experience plenty 
of static friction. That way, as the free end of the ruler 
moves left or right, the pin will rotate and turn the pointer.
 
Your thermometer is now complete. If you turn the 
pin and pointer carefully by hand so that the pointer is 
horizontal, you can “read” the thermometer by its angle 
relative to the tabletop. If you heat the plastic ruler by 
breathing on it, laying your hands on it, or warming 
it gently with a hair dryer, the ruler will become longer. 
Its free end will move away from its fi xed end and will 
cause the pin to rotate. You will see a small change in the 
pointer’s orientation as your thermometer reports its new 
temperature.
 
You can also make the needle turn the other way by 
cooling the ruler. If you place a few ice cubes on the ruler, 
the ruler will contract and the needle will turn in the 
opposite direction. As you can see, the ruler is slightly 
shorter on a cold day than on a hot one, a fact that limits 
the ruler’s accuracy in measuring distance.
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
7
Heat and Phase Transitions
 173

174 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
Chapter Itinerary
In this chapter, we examine thermal energy, temperature, and 
heat in the context of three common types of objects: (1) 
woodstoves; (2) water, steam, and ice; and (3) clothing, insu-
lation, and climate. In Woodstoves, we look at ways to produce 
thermal energy and the three principal means by which ther-
mal energy is transferred as heat from hotter objects to colder 
ones: conduction, convection, and radiation. In Water, Steam, 
and Ice, we look at the effects of heat and temperature on the 
three material phases of water and at the ways transformations 
occur between those phases. In Clothing, Insulation, and Cli-
mate, we examine heat transfer more closely and fi nd out how 
to control it. For a more detailed preview, look ahead at the 
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations at the end 
of the chapter.
SECTION 7.1 
burned when you touch a hot object? Why does your hand feel 
hotter when you hold it above a hot surface than when you 
hold it next to that hot surface? Why does your skin feel warm 
when you face a campfi re, even if the air around you is cold? 
Why does it take time to warm up a cold object?
Experiments to Do: A burning candle produces thermal 
energy, providing both light and warmth to a small room. 
Where does this thermal energy come from and how does it 
fl ow into its surroundings?
 
Light a short candle and look fi rst at how it releases 
thermal energy. The fl ame slowly consumes the wax, but it 
also needs air. Cover the candle with a tall glass, one that 
won’t be touched or damaged by the fl ame. The glass should 
prevent room air from reaching the candle. How does the 
newly sealed environment affect the candle fl ame? Try to 
explain this result.
 
Relight the candle and consider the ways in which heat 
fl ows from the fl ame to you. Carefully pass your hand over the 
fl ame, keeping a safe distance above it to avoid being burned. 
Why does the fl ame warm your skin so quickly when your hand 
is directly above it? Now hold your hand beside the fl ame at a 
safe distance. You should again feel warmth from the fl ame. 
How is heat fl owing from the fl ame to your hand now?
 
Take a wooden pencil and hold it a few centimeters above 
the fl ame for no more than 2 seconds. Then carefully touch the 
pencil’s surface with your fi ngers. It should warm your fi ngers. 
How is heat fl owing from the pencil to your hand in this case? 
Why would it be a painful mistake to try this experiment with a 
metal pencil? Why should you hold it above the fl ame for only 
2 seconds?
Woodstoves
Winter would be pretty unpleasant for most of us were it not for 
heating. Heating keeps our rooms warm even when the weather 
outside is cold. One of the most fashionable types of heating is 
a woodstove, which burns logs in its fi rebox and sends thermal 
energy out into the room. In this section, we’ll look at how a 
woodstove produces thermal energy and how this thermal 
energy fl ows out of the stove to keep us warm.
Questions to Think About: What happens to the chemical 
potential energy in a log when you burn it? Why do you get 
Stove pipe
Firebox
Viewing
window
Air inlet
vents
Air inlet
shutter
Air inlet
shutter
Handle
storage
Primary
air control
lever
Side
loading
door
Bypass
damper
Combustor
air control
Thermometer
Front loading
door
A Burning Log: Thermal Energy
A woodstove produces thermal energy and distributes it as heat to the surrounding room 
(Fig. 7.1.1). We’ve encountered thermal energy before: in a fi le cabinet sliding along the 
sidewalk, in an old tennis ball bouncing ineffi ciently off the fl oor, and in honey pouring 
slowly from a jar. In each case, ordered energy—energy that could easily be used to do 
work—became disordered thermal energy and the temperatures of the objects increased. 
Now that we’re going to study devices that are intended to provide heat, let’s reexamine 
thermal energy and temperature to see how thermal energy moves from one object to another.

Woodstoves 175
 
When you burn a log in the fi replace or woodstove, you’re turning the log’s ordered 
chemical potential energy into disordered thermal energy—energy contained in the kinetic 
and potential energies of individual atoms and molecules. The presence of thermal energy 
in the log, the woodstove, or the room air is what gives it a temperature; the more thermal 
energy it has, the higher its temperature.
 
The nature of thermal energy depends somewhat on what it’s in. In the hot burning log, 
thermal energy is mostly in the wood’s atoms and molecules, which jitter back and forth 
rapidly relative to one another. When each of these particles moves, it has kinetic energy. 
When it pushes or pulls on its neighbors, it has potential energy.
 
In the air near the burning log, thermal energy is again mostly in the atoms and mole-
cules. However, since those particles are essentially free and independent, most of this 
thermal energy is kinetic energy. The air particles store potential energy only during the 
brief moments when they collide with one another.
 
In the metal poker that you use to stir the fi re, thermal energy is not only in the atoms 
and molecules but also in the mobile electrons that move about the metal and allow it to 
conduct electricity. As I noted in Chapter 2, thermal energy is the portion of internal energy 
that’s associated with temperature. Internal energy excludes any energy due to external 
forces or overall motion, so lifting the poker to increase its gravitational potential energy or 
waving it to increase its kinetic energy does not affect either its internal energy or its ther-
mal energy. Furthermore, some of the poker’s internal energy, including most of its chem-
ical and nuclear potential energy, is not associated with temperature and is not part of its 
thermal energy.
 © Peter Anderson/Dorling 
Kindersley/Getty Images, Inc. 
 Fig. 7.1.1   This wood-stove 
transfers heat to the room by 
conduction through its metal 
walls, convection of air past 
its surfaces, and radiation 
from its black exterior. 
Check Your Understanding #1: A Warm-Up Pitch
If you drop a ball, will its thermal energy increase as it falls? (Neglect air resistance.)
Answer: No, its thermal energy will remain constant.
Why: As it falls, the ball’s gravitational potential energy is transformed into kinetic energy. However, 
both energies enable the ball to do work, so they aren’t included in its thermal energy.
Forces between Atoms: Chemical Bonds
To understand how a burning log produces thermal energy, let’s take a look at bonds 
between atoms and the chemical potential energy that’s stored in those bonds. Since both 
result from the forces between atoms, that’s where we’ll begin.
 
As you bring two atoms close together, they exert attractive forces on one another (Fig. 
7.1.2a). These chemical forces are primarily electromagnetic in origin and grow stronger 
as the atoms approach. The attraction diminishes, however, when the atoms start to touch 
and is eventually replaced by repulsion when the atoms are too close (Fig. 7.1.2b). The 
separation between atoms at which the attraction ends and the repulsion begins is their 
equilibrium separation—that is, the separation at which the atoms exert no forces on one 
another (Fig. 7.1.2c). Since atoms are tiny, this equilibrium separation is also tiny, typically 
only about a ten-billionth of a meter.
 
Imagine holding two atoms in tweezers and slowly bringing them together. They pull 
toward one another as they approach, doing work on you and increasing your energy. Since 
energy is conserved, their energy must be decreasing. They’re giving up chemical poten-
tial energy, energy stored in the chemical forces between atoms.
 
Once the atoms reach their equilibrium separation, you can let go of them and they 
won’t come apart. Since they’ve given up some of their chemical potential energy, 
they can’t separate unless that energy is returned to them; it takes work to drag them 
apart. Without that energy, the atoms are held together by an energy debt known as a 
chemical bond.
(a)
Attractive
forces
(b)
(c)
(d)
Repulsive
forces
Equilibrium
Vibration
Fig. 7.1.2 (a) Two atoms 
attract one another at 
moderate distances but 
(b) repel when they’re too 
close. (c) In between is their 
equilibrium separation, at 
which they neither attract 
nor repel and are thus in 
equilibrium. (d) Pairs of 
atoms with excess energy 
tend to vibrate about their 
equilibrium separations.

176 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
 
The bound atoms have become a molecule. The strength of their bond is equal to the 
amount of work the atoms did when they drew together or, equivalently, the work required 
to separate them. Bond strengths range from extremely strong in the case of two nitrogen 
atoms to extremely weak in the case of two neon atoms.
 
If they have a little extra energy, bound atoms can vibrate back and forth about their 
equilibrium separation (Fig. 7.1.2d). Whenever the atoms are moving quickly toward or 
away from one another, most of their energy is kinetic. Whenever the atoms are traveling 
slowly while turning around, most of their energy is chemical potential. Overall, the mole-
cule’s total energy remains constant, and it vibrates back and forth until it transfers its extra 
energy elsewhere.
 
Many molecules have more than two atoms. In a large molecule, many pairs of atoms 
have chemical bonds and equilibrium separations. If you give this molecule excess energy, 
it will vibrate in a complicated manner as the energy moves among the various atoms and 
chemical bonds. The atoms in the molecule will continue to jiggle until something removes 
the excess energy from the molecule.
 
Like all liquids and solids, our burning log is just a huge assembly of atoms and mol-
ecules, held together by chemical bonds of various strengths. These particles push and pull 
on one another as they vibrate about their equilibrium separations. Their motion is thermal 
motion, and the energy involved in this disorderly jiggling is thermal energy. Because ther-
mal energy is fragmented among the atoms and exchanged between them unpredictably, it 
can’t be used directly to do work.
Check Your Understanding #2: When Atoms Collide . . .
As two independent nitrogen atoms collide with one another, what forces do they experience?
Answer: At fi rst, the atoms experience attractive forces. When the atoms come too close, the forces 
become repulsive and they bounce. As they subsequently separate, the forces again become attractive.
Why: As they approach one another, the two nitrogen atoms experience attractive forces and a chem-
ical bond begins to form between them. They accelerate toward one another, converting chemical 
potential energy into kinetic energy. However, when they are very close together, the forces become 
repulsive and they bounce off one another. They head apart and the forces again become attractive, 
but their kinetic energy breaks the bond and they separate forever.
Heat and Temperature
Everything contains thermal energy, from the hot burning log to the cold metal poker you 
use to stir the fi re. However, that doesn’t mean that the thermal energy is equitably distri-
buted. What happens to thermal energy when you push the log with the poker?
 
When they touch, the poker and the log begin to exchange thermal energy. In effect, 
the two objects become one larger object, and thermal energy that has been moving 
about randomly among the particles in each individual object begins to move about 
randomly among the particles of both objects. Well, not quite randomly. Although tiny 
portions of thermal energy move in both directions between the two objects, those 
exchanges don’t cancel. Overall, there is a net fl ow of thermal energy from the hot log 
to the cold poker.
 
To allow us to predict the direction of this fl ow, we defi ne a temperature for each of 
the objects. Their temperatures indicate which way, if any, thermal energy will naturally 
fl ow between two objects. If no thermal energy fl ows when two objects touch, then 
those objects are in thermal equilibrium and their temperatures are equal. But if ther-
mal energy fl ows from the fi rst object to the second, then the fi rst object is hotter than 
the second.
 
A temperature scale classifi es objects according to which way thermal energy will 
fl ow between any pair. An object with a hotter temperature will always transfer thermal 

Woodstoves 177
energy to an object with a colder temperature, and two objects with the same temperature 
will always be in thermal equilibrium. Thus the hot burning log will transfer thermal energy 
to the cold poker. We say that the burning log is hot because it tends to transfer thermal 
energy to most objects, while the poker is cold because most objects tend to transfer ther-
mal energy to it.
 
Energy that fl ows from one object to another because of a difference in their tempera-
tures is called heat. Heat is thermal energy on the move. Strictly speaking, the burning log 
doesn’t contain heat; it contains thermal energy. However, when that log transfers energy 
to the cold poker because of their temperature difference, it’s heat that fl ows from the log 
to the poker. (For a historical note about the understanding of heat, see 1 .)
 
Our present defi nition of temperature can order the objects around us from hottest to 
coldest, but it doesn’t quantify temperature in any unique way. You could make your own 
temperature scale by comparing every pair of objects to see which way heat fl ows between 
them, but you probably wouldn’t enjoy it. You would do better with a standard temperature 
scale such as Celsius, Fahrenheit, or Kelvin.
 
Standard temperature scales are based on an object’s average thermal kinetic energy 
per atom. The more kinetic energy each atom has, on average, the more vigorous the 
object’s thermal motion and the more thermal energy it transfers to the atoms in a second 
object by way of microscopic portions of work. Microscopic work is what actually passes 
heat between objects—a teeny shove here, a tiny yank there, all at the atomic scale. Since 
an object with more average thermal kinetic energy per atom will pass heat to an object 
with less, it makes sense to assign temperatures according to average thermal kinetic ener-
gies per atom.
 
The Celsius, Fahrenheit, and Kelvin scales all measure temperature in this manner. 
In each scale, a 1-degree, or unit, increase in temperature refl ects a specifi c increase in 
average thermal kinetic energy per atom. The relationship between average thermal kinetic 
energy per atom and assigned temperature is based on several standard conditions: absolute 
zero, water’s freezing temperature, and water’s boiling temperature. (Recall from Section 
5.1 that absolute zero is the temperature at which all thermal energy has been removed 
from an object.) Once specifi c temperatures have been assigned to two of these standard 
conditions, the whole temperature scale is fi xed. For example, the Celsius scale is built 
around 0 °C being water’s freezing temperature and 100 °C being water’s boiling tempera-
ture. Temperatures for the three standard conditions appear in Table 7.1.1.
1  Before the time of 
Benjamin Thompson, Count 
Rumford (American-born 
British physicist and 
statesman, 1753–1814), 
heat was believed to be a 
fl uid called caloric that 
was contained within 
objects. Thompson 
disproved the caloric 
theory by showing that the 
boring of cannons 
produced an inexhaustible 
supply of heat. Among his 
scientifi c and technolo-
gical contributions, 
Thompson improved 
cooking and heating 
methods. He reshaped 
fi replaces and developed 
the damper as ways to 
reduce smoking and 
improve heat transfer to 
the room. Thompson also 
had a life of sensational 
escapades and great rises 
and falls in fortune. He 
fl ed New Hampshire in 
1775 because he was a 
British loyalist, he fl ed 
London in 1782 under 
suspicion of being a 
French spy, and he was, at 
the time of his studies of 
heat, among the most 
powerful people in 
Bavaria.
Check Your Understanding #3: Frozen Fingers
If you pick up an ice cube, your hand suddenly feels cold. Which way is heat fl owing?
Answer: From your hotter hand to the colder ice cube.
Why: Heat naturally flows from a hotter object to a colder object. Since the ice cube is colder 
than your hand, heat flows out of your hand and into the ice cube. Since your hand is losing 
thermal energy, its temperature drops and you sense cold. Although it’s tempting to think of 
cold as something that flows out of an ice cube, the only thing that really moves about is heat. 
Ice cubes are wonderful absorbers of heat and cool our drinks by reducing the drinks’ thermal 
energies.
TABLE 7.1.1 Temperatures of Several Standard Conditions, as Measured in Three 
Temperature Scales: Celsius, Kelvin, and Fahrenheit
Standard Condition
Celsius (°C)
Kelvin (K)
Fahrenheit (°F)
Absolute zero
−273.15
0
−459.67
Freezing water
0
273.15
32
Boiling water
100
373.15
212

178 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
Open Fires and Woodstoves
Suppose you needed an easy way to heat your room. The oldest and simplest method would 
be to start a campfi re in the middle of the fl oor. The burning wood would produce thermal 
energy, which would fl ow as heat into the colder room. But how does burning wood pro-
duce thermal energy?
 
This thermal energy is released by a chemical reaction between molecules in the 
wood and oxygen in the air. Recall that atoms do work as they join together in a chemical 
bond and that the amount of work done depends on which atoms are being joined. For 
example, while carbon and hydrogen atoms can bond with one another to form hydrocar-
bon molecules, these atoms form much stronger bonds with oxygen atoms. Thus, although 
it may take work to disassemble a hydrocarbon molecule, the work done by its hydrogen 
and carbon atoms as they bind to oxygen atoms more than makes up for that investment. As 
a hydrocarbon molecule burns in oxygen, new, more tightly bound molecules are formed 
and chemical potential energy is released as thermal energy. The reaction products pro-
duced by burning hydrocarbons in air are primarily water and carbon dioxide.
 
Wood is composed mostly of cellulose, a long carbohydrate molecule. Carbohydrates 
contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. Despite the presence of a few oxygen atoms, 
carbohydrates still burn nicely to form water and carbon dioxide. When you light the wood 
with a match, you’re supplying the energy needed to break the old chemical bonds so that 
the new bonds can form. This starting energy is called activation energy, the energy 
needed to initiate the chemical reaction. Heat from the match fl ame gives the wood enough 
thermal energy to break chemical bonds between various atoms and start the reaction.
 
Unfortunately, wood isn’t pure cellulose. It also contains many complex resins that 
don’t burn well and that create smoke. If you plan to breathe the air in which you burn 
fuel, wood is an awful choice. You’d be better off with kerosene or natural gas, both of 
which are nearly pure hydrocarbons and burn cleanly. Actually, wood can be converted to 
a cleaner fuel by baking it in an airless oven to remove all its volatile resins. This process 
converts the wood into charcoal, which burns to form nearly pure carbon dioxide, water 
vapor, and ash.
 
However, even with clean-burning fuels, the direct fi re-in-the-room heating concept 
has its disadvantages—it consumes the room’s oxygen and presents a safety hazard. None-
theless, fi res have heated dwellings for thousands of years. While fi replaces that burn wood 
or peat have chimneys that carry away their noxious fumes, the rising smoke also takes 
with it much of the fi re’s thermal energy and some of the room’s air. That’s why a room 
that’s heated by a fi replace often feels drafty away from the fi replace itself—cold outside 
air is seeping in through cracks to replace air drawn up the chimney. Even when 
clean-burning fuels are used without a chimney, there are no simple solutions to the oxygen
-loss or safety problems.
 
Like a fi replace, a woodstove sends fumes from its burning wood up a chimney. But 
before its thermal energy can follow the fumes outside, a well-designed woodstove trans-
fers most of that energy into the room. A woodstove is an example of a heat exchanger, a 
device that transfers heat without transferring the hot molecules themselves. Its smoke 
never enters the room, but heat from that smoke does. Most combustion furnaces, such as 
those fueled by natural gas, propane, oil, and coal, also employ heat exchangers.
 
The burning coals and hot gases inside the woodstove contain a great deal of thermal 
energy and are much hotter than the room air. Because of this temperature difference, 
heat tends to fl ow from the fi re to the room. What is not so clear yet is how that heat is 
transferred.
 
There are three principal mechanisms by which heat moves from the fi re to the room: 
conduction, convection, and radiation. The woodstove makes wonderful use of all three so 
that most of the thermal energy released by the burning wood is transferred to the room. 
Let’s examine these three mechanisms of heat transport, beginning with conduction.

Woodstoves 179
Heat Moving through Metal: Conduction
Conduction occurs when heat fl ows through a stationary material. The heat moves from a 
hot region to a cold region, but the atoms and molecules don’t. For example, if you place 
the tip of a metal poker in the fi re, the poker’s handle will gradually become warm as the 
metal conducts heat.
 
Some of this heat is conducted by interactions between adjacent atoms. The vibrating 
atoms frequently push on one another, doing microscopic work in the process and exchang-
ing miniscule amounts of thermal kinetic energy. In this fashion, thermal energy fl ows 
randomly from atom to neighboring atom.
 
However, when the poker’s tip is hotter than its handle, the fl ow is no longer com-
pletely random. The atoms at the hot tip have more thermal kinetic energy to exchange with 
their neighbors than atoms at the cold handle. The exchanges statistically favor the fl ow of 
thermal energy away from the hot tip and toward the cold handle. This fl ow of thermal 
energy from hot to cold through the poker is conduction (Fig. 7.1.3).
 
This atom-by-atom bucket brigade isn’t the only way in which materials conduct heat. 
In a metal, the primary carriers of heat are actually mobile electrons, the tiny negatively 
charged particles that make up the outer portions of atoms. When atoms join together to 
form a metal, some of the electrons stop belonging to particular atoms and travel almost 
freely throughout the metal. These mobile electrons can carry electricity (as we’ll discuss 
in Chapter 10) and are also good at transporting heat.
 
Mobile electrons participate in the bucket brigade of heat conduction because they, 
too, can push on vibrating atoms and exchange thermal kinetic energy with them. However, 
while atoms can pass thermal energy only from one neighbor to the next, mobile electrons 
can travel great distances between exchange partners and can move thermal energy quickly 
from one place to another.
 
The ease with which electrons move heat about a metal explains why metals generally 
have higher thermal conductivities than nonmetals. Thermal conductivity is the measure 
of how rapidly heat fl ows through a material when it’s exposed to a difference in tempera-
tures. The best conductors of electricity—copper, silver, aluminum, and gold—are also the 
best conductors of heat. Poor conductors of electricity—stainless steel and insulators such 
as plastic and glass—are also poor conductors of heat. There are a few exceptions to this 
rule. Diamonds, for example, are terrible conductors of electricity but wonderful conduc-
tors of heat.
 
Conduction is what moves thermal energy from the woodstove’s inside to its outside. 
No atoms move through the metal walls of the stove, just heat. So conduction serves as a 
fi lter, separating desirable thermal energy from the unwanted smoke and noxious gases that 
then go up the chimney.
 
Thus conduction makes the outside surface of the woodstove hot, allowing heat to fl ow 
from it to the colder room. What carries that heat into the room? If you touch the stove, 
conduction will immediately transfer a huge amount of heat to your skin and you’ll be 
burned. Even without touching the stove, you’re aware of its high temperature. It transfers 
heat into the room by convection and radiation.
Check Your Understanding #4: Feeling the Heat
You can make a heat pack by wrapping hot wet towels in a plastic sheet. This pack will warm an 
injured muscle but will not get it wet. Is thermal energy moving in this case?
Answer: Yes, thermal energy is fl owing from the hot towels, through the plastic, to the muscle.
Why: The plastic sheet is acting as a heat exchanger, allowing heat to fl ow from the hot towels to the 
cooler muscle but preventing any movement of the hot water itself.
Heat
Hot
end
Cold
end
 Fig. 7.1.3  When one end 
of a metal poker is hotter 
than the other, the atoms 
at the hot end vibrate more 
vigorously than those at the 
cold end. The poker then 
conducts heat from the hot 
end to the cold end. Some 
of this heat is conducted 
by interactions between 
adjacent atoms. In the 
metal poker, however, most 
of the heat is conducted 
by mobile electrons, which 
carry thermal energy long 
distances from one atom to 
another. 

180 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
Heat Moving with Air: Convection
Convection occurs when a moving fl uid transports heat from a hotter object to a colder 
object. The heat moves as thermal energy in the fl uid so that the two travel together. The 
fl uid usually follows a circular path between the two objects, picking up heat from the 
hotter object, giving it to the colder object, and then returning to the hotter object to begin 
the cycle again.
 
This circulation often develops naturally. As the fl uid warms near the hotter object, its 
density decreases and it fl oats upward, lifted by the buoyant force. When the fl uid cools 
near the colder object, its density increases and it sinks downward.
 
Thus air heated by contact with the woodstove rises toward the ceiling and is replaced 
by colder air from the fl oor (Fig. 7.1.4). Eventually, this heated air cools and descends. 
Once it reaches the fl oor, it’s drawn back toward the hot woodstove to start the cycle over. 
This moving air is a convection current, and the looping path that it follows is a convec-
tion cell. Within the room, convection currents carry heat up and out from the woodstove 
to the ceiling and walls. When you put your hand over the stove, you feel this convection 
current rising as it transfers heat to your hand.
 
Natural convection is good at heating the air above the woodstove, but most of that hot 
air ends up near the ceiling. Although some of it will eventually drift downward to where 
you’re standing, convection sometimes needs help. Adding a ceiling fan will help move the 
hot air around the room and make the woodstove more effective. This forced convection 
still transfers heat from the hot stove to the colder occupants of the room, but it doesn’t rely 
on the buoyant force to keep the air circulating. The faster the air moves, the more heat it 
can transport from hot objects to cold objects.
 Check Your Understanding #5:  Too Hot to Handle 
 Some pot handles remain cool during cooking while others become unpleasantly hot. What deter-
mines which handles remain cool and which become hot? 
 Answer: It’s determined by the handle’s thermal conductivity. 
 Why: Some handles are made of plastics or stainless steel, which are poor conductors of both elec-
tricity and heat. These handles normally remain cool unless hot gases from the stove directly heat 
them. Other handles are made from aluminum, copper, or cast iron, which are good conductors of 
electricity and heat. These handles often become unbearably hot. 
Check Your Understanding #6: Heat and Wind
When sunlight warms the land beside a cool body of water, a breeze begins to blow from the water 
toward the land. Explain.
Answer: Convection occurs, with warmed air rising over the land and being replaced by cooler air 
from above the water. The air moving from over the water to over the land creates the breeze.
Why: Winds are giant convection currents caused by solar heating. Air rises over warm spots on 
Earth’s surface, and surface winds blow toward those warm spots to replace the missing air.
Heat Moving as Light: Radiation
There is one more important mechanism of heat transfer—radiation. As the particles inside 
a material jitter about with thermal energy, they emit and absorb electromagnetic radiation. 
This radiation consists of electromagnetic waves, which include radio waves, microwaves, 
and infrared, visible, and ultraviolet light.
 
We’ll study electromagnetic radiation later in this book. For now, what’s most impor-
tant is that this radiation can carry thermal energy. When heat fl ows from a hot object to a 
Hot air
rising
Cold air
descending
 Fig. 7.1.4  When the 
woodstove is hot, convection 
carries heat from its 
surfaces to the ceiling and 
walls of the room. Warm 
air rises upward, supported 
by the buoyant force, and 
is replaced by cooler air 
from the fl oor. The warmed 
air eventually cools and 
descends. It then returns 
toward the stove to repeat 
the cycle. 

Woodstoves 181
cold object as electromagnetic radiation, we say that heat is being transferred by thermal 
radiation or simply radiation. Unlike conduction and convection, which depend on atoms, 
molecules, or electrons to carry the heat, radiation occurs directly through space. Radiative 
heat transfer happens even when two objects have nothing at all between them.
 
The types of electromagnetic waves in an object’s thermal radiation depend on its 
temperature. While a colder object emits only radio waves, microwaves, and infrared light, 
a hotter object can also emit visible or even ultraviolet light. The red glow of a hot coal in 
the woodstove is that coal’s thermal radiation.
 
Since our eyes are sensitive only to visible light, we can’t see all the thermal radiation 
emitted by an object, even when it’s hot. However, whether we see it or not, electromag-
netic radiation contains energy and transfers heat to whatever absorbs it. While everything 
emits thermal radiation, the amount of that emission depends on temperature: the hotter an 
object, the more thermal radiation it emits. When two objects face one another, thermal 
radiation will travel in both directions between them. However, the hotter object will dom-
inate this radiant exchange of thermal energy, resulting in a net transfer of thermal energy 
to the colder object. Exchanges of thermal energy via radiation always transfer heat from a 
hotter object to a colder one.
 
Radiation transfers a great deal of heat from the woodstove’s surface to the surround-
ing objects. The stove bathes the room in infrared light, which warms everything it reaches. 
To encourage such radiative heat transfer, the metal woodstove and its chimney are often 
painted black. Black not only absorbs light well, but it’s also particularly good at emitting 
thermal light (Fig. 7.1.5). If you heat a black poker red hot, it will glow much more brightly 
than one that’s white, silvery, or transparent.
 Fig. 7.1.5  A hot charcoal briquette glows brightly in the dark (left). However, a fl ash photograph 
reveals that its surface is actually gray and thus a partial absorber of light (right). If it weren’t for the 
white ash, the briquette’s black carbon would make it a nearly ideal emitter of blackbody radiation and 
absorber of light. 
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
 
Even if air in the room is cold, you can usually feel the invisible infrared light from a 
woodstove on your face. When you block this light with your hands, your face suddenly 
feels colder because less heat is reaching your skin. This thermal radiation effect is even 
more pronounced with a fi replace or campfi re, where thermal radiation from the hot coals 
and fl ames is the primary mechanism for heat transfer to the surroundings.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Black Objects and Light
Misconception: A black object never emits light.
Resolution: Although a black object absorbs all light that strikes it, it still emits thermal radiation 
and will glow brightly if it’s hot enough.

182 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
 
Overall, a modern woodstove is an excellent heat exchanger. As convection draws 
hot smoke up the long black chimney pipe, the smoke heats the stove and the pipe. 
These metal components conduct heat to their outer surfaces, which then distribute it 
around the room by convection and radiation. Although the stove consumes some room 
air, it controls the airfl ow with dampers so that it draws in only enough air to completely 
burn the wood. Overall, the stove extracts heat effi ciently, cleanly, and safely from the 
burning wood.
Check Your Understanding #7: Keeping Warm
When you stand under a heat lamp, you feel warm even though the lamp emits little visible light. How 
is heat reaching your skin?
Answer: Radiation transfers heat from the lamp’s fi lament to your skin.
Why: A heat lamp emits large amounts of invisible infrared radiation. Although you can’t see this 
radiation, you can feel it on your skin.
Warming the Room
You light the woodstove, and its heat begins fl owing out into the cold room. Moving always 
from a hotter object to a colder object, heat enters each item in the room and gradually 
raises its temperature. For example, a once-frigid brass bowl near the woodstove is soon 
pleasantly warm to the touch.
 
Let’s take a look at the relationship between the heat added to that bowl and its tem-
perature rise. Because the bowl’s temperature increases steadily when heat is fl owing 
into it steadily, its overall temperature rise must be proportional to the added heat. 
The constant of proportionality is called the bowl’s heat capacity and is the amount of 
heat that must be added to the bowl to cause its temperature to rise by 1 unit. In effect, 
the bowl’s heat capacity is the measure of its thermal sluggishness, its resistance to 
temperature changes.
 
Now suppose that you have an assortment of bowls near the woodstove, each a differ-
ent material. If you keep track of their temperatures, you’ll fi nd that some of them warm 
faster than others. Even when you take into account differences in their masses and in how 
much heat each one is receiving from the woodstove, you’ll fi nd that bowls made of differ-
ent materials respond differently to added heat. Some materials are more thermally slug-
gish than others.
 
We can characterize each material by its heat capacity per unit mass, a quantity known 
as specifi c heat. To fi nd the specifi c heat of the material from which a particular bowl is 
made, you divide that bowl’s heat capacity by its mass, or
specific heat = heat capacity
mass
.
The SI unit of specifi c heat is the joule per kilogram-kelvin (abbreviated J/kg ∙ K).
 
Table 7.1.2 contains the specifi c heats for a number of common materials. The wide 
range of values indicates that different materials respond quite differently to added heat. 
Each material’s specifi c heat depends principally on the number of microscopic ways it can 
store thermal energy per kilogram. Known as a degree of freedom, each independent way 
of handling thermal energy stores an average thermal energy equal to one-half the Boltz-
mann constant times the absolute temperature (½ kT). The Boltzmann constant, which we 
fi rst encountered in Section 5.1, has a measured value of 1.381 × 10−23 J/K, and its units 
here are equivalent to those that appeared in Section 5.1.
 
Brass’s relatively small specifi c heat explains why the brass bowl heats up so quickly 
when you place it directly on the woodstove; the bowl has relatively few degrees of 

Woodstoves 183
freedom in which to store its thermal energy. But if you add even a modest amount of water 
to the bowl, the water’s astonishingly large specifi c heat will dramatically slow the bowl’s 
temperature rise. Water has a remarkable capacity for thermal energy.
 
Like brass or water, air also has a specifi c heat. However, air’s specifi c heat depends 
on how you measure it. That’s because gases tend to expand as they warm up. If you seal 
the air in a bottle, so that its volume doesn’t change, it warms relatively easily; air’s specifi c 
heat at constant volume is 715 J/kg ∙ K. But if you allow the air to expand as its temperature 
rises, so that its pressure doesn’t change, it’s harder to warm. That’s because it needs extra 
energy to push the surrounding air out of its way as it expands; air’s specifi c heat at constant 
pressure is 1001 J/kg ∙ K.
 
Since the room isn’t perfectly sealed, the air inside it expands as it’s heated and 
the larger specific heat applies. If it’s a typical living room, then its volume is about 
40 m3 (1400 ft3) and it contains about 50 kg (110 lbm) of air. The heat needed to warm 
that air is proportional to how much you want to raise its temperature and is equal to 
air’s specific heat times its mass, or about 50,000 J/K. For every kelvin or degree 
Celsius you want to warm the room air, the woodstove has to provide about 50,000 
joules of heat!
 
When the temperature outside is 0 °C (32 °F), it takes about 1,000,000 joules to warm 
the room’s air to 20 °C (68 °F). That’s the heat energy in about 0.07 kg (2 ounces) of wood. 
Every time you open the front door and let the room fi ll with outdoor air, the woodstove has 
to burn that amount of wood to return the room air to 20 °C. You can save energy and help 
the environment simply by keeping the doors and windows closed whenever you’re trying 
to keep the room air hotter (or colder) than it is outside.
Check Your Understanding #8: Hot Stuff
When you pull a metal tray of moist cookies out of the oven, the tray initially feels much hotter than 
the cookies. A little while later, however, the cookies feel much hotter than the tray. Explain.
Answer: At fi rst, both the tray and the cookies are hot. The tray feels hottest because its metal con-
ducts heat well and can deliver more heat to your skin. But the tray has a relatively small heat 
capacity, and its temperature plummets in the cool room air. The moist cookies have large heat 
capacities, so they cool relatively slowly.
Why: Metals often feel hotter or colder to the touch than insulators because they’re so good at trans-
ferring heat in either direction. However, materials containing water have much larger specifi c heats 
than metals and therefore maintain their temperatures better.
TABLE 7.1.2 Specifi c Heats Measured near Room Temperature (293 K) and 
Atmospheric Pressure
Material
Specifi c Heat
Lead
128 J/kg ∙ K
Brass
380 J/kg ∙ K
Copper
386 J/kg ∙ K
Air (at constant volume)
715 J/kg ∙ K
Glass
840 J/kg ∙ K
Aluminum
900 J/kg ∙ K
Air (at constant pressure)
1001 J/kg ∙ K
Wood
∼1100 J/kg ∙ K
Plexiglas or Lucite
1349 J/kg ∙ K
Steam (at constant pressure)
2027 J/kg ∙ K
Ice
2220 J/kg ∙ K
Water
4190 J/kg ∙ K

184 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
Solid, Liquid, and Gas: The Phases of Matter
Like most substances, water exists in three distinct forms or phases: solid ice, liquid water, 
and gaseous steam (Fig. 7.2.1). These phases differ in how easily their shapes and volumes 
can change. Ice is solid, rigid and incompressible; you can’t alter an ice cube’s shape or its 
volume. Water is liquid, fl uid but incompressible; you can reshape the water in a pitcher 
but you can’t change its volume. Steam is gaseous, fl uid and compressible; you can vary 
both the shape and the volume of the steam in a tea kettle.
 
These different characteristics refl ect the different microscopic structures of steam, 
water, and ice. Steam, or water vapor, is a gas, a collection of independent molecules kept 
SECTION 7.2 
Questions to Think About: Why does adding ice make a 
drink cold? Why do icebergs fl oat on water? How does per-
spiration cool you off? Why do humid days feel so muggy? 
What is the difference between evaporating and boiling? 
How does snow disappear from the ground even when it’s 
very cold outside?
Experiments to Do: Experimenting with water is easy. Pick up 
an ice cube with wet fi ngers. What happens if the ice cube has 
just come out of the freezer? What if it has been melting on 
the table for a few minutes? Why is there a difference? Put 
both ice cubes in water. Why do they fl oat?
 
Now heat tap water in a pot. Shortly before the water 
starts to boil, you will see mist begin to form above it. What is 
this mist, and why does it form? Carefully feel the mist, but 
don’t burn yourself! The mist feels damp because it contains 
water. How can water be leaving the pot before the water boils? 
Notice the small gas bubbles on the walls of the pot. They’re 
not steam; where did this gas come from?
 
Once the water boils, invisible steam (gaseous water) will 
push the mist layer upward. Don’t touch this steam because it 
can burn you quickly. Why does steam release so much thermal 
energy when it touches your skin?
Water is probably the most important chemical in our daily 
lives. It is so crucial to biology, climate, commerce, industry, 
and entertainment that it merits a whole section of its own. 
Moreover, it exhibits the three classic phases of matter—solid, 
liquid, and gas—and illustrates the role that heat plays in 
transforming one phase into another. Although most of what we 
can learn from water is applicable to any material, there are a 
few aspects of water that are almost unique in nature. Water 
really is a remarkable substance.
Water, Steam, and Ice
Water droplets
Steam
Water
Ice
Boiling
water
Freezing
water
Droplets of
condensation
Fig. 7.2.1 The three phases of water: solid (ice), liquid (water), and gas (steam).
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Water, Steam, and Ice 185
in motion by thermal energy. These water molecules bounce around their container, peri-
odically colliding with one another or with the walls. The water molecules fi ll the container 
uniformly and can accommodate any changes in its shape or size. Enlarging the container 
simply decreases the steam’s density and lowers its pressure.
 
When they are independent of one another as gaseous steam, water molecules have a 
substantial amount of chemical potential energy. They can release some of this energy by 
joining together to form ordinary water. Water is a liquid, a disorderly collection of mole-
cules that cling to one another with chemical bonds. Because these bonds aren’t very 
strong, the molecules in water can use thermal energy to break them temporarily and then 
change bonding partners. This rebonding process allows water to change shape so that it is 
a fl uid. Despite their fl exibility, however, these bonds manage to bunch the water molecules 
together so snugly that even squeezing can’t pack them much tighter. That’s why water is 
incompressible.
 
The molecules in water can release still more chemical potential energy by linking 
together stiffl y as ice. Ice is a solid, a rigid collection of chemically bound molecules. Like 
most solids, ice is crystalline—its water molecules are arranged in an orderly latticework 
that extends over long distances and gives rise to the beautiful crystal facets seen on snow-
fl akes and frost. Ice’s crystalline structure is so constraining that its water molecules can’t 
use thermal energy to change bonding partners, and consequently ice can’t change shape.
 
Just as an orderly stack of oranges at the grocery store takes up less volume than a 
disorderly heap, a crystalline solid almost always occupies less volume than its correspond-
ing disorderly liquid. The solid phase of a typical substance is thus denser than the liquid 
phase of that same substance, so the solid phase sinks in the liquid phase.
 
There is only one common substance that violates that rule—water. Ice’s crystalline 
structure is unusually open, and its density is surprisingly low. Almost unique in nature, 
solid ice is slightly less dense than liquid water, and ice therefore fl oats on water. That’s 
why icebergs fl oat on the open ocean and why ice cubes fl oat in your drink. In fact, water 
reaches its greatest density when it is liquid at about 4 °C (39 °F).
Check Your Understanding #1: Skating Anyone?
As a pond freezes, where does the ice begin to form?
Answer: It begins to form at the surface of the pond.
Why: Because ice is less dense than water, it fl oats at the surface of the pond. The pond therefore 
freezes from its top down. The insulating layer of ice at the top of the pond impedes the freezing of 
the remainder of the water, so the pond is unlikely to freeze solid. This behavior allows animals to 
live in the pond during winter. If ice sank, the pond would freeze solid and the animals would die. 
Thus, ice’s tendency to fl oat has profound implications for life on our planet.
Melting Ice and Freezing Water
Ice in a freezer is extremely cold, typically −18 °C (0 °F). When you place this ice on a 
warm countertop, heat fl ows into it and its temperature rises. The ice remains solid until its 
temperature reaches 0 °C (32 °F). At that point, the ice stops getting warmer and begins to 
melt. Melting is a phase transition, a transformation from the ordered solid phase to the 
disordered liquid phase. This transition occurs when heat breaks some of the chemical 
bonds between water molecules and permits the molecules to move past one another. The 
melting ice transforms into water, losing its rigid shape and crystalline structure.
 
Zero degrees Celsius is ice’s melting temperature, the temperature at which heat 
goes into breaking bonds and converting ice into water, rather than into making the ice 
hotter. The ice-water mixture remains at 0 °C until all the ice has melted. When only water 
remains, heat once again causes its temperature to rise.

186 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
 
The heat used to transform a certain mass of solid into liquid, without changing its 
temperature, is called the latent heat of melting or, more formally, latent heat of fusion. 
The bonds between the water molecules in ice are strong enough to give ice an enormous 
latent heat of melting; it takes about 333,000 J of heat to convert 1 kg of ice at 0 °C into 1 kg 
of water at 0 °C. Since water’s specifi c heat is 4190 J/kg ∙ K, that same amount of heat 
would raise the temperature of 1 kg of liquid water by about 80 °C. Thus it takes almost as 
much heat to melt an ice cube as it does to warm the resulting water all the way to boiling.
 
The latent heat of melting reappears when you cool the water back to its melting tem-
perature and it starts to freeze. Freezing is another phase transition, a transformation from 
the disordered liquid phase to the ordered solid phase. As you remove heat from water at 
0 °C, the water freezes into ice rather than becoming colder. Because the water molecules 
release energy as they bind together to form ice crystals, the water releases heat as it freezes. 
The heat released when transforming a certain mass of liquid into solid, without changing 
its temperature, is again the latent heat of melting. You must add a certain amount of heat 
to ice to melt it and you must remove that same amount of heat from water to solidify it.
Check Your Understanding #2: Keeping Crops Warm
Fruit growers often spray their crops with water to protect them from freezing in unusually cold 
weather. How does liquid water keep the fruit from freezing?
Answer: Liquid water releases a large amount of heat as it solidifi es, and this heat helps to protect 
the fruit from freezing.
Why: Fruit freezes at a temperature somewhat below 0 °C. As cold air removes heat from the water-
coated fruit, the water begins to freeze. The liquid water gives up a great deal of heat as it solidifi es 
and prevents the fruit’s temperature from dropping below 0 °C until the water has completely turned 
to ice. At that point, ice’s poor thermal conductivity insulates the fruit and slows its loss of heat to 
the colder air.
Phase Equilibrium: Leaving and Landing
We’ve seen that ice has a melting temperature, so now let’s see why it has a melting 
temperature. To do that, we must look at the interface between solid ice and liquid water. 
Whenever both phases are in contact, they exchange water molecules across the interface 
between them. Water molecules regularly break free from the ice to enter the water, and 
they often drop out of the water to stick to the ice. In other words, water molecules are 
leaving the ice and landing on it all the time, like airplanes at a busy airport.
 
Although you can’t see the individual leavings and landings, you can observe their net 
effect. If leavings outpace landings, the ice will gradually transform into water. If the land-
ings outpace leavings, the water will gradually transform into ice. If the two processes 
balance one another, the ice and water will coexist indefi nitely—a situation known as 
phase equilibrium.
 
Temperature plays a crucial role in this balance because it affects the rate at which 
water molecules leave the ice. The warmer the ice, the more often water molecules at its 
surface can gather enough thermal energy to break free and leave. Below ice’s melting 
temperature, water molecules leave the ice too infrequently to balance the landing process 
and the water transforms completely into ice. Above ice’s melting temperature, water mol-
ecules leave the ice so often that they outstrip the landing process and the ice transforms 
completely into water. Only at the melting temperature do the leaving and landing rates 
balance so that ice and water can coexist in phase equilibrium.
 
Ice’s huge latent heat of melting has a stabilizing effect on the phase equilibrium 
between ice and water. Whenever ice and water are mixed together, the mixture’s tempera-
ture will shift rapidly toward 0 °C. That’s because if the mixture’s temperature is above 
0 °C, the ice will melt—a phase transformation that absorbs the heat of melting and thereby 

Water, Steam, and Ice 187
lowers the mixture’s temperature toward 0 °C. If the mixture’s temperature is below 0 °C, 
the-water will freeze—a phase transformation that releases the heat of melting and thereby 
raises the mixture’s temperature toward 0 °C.
 
As long as the mixture doesn’t run out of ice or water, its temperature will soon reach 
0 °C and remain there even as you add or remove heat from it. Any heat you add to the 
mixture goes into melting more ice, not into raising its temperature. Any heat you remove 
from the mixture comes from freezing more water, not from lowering its temperature. 
That’s why your glass of ice water remains at 0 °C, even in the hottest or coldest weather 
(Fig. 7.2.2).
Fig. 7.2.2 Ice and water 
can coexist only at 0 °C, 
ice’s melting temperature.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Check Your Understanding #3: Ice Water
At a restaurant, your glass of water contains 25% ice while your friend’s glass of water contains 75% 
ice. Whose water is colder, or are their temperatures equal?
Answer: Their temperatures are equal.
Why: Both glasses contain mixtures of ice and water at 0 °C (32 °F). If either mixture were colder 
than that, its water would be freezing rapidly into ice, and if either mixture were warmer than that, 
its ice would be melting rapidly into water.
Evaporating Water and Condensing Steam
Water’s open surface is another active interface between phases, but this time the liquid 
water is exchanging molecules with gaseous steam. Water molecules are feverishly leaving 
the water for the steam and landing on the water from the steam, once again like planes at 
a busy airport.
 
While this frantic exchange of molecules is intriguing, what matters most is its net 
effect. If more molecules leave the water than return to it, then water gradually evaporates 
into steam. Evaporation is the phase transition from liquid to gas. On the other hand, if 
more molecules are landing on the water than leaving it, the steam gradually condenses 
into water. Condensation is the phase transition from gas to liquid. If landing and leaving 
are balanced, water and steam coexist in phase equilibrium.
 
These two phase transitions have enormous thermal consequences. Since the mole-
cules in water cling to one another with chemical bonds, it takes energy to separate them. 
Although the bonds between water molecules are weaker than the bonds within water 
molecules, it still takes a great deal of energy to transform water into steam.
 
The heat needed to transform a certain mass of liquid into gas, without changing its 
temperature, is called the latent heat of evaporation or, more formally, latent heat of 
vaporization. Water’s latent heat of evaporation is truly enormous because water mole-
cules are surprisingly hard to separate. About 2,300,000 J of heat is needed to convert 1 kg 
of water at 100 °C into 1 kg of steam at 100 °C. That same amount of heat would raise the 
temperature of 1 kg of water by more than 500 °C!
 
You are most aware of this latent heat of evaporation on hot summer days when the 
perspiration that evaporates from your skin draws heat from you and lowers your tempera-
ture. As each water molecule leaves your skin to become steam, it gathers up more than its 
fair share of thermal energy from its environment and carries it away as chemical potential 
energy. The departing water molecules thus leave you bereft of thermal energy, and you 
grow colder.
 
The latent heat of evaporation reappears when steam condenses and the gathering 
water molecules release their chemical potential energy as heat. The heat released when a 
certain mass of gas is transformed into liquid, without changing its temperature, is again 
the latent heat of evaporation. You must add a certain amount of heat to water to evaporate 
it, and you must remove that same amount of heat from steam to condense it.

188 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
 
The huge amount of heat released by condensing steam is often used to cook food or 
warm radiators in older buildings. When you steam vegetables, you are allowing steam to 
condense on the vegetables and transfer heat to them. A double-boiler uses condensing 
steam to transfer heat from a burner to a cooking container in a controlled manner.
Check Your Understanding #4: Tea Time
A kettle of water heats up rapidly on the stove but takes quite a while to boil away. Why does the 
water take so long to turn into steam?
Answer: The stove must operate for a long time to provide water’s huge latent heat of evaporation.
Why: Converting a kettle of hot water into steam requires an enormous amount of heat. This heat 
separates the molecules without raising their temperature. Since the stove provides only a certain 
amount of heat each second, it may take many minutes to boil away the water.
Relative Humidity
Although we’ve examined the consequences of evaporating and condensing, we haven’t 
yet seen what conditions determine when they’ll occur. It all comes down to water mole-
cules leaving and landing, so let’s take a look at why one process wins out over the other.
 
The basic indicator of whether water will evaporate or steam will condense is relative 
humidity. Relative humidity measures the water molecules’ landing rate as a percentage 
of the leaving rate. When the relative humidity is 100%, the two rates are equal and water 
and steam can coexist—they are in phase equilibrium. When the relative humidity is less 
than 100%, the landing rate is less than the leaving rate and the water evaporates—only 
steam will remain at equilibrium. Finally, when the relative humidity is more than 100%, 
the landing rate is more than the leaving rate and the steam condenses—no equilibrium is 
possible until the relative humidity has dropped to 100%.
 
Relative humidity depends on the temperature and on the density of the steam. Tem-
perature affects the leaving rate. The warmer the water, the more thermal energy it contains 
and the more frequently water molecules leave its surface to become gas. By itself, an 
increase in temperature will boost the leaving rate and thereby decrease the relative humid-
ity. Rising temperatures thus favor evaporation.
 
The density of water molecules in the steam affects the landing rate. The denser the 
steam, the more often water molecules land on the water to become liquid. By itself, an 
increase in steam density will boost the landing rate and thereby increase the relative 
humidity. Rising steam densities thus favor condensation. Even when that steam is mixed 
with air, as it often is, the air molecules act as passive bystanders. The density of water 
molecules alone determines the air’s relative humidity.
 
Relative humidity plays an important role in countless experiences of everyday life. 
When the relative humidity is low, water evaporates quickly and the air feels dry. Perspiration 
cools you effectively. When the relative humidity is high (near 100%), water barely evapo-
rates at all and the air feels damp. Perspiration clings to your skin and doesn’t cool you much.
 
When the relative humidity exceeds 100%, perhaps because of a sudden temperature 
drop, steam begins to condense everywhere. Water droplets grow on surfaces as dew or 
form directly in the air as fog, mist, or clouds. If the humidity remains high, these droplets 
grow larger and eventually fall as rain.
 
You can measure relative humidity by observing the cooling that accompanies evapo-
ration. The most common scheme involves two thermometers (Fig. 7.2.3), one of which 
has a wet cloth wrapped around its bulb (right). Water evaporating from the wet cloth cools 
the thermometer until that water reaches phase equilibrium with steam in the air and 
evaporation ceases. The dryer the air, the colder the thermometer gets. The temperatures of 
the two thermometers can then be used to determine the relative humidity, usually with the 
help of tabulated values.
Fig. 7.2.3 You can 
determine the air’s 
relative humidity using 
two thermometers, one 
of which has a wet cloth 
wrapped around its bulb 
(right). Evaporation cools 
the wet-bulb thermometer 
by an amount related 
to the air’s relative 
humidity. The dryer the 
air, the colder the wet-bulb 
thermometer becomes.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Water, Steam, and Ice 189
Subliming Ice and Depositing Steam
We’ve examined phase transitions between ice and water and between water and steam. 
That brings us to the phase transitions between ice and steam. Oddly enough, water mole-
cules can leave ice to become steam and can land from steam to become ice. In fact, ice and 
steam regularly exchange water molecules even when there is no liquid water present at all.
 
As usual, this exchange of water molecules occurs at the surface of the ice, the inter-
face between ice and steam. Since we’re most interested in the net movement of molecules, 
it comes down to leaving and landing rates on the ice. If molecules leave the ice more often 
than they land, the ice sublimes. Sublimation is the phase transition from solid to gas. If 
molecules land on the ice more often than they leave, the steam deposits. Deposition is the 
phase transition from gas to solid. Once again, relative humidity measures the landing rate 
as a percentage of the leaving rate. At 100% relative humidity, ice and steam are in phase 
equilibrium.
 
When the relative humidity is below 100%, ice sublimes. This effect gives rise to a 
number of familiar phenomena. When the weather is cold and dry, snow gradually disap-
pears from the ground without ever melting. In the low relative humidity of a frostless 
freezer, the ice cubes slowly shrink to miniature size. When you leave food unprotected in 
that same frostless freezer, it eventually dries out. While this “freezer burn” is a nuisance at 
home, sublimation from frozen food is used commercially to prepare freeze-dried foods.
 
When the relative humidity exceeds 100%, steam deposits. This process yields several 
other familiar effects. Frost forms on cold windows and lawns that are exposed to humid 
air. In the high relative humidity of a nonfrostless freezer, frost and ice accumulate on the 
walls and require periodic defrosting. Snowfl akes grow in clouds and then descend grace-
fully to the ground.
Check Your Understanding #5: Seeing Your Breath
When you breathe out on a cold day, you often see mist appearing from your mouth. Explain.
Answer: As the warm, moist air from your mouth cools, its relative humidity increases above 100%. 
The water vapor condenses to form a mist of water droplets.
Why: Changes in temperature affect relative humidity. Although the warm air leaving your lungs can 
contain a large portion of water vapor, its relative humidity increases dramatically as it cools. At lower 
temperatures, condensation takes over and the invisible water vapor condenses into a mist of visible 
water droplets.
Check Your Understanding #6: Disappearing Stink
Mothballs are smelly, crystalline pellets used to protect woolen clothes from attack by insects. If you 
sprinkle them into a closet and wait a few years, the mothballs will disappear. How do they vanish?
Answer: The mothballs sublime.
Why: Although mothballs do not melt at room temperature, they sublime readily. The air around them 
quickly becomes saturated with gaseous mothball molecules, and that’s why it smells so strongly.
Boiling Water
With three phases and six phase transitions, we seem to be out of possibilities. Where does 
boiling fi t into this picture? Boiling is simply an accelerated form of evaporation in which 
bubbles of pure steam grow by evaporation inside the water itself. To understand boiling, 
let’s take a look at the interplay between water and steam.
 
Suppose we seal some water inside an airless container and keep it at a constant tem-
perature. The water will evaporate as steam until the relative humidity inside the container 

190 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
reaches 100%. At that point, the water and steam will have reached phase equilibrium; the 
steam will have just the right density so that its water molecules will land on the water as 
often as they leave. Steam at its equilibrium density is said to be saturated.
 
Of course, the density of that saturated steam depends on the temperature of the con-
tainer. If you warm up the container, water molecules will leave the water more frequently 
and the density of the steam will have to increase to match the landing rate to the leaving 
rate. The density of saturated steam is thus an increasing function of the temperature.
 
The saturated steam’s density, together with its temperature, determines its pressure—
the pressure inside our container. Near room temperature, the pressure of saturated steam 
is only a few percent of atmospheric pressure. It increases with temperature, however, so 
that, as the temperature approaches 100 °C (212 °F), the pressure of saturated steam 
approaches atmospheric pressure.
 
With that background, suppose that we place a bubble of pure saturated steam in room 
temperature water that’s at atmospheric pressure. Because the pressure inside that bubble 
is much lower than atmospheric pressure, the surrounding water will rush inward and com-
press it. As the steam bubble’s volume shrinks, the steam will exceed its saturated density 
and begin to condense. In the blink of an eye, the bubble will be smashed out of existence.
 
Now suppose we begin warming the water on the stove. As the water temperature 
increases, steam’s saturated density and pressure both increase. At fi rst, saturated steam 
bubbles remain unstable; they’re crushed quickly by atmospheric pressure. However, when 
the water temperature is near 100 °C, something remarkable happens: saturated steam bub-
bles suddenly become stable and the water can begin boiling (Fig. 7.2.4). At that tempera-
ture, water’s boiling temperature, the pressure of saturated steam reaches atmospheric 
pressure and bubbles of saturated steam can survive indefi nitely within the water. Even 
more remarkably, these bubbles can grow by evaporation; each bubble’s surface is an inter-
face between water and steam, so when heat is added to the water, water can transform into 
steam and enlarge the bubble. Although the bubbles quickly fl oat to the water’s surface and 
pop, new bubbles can promptly take their place.
 
Boiling converts water to steam so rapidly that it consumes almost any amount of heat 
you add to the water. That’s why it’s so diffi cult to warm water above its boiling tempera-
ture. An open pot of water on the stove warms to water’s boiling temperature and then 
remains at that temperature until all the water has transformed into steam. Only then can 
the pot’s temperature again begin to increase.
 
The constant, well-defi ned temperature of boiling water allows you to cook vegetables 
or an egg at a particular rate. When you place an egg in boiling water, it cooks in 3 minutes 
because it’s in contact with water at its boiling temperature.
Check Your Understanding #7: Vanishing Bubbles
You are heating water in a pot on the stove. Shortly before the water boils properly, bubbles of steam 
begin rising from the bottom of the pot but vanish before they reach the water’s surface. What hap-
pens to those bubbles?
Answer: The rising steam bubbles condense as they pass through water that is below its boiling 
temperature.
Why: Water at the bottom of the pot reaches its boiling temperature fi rst, so bubbles of steam begin 
to rise from it. But water nearer the surface of the pot isn’t quite hot enough to sustain those bub-
bles. Instead, the steam inside them condenses and they collapse completely.
Changing Water’s Boiling Temperature
Water’s boiling temperature depends on the ambient pressure. For an open pot or pan, that 
pressure is atmospheric pressure. However, atmospheric pressure decreases with altitude 
and depends somewhat on the weather. Water boils at 100 °C (212 °F) near sea level but at 
Fig. 7.2.4 Water boils at 
100 °C, when atmospheric 
pressure can no longer 
smash the bubbles of water 
vapor.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Water, Steam, and Ice 191
only 90 °C (194 °F) at an altitude of 3000 m (9800 ft). This reduction in water’s boiling 
temperature with altitude explains why many recipes must be adapted for use at higher 
elevations. At 3000 m, an egg cooks slowly in boiling water because it’s surrounded by 
90 °C water, not 100 °C water. The same problem slows the cooking of rice, beans, and 
many other foods at high altitudes.
 
At suffi ciently low pressures, water boils even at room temperature or below. At the 
other extreme, high pressures can prevent water from boiling until it’s extremely hot. The 
boilers in steam engines and power plants often operate at such high pressures that water’s 
boiling temperature inside them may exceed 300 °C (572 °F).
 
One way to decrease cooking times is to use a pressure cooker, a sturdy pot that seals 
in steam so that the pressure inside it can exceed atmospheric pressure. This increased 
pressure prevents boiling until the water temperature is well above 100 °C. If you subject 
water to twice sea-level atmospheric pressure, it won’t boil until 121 °C (250 °F). An egg 
cooks very quickly at that temperature, as do vegetables and other foods.
 
However, just because water can boil, doesn’t mean that it will boil. Boiling depends on 
tiny seed bubbles that subsequently grow by evaporation. Without seed bubbles, the water 
won’t boil. Because nucleation, or seed-bubble formation, almost never occurs spontane-
ously in water below 300 °C, something else must create those seeds. Most nucleation occurs 
at defects or hotspots on the container or at contaminants in the liquid. Those nucleation sites 
usually trap air or other permanent gases and then serve as nurseries for seed bubbles of 
steam. Reliance on these specifi c nucleation sites explains why the-bubbles of boiling water, 
like those in soda or champagne, often stream upward from-specifi c spots on their containers.
 
When you heat water uniformly in a clean, glass container, it may not boil properly at 
its boiling temperature. Glass has a liquid-like smoothness even at the atomic scale and 
rarely aids seed-bubble formation. Without any long-lived nucleation sites, the water may 
stop forming seed bubbles and cease boiling. Once boiling stops, the water’s temperature 
can rise above the boiling temperature so that it becomes superheated.
 
Superheated water, which forms easily and often in a microwave oven, can be extremely 
dangerous. Touching it with a fork, adding sugar or salt, or even just tapping its container 
can initiate violent or even explosive boiling (Fig. 7.2.5). The more the water’s temperature 
exceeds its boiling temperature, the more energy it can release suddenly if it abruptly boils. 
Be careful when you heat water in a microwave oven, particularly in a glass or glazed con-
tainer. If it doesn’t appear to be boiling properly despite being very hot, recognize that it 
may be superheated. Your safest bet is to stay away from it until it has cooled down.
 
There is one other interesting way to change water’s boiling temperature: dissolve 
chemicals in it. A dissolved chemical keeps the water molecules busy so that they are less 
likely to leave the water to become steam, or ice for that matter. Since dissolved chemicals 
discourage water molecules from leaving water’s liquid phase, they suppress any phase 
transitions that reduce the amount of liquid phase water. That’s why dissolving sugar or salt 
in water slows its evaporation and raises its boiling temperature. It’s also why salt water 
freezes at a lower temperature than freshwater and why salt tends to melt ice. In contrast, 
sand doesn’t melt ice because it doesn’t dissolve in water.
Check Your Understanding #8: Lucky Accident
You pull a ceramic mug of hot water out of the microwave oven and add a spoonful of instant coffee. 
It bubbles amusingly and splatters a little onto the table. What happened?
Answer: The water in your mug was mildly superheated, and adding the powdered coffee nucleated 
boiling.
Why: Like glass, a glazed ceramic mug has no permanent nucleation sites to assist seed-bubble 
formation and boiling. You’re lucky. The water was only slightly superheated, and when you triggered 
boiling by adding the powder, it boiled relatively gently and quickly cooled to its normal boiling tem-
perature. Had the water been more severely superheated, you might have been badly scalded.
Fig. 7.2.5 The water 
in this glass measuring 
cup was superheated in a 
microwave oven and then 
disturbed with a fork. 
Explosive boiling blew all 
the water out of the cup in 
a fraction of second.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

192 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
The Importance of Insulation
Thermal insulation slows the fl ow of heat from hot objects to cold and helps keep your 
body warm, your refrigerator cold, and your home at a comfortable temperature year 
round. Yet in a world where ordered energy is increasingly precious, good insulation is 
more than just a convenience; it’s a necessity. That’s because whenever thermal energy 
leaves something that must remain hot or enters something that must remain cold, replac-
ing or removing that thermal energy consumes ordered energy. You can save ordered 
energy and do your part for the environment simply by using good insulation to keep ther-
mal energy where it belongs.
 
One of the most important examples of thermal insulation is your clothing. Together 
with your skin, clothing lowers the rate at which heat fl ows into or out of your body and 
makes it possible for you to keep your body temperature constant.
 
Why keep your body temperature constant? After all, cold-blooded animals such as 
reptiles, amphibians, and fi sh make no attempts to control their body temperatures. Instead, 
they exchange heat freely with their surroundings and are generally in thermal equilibrium 
with their environments. Maintaining a constant body temperature is a goal that’s unique to 
mammals and birds. Why bother?
 
The chemical processes that are responsible for life are very sensitive to temperature. 
That sensitivity is due in part to thermal energy’s role in initiating chemical reactions; it 
provides the activation energies that many chemical reactions need in order to proceed. As 
a cold-blooded animal’s temperature decreases, there is less thermal energy per molecule 
SECTION 7.3
often made of several different materials? Why does wrapping 
food in aluminum foil help keep it hot or cold? Why do most 
modern windows have more than one pane of glass in them? 
Why does increasing the fraction of greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere raise the average temperature at Earth’s surface?
Experiments to Do: Examine the effects of thermal insula-
tion by touching objects while your hand has or does not 
have insulation on it. As you pick up a piece of hot toast with 
your bare hand, why does your skin feel so hot? Now try again 
with a towel or napkin between your skin and the toast. What 
has changed? Perform the same experiment with an ice 
cube. The towel or napkin keeps your skin comfortable when 
you touch either hot or cold objects. How is that possible? 
What happens when you use aluminum foil instead of the 
towel or napkin?
 
You can do similar experiments with a heavy coat. The 
coat will obviously keep you warm in a cold environment, but it 
will also keep you cool (at least briefl y) in a hot environment. 
Sit in front of a fi replace with a heavy coat on. The parts of your 
body that are covered by the coat will barely notice the fi re’s 
presence. Now touch the exposed surface of the coat carefully 
with your fi ngers. Why is it so hot? As you can see, you need to 
be careful when wearing insulated clothes near a fi re because 
it’s possible to scorch or even ignite those clothes without feel-
ing the heat. Firefi ghters use heavy fi reproof coats to keep cool 
as they combat building fi res.
When you sit in front of a fi re on a cold winter day, heat fl ows 
from the glowing coals to your skin and you feel warm. When 
you walk through the snow on your way to the store, however, 
heat fl ow is the last thing you want. As the hottest object 
around, you will become colder, not warmer. So you bundle up 
in your new down coat. Its thermal insulation keeps you warm 
in your frigid environment. In this section, we’ll examine ther-
mal insulation and see how it prevents heat from moving easily 
between objects.
Questions to Think About: When you wear a thick coat on a 
cold day, what provides the heat that keeps you warm? How 
does your coat keep that heat from leaving you? Your head is 
exposed, so what keeps your head warm? Why is good cookware 
Clothing, Insulation, and Climate
Knit acrylic ﬁbers
Woven nylon 
shell 
Fiber insulation
and trapped air 
Closed-pore 
foam
insulation 

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate 193
and these chemical reactions occur less frequently. The animal’s whole metabolism slows 
down, and it becomes sluggish, dimwitted, and vulnerable to predators.
 
In contrast, warm-blooded animals have temperature regulation systems that allow 
them to maintain constant, optimal body temperatures. Regardless of its environment, a 
mammal or bird keeps the core of its body at a specifi c temperature so that it functions the 
same way in winter as in summer. The advantages of constant temperature are enormous. 
On a cold day, a warm-blooded predator can easily catch and devour its slower-moving 
cold-blooded prey.
 
There is, however, a cost to being warm-blooded. The thermal energy associated with 
an animal’s body temperature must come from somewhere, and the animal must struggle 
against its environment to maintain its temperature. Without realizing it, many of our 
behaviors are governed by our need to maintain body temperature. Our bodies are careful 
about how much thermal energy they produce, and we strive to control the rate at which we 
exchange heat with our surroundings.
 
A resting person converts chemical potential energy into thermal energy at the rate of 
about 80 calories per hour. Eighty calories per hour is a measure of power, equal to about 
100 W, so a resting person generates about 100 W of thermal power. An active person 
generates even more. This steady production of thermal energy is why a room fi lled with 
people can get pretty warm. One hundred watts may not seem like much, but when a hundred 
people are packed into a tight space, they act like a 10,000-W space heater and the whole 
room becomes unpleasantly hot.
 
If you had no way to get rid of this thermal energy of metabolism, you would become 
hotter and hotter. To maintain a constant temperature, you must transfer heat to your sur-
roundings. Since heat fl ows naturally from a hotter object to a colder object, your body 
temperature must generally be higher than the temperature around you. That requirement 
is one reason why human body temperature is approximately 37 °C (98.6 °F). This temper-
ature is higher than all but the hottest locations on Earth, so heat fl ows naturally from your 
body to your surroundings. You produce thermal energy as a by-product of your activities 
and transfer this thermal energy as heat to your colder surroundings.
 
The rate at which your resting body generates thermal energy is fairly constant, so the 
principal way in which you stabilize your body temperature is by controlling heat loss. 
Like all warm-blooded animals, you have a number of physiological and behavioral tech-
niques for doing just that. In hot weather or when you’re exercising hard, you encourage 
heat loss to avoid overheating. In cold weather, you limit heat loss to stay warm. Since this 
section is about clothing, we’re going to focus primarily on heat loss in cold weather. All 
three heat-transfer mechanisms are involved in that heat loss, so you must control them all 
to keep warm.
Check Your Understanding #1: Oven as Space Heater
A toaster oven turns electric energy into thermal energy at a rate of 500 J/s, or 500 W. If the appli-
ance’s temperature remains constant, at what rate is it transferring heat to its environment?
Answer: It’s transferring heat at the rate of 500 W.
Why: For the oven to maintain a constant temperature, its total thermal energy mustn’t change. 
Since it produces 500 W of thermal power electrically, it must transfer that same amount of thermal 
power to its environment. It acts as a 500-W space heater.
Staying Warm by Limiting Thermal Conduction
One way in which your body retains heat in cold weather is by impeding conductive heat 
loss. Heat fl ows through a material via conduction whenever that material is exposed to a 
difference in temperature—whenever one side of the material is hotter than the other side. 
The rate at which heat fl ows, however, depends on several factors: the overall temperature 

194 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
difference, the distance separating the hot side from the cold side, the area through which 
heat can fl ow, and the material itself.
 
Remarkably, heat fl ows in direct proportion to the temperature difference and to the 
area through which that heat can fl ow. Thus, if you touch your fi nger to two different cold 
surfaces, one 20 °C colder than your internal temperature and the other 40 °C colder, you’ll 
lose heat about twice as fast to the colder surface. If you touch two fi ngers at once, doubling 
the area through which heat can fl ow, you’ll lose heat about twice as fast.
 
On the other hand, further separating the hot and cold sides slows heat fl ow. The rate 
of heat fl ow is inversely proportional to that distance. For example, doubling the thickness 
of your gloves when you’re building a snowman will double the separation between hot 
and cold and roughly halve the heat fl ow.
 
Finally, some materials are better conductors of heat than others; they have different 
thermal conductivities. Skin has a particularly low thermal conductivity, meaning that it 
conducts relatively little heat compared to materials such as glass or copper. Thermal con-
ductivity is a characteristic of the material itself, and its SI unit is the watt per meter-kelvin 
(W/m ∙ K). Table 7.3.1 shows the thermal conductivities of a number of common materials.
 
The overall relationship between heat fl ow and these four quantities can be written as 
a word equation:
 
heat flow = thermal conductivity · temperature difference · area
separation
, 
(7.3.1)
in symbols:
H = k · ΔT · A
d
,
and in everyday language:
When you pick up a hot saucepan, wear a thick oven mitt and grab a small 
portion of the cooler handle.
TABLE 7.3.1 Approximate Thermal Conductivities of Various Materials
Material
Thermal Conductivity†
Argon
0.016 W/m ∙ K
Air
0.025 W/m ∙ K
Oak
0.17 W/m ∙ K
Fat
0.2 W/m ∙ K
Skin
0.21 W/m ∙ K
Hair
0.37 W/m ∙ K
Brick
0.6 W/m ∙ K
Water
0.6 W/m ∙ K
Glass
0.8 W/m ∙ K
Marble
2.5 W/m ∙ K
Stainless steel
16 W/m ∙ K
Steel
50 W/m ∙ K
Aluminum
210 W/m ∙ K
Copper
380 W/m ∙ K
Silver
429 W/m ∙ K
Diamond
1000 W/m ∙ K
†The watt per meter-kelvin (abbreviated W/m ∙ K) is the SI unit of thermal conductivity.

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate 195
Equation 7.3.1 tells us that the amount of heat fl owing through your skin depends on its 
thermal conductivity, surface area, thickness, and the temperature difference across it. 
Amazingly, your body has optimized these factors to help you minimize heat loss. Even 
without clothes, you are surprisingly well insulated against conductive heat loss.
 
Your skin and the layers immediately beneath it contain fats and other thermal insula-
tors. Fat’s thermal conductivity is quite low, about a third that of water, so by placing fat in 
and just beneath your skin, your body improves its heat retention. Furthermore, the pres-
ence of a fatty layer beneath your skin effectively thickens your skin and increases the 
distance separating hot from cold. “Thick-skinned” people retain body heat better than 
those who are “thin-skinned.”
 
Minimizing surface area means that your body is relatively compact, shaped more like 
a ball than a sheet. Although other adaptive infl uences have given you arms, legs, and fi n-
gers, which increase your total surface area, you have little superfl uous surface through 
which to lose heat.
 
Finally, your body tries to lessen conductive heat loss by reducing the temperature differ-
ence between your skin and the surrounding air. It does this by letting your hands and feet 
become much cooler than your core body temperature. That arrangement would be simple 
were it not for your circulating blood. Your blood must cool down from core body temperature 
as it approaches your cold fi ngers and warm back up to core body temperature as it returns to 
your heart. This change in blood temperature occurs via a mechanism called countercurrent 
exchange. As the warm blood fl ows through arteries toward your cold fi ngers, it transfers heat 
to the blood returning to your heart through nearby veins (Fig. 7.3.1). The blood heading 
toward your fi ngers becomes colder, while the blood returning to your heart becomes warmer.
Check Your Understanding #2: Hot Potatoes
You have been cooking potatoes in a pot of boiling water, and it’s time to fi sh them out. With which 
are you least likely to burn your hands: copper tongs or stainless steel tongs?
Answer: Stainless steel tongs are less likely to burn you.
Why: The rate at which heat fl ows from the hotter water to your colder hand is proportional to the 
tongs’ thermal conductivity, and stainless steel has a much lower thermal conductivity than copper.
Check Your Figures #1: Cold Hard Brick
You are visiting a tiny fi fteenth-century house that was built entirely of bricks. Its walls have a surface 
area of 20 m2 (215 ft2), and the bricks are 9.2 cm (35
8 in) thick. When the winter air outside is −20 °C 
and the heated air inside is 20 °C, at what rate is heat fl owing through the walls of the house?
Answer: 5200 W.
Why: According to Table 7.3.1, the thermal conductivity of brick is 0.6 W/m ∙ K. The temperature 
difference between the inside and outside of each brick is 40 °C, or, equivalently, 40 K. From Eq. 
7.3.1, we obtain:
heat flow = 0.6 W/m · K · 40 K · 20 m2
0.092 m
= 5217 W.
Because of the limited accuracy of our starting values, we round the result to 5200 W. That is an 
enormous rate of heat loss, and we haven’t even considered losses through the roof. This house needs 
insulation!
Staying Warm by Impeding Convection
Despite its great insulating qualities, skin alone isn’t enough to keep you warm in all situ-
ations. Some of your body heat inevitably fl ows to the surface of your skin and from there 
to your environment. Limiting that second step of heat fl ow is a job for clothing.
Venous
blood
Arterial
blood
37 °C
27 °C
Heat
ﬂow
Fig. 7.3.1 Blood fl owing 
toward your hand through 
arteries exchanges heat 
with blood returning to 
your heart through veins. 
In this fashion, your blood 
is able to carry oxygen 
and food to your fi ngers 
without warming them 
all the way up to core 
body temperature. This 
adaptation reduces the rate 
at which you lose heat in 
cold weather.

196 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
 
On a cold day, heat leaving your skin warms the nearby air. Since air is a very poor 
conductor of heat, however, your skin warms only a thin layer of it. If that warmed air never 
moved, you would have to heat it only once and that would be that. Protected by this insu-
lating layer of air, your skin would no longer have to transport much heat and the tempera-
ture difference across your skin would shrink. You would feel warm.
 
But air moves all too easily. In reality, each time your skin manages to warm the 
nearby air, natural convection gently lifts that warmed air upward and replaces it with fresh 
cold air. The temperature difference across your skin thus remains large, and heat fl ows 
quickly out through your skin. You feel cold.
 
Wind worsens this heat loss because it blows away warmed air near your skin even 
faster than does natural convection. Just as a forced convection oven cooks food faster, so 
a forced convection freezer (such as a cold, windy day) chills people faster. The enhanced 
heat loss caused by moving air is called wind chill—you feel even colder on a windy day.
 
To combat convective heat loss and wind chill, most warm-blooded animals are covered 
with hair or feathers. These fi nely structured materials are poor conductors of heat, but their 
main purpose is actually to trap an even better insulator: air. In the dense tangle of a sheep’s 
wool, air experiences such severe drag forces that it can barely move at all. Since convection 
requires airfl ow, the sheep can lose heat only via conduction through the trapped air and 
wool. That combination of materials is a terrible conductor of heat, so the sheep stays warm.
 
We humans have relatively little hair and are thus poorly adapted to living in cold, 
windy climates. Our lack of natural insulation is one of the reasons we wear clothing. Like 
hair and feathers, our clothing traps the air and reduces convection. Finely divided strands 
or fi laments are particularly effective at stopping the fl ow of air. Not surprisingly, the best 
insulating clothing is made of hair (natural or synthetic) and feathers (also natural or syn-
thetic). Since motionless air has a lower thermal conductivity than any of the materials that 
trap it, the ideal coat uses only enough material to keep a thick layer of air from moving.
 
This discussion also applies to swimming in cold water. If the water near your skin 
would stay put, you could warm up a layer of it and then feel relatively warm. That’s why 
some swimmers wear wet suits. The spongy material in a wet suit keeps the layer of water 
near the swimmer’s skin from moving. As long it remains in place, water is a respectable 
thermal insulator.
Check Your Understanding #3: When a Cold Wind Blows
Why does wearing a thin nylon windbreaker make such a difference in your ability to keep warm on 
a cool, windy day?
Answer: It traps a layer of insulating air near your skin.
Why: Even though the windbreaker is too thin to provide much insulation itself, it traps air near your 
skin. With much less circulation of cold air across your skin, you lose heat more slowly and feel 
relatively warm.
More about Thermal Radiation
When you sit in front of a glowing fi re, you feel its thermal radiation warming your skin. 
But your skin also emits thermal radiation, so what you’re really noticing is that your skin 
is absorbing more thermal radiation from the fi re than it’s emitting toward your surround-
ings. You’re gaining heat. In contrast, if you sit inside an ice sculpture castle, your skin will 
absorb less thermal radiation from the ice than it’s emitting, so you’ll be losing heat and 
feeling cold.
 
Short of walking back and forth between fi re and ice, how can you control how much 
heat you gain or lose via thermal radiation? More broadly, what determines how much 
thermal power you radiate toward your environment and how much you absorb from it? To 
answer these questions, we need to take a closer look at thermal radiation itself.

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate 197
 
You’ve probably noticed that you can often judge the temperature of a hot object by 
the color of the light it emits. An object that’s glowing red is too hot to touch, but one that’s 
glowing yellow-white is a serious fi re hazard. That connection between temperature and 
color isn’t a coincidence. The light that you see emanating from a hot object is part of that 
object’s thermal radiation. You are quite literally seeing its heat.
 
However, you’re not seeing all of its heat. Although thermal radiation consists of elec-
tromagnetic waves and you can see some electromagnetic waves, most are invisible to your 
eyes. Those that you can see, visible light, are part of a continuous spectrum of electromag-
netic radiation that extends from radio waves at one extreme to gamma rays at the other 
(Fig. 7.3.2).
 
Electromagnetic waves are distinguished by their wavelengths, that is, the distances 
between their wave crests. You can easily recognize the wavelength for the waves on a lake 
or sea, where the crests are visible and you can directly measure the distance from one to 
the next. Although the wave crests of electromagnetic waves aren’t so easy to observe, they 
exist and it’s possible to measure the distance between them. Moreover, within the visible 
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum (Fig. 7.3.3), you perceive different wavelengths 
of light as different colors. Light with a wavelength of 630 nanometers (billionths of a 
meter, abbreviated nm) appears red, while light at 420 nm appears blue.
 
However, an object’s thermal radiation isn’t a single electromagnetic wave with one 
specifi c wavelength. Instead, it’s many individual waves that cover a broad range of wave-
lengths. The distribution of those wavelengths depends on the object’s temperature and 
surface properties, particularly its emissivity, the effi ciency with which it emits and absorbs 
thermal radiation. Emissivity is measured on a scale from 0 to 1, with 1 being ideal effi -
ciency. A perfectly black object has an emissivity of 1; it absorbs all light that strikes it and 
emits thermal light as effi ciently as possible.
 
The distribution of wavelengths emitted by a black object is determined by its temper-
ature alone and is called a blackbody spectrum. As shown in Fig. 7.3.4, that spectrum 
brightens and shifts toward shorter wavelengths as the object’s temperature increases. When 
a black object is colder than about 400 °C, its thermal radiation lies entirely in the invisible 
long-wavelength portion of the spectrum and you can’t see the radiation at all. Even at 
400 °C, only your night vision is able to sense the thermal radiation, which appears dim and 
colorless. At about 500 °C, your color vision begins to detect the glow and your eyes make 
an average assessment of the distribution of wavelengths. You see dull red. With increasing 
temperature, you then observe reddish, orangish, yellowish, whitish, and eventually bluish 
10 3
1
10–3
10–6
10–9
10–12
10–15
Wavelength (meters)
AM radio
Shortwave radio
FM radio
VHF television
VHF television
UHF television
Microwaves
Millimeter waves
Far infrared light
Infrared light
Ultraviolet light
X-rays
Gamma rays
Visible light
Fig. 7.3.2 The spectrum 
of electromagnetic 
radiation, arranged by 
wavelength. The scale here 
is logarithmic, meaning 
that the wavelength 
decreases by a factor of 
10 with each tick mark to 
the right.
Wavelength (nanometers)
700
600
500
400
Blue
Indigo
Red
Orange
Green
Yellow
Infrared
Ultraviolet
Violet
Fig. 7.3.3 A portion 
of the electromagnetic 
radiation spectrum 
around visible light. 
Wavelengths are measured 
in nanometers (nm, or 
billionths of a meter).

198 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
light (Table 7.3.2). The temperature of thermal radiation associated with a particular distri-
bution of wavelengths is the color temperature of that light.
 
Whether visible or not, the entire spectrum of thermal radiation is important to retain-
ing body heat. Your body radiates thermal power and if your radiated power is greater than 
the thermal power you absorb from your environment, you are losing heat via radiation.
 
The thermal power you radiate depends primarily on your temperature. It’s clear from 
Fig. 7.3.4 that a black object radiates more power as its temperature increases. What may 
be surprising, however, is how dramatically that radiated power increases with tempera-
ture: it is proportional to the fourth power of the absolute temperature! Thus, although a 
black pot full of boiling water (373 K) and an identical black pot full of ice water (273 K) 
have an absolute temperature ratio of only 1.37, the hotter one radiates 1.374, or 3.5, times 
as much thermal power as the cooler one.
Visible
light
Ultraviolet
light
Infrared
light
Wavelength (nanometers)
Infrared
light
2000
1600
1200
800
400
14,000
12,000
10,000
8000
6000
4000
307 K
0
2×10–7
Intensity
Skin
4×10–7
5800 K
0.00
0.50
1.00
The sun
Incandescent lightbulb
2700 K
0.00
0.01
0.02
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 7.3.4 The distributions of light emitted by black objects at (a) 5800 K, (b) 2700 K, and 
(c) 307 K. In addition to containing a larger fraction of visible light, the object at 5800 K is much 
brighter than the object at 2700 K (note the different intensity scales). The object at 307 K emits 
only dim, long-wavelength infrared light.
TABLE 7.3.2 Temperatures and Colors of Light Emitted by Hot Objects
Object
Temperature
Color
Skin
  34 ºC   (93 ºF)
Invisible
Heat lamp
 500 ºC    (930 ºF)
Dull red
Candle fl ame
1700 ºC  (3100 ºF)
Dim orange
Incandescent bulb
2500 ºC  (4500 ºF)
Bright yellow-white
Sun’s surface
5525 ºC  (9980 ºF)
Brilliant white
Blue star
6000 ºC (10,800 ºF)
Dazzling blue-white

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate 199
 
Your radiated power also depends on your surface area and on your emissivity, and it 
is proportional to each of those quantities. The precise relationship between temperature 
and radiated power can be written as a word equation:
 
radiated power = emissivity · Stefan–Boltzmann constant
 
            · temperature4 · surface area, 
(7.3.2)
in symbols:
P = e ∙ σ ∙ T 4 ∙ A,
and in everyday language:
Hot food radiates away lots of heat, so wrap it compactly in aluminum foil 
to keep it warm.
This relationship is called the Stefan–Boltzmann law, and the Stefan–Boltzmann con-
stant (σ) that appears in it has a measured value of 5.67 × 10−8 J/(s ∙ m2  ∙ K4). Remember 
that the temperature must be measured in kelvins.
 
Your skin temperature and your surface area aren’t hard to measure, but what is your 
emissivity for radiating heat? Prepare for a surprise. Looking at a surface tells you only 
about its high-temperature emissivity—how well it absorbs visible thermal radiation from 
a very hot object (such as the 5800 K sun) and would emit visible thermal radiation if it 
were heated red, yellow, or white hot. Your skin’s temperature is only 307 K, however, so 
its thermal radiation depends on its low-temperature emissivity—how well it absorbs and 
emits invisible long-wavelength infrared light.
 
Now for the surprise: regardless of your appearance in visible light, your skin is almost 
perfectly black at the infrared wavelengths of skin-temperature thermal radiation! Your 
skin’s low-temperature emissivity is approximately 0.97. In fact, most nonmetallic objects 
have low-temperature emissivities greater than 0.95. If you could see infrared light rather 
than visible light, all the people and most of the objects around you would look black—you 
would see that they absorb almost all the infrared light that strikes them and that they glow 
brightly with their own infrared thermal radiation.
Check Your Understanding #4: Seeing Your Outer Glow
Passive infrared sensors are commonly used to turn on lights when a person walks by. They sense 
changes in long-wavelength infrared light. How do they recognize a person in total darkness?
Answer: Both the person and his environment radiate infrared light, but because the person’s 
temperature is different from his surroundings, his infrared brightness is also different.
Why: The sensor responds to the thermal radiation emitted by the objects in front of it. As the person 
walks by, the brightness and pattern of that thermal radiation change and the sensor switches on the light.
Check Your Figures #2: De-Lighted at the Blacksmith’s Shop
When a blacksmith pulls a piece of yellow-hot steel out of the furnace, its temperature plummets and 
it dims rapidly. However, it remains too hot to touch for several minutes. How much faster does the 
steel cool by radiation at 800 °C than it does at 400 °C? (Assume the steel’s emissivity doesn’t 
depend on temperature.)
Answer: The steel cools about 6.46 times as fast at 800 °C.
Why: We fi rst convert the two temperatures to Kelvin: 1073 K and 673 K, respectively. We then fi nd 
the ratio of the radiated powers at these two temperatures by dividing Eq. 7.3.2 for 1073 K by that 
same equation for 673 K:
radiated power at 1073 K
radiated power at 673 K = (1073 K)4
(673  K)4 = 6.46.

200 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
Staying Warm by Controlling Thermal Radiation
The average temperature of human skin is about 307 K (34 °C or 93 °F), and a typical per-
son has a body surface area of about 1.8 m2 (19 ft2). Assuming an emissivity of 0.97, the 
Stefan–Boltzmann law predicts that a person will radiate about 850 W of thermal power. If 
you actually lost heat that fast, you’d cool off quickly and be very uncomfortable. Thus, 
limiting radiative heat loss is important to maintaining your body temperature.
 
Fortunately, everything around you is also emitting thermal radiation, and you typi-
cally absorb about as much thermal power as you emit. You even absorb some of your own 
thermal radiation. If you hold your hand in front of your face on a cold day, you’ll feel its 
thermal radiation warming your face.
 
However, whenever there’s a temperature difference between you and your environ-
ment, heat will fl ow from hotter to colder every way it can, including radiation. While 
conduction and convection transfer heat in proportion to the difference in temperature, 
radiation transfers heat in proportion to the difference between the fourth powers of the 
absolute temperatures. That exotic relationship between temperatures and heat fl ow 
explains why radiative heat transfer to or from your skin is most noticeable when you’re 
exposed to unusually hot or cold objects.
 
For example, the sun warms your skin quickly because it radiates more heat at you 
than the rest of your surroundings combined. Measured on an absolute temperature scale, 
the sun’s surface temperature (5800 K) is about 20 times that of your skin (307 K). Though 
it’s very distant and appears small to your eye, the sun radiates about 204, or 160,000, times 
as much heat at you as you radiate at it.
 
In contrast, the dark night sky cools you quickly because it’s actually colder than your 
surroundings. The nearly empty space beyond Earth’s atmosphere is only a few degrees 
above absolute zero, and even with the atmosphere’s considerable help, the sky’s effective 
radiant temperature is still about 20 °C colder than the air around you. When you lie on the 
snow in an open fi eld and look up at the clear night sky, your 307-K skin radiates about 
twice as much heat at the approximately 250-K sky as it radiates back at you. You lose heat 
quickly and feel cold.
 
You can improve your situation by moving under a sheltering pine tree. Although the 
tree is no warmer than the snow, it’s about 20 °C hotter than the sky and therefore emits 
more thermal radiation at you. Although the tree isn’t quite a crackling campfi re, it will still 
help to keep you warm.
 
That said, we still have you running back and forth between hot and cold objects to 
keep warm. It’s time to look at how you can control thermal radiation while staying in 
one place.
 
You can start by wearing a heavy coat. The coat’s internal insulation allows its outer 
surface to cool down to the temperature of your environment, so that it radiates only a little 
more thermal power than it absorbs and doesn’t lose much heat. This strategy is common 
in birds and mammals. Penguins and polar bears let the outsides of their insulated feathers 
and fur cool to the temperatures of their frozen worlds and therefore lose almost no heat by 
radiation.
 
You can also change your emissivity to control radiative heat transfer. We’ve seen that 
black surfaces are ideal whenever you want to exchange thermal radiation with other 
objects, but what about when you don’t want to exchange thermal energy? That’s where 
shiny, white, and transparent surfaces come into play.
 
A perfectly shiny or white surface has an emissivity of zero; it refl ects all of the light 
that strikes it, absorbing none, and is itself unable to emit any thermal radiation. If you put 
a shiny or white surface between yourself and a snowman, you’ll each see your own ther-
mal radiation coming back at you and you won’t exchange any heat. This insulating effect 
works even if one of you wears the shiny or white surface as clothing; whoever is wearing 
it won’t emit thermal radiation at all, and the other will see his or her own thermal radiation 
returned by that clothing.

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate 201
 
Unfortunately, while truly white clothing would make you immune to radiant heat 
transfer, such clothing doesn’t exist. Clothing exemplifi es the difference between high-
temperature and low-temperature emissivities. Regardless of their colors in visible light, 
virtually all clothing materials are black to infrared light and have low-temperature emis-
sivities close to 1. In other words, most clothes absorb and emit low-temperature thermal 
radiation almost perfectly. Thus, although wearing a white robe on a scorching summer day 
will reduce the amount of thermal radiation you absorb directly from the sun because the 
robe’s high-temperature emissivity is nearly 0, it won’t protect you from the sun-warmed 
objects around you because its low-temperature emissivity is nearly 1.
 
In contrast, shiny clothing can protect you from those sun-warmed objects, but only if it 
contains metals. Metals have small low-temperature emissivities because they conduct elec-
tricity, a property that allows them to refl ect electromagnetic waves extremely well. When 
you wrap food in aluminum foil, its emissivity drops to about 0.05 and it can barely exchange 
heat by radiation (Fig. 7.3.5). Wearing metallic clothes has the same effect for people. Lamé 
fabrics—fabrics with metal threads woven into them—help to keep their typically under-
dressed wearers warm. A less fl amboyant use of metallic cloth is in the-metal-coated plastic 
blankets that are part of emergency rescue kits; wrapping yourself in one of these blankets 
shiny-side out keeps you from exchanging thermal radiation with your surroundings (see 2 ).
 
Transparent materials also have emissivities near 0 and neither absorb nor emit thermal 
radiation well. Unlike shiny or white surfaces, however, transparent materials avoid absorb-
ing thermal radiation by letting it pass through them. For example, when sunlight streams 
through a window to warm your skin, it’s obvious that glass doesn’t absorb much of the 
sun’s thermal radiation. As for emission, any artist who sculpts molten glass knows from 
painful experience that glass provides almost no visible warning that it’s extremely hot.
 
However, emissivity once again varies with temperature. Nearly all the materials that are 
transparent to the visible light of high-temperature thermal radiation, including glass, are black 
to the infrared light of low-temperature thermal radiation. That’s probably just as well for cloth-
ing because clothing that’s transparent to thermal radiation wouldn’t provide much insulation.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Fig. 7.3.5 This silver coffee urn may not seem to be insulated, 
but it is. Its polished silver surface is so shiny that it is an 
almost perfect mirror for infrared and visible light. As a result, 
it neither emits nor absorbs room-temperature thermal radiation 
well. Moreover, the air near the urn’s vertical sides forms tall 
convection cells that aren’t very effi cient at carrying heat away 
from the urn. Overall, the urn loses heat much more slowly than 
it would if it were black and had fewer vertical surfaces.
2  Smoke jumpers who 
battle forest fi res 
occasionally get trapped 
by the fi res they’re 
fi ghting and must try to 
survive as the fi res burn 
over them. Their chances 
improve signifi cantly if 
they use small personal 
survival shelters that have 
shiny metallic surfaces. 
Huddled against the cool 
ground underneath one of 
these tent-like shelters, a 
fi refi ghter is relatively 
insulated from the fi re 
overhead. Assuming the 
fi refi ghter is in a low spot 
with nothing to burn 
nearby and makes no 
contact with the shelter 
itself, conduction and 
convection can’t convey 
much heat to the fi re-
fi ghter. And with the 
shelter’s shiny, 
low-emissivity surface 
refl ecting most of the 
fi re’s thermal radiation, 
radiative heat transfer is 
also greatly diminished. 
On August 29, 1985, 
73 fi refi ghters were trapped 
for several hours by a fi re 
in the Salmon National 
Forrest near Salmon, 
Idaho, and survived only 
with the aid of their 
personal fi re shelters.
Check Your Understanding #5: Foil Wrapping
Wrapping a hot dish of food in shiny aluminum foil seems to keep the dish warm longer than wrap-
ping it in clear plastic fi lm. Aluminum is a much better conductor of heat than plastic, so why does 
it impede the fl ow of heat so well?
Answer: The aluminum foil prevents the dish from losing heat to its environment via thermal radiation.
Why: Both wraps insulate by trapping air, not by preventing heat from conducting through the wrap 
itself. They’re both too thin to permit much of a temperature difference between their inner and outer 
surfaces, despite their huge difference in thermal conductivities. In the case of the aluminum foil, 
however, aluminum’s low emissivity also prevents it from exchanging thermal radiation with the food 
or with the surroundings.

202 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
Insulating Houses
The goal of housing insulation is to limit heat fl ow into or out of a house so that the tem-
perature inside the house is nearly independent of the temperature outside. It’s based on the 
same insulating concepts that help keep people and animals warm, but because houses and 
their contents rarely move, they can employ insulating methods and materials that are 
heavy, bulky, rigid, or fragile.
 
While there are many solid materials that are poor conductors of heat, including glass, 
plastic, wood, sand, and brick, they aren’t nearly as insulating as air. Of course, since air 
tends to undergo convection, it needs to be held in place by porous or fi brous materials such 
as glass wool, sawdust, plastic foam, or narrow channels. Trapped air is the primary insu-
lation in most buildings.
 
Glass wool or fi berglass is made by spinning molten glass into long, thin fi bers that are 
then matted together like cotton candy. Solid glass is already a poor conductor of heat, but 
reducing it to fi bers makes it even more insulating. The path that heat must take as it’s 
conducted through the tangled fi bers is so long and circuitous that little heat gets through. 
Most of the volume in glass wool is taken up by trapped air. The glass fi bers keep the air 
from undergoing convection so the air can carry heat only by conduction.
 
Together, glass wool and the air trapped in it make excellent insulation. Since they’re 
also nonfl ammable, they are commonly used in ovens, hot-water heaters, and other high-
temperature appliances. Most modern houses have about 10–20 cm (4–8 in) of glass wool 
insulation built into their outside walls, along with a vapor barrier to keep the wind from 
blowing air directly through the insulation. (For a discussion of older insulating techniques, 
see Fig. 7.3.6.)
 
Because hot air rises and cold air sinks, the temperature difference between the hot air 
below the ceiling of the top fl oor and the cold air above that ceiling can become quite large 
during the winter. That ceiling is thus a very important site of unwanted heat transfer and 
requires heavy insulation. Glass wool inserted above the ceiling of the top fl oor in a modern 
house may be more than 30 cm (12 in) thick (Fig. 7.3.7).
 
While glass wool is an excellent insulator, other materials are used in certain situa-
tions. Urethane foam and polystyrene foam are waterproof, windproof, and even better 
insulators than glass wool. Unfortunately, they’re also fl ammable and fragile. Nonetheless, 
they are frequently used in buildings and in refrigerators and freezers, where condensation 
makes waterproof insulation a necessity. Polystyrene foam also makes insulating cups that 
keep hot coffee hot and cold drinks cold. Unfortunately, polystyrene foam is hard to recy-
cle, so many coffee shops now use alternatives that are less insulating but more environ-
mentally friendly.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Fig. 7.3.6 Although stone 
is not a good conductor 
of heat, it’s not nearly as 
good an insulator as air 
trapped in a fi brous mat. 
Medieval stone castles were 
notoriously cold in winter 
because heat fl owed too 
easily out of them through 
their stone walls. This 
tapestry slows the fl ow of 
heat to the outside air and 
helps to keep the room 
warm.
Fig. 7.3.7 The space 
between the sloped ceiling 
of this building and its 
actual roof is insulated 
with a thick mat of 
fi berglass insulation (left). 
The importance of that 
insulation is clearly visible 
on a snowy day, when the 
snow melts fi rst where the 
fi berglass insulation is 
compressed by the beams 
and is therefore thinnest 
(right).
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate 203
Modern Insulating Windows
Since windows have to be transparent, they can’t be fi lled with fi berglass or foam, and a 
window made of solid glass is a poor insulator unless it’s extremely thick. Insulating win-
dows requires a different approach.
 
The most common way to insulate a window is to use two thin panes of glass that are 
spaced a centimeter or two apart. That vertical gap is typically fi lled with argon gas, which is 
an even poorer conductor of heat than air (see Table 7.3.1). Although convection occurs inside 
the gap, the convection cells that form are tall and thin and therefore relatively ineffective at 
carrying heat from one pane to the other. When properly designed, assembled, and installed, 
a double-pane window transports relatively little heat by conduction or convection.
 
What about radiative heat transfer? Alas, this turns out to be a big problem. Although 
ordinary glass is clear to visible light, it has a low-temperature emissivity of 0.92 and is 
nearly black to long-wavelength infrared light. Thus the glass panes of a conventional 
double-pane window are exchanging thermal radiation with almost perfect effi ciency. If 
there’s a big temperature difference between the inside and outside panes, heat will fl ow 
via thermal radiation from the hotter pane to the colder pane and spoil the window’s insu-
lating behavior.
 
To decrease this radiant heat fl ow, an energy-effi cient low-emissivity (Low-E) window 
has a thin coating applied to the inner surface of one of its panes. That coating makes the 
pane’s surface behave like a shiny mirror for infrared light; it emits very little thermal radi-
ation, and it refl ects back most of what it receives from the other pane. The coating doesn’t 
refl ect visible light, though, so the window still looks clear. Known as a “heat mirror” 
because it refl ects only low-temperature thermal radiation, this coating dramatically reduces 
the fl ow of radiant heat through the window.
 
One of the most common Low-E coatings is indium-tin-oxide, a transparent electrical 
conductor that’s also widely used in electronic displays for watches and computers. Like a 
metal, indium-tin-oxide uses its electrical conductivity to refl ect electromagnetic waves. It 
has a low-temperature emissivity of about 0.10, so it’s almost as refl ective as aluminum 
foil. However, because indium-tin-oxide’s conductivity is limited, it can respond only to 
long-wavelength electromagnetic waves. It refl ects low-temperature thermal radiation but 
transmits visible light.
 
By suppressing all three heat transfer mechanisms, a Low-E window is able to provide 
surprisingly good insulation. The temperature of its outer pane matches the outdoor tem-
perature and the temperature of its inner pane matches the indoor temperature, yet little 
heat fl ows through the gap between those panes.
 
One potential problem for Low-E windows is leakage. If the argon gas escapes from 
between the two panes and is replaced by moist air, the heat mirror coating may degrade 
and the window can become foggy. Keeping the window assembly perfectly sealed for 
decades is a challenge, particularly when that assembly is subject to large changes in tem-
perature. The metals, plastics, and glass used in the window assembly don’t all expand 
equally as they warm up, and the assembly can literally tear itself apart.
Check Your Understanding #6: Is More Always Better?
Glass wool insulation is easily compressed so that you can put two or three layers into the space that 
one layer will normally fi ll. To improve a building’s insulation, why not pack as much glass wool 
insulation into the walls as possible?
Answer: The glass wool’s purpose is to trap air so that the air can act as the insulation. Glass is a 
better conductor of heat than air, so adding more glass wool will actually reduce the insulating effect.
Why: Commercial glass wool is designed to thwart convection in air while minimizing conduction 
through the glass. The wool is just dense enough to keep the air in place. Overpacking the wool will 
reduce its insulation and add weight and expense to the construction.

204 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
 
A material’s thermal expansion is caused by atomic vibrations. Because of thermal 
energy, adjacent atoms vibrate back and forth about their equilibrium separations (Fig. 
7.3.8). This vibrational motion isn’t symmetrical; the repulsive forces the atoms experience 
when they’re too close together are stiffer than the attractive forces they experience when 
they’re too far apart. As a result of this asymmetry, they push apart more quickly than they 
draw together and thus spend most of their time at more than their equilibrium separation. 
On average, their actual separation is larger than their equilibrium separation, and the 
material containing them is bigger than it would be without thermal energy.
 
As an object’s temperature rises, it grows larger in all directions. The extent to which 
it expands with increasing temperature is normally described by its coeffi cient of volume 
expansion, the fractional change in the object’s volume per unit of temperature increase. 
Fractional change in volume is the net change in volume divided by the total volume. Since 
most materials expand only a small amount when becoming 1 °C (or 1 K) hotter, coeffi -
cients of volume expansion are small, typically about 2.5 × 10−5 K−1 for glass , 5 × 10−5 
K−1 for metals, and 2 × 10−4 K−1 for plastics.
 
As the window assembly heats up, its plastics expand more than its metals, which 
expand more than its glass. Those differences in expansion put stresses on the components 
and can separate them or break them. Making an assembly that tolerates thousands of 
warming and cooling cycles without leaking is no small feat.
Check Your Understanding #7: Cool Light
To provide bright white light and almost no unnecessary heat, a special lamp uses a heat mirror. What 
does that heat mirror do?
Answer: The heat mirror refl ects infrared light back toward the actual light source while allowing the 
visible light to continue on to its destination.
Why: The heat mirror transmits only visible light, so it refl ects away infrared light that would simply 
add unnecessary heat to the lamp’s output.
Earth’s Temperature and the Greenhouse Effect
Despite variations with time, place, and season, Earth’s overall surface temperature has a 
fairly constant average value of about 15 °C (59 °F). To maintain that constant average 
temperature, Earth must avoid gaining or losing heat. A net fl ow of heat to Earth would 
increase its average temperature, while a net fl ow from Earth would decrease its tempera-
ture. In short, Earth must balance any heat it receives with an equal amount of heat it emits.
 
Earth’s main source of heat is the sun, and this heat reaches Earth almost entirely as 
electromagnetic radiation. Because the sun’s surface temperature is about 5800 K, solar 
radiation is primarily visible light, although it also includes a substantial amount of infrared 
and ultraviolet light (Fig. 7.3.4). The total solar power reaching Earth is about 1.74 × 1017 W. 
For comparison, the world’s total electric-generating capacity is roughly 3 × 1012 W.
 
While about 30% of the sunlight is simply refl ected or scattered back from Earth’s 
surface and atmosphere, the remaining 1.21 × 1017 W is absorbed by Earth’s surface and 
atmosphere. Earth must get rid of that heat by radiating it into cold, dark space as black-
body radiation. To radiate 1.21 × 1017 W of thermal power, Earth’s radiating surface—the 
effective source of its blackbody radiation—must have a temperature of about −18 °C 
(0 °F). So while Earth receives heat as mostly visible sunlight, it reemits that heat as invisi-
ble infrared light.
 
If there were no atmosphere, Earth’s radiating surface would be the ground itself and 
the average temperature of that ground would be about −18 °C. But Earth does have an 
atmosphere, and even though that atmosphere is nearly transparent to visible light, it 
absorbs and emits infrared light fairly well. Earth’s principal source of thermal radiation 
Increasing temperature
Average separation
Fig. 7.3.8 The thermal 
kinetic energy of a 
solid increases with 
temperature, causing 
its atoms to bounce 
against one another more 
vigorously. As they vibrate, 
the atoms repel more 
strongly than they attract, 
so their average separation 
increases slightly.

Clothing, Insulation, and Climate 205
therefore isn’t the ground but the atmosphere. In fact, Earth’s radiating surface is located 
about 5 km (3 miles) above the ground, and it is the air at that altitude that has the −18 °C 
average temperature!
 
This displacement of Earth’s radiating surface from ground level to an elevated layer 
in the atmosphere gives rise to the greenhouse effect. Since the ground itself isn’t respon-
sible for radiating away Earth’s excess heat, its temperature doesn’t have to be −18 °C. 
Also because the atmosphere naturally develops a temperature gradient of about −6.6 °C 
per kilometer of altitude (see 3 ), the ground 5 km below Earth’s radiating surface is about 
33 °C hotter, or roughly 15 °C.
 
Since life would be diffi cult at −18 °C, we are fortunate to have the greenhouse effect. 
However, too large a greenhouse effect would be disastrous. If the atmosphere were to 
become even more effective at absorbing and emitting infrared light, the altitude of Earth’s 
radiating surface would increase and so would the temperature at Earth’s surface. It is 
critical to our climate that this altitude stay about 5 km and not rise to 6 km or more.
 
Just how effective Earth’s atmosphere is at absorbing and emitting infrared light 
depends on its chemical makeup. Nitrogen and oxygen molecules, though extremely com-
mon in the atmosphere, are remarkably transparent to both infrared and visible light. It’s 
the less common, more complicated gas molecules that allow air to absorb and emit infra-
red light and are thus greenhouse gases.
 
Although the principal greenhouse gas is water vapor, gases such as carbon dioxide, 
methane, and nitrous oxide are also extremely important. Each gas absorbs its own charac-
teristic portions of the infrared spectrum, and together they darken the atmosphere to infra-
red light the way a mixture of watercolors darkens a canvas to visible light. The more 
greenhouse gases the atmosphere contains, the higher the altitude of Earth’s radiating sur-
face and the warmer Earth’s surface.
 
There is now overwhelming scientifi c evidence that human production of greenhouse 
gases, particularly carbon dioxide, is causing a rapid warming of Earth’s surface and a 
change in its climate. That climate change will be severe unless we dramatically reduce 
greenhouse emissions now. Since burning fossil fuels produces carbon dioxide, our current 
approach to using those fuels must change. Atmospheric methane is generated primarily by 
digestive bacteria in cows, and reducing it will require changes to the cattle and dairy 
industries. There are other gases that we have been releasing casually into the atmosphere 
for years, including refrigerants and aerosol propellants, that turn out to be especially 
potent greenhouse gases and don’t belong in the atmosphere. Alas, maintaining the envi-
ronment turns out to be much harder than people thought at the dawn of the industrial 
revolution. We reap what we sow.
Check Your Understanding #8: Canned Heat
When you use a can of spray paint, its propellant (typically propane and butane) immediately enters 
the atmosphere. As the paint dries, its solvents also enter the atmosphere. How do these gases affect 
the atmosphere’s transparency in the infrared?
Answer: All these gas molecules darken the atmosphere in the infrared.
Why: Most of the chemicals in your spray can end up in the atmosphere, where they increase its 
effi ciency at emitting and absorbing infrared light and therefore contribute to the greenhouse effect.
Epilogue for Chapter 7
This chapter has examined the roles of thermal energy and heat in a variety of common 
objects. In Woodstoves, we saw how combustion converts ordered chemical potential energy 
into disordered thermal energy and we studied the ways in which this thermal energy fl ows 
into the woodstove’s surroundings: conduction, convection, and radiation. In Water, Steam, 
and Ice, we examined the three phases of matter and looked at how the transformations 
3  A competition between 
gravity and thermal 
energy structure Earth’s 
atmosphere and give it 
downward gradients in 
pressure, density, and 
temperature (see Section 
5.1). One explanation for 
the atmosphere’s 
decreasing temperature 
with altitude is that rising 
air molecules convert 
thermal energy into 
gravitational potential 
energy, so air becomes 
cooler as it rises upward. 
Another equivalent 
explanation is that rising 
air expands as the 
surrounding pressure 
decreases and that 
expansion cools the air. 
Although the presence of 
moisture in the air 
weakens this effect, the air 
still gets signifi cantly 
colder as you go up a 
mountain.

206 
CHAPTER 7 Heat and Phase Transitions
between those phases are infl uenced by temperature, heat, and other characteristics of their 
environment. In Clothing, Insulation, and Climate, we examined the laws governing heat 
fl ow and found out how to limit that fl ow. We then used that understanding to explain the 
greenhouse effect and the ways humans are contributing to climate change.
Explanation: A Ruler Thermometer
Like most things, the clear plastic ruler expands when you heat it. Its length increases by an 
amount proportional to its increase in temperature. When you transfer heat to the ruler, by 
breathing on it, touching it, or exposing it to a hair dryer, its temperature rises, it expands, 
and its free end turns the needle and pointer. Since the pointer’s movement is proportional to 
the ruler’s length change, it’s also proportional to the thermometer’s change in temperature.
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Woodstoves Work: A woodstove burns wood in air to obtain hot gas. The burning process 
is actually a chemical reaction in which molecules in the wood and air are disassembled into 
fragments and then reassembled into new, more tightly bound molecules such as water and 
carbon dioxide. This reassembly process releases more energy than was required to disas-
semble the original wood and oxygen molecules. This extra energy appears as thermal energy 
within the reaction products, so they’re hot. Rather than distributing the hot burned gas di-
rectly to the room, a woodstove transfers heat from the burned gas to clean air or water. Heat 
is conducted through the walls of a woodstove and then fl ows into the room via convection 
and radiation.
How Water, Steam, and Ice Work: Water, steam, and ice are the liquid, gaseous, and solid 
phases of the chemical we call water. The water molecules in liquid water are bound together 
strongly enough to fi x water’s volume, but not strongly enough to give water a rigid shape. In 
steam, the water molecules are independent and the gas has neither a fi xed shape nor a fi xed 
volume. The molecules in ice are bound together rigidly in solid crystals, so ice is rigid and 
its volume is constant.
 
Ice can transform into water, or vice versa, at its melting temperature. Heat added to ice 
at this temperature causes it to melt without becoming warmer. Heat removed from water at 
this temperature causes it to freeze without becoming colder. Similarly, water and ice can 
transform into steam, or vice versa, through evaporation, condensation, sublimation, and 
deposition. Turning water into steam requires heat, and this heat is released when the steam 
turns back into water. Boiling is a special case of evaporation in which evaporation occurs 
within the body of the water itself. For boiling to occur, the water’s vapor pressure must equal 
the ambient pressure on the water, which is normally atmospheric pressure.
How Clothing, Insulation, and Climate Work: Clothing serves as insulation for people, help-
ing them maintain their body temperatures in inhospitable environments. Most clothes are 
constructed out of threads and other fi brous materials that not only are poor conductors of 
heat but also trap air so that it can act as the primary insulation. The outer surface of thick 
clothing has nearly the same temperature as its surroundings and therefore exchanges little 
heat via radiation.
 
Building insulation reduces heat fl ow between inside and outside. The insulation in 
walls and ceilings consists primarily of air trapped in fi brous or porous materials such as 
glass wool and urethane foam, but the insulation in windows is necessarily different. The 
narrow, gas-fi lled gap between doubled panes in a modern window limits the heat that can 
fl ow between the panes by conduction and convection, while a low-emissivity coating on one 
of the panes limits radiative heat transfer.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 207
 
Earth’s climate is determined in large part by how it eliminates the heat it receives from 
the sun. That heat is emitted into space as infrared thermal radiation, mostly by Earth’s 
atmosphere. The average temperature at Earth’s surface increases in proportion to the effec-
tive altitude from which that thermal radiation is emitted. Since greenhouse gases darken the 
atmosphere to infrared light and increase that altitude, they warm Earth’s surface. Human 
production of such gases is changing Earth’s climate.
1. Heat conduction: The thermal power an object conducts from 
one surface to the other is equal to its thermal conductivity times 
the temperature difference between the surfaces times their sur-
face area divided by the distance separating the surfaces, or
heat flow = thermal conductivity · temperature difference · area
separation
. 
(7.3.1)
2. The Stefan–Boltzmann Law: The power an object radiates 
is proportional to its emissivity times the fourth power of its 
temperature times its surface area, or
radiated power = emissivity · Stefan–Boltzmann constant
 
            · temperature4 · surface area. 
(7.3.2)

 H 
eat normally fl ows from a hotter object to a colder object, which is why the hot sun warms 
your skin as you sit on a beach and why a cold winter breeze cools it as you sled down a 
mountain. But not everything in nature permits heat to fl ow passively. Our technological 
world includes many devices that actively transfer heat from colder objects to hotter objects or that 
use the fl ow of heat to do useful work. In this chapter, we examine the rules governing the move-
ment of heat, a fi eld of physics known as thermodynamics.
Making Fog in a Bottle
Fog occurs naturally when humid air experiences a sud-
den drop in temperature. To make fog in a bottle, you’ll 
need to do the same thing: cool humid air quickly. In a 
room where everything is at the same temperature, cool-
ing air sounds impossible. It’s not.
 
To make fog in a bottle, obtain a clean 1- or 2-liter 
plastic soda bottle and put several spoonfuls of water in 
it. Cap the bottle tightly, and shake it to help the water 
evaporate into the air. In a minute or two, the relative 
humidity in the bottle will reach 100% and you’ll be 
ready to do the experiment.
 
Lay the bottle on its side on the fl oor, and step on it 
with your shoe. You must press down hard enough to dent 
the bottle signifi cantly, but you don’t want to pop it or 
crack its sides. Wait like this for 20 or 30 seconds. Heat is 
fl owing out of the bottle, and that takes time. Now step 
quickly off the bottle, and immediately illuminate its con-
tents with a bright light. You should see a mist of tiny 
water droplets. Abruptly releasing the compression 
causes the air’s temperature to plummet, and fog forms in 
the bottle.
 
If no fog has formed despite a hard squeeze with 
your shoe and enough patience to let the heat fl ow out of 
the bottle, you can help the fog start by dropping a smok-
ing match into the bottle before capping it. You want just 
enough tiny smoke particles to help the mist droplets 
form but not enough smoke to obscure the fog itself. It 
doesn’t take much smoke to do the trick. After capping 
the bottle, squeeze it hard and wait, and then release the 
compression suddenly and look for the fog.
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS 
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
208
8
Thermodynamics

Air Conditioners 209
Chapter Itinerary
In this chapter, we examine the movement of heat in two every-
day machines: (1) air conditioners and (2) automobiles. In Air 
Conditioners, we look at the rules governing the movement of 
thermal energy—the laws of thermodynamics—and see how 
those rules permit an air conditioner to use ordered electric 
energy to transfer heat from the cold room air to the hot outdoor 
air. In Automobiles, we investigate the ways in which thermal 
energy can be used to do work and see how the engine is able 
to convert thermal energy into work as heat fl ows from the 
hot burning fuel to the cold outdoor air. For additional preview 
information, skip ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important 
Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.
 
The principles illustrated by these two machines are also 
found in many other places. Refrigerators and home heat 
pumps use ordered energy to transfer heat from cold objects 
to hot objects, and steam engines and hot-air balloons use the 
natural fl ow of heat to make things move. Once you under-
stand the concepts behind these heat pumps and heat 
engines, you’ll see that they’re quite common in the world 
around you.
SECTION 8.1
also a classic illustration of the laws of thermodynamics in 
action.
Questions to Think About: Why doesn’t heat naturally fl ow 
from a colder object to a hotter object? An air conditioner 
removes thermal energy from room air, so why does the air 
conditioner require electric energy to operate? Where does this 
electric energy go? Why does an air conditioner always have an 
indoor component and an outdoor component? If you put a 
window air conditioner in the middle of a room and turn it on, 
what will happen to the temperature of the room?
Experiments to Do: Take a look at a window air conditioner. If you 
can’t fi nd one, examine a refrigerator instead because it’s basically 
a powerful air conditioner cooling a food-storage closet. As the air 
conditioner (or refrigerator) operates, feel the air leaving the indoor 
air vent (or inside the refrigerator) and compare its temperature to 
that of air leaving the outdoor air vent (or near the metal coils on 
the back of the refrigerator). Which way does the cooling mecha-
nism move heat? If that mechanism were absent, which way would 
heat fl ow? Turn off the air conditioner or refrigerator, and observe 
the resulting heat fl ow. Did you confi rm your prediction?
On a summer day, your problem isn’t staying warm; it’s keeping 
cool. Instead of looking for something to burn in your wood-
stove, you turn on your air conditioner. An air conditioner is a 
device that cools room air by removing some of its thermal 
energy. The air conditioner, however, can’t make thermal 
energy either disappear or become ordered energy. Instead, it 
transfers thermal energy from the cooler room air to the warmer 
air outside. Since the air conditioner transfers heat against its 
natural direction of fl ow, the air conditioner is a heat pump. It’s 
Air Conditioners
Fan 
motor
Casing
Condenser 
fan
Condenser coils
Control panel
Evaporator 
blower
Thermostat
Fan control
Function selector
Vent
Louver
Compressor
Evaporator coils
Grille
Moving Heat Around: Thermodynamics
On a sweltering summer day, the air in your home becomes unpleasantly hot. Heat enters 
your home from outdoors and doesn’t stop fl owing until it’s as hot inside as it is outside. 
You can make your home more comfortable by getting rid of some of its thermal energy. 
Although we’ve already looked at ways to add thermal energy to room air, we haven’t yet 
learned how to remove it. At present, the only cooling method we’ve discussed is contact 
with a colder object. Unless you have an icehouse nearby, you need another scheme for 
eliminating thermal energy. You need an air conditioner.
An air conditioner transfers heat against its natural direction of fl ow. Heat moves 
from the colder air in your home to the hotter air outside so that your home gets colder 
while the outdoor air gets hotter. There’s a cost to transferring heat in this manner. 
The air conditioner requires ordered energy to operate and typically consumes large 

210 
CHAPTER 8 Thermodynamics
amounts of electric energy. It’s a type of heat pump, a device that uses ordered energy 
to transfer heat from a colder object to a hotter object, against its natural direction 
of fl ow.
Before studying how an air conditioner pumps heat, we should fi rst show that pumping 
is necessary. There are three harebrained cooling alternatives that we need to discredit 
before turning to air conditioning:
1. 
Letting heat fl ow from your home to your neighbor’s home.
2. 
Destroying some of your home’s thermal energy.
3. 
Converting some of your home’s thermal energy into electric energy.
We’ll fi nd it useful to examine each of these alternatives because, in doing so, 
we’ll learn about the laws governing the movement of thermal energy, the laws of 
thermodynamics.
The fi rst alternative raises an interesting issue. Your home is in thermal equilibrium 
with the outdoor air, meaning that no heat fl ows from one to the other and they’re at the 
same temperature. Your neighbor’s home is also in thermal equilibrium with the outdoor 
air. What will happen if you permit heat to fl ow between your home and your neighbor’s 
home? Nothing. Since both homes are simultaneously in thermal equilibrium with the out-
door air, they’re also in thermal equilibrium with one another. All three are at the same 
temperature.
This observation is an example of the law of thermal equilibrium (often called the 
zeroth law of thermodynamics), which says that two objects that are each in thermal 
equilibrium with a third object are also in thermal equilibrium with one another (Fig. 8.1.1). 
This seemingly obvious law is the basis for a meaningful system of temperatures. If you 
had a roomful of objects at 35 °C (95 °F) and some were in thermal equilibrium with one 
another while others were not, then “being at 35 °C” wouldn’t mean much. However, every 
object that has a temperature of 35 °C is in thermal equilibrium with every other object at 
35 °C. The law of thermal equilibrium is observed to be true in nature, so temperature does 
have meaning. Since your neighbor’s home is just as hot as yours, they can relax because 
you’re not going to be sending them any extra heat.
THE LAW OF THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM
Two objects that are each in thermal equilibrium with a third object are also in thermal 
equilibrium with one another.
The second alternative sounds unlikely from the outset. We’ve known since the fi rst 
chapter that energy is special, that it’s a conserved quantity. You can’t cool your home by 
destroying thermal energy because energy can’t be destroyed. To eliminate thermal energy, 
you must convert it to another form or transfer it elsewhere.
This concept of energy conservation is the basis for the law of conservation of 
energy (often called the fi rst law of thermodynamics), which offi cially recognizes that 
there are actually two ways to transfer energy: the mechanical means we know as work 
and the thermal means we know as heat. You can increase an object’s internal energy, 
which includes its thermal energy, only by doing work on it or by transferring heat to it 
(Fig. 8.1.2).
In its traditional form, the law of conservation of energy observes that the change in a 
stationary object’s internal energy is equal to the heat transferred into that object minus the 
work that object does on its surroundings. In other words, heat added to the object increases 
Fig. 8.1.1 Although they 
are touching, no heat is 
fl owing between the red 
bottle and the blue bottle. 
Similarly, no heat is fl owing 
between the red bottle and 
the green bottle. Based on 
those two observations, the 
law of thermal equilibrium 
states that no heat will fl ow 
between the blue bottle 
and the green bottle when 
they touch.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Air Conditioners 211
its internal energy, while work done by the object decreases its internal energy. The law of 
conservation of energy can be written as a word equation:
change in object’s internal energy = heat added to object −work done by object, (8.1.1)
in symbols,
ΔU = Q −W,
and in everyday language:
You can add energy to a ball as heat by cooking it or as work by squeezing it.
(b)
(c)
Fig. 8.1.2 According to the law of conservation of energy, you 
can increase the internal energy (that is, thermal energy) of an 
object either by adding heat to it or by doing work on it. Here the 
work done on air while compressing it raises that air’s temperature 
so high that a piece of cotton in that air bursts into fl ames.
(a)
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
THE LAW OF CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
The change in a stationary object’s internal energy is equal to the heat transferred into 
that object minus the work that object does on its surroundings.
Check Your Understanding #1: Stirring Up Trouble
If you put cold water into a blender and mix it rapidly for several minutes, the water will become 
warm. From where does the additional thermal energy come?
Answer: The blender’s blade does work on the water, and this work becomes thermal energy.
Why: The law of conservation of energy states that the change in the water’s internal energy is equal to 
the heat fl owing into it minus the work it does on its surroundings. In this case, the water’s surroundings 
are doing work on it by stirring it, so its internal energy increases. Since the water can’t store this new 
internal energy as ordered potential energy, the energy becomes thermal energy and the water gets hotter.

212 
CHAPTER 8 Thermodynamics
Disorder and Entropy
The third alternative looks much more promising than the fi rst two. It seems as though you 
should be able to convert thermal energy into electricity (or some other ordered form of 
energy). You could then sell it back to the electric company and get credit on your bill. 
Wouldn’t that be great?
There’s a problem with this idea—ordered energy and thermal energy aren’t equiva-
lent. You can easily convert ordered energy into thermal energy, but the reverse is much 
harder. For example, you can burn a log to convert its chemical potential energy into 
thermal energy, but you’ll have trouble converting that thermal energy back into chemical 
potential energy to recreate the log.
The basic laws of motion are silent on this issue. The log’s original energy and con-
stituent particles still exist, and they could, in principle, act together to reassemble the log. 
It is the laws of statistics that prevent the log’s reassembly. That reassembly process would 
require a long series of remarkably unlikely events. The particles would all have to move 
in just the right ways to turn the burned gases back into wood and oxygen, an incredible 
coincidence that simply never happens. Similarly, all the air particles in your home would 
have to act together to convert their thermal energy into electricity. Since that coordinated 
behavior is ridiculously improbable, you’re not going to be selling thermal-energy power 
to the electric company any time soon.
Once ordered energy has been scattered randomly among the individual air particles, you 
can’t collect that energy back together again. Creating disorder out of order is easy, but recover-
ing order from disorder is nearly impossible. As a result, systems that begin with some amount 
of order gradually become more and more disordered, never the other way around (Fig. 8.1.3). 
The best they can do is to stay the same for a while so that their disorder doesn’t change. From 
these observations, we can state that the disorder of an isolated system never decreases.
This notion of never-decreasing disorder is one of the central concepts of thermal phy-
sics. There is even a formal measure of the total disorder in an object, entropy. All disorder 
contributes to an object’s entropy, including its thermal energy and its structural defects. 
Both breaking a window and heating it increase its entropy. Although its name sounds simi-
lar to energy, don’t confuse energy and entropy. Energy is a conserved quantity, while 
entropy is a quantity that can and generally does increase. It’s easy to make more entropy.
Because disorder never decreases, the third cooling alternative is impossible. Turning 
your home’s thermal energy into electric energy would reduce its disorder and decrease its 
entropy. Our observations about entropy aren’t yet complete, though. There is one way to 
decrease your home’s entropy: you can export that entropy somewhere else. In fact, you 
export entropy every time you take out the garbage, though that action also changes the 
contents of your home. You can also export entropy without modifying your home’s con-
tents by transferring heat somewhere else. Heat carries disorder and entropy with it, so 
getting rid of heat also gets rid of entropy.
Our rule about entropy never decreasing is weakened by the possibility of exchanging 
heat and entropy between objects. Before asserting that an object or system of objects can’t 
decrease its entropy, we must ensure that the object is thermally isolated from its surroundings 
so that it can’t export its entropy. With that in mind, the strongest statement that we can make 
Check Your Figures #1: Powerful You
You have been pedaling the exercise bicycle steadily for 20 min at a power of 200 W. How much 
thermal power is the bicycle emitting into the room?
Answer: 200 W.
Why: Since the bicycle’s internal energy can’t increase or decrease forever, it must be emitting as much 
thermal power into the room as it is receiving mechanical power from you. As required by Eq. 8.1.1, the 
200 W of mechanical power you supply to the bicycle is fl owing into the room as 200 W of thermal power.

Air Conditioners 213
concerning entropy is that the entropy of a thermally isolated system of objects never decreases. 
This observation is the law of entropy (often called the second law of thermodynamics).
THE LAW OF ENTROPY
The entropy of a thermally isolated system of objects never decreases.
Because of the law of entropy, the only way to cool your home is to export its thermal 
energy and entropy elsewhere. Such a transfer would be easy if you had a cold object nearby 
to receive the heat. Lacking a cold object, you must use an air conditioner. Like all heat 
pumps, an air conditioner transfers heat and entropy in such a way that the law of entropy is 
never violated and the entropy of each thermally isolated system of objects never decreases. 
As we’ll see, the air conditioner lowers the entropy of your home but raises the entropy of 
the outdoor air even more, so that, overall, the entropy of the world actually increases.
Check Your Understanding #2: Something for Nothing
People have tried for centuries to build machines that provide endless outputs of useful, ordered 
energy without any inputs of ordered energy. Unfortunately, such perpetual motion machines violate 
the laws of thermodynamics. If such a machine is thermally isolated, which law does it violate? What 
if it’s not thermally isolated?
Answer: A thermally isolated perpetual motion machine violates the law of conservation of energy, 
while one that is not thermally isolated violates the law of entropy.
Why: A thermally isolated perpetual motion machine clearly violates the conservation of energy. This 
isolated machine simply can’t export energy forever because it will eventually run out. A perpetual 
motion machine that is not thermally isolated may not violate conservation of energy because it can 
absorb heat energy from its surroundings. Instead, it violates the law of entropy. This machine can’t 
endlessly absorb heat energy and then export it as ordered energy. In doing so, the machine will 
eventually begin to reduce the entropy of the universe and violate the law of entropy. Sad though it 
may be, perpetual motion machines can’t exist.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 8.1.3 It’s easy to place these three photographs in their 
correct time sequence. You simply look for disorder in each 
photograph and arrange the sequence from least disorder to most 
disorder. You are making use of the law of entropy, which observes 
that the entropy (disorder) of a thermally isolated system never 
decreases.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

214 
CHAPTER 8 Thermodynamics
Pumping Heat Against Its Natural Flow
Although the law of entropy doesn’t allow the entropy of a thermally isolated system to 
decrease, it does permit the objects in that system to redistribute their individual entropies. 
One object’s entropy can decrease as long as the entropy of the rest of the system increases 
by at least as much. Such entropy redistribution allows part of the system to become colder 
if the rest of the system becomes hotter.
For example, suppose that there’s a pond of cold water behind your home. You pump 
that water through your bathtub and let it draw heat out of the room air. Your home 
becomes colder while the pond becomes warmer. This transfer of heat from the hot air in 
your home to the cold water in the pond satisfi es the law of entropy. The entropy of the 
combined system—your home and the pool of water—doesn’t decrease. In fact, it actu-
ally increases!
This entropy increase occurs because heat is more disordering to cold objects than it is 
to hot objects. Each joule of heat that fl ows from your home to the pool creates more dis-
order in the pool than it creates order in your home.
A useful analog for this effect involves two parties taking place simultaneously: the 
garden society’s annual tea party and a 4-year-old’s birthday party. The orderly tea party 
represents the cold pool while the disorderly birthday party represents your hot home. The 
analogy to letting heat fl ow from your hot home to the cold pool is to trade one lively 
4-year-old from the disorderly birthday party for one quiet octogenarian from the orderly 
tea party. This exchange will reduce the birthday party’s disorder only slightly, but it will 
dramatically increase the disorder of the tea party. The attendance at each party will be 
unchanged but their total disorder will increase.
When heat fl ows from your home to the pool, the overall entropy increases and the 
law of entropy is more than satisfi ed. A similar increase in entropy occurs whenever 
heat fl ows from a hot object to a cold object, which is why heat normally fl ows in that 
direction.
An air conditioner, however, does the seemingly impossible: it transfers heat from a 
cold object, your home, to a hot object, the outdoor air. This heat fl ows in the wrong 
direction, and the disorder it creates by entering the hot outdoor air is less than the dis-
order it removes by leaving the cold indoor air. It’s like returning the tea party’s lone 
4-year-old to the birthday party in exchange for the elderly garden fancier—the birthday 
party becomes only a tiny bit more disorderly while the garden party becomes much 
more orderly, so the net disorder of the two gatherings decreases substantially. Similarly, 
if nothing else happened when the air conditioner moved heat from the cold indoor air to 
the hot outdoor air, the entropy of the combined system would decrease and the law of 
entropy would be violated!
However, we’ve omitted an important feature of the air conditioner’s operation—the 
electric energy it consumes. The air conditioner converts this ordered energy into thermal 
energy and delivers it as additional heat to the outdoor air (Fig. 8.1.4). In doing so, the air 
conditioner creates enough extra entropy to ensure that the overall entropy of the combined 
system increases. The law of entropy is satisfi ed after all.
Colder
region
Hotter
region
Heat
pump
Heat
Work
Fig. 8.1.4 A heat pump transfers heat from a colder 
region to a hotter region. In doing so, it converts some 
work (ordered energy) into heat (thermal energy in the 
hotter region). The larger the temperature difference 
between the two regions, the more work is required to 
transfer each joule of heat.

Air Conditioners 215
The amount of ordered energy the air conditioner consumes depends on the tempera-
tures of the indoor air and outdoor air. If the two are close in temperature, the transfer 
of heat reduces the entropy only slightly, so the air conditioner doesn’t need to convert 
much ordered energy into thermal energy. If they are far apart in temperature, however, 
the air conditioner must create lots of extra entropy to make up for the entropy lost in 
the transfer.
This requirement that entropy not decrease explains why an air conditioner works 
best when it’s cooling your home the least. The greater the temperature difference 
between the indoor air and the outdoor air, the more electric energy or other form of work 
the air conditioner must consume to transfer each joule of heat. For an ideally effi cient 
air conditioner or other heat pump, the relationships between the work consumed, the 
heat removed from the cold object, and the heat added to the hot object can be written as 
two word equations:
heat removed from cold object = work consumed ·
temperaturecold
temperaturehot −temperaturecold
heat added to hot object = heat removed from cold object + work consumed, (8.1.2)
in symbols:
 −Qc = W
Tc
Th −Tc
,
 Qh = −Qc + W,
and in everyday language:
The closer the two temperatures are, the easier it is to move heat 
from cold to hot,
where the temperatures are measured on an absolute scale. The hot object receives not only 
the heat removed from the cold object but also an amount of heat equal to the work con-
sumed by the transfer. Note also that the work needed to remove heat from your home 
approaches infi nity as its temperature approaches absolute zero; that’s why absolute zero is 
unattainable.
Sadly, a practical air conditioner never reaches ideal effi ciency, so it moves less heat 
than promised by Eqs. 8.1.2. Moreover, heat leaks back into your home through its walls at 
a rate that’s roughly proportional to the temperature difference. No wonder your electric 
bill soars when you cool your home to arctic temperatures in tropical weather!
Check Your Understanding #3: Heat Pumps in Cold Weather
Homes located in mild climates are often heated by heat pumps during the winter. Home heat pumps 
are essentially air conditioners run backward. They extract heat from the cold outdoor air and release 
it to the warm indoor air. Why are heat pumps most effective in mild weather, when the outdoor air 
isn’t too cold?
Answer: heat pump requires more ordered energy to pump heat from a cold object to a hot object 
when the temperature difference between them is large.
Why: A heat pump becomes less effi cient at pumping heat when the temperature of the heat’s source 
becomes much colder than the heat’s destination. The colder it is outside, the more ordered energy 
it takes to move each joule of heat. On bitter cold days, heat pumps aren’t able to move enough heat 
to keep their homes warm, which is why most home heat pumps have built-in electric or gas furnaces 
to assist them during unusually cold weather.

216 
CHAPTER 8 Thermodynamics
How an Air Conditioner Cools the Indoor Air
Having determined the air conditioner’s goals, we can now look at how a real air condi-
tioner meets them. In most cases, the air conditioner uses a fl uid to transfer heat from the 
colder indoor air to the hotter outdoor air. Known as the working fl uid, this substance 
absorbs heat from the indoor air and releases that heat to the outdoor air.
The working fl uid fl ows in a looping path through the air conditioner’s three main 
components: an evaporator, a condenser, and a compressor (Fig. 8.1.5). The evaporator is 
located indoors, where it transfers heat from the indoor air to the working fl uid (Fig. 8.1.6). 
The condenser is located outdoors, where it transfers heat from the working fl uid to the 
outdoor air. The compressor is also located outdoors, where it squeezes the working fl uid 
and does the work needed to move heat against its natural fl ow. To see how these three 
components pump heat out of your home, let’s look at them individually.
We’ll begin with the evaporator, a long metal pipe that’s decorated with thin metal fi ns. 
The evaporator is a heat exchanger that allows heat to fl ow from the warm indoor air around 
it to the cool working fl uid inside it. Its fi ns provide additional surface area through which 
heat can fl ow, and a fan blows indoor air rapidly past those fi ns to encourage that fl ow.
True to its name, the evaporator is where the working fl uid evaporates from liquid to 
gas. To evaporate, the liquid working fl uid needs its latent heat of evaporation, the energy 
required to separate a liquid’s molecules so that it becomes a gas. The working fl uid obtains 
part of that energy from its own thermal energy, and its temperature decreases. Heat from 
the indoor air then fl ows into the chilled working fl uid and completes the evaporation. By 
the time the working fl uid leaves the evaporator as a gas, it has absorbed a great deal of the 
indoor air’s thermal energy and carries that energy with it as chemical potential energy.
To make the working fl uid evaporate, the air conditioner abruptly reduces its pressure. In 
Chapter 7, we learned that phase transitions such as evaporation depend on molecular landing 
and leaving rates, and that those rates are sensitive to pressure and temperature. Working fl uid 
Check Your Figures #2: A Hot House for Cheap
Your house is heated by an ideally effi cient heat pump that uses ordered energy to pump heat from 
the colder outdoor air to the warmer indoor air. On a winter day, the outdoor temperature is 270 K 
(−3 °C or 26 °F) and the indoor temperature is 300 K (26 °C or 80 °F). To deliver 1000 J of heat to 
the indoor air, how much electric energy must the heat pump consume?
Answer: The pump must consume 100 J.
Why: The difference in temperature between indoor air and outdoor air is 30 K, so according to 
Eqs. 8.1.2, the heat pump can remove 9 times as much heat from the outdoor air as it consumes in 
work and deliver 10 times as much heat to the indoor air. Thus it takes only 100 J of electric energy 
to remove 900 J of heat from the outdoor air and deliver all 1000 J as heat to the indoor air. What 
a bargain!
Gas
Insulated
wall
Heat
Heat
Constriction
Liquid
Evaporator
Condenser
Colder region
Hotter region
Compressor
One-way
valves
Fig. 8.1.5 A typical air conditioner transfers heat 
from colder air to hotter air by condensing a gas 
to a liquid in the hotter region and evaporating the 
liquid to a gas in the colder region. A compressor 
provides the necessary input of ordered energy.

Air Conditioners 217
fl ows toward the evaporator as a warm, high-pressure liquid, but its pressure drops dramatic-
ally when it fl ows into the evaporator through a narrow constriction in the tubing. That pres-
sure drop slows the rate at which working fl uid molecules land on the liquid from the gas so 
that molecules leaving the liquid for the gas dominate and the liquid starts to evaporate.
As the working fl uid evaporates, its temperature plummets and its evaporation slows down; 
molecules rarely gather enough thermal energy from the cold liquid to leave it for the gas. How-
ever, heat from the warmer room air now rushes into the cold working fl uid and encourages 
further evaporation. By the time the working fl uid emerges from the evaporator, it has evapo-
rated completely and has absorbed considerable thermal energy from the indoor air. It leaves the 
evaporator as a cool low-pressure gas and travels through a pipe toward the compressor.
Half the air conditioner’s job is done: it has removed heat from the indoor air. The 
remaining half of its job is more challenging; it must add heat to the outdoor air while 
ensuring that the total entropy of the combined system doesn’t decrease. After all, there’s 
no getting around the law of entropy.
(b) Indoor unit
(a) Outdoor unit
Gas
Gas
Liquid
Liquid
Compressor
Evaporator
Condenser
Fig. 8.1.6 The two components of 
a central air-conditioning system. 
(a) In the outdoor unit, gaseous 
working fl uid is compressed and 
condensed into a liquid, releasing heat 
into the outdoor air. (b) In the indoor 
unit, liquid working fl uid is evaporated 
into a gas, extracting heat from the 
indoor air. This system is actually a 
heat pump, meaning that the roles of 
the condenser and evaporator can be 
reversed and the system can heat the 
indoor air during the winter.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Check Your Understanding #4: Cooling at the Gas Grill
When liquid propane evaporates into a gas in the tank of a propane grill, the tank that contains that 
liquid propane becomes colder. Why?
Answer: The tank’s liquid propane needs heat to evaporate into a gas, and it extracts that heat from 
its surroundings.
Why: Just as in the evaporator of an air conditioner, the evaporating liquid propane absorbs heat.
How an Air Conditioner Warms the Outdoor Air
Satisfying the law of entropy is the task of the compressor, an electrically powered device 
that squeezes gas into a smaller volume. The compressor receives low-pressure gaseous 
working fl uid from the evaporator, compresses it to much higher density, and delivers it as 
a high-pressure gas to the condenser. The compressor may use a piston and one-way valves, 
like the water pump in Fig. 5.2.3, or it may use a rotary pumping mechanism. Regardless 
of how it functions, the result is the same: the gaseous working fl uid undergoes a dramatic 
increase in density and pressure as it passes through the compressor.

218 
CHAPTER 8 Thermodynamics
The compressor does work on the gas while compressing it—pushing the gas inward 
as the gas moves inward. In accordance with the law of conservation of energy, this work 
increases the internal energy of the working fl uid. The only way that a gas can store addi-
tional energy is as thermal energy, so the working fl uid leaves the compressor much hotter 
than when it arrived. There is no getting around that temperature rise; compressing a gas 
unavoidably raises its temperature.
Hot, high-pressure working fl uid then fl ows into the condenser. Like the evaporator, 
the condenser is a long metal pipe with fi ns attached to it. It acts as a heat exchanger, and 
its fi ns provide extra surface area to speed the fl ow of heat from the hotter working fl uid 
inside it to the less hot outdoor air. There may also be a fan to move outdoor air quickly past 
the condenser and speed up the heat transfer.
As its name suggests, the condenser is where the working fl uid condenses from gas to 
liquid. That condensation starts when the gas begins to cool after compression. While it fl ows 
through a pipe toward the compressor, the low-pressure working fl uid is stable as a gas. But in 
the high-pressure, high-density working fl uid that emerges from the compressor and starts to 
cool in the condenser, the landing rate outpaces the leaving rate and the gas begins to condense.
As its molecules bind together to form a liquid, the hot gaseous working fl uid releases 
its latent heat of evaporation. This chemical potential energy becomes thermal energy in 
the working fl uid, keeping it hot so that heat continues to fl ow out of it through the walls of 
the condenser to the cooler outdoor air.
By the time the working fl uid leaves the condenser as a liquid, it has transformed a great 
deal of chemical potential energy into thermal energy and released that energy into the outdoor 
air. The outdoor air receives as heat not only the thermal energy extracted from the indoor air 
but also the electric energy consumed by the compressor. The working fl uid exits the con-
denser as a warm, high-pressure liquid and travels through a pipe toward the evaporator.
The second half of the air conditioner’s job is now complete; it has released heat into 
the outdoor air and, in the process, converted ordered energy into thermal energy. From 
here, the working fl uid returns to the evaporator to begin the cycle all over again. The work-
ing fl uid passes endlessly around the loop, extracting heat from the indoor air in the evapo-
rator and releasing it to the outdoor air in the condenser. The compressor drives the whole 
process and thereby satisfi es the law of entropy.
In fact, heat pumps of this type also appear in many common appliances. A refrigerator 
uses a heat pump to extract heat from food and release that heat to the room air (Fig. 8.1.7). 
A drinking fountain uses a heat pump to transfer heat from water to the room air (Fig. 8.1.8). 
Like all heat pumps, these cooling devices release more heat to the warm object (room air) 
than they extract from the cold object (food or water). That’s why when you hold the refri-
gerator door open and it begins to pump heat from one portion of room air to another portion 
Fig. 8.1.8 These drinking 
fountains have heat pumps 
built into them to cool the 
water. Heat removed from the 
water, along with heat produced 
by the heat-pumping process 
itself, is released into the room 
air through the louvers visible 
on the sides of the drinking 
fountains.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Fig. 8.1.7 The 
compressor (bottom) and 
condenser coils (top) 
are visible on the back 
of this refrigerator. The 
compressor squeezes the 
working fl uid into a hot 
dense gas and delivers it 
to the condenser. There 
it gives up heat to the 
room air and condenses 
into a liquid. The working 
fl uid evaporates inside the 
refrigerator, extracting heat 
from the food.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Automobiles 219
of room air, the room gets warmer overall—the electric energy the refrigerator consumes 
while operating is being turned wastefully into thermal energy in the room. To save energy, 
keep the refrigerator closed whenever possible.
Many homes in moderate climates are heated by effectively running their air condi-
tioners backward. Called heat pumps rather than air conditioners, these systems are capable 
of pumping heat against its natural direction of fl ow in winter as well is in summer.
In summer, a heat pump moves heat from indoor air to outdoor air to cool the home. In 
winter, however, it moves heat from outdoor air to indoor air to heat the home. Rather than 
turning electricity directly into thermal energy to heat the home, it leverages that electrical 
energy by using it to gather the abundant thermal energy from outdoors and to carry that indoors.
Before leaving air conditioners, we should take a moment to look at the working fl uid 
itself. This fl uid must become a gas at low pressure and a liquid at high pressure, over most 
of the temperature range encountered by the air conditioner. For decades, the standard 
working fl uids were chlorofl uorocarbons such as the various Freons. These compounds 
replaced ammonia, a toxic and corrosive gas used in early refrigeration.
Chlorofl uorocarbons are ideally suited to air conditioners because they easily trans-
form from gas to liquid and back again over a broad range of temperatures. They’re also 
chemically inert and inexpensive. Unfortunately, chlorofl uorocarbon molecules contain 
chlorine atoms and, when released into the air, can carry those chlorine atoms to the upper 
atmosphere. There they promote the destruction of ozone molecules, essential atmospheric 
constituents that absorb portions of the sun’s ultraviolet radiation. Recently, chlorine-free 
hydrofl uorocarbons have replaced chlorofl uorocarbons as the working fl uids in most air 
conditioners. Though not as energy effi cient and chemically inert as the materials they 
replace, hydrofl uorocarbons do not damage the ozone layer. They are, however, potent 
greenhouse gases (see Section 7.3) and should not be released to the atmosphere.
Check Your Understanding #5: Air Conditioning or Space Heating?
What would happen to the average air temperature in your room if you placed a window air-conditioning 
unit in the middle of the room and turned it on?
Answer: The room air would become warmer, on average.
Why: The air conditioner would begin to pump heat from its front to its back. The air right in front of 
the unit would become colder, while the air behind the unit would become hotter. Since the unit 
would deliver more heat to the hotter air than it would absorb from the colder air, it would increase 
the total amount of thermal energy in the room. On average, the room would become warmer.
Washer 
nozzle
Cowl
Windshield 
wiper
Windshield
Sliding 
sunroof
Antenna 
Drip molding
Gas tank door
Mud ﬂap
Wheel 
cover
Wheel
Fender
Bumper
Grille
Headlight
Engine
Transmission
Tire
SECTION 8.2    Automobiles
Nothing is more symbolic of freedom and personal indepen-
dence than an automobile. With its keys in your hand, you can 
go almost anywhere at a moment’s notice. The mechanism that 
makes this instant transportation possible is the internal com-
bustion engine. Though it has been refi ned over the years, this 
engine’s basic design has changed little since it was invented 
more than a century ago. It uses thermal energy released by 
burning fuel to do the work needed to propel the car forward. 
That thermal energy can do work at all is one of the marvels of 
thermal physics and the primary focus of this section.
Questions to Think About: What obstacles stand in the way of 
using burning fuel’s thermal energy to propel a car? Why are two 
objects, one hot and one cold, required to convert any thermal 

220 
CHAPTER 8 Thermodynamics
Using Thermal Energy: Heat Engines
The light turns green, and you step on the accelerator pedal. The engine of your car roars 
into action, and in a moment, you’re cruising down the road a mile a minute. The engine 
noise gradually diminishes to a soft purr and vanishes beneath the sound of the radio and 
the passing wind.
The engine is the heart of the automobile, pushing the car forward at the light and 
keeping it moving against the forces of gravity, friction, and air resistance. It’s not simply 
a miracle of engineering. It’s also a wonder of thermal physics because it performs the 
seemingly impossible task of converting thermal energy into ordered energy. However, the 
law of entropy forbids the direct conversion of thermal energy into ordered energy, so how 
can a car engine use burning fuel to propel the car forward?
The car engine avoids confl ict with the law of entropy by being a heat engine, a device 
that converts thermal energy into ordered energy as heat fl ows from a hot object to a cold 
object (Fig. 8.2.1). Although thermal energy in a single object can’t be converted into work, 
that restriction doesn’t apply to a system of two objects at different temperatures. Because 
heat fl owing from the hot object to the cold object increases the overall entropy of the sys-
tem, a small amount of thermal energy can be converted into work without decreasing the 
system’s overall entropy and without violating the law of entropy.
Another way to look at a heat engine is through the contributions of the two objects. 
The hot object provides the thermal energy that’s converted into work. The cold object 
provides the order needed to carry out that conversion. As the heat engine operates, the hot 
object loses some of its thermal energy and the cold object loses some of its order. The heat 
engine has used them to produce ordered energy. Since the heat engine needs both thermal 
energy and order, it can’t operate if either the hot or the cold object is missing.
In a car engine, the hot object is burning fuel and the cold object is outdoor air. Some 
of the heat passing from the burning fuel to the outdoor air is diverted and becomes the 
ordered energy that propels the car. But what limits the amount of thermal energy the 
engine can convert into ordered energy?
To answer that question, let’s examine a simplifi ed car engine. We’ll treat the burning 
fuel and outdoor air as a single, thermally isolated system and look at what happens to their 
total entropy as the engine operates. In accordance with the law of entropy, this total entropy 
can’t decrease while the engine is transforming some thermal energy into ordered energy.
energy into useful work? What hot and cold objects does a car 
have? Why does a car have a cooling system to get rid of waste 
heat rather than just converting it all into useful work? How does 
premium, high-octane gasoline differ from regular, low-octane 
gasoline? Why aren’t gasoline and diesel fuel interchangeable?
Experiments to Do: The recent advances in automobile 
technology and the increasing demands for pollution-control 
equipment have made automobiles exceedingly complicated. 
Nonetheless, take a moment to look under the hood of your or 
a friend’s car. You should be able to identify the engine and 
its electric support system. You should be able to count four 
or more spark plug wires heading toward the engine’s cylin-
ders. These cylinders convert thermal energy from burning 
fuel into work to propel the car. Why does the engine need so 
many cylinders rather than relying on one larger cylinder?
 
At the front of the engine compartment, you’ll fi nd the 
radiator. How does this device extract waste heat from the 
engine? Does heat fl ow naturally into the radiator and then into 
the outdoor air, or is there a heat pump involved?
Colder
region
Hotter
region
Heat
engine
Heat
Work
Fig. 8.2.1 A heat engine converts heat (thermal energy 
from the hotter region) into work (ordered energy) as heat 
fl ows from a hotter region to a colder region. The larger the 
temperature difference between the two regions, the larger 
the fraction of heat that can be converted into work.

Automobiles 221
When the car is idling at a stoplight, its engine is doing no work and heat is simply 
fl owing from the hot burning fuel to the cold outdoor air. The system’s total entropy 
increases because this heat is more disordering to the cold air it enters than to the hot burn-
ing fuel it leaves. In fact, the system’s entropy increases dramatically because the burning 
fuel is extremely hot compared to the cold outdoor air.
This increase in the system’s entropy is unnecessary and wasteful. The law of entropy 
requires only that the engine add as much entropy to the cold outdoor air as it removes from 
the hot burning fuel. Since a little heat is quite disordering to cold air, the car engine can 
deliver much less heat to the outdoor air than it removes from the burning fuel and still not 
cause the system’s total entropy to decrease. As long as the engine delivers enough heat to 
the outdoor air to keep the total entropy from decreasing, there’s nothing to prevent it from 
converting the remaining heat into ordered energy!
This conversion starts as soon as you remove your foot from the brake and begin to 
accelerate forward. Instead of transferring all the thermal energy in the burning fuel to the 
outdoor air, your car then extracts some of it as ordered energy and uses it to power the 
wheels. The car engine can convert thermal energy into ordered energy, as long as it passes 
along enough heat from the hot object to the cold object to satisfy the law of entropy.
Obeying the law of entropy becomes easier as the temperature difference between the 
two objects increases. When the temperature difference is huge, as it is in an automobile 
engine, a large fraction of the thermal energy leaving the hot object can be converted into 
ordered energy—at least in theory. For an ideally effi cient automobile engine or other heat 
engine, the relationships among the heat removed from the hot object, the heat added to the 
cold object, and the work provided can be written as two word equations:
work provided = heat removed from hot object · temperaturehot −temperaturecold
temperaturehot
heat added to cold object = heat removed from hot object −work provided, 
(8.2.1)
in symbols:
 W = −Qh
Th −Tc
Th
 Qc = −Qh −W,
and in everyday language:
The greater the temperature difference between hot and cold, the larger the 
fraction of heat you can divert and transform into work,
where the temperatures are measured on an absolute scale.
Unfortunately, theoretical limits are often hard to realize in actual machines, and the best 
automobile engines extract only about half the ordered energy specifi ed by Eqs. 8.2.1. Still, 
obtaining even that amount is a remarkable feat and a tribute to scientists and engineers who, 
in recent years, have labored to make automobile engines as energy effi cient as possible.
Check Your Understanding #1: Heat Pumps and Heat Engines
An air conditioner uses electric energy to make the air in your home colder than the outdoor air. 
Could you use this difference in temperatures to operate a heat engine and generate electric energy?
Answer: Yes, you could.
Why: A heat engine is essentially a heat pump operating backward. The air conditioner (a heat pump) 
uses ordered electric energy to pump heat from the cold air in your home to the hot outdoor air. The 
heat engine we are considering would use the fl ow of heat from the hot outdoor air to the cold air in 
your home to produce ordered electric energy.

222 
CHAPTER 8 Thermodynamics
The Internal Combustion Engine
Invented by the German engineer Nikolaus August Otto in 1867, the internal combustion 
engine burns fuel directly in the engine itself. Gasoline and air are mixed and ignited in an 
enclosed chamber. The resulting temperature rise increases the pressure of the gas and 
allows it to perform work on a movable surface.
To extract work from the fuel, the internal combustion engine must perform four tasks 
in sequence:
1. 
It must introduce a fuel-air mixture into an enclosed volume.
2. 
It must ignite that mixture.
3. 
It must allow the hot burned gas to do work on the car.
4. 
It must get rid of the exhaust gas.
In the standard, four-stroke fuel-injected engine found in modern gasoline automobiles, 
this sequence of events takes place inside a hollow cylinder (Fig. 8.2.2). It’s called a four-
stroke engine because it operates in four distinct steps, or strokes: induction, compression, 
power, and exhaust. Fuel-injected refers to the technique used to mix the fuel and air as 
they’re introduced into the cylinder.
Automobile engines usually have four or more of these cylinders. Each cylinder is a 
separate energy source, closed at one end and equipped with a movable piston, several 
valves, a fuel injector, and a spark plug. The piston slides up and down in the cylinder, 
shrinking or enlarging the cavity inside. The valves, located at the closed end of the cylin-
der, open to introduce fuel and air into the cavity or to permit burned exhaust gas to escape 
from the cavity. The fuel injector adds fuel to the air as it enters the cylinder. The spark 
plug, also located at the closed end of the cylinder, ignites the fuel-air mixture to release its 
chemical potential energy as thermal energy.
Check Your Figures #1: Back to the Steam Age
A train locomotive is powered by an ideal steam engine. If the steam boiler operates at 450 K (177 °C 
or 350 °F) and the outdoor temperature is 300 K (26 °C or 80 °F), how much work can the steam 
engine obtain by removing 1200 J of heat from the boiler?
Answer: It can obtain 400 J of work.
Why: Since the hot object is at 450 K and the temperature difference is 150 K, Eqs. 8.2.1 allow 1/3 
of the heat removed from the boiler to be converted into work. The remaining 800 J of heat must fl ow 
into the outdoor air.
Spark
plug
Fuel and
air inlet
Induction
Compression
Power
Exhaust
Exhaust
outlet
Fig. 8.2.2 A four-stroke 
engine cylinder. During 
the induction stroke, fuel 
and air enter the cylinder. 
The compression stroke 
squeezes that mixture into 
a small volume. The spark 
plug ignites the mixture, 
and the power stroke 
allows the hot gas to do 
work on the automobile. 
Finally, the exhaust stroke 
ejects the exhaust gas from 
the cylinder.

Automobiles 223
The fuel-air mixture is introduced into each cylinder during its induction stroke. In this 
stroke, the engine pulls the piston away from the cylinder’s closed end so that its cavity 
expands to create a partial vacuum. At the same time, the cylinder’s inlet valves open so 
that atmospheric pressure can push fresh air into the cylinder. The cylinder’s fuel injector 
adds a mist of fuel droplets to this air so that the cylinder fi lls with a fl ammable fuel-air 
mixture. Because it takes work to move air out of the way and create a partial vacuum, the 
engine does work on the cylinder during the induction stroke.
At the end of the induction stroke, the inlet valves close to prevent the fuel-air mixture from 
fl owing back out of the cylinder. Now the compression stroke begins. The engine pushes the 
piston toward the cylinder’s closed end so that its cavity shrinks and the fuel-air mixture becomes 
denser. The engine does work on the mixture while compressing it—the piston pushes the gas 
inward as the gas moves inward—so the mixture’s internal energy increases. The only way that 
a gas can store this additional energy is as thermal energy, so the mixture’s temperature rises as 
it’s compressed. Since increases in a gas’s density and temperature both increase its pressure, 
the pressure in the cylinder rises rapidly as the piston approaches the spark plug.
At the end of the compression stroke, the engine applies a high-voltage pulse to the spark 
plug and ignites the fuel-air mixture. The mixture burns quickly to produce hot, high-pressure 
burned gas, which then does work on the car during the cylinder’s power stroke. In that 
stroke, the gas pushes the piston away from the cylinder’s closed end so that its cavity expands 
and the burned gas becomes less dense. Since the hot gas exerts a huge pressure force on the 
piston as it moves outward, it does work on the piston and ultimately propels the car. As it 
does work, the burned gas gives up thermal energy and cools in accordance with the law of 
conservation of energy. Its density and pressure also decrease. At the end of the power stroke, 
the exhaust gas has cooled signifi cantly and its pressure is only a few times atmospheric 
pressure. The cylinder has extracted much of the fuel’s chemical energy as work.
The cylinder gets rid of the exhaust gas during its exhaust stroke. In this stroke, the 
engine pushes the piston toward the closed end of the cylinder while the cylinder’s outlet 
valves are open. Because the burned gas trapped inside the cylinder at the end of the power 
stroke is well above atmospheric pressure, it accelerates out of the cylinder the moment the 
outlet valves open. These sudden bursts of gas leaving the cylinders create the “poof-poof-
poof” sound of a running engine. Without a muffl er on its exhaust pipes, the engine would 
be loud and unpleasant.
Just opening the outlet valves releases most of the exhaust gas, but the rest is squeezed 
out as the piston moves toward the cylinder’s closed end. The engine again does work on 
the cylinder as it squeezes out the exhaust gas. At the end of the exhaust stroke, the cylinder 
is empty and the outlet valves close. The cylinder is ready to begin a new induction stroke.
Check Your Understanding #2: Getting Out More Than You Put In
Why does the burned gas do more work on the piston during the power stroke than the piston does 
on the unburned fuel-air mixture during the compression stroke?
Answer: The pressure is much higher in the burned gas than in the unburned fuel-air mixture.
Why: The amount of work done on the piston by the gas or done on the gas by the piston depends on 
the pressure inside the cylinder. The higher that pressure, the more outward force the piston experi-
ences and the more work is done on it as it moves. The sudden rise in pressure that occurs when the 
fuel-air mixture burns explains why the burned gas does so much work on the piston as it moves 
outward. That pressure rise is due partly to the rise in temperature and partly to the fragmentation of 
the fuel and oxygen molecules into more, smaller molecules.
Engine Effi ciency
The goal of an internal combustion engine is to extract as much work as possible from a 
given amount of fuel. In principle, the fuel’s chemical potential energy can be converted 
entirely into work because both are ordered energies. However, it’s diffi cult to convert 

224 
CHAPTER 8 Thermodynamics
chemical potential energy directly into work, so the engine burns the fuel instead. This step 
is unfortunate, for in burning the fuel, the engine converts the fuel’s chemical potential 
energy directly into thermal energy and produces lots of unnecessary entropy.
But all is not lost. Since the burned fuel is extremely hot, a good fraction of its thermal 
energy can be converted into ordered energy by diverting some of the heat that fl ows from 
the burned fuel to the outdoor air. As we noted earlier, the hotter the burned fuel and the 
colder the outdoor air, the more ordered energy the engine can extract. To maximize its fuel 
effi ciency, an internal combustion engine obtains the hottest possible burned gas, lets that 
gas do as much work as it can on the piston, and releases the gas at the coldest possible 
temperature.
It would be wonderful if, during the power stroke, the burned gas expanded and cooled 
until it reached the temperature of the outdoor air. The exhaust gas would then leave the 
engine with the same amount of thermal energy it had when it arrived, and the engine 
would have extracted all of the fuel’s chemical potential energy as work. Unfortunately, 
that would violate the law of entropy by converting thermal energy completely into ordered 
energy. As Eqs. 8.2.1 indicate, an operating heat engine always adds some heat to its cold 
object. In this case, the engine releases the burned gas before it cools to the temperature of 
the outdoor air. It has no choice; the engine’s exhaust must be hot!
An ordinary internal combustion engine, however, is even less fuel effi cient than the 
law of entropy requires. It releases the burned gas while that gas is still well above atmos-
pheric pressure and is therefore still capable of doing work on the piston. By allowing that 
gas to expand further before release, an improved engine could extract more work from it 
and thus be more fuel effi cient. The Atkinson cycle engine is just such a device, with a 
power stroke that is longer than its compression stroke. However, even if the engine expan-
ded the burned gas until it reached atmospheric pressure, the temperature of its exhaust 
would still remain somewhat above the temperature of the outdoor air. Invented in 1882, 
Atkinson cycle engines have become popular only recently as part of the effort to build 
more fuel-effi cient vehicles.
Regardless of these improvements, real internal combustion engines always waste 
some energy and extract less work than the law of entropy allows. For example, a fraction 
of the heat leaks from the burned gas to the cylinder walls and is removed by the car’s 
cooling system. This wasted heat isn’t available to produce work. Similarly, sliding friction 
in the engine wastes mechanical energy and necessitates an oil-fi lled lubricating system. 
Overall, real internal combustion engines convert only about 20–30% of the fuel’s chemi-
cal potential energy into work.
Check Your Understanding #3: Too Much of a Good Thing
What would happen to the pressure of the burned gas in an internal combustion engine if that engine 
tried to expand it until it cooled to the temperature of the outdoor air?
Answer: The pressure of the burned gas would drop below atmospheric pressure.
Why: As the engine lets the burned gas expand, that gas does work on the piston and its temperature 
and pressure decrease. By the time the gas reaches atmospheric pressure, it has cooled signifi cantly 
but it is still hotter than the outdoor air. To cool the burned gas further, the engine would have to 
expand it further and its pressure would drop below atmospheric. The engine would then be doing 
work on its piston to create a partial vacuum.
Improving Engine Effi ciency
To obtain the hottest possible burned gas, the compression stroke should squeeze the fuel-
air mixture into as small a volume as possible. The more tightly the piston compresses the 
mixture, the higher its density, pressure, and temperature will be before ignition and the 
hotter the burned gases will be after ignition. Since the effi ciency of any heat engine 

Automobiles 225
increases as the temperature of its hot object increases and since the hot burned gas is the 
automobile engine’s “hot object,” its high temperature after ignition is good for effi ciency.
The extent to which the cylinder’s volume decreases during the compression stroke is 
measured by its compression ratio, its volume at the start of the compression stroke 
divided by its volume at the end of the compression stroke. The larger this compression 
ratio, the hotter the burned gas and the more energy effi cient the engine. While normal 
compression ratios are between 8:1 and 12:1, those in high-compression engines may be 
as much as 15:1.
Unfortunately, the compression ratio can’t be made arbitrarily large. If the engine 
compresses the fuel-air mixture too much, the fl ammable mixture will become so hot that 
it will ignite all by itself. This spontaneous ignition due to overcompression is called pre-
ignition or knocking. When an automobile knocks, the gasoline burns before the engine is 
ready to extract work from it and much of the energy is wasted.
There are two ways to reduce knocking. First, you can mix the fuel and air more 
uniformly. In a nonuniform mixture, there may be small regions of gas that get hotter or 
are more susceptible to ignition than others. The fuel-injection technique used in all 
modern cars provides excellent mixing and also allows a car’s computer to adjust the 
fuel-air mixture for complete combustion and minimal pollution. So unless a car is seri-
ously out of tune, there isn’t much room for improvement as far as mixture uniformity is 
concerned.
Second, you can use the most appropriate fuel. Not all fuels ignite at the same tempe-
rature, so you should select a fuel that is able to tolerate your car’s compression process 
without igniting spontaneously. That’s exactly what you do when you purchase the proper 
grade of gasoline. Regular gasoline ignites at a relatively low temperature and is most sus-
ceptible to knocking. Premium gasoline ignites at a relatively high temperature and is most 
resistant to knocking.
Fuels that are more diffi cult to ignite and more resistant to knocking are assigned 
higher octane numbers. Regular gasoline has an octane number of about 87, while premium 
has an octane number of about 93 (Table 8.2.1). Choosing the proper fuel is simply a matter 
of fi nding the lowest octane gasoline that your car can use without excessive knocking. A 
little knocking in the most demanding circumstances is quite acceptable. Most modern 
well-tuned automobiles work beautifully on regular gasoline. Since only high-performance 
cars with high-compression engines need premium gasoline, putting anything other than 
regular gasoline in a normal car is usually a waste of money.
TABLE 8.2.1 Approximate Ignition Temperatures for the 
Three Standard Grades of Gasoline During Compression
Octane Number
Approximate Ignition Temperature
87 (regular)
750 °C (1382 °F)
90 (plus)
800 °C (1472 °F)
93 (premium)
850 °C (1562 °F)
Check Your Understanding #4: The Only Premium Is the Price
As part of its aggressive advertising campaign, one oil company has begun calling its 93-octane 
gasoline “the auto elixir.” People are fl ocking to the pumps to fi ll up even the most ordinary cars with 
it. Should you join them or merely chuckle?
Answer: Chuckle away.
Why: Like any high-octane gasoline, the elixir is an expensive fuel that has been carefully formulated 
to be hard to ignite. Although it works wonders for a high-compression engine that would otherwise 
overheat the fuel-air mixture and cause it to knock, its resistance to ignition is wasted on most ordi-
nary engines.

226 
CHAPTER 8 Thermodynamics
Diesel Engines and Turbochargers
Since knocking sets the limit for compression ratio, it also sets the limit for effi ciency in a 
gasoline engine. However, diesel engines avoid the knocking problem by separating the 
fuel and air during the compression stroke (Fig. 8.2.3). Invented by German engineer 
Rudolph Christian Karl Diesel (1858–1913) in 1896, the diesel engine has no spark plug to 
ignite the fuel. Instead, it compresses pure air with an extremely high compression ratio of 
perhaps 20:1 and then injects diesel fuel directly into the cylinder just as the power stroke 
begins. The fuel ignites spontaneously as it enters the hot compressed air. Unlike an inter-
nal combustion engine, which uses a fuel that is diffi cult to ignite, a diesel engine uses fuel 
that ignites easily.
Because of its higher compression ratio, a diesel engine burns its fuel at a higher tem-
perature than a standard gasoline engine and can therefore be more energy effi cient. It 
effectively has a hotter “hot object” and can convert a larger fraction of heat into work.
Some gasoline or diesel engines combine fuel injection with a turbocharger. A turbochar-
ger is essentially a fan that pumps outdoor air into the cylinder during the induction stroke. By 
squeezing more fuel-air mixture into the cylinder, a turbocharger increases the engine’s power 
output. The engine burns more fuel with each power stroke and behaves like a larger engine. 
The fan of a turbocharger is powered by pressure in the engine’s exhaust system. A nearly 
identical device called a supercharger is driven directly by the engine’s output power.
For an internal combustion engine, turbochargers have a downside: they encourage 
knocking. As a turbocharger squeezes air into the cylinder, it does work on that air and the 
air becomes hot. Since the fuel-air mixture enters the engine hot, it may ignite spontan-
eously during the compression stroke. To avoid knocking in a car equipped with a tur-
bocharger, you may need to use premium gasoline. Some turbocharged cars are equipped 
with an intercooler, a device that removes heat from the air passing through the turbochar-
ger. By providing cool, high-density air to the cylinders, the intercooler reduces the peak 
temperature of the compression stroke and avoids knocking.
For diesel engines, however, knocking is not an issue. In fact, turbochargers have revo-
lutionized diesel engines, transforming them from sluggish to high performance. Because 
of their high compression ratios and extremely hot combustion temperatures, diesel engines 
develop enormous pressures inside their cylinders and tremendous forces on their pistons. 
As a result, diesel engines can provide large torques and enormous powers, even at low 
engine speeds.
With higher fuel effi ciency and enhanced performance, these modern diesel engines 
have a clear environmental advantage over gasoline engines. However, they still had to 
Induction
Compression
Power
Exhaust
Fuel
injector
Pure air
intake
Exhaust
outlet
Fig. 8.2.3 A diesel 
engine cylinder contains 
pure air during the 
compression stroke. As 
the piston does work 
on it, this air becomes 
extremely hot. At the start 
of the power stroke, diesel 
fuel is injected into the 
cylinder. The fuel ignites 
spontaneously, and the 
hot burned gas does work 
on the piston and engine 
during the power stroke.

Automobiles 227
solve a long-standing problem with diesel engines—particulate pollution. Because a diesel 
engine must burn its oily liquid fuel in about 1/1000th of a second, it was diffi cult to burn 
the fuel completely and some of it became carbon soot. To eliminate that soot, diesel 
engines were reengineered to swirl their fuel and air vigorously for more complete burning 
and they now incorporate fi lters that capture and burn up any soot that does manage to get 
into the exhaust system. The result is a relatively fuel-effi cient vehicle with environmental 
specifi cations that rival hybrid vehicles.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: The Hydrogen Economy
Misconception: One day soon, hydrogen will eliminate the need for other sources of energy.
Resolution: Since hydrogen doesn’t occur naturally on Earth, it is not a primary energy source. 
Hydrogen is a secondary energy source, meaning that it is produced using a primary source of 
energy. Although hydrogen can be made using solar, wind, or hydroelectric energy, most hydrogen 
is now produced using natural gas or coal. Hydrogen itself is neither renewable nor nonrenewable; 
what matters is which energy source you use to make it.
Check Your Understanding #5: Steam Heat
How can a steam engine be more energy effi cient when it operates on 325 °C steam than when it 
uses 300 °C steam?
Answer: Like all heat engines, the steam engine can convert more thermal energy into work when 
the temperature of its hot object (the steam) increases.
Why: The steam engine converts thermal energy into work as heat fl ows from the hot steam to the 
outdoor air. The greater the temperature difference between those two objects, the more effi cient 
the steam engine can be at turning thermal energy into work. That is why most steam engines use 
extremely hot steam.
Multicylinder Engines
Since the purpose of the engine is to extract work from the fuel-air mixture, it’s important 
that each cylinder do more work than it consumes. Three of the strokes require the engine to 
do work on various gases, and only one of the strokes extracts work from the burned gas. 
During the induction stroke, the engine does work drawing the fuel-air mixture into the 
cylinder. During the compression stroke, the engine does work compressing the fuel-air 
mixture. During the exhaust stroke, the engine does work squeezing the exhaust gas out of 
the cylinder. Fortunately, the work done on the engine by the hot burned gas during the 
power stroke more than makes up for the work the engine does during the other three strokes.
Still, the engine has to invest a great deal of energy into the cylinder before each power 
stroke. To provide this initial energy, most four-stroke engines have four or more cylinders, 
timed so that there is always one cylinder going through the power stroke. The cylinder that 
is in the power stroke provides the work needed to carry the other cylinders through the 
three nonpower strokes, and there is plenty of work left over to propel the car itself.
While the pistons move back and forth, the engine needs a rotary motion to turn the 
car’s wheels. The engine converts each piston’s reciprocating motion into rotary motion by 
coupling that piston to a crankshaft with a connecting rod. The crankshaft is a thick steel 
bar, suspended in bearings, that has a series of pedal-like extensions, one for each cylinder. 
As the piston moves out of the cylinder during the power stroke, it pushes on the connect-
ing rod and the connecting rod pushes on its crankshaft pedal. The connecting rod thus 
produces a torque on the crankshaft. The crankshaft rotates in its bearings and transmits 
this torque out of the engine so that it can be used to propel the car. So, while each cylinder 
initially exerts a force, the crankshaft uses that force to produce a torque.

228 
CHAPTER 8 Thermodynamics
The spinning crankshaft conveys its rotary power to the car’s transmission, and from 
there the power moves on to the wheels. Overall, a signifi cant portion of the heat fl owing 
out of the burning fuel-air mixture is being converted into work and used to spin the car’s 
wheels. Assisted by friction with the pavement, the wheels push the car forward, and you 
cruise down the highway toward your destination.
Check Your Understanding #6: Hard Starting
Modern cars use an electric motor to start the engine turning, but early cars were started with a hand 
crank. Why was it so hard to turn the crank?
Answer: The person turning the crank had to do all the work needed to move the engine’s pistons 
through the three nonpower strokes.
Why: Before the engine started running on its own, it couldn’t provide any of the energy the cylinders 
needed during the induction, compression, and exhaust strokes. The person turning the crank had to 
provide this energy. Once the fuel started burning, the power strokes could take over, but up to that 
point, turning the crank was hard work.
Epilogue for Chapter 8
This chapter has examined two devices that control the fl ow of heat to accomplish chal-
lenging tasks. In Air Conditioners, we learned how heat pumps use ordered energy to pump 
heat against its natural fl ow and observed that the only way to get rid of thermal energy is 
to transfer it to something else. In Automobiles, we saw that heat engines are able to divert 
some of the heat fl owing from a hot object to a cold object and convert it into useful work. 
We also examined the roles of the two objects in a heat engine, hot and cold, fi nding that 
the hot object provides the energy needed to do the work, while the cold object provides the 
order that makes the conversion of thermal energy into ordered energy possible.
Explanation: Making Fog in a Bottle
Even when everything in the room is at a single temperature, you can still use thermody-
namics to cool the air in the bottle below room temperature. When you step on the bottle, 
you compress the air inside it and do work on that air. Since air can accommodate added 
energy only as thermal energy, its temperature rises. The air in the bottle becomes hotter, 
and heat fl ows out of the warmer bottle into the cooler room. After half a minute or so, the 
temperature of air in the bottle returns to the temperature of the room.
When you step off the bottle, the air inside it expands and does work on you. Since air 
can obtain that work only from its thermal energy, its temperature drops. The air in the 
bottle becomes colder, and its relative humidity suddenly exceeds 100%. As a result, mois-
ture inside the bottle condenses into droplets and the air becomes foggy.
Smoke particles assist the droplet formation by acting as seeds for the droplets. As we 
saw in Chapter 7, water can’t boil without seed bubbles. Similarly, steam can’t condense in 
air without seed droplets. When the seed droplets fail to form spontaneously, the smoke 
gives them a little help.
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Air Conditioners Work: An air conditioner moves heat against its natural direction of 
fl ow, using a working fl uid that passes endlessly through an evaporator, a compressor, and a 
condenser. The working fl uid fl ows toward the evaporator as a stable high-pressure liquid. Just 
before pouring into the evaporator, this liquid passes through a constriction in the pipe and 

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 229
experiences a large drop in pressure. Since the working fl uid is not stable as a low-pressure 
liquid, it evaporates rapidly in the evaporator and thereby absorbs a great deal of heat from 
the indoor air.
 
The working fl uid then fl ows to the compressor as a stable low-pressure gas. The com-
pressor squeezes it into a hot, high-density, high-pressure gas and blows it into the condenser. 
Since the working fl uid is not stable as a high-pressure gas, it condenses rapidly in the con-
denser and thereby releases a large amount of heat to the outdoor air. The resulting liquid 
working fl uid then returns toward the evaporator to begin the cycle again.
 
To propel this process, the compressor consumes ordered energy and delivers it as heat 
to the outdoor air. Without this input of ordered energy, the air conditioner could not move 
heat against its natural direction of fl ow.
How Automobiles Work: An automobile engine extracts work from its chemical fuel by burn-
ing that fuel inside its cylinders and making the resulting burned gas do work on the engine. 
Most engines have at least four cylinders, each of which requires four strokes to extract work 
from the fuel. During the induction stroke, a piston moves out of the cylinder and draws a 
mixture of fuel and air into the resulting cavity. During the compression stroke, the piston 
moves into the cylinder, compressing this fuel-air mixture to high density, pressure, and 
temperature. An electric spark then ignites the mixture and it burns to form extremely hot 
burned gas. During the power stroke, the piston again moves out of the cylinder while the hot 
gas does work on it. This work is what powers the car. Finally, during the exhaust stroke, the 
piston moves into the cylinder and squeezes out the burned gas. The cylinder then begins 
again with fresh fuel and air.
1. Law of thermal equilibrium: Two objects that are each in 
thermal equilibrium with a third object are also in thermal equi-
librium with one another.
2. Law of conservation of energy: The change in a stationary 
object’s internal energy is equal to the heat transferred into 
that object minus the work that object does on its surround-
ings or
internal energy change = heat added −work done. (8.1.1)
3. Law of entropy: The entropy of a thermally isolated system 
of objects never decreases.
4. Effi ciency of a heat pump: The ideal effi ciency of a heat 
pump depends on the temperatures of its hot and cold objects:
 heat from cold object = work ·
tempcold
temphot −tempcold
heat to hot object = heat from cold object + work. (8.1.2)
5. Effi ciency of a heat engine: The ideal effi ciency of a heat 
engine depends on the temperatures of its hot and cold objects:
 
work = heat from hot object · temphot −tempcold
temphot
heat to cold object =  heat from hot object −work. (8.2.1)

 M
any fascinating motions in the world around us are repetitive ones. Our lives are fi lled with 
cycles, from the sun’s daily passage overhead to a pond’s undulating ripples on a rainy day. 
These cyclic motions are governed by the physical laws and steadily mark our journey 
through time and space. Some of these cycles structure our lives out of necessity or tradition, while 
others are simply there to be observed. Still other cycles have become part of our everyday world 
because they’re useful or enjoyable. In this chapter, we cover those three possibilities by examining 
cyclic motions in three contexts: in clocks, in musical instruments, and at the seashore.
A Singing Wineglass
One simple experiment with cyclic motion involves a 
crystal wineglass, a little water, and a delicate touch. A 
crystal wineglass is hard and thin and easily supports 
a repetitive mechanical motion called a vibration. The 
glass’s hardness allows it to retain energy in this vibrating 
motion for a long time so that it rings clearly when you 
tap it gently with a spoon and to acquire energy slowly in 
the manner described next.
 
The experiment itself is an activity discovered by 
many a bored youth, sitting too long in a fancy restaurant 
with only the place settings as entertainment. If you wet 
your fi nger slightly and run it gently around the lip of the 
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
9
Resonance and Mechanical 
Waves
230

Clocks 231
Chapter Itinerary
The wineglass’s vibration is an example of a natural resonance, 
a cyclic motion of the glass itself. Whether you tap the glass 
gently with a spoon or rub it with your fi nger, you’re causing 
it to undergo this characteristic motion. In this chapter we 
examine several other objects that exhibit natural resonances: 
(1) clocks, (2) musical instruments, and (3) the sea.
 
In Clocks, we study pendulums, balance rings, and quartz 
crystals to see how their natural resonances are used to measure 
the passage of time. In Musical Instruments, we look at the 
vibrations of strings, air columns, and drumheads to fi nd out 
how these instruments produce their musical sounds and to 
learn how those sounds travel to our ears. Last, in The Sea, we 
look at the nature of waves on the surface of water and explore 
such issues as tides, tsunamis, and surf. For a more detailed 
preview, turn to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and 
Equations at the end of the chapter.
required constant attention. Better clocks measure time with 
repetitive motions such as swinging or rocking. In this section, 
we’ll examine the workings of modern clocks based on repeti-
tive motions. As we do, we’ll see that repetitive motions are 
interesting in their own right and appear throughout nature in 
countless objects in addition to clocks.
Questions to Think About: What exactly is time? Why do some 
objects swing or rock back and forth repetitively? How can you 
use a repetitive motion to measure time? How can you change 
the rate at which an object swings or rocks? Since repetitive 
motions don’t normally continue forever, how can you keep 
them going without upsetting their timekeeping ability?
Experiments to Do: You can build the timekeeping portion of 
a pendulum clock by attaching a small, dense object to the 
end of a string and hanging that string from a table or doorway. 
Push the object gently so that it swings back and forth. You’ll 
fi nd that it completes this repetitive motion with great regular-
ity. What limits its regularity?
 
If the string is about 25 cm (10 in) long, a complete swing 
(back and forth) will take almost exactly 1 s. Change the length 
of the string and observe its effect on the swing. Do you think 
that the object’s weight affects the swing? Try a different object 
and see whether you’re right.
 
Now vary the extent of the swing to fi nd out whether it 
affects the time each swing takes. How can it be that a small 
swing takes the same time as a large swing? Notice that you can 
get the object swinging by pushing on it rhythmically. Randomly 
timed pushes won’t do; you must push the object in synchrony 
with its motion. At what times should you push it to make it 
swing farther? To make it swing less far? Rhythmic pushes of 
this sort keep the timekeeper in a clock moving, hour after hour.
People measure their lives according to the sky, dividing exis-
tence into days, months, and years according to the celestial 
motions of the sun, moon, and stars. On the less romantic 
scale of daily life, the sky offers little help. Since it provides no 
easy way to measure short periods of time, people invented 
clocks.
 
Early clocks were based on the time it took to complete 
simple processes—the fl ow of sand or water, or the burning of 
candles. However, these clocks had limited accuracy and 
wineglass at a slow, steady pace, you should be able to get 
the wineglass to sing loudly. The walls of the glass will 
vibrate back and forth and emit a clear tone.
 
If you can’t fi nd a crystal wineglass, you may be out 
of luck. An ordinary glass doesn’t work as well because it 
converts the energy from your fi nger into thermal energy 
rapidly and doesn’t emit much sound. In any case, be sure 
that the glass has no sharp edges on its lip so that you 
don’t cut your fi nger.
 
What will happen to the sound if you add some water 
to the glass? Try it and see what happens. Is anything visible 
on the surface of the water as you make the glass vibrate?
Pediment
Body
Hour hand
Dial
Minute hand
Weight
Pendulum
Plinth
Timing
adjustment
SECTION 9.1 
Clocks

232 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
Time
Before examining clocks, we should take a brief look at time itself. Scientists treat time as a 
dimension, similar but not identical to the three spatial dimensions that we perceive in the 
world around us. In total, our universe has four dimensions: three spatial dimensions and one 
temporal dimension. Thus it takes four numbers to completely specify when and where an 
event occurs: three numbers identify the event’s location and one identifi es its moment in time.
An obvious difference between space and time is that, while we can see space stretched 
out around us, we can observe only the passage of time. Although we occupy only one 
location in space at a given moment, we are somehow more aware of the expanse of space 
around us. It’s much harder to sense the whole framework of time stretching off into the 
past and future; you must use your imagination.
Another difference between time and space is that, while you can turn around and walk 
back the way you came, you can’t grow any younger. Our travels through space are revers-
ible, but our travels through time are one-way. That irreversibility of time is associated with 
entropy and the law of entropy (see Chapter 8), particularly the ever-increasing disorder of 
the universe. Disorder increases, we get older, the weeds grow around our homes, and even 
clocks run down.
Our perception of space is ultimately based on the need for forces, accelerations, and 
velocities to travel from one place to another. A city seems far away because we know that 
traveling there with reasonable forces, accelerations, and velocities will take a long time. 
Our perception of time is based on the same mechanical principles. If two moments are 
separated by a long time, then reasonable forces, accelerations, and velocities will permit 
us to travel large distances between the two moments. In short, our perceptions of space 
and time are interrelated, and measurements of time and space are connected as well.
We measure space with rulers and time with clocks. How would you make a ruler? You 
could construct a rather large ruler by driving a car at constant velocity and marking the 
pavement with paint once each second. Your ruler wouldn’t be very practical, but it would 
fi t the defi nition of a ruler as having spatial markings at uniform distances. You would be 
using your movement through time to measure space.
How would you make a clock? You could make a rather strange clock by driving a car 
at constant velocity down your giant ruler and counting each time you see one of your 
marks go by. You would then be using your movement through space to measure time. 
Most clocks really do use motion to measure time. As we are about to see, however, they 
use motions that are a bit more compact than a car ride.
Check Your Understanding #1: The Ultimate Moon Bounce
To measure the distance from Earth to the moon, scientists bounce light from refl ectors placed on 
the moon by the Apollo astronauts. Light travels at a constant speed. How can a measurement of 
light’s travel time to and from the moon be used to determine the distance from Earth to the moon?
Answer: Since light travels at a constant speed, the distance it travels is equal to its speed times its 
travel time. If you know the travel time and the speed, you can determine that distance.
Why: Many distance measurements are made by measuring time. Surveyors routinely use light’s 
travel time to measure distances. Decorators and architects often use sound’s travel time to measure 
the distances between walls. In general, the motion of an object at constant velocity can be used 
either to measure the distance traveled if you know the elapsed time or to measure the elapsed time 
if you know the distance traveled.
Natural Resonances
An ideal timekeeping motion should offer both accuracy and convenience. That rules out 
some of the obvious choices. The sun, moon, and stars keep excellent time but fail the 
convenience test. Sure, conservation of energy, momentum, and angular momentum so 

Clocks 233
dominate their motions that these celestial bodies move steadily and predictably through 
the heavens, century after century, but what do you do on a cloudy day? And while simple 
interval timers like sandglasses and burning candles are easy to make and use, they’re not 
very accurate. Besides, who’s going to stay up all night lighting fresh candles just to keep 
the “clock” running? (For an interesting astronomical clock, see 1 .)
Instead, practical clocks are based on a particular type of repetitive motion called a 
natural resonance. In a natural resonance, the energy in an isolated object or system of 
objects causes it to perform a certain motion over and over again. Many objects in our 
world exhibit natural resonances, from tipping rocking chairs to sloshing basins of water to 
waving fl agpoles, and those natural resonances usually involve motion about a stable equi-
librium. Like the bouncing spring scale in Section 3.1, an object that has been displaced 
from its stable equilibrium accelerates toward that equilibrium but then overshoots; it 
coasts right through equilibrium and must turn around to try again. As long as it has excess 
energy, this object continues to glide back and forth through its equilibrium and thus exhib-
its a natural resonance.
Some resonances, such as those of bouncing balls and teetering bottles, don’t maintain 
a steady beat and aren’t suitable for clocks. However, we are about to encounter a group of 
resonances that are extremely regular and that can be used to measure the passage of time 
with remarkable accuracy. Those resonances belong to an important class of mechanical 
systems known as harmonic oscillators.
1  The daughter of a 
planetarium architect, 
Jocelyn Bell (British 
astronomer, 1943– ) 
acquired an early interest 
in radio astronomy. 
Advised to study physics 
fi rst, she became the only 
woman in a class of 50 at 
Glasgow University. 
While working on her 
Ph.D. at Cambridge, Bell 
discovered an extrater-
restrial source of radio 
bursts, occurring precisely 
1.33730113 seconds apart. 
She had discovered the 
fi rst pulsar, a collapsed 
star whose angular 
momentum keeps it 
turning at an extraordinar-
ily uniform rate. Each 
burst coincided with one 
rotation of the star 
remnant.
Check Your Understanding #2: An Egg-Timer Clock
Although a sandglass can be made repetitive by turning it over every time the sand runs out, this 
manual restarting process introduces timing errors. If a 3-min sandglass is always turned over within 
10 s after the sand runs out, how accurately will it measure time over the course of a day?
Answer: It may have lost as much as 80 min after 24 h.
Why: If the operator of a sandglass waits 10 s before turning it over each time the sand runs out, 
the clock will lose 10 s every 3 min, 200 s every h, and 4800 s every day. If you could be sure that 
the operator would always wait 10 s, you could include it in the clock’s design. However, the oper-
ator might be faster one time than the next, and this uncertainty makes the clock unreliable and 
inaccurate. For a repetitive clock to keep accurate time, it must repeat its motion with almost perfect 
regularity.
Pendulums and Harmonic Oscillators
One of the fi rst natural resonances to fi nd its way into clocks is the swing of a pendulum, a 
weight hanging from a pivot (Fig. 9.1.1). When the pendulum’s center of gravity is directly 
below its pivot, it’s in a stable equilibrium. Its center of gravity is then as low as possible, 
so displacing it raises its gravitational potential energy and a restoring force begins pushing 
it back toward that equilibrium position (Fig. 9.1.2). For geometrical reasons, this restoring 
force is almost exactly proportional to how far the pendulum is from equilibrium. As you 
displace the pendulum steadily from equilibrium, the restoring force on it also increases 
steadily.
When you release the displaced pendulum, its restoring force accelerates it back 
toward equilibrium. Instead of stopping, however, the pendulum swings back and forth 
about its equilibrium position in a repetitive motion called an oscillation. As it swings, its 
energy alternates between potential and kinetic forms. When it swings rapidly through its 
equilibrium position in the middle of a swing, its energy is all kinetic. When it stops 
momentarily at the end of a swing, its energy is all gravitational potential. This repetitive 
transformation of excess energy from one form to another is part of any oscillation and 
keeps the oscillator—the system experiencing the oscillation—moving back and forth until 
that excess energy is either converted into thermal energy or transferred elsewhere.
Pivot
Center of
mass/gravity
Timing
adjustment
Fig. 9.1.1
A pendulum 
consists of a weight 
hanging from a pivot. The 
pendulum is in a stable 
equilibrium when its center 
of gravity is directly below 
the pivot.

234 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
The pendulum isn’t just any oscillator, though. Because its restoring force is propor-
tional to its displacement from equilibrium, the pendulum is a harmonic oscillator—the 
simplest and best understood mechanical system in nature. As a harmonic oscillator, 
the pendulum undergoes simple harmonic motion, a regular and predictable oscillation 
that makes it a superb timekeeper.
The period of any harmonic oscillator, the time it takes to complete one full cycle 
of its motion, depends only on how stiffl y its restoring force pushes it back and forth, 
and on how strongly its inertia resists the accelerations of that motion. Stiffness is the 
measure of how sharply the restoring force increases as the oscillator is displaced from 
equilibrium; stiff restoring forces are associated with fi rm or hard objects, while less 
stiff restoring forces are associated with soft objects. The stiffer the restoring force, the 
more forcefully it pushes the oscillator back and forth and the shorter the oscillator’s 
period. On the other hand, the larger the oscillator’s mass, the less it accelerates and the 
longer its period.
However, the most remarkable and important characteristic of a harmonic oscillator is 
not that its period depends on stiffness and mass, but that its period doesn’t depend on 
amplitude, its furthest displacement from equilibrium. Whether that amplitude is large or 
small, the harmonic oscillator’s period remains exactly the same. This insensitivity to amp-
litude is a consequence of its special restoring force, a restoring force that is proportional 
to its displacement from equilibrium. At larger amplitudes, the oscillator travels farther 
each cycle, but the forces accelerating it through that cycle are stronger as well. Overall, the 
harmonic oscillator completes a large cycle of motion just as quickly as it completes a 
small cycle of motion.
Any harmonic oscillator can be thought of as having a restoring force component that 
drives the back and forth motion and an inertial component that resists that motion. Their 
competition determines the oscillator’s period. Harmonic oscillators with stiff restoring 
forces and little inertia have short periods, while those with soft restoring forces and great 
inertia have long periods. Their amplitudes of oscillation simply don’t affect their periods, 
which is why harmonic oscillators are so ideal for timekeeping. Because practical clocks 
can’t control the amplitudes of their timekeeping oscillators perfectly, virtually all of them 
are based on harmonic oscillators.
Restoring
force
Restoring
force
Equilibrium
position
Fig. 9.1.2 If you tilt a pendulum’s 
center of gravity away from its 
equilibrium position, it experiences 
a restoring force proportional to 
its distance from that equilibrium 
position.

Clocks 235
Actually, a pendulum is an unusual harmonic oscillator because increasing its mass 
doesn’t increase its period. That’s because increasing the pendulum’s mass also increases 
its weight and therefore stiffens its restoring force. These two changes compensate for one 
another perfectly so that the pendulum’s period is unchanged.
A pendulum’s period does, however, depend on its length and on gravity. When you 
reduce the pendulum’s length, the distance from its pivot to its center of mass, you stiffen 
its restoring force and shorten its period. Similarly, when you strengthen gravity (perhaps 
by traveling to Jupiter), you increase the pendulum’s weight, stiffen its restoring force, and 
reduce its period. Though we won’t try to prove it, the period of a pendulum is
period of pendulum = 2π B
length of pendulum
acceleration due to gravity.
Thus a short pendulum swings more often than a long one, and any pendulum swings more 
often on Earth than it would on the moon.
On Earth’s surface, a 0.248-m (10-in) pendulum has a period of 1 s (Fig. 9.1.3), 
making it suitable for a wall clock that advances its second hand by 1 s each time the 
pendulum completes a cycle. Since a pendulum’s period increases as the square root of 
its length, a 0.992-m (40-in) pendulum (four times as tall as a 0.248-m pendulum) takes 
2 s to complete its cycle and is appropriate for a fl oor clock that advances its second hand 
by 2 s per cycle.
HARMONIC OSCILLATORS
A harmonic oscillator is an oscillator with a restoring force proportional to its displace-
ment from equilibrium. Its period of oscillation depends only on the stiffness of that 
restoring force and on its mass, not on its amplitude of oscillation.
© Robert Mathena/Fundamental Photographs
Fig. 9.1.3 The swinging pendulum 
controls the movement of the clock’s 
hands. The pendulum is 0.248 m long, 
from pivot to center of mass/gravity, so 
each cycle takes 1 s to complete and 
advances the hands by 1 s.

236 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
Because a pendulum’s period depends on its length and gravity, a change in either one 
causes trouble. As we learned in Chapter 7, materials expand with increasing temperature, 
so a simple pendulum slows down as it heats up. A more accurate pendulum is thermally 
compensated by using several different materials with different coeffi cients of loudness 
expansion to ensure that its center of mass remains at a fi xed distance from its pivot.
Although gravity doesn’t change with time, it does vary slightly from place to place. 
To correct for differences in gravity between the factory and a clock’s fi nal destination, its 
pendulum has a threaded adjustment knob. This knob allows you to change the pendulum’s 
length to fi ne-tune its period.
Check Your Understanding #3: Swing Time
A child swinging on a swing set travels back and forth at a steady pace. What determines the period 
of the child’s motion?
Answer: The strength of Earth’s gravity and the length of the swing’s chains.
Why: A child swinging on a swing set is a form of pendulum. As with any pendulum, the child’s period 
of motion is determined only by the strength of gravity and the length of the pendulum. In this case, 
the length of the pendulum is approximately the length of the swing’s supporting chains. Thus, a tall 
swing has a longer period than a short swing.
Pendulum Clocks
Although a pendulum maintains a steady beat, it’s not a complete clock. Something must 
keep the pendulum swinging and use that swing to determine the time. A pendulum clock 
does both. It sustains the pendulum’s motion with gentle pushes, and it uses that motion to 
advance its hands at a steady rate.
The top of the pendulum has a two-pointed anchor that controls the rotation of a 
toothed wheel (Fig. 9.1.4). This mechanism is called an escapement. A weighted cord 
wrapped around the toothed wheel’s shaft exerts a torque on that wheel, so that the wheel 
would spin if the anchor weren’t holding it in place. Each time the pendulum reaches the 
end of a swing, one point of the anchor releases the toothed wheel while the other point 
catches it. The wheel turns slowly as the pendulum rocks back and forth, advancing by one 
tooth for each full cycle of the pendulum. This wheel turns a series of gears, which slowly 
advance the clock’s hands. Although these hands are actually counting the number of pen-
dulum swings since midnight, their movement is calibrated so that their positions indicate 
the current time.
The toothed wheel also keeps the pendulum moving by giving the anchor a tiny 
forward push each time the pendulum completes a swing. Since the anchor moves in the 
direction of the push, the wheel does work on the anchor and pendulum, and replaces energy 
lost to friction and air resistance. This energy comes from the weighted cord, which releases 
gravitational potential energy as its weight descends. When you wind the clock, you rewind 
this cord around the shaft, lifting the weight and replenishing its potential energy.
While these pushes from the toothed wheel can keep even the clumsiest pendulum 
swinging, a clock works best when its pendulum swings with almost perfect freedom. 
That’s because any outside force—even the push from the toothed wheel—will infl uence 
the pendulum’s period. The most accurate timekeepers are those that can oscillate without 
any assistance or energy replacement for thousands or millions of cycles. These precision 
timekeepers need only the slightest pushes to keep them moving and thus have extremely 
precise periods. That’s why a good pendulum clock uses an aerodynamic pendulum and 
low-friction bearings.
Finally, the clock must keep the oscillation amplitude of its pendulum relatively con-
stant. From a practical perspective, drastic changes in that amplitude will make the toothed 
wheel turn erratically. However, there is a more fundamental reason to keep the pendulum’s 
Anchor and
bearing
Toothed
wheel
Weight
Swinging motion
Fig. 9.1.4 A pendulum 
clock uses a swinging 
pendulum to determine 
how quickly a toothed 
wheel turns and advances 
a series of gears that 
control the hands of the 
clock. The anchor permits 
the toothed wheel to 
advance by one tooth 
each time the pendulum 
completes a full cycle.

Clocks 237
amplitude steady: it’s not really a perfect harmonic oscillator. If you displace the pendulum 
too far, it becomes an anharmonic oscillator—its restoring force ceases to be proportional 
to its displacement from equilibrium, and its period begins to depend on its amplitude. Since 
a change in period will spoil the clock’s accuracy, the pendulum’s amplitude must be kept 
small and steady. That way, the amplitude has almost no effect on the pendulum’s period.
Check Your Understanding #4: Swing High, Swing Low
When pushing a child on a playground swing, you normally push her forward as she moves away from 
you. What happens if you push her forward each time she moves toward you?
Answer: The amplitude of her motion will gradually decrease so that she comes to a stop.
Why: To keep her swinging, you must make up for the energy she loses to friction and air resistance. 
By pushing her forward each time she moves away from you, you do work on her and increase her 
energy. However, when you push her as she moves toward you, she does work on you and you extract 
some of her energy. You are then slowing her down rather than sustaining her motion.
Balance Clocks
Because it relies on gravity for its restoring force, a swinging pendulum mustn’t be tilted 
or moved. That’s why there are so few pendulum-based wristwatches. To make use of the 
excellent timekeeping characteristics of a harmonic oscillator, a portable clock needs some 
other restoring force that’s proportional to displacement but independent of gravity. It 
needs a spring!
As we saw in Section 3.1, the force a spring exerts is proportional to its distortion. The 
more you stretch, compress, or bend a spring, the harder it pushes back toward its equilib-
rium shape. Attach a block of wood to the free end of a spring, stretch it gently, and let go, 
and you’ll fi nd you have a harmonic oscillator with a period determined only by the stiff-
ness of the spring and the block’s mass (Fig. 9.1.5). Since the period of a harmonic oscil-
lator doesn’t depend on the amplitude of its motion, the block oscillates steadily about its 
equilibrium position and makes an excellent timekeeper.
Unfortunately, gravity complicates this simple system. Although gravity doesn’t 
alter the block’s period, it does shift the block’s equilibrium position downward. That 
Equilibrium
Acceleration
Velocity
Force
Fig. 9.1.5
A metal 
cylinder attached to a 
spring is a harmonic 
oscillator, shown here in 
a time sequence (top to 
bottom). The oscillator’s 
period is determined only 
by the stiffness of the 
spring and the cylinder’s 
mass.

238 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
shift is a problem for a clock that might be tilted sometimes. However, there’s another 
spring-based timekeeper that marks time accurately in any orientation or location. This 
ingenious device, used in most mechanical clocks and watches, is called a balance ring 
or simply a balance.
A balance ring resembles a tiny metal bicycle wheel, supported at its center of mass/
gravity by an axle and a pair of bearings (Fig. 9.1.6). Any friction in the bearings is exerted 
so close to the ring’s axis of rotation that it produces little torque and the ring turns 
extremely easily. Moreover, the ring pivots about its own center of gravity so that its weight 
produces no torque on it. In keeping with its name, the balance is balanced.
The only thing exerting a torque on the balance ring is a tiny coil spring. One end of 
this spring is attached to the ring, while the other is fi xed to the body of the clock. When 
the spring is undistorted, it exerts no torque on the ring and the ring is in equilibrium. If 
you rotate the ring either way, however, torque from the distorted spring will act to restore 
it to its equilibrium orientation. Since this restoring torque is proportional to the ring’s 
rotation away from a stable equilibrium, the balance ring and coil spring form a harmonic 
oscillator!
Because of the rotational character of this harmonic oscillator, its period depends on 
the torsional stiffness of the coil spring, that is, on how rapidly the spring’s torque 
increases as you twist it, and on the balance ring’s rotational mass. Since the balance 
ring’s period doesn’t depend on the amplitude of its motion, it keeps excellent time. Also, 
because gravity exerts no torque on the balance ring, this timekeeper works anywhere and 
in any orientation.
The rest of a balance clock is similar to a pendulum clock (Fig. 9.1.7). As the balance 
ring rocks back and forth, it tips a lever that controls the rotation of a toothed wheel. An 
anchor attached to the lever allows the toothed wheel to advance one tooth for each com-
plete cycle of the balance ring’s motion. Gears connect the toothed wheel to the clock’s 
hands, which slowly advance as the wheel turns.
Because the balance clock is portable, it can’t draw energy from a weighted cord. 
Instead, it has a main spring that exerts a torque on the toothed wheel. This main spring is 
a coil of elastic metal that stores energy when you wind the clock. Its energy keeps the 
balance ring rocking steadily back and forth and also turns the clock’s hands. Since the 
Equilibrium
Ring
Coil spring
Angular
velocity
Torque
Angular
acceleration
Fig. 9.1.6 A small wheel 
attached to a coil spring is 
a harmonic oscillator known 
as a balance ring, shown 
here in a time sequence 
(top to bottom). Its period 
is determined only by the 
stiffness of the coil spring 
and the rotational mass of 
the wheel.
Balance ring
Coil spring
Jewel bearing
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Fig. 9.1.7 The balance ring in this 
antique French carriage clock twists back 
and forth rhythmically under the infl uence 
of the spiral spring near its center. The 
tiny ruby bearings that support the ring 
minimize friction and permit this clock to 
keep very accurate time.

Clocks 239
main spring unwinds as the toothed wheel turns, the clock occasionally needs winding. 
(For two interesting examples of balance clocks, see 2  and 3 .)
Check Your Understanding #5: A Little Light Entertainment
When you accidentally strike a chandelier with a broom, this hanging lamp begins to twist back and 
forth with a regular period. What determines its period of oscillation?
Answer: It’s determined by the torsional stiffness of the chandelier’s supporting cord and the chan-
delier’s rotational mass.
Why: The hanging chandelier is a harmonic oscillator. Its supporting cord opposes any twists by 
exerting a restoring force on the chandelier. Once you twist it away from its equilibrium orientation, 
the chandelier oscillates back and forth with a period determined only by the cord’s torsional stiffness 
(its stiffness with respect to twists) and the chandelier’s rotational mass. As with any harmonic oscil-
lator, the amplitude of the chandelier’s motion doesn’t affect its period.
Electronic Clocks
The potential accuracy of pendulum and balance clocks is limited by friction, air resis-
tance, and thermal expansion to about 10 s per year. To do better, a clock’s timekeeper must 
avoid these mechanical shortcomings. That’s why so many modern clocks use quartz oscil-
lators as their timekeepers.
A quartz oscillator is made from a single crystal of quartz, the same mineral found 
in most white sand. Like many hard and brittle objects, a quartz crystal oscillates 
strongly after being struck. In fact, it’s a harmonic oscillator because it acts like a spring 
with a metal cylinder at each end (Fig. 9.1.8, left). The two cylinders oscillate in and out 
symmetrically about their combined center of mass, with a period determined only by 
the cylinders’ masses and the spring’s stiffness. In a quartz crystal, the spring is the 
crystal itself and the cylinders’ are its two halves (Fig. 9.1.8, right). Since their restoring 
forces are proportional to displacement from equilibrium, both systems are harmonic 
oscillators.
Because of its exceptional hardness, a quartz crystal’s restoring forces are extremely 
stiff. Even a tiny distortion leads to huge restoring forces. Since the period of a harmonic 
oscillator decreases as its spring becomes stiffer, a typical quartz oscillator has an extremely 
short period. Its motion is usually called a vibration rather than an oscillation because 
vibration implies a fast oscillation in a mechanical system. Oscillation itself is a more gen-
eral term for any repetitive process, and it can even apply to such nonmechanical processes 
as electric or thermal oscillations.
Equilibrium
Equilibrium
Force
Acceleration
Velocity
Fig. 9.1.8 A quartz crystal disk (right) acts like a spring with metal cylinders at each end (left). 
As shown in a time sequence (top to bottom), both systems can oscillate about equilibrium. They 
accelerate outward when compressed and inward when stretched.
2  The son of freed 
slaves, Benjamin 
Banneker (African 
American mathematician, 
astronomer, and writer, 
1731–1806) grew up on a 
Maryland tobacco farm 
and supplemented his 
limited schooling with 
borrowed books. Though 
best remembered for his 
work in astronomy and for 
compiling six almanacs, 
he also produced one of 
the fi rst clocks made 
entirely in America. Based 
on a borrowed pocket 
watch, Banneker built his 
wooden balance clock by 
hand, using a knife to 
shape the parts. The clock 
kept accurate time for half 
a century and even struck 
the hours.
3  Although ships’ 
navigators could determ-
ine latitude (north–south) 
by measuring the angles 
of the sun and stars, 
Earth’s rotation prevented 
them from determining 
their longitudes (east–
west) without help from 
accurate clocks. Uncer-
tainty in longitude caused 
so many shipwrecks that, 
in 1714, the British 
government offered the 
Longitude Prize to anyone 
who could measure 
longitude to within a 
prescribed accuracy. 
One contender for that 
enormous prize was 
English clockmaker John 
Harrison (1693–1776). 
Harrison spent more than 
30 years working on a 
series of four increasingly 
accurate clocks. His fi nal 
prototype, a small 
balance-ring chronometer 
known as H4, lost only 5 s 
during its fi rst transat-
lantic voyage and could 
therefore determine 
longitude to within about 
1 mile. Despite H4’s 
repeated successes, the 
British government took 
over a decade to fully 
reward Harrison for his 
achievements.

240 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
Because of its rapid vibration, a quartz oscillator’s period is a small fraction of a 
second. We normally characterize such a fast oscillator by its frequency, the number of 
cycles it completes in a certain amount of time. The SI unit of frequency is the cycle per 
second, also called the hertz (abbreviated Hz) after German physicist Heinrich Rudolph 
Hertz. Period and frequency are reciprocals of one another,
frequency =
1
period
,
so an oscillator with a period of 0.001 s has a frequency of 1000 Hz.
Because the vibrating crystal isn’t sliding across anything or moving quickly through 
the air, it loses energy slowly and vibrates for a long, long time. Also, because quartz’s 
coeffi cient of thermal expansion is extremely small, the crystal’s period is nearly inde-
pen-dent of its temperature. With its exceptionally steady period, a quartz oscillator can 
serve as the timekeeper for a highly accurate clock, one that loses or gains less than a tenth 
of a second per year.
Of course, a quartz crystal isn’t a complete clock. Like the pendulum and balance, it 
needs something to keep it vibrating and to use that vibration to determine the time. 
Although these tasks could conceivably be done mechanically, quartz clocks are normally 
electronic. There are two reasons for this choice. First, the crystal’s vibrations are too fast 
and too small for most mechanical devices to follow. Second, a quartz crystal is intrinsic-
ally electronic itself; it responds mechanically to electrical stress and electrically to mech-
anical stress. Because of this coupling between its mechanical and electrical behaviors, 
crystalline quartz is known as a piezoelectric material and is ideal for electronic clocks.
The clock’s circuitry uses electrical stresses to keep the quartz crystal vibrating (Fig. 
9.1.9). Just as carefully timed pushes keep a child swinging endlessly on a playground 
swing, carefully timed electrical stresses keep the quartz crystal vibrating endlessly in its 
holder. Because the crystal loses so little energy with each vibration, only a tiny amount of 
work is required each cycle to maintain its vibration.
The clock also detects the crystal’s vibrations electrically. Each time its halves move 
in or out, the crystal experiences mechanical stress and emits a pulse of electricity. These 
pulses may control an electric motor that advances clock hands or may serve as input to an 
electronic chip that measures time by counting the pulses.
The quartz crystals used in clocks and watches are carefully cut and polished to vibrate 
at specifi c frequencies. In effect, these crystals are tuned like musical instruments to match 
the requirements of their clocks. Because counting each vibration of the crystal consumes 
energy, we can prolong clocks’ battery lives by using crystals that vibrate relatively 
slowly—just above the range of human hearing. To make a small crystal vibrate slowly, the 
manufacturer cuts away most of the center of that crystal to weaken its restoring forces and 
slow its oscillations. The resulting quartz “tuning fork” oscillator (Fig 9.1.10) is carefully 
metalized to permit the watch to interact with it electrically and then it’s tuned: a laser 
beam slowly evaporates the metal from the tips of the fork, decreasing its mass and increas-
ing its frequency, until the desired frequency is reached.
Quartz tuning fork
Fig. 9.1.9 The quartz 
crystal in this wristwatch 
is located inside the 
silver cylinder at the 
bottom. Carefully polished 
to vibrate at a precise 
frequency, the crystal 
keeps the watch accurate 
to a few seconds a month.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Check Your Understanding #6: Heavy Metal Music
If you drop a metal rod on the fl oor, end fi rst, you hear a high-pitched tone. What’s happening?
Answer: The rod is vibrating as a harmonic oscillator, with its two halves fi rst approaching one another 
and then moving apart.
Why: The metal rod vibrates in the same manner as a quartz crystal. The body of the rod exerts 
restoring forces on its two halves. After hitting the fl oor, these halves move toward and away from one 
another rapidly, emitting the tone that you hear. Because it’s a harmonic oscillator, the frequency 
(and pitch) of the tone doesn’t change as the amplitude of motion decreases.
Fig. 9.1.10 Shaped like a 
tiny tuning fork, this watch 
crystal vibrates almost 
exactly 32,768 times per 
second. Burn marks at its 
tips were created when its 
vibrational frequency was 
tuned by a laser beam.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Musical Instruments 241
Sound and Music
To understand how instruments work, we need to know a bit more about sound and music. 
In air, sound consists of density waves, patterns of compressions and rarefactions that travel 
outward rapidly from their source. When a sound passes by, the air pressure in your ear 
fl uctuates up and down about normal atmospheric pressure. Even when these fl uctuations 
have amplitudes less than a millionth of atmospheric pressure, you hear them as sound.
When the fl uctuations are repetitive, you hear a tone with a pitch equal to the fl uctu-
ation’s frequency. Pitch is the frequency of a sound. A bass singer’s pitch range extends 
from 80 to 300 Hz, while that of a soprano singer extends from 300 to 1100 Hz. Musical 
instruments can produce tones over a much wider range of pitches, but we can hear only 
those between about 30 and 20,000 Hz, and that range narrows as we get older.
Most music is constructed around intervals, the frequency ratio between two different 
tones. This ratio is found by dividing one tone’s frequency by that of the other. Our hearing 
is particularly sensitive to intervals, with pairs of tones at equal intervals sounding quite 
similar to one another. For example, a pair of tones at 440 and 660 Hz sounds similar to a 
pair at 330 and 495 Hz because they both have the interval 3/2.
The interval 3/2 is pleasing to most ears and is common in Western music, where it’s 
called a fi fth. A fi fth is the interval between the two “twinkles” at the beginning of “Twinkle, 
Twinkle, Little Star.” If your ear is good, you can start with any tone for the fi rst twinkle 
and will easily fi nd the second tone, located at 3/2 the frequency of the fi rst. Your ear hears 
that factor of 3/2 between the two frequencies.
The most important interval in virtually all music is 2/1, or an octave. Tones that differ 
by a factor of 2 in frequency sound so similar to our ears that we often think of them as 
SECTION 9.2
vibrating inside a pipe organ? Why are some organ pipes lon-
ger than others? Why do most drums sound toneless, providing 
more rhythm than pitch?
Experiments to Do: Find a violin or guitar, or stretch a strong 
string between two rigid supports. Even a rubber band will do 
in a pinch. Pluck the string with your fi nger and listen to the 
tone it makes. The string vibrates back and forth at a particu-
lar frequency or pitch even as its amplitude of motion gradu-
ally decreases. What kind of oscillator has that behavior?
 
Change the string’s frequency of vibration by changing its 
tension or length. What happens when you shorten the string or 
prevent part of it from moving? What happens if you increase its 
tension by pulling it tighter? You can also increase the string’s 
mass by wrapping it with tape. How does that affect its pitch?
 
You can imitate a pipe organ by blowing gently across 
the mouth of a bottle or soda straw. If done properly, you’ll get 
the air inside the bottle vibrating up and down rhythmically 
and you’ll hear a tone. What happens to its pitch when you add 
water to the bottle or pinch off the straw at various points? Why 
does this tone sound different from that of the string, even 
when the two have the same pitch?
 
Finally, a table or plate will act like a drum when you tap 
it. Compare the sound it makes with those of the previous two 
“instruments.” Does it have a pitch? What distinguishes the 
sounds of different tables or plates?
Music is an important part of human expression. Although 
what qualifi es as music is a matter of taste, it always involves 
sound and often involves instruments. In this section, we’ll 
examine sound, music, and several instruments: violins, pipe 
organs, and drums. As examples of the three most common 
types of instruments—strings, winds, and percussion—this trio 
will help us to understand many other instruments as well.
Questions to Think About: Why are the low-pitch strings on a 
violin thicker than the high-pitch strings? How does pressing a 
violin’s string against the fi ngerboard change its pitch? Why 
does a violin sound different when it’s plucked rather than 
bowed? What purpose does the violin’s body serve? What is 
Musical Instruments
Scroll
Peg
Nut
Neck
Finger-
board
String
Soundboard
Purﬂing
Bridge
Sound 
hole
Tailpiece
Chin rest
End 
button

242 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
being the same. When men and women sing together “in unison,” they often sing an octave 
or two apart, and the differences in the tones, always factors of 2 or 4 in frequency, are only 
barely noticeable.
The octave is so important that it structures the entire range of audible pitches. Most of 
the subtle interplay of tones in music occurs in intervals of less than an octave, less than a 
factor of 2 in frequency. Thus most traditions build their music around the intervals that lie 
within a single octave, such as 5/4 and 3/2. They pick a particular standard pitch and then 
assign notes at specifi c intervals from this standard pitch. This arrangement repeats at 
octaves above and below the standard pitch to create a complete scale of notes. (For a his-
tory of scales, see 4 .)
The scale used in Western music is constructed around a note called A4, which has a 
standard pitch of 440 Hz. At intervals of 9/8, 5/4, 4/3, 3/2, 5/3, and 15/8 above A4 lie the six 
notes B4, C#
5, D5, E5, F#
5, and G#
5. Similar collections of six notes are built above A5 (880 
Hz), which has a frequency twice that of A4, and above A3 (220 Hz), which has a frequency 
half that of A4. In fact, this pattern repeats above A1 (55 Hz) through A8 (7040 Hz).
Actually, Western music is built around 12 notes and 11 intervals that lie within a 
single octave. Five more intervals account for fi ve additional notes, Bb
4, C5, D#
5, F5, and 
G5. It’s also not quite true that every note is based exclusively on its interval from A4. While 
A4 remains at 440 Hz, the pitches of the other 11 notes have been modifi ed slightly so that 
they’re at interesting and pleasing intervals from one another as well as from A4. This 
adjustment of the pitches led to the well-tempered scale that has been the basis for Western 
music for the last several centuries.
4  In addition to his 
contributions to mathe-
matics, geometry, and 
astronomy, the Greek 
mathematician Pythagoras 
(ca. 580–500 BC) was 
perhaps the fi rst person to 
use mathematics to relate 
intervals, pitches, and 
the lengths of vibrating 
strings. He and his 
followers laid the 
groundwork for the scale 
used in most Western 
music.
Check Your Understanding #1: A Night at the Opera
A typical singing voice can cover a range of about two octaves—for example, from C4 to C6. How 
broad is this range of frequencies?
Answer: There is a factor of 4 in frequency between the lowest and the highest notes that the typical 
voice can sing.
Why: Since notes separated by an octave are separated by a factor of 2 in frequency, notes separated 
by two octaves are separated by a factor of 4.
A Violin’s Vibrating String
The tones produced by a violin begin as vibrations in its strings. On their own, these strings 
are limp and shapeless so they rely on the violin’s rigid body and neck for structure. The 
violin subjects its strings to tension, outward forces that act to stretch it, and this tension 
gives each string an equilibrium shape—a straight line.
To see that a straight violin string is in equilibrium, think of it as being composed of 
many individual pieces that are connected together in a chain (Fig. 9.2.1). Tension exerts a 
pair of outward forces on each piece of the string; its neighboring pieces are pulling that 
piece toward them. Since the string’s tension is uniform, these two outward forces sum to 
zero; they have equal magnitudes but point in opposite directions. With zero net force on 
each of its pieces, the straight string is in equilibrium.
When the string is curved, however, the pairs of outward forces no longer sum to zero 
(Fig. 9.2.2). Although those outward forces still have equal magnitudes, they now point in 
slightly different directions. As a result, each piece experiences a small net force.
The net forces on its pieces are restoring forces because they act to straighten the 
string. If you distort the string and release it, these restoring forces will cause the string to 
vibrate about its straight equilibrium shape in a natural resonance. The string’s restoring 
forces are special; the more you curve the string, the stronger the restoring forces on its 
pieces become. In fact, the restoring forces are springlike forces—they increase in propor-
tion to the string’s distortion—so the string is a form of harmonic oscillator!
Tension
Tension
Zero net force
Fig. 9.2.1 A taut violin 
string can be viewed as 
being composed of many 
individual pieces. When 
the string is straight, 
the two forces exerted 
on a given piece by its 
neighbors cancel perfectly.
Net force
Tension
Tension
Fig. 9.2.2 When a violin 
string is curved, the two 
forces exerted on a given 
piece by its neighbors 
don’t point in exactly 
opposite directions and 
don’t balance one another. 
The piece experiences a 
net force.

Musical Instruments 243
Actually, the string is much more complicated than a pendulum or a balance ring. It 
can bend and vibrate in many distinct modes, or basic patterns of distortion, each with its 
own period of vibration. Nonetheless, the string retains the most important feature of a 
harmonic oscillator: the period of each vibrational mode is independent of its amplitude. 
Thus a violin string’s pitch doesn’t depend on how hard it’s vibrating. Think how tricky it 
would be to play a violin if its pitch depended on its loudness!
A violin string has one simplest vibration—its fundamental vibrational mode. In 
this mode, the entire string arcs alternately one way and then the other (Fig. 9.2.3). Its 
kinetic energy peaks as it rushes through its straight equilibrium shape, and its potential 
energy (elastic potential energy in the string) peaks as it stops to turn around. The string’s 
midpoint travels the farthest (the vibrational antinode), while its ends remain fi xed (the 
vibrational nodes). At each moment, its shape is the gradual curve of the trigonometric 
sine function.
In this fundamental mode, the violin string behaves as a single harmonic oscillator. As 
with any harmonic oscillator, its vibrational period depends only on the stiffness of its 
restoring forces and on its inertia. Either stiffening the violin string or reducing its mass 
will quicken its fundamental vibration and increase its fundamental pitch.
A violin has four strings, each with its own stiffness and mass, and therefore with its 
own fundamental pitch. In a tuned violin, the notes produced by these strings are G3 
(196 Hz), D4 (294 Hz), A4 (440 Hz), and E5 (660 Hz). The G3 string, which vibrates rather 
slowly, is the most massive. It’s usually made of gut, wrapped in a coil of heavy metal wire. 
The E5 string, on the other hand, must vibrate quite rapidly and so needs to have a low 
mass. It’s usually a thin steel wire.
You tune a violin by adjusting the tension in its strings using the pegs in its neck and 
tension adjusters on the tailpiece. Tightening the string stiffens it by increasing both the 
outward forces on its pieces and the net forces they experience during a distortion. Since 
temperature and time can alter a string’s tension, you should always tune your violin just 
before a concert.
A string’s fundamental pitch also depends on its length. Shortening the string both 
stiffens it and reduces its mass, so its pitch increases. That stiffening occurs because a 
shorter string curves more sharply when it’s displaced from equilibrium and therefore sub-
jects its pieces to larger net forces. This dependence on length allows you to raise a string’s 
pitch by pressing it against the fi ngerboard in the violin’s neck and effectively shortening 
it. Part of a violinist’s skill involves knowing exactly where on the string to press it against 
the fi ngerboard to produce a particular note.
If the arc of a string vibrating in its fundamental mode reminds you of a wave, that’s 
because it is one. It’s a mechanical wave, the natural motions of an extended object about 
its stable equilibrium shape or situation. An extended object is one like a string, stick, or 
lake surface that has many parts that move with limited independence. Since its parts infl u-
ence one another, an extended object with a stable equilibrium exhibits fascinating natural 
motions that involve many parts moving at once; it exhibits mechanical waves.
With its innumerable linked pieces and its stable equilibrium shape, the violin string 
exhibits such waves. The string’s fundamental mode is a particularly simple wave, a stand-
ing wave, which is a wave with fi xed nodes and antinodes. A standing wave’s basic shape 
doesn’t change with time; it merely scales up and down rhythmically at a particular fre-
quency and amplitude (its peak extent of motion). Most important, the standing wave 
doesn’t travel along the string.
Node
Node
Antinode
Fundamental
Force
Force
Equilibrium
Fig. 9.2.3
Pulled outward 
at its fi xed ends, this 
string’s tension gives it 
a straight equilibrium 
shape about which it can 
vibrate. Here, the string 
vibrates in its fundamental 
vibrational mode—the 
whole string moves up and 
down together as a single 
harmonic oscillator.

244 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
Although this wave extends along the string, its associated oscillation is perpendicular 
to the string and therefore perpendicular to the wave itself. A wave in which the underlying 
oscillation is perpendicular to the wave itself is called a transverse wave (Fig. 9.2.4). 
Waves on strings, drums, and the surface of water are all transverse waves.
Start
1/4 cycle
1/2 cycle
3/4 cycle
1 cycle
Oscillation
Wave
Fig. 9.2.4 In a transverse 
wave, the underlying 
oscillation is perpendicular 
to the wave itself. In this 
case, a spring is oscillating 
vertically but forming a 
horizontal wave. With its 
fi xed nodes and antinodes, 
this transverse wave is also 
a standing wave.
Check Your Understanding #2: Feeling Tense?
A common way to determine the tension in a cord is to pluck it and listen for how fast it vibrates. Why 
does this technique measure tension?
Answer: The frequency of a string’s fundamental vibrational mode increases with its tension.
Why: Any cord that is drawn taut from its ends will exhibit natural resonances like those in a violin 
string. The tauter the string, the higher will be the frequencies of those resonances.
The Violin String’s Harmonics
The fundamental vibrational mode isn’t the only way in which a violin string can vibrate. 
The string also has higher-order vibrational modes in which the string vibrates as a chain 
of shorter strings arcing in alternate directions (Fig. 9.2.5). Each of these higher-order 
vibrational modes is another standing wave, with a fi xed shape that scales up and down 
rhythmically at its own frequency and amplitude.
Node
Node
Node
Antinode
Antinode
Second harmonic
Third harmonic
Fourth harmonic
Fig. 9.2.5 A taut string 
vibrating between two 
fi xed points in its second, 
third, and fourth harmonic 
modes. The string vibrates 
as two, three, or four 
segments, completing 
cycles at two, three, or four 
times the fundamental 
vibrational frequency, 
respectively.

Musical Instruments 245
For example, the string can vibrate as two half-strings arcing in opposite directions and 
separated by a motionless vibrational node. In this mode, the violin string not only vibrates as 
half-strings but has the pitch of half-strings as well. Remarkably, that half-string pitch is 
exactly twice the whole-string (fundamental) pitch! In general, a string’s vibrational frequency 
is inversely proportional to its length, so halving its length doubles its frequency. Frequencies 
that are integer multiples of the fundamental pitch are called harmonics, so this half-string 
vibration occurs at the second harmonic pitch and is called the second harmonic mode.
A violin string can also vibrate as three third-strings, with a frequency that’s three 
times the fundamental. The interval between this third harmonic pitch and the fundamental 
pitch is an octave and a fi fth (2/1 times 3/2). Overall, the fundamental and its second and 
third harmonics sound very pleasant together.
While the violin string can vibrate in even higher harmonics, what’s more important is 
that the string often vibrates in more than one mode at the same time. For example, a violin 
string vibrating in its fundamental mode can also vibrate in its second harmonic and emit 
two tones at once.
Harmonics are important because bowing a violin excites many of its vibrational 
modes. The violin’s sound is thus a rich mixture of the fundamental tone and the harmon-
ics. Known as timbre, this mixture of tones is characteristic of a violin, which is why an 
instrument producing a different mixture doesn’t sound like a violin.
When a violin string is vibrating in several modes at once, its shape and motion are 
complicated. The individual standing waves add on top of one another, a process known as 
superposition. Each vibrational mode has its own amplitude and therefore its own loud-
ness contribution to the string’s timbre.
While these individual waves coexist beautifully on the string, with virtually no effect 
on one another, the string’s overall distorted shape is now the superposition of the indi-
vidual wave shapes. Not only is that overall shape quite complicated, it also actually 
changes substantially with time. That’s because the different harmonic waves vibrate at 
different frequencies, and their superposition changes as they change. The string’s overall 
wave is not a standing wave, and its features can even move along the string!
Check Your Understanding #3: Swinging High and Low Together
When two people swing a long jump rope, they can make it swing as a single arc or as two half-ropes 
arcing in opposite directions. To make the rope swing as two half-ropes, it must be turned faster or 
with less tension. Why?
Answer: A jump rope is essentially a vibrating string. The two-half-rope pattern is the second har-
monic mode, with a vibrational frequency twice that of the normal fundamental arc.
Why: Although it swings around in a circle, the jump rope is actually vibrating up and down at the 
same time it’s vibrating forward and back. Together, these two vibrations create the circular motion. 
To make the rope vibrate in its second harmonic mode (as two half-ropes) without changing its ten-
sion, it must be swung twice as fast as normal.
Bowing and Plucking the Violin String
You play a violin by drawing a bow across its strings. The bow consists of horsehair, pulled 
taut by a wooden stick and coated with rosin, a sticky substance based on pine sap. This 
coated horsehair exerts frictional forces on the strings as it moves across them. Most impor-
tant, however, is that it exerts much larger static frictional forces than sliding ones.
As the sticky bow hairs rub across a string, they grab the string and push it forward 
with static friction. Eventually the string’s restoring force overpowers static friction, and 
the string suddenly starts sliding backward across the hairs. Because the hairs exert little 
sliding friction, the string completes half a vibrational cycle with ease. As it stops to reverse 
direction, however, the hairs grab the string again and begin pushing it forward. This pro-
cess repeats over and over.

246 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
Each time the bow pushes the string forward, it does work on the string and adds 
energy to the string’s vibrational modes. This process is an example of resonant energy 
transfer, in which a modest force doing work in synchrony with a natural resonance can 
transfer a large amount of energy to that resonance. Just as gentle, carefully timed pushes 
can get a child swinging high on a playground swing, so too can gentle, carefully timed 
pushes from a bow get a string vibrating vigorously on a violin. Similar rhythmic pushes 
can cause other objects to vibrate strongly, notably a crystal wineglass (Fig. 9.2.6) and the 
Tacoma Narrows Bridge near Seattle, Washington (Fig. 9.2.7). The wineglass’s response to 
a certain tone is also an example of sympathetic vibration, the transfer of vibrational 
energy between two systems that share a common vibrational frequency.
The amount of energy the bow adds to each vibrational mode depends on where it 
crosses the violin string. When you bow the string at the usual position, you produce a 
strong fundamental vibration and a moderate amount of each harmonic. Bowing the string 
nearer its middle reduces the string’s curvature, weakening its harmonic vibrations and 
giving it a more mellow sound. Bowing the string nearer its end increases the string’s 
curvature, strengthening its harmonic vibrations and giving it a brighter sound.
The sound of a plucked violin string also depends on harmonic content and thus on 
where that string is plucked. However, this sound is quite different from that of a bowed 
string. The difference lies in the sound’s envelope, the way the sound evolves with time. 
This envelope can be viewed as having three time periods: an initial attack, an intermediate 
sustain, and a fi nal decay. The envelope of a plucked string is an abrupt attack followed 
immediately by a gradual decay. In contrast, the envelope of a bowed string is a gradual 
attack, a steady sustain, and then a gradual decay. We learn to recognize individual instru-
ments not only by their harmonic content but also by their sound envelopes.
Check Your Understanding #4: What’s the Buzz?
Sometimes a tone from an instrument or sound system will cause some object in the room to begin 
vibrating loudly. Why does this happen?
Answer: The object has a natural resonance at the tone’s frequency, and sympathetic vibration is 
transferring energy to the object.
Why: Energy moves easily between two objects that vibrate at the same frequency. A note played on 
one instrument will cause the same note on another instrument to begin playing. Even everyday 
objects will exhibit sympathetic vibration when the right tone is present in the air.
Fig. 9.2.6 Resonant 
energy transfer makes 
it possible for sound to 
shatter a crystal wineglass. 
When the sound pushes 
on the glass rhythmically, 
the sound slowly transfers 
energy to the glass, 
until it fi nally shatters. 
Because the sound must 
be extremely loud and 
at exactly the resonant 
frequency of the glass, 
only the most extraordinary 
opera singers can break a 
crystal wineglass.
© Steve Bronstein/Stone/Getty Images, Inc.
Fig. 9.2.7 The Tacoma Narrows Bridge collapsed in November 1940, as the result of resonant energy 
transfer between the wind and the bridge surface. Shortly after its construction, the automobile bridge 
began to exhibit an unusual natural resonance in which its surface twisted slowly back and forth so 
that one lane rose as the other fell. During a storm, the wind slowly added energy to this resonance 
until the bridge ripped itself apart.
© AP/Wide World Photos

Musical Instruments 247
An Organ Pipe’s Vibrating Air
Like a violin, a pipe organ uses vibrations to create sound. However, its vibrations take 
place in the air itself. An organ pipe is essentially a hollow cylinder, open at each end 
and fi lled with air. Because that air is protected by the rigid walls of the pipe, its pres-
sure can fl uctuate up and down relative to atmospheric pressure and it can exhibit 
natural resonances.
In its fundamental vibrational mode, air moves alternately toward and away from the 
pipe’s center (Fig. 9.2.8), like two blocks on a spring. As air moves toward the pipe’s cen-
ter, the density there rises and a pressure imbalance develops. Since the pressure at the 
pipe’s center is higher than at its ends, air accelerates away from the center. The air even-
tually stops moving inward and begins to move outward. As air moves away from the 
pipe’s center, the density there drops and a reversed pressure imbalance occurs. Since the 
pressure at the pipe’s center is lower than at its ends, air now accelerates toward the center. 
It eventually stops moving outward and begins to move inward, and the cycle repeats. The 
air’s kinetic energy peaks each time it rushes through that equilibrium and its potential 
energy (pressure potential energy in the air) peaks each time it stops to turn around.
This air is vibrating about a stable equilibrium of uniform atmospheric density and 
pressure, and it is clearly experiencing restoring forces. It should come as no surprise that 
those restoring forces are springlike and that the air column is yet another harmonic oscil-
lator. As such, its vibrational frequency depends only on the stiffness of its restoring forces 
and on its inertia. Either stiffening the air column or reducing its mass will quicken its 
vibration and increase its pitch.
These characteristics depend on the length of the organ pipe. A shorter pipe not only 
holds less air mass than a longer pipe, it also offers stiffer opposition to any movements of 
air in and out of that pipe. With less room in the shorter pipe, the pressure inside it rises and 
falls more abruptly, leading to stiffer restoring forces on the moving air. Together, these 
effects make the air in a shorter pipe vibrate faster than the air in a longer pipe. In general, 
an organ pipe’s vibrational frequency is inversely proportional to its length.
Unfortunately, the mass of vibrating air in a pipe also increases with the air’s average 
density, so even a modest change in temperature or weather will alter the pipe’s pitch. For-
tunately, all the pipes shift together so that an organ continues to sound in tune. Nonethe-
less, this shift may be noticeable when the organ is part of an orchestra.
Velocity
Pressure node
Pressure antinode
High
pressure
and
density
Pressure node
Low
pressure
and
density
Fig. 9.2.8
A time sequence (left 
to right) showing a column of air 
vibrating in a pipe that’s open at both 
ends. Here, the column vibrates in 
its fundamental vibration mode—
the whole column moves in and 
out together as a single harmonic 
oscillator.

248 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
As you may suspect, the fundamental vibrational mode of air in the organ pipe is 
another standing wave. Air in the pipe is an extended object with a stable equilibrium, and 
the disturbance associated with its fundamental vibrational mode has a basic shape that 
doesn’t change with time; it merely scales up and down rhythmically.
However, the shape of the wave in the pipe’s air now has to do with back-and-forth 
compressions and rarefaction, not with side-to-side displacements, as it did in the violin 
string. In fact, all the wave’s associated oscillation is along the pipe and therefore along the 
wave itself. A wave in which the underlying oscillation is parallel to the wave itself is called 
a longitudinal wave (Fig. 9.2.9). Waves in the air, including those inside organ pipes and 
other wind instruments and those in the open air, are all longitudinal waves.
Oscillation
Wave
Start
1/4 cycle
1/2 cycle
3/4 cycle
1 cycle
Fig. 9.2.9 In a 
longitudinal wave, the 
underlying oscillation is 
parallel to the wave itself. 
In this case, a spring is 
oscillating horizontally, 
in the same direction as 
the wave. With its fi xed 
nodes and antinodes, this 
longitudinal wave is also a 
standing wave.
Check Your Understanding #5: A Pop Organ
If you blow across a soda bottle, it emits a tone. Why does adding water to the bottle raise the pitch 
of that tone?
Answer: The water shortens the column of moving air inside the bottle and increases the frequency 
of its fundamental vibrational mode.
Why: A water bottle is essentially a pipe that is open at only one end. It has a fundamental vibrational 
mode with a frequency that is half that of an open pipe of equal length. As you add water to the 
bottle, you shorten the effective length of the pipe and raise its pitch.
Playing an Organ Pipe
The organ uses resonant energy transfer to make the air in a pipe vibrate. It starts this 
transfer by blowing air across the pipe’s lower opening (Fig. 9.2.10a), although for 
practical reasons that lower opening is usually found on the pipe’s side (Fig. 9.2.10b). 
As the air fl ows across the opening, it’s easily defl ected to one side or the other and 
tends to follow any air that’s already moving into or out of the pipe. If the air inside the 
pipe is vibrating, the new air will follow it in perfect synchrony and strengthen the 
vibration.
This following process is so effective at enhancing vibrations that it can even initiate 
a vibration from the random noise that’s always present in a pipe. That’s how the sound 
starts when the organ’s pump fi rst blows air across the pipe. Once the vibration has 
started, it grows quickly in amplitude. That amplitude increases until energy leaves the 
pipe as sound and heat as quickly as it arrives via compressed air. The more air the organ 
blows across the pipe each second, the more power it delivers to the pipe and the louder 
the vibration.
Airﬂow
Airﬂow
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.2.10 (a) Air blown 
across the bottom of an 
open pipe will follow any 
other air that’s moving 
into the pipe. If the air 
in the pipe is vibrating, 
this effect will add energy 
to that vibration. (b) The 
lower opening in an organ 
pipe is cut in its side for 
practical reasons.

Musical Instruments 249
Like a violin string, an organ pipe can support more than one mode of vibration. In its 
fundamental vibrational mode, the pipe’s entire column of air vibrates together. In the 
higher-order vibrational modes, this air column vibrates as a chain of shorter air columns 
moving in alternate directions. If the pipe has a constant width, these vibrations occur at 
harmonics of the fundamental. When the air column vibrates as two half-columns, its pitch 
is exactly twice that of the fundamental mode. When it vibrates as three third-columns, its 
pitch is exactly three times that of the fundamental. And so on.
Also, the air column inside a pipe can vibrate in more than one mode simultaneously. 
As with a violin string, the standing waves superpose and the fundamental and harmonic 
tones are produced together. The shape of the organ pipe and the place where air is blown 
across it determine the pipe’s harmonic content and thus its timbre. Different pipes can 
imitate different instruments. To sound like a fl ute, the pipe emits mostly the fundamental 
tone and keep the harmonics fairly quiet. To sound like a clarinet, its harmonics must be 
much louder. An organ pipe’s loudness always builds slowly during the attack, so it can’t 
pretend to be a plucked string. However, a clever designer can make the organ imitate a 
surprising range of instruments.
Check Your Understanding #6: An Across Blow
To make the air in a soda bottle vibrate, you must blow across the bottle’s mouth. Why doesn’t blow-
ing into its mouth work?
Answer: By blowing across the mouth, you let air that is already vibrating in the bottle redirect your 
breath so that it enhances the vibration. Blowing into the bottle’s mouth merely compresses the air 
inside the bottle.
Why: Like the bow of a violin moving across its strings, your breath moving across the bottle’s mouth 
enhances the air’s vibration via resonant energy transfer. The spontaneous redirection of your breath 
when you blow across the bottle’s mouth leads to rhythmic pushes that are perfectly synchronized 
with the air’s vibration.
A Drum’s Vibrating Surface
After examining violin strings and organ pipes, you might think that drums have no new 
physics concepts to show us. But while a drumhead is yet another extended object with a 
stable equilibrium and springlike restoring forces, its overtone vibrations have an important 
difference: they aren’t harmonics.
Violin strings and organ pipes are effectively one-dimensional or linelike objects, 
dividing easily into half-objects or third-objects that then vibrate at second or third har-
monic pitches. Together with the many other one-dimensional instruments in an orchestra 
or band, they blend seamlessly when they’re playing the same fundamental pitch because 
they share the same harmonics.
However, because a drumhead is effectively two-dimensional or surfacelike, it doesn’t 
divide easily into pieces that resemble the entire drumhead. As a result, the pitches of its 
overtone vibrations have no simple relationship to its fundamental pitch. A timpani stands 
out relative to other instruments in part because of the unique overtone pitches.
Figure 9.2.11 illustrates the fundamental (Fig. 9.2.11a) and fi ve lowest-pitched over-
tone (Fig. 9.2.11b–f) vibrational modes for a drumhead. Each vibrational mode is a 
standing wave but with vibrational nodes that are curves or lines rather than points. The 
fundamental mode (Fig. 9.2.11a) has only one node on its outer edge, while the overtone 
modes have additional nodes within the surface. In each vibrational mode, these nodes 
remain motionless as the rest of the surface vibrates up and down, its peaks and valleys 
interchanging alternately. The pitches of the overtone vibrations are indicated relative to 
the pitch of the fundamental vibration. (For a historical note on the understanding of 
surface modes, see 5 ).
5  In 1809, the French 
Academy of Sciences 
announced a competition 
to explain the intricate 
patterns observed on 
vibrating surface plates. 
The only respondent was 
French mathematician 
Sophie Germain (1776–
1831). As a woman, 
Germain had been barred 
from formal education in 
mathematics and had 
struggled to learn the 
subject from books and 
via correspondence with 
leading mathematicians, 
which she conducted 
under the pseudonym 
Antoine-August Le Blanc. 
It took her three tries, but 
in 1816 she was awarded 
the prize. Because she was 
a woman, however, she 
did not attend the 
ceremony. Her analysis of 
surface vibrations, though 
imperfect, was a visionary 
effort, made all the more 
extraordinary by her 
circumstances. Although 
her mentor, Carl Friedrich 
Gauss, managed to 
convince the University of 
Göttingen to award her an 
honorary degree, she died 
of breast cancer before 
she could receive it.

250 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
Because striking a drumhead causes it to vibrate in several modes at once, the drum 
emits several pitches simultaneously. The amplitude of each mode, and consequently its 
loudness, depends not only on how hard you hit the drumhead but also on where you hit it. 
If you hit it at its center, it vibrates primarily in circular modes (Fig. 9.2.11a,d). If you hit 
it nearer its edge, it also vibrates in noncircular modes (Fig. 9.2.11b,c,e,f).
A timpani sounds most musical when it’s struck off-center in such a way that the amp-
litude of its fundamental vibrational mode is nearly zero and its overtones, particularly Fig. 
9.2.11b, dominate its sound. That’s because the fundamental vibrational mode emits sound 
so effi ciently that its vibrational energy dissipates before it can produce a discernible tone. 
Unless all you want is a loud thump, you must hit the timpani off-center so that its long-
lived overtone vibrations receive most of the energy and emit most of the sound. The dom-
inant pitch of a properly played timpani is that of its fi rst overtone vibration, and it is tuned 
with that pitch in mind.
In truth, the pitches shown in Fig. 9.2.11 neglect the effects of air’s inertia on the drum-
head’s vibrations. Since air adds inertia to the drumhead, it lowers the pitches of all the 
vibrational modes, some more than others. Because of air’s infl uence on pitch, a drum must 
be tuned to accommodate changes in temperature and weather.
Pitch = 1.000
Node
Node
Pitch = 1.593
Pitch = 2.136
Pitch = 2.295
Pitch = 2.653
Pitch = 2.917
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Node
Antinode
Fig. 9.2.11 The six 
lowest-pitch vibrational 
modes of a drumhead, 
including (a) the 
fundamental vibrational 
mode and (b–f ) overtone 
modes. Pitches are shown 
relative to the fundamental 
pitch.
Check Your Understanding #7: Space Kid One
A trampoline is hazardous with several children on it because a child landing on one side of its sur-
face can launch skyward a second child standing on the other side of the surface. How does a down-
ward impact on one side of the trampoline produce a sudden rise of the other side?
Answer: The off-center impact causes the surface to vibrate in its noncircular overtone modes. The 
simplest such mode, Fig. 9.2.11b, has its two sides moving in alternate directions.
Why: The trampoline is essentially a drumhead, and the children are riding its vibrational modes. 
Off-center impacts can cause the surface to vibrate in its overtone modes, and these can toss the 
children in unexpected directions.
Sound in Air
All these vibrations would serve little purpose if we couldn’t hear them, so it’s time to look 
at how instruments produce sound. We’ll start by looking at sound itself.

Musical Instruments 251
We noted at the beginning of this section that sound in air consists of density 
waves—patterns of compressions and rarefactions that travel outward rapidly from their 
source. While that observation was mysterious at the time, we can now understand those 
waves as vibrations in an extended object with a stable equilibrium. That extended 
object is air.
Neglecting gravity, air is in a stable equilibrium when its density is uniform. If we 
disturb it from equilibrium, the resulting pressure imbalances will provide springlike 
restoring forces. These forces, together with air’s inertia, lead to rhythmic vibrations—the 
vibrations of harmonic oscillators. In open air, the most basic vibrations are waves that 
move steadily in a particular direction and are therefore called traveling waves. Like the 
standing waves inside an organ pipe, the traveling waves in open air are longitudinal—air 
vibrates along the same direction as the sound wave travels.
As it moves through the open air, a basic traveling sound wave consists of an 
alternating pattern of high-density regions we’ll call crests and low-density regions 
we’ll call troughs (Fig. 9.2.12). While those names will seem more appropriate when 
we examine water surface waves in the next section, it’s customary to refer to the 
alternating highs and lows of any wave as crests and troughs, respectively. Whether a 
wave is standing or traveling, the shortest distance between two adjacent crests is 
known as the wavelength.
A standing wave’s crests and troughs merely fl ip back and forth in place, crests becom-
ing troughs and troughs becoming crests. However, a traveling wave’s crests and troughs 
move steadily in a particular direction at a particular speed. The speed and direction of 
travel together constitute the traveling wave’s wave velocity.
Figure 9.2.13 shows fi ve snapshots of a simple sound wave that’s heading toward the 
right. If we watch air’s density at the same point in space (green line), it begins as a crest 
(a), decreases (b) to a trough (c), then rises (d) back to a crest (e) during one complete 
vibration cycle. However, if we follow the same crest (red line) over time, it travels one 
wavelength to the right during one complete vibration cycle (a–e). Since a crest moves 
one wavelength per vibration cycle and frequency is the number of vibration cycles per 
second, the speed at which the crest moves is equal to the wavelength times the frequency. 
That relationship can be written as a word equation:
 
wave speed = wavelength · frequency, 
(9.2.1)
in symbols:
s = 𝜆𝜈,
and in everyday language:
Broad waves that vibrate quickly travel fast.
Remarkably enough, all sound waves travel at the same speed through air, regardless 
of wavelength or frequency. That’s because as a sound wave’s wavelength increases, its 
crests travel farther during one cycle of vibration but that cycle also takes longer. The two 
changes balance one another, so the crests travel at the same speed. Longer wavelengths 
lead to slower vibrations because broadening out the pressure variations in the sound wave 
weakens its restoring forces. With softer restoring forces and the same inertia (that is, its 
density), the air vibrates more slowly as the wavelength increases.
Equation 9.2.1 thus yields the same wave speed for any sound wave. Known as the 
speed of sound in air, it’s about 331 m/s (1086 ft/s) under standard conditions at sea level 
(0 °C, 101, 325 Pa pressure). Although that’s fast, there is still a noticeable delay between 
when a percussionist strikes the cymbals and when you hear them from across the concert 
Wave (crest) velocity
Wavelength
High density (crest)
Low density (trough)
Fig. 9.2.12 A traveling 
sound wave in air consists 
of a washboard pattern of 
high-density (blue) and low-
density (white) regions. The 
distance separating adjacent 
crests is the wavelength, 
and the speed and direction 
of crest motion are the wave 
velocity.
Start
1/4 cycle
1/2 cycle
3/4 cycle
1 cycle
Same point
Same crest
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Wavelength
Wave velocity
Fig. 9.2.13 A sound wave 
at fi ve evenly spaced times 
(a–e) showing one complete 
cycle of oscillation. During 
that cycle, the pressure at a 
specifi c point in space goes 
from high to low to high 
(green line), and a specifi c 
crest moves 1 wavelength 
to the right (red line).

252 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
hall. Fortunately, because the speed of sound doesn’t depend on frequency, when the entire 
orchestra plays in unison you hear all its different pitches simultaneously.
This discussion of sound assumes that the instruments and listener maintain a constant 
separation, as they usually do at an orchestra concert. However, when a marching band 
steps quickly toward or away from the listener, something odd happens: the listener hears 
its music shifted up or down in pitch. Known as the Doppler effect, this frequency shift 
occurs because the listener encounters sound wave crests at a rate that’s different from the 
rate at which those crests were created. If an instrument and the listener are approaching 
one another, the listener encounters the crests at an increased rate and the pitch increases. 
If the two are moving away from one another, the listener encounters the crests at a 
decreased rate and the pitch decreases. Fortunately, the Doppler effect is subtle at speeds 
that are small compared to the speed of sound, so you can listen to parades without their 
sounding fl at or sharp.
Check Your Understanding #8: Sounds Faster
Helium in a toy balloon has the same stiffness as ordinary air, but its density and inertia are smaller. 
How does this difference affect the speed of sound in helium?
Answer: Sound travels faster in helium than it does in ordinary air.
Why: With its reduced density and inertia, helium vibrates faster than air when the two gases carry 
sound waves of equal wavelengths. Since the speed at which sound of a specifi c wavelength travels 
is proportional to the frequency of that sound, the wave speed in helium is greater than that in air.
Check Your Figures #1: Underwater Sound
Although water is about 800 times as dense as ordinary air, water is also about 15,000 times as stiff 
and its sound vibrations therefore have increased frequencies relative to those in air. When two sound 
waves have equal wavelengths, the wave in water has a frequency about 4.3 times greater than the 
wave in air. What is the speed of sound in water?
Answer: The speed of sound in water is about 1420 m/s (4700 ft/s).
Why: From Eq. 9.2.1, the wave speed in water must be 4.3 times the wave speed in air. Since the 
sound waves have a wave speed of about 331 m/s in air, they must have a speed of about 331 m/s 
times 4.3 or 1420 m/s in water.
Turning Vibrations into Sound
Anything that disturbs air’s otherwise uniform density can produce traveling sound waves. 
Instruments emit sound by compressing and rarefying the nearby air in synch with their 
own vibrations. How they accomplish this task differs from instrument to instrument, so 
we’ll have to look at them individually. As we’ll see, some instruments fi nd it easier to 
produce sound than others.
A drum produces sound when its vibrating drumhead alternately compresses and rar-
efi es the nearby air. As portions of that drumhead rise and fall, they upset the air’s uniform 
density and thereby produce sound waves. Whenever it can, though, air simply fl ows 
silently out of the drumhead’s way, leading to smaller density fl uctuations and less intense 
sound. For example, when the drumhead is experiencing one of the fi ve overtone vibrations 
shown in Fig. 9.2.11, air fl ows away from each rising peak in the undulating surface and 
toward each falling valley. The overtone vibrations still manage to produce sound, but it’s 
less intense and the vibrational energy in the drumhead transforms relatively ineffi ciently 
into sound energy.
Air’s partial success in dodging the drumhead’s overtone vibrations allows those 
overtones to complete many vibrational cycles before running out of vibrational 

Musical Instruments 253
energy. Their vibrations are therefore long-lived and have distinct pitches. In contrast, 
air has diffi culty dodging the drumhead’s fundamental vibrational mode, which alter-
nately compresses and rarefi es the air so effectively that it transfers all its vibrational 
energy to the air in just a few cycles. That’s why the fundamental vibrational mode of 
a drumhead produces the intense and nearly pitchless “thump” sound that we associate 
with a drum.
If air can dodge a vibrating surface, it can certainly dodge a vibrating string. Little 
of a violin’s sound comes directly from its vibrating strings; the air simply skirts 
around them. Instead, the violin creates sound with its top plate, or belly (Fig. 9.2.14). 
The strings transfer their vibrational motions to the belly and the belly pushes on the 
air to create sound.
Most of this vibrational energy fl ows into the belly through the violin’s bridge, 
which holds the strings away from the violin’s body (Fig. 9.2.15). Beneath the G3-string 
side of the bridge is the bass bar, a long wooden strip that stiffens the belly. Beneath the 
E5-string side of the bridge is the sound post, a shaft that extends from the violin’s belly 
to its back.
As a bowed string vibrates across the violin’s belly, it exerts a torque on the bridge 
about the sound post. The bridge rotates back and forth, causing the bass bar and belly to 
move in and out. The belly’s motion produces most of the violin’s sound. Some of this 
sound comes directly from the belly’s outer surface, and the rest comes from its inner sur-
face and must emerge through its S-shaped holes.
An organ pipe doesn’t have to produce sound because that sound already exists. In 
effect, the pipe’s vibrating column of air is a standing sound wave that gradually leaks out 
of the pipe as a traveling one. Trapped sound is escaping from its container.
This conversion of a standing wave into a traveling wave isn’t so remarkable because 
the two types of waves are closely related. The pipe’s standing wave can be thought of as a 
refl ected traveling wave, a traveling wave that’s bouncing back and forth between the two 
ends of the pipe. Because of the refl ections, the traveling wave is superposed with itself 
heading in the opposite direction, and the sum of two equal but oppositely directed travel-
ing waves is a standing wave!
The fact that sound refl ects from the open end of an organ pipe is rather surprising. If 
that end were closed, you’d probably expect a refl ection. After all, sound echoes from cliffs 
and other rigid surfaces. But sound partially refl ects from a surprising range of other tran-
sitions, including the transition from inside a pipe to outside it. If you don’t believe that, 
clap your hands inside a long pipe and listen for the decaying echoes.
The refl ections at the organ pipe’s open ends aren’t perfect, so the trapped sound 
wave gradually leaks out and becomes the sound you hear. This process of letting a 
standing sound wave emerge slowly as a traveling wave is typical of woodwind and 
brass instruments. The refl ection at an open pipe end depends on the shape of that end. 
Flaring it into the horn shape common in brass instruments reduces the refl ection and 
eases the transition from standing wave to traveling wave. That’s why horns project 
sound so well.
Fig. 9.2.14 A violin’s 
bridge transfers energy 
from its vibrating strings to 
its belly. The belly moves 
in and out, emitting sound. 
Some of this sound leaves 
the violin through the 
S-holes in its body.
Bridge
Sound
post
Bass bar
Fig. 9.2.15 The bridge 
is supported by the bass 
bar on one side and the 
sound post on the other. 
As the strings vibrate 
back and forth, the bridge 
experiences a torque that 
causes the belly of the 
violin to move in and out 
and emit sound.
Check Your Understanding #9: Air Guitar
Why does an acoustic guitar have a sound box?
Answer: The sound box transfers the vibrational energy of the strings to the air.
Why: Guitar strings are too narrow to push effectively on the air and emit sound. They do better by 
transferring their energy to the body of the acoustic guitar so that its fl at surfaces can push on the 
air. An electric guitar avoids the need for a sound box by converting the string’s vibrations directly 
into electric currents and from there into movements of an audio speaker.

254 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
The Tides
If you watch the sea for a few days, you’ll notice the tides. In a cycle as old as the oceans 
themselves, the water level rises for about 6¼ hours to reach high tide, drops for about 6¼ 
hours to arrive at low tide, and then begins rising again. Once a wonderful mystery, we now 
know that the tides are caused by Earth’s rotation, the moon’s gravity, and, to a lesser 
extent, the sun’s gravity.
On Earth, the moon’s gravity is so weak that we normally don’t notice it. The moon is 
far away, and as we learned in Section 4.2, gravity diminishes with distance. But this 
dependence on distance also means that the moon’s gravity is stronger on one side of Earth 
than the other; you experience a stronger pull when you’re on the side of Earth nearest the 
moon than you do when you’re on the side opposite it (Fig. 9.3.1). Although you can’t feel 
these variations in moon gravity yourself, Earth’s oceans respond to them. The oceans are 
deformed by the moon’s gravity (Fig. 9.3.2), and this deformation produces the tides.
The differences between the moon’s gravity at particular locations on Earth and its 
average strength for the entire Earth give rise to tidal forces, residual gravitational forces 
that act to displace those locations relative to Earth as a whole. The near side of Earth is 
pulled toward the moon more strongly than average, so it experiences a tidal force toward 
the moon. The far side of Earth is pulled less strongly than average, so it experiences a tidal 
force away from the moon.
If Earth were less rigid, these tidal forces would stretch it into an egg shape. The near 
side of Earth would bulge outward toward the moon, while the far side of Earth would 
bulge outward away from the moon. But while Earth itself is too stiff to deform much, the 
oceans are not and they bulge outward in response to the tidal forces. Two tidal bulges 
appear: one closest to the moon and one farthest from the moon (Fig. 9.3.2). The near-side 
bulge develops because the water there tries to fall toward the moon faster than Earth does 
as a whole. The far-side bulge forms because water there tries to fall toward the moon 
SECTION 9.3
the same speed? How deep is a wave? Why do waves break 
near shore? Why do waves always seem to head almost directly 
toward shore? Why is there often a rhythm to the surf?
Experiments to Do: Although you can make water waves in a 
basin or tub, they move too quickly for you to see them clearly. 
You would do better to watch waves at the beach. On a calm 
day, the sea is in its fl at equilibrium shape—but when the 
wind picks up, look out. How does wind affect the sea’s sur-
face? If water waves contain energy, where does that energy 
come from and what forms does it take in the water?
 
Watch a fl oating object move as a wave passes it. Does the 
object travel with the wave? Does the water itself travel with the 
wave? Can you think of other cases in which a disturbance 
moves steadily forward but the material carrying the distur-
bance remains behind?
 
Now watch as waves break near the shore. If you look 
around at different beaches, you’ll fi nd waves breaking in two 
different ways. In some cases a wave will simply collapse into 
churning froth, while in others its top will dive forward over the 
water ahead of it. Can you see anything about the beaches or 
water that might account for this difference?
The sea is never still. If you’ve visited the seashore, you’ve prob-
ably noticed two of the sea’s most important motions: tides and 
surface waves. In this section, we’ll examine the cycle of tides 
and look at how surface waves travel across water. These water 
waves can help us understand other wave phenomena, includ-
ing the electromagnetic waves that are responsible for light and 
the density waves that are the basis for sound.
Questions to Think About: Why do the tides vary in height 
from place to place? Why are there no signifi cant tides in a 
lake or swimming pool? Why does high tide occur about every 
12 hours? What moves in a water wave? Do all waves travel at 
The Sea
Breaking crest
Trough
Moon
Moon’s 
gravity
Earth
Fig. 9.3.1 The moon’s 
gravity varies over the 
surface of Earth. The closer 
a point is to the moon, 
the stronger the gravity it 
experiences. This variation 
in the moon’s gravity 
produces the tides.

The Sea 255
slower than Earth does as a whole. A beach located in one of these tidal bulges experiences 
high tide, while one in the ring of ocean between the bulges experiences low tide.
As Earth rotates, the locations of the two tidal bulges move westward around the 
equator. Since a particular beach experiences high tide whenever it’s closest to or farthest 
from the moon, the full cycle from high to low to high tide occurs about once every 12 h and 
24.4 min. The extra 24.4 min refl ects the fact that the moon isn’t stationary; it orbits Earth 
and completes a lunar month (the time it takes for the moon to orbit Earth) every 29.53 days. 
The moon thus passes overhead once every 24 h and 48.8 min, rather than every 24 h.
The moon isn’t the only source of tidal forces on Earth’s oceans. Although the sun is 
much farther away from Earth than the moon is, it’s so massive that the tidal forces it exerts 
are almost half as large as those exerted by the moon. The sun’s principal effect is to 
increase or decrease the strength of the tides caused by the moon (Fig. 9.3.3). When the 
moon and the sun are aligned with one another, their tidal forces add together and produce 
extra large tidal bulges. When the moon and the sun are at right angles to one another, their 
tidal forces partially cancel and produce tidal bulges that are unusually small. Twice each 
lunar month, the tides are particularly strong. These spring tides occur whenever the moon 
and sun are aligned with one another (full moon and new moon). Twice each lunar month 
the tides are particularly weak. These neap tides occur whenever the moon and sun are at 
right angles to one another (half moon).
Because of this interplay between lunar and solar tidal effects, the cycle of tides varies 
slightly from day to day. While the average cycle is 12 h and 24.4 min, it fl uctuates over a lunar 
month. Moreover, the exact moment of high or low tide at a particular location is infl uenced by 
water’s inertia, Earth’s rotation, and the environment through which water must fl ow to form 
the tidal bulge. This variation is why shore areas often publish tables of the local tides.
Moon
High
tide
High
tide
Low tide
Water
Low tide
Fig. 9.3.2 Variations in the moon’s gravity produce tidal 
forces on Earth’s surface and cause Earth’s oceans to bulge 
outward in two places. These bulges, which are located 
nearest and farthest from the moon, move over Earth’s 
surface as it rotates.
Check Your Understanding #1: Seaside Vacations of the Tidal Rich
The Atlantic and Pacifi c oceans come very close to one another in Central America. If the Atlantic 
side of this isthmus is experiencing high tide, what tide is the Pacifi c side experiencing?
Answer: It is experiencing high tide, too.
Why: When the Atlantic side of the Central American isthmus is experiencing high tide, there is a 
tidal bulge over all of Central America. Both sides of the isthmus experience the same (high) tide.
Tidal Resonances
The sizes of the tides depend on where you are, but high tide is typically a meter or two 
above low tide. Because the tidal bulges are located near the equator, tides far to the north or 
south are smaller than that; tides in isolated lakes or seas are smaller still because water can’t 
fl ow in to create the bulges. However, there are a few special places that have enormous 
tides. For example, tides in the Bay of Fundy, an estuary between New Brunswick and Nova 
Scotia, can change the water level by as much as 15 m. How can tides ever get this large?
Giant tides result from natural resonances in channels and estuaries. Just as air in an 
organ pipe can be made to vibrate strongly by a series of carefully timed pushes from a 
pump, water in a channel or estuary can be made to oscillate strongly by a series of carefully 
Moon
Neap tide (Day 0)
Sun
Earth
Moon
Spring tide (Day 7)
Sun
Earth
Moon
Neap tide (Day 14)
Sun
Earth
Spring tide (Day 21)
Sun
Earth Moon
Fig. 9.3.3 The tides vary 
over a lunar month. They’re 
strongest when the sun 
and the moon are aligned 
(spring tides) and weakest 
when they are at 90° from 
one another (neap tides).

256 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
timed pushes from the tides. The water in that channel is another extended object with a 
stable equilibrium, so it will oscillate about its equilibrium after being disturbed. Giant 
tides occur through resonant energy transfer when the cycle of the tides gradually builds up 
the amplitude of a suitable standing wave in a channel.
However, while standing waves in an organ pipe involve the column of air as a whole, 
standing waves in a channel involve primarily the water’s open surface. That water is at 
equilibrium when its surface is smooth and horizontal, and it experiences springlike restor-
ing forces whenever its surface is disturbed. For the broad waves we’re considering in this 
section, those restoring forces are due to gravity and they are known as gravity waves. For 
the miniature waves in a small drinking glass, however, water’s springy, elastic surface 
contributes signifi cantly to the restoring forces. Waves that involve this surface tension are 
known as capillary waves.
You can observe standing gravity waves on the surface of a large cup of coffee. As you 
walk with the cup in hand and jostle it back and forth rhythmically, you’ll produce gravity 
waves on the coffee’s surface. If you time your walking motion so that it’s synchronized 
with the natural rhythm of a particular standing wave, you’ll build up the amplitude of that 
wave by resonant energy transfer and may fi nd yourself needing a change of clothes. Sim-
ilar gravity-wave resonances occur in washbasins and bathtubs, phenomena that children 
fi nd particularly amusing—to the dismay of their parents and the delight of people who 
repair water-damaged fl oors and ceilings.
Like standing waves on violin strings and drumheads, standing surface waves on 
water are transverse—the water’s vertical surface vibrations are perpendicular to the hori-
zontal waves themselves. In a basin, the fundamental vibrational mode (Fig. 9.3.4) has a 
node along the middle of the basin and antinodes at either end. At one antinode, water arcs 
up to a crest—a maximum upward displacement from equilibrium. At the other antinodes, 
water arcs down to a trough—a maximum downward displacement from equilibrium. Over 
time, the crest drops to become a trough, while the trough rises to become a crest. That 
process reverses and then repeats, over and over again until the sloshing water turns all its 
vibrational energy into thermal energy or transfers it elsewhere.
The giant tides at the end of an estuary are simply the antinode of a standing wave 
fl uctuating up and down between a crest and a trough. While the standing waves in an 
ordinary washbasin have periods measured in seconds or less, large bodies of water can 
sustain standing waves known as seiches that have periods of minutes or even hours. These 
standing waves appear throughout the oceans and signifi cantly affect the heights and tim-
ings of the tides almost everywhere on Earth.
Water in the Bay of Fundy has a fundamental seiche mode with a period of roughly 
13.3 hours. Because this period nearly matches the 12.5-hour cycle of the tides, there’s a 
resonant transfer of energy from the moon to the water oscillating in the estuary. The tides 
drive water back and forth in this estuary until, after many cycles, that water is moving so 
strongly that its height varies dramatically with time (Fig. 9.3.5).
Trough
Crest
Water flow
Trough
Crest
Node
Equilibrium level
Water flow
Water flow
Fig. 9.3.4 Water 
sloshing in a basin in its 
fundamental mode. Its 
surface oscillates up and 
down, its crest becoming a 
trough and vice versa, over 
and over again.
© Everett Johnson/eStock Photo
Fig. 9.3.5 The giant tides in the Bay of Fundy can cause its water level to change by as much as 15 m 
between high and low tide.

The Sea 257
Traveling Waves on the Surface of Water
As you sit at the seashore on a cloudless day, enjoying a warm, steady breeze, you can’t 
help but notice that the sea in front of you is covered with ridges. These ridges move stead-
ily toward land and fi nally crash on the beach. Though it’s customary to think of each 
breaking swell as a separate wave, we’ll fi nd it useful to view the entire moving pattern of 
evenly spaced ridges as a single wave—a traveling surface wave on water.
Traveling surface waves are the basic modes of oscillation on the open ocean, the 
simplest waves on that effectively limitless surface. Despite their steady progress across 
the water, these traveling waves actually involve oscillation. You can see this oscillation by 
watching a fi xed point on the water’s surface. That point fl uctuates up and down as the 
crests and troughs of a traveling wave pass through it. The period of this oscillation is 
the time required for one full cycle of rise and fall, and the frequency is the number of 
crests passing through that fi xed point each second.
The ocean’s surface can host an incredible variety of traveling waves, each moving in 
its own direction with its own period and frequency. Moreover, these basic waves can coex-
ist, adding together on the ocean’s surface to create ever more complicated patterns. Like 
the pure tones of many fl utes, which when blended together in proper proportions imitate 
the richer timbres of oboes and violins and which when blended still further can produce 
any possible pattern of sound, traveling waves can be superposed in proper proportions to 
produce any possible surface pattern or wave. When the ocean is rough and its surface 
features are ripples layered on swells layered on broad undulations, you’re seeing this 
superposition of “pure tone” traveling waves in all its glory.
In contrast, the basic modes of oscillation on a channel or lake are standing surface 
waves—the simplest waves on that limited surface. In a standing wave, the water’s surface 
oscillates up and down vertically, with its crests and troughs interchanging periodically: 
crests become troughs and troughs become crests. The standing wave’s pattern of crests and 
troughs doesn’t move anywhere; it simply fl ips up and down in place at a certain frequency.
On their limited surface, these standing waves can be superposed to produce any pos-
sible surface pattern or wave, so they, too, are like primary colors. Overall, traveling waves 
constitute the primary palette of waves for a limitless ocean, and standing waves constitute 
the primary palette of waves for a limited channel or lake.
STANDING AND TRAVELING WAVES
The most basic waves on an extended object of limited dimensions are standing waves. 
With their different periods and/or patterns, these standing waves can be superposed 
to form any possible wave on that limited object.
The most basic waves on an extended object of limitless dimensions are traveling 
waves. With their different periods and/or directions of travel, these traveling waves 
can be superposed to form any possible wave on that limitless object.
Check Your Understanding #2: Potential Profi ts
People occasionally propose using giant tides to generate electric power, but there’s a problem with 
this idea. If you extracted all the gravitational potential energy from the water at high tide in the Bay 
of Fundy, how long would it take for a giant high tide to appear again?
Answer: It would take many days.
Why: The sloshing water in the Bay of Fundy acquires its energy via resonant energy transfer. The 
tides do work on the water, slowly increasing its energy over many cycles of its periodic motion. Since 
each cycle takes half a day, many days are required to build up the energy needed for a giant tide. If 
you were to extract all this stored energy at once, the bay would have to start sloshing all over again. 
A small power plant that extracts only a tiny portion of the stored energy each cycle is possible, how-
ever, and one such plant is actually in operation.

258 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
Actually, we’ve seen these ideas before in the context of musical instruments and 
sound. Since instruments are limited objects, their basic vibrations are standing waves—
the fundamental and overtone vibrations. And because air is effectively limitless, its basic 
vibrations are traveling waves—the sound waves it carries. The timbre of an instrument 
reveals the superposition of its many standing waves, while the full sound of an orchestra 
or band displays the superposition of its many traveling waves.
Both standing and traveling water surface waves carry energy—energy that they typ-
ically obtain from the wind, the tide, and occasionally seismic activity. Each wave’s energy 
consists of kinetic energy in moving water and gravitational potential energy in water that 
has been displaced from its level equilibrium.
In a standing wave, the energy of the entire wave fl uctuates back and forth between 
kinetic and gravitational potential; the wave’s kinetic energy peaks as the surface rushes 
through its level equilibrium, and its potential energy peaks as the surface stops to turn 
around at its maximum displacement from equilibrium.
A traveling wave’s crests and troughs move steadily forward, so the water is never 
level or motionless. The energy in a traveling wave is therefore always an even mixture of 
kinetic and potential energies. Also, because of its directed motion, a traveling wave carries 
momentum pointing in the same direction as the wave velocity.
Check Your Understanding #3: The Frequency of Seasickness
You’re sitting in a small boat on the open ocean, rising and falling with each passing wave crest. How 
could you measure the frequency of the wave passing under your boat?
Answer: Count the number of up and down cycles you complete in a certain amount of time.
Why: Your boat’s up and down motion is caused by the oscillation of the ocean’s surface. You are 
rising and falling at the frequency of the passing wave.
The Structure of a Water Wave
We’ve seen that a traveling surface wave moves across the open ocean with a certain veloc-
ity, wavelength, and frequency. But what is the water itself doing as the wave passes?
You can begin to answer that question by watching a bottle fl oating on the water’s 
surface (Fig. 9.3.6). As a wave passes it, that bottle rises and falls with the crests and 
troughs, but it makes no overall progress in any direction. Instead, the bottle travels in a 
circle. Like the bottle, the water itself doesn’t actually move along with the passing wave. 
Although this water bunches up to create each crest and spreads out to create each trough, 
it returns to its starting point once the wave has left.
Like the bottle in Fig. 9.3.6, a patch of water on the ocean’s surface moves in a circular 
pattern (Fig. 9.3.7) as a traveling wave passes. Water that starts out on top of a crest moves 
down and forward as the crest departs. It moves down and backward as the trough arrives, 
then up and backward as the trough departs, and fi nally up and forward as the next crest 
arrives. When it reaches the top of the arriving crest, this water is back where it started on 
Wave (crest) velocity
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 9.3.6 You can see that water doesn’t move with a wave by watching a bottle fl oating on the 
water. The bottle moves in a circle as each crest passes by. Starting at (a) a crest, the bottle moves 
(b) down and right, (c) down and left, (d) up and left, and then (e) up and right. It returns to its original 
position just as the next crest arrives.

The Sea 259
the ocean’s surface. Which way the water circles depends on the wave velocity’s direc-
tion—the wave’s direction of travel. The water at the top of a crest always moves in the 
same direction as the wave itself.
It isn’t only the surface water that moves; water beneath the surface also circles. How-
ever, the circles diminish in radius gradually with depth and become negligible at a depth 
roughly equal to half the wave’s wavelength. Thus although it’s called a surface wave, it 
has a depth to it and therefore a sensitivity to shallow water, as we’ll soon see.
‘These surface waves have another interesting characteristic—their wave speed 
increases with wavelength. As you may have noticed, long-wavelength swells travel faster 
than short-wavelength ripples. That’s quite different from sound waves, which all have the 
same wave speed regardless of wavelength.
Such dependence of wave speed on wavelength is known as dispersion. It occurs in 
this case because water’s surface is surprisingly stiff when carrying long-wavelength 
waves. Unlike a taut violin string, which opposes short-wavelength distortions much more 
stiffl y than long-wavelength ones, water’s surface uses its weight to oppose long-wavelength 
disturbances almost as vigorously as it opposes short-wavelength ones. That heightened 
stiffness for long-wavelength waves boosts their frequencies and therefore increases their 
wave speeds (see Eq. 9.2.1).
Little ripples have short wavelengths and travel slowly, while large ocean swells have 
long wavelengths and travel much more rapidly. Giant waves produced by earthquakes and 
volcanic eruptions, known as tsunamis, have extremely long wavelengths and can travel at 
hundreds of kilometers per hour. Because these giant waves travel so fast and move water 
so deep in the ocean, they carry enormous amounts of energy and momentum and are 
potentially disastrous to shore areas (Fig. 9.3.8).
Wave velocity
Loop diameter
decreases
downward
Wave base
Wavelength
Negligible motion
at depth equal to
wavelength/2
Fig. 9.3.7 Surface water 
moves in a circular motion 
as a wave passes. The 
water currently located at 
each dark dot will follow 
the circular path outlined 
around it as time passes. 
The circles are largest at 
the surface and become 
relatively insignifi cant once 
you look more than half 
a wavelength below the 
surface. The sense of the 
circular motion (clockwise 
or counterclockwise) 
determines the direction 
in which the wave travels. 
This wave travels toward 
the right.
Check Your Understanding #4: Beneath the Waves
If you’re swimming and want to dive beneath a wave, how deep must you go to avoid any signifi cant 
motion in the water?
Answer: You must dive about half a wavelength beneath the water’s surface.
Why: A wave causes motion in the water up to a depth of roughly half its wavelength. A typical wave 
has a wavelength of about 5 m, so you must dive 2.5 m under water before the water will remain 
essentially still.

260 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
Waves at the Shore
As a wave approaches the shore, it begins to travel through shallow water. Since the water’s 
circular motion extends below the surface, there comes a point at which the wave begins to 
encounter the seabed. Once the water is shallower than half the wavelength of the wave, the 
seabed distorts the water’s circular motion so that it becomes elliptical.
That change has a number of interesting effects on the wave. First, its wave speed 
gradually decreases so that the crests begin to bunch together. Second, its amplitude (the 
height of its crests and depth of its troughs) increases as the wave acts to keep its overall 
forward momentum constant despite its decrease in speed. These two effects explain why 
waves that look broad and gradual on the open ocean look quite steep and dangerous nearer 
the beach. Their crests have bunched together and grown taller, so the slopes between crests 
and troughs really have become steeper.
A third effect of the shallowing water is a gradual change in the wave’s direction of 
travel. Known as refraction, this bending occurs whenever a wave’s speed changes as it 
passes from one environment to another. Since a water surface wave slows as it approaches 
the shore, that wave refracts—it bends—so as to head more directly toward the shore (Fig. 
9.3.9). Because of refraction, waves approach the beach almost perpendicular to it, even if 
they were traveling at relatively oblique angles far from shore.
A fourth and fi nal effect is the destruction of the wave—it eventually runs out of water 
and crashes onto the beach. The wave builds each of its crests using local water. When the 
crest enters very shallow water, there isn’t enough water in front of it to construct its for-
ward side. The crest becomes incomplete and begins to “break.”
The form of its demise depends on the slope of the seabed. If that slope is gradual, the 
wave breaks slowly to form a smooth, rolling, “boiling” surf (Fig. 9.3.10). However, if the 
slope of the seabed is steep, the wave breaks quickly by having the top of its crest plunge 
forward over the trough in front of it (Fig. 9.3.11). The steep slope essentially prevents the 
forward half of the crest from forming. The rearward half continues through its normal 
circular motion and dives over the missing half-crest in front of it.
The wave can avoid this violent end by colliding with a seawall or cliff instead of a 
beach. Rather than breaking, the wave will then bounce off the wall and continue on in a new 
direction. Known as refl ection, this bouncing effect occurs whenever a wave would have to 
change signifi cantly to cross a boundary. In this case, the water actually ends at the rigid 
wall, so the wave simply cannot cross that boundary and must refl ect instead. The refl ecting 
wave passes back over itself, and as it does, what had been a traveling wave develops some 
standing-wave character—a consequence of the wall’s limiting the surface of the sea.
Fig. 9.3.8 The Indian Ocean 
tsunami of December 26, 
2004, was initiated by a sudden 
rise in the ocean fl oor off the 
northern coast of Sumatra. 
This long-wavelength traveling 
wave moved so quickly through 
the surrounding Indian Ocean 
that most shore inhabitants 
received no warning and were 
caught unprepared. Moreover, 
the wave’s phenomenal troughs 
exposed vast stretches of seabed, 
attracting inquisitive people 
offshore, where they were then 
unprotected from the destructive 
crests that followed. Roughly a 
quarter million people perished.
© Reuters/Corbis Images
Beach
Shallow
water
Deep
water
Wave velocity
Fig. 9.3.9 When a 
traveling water surface 
wave encounters shallow 
water, it slows down and its 
direction of travel changes. 
This refraction process 
bends the wave velocity so 
that it points more directly 
toward the beach.

The Sea 261
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Fig. 9.3.10 When the 
slope of the sea bottom 
is very gradual, the wave 
crests crumble gently into 
rolling surf.
Wave becomes
higher and
steeper
Breaking
wave
Swash
Beach
Shallow
water
Wave ﬁrst
"feels bottom"
here
Loops deformed
by conﬁned
space
Turbulent
water
Looplike motion
Deep water
Wave base = wavelength/2
Fig. 9.3.11 When the water becomes too shallow to form a complete crest for the wave, the wave 
“breaks.” If the slope of the shore is steep enough, the crest will be quite incomplete on its shore side 
and will plunge forward over the trough in front of it.
© Sean Davey/Aurora Photos, Inc.

262 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
Less severe changes in how a wave travels on opposite sides of a boundary can also 
make that wave refl ect from the boundary, if only partially. Thus when a water surface wave 
passes over a sandbar or coral reef and its wave speed changes, it may experience both 
partial refl ection and refraction. These effects contribute to the complicated dynamics of 
waves near the shore.
Check Your Understanding #5: Out Past the Surf
As you swim away from shore at the ocean, you go through a region where the wave crests are 
breaking and then reach a more distant region where they don’t break. What distinguishes the two 
regions?
Answer: The breaking region is too shallow for complete crests to form. The nonbreaking region is 
deep enough to form complete crests.
Why: Wave crests break in shallow regions, where complete crests can’t be formed. As long as the 
water is deep enough, the waves travel intact. However, if there is a shallow region such as a sandbar, 
even quite far from shore, the crests may break as the wave passes through it.
The Rhythm of the Surf: Wave Interference
If the ocean were carrying only one pure traveling wave toward shore, every breaking swell 
would look and sound the same. However, there is often a complicated rhythm to the crash-
ing surf; its loudness fl uctuates with an overall pattern known as surf beat. Surf beat is a 
sign that the ocean’s surface is a busy place; it’s actually carrying more than one traveling 
wave at a time, and these various waves all contribute to the surf.
To understand how multiple traveling waves produce surf beat, let’s consider a 
simple case. Suppose that two traveling waves are heading toward shore and that they 
have equal amplitudes but different wavelengths (Fig. 9.3.12). Such a situation can eas-
ily arise when winds over two portions of the ocean produce two different traveling 
waves that later overlap. Since they are sharing the ocean’s surface, they are superposed 
on one another.
Because these traveling waves are different, their patterns of crests and troughs 
can’t coincide everywhere. Instead, these waves experience interference, their overly-
ing patterns enhance one another at some locations and cancel one another at other 
locations. Wherever the two waves are in phase, that is, whenever their crests or troughs 
coincide, they experience constructive interference—the waves act together to pro-
duce enormous crests or troughs. Wherever the two waves are out of phase, that is, 
whenever the crest of one wave coincides with the trough of the other wave, they exper-
ience destructive interference—the waves oppose one another to produce muted or 
absent crests or troughs.
The result is an interference pattern, an intricate structure that spreads across space 
and time when waves are superposed. This interference pattern on the ocean’s surface 
moves and evolves as the traveling waves head toward shore, and it leaves its impression 
Destructive interference
Constructive interference
Waves A+B (superposed)
Wave B (short-wavelength)
Wave A (long-wavelength)
Fig. 9.3.12 When two traveling waves A and B are 
superposed on the surface of the ocean, they produce 
interference pattern A + B. As this moving pattern encounters 
the shore, its varying crest heights give rise to surf beat.

The Sea 263
on the crests that eventually break on the beach. Since these crests are no longer equal in 
height, they exhibit the complicated rhythm of surf beat. When you listen to that beat, 
you’re hearing the consequence of superposition and the interference of waves.
Of course, the real ocean carries many traveling waves, each with its own amp-
litude, wavelength, and direction of travel. But no matter how complicated the ocean’s 
surface or how intricate the surface beat, you are still just observing the interference of 
waves.
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT WAVE PHENOMENA
Refl ection: The complete or partial mirror redirection of a wave that occurs when certain 
dynamical properties of that wave, particularly its speed, change abruptly as it passes 
from one environment to another.
Refraction: The bending of a wave that occurs when that wave’s speed changes as it 
passes from one environment to another.
Dispersion: The dependence of a wave’s speed on its wavelength.
Interference: The interaction of two or more waves when they are superposed; their 
crests and troughs can enhance one another (constructive interference) or cancel 
one another (destructive interference) and can produce an interference pattern.
Check Your Understanding #6: Sound Beats
Many notes on a piano are played by two or even three separate strings. If those strings aren’t tuned 
to exactly the same pitch, the resulting sound has a pulsing character—it grows louder and softer 
rhythmically. What causes this strange pulsation or beat?
Answer: The slightly different sound waves produced by the separate strings are experiencing 
interference.
Why: Like slightly different water waves, slightly different sound waves exhibit interference effects. 
The resulting pulsation refl ects alternating constructive and destructive interference between the 
sound waves with slightly different pitches.
Epilogue for Chapter 9
In this chapter, we have looked at natural resonances in a variety of objects. In Clocks, we 
examined resonances in pendulums, balance rings, and quartz crystals, and we found that 
these objects are harmonic oscillators—their restoring forces are proportional to displace-
ment. As such, these timekeepers have periods that don’t depend on the amplitudes of 
their motions.
In Musical Instruments, we explored the vibrations of strings and air columns and 
found that they, too, behave as harmonic oscillators, but with many modes of vibration 
and thus more complicated behaviors. We found that we could view their motions as 
waves.
In The Sea, we further explored two different types of waves: standing waves and 
traveling waves. We saw that both types of waves are found in water, with standing waves 
appearing in tidal resonances and traveling waves heading out over the open ocean.
Explanation: A Singing Wineglass
Rubbing the lip of the glass is similar to bowing a violin string; both procedures cause 
resonant energy transfer. Your fi nger alternately pushes on the glass and then slips, 

264 
CHAPTER 9 Resonance and Mechanical Waves
helping the glass itself to vibrate back and forth beneath your fi nger in its fundamental 
vibrational mode. As the glass begins to vibrate, your fi nger does a little work on it each 
time the glass is moving in the same direction as your fi nger. Once the glass is singing 
loudly, you can keep it singing by circling your fi nger steadily around the glass. Although 
the glass continues to emit its energy as sound, you keep giving it more energy by doing 
work on it with your fi nger. Adding more water to the glass increases its inertia and slows 
its vibrations.
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Clocks Work: Clocks are usually based on harmonic oscillators because of their ex-
tremely steady periods. Most important, the period of a harmonic oscillator doesn’t depend on 
the amplitude of its motion. Common harmonic oscillator timekeepers include pendulums, 
balance rings, and quartz crystals.
 
In a pendulum clock, a swinging pendulum controls the rotation of a toothed wheel, 
which in turn controls the rotation of the clock’s hands. Energy needed to keep the pendulum 
swinging and to advance the hands comes from the descent of a weighted cord. In a balance 
clock, a rocking balance ring controls the toothed wheel. Energy for this clock comes from a 
wound coil spring. A quartz crystal clock detects the vibration of its crystal electronically and 
uses that vibration to control a motor that advances its clock hands or an electronic circuit 
that measures time by counting the crystal’s vibrations. Small, carefully timed electric pulses 
from the clock provide the energy that keeps the crystal vibrating.
How Musical Instruments Work: A violin string exhibits natural resonances by vibrating 
back and forth about its equilibrium shape, a straight line. Bowing the string causes it to 
vibrate by pushing it away from its equilibrium shape and then allowing it to slip back. 
The bow transfers energy to the vibrating string by pushing it each time it moves in the 
bow’s direction. The string’s fundamental pitch is determined by its mass, tension, and 
length, and the pitch corresponds to a standing wave on the string. After selecting a string 
of the correct mass, you tune that string by adjusting its tension. While playing, you 
change the string’s length and pitch by pressing it against the fi ngerboard. The belly of 
the violin serves to convert the string’s vibration into sound by moving in and out as the 
string vibrates.
 
The air inside an organ pipe also exhibits natural resonances. As the organ blows air 
across the opening at the bottom of a pipe, the air inside that pipe begins to vibrate as a 
standing wave. The frequency of this vibration is determined principally by the pipe’s length, 
so a short pipe has a higher pitch than a long one. Pipes with different shapes produce differ-
ent amounts of harmonics and yield different sounds.
 
The surface of a drum has natural resonances but with a difference: they’re not harmon-
ics of the fundamental pitch. The complicated standing waves on the drumhead contribute to 
its unique sound.
How the Sea Works: The sea exhibits two interesting motions: tides and waves. Tides are 
caused by bulges in Earth’s oceans, created by gravitational tidal forces from the moon and 
sun. The moon dominates the tides so that bulges appear on the regions of Earth closest to 
and farthest from the moon. Since Earth is rotating, these bulges move with respect to land 
and give the tides their 12½-hour cycle.
 
Waves occur because the water’s surface has a stable equilibrium. When it’s disturbed 
from that fl at, level equilibrium, this surface will oscillate. Its most basic oscillations are 
standing waves on confi ned bodies of water and traveling waves on open water.
 
The familiar ripples on the ocean’s surface are traveling waves that head toward shore 
at speeds that increase with wavelength. As they approach the shore, these waves form 

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 265
1. Harmonic oscillator: An oscillator with a restoring force pro-
portional to displacement. Its period of oscillation depends only 
on the stiffness of its restoring force and on its mass, not on its 
amplitude of oscillation.
2. Relationship among wave speed, wavelength, and frequency: 
Wave speed equals wavelength times frequency, or
 
wave speed = wavelength · frequency. 
(9.2.1)
incomplete crests, which eventually break. The shallowing water also slows the waves, so 
that they bend more directly toward shore. Interference effects among multiple traveling 
waves give rise to intricate patterns on the water’s surface and to complicated rhythms in 
the crashing surf.

 W
hile it’s hard to see the electric charges that are responsible for electricity, it’s easy to see 
their effects. They’re all around us, in the sparks and shocks of a cold winter day, the 
imaging process of a xerographic copier, and the illumination of a fl ashlight when you turn 
on its switch. Although we often take electricity for granted, it clearly underlies many aspects of 
our modern world.
 
Just imagine what life would be like if there were no electric charges and no electricity. For starters, 
we’d probably be sitting around campfi res at night, trying to think of things to do without television, cell 
phones, or computer games. But before you remark on just how peaceful such a pre-electronic-age 
existence would be, let me add one more sobering thought: we wouldn’t exist either. Whether it’s motion-
less as static charge or moving as electric current, electricity really does make the world go ‘round.
Moving Water without Touching It
Unlike gravity, which always pulls objects toward one 
another, electric forces can be either attractive or repul-
sive. You can experiment with electric forces using a 
thin stream of water and an electrically charged comb. 
First, open a water faucet slightly so that the fl ow of 
water forms a thin but continuous strand below the 
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
266
10
Electricity

Static Electricity 267
Chapter Itinerary
Although we often experience electric forces and currents as 
novelties or nuisances, there are also many devices that depend 
on them. In this chapter, we examine the mysteries of (1) static 
electricity and study two modern devices based on electricity: 
(2) xerographic copiers and (3) fl ashlights. In Static Electricity, 
we look at how clothes and other objects acquire charges and 
how they exert forces on one another as a result. In Xerographic 
Copiers, we see how these same electric forces work together 
with light to control the placement of black powder to reproduce 
images on sheets of paper. In Flashlights, we look at how a 
current of electric charges conveys power from batteries to a 
lightbulb. For a more complete preview of the chapter, turn 
ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equa-
tions at the end of the chapter.
 
This chapter concentrates on electricity and its charges, 
but as we will see in Chapter 11, electricity is closely related to 
magnetism and its poles. While we’ll leave the relationships 
between electricity and magnetism for that next chapter, you 
may already begin seeing similarities between those two seem-
ingly separate phenomena as you read Chapter 10.
mouth of the faucet. Next, give your rubber or plastic 
comb an electric charge by passing it rapidly through 
your hair or rubbing it vigorously against a wool sweater. 
Finally, hold the comb near the stream of water, just 
below the faucet, and watch what happens to the stream. 
Is the electric force that you’re observing attractive or 
repulsive? Why does this force change the path of the 
falling water?
 
Rubbing the comb through your hair makes it electri-
cally charged. What other objects can acquire and hold a 
charge when you rub them across hair or fabric? Which 
works better: a metal object or one that’s an insulator? Why?
things around, however, as you’ve probably noticed while 
reaching for a doorknob or a friend’s hand on a cold, dry day. In 
this section, we’ll examine static electricity and the physics 
behind its intriguing forces and often painful shocks.
Questions to Think About: How does a dryer produce static 
electricity, and why do some clothes cling while others repel 
each other? Why does walking across a carpet on a cold, dry 
day put you at great risk of a shock as you reach for a door-
knob? Why do you get only a single brief shock from that knob 
and not a long sustained one? When you touch a friend and get 
a shock, did one of you cause that shock or are you both 
responsible? If rubbing is required to develop static electricity, 
why does the plastic wrap produce so much of it when you 
open a package? Why do moist air and antistatic chemicals 
reduce static electricity?
Experiments to Do: You can study static electricity by rubbing 
a toy balloon vigorously through your hair or against a wool 
sweater. Though its appearance won’t change, the balloon will 
begin to attract other things, particularly your hair. What has 
happened to the balloon? to your hair? Why does the balloon 
also attract things that weren’t rubbed?
 
Try to get rid of the balloon’s attractiveness by letting a thick 
stream of water fl ow over its surface. Why does this process return 
the balloon to normal? What did you “wash” off the balloon? Now 
rub two identical balloons through your hair and see whether they 
attract or repel one another. Does the result make sense?
 
Finally, draw two long strips of transparent tape from a 
dispenser without rubbing them on anything, and see if they 
attract or repel. Is rubbing essential to the development of 
static electricity?
Electricity may be diffi cult to see, but you can easily observe 
its effects. How often have you found socks clinging to a shirt 
as you remove them from a hot dryer or struggled to throw away 
a piece of plastic packaging that just won’t leave your hand or 
stay in the trash can? The forces behind these familiar effects 
are electric in nature and stem from what we commonly call 
static electricity. Static electricity does more than just push 
SECTION 10.1
Static Electricity

268 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
Electric Charge and Freshly Laundered Clothes
Unless you have always lived in a damp climate and avoided synthetic materials, you have 
experienced the effects of static electricity. Seemingly ordinary objects have pushed or 
pulled on one another mysteriously, and you’ve received shocks while reaching for light 
switches, car doors, or friends’ hands. Static electricity is more than an interesting nui-
sance, though; it’s a simple window into the inner workings of our universe and worthy of 
a serious look. It will take some time to lay the groundwork, but soon you’ll be able to 
explain most of the effects of static electricity and even to control it to some extent.
 
The existence of static electricity has been known for several thousand years. About 
600 bc, the Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus (ca. 624–546 bc) observed that when 
amber is rubbed vigorously with fur, it attracts light objects such as straw and feathers. 
Known in Greek as elektron (,η'λεκτρου), amber is a fossil tree resin with properties similar 
to those of modern plastics. The term static electricity, like many others in this chapter, 
derives from that Greek root.
 
Static electricity begins with electric charge, an intrinsic property of matter. Electric 
charge is present in many of the subatomic particles from which matter is constructed, 
and these particles incorporate their charges into nearly everything. No one knows why 
charge exists; it’s simply one of the basic features of our universe and something that peo-
ple discovered through observation and experiment. Because electric charge has so much 
infl uence on the objects that contain it, we sometimes refer to those objects as electric 
charges, or simply as charges.
 
Charges exert forces on one another, and these forces are what you observe with static 
electricity. Next time you’re doing laundry, experiment with your clothes as they come out 
of the dryer. You’ll fi nd that some electrically charged garments attract one another, while 
others repel each other. Evidently, there are two different types of charge. Although this 
dichotomy has been known since 1733, when it was discovered by French chemist Charles-
François de Cisternay du Fay (1698–1739), it was Benjamin Franklin 1  who fi nally gave 
the two charges their present names. Franklin called what appears on glass when it’s rubbed 
with silk “positive charge” and what appears on hard rubber when it’s rubbed with animal 
fur “negative charge.”
 
Two like charges (both positive or both negative) push apart, each experiencing a 
repulsive force that pushes it directly away from the other (Figs. 10.1.1a, b). Two opposite 
charges (one positive and one negative) pull together, each experiencing an attractive force 
that pulls it directly toward the other (Fig. 10.1.1c). These forces between stationary elec-
tric charges are called electrostatic forces.
 
When you fi nd that two freshly laundered socks push apart, it’s because they both have 
the same type of charge. Whether that charge is positive or negative depends on the fabrics 
involved (more on that later), so let’s just suppose that the dryer has given each sock a 
negative charge. Since like charges repel, the socks push apart. What does it mean for the 
dryer to give each sock a negative charge?
 
The answer to that question has several parts. First, the dryer didn’t create the negative 
charge that it gave to a sock. Like momentum, angular momentum, and energy, electric 
charge is a conserved physical quantity—it cannot be created or destroyed, only trans-
ferred. The negative charge that the dryer gave to the sock must have come from something 
else, perhaps a shirt.
 
Second, positive charge and negative charge aren’t actually separate entities—they’re 
just positive and negative amounts of the same physical quantity: electric charge. Positive 
charges have positive amounts of electric charge, while negative charges have negative 
amounts. Like most physical quantities, we measure charge in standard units. The SI unit 
of electric charge is the coulomb (abbreviated C). Small objects rarely have a whole cou-
lomb of charge, and your sock’s charge is only about −0.0000001 C.
 
Third, the sock’s negative charge refers to the sock as a whole, not to its internal 
pieces. As with all ordinary matter, the sock contains an enormous number of positively 
1  Although best 
remembered for his 
political activities, 
American statesman and 
philosopher Benjamin 
Franklin (1706–1790) was 
also the preeminent 
scientist in the American 
colonies during the 
mid-1700s. His experi-
ments, both at home and 
in Europe, contributed 
signifi cantly to the 
understanding of 
electricity and electric 
charge. In addition to 
demonstrating that 
lightning is a form of 
electric discharge, 
Franklin invented a 
number of useful devices, 
including the Franklin 
stove, lightning rods, and 
bifocals.
(a)
(b)
(c)
+
–
–
–
+
+
Fig. 10.1.1 (a) Two 
positive charges experience 
equal but oppositely 
directed forces exactly 
away from one another. 
(b) The same effect occurs 
for two negative charges. 
(c) Two opposite charges 
experience equal but 
oppositely directed forces 
exactly toward one another.

Static Electricity 269
and negatively charged particles. Each of the sock’s atoms consists of a dense central core 
or nucleus, containing positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons, surrounded by 
a diffuse cloud of negatively charged electrons. The electrostatic forces between those tiny 
charged particles hold together not only the atoms but also the entire sock. However, in 
giving the sock a negative charge, the dryer saw to it that the sock’s net electric charge, the 
sum of all its positive and negative amounts of charge, is negative. With its negative net 
charge, the sock behaves much like a simple, negatively charged object.
 
Last, the sock became negatively charged when it contained more electrons than pro-
tons. Underlying that seemingly simple statement is a great deal of painstaking scientifi c 
study. To begin with, experiments have shown that electric charge is quantized, that is, 
charge always appears in integer multiples of the elementary unit of electric charge. This 
elementary unit of charge is extremely small, only about 1.6 × 10−19 C, and is the magni-
tude of the charge found on most subatomic particles. An electron has a −1 elementary unit 
of charge, while a proton has a +1 elementary unit of charge. Since the only charged sub-
atomic particles in normal matter are electrons and protons, the sock becomes negatively 
charged simply by having more electrons than protons.
 
Returning to the original question, we now know what the dryer did that gave a sock a 
negative charge. Assuming the sock was electrically neutral to start—it had zero net charge—
the dryer must have added electrons to the sock or removed protons from the sock or both. 
These transfers of charge upset the sock’s charge balance and gave it a negative net charge.
 
In keeping with our convention regarding conserved quantities, all unsigned references 
to charge in this book imply a positive amount. For example, if the dryer gave charge to a 
jacket, we mean it gave a positive amount of charge to that jacket. We follow this same 
convention with money: when you say that you gave money to a charity, we assume that 
you gave a positive amount.
 
Finally, Franklin’s charge-naming scheme was brilliant in concept but unlucky in exe-
cution. Although it reduced the calculation of net charge to a simple addition problem, it 
required Franklin to choose which type of charge to call “positive” and which to call “neg-
ative.” Unfortunately, his seemingly arbitrary choice made electrons, the primary constitu-
ents of electric current in wires, negatively charged. By the time physicists had recognized 
the mistake, it was too late to fi x. Scientists and engineers have had to deal with negative 
amounts of charge fl owing through wires ever since. Imagine the awkwardness of having 
to carry out business using currency printed only in negative denominations!
Check Your Understanding #1: In Charge of Opening Gifts
The gift you are about to unwrap is electrically neutral. You tear off the clingy wrapper and fi nd that 
it has a large negative charge. What charge does the gift itself have, if any?
Answer: It has a large positive charge equal in amount to the wrapper’s negative charge.
Why: Since charge is a conserved physical quantity, the wrapper and gift must remain neutral 
overall even after you separate them. The wrapper’s negative charge must be balanced by the gift’s 
positive charge.
Coulomb’s Law and Static Cling
Although your sock and shirt pull together strongly when they’re only inches apart, you can 
put on your shirt and go to the movies without fear of being attacked by your sock from the 
other side of town. Evidently, the forces between charges weaken with distance.
 
Over two centuries ago, French physicist Charles-Augustin de Coulomb 2  studied 
electrostatic forces experimentally and determined that the forces between two electric 
charges are inversely proportional to the square of their separation (Fig. 10.1.2). For exam-
ple, doubling the separation between your shirt and sock reduces their attraction by a factor 
of four, which explains your uneventful night out on the town.
2  In 1781, after a career 
as a military engineer in 
the West Indies, French 
physicist Charles-Augustin
de Coulomb (1736–1806) 
returned to his native Paris 
in poor health. There he 
conducted scientifi c 
investigations into the 
nature of the forces 
between electric charges 
and published a series of 
memoirs on the subject 
between 1785 and 1789. 
His research came to a 
close in 1789 when he 
was forced to leave Paris 
because of the French 
Revolution.

270 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
 
Coulomb’s experiments also showed that the forces between electric charges are propor-
tional to the amount of each charge. That means that doubling the charge on either your shirt 
or your sock doubles the force each garment exerts on the other. Finally, changing the sign of 
either charge turns attractive forces into repulsive ones or vice versa. If both garments were 
either positively charged or negatively charged, they’d repel instead of attracting.
 
These ideas can be combined to describe the forces acting on two charges and can be 
written as a word equation:
 
force = Coulomb constant · charge1 · charge2
(distance between charges)2
, 
(10.1.1)
in symbols:
F = k · q1 · q2
r2
,
and in everyday language:
When there are enough like charges packed close together on your hair, 
it’ll stand up.
The force on charge1 is directed toward or away from charge2, and the force on charge2 is 
directed toward or away from charge1.
 
This relationship is called Coulomb’s law, after its discoverer. The Coulomb constant 
is about 8.988 × 109 N ∙ m2/C2 and is one of the physical constants found in nature. Con-
sistent with Newton’s third law, the force that charge1 exerts on charge2 is equal in amount 
but oppositely directed from the force that charge2 exerts on charge1.
(a)
(b)
+
+
+
+
Fig. 10.1.2 The 
electrostatic forces between 
two charges increase 
dramatically as they become 
closer. As the distance 
separating two positive 
charges decreases by a 
factor of 2 between (a) and 
(b), the forces those two 
charges experience increase 
by a factor of 4.
COULOMB’S LAW
The magnitudes of the electrostatic forces between two objects are equal to the Cou-
lomb constant times the product of their two electric charges divided by the square of 
the distance separating them. If the charges are like, then the forces are repulsive. If 
the charges are opposite, then the forces are attractive.
 
In addition to protecting you from distant charged socks, this relationship between 
electrostatic forces and distance gives rise to another intriguing feature of laundry static: 
charged clothes can cling to objects that are electrically neutral! For example, a negatively 
charged sock can stick to a neutral wall.
 
The origin of this attraction is a subtle rearrangement of charges within the wall. Even 
though the wall has zero net charge, it still contains both positively and negatively charged 
particles. When the negatively charged sock is near the wall, it pulls the wall’s positive 
charges a little closer and pushes the wall’s negative charges a little farther away (Fig. 
10.1.3). Although each individual charge shifts just a tiny distance, the wall contains so 
many charges that together they produce a dramatic result. The wall develops an electric 
polarization—it remains neutral overall but has a positively charged region nearest the 
sock and a negatively charged one farthest from the sock.
 
The wall’s positive region attracts the sock, while its negative region repels the sock. 
Although you might expect those two opposing forces to balance, Coulomb’s law says 
otherwise. Since electrostatic forces grow weaker with distance, the sock is attracted more 
strongly to the nearer positive region than it is repelled by the more distant negative region. 
Overall, there is a net electrostatic attraction between the charged sock and the polarized 
wall, so the sock clings to the wall!

Static Electricity 271
Transferring Charge: Sliding Friction or Contact?
While it’s clear that the dryer transfers charge between the clothes, why does that charge 
move and what determines which garments gain charge and which lose it?
 
You might suppose that sliding friction is responsible for the transfer—that the dryer 
rubs the clothes together and somehow wipes charge from one garment to the other. After 
all, friction seems to help you charge a balloon as you rub it through your hair or against a 
wool sweater. However, be careful—there are other cases of charge transfer that don’t 
involve rubbing at all. For example, the plastic wrap you remove from a store package can 
acquire a charge no matter how careful you are not to rub it against its contents. And an 
antique car can build up enough charge to give you a nasty shock even when its pale rubber 
tires never skid across the pavement.
 
Charge transfer is less the result of rubbing than it is of contact between dissimilar sur-
faces. When two different materials touch one another, a few electrons normally shift from 
one surface to the other. That transfer results from the chemical differences between the two 
touching surfaces and the associated change in an electron’s potential energy when it shifts. 
In effect, some surfaces are “hungrier” for electrons than others, and whenever two dissim-
ilar surfaces touch, the hungrier surface steals a few electrons from its “less hungry” partner.
 
The physics behind this theft has to do with chemical potential energy, energy stored 
in the chemical forces that bind together a material’s constituent atoms and electrons. To 
hold onto its electrons, a surface reduces their chemical energies to less than zero, meaning 
that it would take additional energy to free those electrons from the surface. However, some 
surfaces reduce the electron chemical potential energies more than others and thus bind 
their electrons more tightly. If an electron on one surface can reduce its chemical potential 
energy by shifting to the other surface, it will accelerate toward that “hungrier” surface and 
eventually stick there. You can picture the electron as “rolling downhill” from a chemical 
“valley” on one surface to an even deeper valley on the other surface.
(a)
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
(b)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
(c)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
– –
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Fig. 10.1.3 (a) A neutral wall contains 
countless positive and negative charges. (b) As a 
negatively charged sock approaches the wall, the 
positive charges move toward it and the negative 
charges move away from it. (c) The polarized 
wall continues to attract the sock and holds it 
in place.
Check Your Understanding #2: Wrapper Recycling
After opening your gift, you try to throw away its negatively charged wrapper. However, the wrapper 
keeps returning to your hand. What attracts it to your electrically neutral hand?
Answer: Its negative charge polarizes your hand and is then attracted to your hand’s nearby positive 
charge.
Why: Although your hand is neutral, its charges rearrange in response to the nearby wrapper’s neg-
ative charge. Positive charge in your hand shifts toward the wrapper and attracts it.
Check Your Figures #1: Moving Out
You have two positively charged balls, each of which is experiencing a force of 1 N away from the 
other. If you halve the distance separating the balls, what force will each exert on the other?
Answer: 4 N.
Why: According to Coulomb’s law, the force on each charge varies inversely with the square of their 
separation. By halving that separation, you increase the electrostatic force by a factor of 4.

272 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
 
This transfer of electrons is self-limiting. As electrons accumulate on the lower 
energy surface, they begin to repel any electrons that try to follow and the transfer process 
soon grinds to a halt. It stops altogether when the electrons reach equilibrium—when the 
forward chemical force an electron experiences is exactly balanced by the backward elec-
trostatic force. The transfer won’t resume until you bring fresh uncharged surface regions 
into contact.
 
That’s where rubbing enters the picture. Rubbing involves lots of surface contact and 
almost endless opportunities for charge transfer between those surfaces. As clothes tumble 
about in the dryer, touching one another and often rubbing, some fabrics steal electrons and 
become negatively charged, while other fabrics lose electrons and become positively charged.
 
That said, you should be aware that the details of contact charging are messy. For 
starters, the surfaces that actually touch one another are neither chemically pure nor free of 
microscopic defects. Although it’s generally true that whichever fabric binds electrons 
most tightly is the one most likely to develop a negative net charge, surface contamination 
and defects can change the outcome radically. Even your choice of laundry detergent may 
affect the fabric’s surface chemistry and thus how it charges. Furthermore, water molecules 
cling to most surfaces and infl uence the contact charging process. Finally, while we’ve 
concentrated on the exchange of electrons, it’s also possible for certain surfaces to exchange 
ions, that is, electrically charged atoms, molecules, or small particles, along with electrons 
and acquire net charges as a result.
Check Your Understanding #3: Sticky Tape
When you peel a piece of adhesive tape off a glass window, you fi nd that the tape is attracted toward 
the spot it left behind. How did the tape and glass acquire electric charges?
Answer: While the tape and glass were in contact, charge was unevenly distributed between their 
surfaces. Removing the tape merely made that imbalance more obvious.
Why: The tape and glass have different chemical affi nities for electrons and become oppositely 
charged whenever they touch. In fact, the tape’s stickiness itself comes from electrostatic attraction.
Separating Your Clothes: Producing High Voltages
The dryer stops, and you take out your favorite shirt. It has several socks clinging to it, 
so you begin to remove them. As you separate the garments, they crackle and spark. 
Their attraction is obviously due to opposite charges, but why does separating them make 
them spark?
 
To answer that question, let’s think about energy as you pull the negatively charged 
sock steadily away from the positively charged shirt. Since the sock would accelerate 
toward the shirt if you let go, you are clearly exerting a force on the sock. And because that 
force and the sock’s movement are in the same direction, you are also doing work on the 
sock. You are transferring energy to it.
 
That energy is stored in the electrostatic forces; the shirt and sock accumulate electro-
static potential energy. Electrostatic potential energy is present whenever opposite charges 
have been pulled apart or like charges have been pushed together. With the negatively 
charged sock now far from the positively charged shirt, both attraction and repulsion con-
tribute to the electrostatic potential energy—opposite charges are separated on the two 
garments, and like charges are assembled together on each garment.
 
The total electrostatic potential energy in the shirt and sock is the work you did to 
separate them. However, that potential energy isn’t divided equally among the individual 
charges on these garments. Depending on their locations, some charges have more electro-
static potential energy than others and are therefore more important when it comes to 
sparks. In recognition of those differences, we need a proper way to characterize the elec-
trostatic potential energy available to a charge at a particular location. The measure we’re 

Static Electricity 273
seeking is voltage, the electrostatic potential energy available per unit of electric charge at 
a given location, or
voltage = electrostatic potential energy
charge
.
 
Voltage is a diffi cult quantity to conceptualize because you can’t see charge or sense 
its stored energy. To help you understand voltage, let’s use a simple analogy. In this anal-
ogy, the role of charge will be played by water and the role of voltage will be played by 
pressure. Where voltage is high, visualize water at high pressure. Where voltage is low, 
picture water at low pressure. Just as water tends to fl ow from a higher pressure to a lower 
pressure, so charge tends to fl ow from a higher voltage to a lower voltage.
 
This analogy works well because both voltage and pressure measure the energy per unit 
of something. Voltage is the electrostatic potential energy per unit of charge and pressure is the 
pressure potential energy per unit of volume (see Section 5.2). Both water at high pressure and 
charge at high voltage are loaded with energy per unit and likely to do something exciting!
 
Since the SI unit of energy is the joule and the SI unit of electric charge is the coulomb, 
the SI unit of voltage is the joule per coulomb, more commonly called the volt (abbreviated 
V). Where the voltage is positive, (positive) charge can release electrostatic potential 
energy by escaping to a distant neutral place, where the voltage is zero. Charge at positive 
voltage is analogous to pressurized water, which can release pressure potential energy by 
fl owing into the open air. Where the voltage is negative, charge needs energy to escape to a 
distant neutral place, where the voltage is zero. Charge at negative voltage is analogous to 
water at less than atmospheric pressure, which needs energy to fl ow out into the open air.
 
In addition to the voltage ↔ pressure analogy, we can also draw a voltage ↔ altitude 
one. In this second analogy, charges at high voltage are like bicyclists at high altitude. Just 
as charges tend to fl ow from a higher voltage to a lower voltage, so bicyclists tend to roll 
from a higher altitude to a lower altitude. In this analogy, altitude plays the role of voltage 
and gravitational potential energy plays the role of electrostatic potential energy. The bicy-
clists release gravitational potential energy as they roll downhill from a mountain, and they 
need energy to climb uphill from a valley.
 
Returning to those clothes, you’ll fi nd that each point on the shirt or sock has its own 
voltage. You can determine that voltage by taking a tiny amount of positive charge at that 
point and moving it to a distant neutral place, where the voltage is zero. The point’s voltage 
is simply the electrostatic potential energy the charge releases during that trip divided by 
the amount of its charge. If the point you examine is on the positively charged shirt, you’ll 
measure a large positive voltage—probably several thousand volts. If it’s on the negatively 
charged sock, pulling positive charge away from that point will require considerable work, 
so you’ll measure a large negative voltage—probably negative several thousand volts. 
Whether positive or negative, these large or “high” voltages tend to cause sparks.
 
We’ll look at the physics of sparks and discharges soon, but you can already see why 
oppositely charged clothes spark as you separate them: that’s when the high voltages 
develop. As long as your sock is clinging tightly to your shirt, there isn’t much electrostatic 
potential energy available. But as soon as you begin to separate them, watch out!
Check Your Understanding #4: High-Altitude Voltage
Although any cloud may contain opposite charges, only the violent updrafts inside thunderheads are 
able to separate those charges and produce lightning. Why does such separation lead to lightning?
Answer: That separation takes work, which appears as electrostatic potential energy in the sepa-
rated charges. The positively charged regions of the thunderhead acquire huge positive voltages, and 
the negatively charged regions acquire huge negative voltages.
Why: When opposite charges are near each other, they don’t necessarily have much electrostatic 
potential energy per charge and the voltages may be small. Separating those charges to great dis-
tances dramatically increases their stored energy and produces high voltages.

274 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
Accumulating Huge Static Charges
We’ve seen that touching two different materials together causes a small transfer of charge 
from one surface to the other and that separating those oppositely charged surfaces pro-
duces elevated voltages and perhaps sparks. However, the quiet crackling and snapping of 
items in your laundry basket is nothing compared to the miniature lightning bolts you can 
unleash after walking across a carpet on a dry winter day, stepping out of an antique car, or 
playing with a static generator. To get a really big spark, you need to separate lots of charge, 
and that usually requires repeated effort.
 
Walking across a carpet is just such a repetitive process. Each time your rubber-soled 
shoe lands on an acrylic carpet, some (positive) charge shifts from the carpet to your shoe. 
Although the transfer is brief and self-limiting, you now have a little extra charge on your 
shoe. When you lift that shoe off the carpet, you do work on its newfound charge and your 
shoe’s voltage surges to a high positive value. High-voltage charge tends to leak from one 
place to another, and the shoe’s charge quickly spreads to the rest of your body. By the time 
your foot lands again on a fresh patch of carpet, the shoe has given away most of its charge 
and is ready to begin the process all over again.
 
Each time your foot lands on the carpet, it picks up some charge. Each time it lifts off 
the carpet, that charge spreads out on your body. By the time you fi nally reach for the door-
knob, you are covered with charge and have an enormous positive voltage. As your hand 
draws close to the doorknob, it begins to infl uence the doorknob’s charges—pulling the 
doorknob’s negative charges closer and pushing its positive charges away. You are polariz-
ing the doorknob.
 
As we saw while separating your freshly laundered sock from your shirt, oppositely 
charged objects that are close but not touching can have both large electrostatic potential 
energies and strong electrostatic forces. That’s the situation here. The closer your hand 
gets to the doorknob, the stronger the electrostatic forces become until fi nally the air itself 
cannot tolerate the forces and a spark forms. In an instant, most of your accumulated elec-
trostatic potential energy is released as light, heat, and sound. And that doesn’t include 
any screams.
 
As good as walking is at building up charge, though, an antique car is even better. Its 
pale rubber tires gather negative charge when they touch the pavement and develop large 
negative voltages as they roll away from it. This charge migrates onto the car body so that, 
after a few seconds of driving, the car accumulates enough charge to give anyone who 
touches it a painful shock. Collecting tolls used to be hazardous work! Fortunately, modern 
tires are formulated to allow this negative charge to return safely to the pavement, so now 
cars rarely accumulate much charge. Instead, most shocks associated with cars now come 
from sliding across the seat as you step in or out.
 
While cars try to avoid static charging, some machines deliberately accumulate sepa-
rated charge to produce extraordinarily high voltages. The most famous of these static 
machines is the Van de Graaff generator (Fig. 10.1.4). It uses a rubber belt to lift positive or 
negative charges onto a metal sphere until the magnitude of that sphere’s voltage reaches 
hundreds of thousands or even millions of volts.
 
A typical classroom Van de Graaff generator uses a motor-driven rubber belt to carry 
negative charges from its base to its spherical metal top. Once inside the sphere, the belt’s 
negative charges fl ow outward onto the sphere’s surface, where they can be as far apart as 
possible. There they remain until something releases them.
 
Suspended at the top of a tall, insulating column, the Van de Graaff generator’s 
sphere can accumulate an enormous negative charge. You may hear the motor struggling 
as it pushes the belt’s negative charges up to the sphere, a refl ection of how much nega-
tive voltage the sphere is developing. Eventually it releases its negative charge via an 
immense spark.
 
Even without sparks, the Van de Graaff generator is an interesting novelty. If you iso-
late yourself from the ground and touch the metal sphere while it’s accumulating negative 
Charge
storage
sphere
Belt charger
and motor-
driven pulley
Rubber
belt
Fig. 10.1.4 Static 
electricity can be produced 
by mechanical processes. 
In this Van de Graaff 
generator, a moving rubber 
belt transfers negative 
charges from the base to 
the shiny metal sphere. 
This negative charge 
creates dramatic sparks as 
it returns through the air 
toward the positive charge 
it left behind.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Static Electricity 275
charges, some of those negative charges will spread onto you as well. If your hair is long 
and fl exible, and permits the negative charges to distribute themselves along its length, it 
may stand up, lifted by the fi erce repulsions between those like charges.
Check Your Understanding #5: Stop the Presses!
The paper in some printing presses moves through the rollers at half a kilometer per minute. If no 
care is taken, dangerous amounts of static charge can accumulate on parts of the press. How does 
the moving paper contribute to that charging process?
Answer: Contact between dissimilar materials puts charge on the paper, which then carries that 
charge with it to isolated parts of the press. Enough charge can accumulate on those parts to be 
dangerous.
Why: Nonconductive paper is an excellent transporter of electric charge. Once the paper picks 
up a static charge by touching a dissimilar material, it can carry that charge with it as it moves 
through the press. Not surprisingly, printing presses use various tools to suppress this static 
charging.
Controlling Static Electricity: Fabric Softeners 
and Conditioners
Now that we’ve seen what static electricity is and how to produce it, we’re ready to see how 
to tame it. Static cling, fl yaway hair, and electrifying handshakes aren’t everyone’s cup of 
tea. The basic solution to static charge is mobility; if charges can move freely, they’ll elim-
inate static electricity all by themselves. Opposite charges attract, so any separated positive 
and negative charges will join up as soon as they’re allowed to move.
 
Materials such as metals that permit free charge movement are called electrical con-
ductors. Those such as plastic, hair, and rubber that prevent free charge movement are 
called electrical insulators. Since charge movement eliminates static electricity, our trou-
bles with static electricity stem mostly from insulators. If you wore metal clothing, you 
wouldn’t have static problems with your laundry.
 
The simplest way to reduce static electricity is to turn the insulators into conductors. 
Even slight conductors, ones that just barely let charges move, will gradually get rid of any 
accumulations of separated charge. That’s one of the main goals of fabric softeners, dryer 
sheets, and hair conditioners. They all turn insulating materials—fabrics and hair—into 
slight electrical conductors. The result is the near disappearance of static electricity and all 
its fashion inconveniences.
 
How these three items work is an interesting tale. They all employ roughly the same 
chemical: a positively charged detergent molecule. A detergent molecule is a long molecule 
that is electrically charged at one end and electrically neutral at the other end. Its charged 
end clings electrostatically to opposite charges and is chemically “at home” in water. Its 
neutral end is oil-like, slippery, and “at home” in oils and greases. This dual citizenship is 
what makes detergents so good for cleaning.
 
While it might seem that positively and negatively charged detergent molecules would 
clean equally well, that’s not the case. Since cleaning agents shouldn’t cling to the materi-
als they’re cleaning, it’s important that the two not have opposite charges. Fabrics and hair 
generally become negatively charged when wet—another example of a charge shift when 
two different materials touch—so negatively charged detergent molecules clean much bet-
ter than positively charged ones.
 
Positively charged detergents are still useful, however, although you mustn’t apply 
them until after you’ve cleaned your clothes or hair. Because they cling so well to wet 
fi bers, these slippery detergent molecules will remain in place long after washing and give 
fabrics and hair a soft, silky feel. They’ll also allow those materials to conduct electricity, 
albeit poorly, so as to virtually eliminate static electricity!

276 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
Xerography: Using Light to Print Copies
The image that a xerographic copier prints on a sheet of paper begins as a pattern of tiny 
black particles or toner on a smooth, light-sensitive surface. The copier uses static elec-
tricity and light refl ected from the original document to arrange this toner on the surface 
and then carefully transfers the toner to the paper (Fig. 10.2.1). Invented in 1938 by 
Chester Carlson 3 , this process is basically our old friend static electricity doing some-
thing useful.
 
At the heart of the xerographic copier is a thin, light-sensitive surface made from a 
photoconductor, a normally insulating material that becomes a conductor while exposed 
to light. Although the darkened photoconductor can keep positive and negative charges 
apart, these charges quickly draw together when light hits the photoconductor (Fig. 10.2.2). 
Check Your Understanding #6: No Lightning at Work
The conveyor belts used to move fl ammable materials often have metal threads woven into their 
fabric. Why are such conducting belts important for fi re safety?
Answer: An insulating conveyor belt can separate enormous amounts of charge, leading to high 
voltages, sparks, and possibly fi re. A conductive belt can’t carry charge with it as it moves, so no 
charge accumulates.
Why: When an insulating belt has charge on its surface, that charge must move with the belt. How-
ever, charges are mobile in a conductive belt and don’t normally move with it.
Questions to Think About: How could you use static electric-
ity to position black powder on a sheet of paper? How would 
you put that static electricity on the paper? For characters to 
appear on the sheet, how should its static electricity be dis-
tributed? In a copier, what should light do to the static elec-
tricity to produce a copy of the original? How can a device 
spray static electricity onto a surface?
Experiments to Do: To get a feel for how a copier works, cut a 
small sheet of paper into tiny squares, about 1 mm on a side. 
Put the squares on a table and suspend a thin plate of clear 
plastic above them, a few millimeters away. The top of a clear 
plastic box will do. Now run a plastic comb through your hair 
or against a sweater several times and touch it to the top of the 
plastic plate. Squares of paper will leap off the table and stick 
to the plastic plate. What’s holding the squares against the 
plastic? If the paper were black, how could you form letters on 
the surface of the plastic?
The days of carbon paper and mimeograph machines are long 
gone. What modern offi ce could operate without a xerographic 
copier? Advertisements for copiers are everywhere, and 
although each manufacturer claims to make the best copiers, 
that’s mostly just salesmanship. In reality, all xerographic copi-
ers are based on the same principles, discovered in 1938 by 
Chester Carlson. In this section, we’ll examine xerographic 
copiers and the ideas that make them possible.
Top document 
feeder
Document 
glass
Document 
output tray
Toner reservoir
Computer 
forms basket
Rollers
Photoconductor belt
Lens
Paper tray 1
Side output tray
Side document
feeder
Finisher
Paper tray 2
Top output tray
Control 
console
Power on/off
switch
SECTION 10.2
Xerographic Copiers
 
This conductivity is due principally to their tendency to attract moisture. Water is 
a slight electrical conductor and damp surfaces allow charges to move around. That’s 
why moist air decreases static electricity. By making fabrics and hair almost impercep-
tibly damp, the positively charged detergents allow separated charges to get back 
together and do away with static hair problems and laundry cling. That’s why they’re 
the main ingredients in fabric softeners, dryer sheets, hair conditioners, and even many 
antistatic sprays.

Xerographic Copiers 277
That fl exibility allows light from the original document to determine the pattern of static 
electricity on the photoconducting surface and consequently the placement of toner on the 
piece of paper.
 
Each copying cycle begins in the dark with the copier spraying negative charges onto 
its photoconductor. On the other side of the photoconductor is a grounded metal surface—
grounded in the sense that it’s electrically connected to Earth so that charges are free to 
fl ow between the two. As negative charges land on the open surface of the photoconductor, 
they attract positive charges onto the metal surface beneath it. When the charge-spraying 
process is complete, the open surface of the photoconductor is uniformly coated with neg-
ative charges while the underlying metal surface is uniformly coated with positive charges 
(Fig. 10.2.3a).
 
After this precharging, the copier uses a lens to cast a sharp image of the original 
document onto the photoconducting surface. We’ll examine lenses and the formation of 
images when we study cameras in Chapter 14. For now, what matters is that light hits the 
photoconductor only in certain places, corresponding to the white parts of the original 
document.
 
There are two standard techniques for exposing the photoconductor to light. Some 
copiers illuminate the whole original document with the brilliant light of a fl ash lamp and 
cast a complete image onto a fl attened portion of a photoconductor belt. In other copiers, 
a moving lamp or mirror illuminates the original a little at a time and the image is cast as 
a moving stripe on a rotating photoconductor drum. Either way, charges move through any 
regions of the photoconductor that are exposed to light, leaving these regions electrically 
neutral (Fig. 10.2.3b). The result is a charge image, a pattern of electric charge on the 
photoconductor’s surface that exactly matches the pattern of ink on the original document 
(Fig. 10.2.3c).
3  Impoverished as a 
youth, American inventor 
Chester F. Carlson 
(1906–1968) supported 
his family by washing 
windows and cleaning 
offi ces after school. His 
work in a print shop as a 
teenager started him 
thinking about copying 
and he began to experi-
ment with electrophotog-
raphy. After attending 
Caltech (the California 
Institute of Technology), 
he worked for Bell 
Laboratories but was laid 
off during the Depression. 
While attending law 
school, he continued his 
experiments and invented 
the xerographic copying 
process in 1937–1938. 
Development of commer-
cial copiers was slow, and 
it wasn’t until 1960 that 
the Haloid Xerox 
Corporation produced its 
fi rst successful copier, 
Model 914. Carlson 
became extremely wealthy 
but gave most of his 
money away anonymously.
Photoconductor
belt
Precharger
Original
Flashlamps
Transfer
charger
Paper
Charge
erase
lamp
Lens
Toner
Real
image
Cleaner
Charge
erase
lamp
Fuser
Fig. 10.2.1 This xerographic copying machine uses a photoconductor belt to form black-and-white 
images of an original document. The copying process begins with the precharger, which coats the 
photoconductor with charge. The optical system then forms a real image on a fl at region of the 
photoconductor belt, producing a charge image. After the charge image picks up toner particles, the 
fi rst charge erase lamp eliminates the charge image and weakens the toner’s attachment to the belt. 
The toner is then transferred and fused to the paper.
Light
(a)
Dark
Photoconductor
(b)
Photoconductor
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
– – –
–
–
– – – – –
+
+
+ +
+ +
Fig. 10.2.2 (a) In the 
dark, a photoconductor is an 
electrical insulator so that 
separated electric charges 
on its surfaces remain there 
indefi nitely. (b) When the 
photoconductor is exposed 
to light, it becomes an 
electrical conductor and the 
opposite electric charges 
soon join one another.

278 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
 
To develop this charge image into a visible one, the xerographic copier exposes 
the photoconductor to positively charged toner particles (Fig. 10.2.3d). This toner is a 
fi ne, insulating plastic powder containing a colored pigment, usually black. Applying 
toner to the photoconductor must be done gently, and it’s often accomplished with 
the help of Tefl on-coated iron balls. These tiny balls are held together in long fi laments 
by a rotating magnetic shaft, so that the shaft resembles a spinning brush with extra-
ordinarily soft bristles. These bristles wipe toner particles out of their storage tray 
and onto the photoconductor. Contact with the Tefl on leaves the toner particles posi-
tively charged, so they stick to the negatively charged portions of the photoconductor 
(Fig. 10.2.3e).
 
The photoconductor now carries a black image of the original document, an image that 
the copier must transfer to the paper. Before attempting that transfer, the copier fi rst weak-
ens the photoconductor’s grip on the toner by exposing it to light from a charge erase lamp. 
This light eliminates the photoconductor’s charge (Fig. 10.2.3f) and leaves the positively 
charged toner particles clinging only loosely to its surface (Fig. 10.2.3g).
 
The copier then transfers the toner image to a blank sheet of paper by pressing that 
paper lightly against the photoconductor while spraying negative charge onto the paper’s 
back (Fig. 10.2.3h). The positively charged toner is attracted to the negatively charged 
paper, and the two leave the photoconductor together. The copier then heats and presses the 
copy, permanently fusing the toner onto the paper (Fig. 10.2.3i). Once the image has been 
transferred to the paper, the copier cleans its photoconducting surface in preparation for the 
next copy; a second charge erase lamp eliminates any remaining charge, and a brush or 
squeegee mops up any residual toner.
 
With that introduction to xerography, you can already explain many things about copi-
ers. For example, while fi xing a copier jam, you may fi nd that you have removed unfi nished 
copies—ones bearing toner images that haven’t yet been fused onto the paper. The toner of 
an unfused copy comes off on your hand because it’s held in place only by electrostatic 
forces. When you replace the toner cartridge in a personal copier, in addition to adding new 
toner, you’re also installing a new precharge system, photoconductor drum, and toner 
applicator (Fig. 10.2.4).
 
However, we’ve glossed over three important physics issues. Two we’ll leave for later 
chapters: why a photoconductor becomes conducting when exposed to light (Chapter 13, 
Light), and how a lens projects an image of the document onto the photoconductor (Chap-
ter 14, Optics and Electronics). The third issue is relevant now, and so we’ll examine it 
carefully—how the copier sprays charges onto surfaces.
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
Negative corona wire
Photoconductor
Velocity
Heater
Paper
Negative corona wire
Paper
Metal
Light
Light
Light
Toner
(a)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
–
– –
–
– – – – – – – – – –
–
– – – –
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
(b)
–
– – – – – – –
– – –
+       + + + + + + +       + + +
(c)
–
– – – – – – –
– – –
+       + + + + + + +       + + +
(d)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
– – – – – – –
– – –
+       + + + + + + +       + + +
(e)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+       + + + + + + +      + + +
( f )
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
(g)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
(h)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
(i)
––
–
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
– –
–
Fig. 10.2.3 The 
photoconductor is fi rst 
coated (a) with a uniform 
layer of negative charge. 
Exposure to light (b) erases 
some charge to form a 
charge image (c). The 
charge image attracts (d) 
positively charged toner 
particles (e). The charge 
image is erased (f) to 
release the toner particles 
(g). The toner is transferred 
to the negatively charged 
paper (h) and fused to the 
paper with heat (i).
Check Your Understanding #1: Sticky Copies
When the copies emerge from a xerographic copier, they tend to stick to things and attract lint. What 
causes this effect?
Answer: The charge that was placed on the paper to attract the toner isn’t always removed com-
pletely. Moreover, the toner itself is charged.
Why: The fi nal transfer process, lifting the toner particles from the photoconductor to the paper, is 
done by charging the paper, and some of this charge remains on the paper when it leaves the copier. 
Copier transparencies are particularly clingy because plastic retains charge so well.
Discharges and Electric Fields
At the start of the copy cycle, the xerographic copier coats its photoconducting surface 
uniformly with electric charges. Because this precharging process is done in the dark, 
while the surface is an electrical insulator, the charges must be sprayed onto it like paint. 
The copier’s charge sprayer is a corona discharge, a gentle sustained spark that forms in 
the air near a needle or fi ne wire that’s kept at high voltage.

Xerographic Copiers 279
 
It’s a type of discharge, a fl ow of electric charge through a gas. Air is normally an 
insulator because its atoms and molecules are neutral and can’t convey charge from one 
place to another. However, by seeding air liberally with individual charged particles, the 
copier manages to turn that air into a conductor and then to produce a discharge in it. 
How does the copier seed the air with charges and produce its discharge? And how does 
it use that discharge to coat its photoconducting surface? To answer those questions, we 
need to know more about electrostatic forces and voltages, and about a related concept, 
electric fi elds.
 
Because free charges are hard to come by in the air, the copier begins with just a few 
charged particles and uses them to generate more. The idea is simple: the copier uses elec-
trostatic forces to accelerate those initial charges to enormous speeds and lets them smash 
into air’s neutral particles. When hit hard enough, a neutral air particle breaks into oppo-
sitely charged fragments and thus adds two more free charges to the air. These new charges 
join the mix, accelerating, colliding, and breaking up still more air particles. A cascade of 
collisions ensues, and the air “breaks down,” transforming from an insulator to a conductor. 
The copier then uses this conducting air to spray the photoconductor with charges.
 
Where do those initial charges come from? Surprisingly, they’re already there, the 
products of cosmic rays and natural radioactivity! Every cubic centimeter of ordinary air 
contains almost 2000 charged particles, roughly half positive and half negative. Consider-
ing that this same volume of air contains almost 3 × 1019 neutral particles, that’s not many 
charges. But it’s enough to get the discharge started.
 
To parlay those initial charges into the vast numbers it needs, the copier must acceler-
ate them aggressively. The neutral air particles are so densely packed that it’s diffi cult for 
the charged ones to pick up much speed before they hit something and slow down. To give 
each initial charge a good shot at breaking the fi rst neutral particle it hits, the copier must 
accelerate that charge very quickly.
 
The copier accelerates its charges using strong electrostatic forces. Up until now, 
we’ve associated electrostatic forces with pairs of charges, each charge pushing or pulling 
on the other. As long as there are only a handful of charges in a given situation, the individ-
ual electrostatic forces on a particular charge can be added together to obtain the overall 
electrostatic force on that charge. However, in the copier’s wires and discharge, there are so 
many individual charges that adding up their forces is virtually impossible. We need some 
other way to characterize the overall electrostatic force on a particular charge.
 
Instead of thinking about the many interactions between one particular charge and all the 
other charges around it, we can view the electrostatic force on our charge as the result of its 
one interaction with something local: an electric fi eld, an attribute of space that exerts an 
electrostatic force on a charge. The surrounding charges create the electric fi eld and that elec-
tric fi eld pushes on our charge. The electrostatic force on our charge depends on the charge’s 
location in space and time, so the value of the electric fi eld also depends on space and time.
 
The electric fi eld is an example of a fi eld, a structure that associates a physical quantity 
with each point in space and time. The term fi eld suggests another structure that extends 
across space and time—a fi eld of growing wheat. Since the length of the wheat stalks 
depends on where and when you look, stalk length is a fi eld. Moreover, in windy weather, 
the direction of those wheat stalks also depends on where and when you look, so the stalks 
are actually vectors and form a vector fi eld, a structure that associates a vector quantity 
with each point in space and time. The electric fi eld is also a vector fi eld; at each point, its 
magnitude is the amount of electrostatic force it exerts per unit of electric charge and its 
direction is the direction in which it pushes a positive charge.
 
Figure 10.2.5a illustrates the electric fi eld of a motionless positive charge. Each white 
dot represents a point in space and time, and the red arrow passing through that dot rep-
resents the electric fi eld at that point. The direction of the arrow indicates the direction of 
the fi eld, and its volume is proportional to the fi eld’s magnitude. Also shown are the fi eld’s 
effects on two test charges, idealized positive charges that have no electric fi elds of their 
own and thus no infl uence on their surroundings.
Fig. 10.2.4 This 
xerographic copier places 
the photoconductor drum, 
toner supply, and a corona 
wire inside a disposable 
cartridge. After the 
paper passes through the 
cartridge, toner is fused 
onto its surface and it 
leaves the copier.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

280 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
 
Test charges don’t really exist, but they’re useful conceptual tools for examining elec-
tric fi elds. In the present case, the central positive charge’s electric fi eld pushes each test 
charge away from the positive charge with an electrostatic force that is inversely propor-
tional to the distance from the positive charge. When the central charge is negative (Fig. 
10.2.5b), its electric fi eld is reversed and that fi eld pushes each test charge toward the 
central charge.
 
From this new perspective, the electrostatic force on a charge is exerted by the electric 
fi eld itself, not by the source of the electric fi eld. That electrostatic force is equal to the 
charge times the electric fi eld at the charge’s position. We can write this relationship as a 
word equation:
electrostatic force = charge · electric field, 
(10.2.1)
in symbols:
F = qE,
and in everyday language:
Charged lint accelerates quickly in a region full of static electricity,
where the electrostatic force is in the direction of the electric fi eld. Note that a particle 
carrying a negative amount of charge (an electron) experiences a force opposite the electric 
fi eld. The SI unit of electric fi eld is the newton per coulomb (abbreviated N/C).
 
At present, the electric fi eld may seem like an unnecessary fi ction. In later sections, 
however, we’ll see that the electric fi eld is much more than just a new way of thinking about 
the forces between charges. That’s because the electric fi eld truly exists in space, indepen-
dent of the charges that produce it. In fact, electric fi elds are often created by things other 
than charges and can infl uence things other than charges as well.
 
The copier employs a very strong electric fi eld to “break down” the air so that it can 
operate its discharge. That fi eld accelerates charges so rapidly that collision cascades 
occur and fi ll the air with free charges. Unfortunately, you can’t sense electric fi elds 
directly, so it’s hard to visualize a strong one. We’ll work on that problem, but for now just 
remember that strong electric fi elds can initiate discharges in air. That’s how thunder-
storms produce lightning!
(a)
(b)
Test charge
Electrostatic force
Fig. 10.2.5 (a) The 
electric fi eld of a 
motionless positive charge, 
represented by red arrows 
at positions indicated by 
white dots. Each fi eld 
vector points away from 
the positive charge and its 
magnitude is proportional 
to one over the square 
of the distance from the 
charge. Each of two test 
charges experiences an 
electrostatic force equal 
to the test charge’s charge 
times the electric fi eld at 
its position. (b) The electric 
fi eld of a motionless 
negative charge.

Xerographic Copiers 281
Conductors and Voltage Gradients
A copier’s precharging system uses the gentle corona discharge that develops in the strong 
electric fi eld just outside a fi ne high-voltage wire. This discharge ferries charges to the 
photoconductor surface and coats it uniformly. To understand why a strong electric fi eld 
exists outside a fi ne high-voltage wire and why the discharge it produces is “gentle,” we 
need some background. Let’s start by looking at electric fi elds inside and outside electrical 
conductors.
 
Consider the simplest conducting object—a solid metal ball. If you release some iden-
tical positive charges inside that ball (Fig. 10.2.6a), what happens to them? Because they 
repel one another, those charges accelerate outward and move apart. In fact, they’d leave 
the ball altogether if they weren’t chemically bound to its metal. After spending a moment 
or two ridding themselves of extra electrostatic potential energy, principally as thermal 
energy, the charges settle down in stable equilibria on the ball’s surface (Fig. 10.2.6b). At 
its equilibrium point, the outward electrostatic force that each charge experiences from its 
fellow charges is perfectly balanced by the inward chemical force it experiences from the 
metal. The net force on it is zero.
 
At equilibrium, each charge has also minimized its total potential energy. After all, it 
can’t stop accelerating until there is no direction in which it can move to lower its potential 
energy further. What’s amazing about how the charges arrange themselves on the ball’s 
surface is that each one ends up with the same total potential energy. That’s because if one 
of them had less total potential energy than the rest, the other charges would accelerate 
toward it to lower their total potential energies as well!
 
Since the only potential energy that signifi cantly affects charges in our small homoge-
neous ball is electrostatic potential energy, every charge in our ball has essentially the same 
electrostatic potential energy. Because voltage is the electrostatic potential energy per unit 
of charge, equal potential energies on equal charges means equal voltages—the entire ball 
has a single, uniform voltage! In our voltage ↔ altitude analogy, this observation is analo-
gous to the fact that, at equilibrium, the water level in a swimming pool has a single uni-
form altitude.
 
Because of the ball’s perfect symmetry, charges in equilibrium are spread evenly on its 
surface. Had we chosen a less symmetric conducting object, such as the copier’s fi ne metal 
wire, charges in equilibrium would not be spread so evenly. Nonetheless, those charges 
would still be on the outside of the object, and it would still have a single uniform voltage.
Check Your Understanding #2: Medical Electrons
A medical linear accelerator uses a strong electric fi eld to accelerate electrons forward and give them 
enormous kinetic energies. These high-energy electrons enter the patient and kill cancer cells. In 
which direction does the accelerator’s electric fi eld point?
Answer: It points backward, away from the patient.
Why: Since electrons are negatively charged, they accelerate in the direction opposite to the fi eld. 
Since the accelerator must push the electrons forward, toward the patient, its fi eld must point away 
from the patient.
Check Your Figures #1: Lint Floats
A piece of charged lint refuses to fall because an electric fi eld is exactly supporting its weight. If the 
lint weighs 10−8 N and has a positive charge of 10−11 C, what electric fi eld is supporting it?
Answer: The lint is supported by an electric fi eld of 1000 N/C in the upward direction.
Why: The electric fi eld is equal to the force it exerts divided by the charge, or 10−8 N divided by 
10−11 C. It must point upward to support the positively charged lint against the downward pull of 
gravity.

282 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
 
Given a conducting object’s charges in equilibrium on its surface, we can make one 
more remarkable observation: the electric fi eld inside that object is zero! To see why, let’s 
place a test charge inside the object. Putting a real charge inside the object would upset the 
equilibrium, and that charge would be pushed toward the surface. A test charge, however, 
has no electric fi eld of its own and doesn’t infl uence its surrounding; it leaves the other 
charges in equilibrium and merely responds to the existing electric fi eld. Because the volt-
age is uniform throughout the object, the test charge’s electrostatic potential energy doesn’t 
depend on its position and it therefore can’t reduce its electrostatic potential energy by 
moving. It doesn’t accelerate, so it must be experiencing zero electrostatic force and zero 
electric fi eld.
(a)
(b)
Electric ﬁeld
1000 volts
0 volts
Voltage
Fig. 10.2.6 (a) When like charges are 
placed inside a conducting sphere, they 
repel one another and accelerate toward 
the sphere’s surface. (b) When those 
charges have settled in equilibrium on the 
sphere’s surface, the sphere has a single, 
uniform voltage and zero electric fi eld 
inside it. Outside the sphere, the voltage 
decreases toward zero and there is an 
electric fi eld.
VOLTAGE AND CHARGE ON A CONDUCTING OBJECT
With its charges at equilibrium, a homogeneous conducting object has a single uniform 
voltage and the net charge anywhere in its interior is zero.
ELECTRIC FIELD IN A CONDUCTING OBJECT
With its charges at equilibrium, a homogeneous conducting object has zero electric 
fi eld in its interior.
 
Although the voltage is uniform in and on the copier’s fi ne conducting wire, it varies 
rapidly with position outside that wire (Fig. 10.2.6b). Accompanying this large spatial vari-
ation in voltage is a strong electric fi eld, offi cially called a voltage gradient. You can think 
of a spatial variation in voltage as a “slope” in the voltage. In our voltage ↔ altitude anal-
ogy, a voltage gradient is analogous to an altitude gradient, the slope of an ordinary hill. 

Xerographic Copiers 283
Just as water accelerates swiftly down a steep slope toward a lower altitude, so (positive) 
charge accelerates swiftly down a large voltage gradient toward a lower voltage. Both are 
examples of the accelerations toward lower potential energy that we fi rst examined in 
Chapter 2. In our voltage ↔ pressure analogy, a voltage gradient is analogous to a pressure 
gradient and charge accelerates toward lower voltage in the same way that water acceler-
ates toward lower pressure.
 
Since both electric fi elds and voltage gradients cause charges to accelerate, it shouldn’t 
surprise you to learn that a voltage gradient is an electric fi eld. Although we’ll uncover a 
second source of electric fi elds in the next chapter, we’ll treat a voltage gradient and an 
electric fi eld as equivalent for now. Their relationship can be written as a word equation:
 
electric field = voltage gradient = voltage drop
distance
, 
(10.2.2)
in symbols:
E = Gradient(V),
and in everyday language:
Charges rush down steep drops in voltage, much as bicycles rush down steep 
drops in hill height,
where the electric fi eld points in the direction of the most rapid voltage decrease.
 
This relationship gives us a second way to look at an electric fi eld. In addition to being 
the electrostatic force exerted per unit of charge, electric fi eld is also the voltage drop 
per unit of distance. The SI unit of electric fi eld therefore has a second form: the volt per 
meter (abbreviated V/m). The volt per meter is exactly the same unit as the newton per 
coulomb. As an example of an electric fi eld produced by a voltage drop, consider the top of 
a normal 9-V battery. With its two terminals separated by just 0.005 m and a voltage drop 
of 9 V between them, the space between those terminals contains an electric fi eld of about 
1800 V/m, pointing toward the negative terminal.
Check Your Understanding #3: Don’t Get Out of a Hot Car!
During a thunderstorm, a lightning strike places a huge static charge on your car. Why don’t you 
notice this charge as long as you remain inside the car?
Answer: The accumulated charge is all on the outside of the conducting car, so it will affect you 
only if you step outside and offer it a conducting path to the ground.
Why: Since the car body is an electrical conductor and its charges are in equilibrium, the car has a 
uniform voltage and there is no electric fi eld inside the car. Outside the car, however, there is a sub-
stantial electric fi eld. If your body provides a conducting path to the ground, that electric fi eld will 
push charges through you and you will experience a shock. Similarly, if electric power lines ever fall 
on your car, stay inside the car to avoid a potentially lethal shock.
Check Your Figures #2: Riding the Field
An electric fi eld pushes charged particles through the tube of a fl uorescent lamp, allowing it to pro-
duce light. To operate properly, a typical fl uorescent tube needs an electric fi eld of about 100 V/m. 
If the average voltage difference between the two ends of a tube is 120 V, how long can that fl uores-
cent tube be?
Answer: It can be about 1.2 m (4 ft).
Why: With a voltage difference of 120 V between its ends and a length of 1.2 m, the tube’s electric 
fi eld will be 120 V divided by 1.2 m, or about 100 V/m. This result explains why so many fl uorescent 
lamps in the United States are about 1.2 m (4 ft) long.

284 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
Fine Wires and High Voltages: Corona Discharges
Ordinary air breaks down in an electric fi eld of about 3 × 106 V/m, or, in customary units, 
about 30,000 V per centimeter. At that fi eld, free charges accelerate so rapidly that a cas-
cade of charge-freeing collisions suddenly transforms air from a nearly perfect insulator 
into a reasonably good conductor.
 
You can produce such a strong fi eld all by yourself. On a dry winter day, you can coat 
yourself with positive charges and raise your voltage to about 30,000 V simply by scuffi ng 
your rubber-soled shoes across an acrylic carpet. As you then approach a grounded door-
knob at 0 V, the voltage difference between the doorknob and your hand will be 30,000 V. 
When your hand is about 1 cm from the doorknob, the electric fi eld will reach 30,000 V per 
centimeter and the air will break down with a brilliant spark (Fig. 10.2.7).
 
Because your hand and the doorknob are similar in size and shape, the voltage 
changes smoothly between them (Fig. 10.2.8a). It varies steadily from 0 V on the door-
knob to 30,000 V on your hand, so the voltage gradient or electric fi eld is nearly uniform. 
When two objects differ signifi cantly in size, however, the larger object dominates volt-
ages in the space between them. For example, if you hold a long pin in your hand as you 
approach the doorknob, the doorknob will control the voltage most of the way to the pin 
and nearly all the increase in voltage will occur just outside the pin’s point (Fig. 10.2.8b). 
Rather than being uniform, the voltage gradient or electric fi eld will be strongest near 
that point.
Fig. 10.2.7 These 
two metal spheres are 
1 cm apart. When their 
difference in voltage is 
about 30,000 V, the air 
between them breaks down 
and forms a spark.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
30,000 volts
30,000 volts
0 volts
Voltage
Uniform
electric
ﬁeld
(a)
0 volts
(b)
30,000 volts
0 volts
Voltage
Sharp pin
Strong electric ﬁeld
Weak electric
ﬁeld
30,000 volts
0 volts
Fig. 10.2.8 Your voltage is 30,000 V when you reach for the 0-V doorknob. (a) Since your hand and 
the doorknob are similar in size, the voltage decreases steadily between them and the electric fi eld is 
uniform. (b) When you hold out a pin, the voltage plummets near its sharp point and the electric fi eld 
there is extremely strong.

Xerographic Copiers 285
 
The copier makes good use of this nonuniform fi eld. Its fi ne high-voltage wire is nearly 
surrounded by a much larger metal shroud. The wire is so thin that its infl uence fades just 
a hair’s breadth from its surface and the grounded shroud dominates voltage almost all the 
way to the wire. Although the wire’s negative voltage is only −3000 V and it’s about 1 cm 
from the shroud, the voltage changes so rapidly in the air just outside this wire that the 
electric fi eld there easily exceeds 30,000 V/cm and breaks down the air.
 
The discharge that forms near the fi ne wire is a special, self-regulating one—a corona 
discharge (Fig. 10.2.9). While most discharges can’t control how many free charges they 
produce, a corona discharge automatically maintains a steady production. Because free 
charges form only in the strong electric fi eld near its thin conductor, their production rate 
is very sensitive to changes in that conductor’s effective thickness. If there are too many 
free charges in the air near the conductor, their ability to conduct electricity effectively 
thickens the conductor, weakens the electric fi eld, and slows the production of free charges. 
The discharge is correcting its own mistake.
 
Because of this stabilizing effect, the air in a corona discharge maintains a steady elec-
trical conductivity that’s ideal for charging a copier’s photoconductor. However, corona 
discharges were common long before copiers. They often occur spontaneously near sharp 
points or fi ne wires at high voltages, leading to charge leakage from power transmission 
lines and occasionally producing a glow called St. Elmo’s fi re on the masts and rigging of 
sailing ships (see 4 ).
4  Contrary to popular 
belief, lightning rods 
don’t simply attract 
lightning strikes so as to 
protect the surrounding 
roof. Instead, they 
produce corona discharges 
that diminish any local 
buildups of electric 
charge. By neutralizing 
the local electric charge, 
the lightning rod reduces 
the chances that lightning 
will strike the house. 
Similar devices, called 
static dissipaters, are 
found near the tips of 
airplane wings and protect 
planes from lightning 
strikes.
Check Your Understanding #4: A Safety Pin
You can avoid the shock of static electricity by holding out a sharp needle as you reach for a metal 
doorknob or wall. How does that needle protect you from static electricity?
Answer: The needle emits charge into the air via a corona discharge.
Why: The needle acts as your personal lightning rod. When you are carrying a net electric charge, 
some of that charge settles onto the needle. The strong electric fi eld near the needle’s tip initiates a 
corona discharge, and much of your accumulated charge leaves through it. This discharge limits your 
net electric charge and thus the size of any shock you experience.
Getting Ready to Copy: Charging by Induction
A corona discharge does more than just turn air into a conductor; it also produces an 
outward spray of electric charges. Those charges are pushed outward by the electric 
fi eld surrounding the corona wire. Since the copier’s corona wire has a negative volt-
age, the surrounding electric fi eld points toward that wire. Because negative charges 
accelerate opposite an electric fi eld, the copier’s corona produces a shower of outgoing 
negative charges. They spray onto the photoconducting surface as it moves steadily 
past the corona, and the photoconductor thus acquires a uniform coating of negative 
charges.
 
As each negative charge lands, it draws a positive charge onto the grounded metal 
surface beneath the photoconductor and the attraction between those two opposite charges 
holds them fi rmly in place. While the photoconductor’s open surface is acquiring its uni-
form negative charge, the metal layer underneath is acquiring an equivalent positive charge 
(Fig. 10.2.3a). This process, whereby a grounded conductor acquires a charge through the 
attraction of nearby opposite charge, is called “charging by induction.”
 
The induced positive charge on the metal side of the photoconductor is important to 
the xerographic process for several reasons. First, it lowers the electrostatic potential energy 
of the negative charge so that the surface’s negative voltage isn’t as enormous. Second, 
without that positive layer nearby, repulsion between like charges would tend to push neg-
ative charges on the open surface toward the edges of the photoconductor and distort the 
resulting images.
Fig. 10.2.9 The electric 
fi eld near this sharp, high-
voltage pin is so strong that 
it breaks down the air and 
forms a corona discharge. 
The resulting glow is 
produced by air particles 
that receive energy from 
the discharge.
Courtesy Lou 
Bloomfi eld

286 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
 
Most signifi cantly, however, the positive charge layer gives the negative charge layer 
somewhere to go when the photoconductor is exposed to light! Wherever light from the 
original document turns a patch of the photoconductor into a conductor, the negative and 
positive charge layers rush together and cancel. The resulting uncharged portion of the pho-
toconductor subsequently attracts no toner and produces a white patch on the fi nished copy.
 
Having come full circle, we can now see how the copier achieves its goal. It uses a 
corona discharge to coat a photoconducting surface with negative charge and then selec-
tively erases portions of that charge layer with light from the original document. The 
remaining charged patches on the photoconductor attract positively charged black toner, 
which is then transferred permanently to the paper.
 
It’s worth mentioning that, for technical reasons, some copiers precoat their photocon-
ductors with positive rather than negative charges and then use that charge to attract nega-
tively charged toner. These copiers put high positive voltages on their fi ne wires so that 
their coronas spray positive charges.
Metal 
plates
Insulator
layer
Outside of 
capacitor
Inside of 
capacitor
Symbol for capacitor
(a)
(b)
(c)
0.02 μF
μF
Fig. 10.2.10 (a) A 
capacitor is usually a 
disk or cylinder with 
two protruding wires. Its 
capacitance is printed 
on its surface. Inside 
(b), the wires are connected 
to two conducting plates 
that are separated by a 
thin insulating layer. 
(c) In a schematic diagram 
of an electronic device, the 
capacitor is represented by 
two parallel lines.
Check Your Understanding #5: Hot Rod
A thick wire connects the lightning rod on the courthouse steeple to the ground and normally ensures 
that the rod is electrically neutral. However, when a negatively charged cloud fl oats overhead, what 
charge does that rod acquire?
Answer: The rod becomes positively charged.
Why: The lightning rod charges by induction—the cloud’s negative charge attracts positive charge 
up the wire and onto the rod. The rod’s sharp point initiates a corona discharge, spraying positive 
charge toward the cloud and gradually decreasing the cloud’s charge. In that fashion, the lightning 
rod acts to suppress lightning strikes.
Capacitors
When it’s in the dark, the copier’s photoconductor system is an example of a capacitor, a 
device that stores separated positive and negative charge. Capacitors are common in mod-
ern technology, and most consist of two oppositely charged surfaces separated by a thin 
insulating layer. To make adding or removing charge easy, those surfaces are usually made 
of metals or other electrical conductors (Fig. 10.2.10). The copier’s capacitor, however, has 
only one metal surface on its insulating photoconductor layer; the other surface is open and 
nonconducting (Fig. 10.2.3a). The copier uses its corona discharge to put charge on that 
open surface, and it uses light to remove that charge.
 
The two conducting surfaces of an ordinary capacitor are often called plates. When one 
plate is positively charged and the other is negatively charged, the attraction of opposite charges 
on those plates offsets the repulsion of like charges on each plate. The plates thus manage to 
store large quantities of separated charge while leaving the overall capacitor electrically neutral.
 
You can “charge” a capacitor’s plates by transferring (positive) charge from its nega-
tive plate to its positive one. Since each charge you move experiences an electrostatic force 
in the opposite direction, you must do work on that charge as you push it from the negative 
plate to the positive plate. Your work is stored in the capacitor as electrostatic potential 
energy, and that stored energy is released when you let the separated charge get back 
together. Since (positive) charge has more electrostatic energy on the positive plate than on 
the negative plate, the voltage of the positive plate is higher than the voltage of the negative 
plate. The voltage difference between plates is proportional to the separated charge on 
them; the more separated charge the capacitor is holding, the larger the voltage difference.
 
This voltage difference also depends on the physical structure of the capacitor. Increas-
ing the surface area of each plate decreases the repulsion of its like charges. Thinning the 
insulating layer between the plates increases the attraction of their opposite charges. Both 
changes lower the separated charge’s electrostatic potential energy and, consequently, the 

Flashlights 287
voltage difference between the plates. The bigger and closer the plates, the less energy it 
takes to store separated charge on them.
 
Changes that allow the capacitor to store separated charge more easily increase its 
capacitance, the amount of separated charge the capacitor holds divided by the voltage 
difference between its plates. The SI unit of capacitance is the coulomb per volt, also called 
the farad (abbreviated F). A capacitor with a farad of capacitance stores an incredible 
amount of separated charge, even at a low voltage difference, but a capacitor with a bil-
lionth of a farad of capacitance is much more typical. A capacitor’s capacitance is marked 
on its wrapper, often in an abbreviated form. A Greek letter μ appearing in front of the F 
means millionths of a farad (μF, or microfarads), a letter n appearing in front of the F means 
billionths of a farad (nF, or nanofarads), and a letter p appearing in front of the F means 
trillionths of a farad (pF or picofarads).
Check Your Understanding #6: Recycling Charges
As you recycle old computer parts, you come across a capacitor and wonder if it has separated charge 
in it. How can you tell?
Answer: If it has separated charge, it will have a voltage difference between its two plates.
Why: If the capacitor contains no separated charge, its two plates will have the same voltage. In 
other words, the energy per charge on the two plates will be equal. If the plates store separated 
charge, however, their voltages will be different. The plate containing extra positive charge will have 
more energy per charge and thus a greater voltage than the plate containing extra negative charge.
Questions to Think About: Why are some fl ashlights brighter 
than others? Why is it important that all the batteries point in 
the same direction? What is the difference between old batter-
ies and new ones? What makes a fl ashlight suddenly become 
dim or bright when you shake it?
Experiments to Do: Find a fl ashlight that uses two or more remov-
able batteries. Turn it on. What did the switch do to make the 
fl ashlight produce light? With the fl ashlight turned on, slowly open 
the battery compartment. The lamp will probably become dark. 
You should be able to turn the fl ashlight on and off by opening and 
closing the battery compartment. Why does this method work?
 
Replace the fl ashlight’s batteries with older or newer ones 
and compare its brightness. Turn one or more of the batteries 
around backward, and see how that change affects the fl ash-
light. What happens when you put a piece of paper or tape 
between two of the batteries? What happens when you care-
fully clean the metal surfaces of each battery with a pencil 
eraser before putting the batteries in the fl ashlight? Does it 
matter whether the fl ashlight uses a bulb or an LED?
There isn’t much to a typical fl ashlight; you can see the few 
parts it has when you open it to replace its batteries. A fl ash-
light isn’t a mechanical device, though; it’s electrical. It con-
tains an electric circuit, and most of its components are 
involved in the fl ow of electricity. To understand how a fl ash-
light works, we need to understand how an electric circuit 
works and how electricity carries power from batteries to a 
lightbulb or LED. As we’ll see, fl ashlights aren’t as simple as 
they appear.
Reflector
Switch
contact
Switch
Batteries
+
+
–
–
Contact
spring
Bulb
Magnet
SECTION 10.3
Flashlights
Electricity and the Flashlight’s Electric Circuit
A basic, old-fashioned fl ashlight has just three components—a battery, a lightbulb, and a 
switch—connected together by metal strips. When the switch is on, the strips transfer 
energy from the batteries to the bulb. How does energy move through the strips, and why 
does the switch start or stop that energy transfer? To answer these questions, we must fi rst 
understand electricity and electric circuits, so that’s where we’ll begin.

288 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
 
When you turn on a fl ashlight, electricity conveys energy from the batteries to the bulb. 
An electric current, a current of electric charges, fl ows through these components, carry-
ing the energy with it. We’ll examine the exact nature of this current soon; for now, you can 
picture it as a steady stream of tiny positive charges following a circular route that takes 
them through the batteries, through the bulb, and then back to the batteries for another trip 
(Fig. 10.3.1). As long as the fl ashlight is on, charges fl ow around this loop, receiving energy 
from the batteries and delivering it to the bulb, over and over again. On route, the charges 
carry this energy mostly as electrostatic potential energy.
 
The looping path taken by charges in a fl ashlight is called an electric circuit. 
Because a circuit has no beginning or end, charges can’t accumulate in one place, where 
their mutual repulsion would eventually stop them from fl owing. Circuits are present in 
virtually all electric devices, and they explain the need for at least two wires in the 
power cord of any home appliance: one wire carries charges to the appliance to deliver 
energy, and the other wire carries those charges back to the power company to receive 
some more.
 
But what role does the switch play in all this? As part of one conducting path 
between the batteries and bulb, the switch can make or break the fl ashlight’s circuit 
(Fig. 10.3.2). When the fl ashlight is on, the switch completes the loop so that charges 
can fl ow continuously around the closed circuit (Fig. 10.3.2a). A closed circuit appears 
in Fig. 10.3.3a.
 
However, when you turn off the fl ashlight, the switch breaks the loop to form an open 
circuit (Fig. 10.3.2b). Although one conducting path still connects the batteries and bulb, 
the loop now has a gap in it and can no longer carry a continuous current. Instead, charges 
accumulate at the gap and current stops fl owing through the fl ashlight. Since energy can no 
longer reach the bulb, it goes dark. An open circuit appears in Fig. 10.3.3b.
 
There’s one other type of circuit worth mentioning. A short circuit forms when the 
two separate paths connecting the batteries to the bulb accidentally touch one another 
(Fig. 10.3.4). This unintended contact creates a new, shorter loop around which the charges 
can fl ow. Because the bulb is expected to extract energy from the charges, it’s designed to 
impede their fl ow and to convert their electrostatic potential energy into thermal energy and 
light. This opposition to the fl ow of electricity is called electrical resistance. Since the 
shortened loop offers little resistance, most of the charges fl ow through it, bypassing the 
bulb. The bulb dims or goes out altogether.
 
Since the bulb is the only part of the fl ashlight that’s designed to consume electric 
energy, a short circuit leaves the charges without a safe place to get rid of their electrostatic 
potential energy. They deposit it dangerously in the batteries and the metal paths, making 
them hot. Since short circuits can start fi res, fl ashlights and other electric equipment are 
designed to avoid them.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10.3.3
When the switch is on (a), current fl ows around the closed circuit and carries power from 
the battery to the lightbulb. When the switch is off (b), no current fl ows through the open circuit.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Switch
+
+
–
–
Bulb
Contact spring
Reﬂector
Fig. 10.3.1 A fl ashlight 
contains one or more 
batteries, a lightbulb, a 
switch, and several metal 
strips to connect them all 
together. When the switch 
is turned on (as shown), the 
components in the fl ashlight 
form a continuous loop 
of conducting materials. 
Electrons fl ow around this 
loop counterclockwise.
+
–
1.5 V
+
–
1.5 V
Switch closed
or “on”
Bulb
filament
(cold)
Fig. 10.3.4
When an 
unwanted conducting path 
allows current to bypass 
the fl ashlight’s fi lament, 
it forms a short circuit. 
Because it has no proper 
place for electrons to 
deposit their energy, the 
short circuit becomes hot.
+
–
1.5 V
+
–
1.5 V
+
–
1.5 V
+
–
1.5 V
Switch closed
or “on”
Switch open
or “off”
Bulb
filament
(hot)
Bulb
filament
(cold)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10.3.2 (a) When the 
fl ashlight’s switch is on, it 
closes the circuit so that 
current can fl ow continuously 
from the batteries, through 
the bulb’s fi lament, and 
back through the batteries. 
It follows this circuit over 
and over again. (b) When 
the fl ashlight’s switch is off, 
it opens the circuit so that 
current stops fl owing.

Flashlights 289
 
Many modern fl ashlights use one or more light-emitting diodes (LEDs) in place of 
the old-fashioned bulb. However, an LED is more complicated than a bulb, and operat-
ing several LEDs at once complicates the fl ashlight’s electric circuit. For simplicity, 
we’ll start with a single bulb in our fl ashlight and replace it with one or more LEDs later 
in this section.
Check Your Understanding #1: Cutting the Power
If you remove just one of the wires from an automobile’s battery, the vehicle will not start at all. Why 
doesn’t the other wire supply any energy?
Answer: Removing a single wire from the battery breaks the circuit and prevents a steady fl ow of 
electric current through the car’s electric system.
Why: Neither the battery nor the rest of the car can accumulate charges indefi nitely. Without one 
wire to carry charges from the battery to the car and a second wire to return those charges from the 
car to the battery, accumulation will occur and charge movement will stop.
The Electric Current in the Flashlight
Each of the tiny charged particles fl owing through the fl ashlight’s circuit carries with it just 
a single elementary unit of electric charge and a miniscule amount of electrostatic potential 
energy. However, because those charges fl ow in astonishing numbers, they convey a con-
siderable amount of energy per second—the quantity we know as power (see Section 2.2) 
and measure in watts (abbreviated W). The bulb needs a certain amount of power to keep 
its fi lament glowing brightly, and you can determine how much power is reaching the bulb 
by multiplying the number of elementary charges passing through the bulb each second by 
the amount of energy each one delivers.
 
There are too many elementary charges to count, though. You’ll do much better to mea-
sure the circuit’s current, that is, the amount of charge passing a particular point in the circuit 
per unit of time. The SI unit of current is the coulomb per second, more commonly called the 
ampere (abbreviated A). One ampere corresponds to 1 C of charge passing by the designated 
point each second. One coulomb is roughly 6.25 × 1018, or 6,250,000,000,000,000,000, ele-
mentary charges, so even a 1-A current involves a tremendous fl ow of elementary charges.
 
Using electric current instead of counting charges, you can determine how much 
power is reaching the bulb by multiplying that current by its electrostatic energy per cou-
lomb—the quantity we already know as voltage. For example, a current of 2 A (2 C/s) at a 
voltage of 3 V (3 J/C) will bring 6 W of power (6 J/s) to the bulb. Brighter fl ashlights 
involve larger currents, greater voltages, or both.
 
Current has a direction, pointing along the route of positive charge fl ow. When you 
turn on the fl ashlight in Fig. 10.3.1, charge fl ows around the circuit clockwise, from the 
battery chain’s positive terminal, through the bulb’s fi lament, through the switch, and 
into the battery chain’s negative terminal. However, now it’s time to address an awk-
ward issue: the positive charges that fl ow clockwise around this circuit are fi ctitious. In 
reality, the electric current is carried by negatively charged electrons heading in the 
opposite direction!
 
As mentioned before, this issue dates back to Franklin’s unfortunate choice of which 
charge to call positive and which to call negative. By the time scientists discovered the 
electron and realized that these negatively charged particles carry currents in wires, current 
had already been defi ned as pointing in the direction of positive charge fl ow. Since it was 
far too late to make current and electron fl ow point in the same direction, scientists and 
engineers simply pretend that current is carried by fi ctitious positive charges heading in the 
current’s direction.
 
This fi ction actually works extremely well, as illustrated by a simple example. When 
negatively charged electrons fl ow to the right through a neutral piece of wire, the wire’s 

290 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
right end becomes negatively charged and its left end becomes positively charged (Fig. 
10.3.5a). But exactly the same thing would happen if a current of fi ctitious positively 
charged particles were to fl ow to the left through that same piece of wire (Fig. 10.3.5b). 
Without sophisticated equipment, you can’t tell whether negative charges are fl owing to the 
right or positive charges are fl owing to the left because the end results are essentially indis-
tinguishable.
 
We, too, adopt this fi ction and pretend that current is the fl ow of positively charged 
particles. In this and subsequent chapters, we’ll stop thinking about electrons and imagine 
that electricity is carried by positive charges moving in the direction of the current. There 
are only a few special cases in which the electrons themselves are important, and we’ll 
consider those situations separately when they arise.
–
–
+
+
(a)
(b)
Before
After
Before
After
–
–
–
+
+
–
+
+
Fig. 10.3.5 A current 
of negatively charged 
particles fl owing to the 
right through a piece 
of wire (a) can’t easily 
be distinguished from 
a current of positively 
charged particles fl owing to 
the left (b). The end result 
of both processes is an 
accumulation of positive 
charge on the left end 
of the wire and negative 
charge on its right end.
Check Your Understanding #2: Don’t Touch That Pipe
A walk across wool carpeting in rubber-soled shoes has left you covered with negative charges. If you 
bring your hand near a large piece of metal, the negative charges will leap through the air as a spark 
to reach the metal. Which way is current fl owing in this spark?
Answer: The current fl ows from the metal toward your hand.
Why: Because current is defi ned as the fl ow of positive charges, it points in the direction opposite 
the fl ow of negative charges. Thus, the current fl ows from the metal toward your hand. These charges 
move only briefl y because there is no circuit. For the charges to move continuously, they would have 
to be recycled and a circuit would be essential.
Batteries
While a battery is basically a portable source of electric power, here are two other interest-
ing ways to think of it. The fi rst is rather abstract: a battery is a type of pump. It “pumps” 
charge from low voltage to high voltage, much as a water pump pumps water from a low 
altitude to a high altitude or as a second water pump pumps water from low pressure to high 
pressure. Once again, our voltage ↔ altitude and voltage ↔ pressure analogies are helpful. 
Each pump moves something against its natural direction of fl ow, pushing it forward and 
doing work on it in the process. The battery increases a charge’s electrostatic potential 
energy by pushing it up a voltage gradient. The fi rst water pump increases water’s gravita-
tional potential energy by pushing it up an altitude gradient. The second water pump 
increases water’s pressure potential energy by pushing it up a pressure gradient.
 
The second perspective on batteries is more mechanical: a battery is a chemically 
powered machine. It uses chemical forces to transfer charges from its negative terminal to 
its positive terminal. As positive charges accumulate on the battery’s positive terminal, the 
voltage there rises, and as negative charges accumulate on the battery’s negative terminal, 
the voltage there drops. Since the battery does work transferring charges from low voltage 
to high voltage, it is converting its chemical potential energy into electrostatic potential 
energy in these separated charges.
 
A battery’s rated voltage refl ects its chemistry, specifi cally the amount of chemical 
potential energy it has available for each charge transfer. As the voltage difference between 
its terminals increases, so does the energy required for each charge transfer. Eventually, the 
chemicals can’t do enough work on a charge to pull it away from the negative terminal and 
push it onto the positive terminal, so the transfers stop. The battery is then in equilibrium—
the electrostatic forces opposing the next charge transfer exactly balance the chemical 
forces promoting it. A typical alkaline battery reaches this equilibrium when the voltage of 
its positive terminal is 1.5 V above the voltage of its negative terminal. Lithium batteries, 
with their more energetic chemistries, can achieve voltage differences of 3 V or more.
 
When you turn on the fl ashlight, you upset its equilibrium by allowing charges to leave 
the battery’s positive terminal for its negative terminal. With fewer separated charges now 

Flashlights 291
on its terminals, the battery’s voltage difference decreases slightly and it begins pumping 
charges again. That renewed charge transport replenishes the terminals’ separated charges 
and opposes any further decrease in the battery’s voltage. In this manner, a 1.5-V alkaline 
battery maintains a nearly steady voltage difference of 1.5 V between its terminals, whether 
its fl ashlight is on or off.
 
That alkaline battery is powered by an electrochemical reaction in which powdered 
zinc at its negative terminal reacts with manganese dioxide paste at its positive terminal. 
This reaction resembles controlled combustion. In effect, the battery “burns” zinc to obtain 
the energy it needs to pump charges from its negative terminal to its positive terminal. 
However, as the battery consumes its chemical potential energy, its ability to pump charges 
diminishes. When its chemicals are nearly exhausted, the battery’s increasing disorder 
reduces its voltage. An aging battery can pump less current than a fresh one, and it provides 
that current with less voltage. Ultimately, less power reaches the fl ashlight’s bulb and it 
goes dim.
 
Most fl ashlights use more than one battery. When two alkaline batteries are connected 
together in a chain, so that the positive terminal of one battery touches the negative terminal 
of the other, the two batteries work together to pump charges from the chain’s negative 
terminal to its positive terminal (Fig. 10.3.6). Each battery pumps charges until its positive 
terminal is 1.5 V above its negative terminal, so the chain’s positive terminal is 3.0 V above 
its negative terminal. Because charges never leave the fl ashlight’s circuit, only relative 
voltages matter in that circuit. We’ll fi nd it convenient to ignore the fl ashlight’s absolute 
voltages and defi ne the voltage of the battery chain’s negative terminal to be 0 V (Fig. 
10.3.6). With that choice, the voltage of its positive terminal becomes 3.0 V.
 
The more batteries in the fl ashlight’s chain, the more energy a charge receives overall 
and the more the voltage will increase from the chain’s negative terminal to its positive 
terminal. A fl ashlight that uses six alkaline batteries in its chain has a positive terminal that 
is 9 V above its negative terminal. A typical 9-V battery actually contains a chain of six 
miniature 1.5-V batteries, arranged so that their voltages add up to 9 V (Fig. 10.3.7).
 
If you reverse one of the batteries in a chain, the reversed battery will extract energy 
from any charge passing through it (Fig. 10.3.8). While the chain may still pump charge 
from its negative terminal to its positive terminal, its overall voltage will be reduced 
because, instead of adding 1.5 V to the chain’s overall voltage, the reversed battery will 
subtract that amount. If the chain has three batteries, two will add energy to the charge 
while the third will subtract it, and the chain’s overall voltage will be only 1.5 V.
 
As the reversed battery extracts energy from the charges passing through it, at least 
some of that extracted energy is converted into chemical potential energy. The reversed 
battery is recharging! Battery chargers follow that concept, pushing current backward 
through a battery—from its positive terminal to its negative terminal—to restore the chem-
ical potential energy in a rechargeable battery. However, normal alkaline batteries are 
“nonrechargeable,” meaning that they turn most of the recharging current’s energy into 
thermal energy instead of chemical potential energy. Nonrechargeable batteries may over-
heat and explode during recharging.
Check Your Understanding #3: Car Batteries
A lead-acid automobile battery provides 12 V between its negative terminal and its positive terminal. 
It actually contains six individual batteries, connected in a chain. How much voltage does each indi-
vidual battery provide?
Answer: Each individual battery provides 2 V.
Why: The voltages of the individual batteries add, so it takes six 2-V batteries to yield a 12-V chain. 
If one of the batteries becomes weak, through damage, loss of fl uid, or consumption of its chemical 
potential energy, the voltage of the chain will drop below 12 V. Pushing current backward through a 
lead-acid battery recharges it.
3.0 V
1.5 V
0.0 V
+
+
–
–
Fig. 10.3.6 When 
two 1.5-V batteries are 
connected in a chain, their 
voltages add so that the 
chain’s positive terminal 
has a voltage that is 3.0 
V higher than the chain’s 
negative terminal. If the 
chain’s negative terminal 
is at 0 V, then the chain’s 
positive terminal is at 3.0 V.
1.5 V
1.5 V
0.0 V
0.0 V
+
+
–
+
+
–
–
Fig. 10.3.8 When one 
battery in a chain of 
three is reversed, the 
reversed battery’s voltage 
is subtracted from the sum 
of the others. The chain’s 
positive terminal has a 
voltage only 1.5 V higher 
than its negative terminal. 
The reversed battery 
recharges.
Fig. 10.3.7 A 9-V battery 
actually contains six small 
1.5-V cells, connected in 
a chain. Positive charges 
that enter the chain at the 
battery’s negative terminal 
pass through all six cells 
before arriving at the 
battery’s positive terminal.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

292 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
Bulbs and Metal Strips
Whereas a battery gives charges electrostatic potential energy by pushing them up a voltage 
gradient, a bulb releases that electrostatic potential energy by letting charges slide down
another voltage gradient. Those two devices make a perfect pair: the battery provides elec-
tric power, and the bulb consumes it. The bulb uses this power to heat its tungsten fi lament 
so hot that it glows yellow-white—but how does electricity heat the fi lament?
 
Consider a fl ashlight with two alkaline batteries (Fig. 10.3.9a). The bulb’s fi lament is 
a fi ne wire, and its two ends are electrically connected to the battery chain’s terminals. With 
one end at 3.0 V and the other at 0.0 V, the fi lament has a voltage gradient across it and 
therefore an electric fi eld. How is that possible? While discussing copiers, we observed that 
a conductor has a uniform voltage throughout. Isn’t the fi lament violating that rule?
 
No, it isn’t. While a conductor has a uniform voltage when its charges are in equilib-
rium, the charges in the bulb are in equilibrium only when the fl ashlight is off. When you 
switch the fl ashlight on, you impose a 3.0-V difference between the two ends of the fi la-
ment and the fi lament’s charges immediately begin accelerating down the voltage gradient 
toward the 0.0-V end.
 
In our voltage ↔ altitude analogy, it’s as though you suddenly tilted a level fi eld to 
create a hill and water that had been lying motionless on that fi eld now accelerated downhill. 
However, a better analog to the individual charges that we’re considering at the moment 
would be bicyclists. Picture hundreds of bicyclists on a level fi eld that suddenly tilts to form 
a hill. All the bicyclists that were at equilibrium on the level fi eld now accelerate downhill.
(a)
(b)
(c)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
0 volts
3 volts
0 volts
altitude =
100 meters
altitude = 0 meters
Batteries
Filament
Filament
(hot)
Batteries
Switch 
(on)
1.5 V
+
–
1.5 V
+
–
3 volts
0 volts
Metal strip
Metal strip
Fig. 10.3.9
(a) Current 
in a fl ashlight’s circuit 
conveys power from the 
batteries to the fi lament. 
(b) Its voltage rises in the 
batteries and decreases in 
the fi lament. The fi lament’s 
voltage drop leads to an 
electric fi eld that keeps the 
charges moving forward at 
constant velocity despite 
many collisions in the 
fi lament. (c) This behavior 
is analogous to bicyclists 
pedaling up a smooth hill 
and then rolling down 
a rough one at constant 
velocity.

Flashlights 293
 
If the fi lament were a perfect conductor of electricity, each charge would accelerate 
steadily down the voltage gradient and convert its electrostatic potential energy into kinetic 
energy. However, the fi lament has a large electrical resistance—it signifi cantly impedes the 
fl ow of electric current. Instead of accelerating smoothly from one end of the fi lament to 
the other, each charge bounces its way down the voltage gradient, colliding frequently with 
the fi lament’s tungsten atoms and giving up kinetic energy with each collision (Fig. 
10.3.9b). What began as ordered electrostatic potential energy in the charges becomes ther-
mal energy in the tungsten atoms, and the fi lament glows brightly. Referring again to our 
voltage ↔ altitude analogy, picture the bicyclists riding down a rough hill strewn with 
rocks and trees (Fig. 10.3.9c). They pick up bruises instead of speed.
 
What about the metal strips connecting the fl ashlight’s batteries and bulb? These strips 
are excellent conductors, but like all ordinary electrical wires, they’re not quite perfect. 
Each strip has a small electrical resistance, so charges can’t coast through it because of 
inertia alone. Instead, the charges need a small voltage gradient to keep them moving for-
ward, and they emerge from the strip at a slightly lower voltage than where they entered. 
The missing energy has become thermal energy, slightly heating the metal strip. In general, 
the less electrical resistance in the strips carrying current to and from the bulb, the less 
power is wasted on route and the more power reaches the bulb. That’s why it’s so important 
to use thick metal strips or even the fl ashlight’s metal case in the connections.
 
A poor connection anywhere in the circuit can spoil this effi cient transfer of power. If 
there is dirt or grease on a battery terminal or worn materials in the switch, the current will 
have to pass through a large electrical resistance and waste power. Improving that connec-
tion, either by shaking the fl ashlight or by cleaning the metal surfaces, will increase the 
current fl ow through the circuit, reduce the wasted power, and brighten the fl ashlight.
Check Your Understanding #4: You Get What You Pay For
The battery in your car is dead, so you use cheap jumper cables to connect the electric system in your 
car to the electric system in your friend’s car. When you try to start your car, too little power reaches 
it to start its engine. What’s wrong with those cables?
Answer: The cables have relatively large electrical resistances.
Why: Starting your car requires a huge current, and the wires supplying that current must not limit 
it or waste its energy. Cheap jumper cables have too much electrical resistance to fulfi ll those require-
ments. There is no substitute for good, thick jumper cables—they’re worth the extra money.
Voltage, Current, and Power in Flashlights
When you turn on the fl ashlight, an electric current carries power from its two alkaline 
batteries to its bulb. Let’s suppose that a current of 1 A is fl owing through the fl ashlight’s 
circuit and take a look at how much power is being transferred.
 
A bulb consumes electric power because the current passing through it slides down the 
voltage gradient and there is a drop in voltage between where the current arrives at the fi l-
ament and where it leaves the fi lament. This voltage drop measures the electrostatic poten-
tial energy each unit of charge loses while struggling through the fi lament. Multiplying the 
voltage drop by the current passing through the bulb gives you the power consumed by 
the bulb. This observation can be written as a word equation:
 
power consumed = voltage drop · current, 
(10.3.1)
in symbols:
P = V · I,

294 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
and in everyday language:
A large electric current dropping from high voltage to low voltage is like the 
torrent of water dropping from high to low over Niagara Falls: both release a lot 
of power.
Since the voltage drop across the bulb is 3.0 V and the current passing through it is 1.0 A, 
it’s consuming 3.0 W of power.
 
A battery chain produces electric power because the current passing through it is 
pushed up a voltage gradient and there is a rise in voltage between where the current 
arrives at the battery chain and where it leaves the battery chain. This voltage rise mea-
sures the electrostatic potential energy each unit of charge gains while being pumped 
through the batteries. Multiplying the voltage gain by the current passing through the 
batteries gives you the power provided by the batteries. This observation can be written as 
a word equation:
 
power provided = voltage rise · current, 
(10.3.2)
in symbols:
P = V · I,
and in everyday language:
Raising a large current from low voltage to high voltage is like pumping a huge 
stream of water from low to high to fi ght a fi re at the top of a skyscraper: both 
require a lot of power.
Since the voltage rise across the chain is 3.0 V and the current passing through it is 1.0 A, 
it’s providing 3.0 W of power.
Check Your Understanding #5: Current Trends in Music
A large battery powers your portable radio. Current enters the radio through one wire and leaves 
through another. Which wire has a higher voltage?
Answer: The wire through which current enters the radio.
Why: The radio is consuming power, so the current passing through it is experiencing a voltage 
drop. The current has a higher voltage when it enters the radio than when it leaves.
Check Your Figures #1: When You Turn the Ignition Key
When you fi rst start your car, its cold engine is diffi cult to turn and a 200-A current fl ows through its 
starter motor. If there is a voltage drop of 12 V between where the current enters the starter and 
where it leaves the starter, how much power is being consumed?
Answer: 2400 W of power is begin consumed.
Why: The voltage drop across the starter motor is 12 V (each coulomb of charge loses 12 J of energy 
in passing through it), and the current through it is 200 A (200 C of charge pass through it each 
second). We can use Eq. 10.3.1 to determine the power the motor is consuming:
 power consumed = voltage drop · current
 = 12 V · 200 A = 2400 W.

Flashlights 295
Choosing the Bulb: Ohm’s Law
Our fl ashlight’s bulb is designed to operate properly with a voltage drop of 3.0 V. Subjected 
to that voltage drop, it will carry a current of 1 A and thus consume 3 W of electric power—
just enough to make it glow properly. If you were to use the wrong bulb in this fl ashlight, 
one designed for a different voltage drop, its fi lament would carry the wrong amount of 
current and receive the wrong amount of power. Too much power would quickly burn out 
its fi lament, while too little power would make the fi lament glow dimly.
 
The bulb’s fi lament must clearly match the fl ashlight, particularly the voltage of the 
fl ashlight’s battery chain. For example, fl ashlights that use many batteries require bulb fi l-
aments that are designed to operate with large voltage drops. Why is the current carried by 
a particular bulb fi lament related to the voltage drop across it, and why do different bulbs 
respond differently to a particular voltage drop?
 
The relationship between current and voltage drop is the result of collisions. Charges 
effectively stop each time they crash into metal atoms, so they need the push of an electric 
fi eld to keep them moving forward (Fig. 10.3.10). Doubling that electric fi eld doubles each 
charge’s average speed and, because the number of mobile charges in the fi lament is fi xed, 
also doubles the overall current fl owing through the fi lament. Since the electric fi eld that 
propels this current is the fi lament’s voltage gradient, doubling the voltage drop through the 
fi lament doubles the current as well.
 
Returning to our voltage ↔ altitude analogy, picture bicyclists riding on extremely 
rocky terrain without pedaling. These lazy bicyclists effectively stop each time they crash 
into rocks, so they need the push of a slope to keep them moving forward. Doubling the 
Check Your Figures #2: When You Turn the Ignition Key Again
When you restart the car, its warm engine is easier to turn and a smaller current of 150 A fl ows 
through the car’s starter motor. The battery is supplying power to this current, and there is a voltage 
rise of 12 V between where the current arrives at the battery and where it leaves the battery. How 
much power is the battery providing?
Answer: It is providing 1800 W of power.
Why: The voltage rise across the battery is 12 V (each coulomb of charge gains 12 J of energy in 
passing through it), and the current through it is 150 A (150 C of charge pass through it each sec-
ond). We can use Eq. 10.3.2 to determine the power the battery is providing:
 power provided = voltage rise · current
 = 12 V · 150 A = 1800 W.
3 volts
Electric ﬁeld:
0 volts
2 volts
1 volt
+
+
+
+
Fig. 10.3.10 This fi lament has 
a voltage drop of 3 V between 
its two ends. Charges moving 
through this fi lament are pushed 
forward by the resulting electric 
fi eld. They maintain a constant 
speed despite frequent collisions 
with tungsten atoms.

296 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
slope’s altitude gradient—the altitude drop per meter of downhill travel—doubles each 
bicyclist’s average speed and, because the number of bicyclists who can fi t on the hill at one 
time is fi xed, also doubles the overall current of bicyclists rolling down the hill. Since the 
slope that propels this bicyclist current is the hill’s altitude gradient, doubling the hill height 
doubles the current of bicyclists as well.
 
The infl uence of fi lament choice on current fl ow refl ects the different electrical resis-
tances of those fi laments. Anything that increases the number of mobile electric charges 
across the fi lament’s width or allows those charges to maintain a higher average speed for a 
given voltage drop will decrease the fi lament’s electrical resistance and increase the current 
fl owing through it. In fact, electrical resistance is defi ned as the voltage drop through the 
fi lament divided by the current that arises as a result. Making the fi lament thicker or shorter 
will lower its resistance, as will changing its composition to make collisions less frequent.
 
Again our voltage ↔ altitude analogy with bicyclists on a hill is helpful. Anything 
that increases the number of bicyclists across the hill’s width or allows those bicyclists to 
maintain a higher average speed for a given hill height will decrease the hill’s “bicycle 
resistance” and increase the current of bicyclists rolling down it. In fact, “bicycle resis-
tance” is defi ned as the hill height divided by the current of bicyclists it produces. Making 
the hill wider or shorter will lower its bicycle resistance, as will changing its rockiness to 
make collisions less frequent.
 
Combining these observations, we see that the current fl owing through the fi lament is 
proportional to the voltage drop through it and inversely proportional to the fi lament’s 
electrical resistance, which can be written:
 
current =
voltage drop
electrical resistance. 
(10.3.3)
 
This relationship is called Ohm’s law, after its discoverer Georg Simon Ohm 5 . 
Structuring the relationship this way separates the causes (voltage drop and electrical resis-
tance) from their effect (current fl ow). However, this equation is often rearranged to elimi-
nate the division. The relationship then takes its customary form, which can be written as a 
word equation:
 
voltage drop = current · electrical resistance, 
(10.3.4)
in symbols:
V = I · R,
and in everyday language:
Long, skinny jumper cables have large resistances. When you connect them to 
a battery to jumpstart your car, they’ll carry a relatively small current and your 
car probably won’t start.
 
The SI unit of electrical resistance, the volt per ampere, is called the ohm (abbreviated 
Ω, the Greek letter omega). Despite its simplicity, Ohm’s law is extremely useful in physics 
and electrical engineering. It applies to so many systems that nearly everything is ohmic, 
that is, can be characterized by an electrical resistance. Once an object’s electrical resis-
tance is known, the current fl owing through it can be calculated from its voltage drop or its 
voltage drop can be calculated from the current fl owing through it. Devices that obey 
Ohm’s law are common in modern technology, often as simple electronic components 
known as resistors (Figs. 10.3.11). A resistor carries a current equal to its voltage drop 
divided by its resistance, and it experiences a voltage drop equal to the current it carries 
times its resistance.
5  German physicist 
Georg Simon Ohm 
(1787–1854) served as a 
professor of mathematics, 
fi rst at the Jesuits’ college 
of Cologne and then at the 
polytechnic school of 
Nuremberg. His numerous 
publications were 
undistinguished, with the 
exception of one pamphlet 
on the relationship 
between current and 
voltage. This extraordin-
ary document, written in 
1827, was initially 
dismissed by other 
physicists, even though it 
was based on good 
experimental evidence and 
explained many previous 
observations by others. In 
despair, Ohm resigned his 
position at Cologne, and it 
was not until the 1840s 
that his work was 
accepted. He was fi nally 
appointed professor of 
physics at Munich only 
two years before his 
death.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Wire
Wire
Poor conductor
Inside of resistor
Outside of resistor
Symbol of resistor
Fig. 10.3.11 (a) A 
resistor is two wires with 
an imperfect conductor of 
electricity between them. 
(b) It’s usually encased in 
a cylindrical shell, with 
colored stripes to indicate 
its resistance. (c) In a 
schematic diagram of an 
electronic device, the 
resistor is represented by a 
zigzag line.

Flashlights 297
 
Finally, an object’s electrical resistance is typically temperature dependent. Rising 
temperature increases the number of mobile charges in an object but also makes them col-
lide more frequently with the jiggling atoms. If the increasing collision frequency domi-
nates, as it does in metals, an object’s resistance increases with temperature. For example, 
a fi lament carries less and less current as it approaches operating temperature, a behavior 
that helps it avoid overheating. However, if the increase in mobile charges dominates, as it 
does in semiconductors, an object’s resistance decreases with temperature. This explains 
why semiconductor-based computer chips carry more and more current as they get hotter 
and will self-destruct at excessive temperatures.
OHM’S LAW
The voltage drop through a wire is equal to the current fl owing through that wire times 
the wire’s electrical resistance.
Check Your Understanding #6: Skin Protection
Your skin has a much larger electrical resistance than your tissues. If you touch the two terminals of 
a battery with your fi ngers, where is the larger voltage drop—in your skin or in your tissues?
Answer: The larger voltage drop is in your skin.
Why: The fl uids in your body resemble saltwater when exposed to voltages; they conduct current 
relatively well. If it weren’t for your skin’s large electrical resistance, even battery voltages would be 
capable of pushing large currents through you and might disrupt your heart and other functions. 
However, your skin’s high resistance protects you from battery voltages. As long as your skin is dry 
and intact, it usually takes higher voltages to push enough current through you to cause injury.
Check Your Figures #3: Light Resistance
Two 3-W fl ashlight bulbs have different resistances: 3 Ω and 12 Ω. Which bulb is meant to operate 
from two 1.5-V alkaline batteries?
Answer: It’s the 3-Ω bulb.
Why: Equation 10.3.3 indicates that, with the voltage drop of 3 V supplied by the two alkaline 
batteries, the 3-Ω bulb will carry:
 current =
voltage drop
electrical resistance
 = 3 V
3 Ω= 1 A.
Equation 10.3.1 then shows that this bulb consumes the specifi ed 3 W:
 power consumed = voltage drop · current
 = 3 V · 1 A = 3 W.
With a voltage drop of 3 V, the 12-Ω bulb will carry a current of 0.25 A and consume just 0.75 W of 
power. It needs a voltage drop of 6 V to consume 3 W.
LED Flashlights: Series and Parallel Circuits
Unfortunately, lightbulbs drain fl ashlight batteries quickly and burn out at inconvenient 
times. Since LEDs are much more energy effi cient than bulbs and last almost forever, it’s 
no surprise that LED fl ashlights are rapidly replacing bulb fl ashlights.

298 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
 
LEDs are sophisticated semiconductor devices that we’ll examine in Chapter 13. I 
have ignored them until now because they’re nonohmic; that is, they don’t obey Ohm’s law 
and cannot be characterized by resistance. Instead, an LED conducts zero current when the 
voltage drop across it is less than a threshold voltage of about 2–4 V, depending on color, 
and it conducts a large, potentially damaging current when the voltage drop is signifi cantly 
more than that threshold. Because small changes in voltage drop across the LED dramati-
cally change the current passing through it, the LED is diffi cult to control on its own. That’s 
why an LED is often paired with a resistor.
 
In a simple LED fl ashlight, current leaving the positive terminal of the batteries fl ows 
sequentially through a resistor and an LED before returning to the negative terminal of 
the batteries (Fig. 10.3.12a). That arrangement, in which the same current fl ows sequen-
tially through each component, is known as a series circuit. Although all the components 
in a series circuit carry the same current, they share the circuit’s overall voltage drop 
(Fig. 10.3.12b). To apply the voltage ↔ altitude analogy, a current of charge fl owing through 
a series of components is like a current of water fl owing down a series of waterfalls 
(Fig. 10.3.12c).
 
The overall voltage drop available to the LED fl ashlight’s power-consuming compo-
nents is equal to the voltage rise provided by its batteries. Because they are in series, the 
resistor and the LED must share that overall voltage drop (neglecting the small voltage 
drops in the metal strips and switch). Since they also carry the same current, the resistor’s 
ohmic behavior limits the current passing through the entire circuit, including the LED. In 
effect, the resistor and LED negotiate—each component takes enough of the overall volt-
age drop to allow it to conduct the same current as the other component. Following the 
negotiation, the voltage drop across the LED is slightly more than its threshold voltage 
and the rest of the overall voltage drop is taken by the resistor. The resistor is chosen so 
that, when subject to that voltage drop, it conducts the right amount of current to power 
the LED properly.
 
When an LED fl ashlight has more than one LED, the fl ashlight must supply each with 
current. This is usually done by dividing the current from the batteries into parts and send-
ing one part through each of the LEDs (Fig. 10.3.13a). That arrangement, in which the 
current is divided into parts that fl ow simultaneously through each component, is known as 
a parallel circuit. Although each component in a parallel circuit carries its own fraction of 
the overall current, all the components experience the same voltage drop (Fig. 10.3.13b). In 
the voltage ↔ altitude analogy, a current of charge fl owing through components in parallel 
is like a current of water fl owing down waterfalls in parallel (Fig. 10.3.13c).
 
In a typical multiple-LED fl ashlight, each LED is actually paired with a resistor to 
regulate its current. The fl ashlight thus combines parallel and series circuits. Each LED and 
its resistor are connected in series, so they carry the same current but share the overall 
voltage drop. The multiple LED-resistor pairs are connected in parallel, so they carry sep-
arate portions of the circuit’s overall current but experience the same voltage drop.
Check Your Understanding #7: Electric Defrosters
Your car has an electric defroster on its rear window. That defroster consists of 12 thin metal strips 
bonded to the inside surface of the glass. All the driver-side ends join together and all the passen-
ger-side ends join together. When you switch on the defroster, current fl ows from the positive terminal 
of the battery to the driver-side end of the defroster and from the passenger-side end of the defroster 
to the negative terminal of the battery. Do the individual defroster strips form a series circuit or a 
parallel circuit?
Answer: The defroster strips form a parallel circuit.
Why: Current from the battery’s positive terminal is divided into 12 portions, one for each of the 12 
defroster strips. After fl owing through the strips, those portions rejoin into a single current to return 
to the battery’s negative terminal. Because the strips are connected in parallel, they carry separate 
currents but experience the same voltage drop.

Flashlights 299
Epilogue for Chapter 10
This chapter has dealt with three venues in which charge and electricity play important 
roles. In Static Electricity, we introduced the concept of electric charge and discussed the 
attractive and repulsive forces that charged particles exert on one another. We studied the 
electrostatic potential energies stored in those charge forces and the relationship between 
this energy and the voltages of various locations. We learned how different objects acquire 
0 volts
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
4.5 volts
0 volts
Batteries
Resistor
LED
(a)
(b)
1.5 V
+
–
1.5 V
+
–
1.5 V
+
–
4.5 volts
0 volts
Resistor
LED
Fig. 10.3.12 (a) Current in an LED fl ashlight’s series circuit fl ows sequentially through the resistor and 
LED. (b) The voltage rises in the batteries and drops in the resistor and the LED. Because the resistor 
and LED are in series, they carry the same current but share the overall voltage drop. (c) These waterfalls 
are in series. The waterfalls carry the same current of water, but they share the overall altitude drop.
© JasonMichael/Flickr/Getty Images, Inc.
(c)

300 
CHAPTER 10 Electricity
net charges through contact and how high voltages can be produced by separating large 
quantities of opposite charge.
 
In Xerographic Copiers, we studied electric fi elds and saw how those fi elds can be 
used to move charges from one place to another. We examined the corona discharges that 
form in the strong electric fi elds around sharp points or thin wires at high voltages. We also 
saw how placing a charge on one object can induce an opposite charge on a grounded 
object nearby.
 
In Flashlights, we examined circuits to see how a current of electric charges can trans-
fer power from batteries to a lightbulb. We found that both voltage and current contribute 
to this power transfer, and we learned how the bulb’s electrical resistance governs the 
power it consumes.
Explanation: Moving Water without Touching It
This experiment uses contact between dissimilar materials to give the comb a net electric 
charge. Electrons shift from your hair to the comb, leaving your hair positively charged and 
the comb negatively charged. Because the comb is an electrical insulator, its negative 
charge remains trapped on its surface for a long time.
 
As you hold the negatively charged comb near the water stream, the comb attracts 
positive charges present in the water and repels negative charges. Because the water con-
ducts electricity somewhat, positive charges can travel down the water stream from the 
faucet while negative charges travel the other way. The water thus acquires a net positive 
charge in the presence of the negatively charged comb, an example of charging by induc-
tion. Since the oppositely charged water and comb attract one another, the water acceler-
ates toward the comb and arcs sideways as it falls.
0 volts
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
4.5 volts
0 volts
Batteries
Resistor
LED
(a)
(b)
1.5 V
+
–
1.5 V
+
–
1.5 V
+
–
4.5 volts
0 volts
Resistor
LED
Fig. 10.3.13 (a) Current in a two-LED fl ashlight’s parallel circuit divides into two portions that fl ow 
in parallel through the two LEDs, each paired with its own resistor. (b) Because the two LED-resistor 
pairs are in parallel, they experience the same voltage drop but share the overall current. (c) These 
waterfalls are in parallel. The waterfalls experience the same altitude drop, but they share the overall 
current of water.
© Jerry and Marcy Monkman/Aurora Photos, Inc.
(c)

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 301
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Static Electricity Works: When clothes tumble about in the dryer, contact between 
dissimilar materials transfers negatively charged electrons from one item to the other. As a 
result of this contact-charging effect, the various garments acquire net charges, some posi-
tive and others negative. When the clothes are subsequently separated, the work done in 
pulling them apart becomes electrostatic potential energy and the clothes develop high volt-
ages. High voltages can also develop when you walk across a carpet or drive your car along 
the road. Since high voltage tends to push charges into the air as leaks and sparks, static 
charging can be a nuisance. You can control it with the help of conducting materials; allow-
ing charge to move spontaneously from high voltage to low voltage prevents large quantities 
of separated charge from accumulating so that high voltages can’t develop.
How Xerographic Copiers Work: The photoconductor in a xerographic copier allows light to 
control the distribution of electric charge on its surface. This photoconductor is uniformly 
precoated with charge by passing it near a corona discharge. An optical image of the original 
document is then projected onto this charged photoconductor. Wherever light hits the photo-
conductor, the surface charge escapes. The result is a charge image on the photoconductor. 
Tiny black toner particles, oppositely charged from the unilluminated portions of the photo-
conductor, are brought near the charge image. These toner particles stick to the charged 
portions of the photoconductor, forming a visible image of the document. The toner particles 
are then transferred to and fused onto a sheet of paper to create a fi nished copy.
How Flashlights Work: A fl ashlight produces light when a current fl ows through its electric 
circuit. This circuit consists of a chain of batteries, a lightbulb, a switch, and several metal 
strips, all connected in a continuous loop. The current obtains power as it passes through the 
battery, and it releases this power as it passes through the fi lament of the lightbulb, heating 
that fi lament white hot.
 
The switch provides a way to control the fl ow of current in the circuit. When the switch is 
off, it breaks the circuit and prevents current from fl owing completely around the circuit. With-
out a steady current to carry power from the batteries to the bulb, the bulb is dark. When the 
switch is on, it completes the circuit so that power can reach the bulb and the bulb lights up.
1. Coulomb’s law: The magnitude of the electrostatic force 
between two objects is equal to the Coulomb constant times the 
product of their two electric charges divided by the square of the 
distance separating them, or
 
force = Coulomb constant · charge1 · charge2
(distance between charges)2
. 
(10.1.1)
If the charges are like, then the forces are repulsive. If the charges 
are opposite, then the forces are attractive.
2. Force exerted on a charge by an electric fi eld: A charge exper-
iences a force equal to its charge times the electric fi eld, or
 
force = charge · electric field, 
(10.2.1)
where the force points in the direction of the electric fi eld.
3. Electric fi eld due to a voltage drop: A voltage drop produces 
an electric fi eld equal to that voltage drop divided by the dis-
tance over which the drop occurs, or
 electric field = voltage gradient = voltage drop
distance
, 
(10.2.2)
where the fi eld points in the direction of the most rapid voltage 
decrease.
4. Power consumption: The electric power consumed by a 
device is the voltage drop across it times the current fl owing 
through it, or
 
power consumed = voltage drop · current. 
(10.3.1)
5. Power production: The electric power provided by a device is 
the voltage rise across it times the current fl owing through it, or
 
power provided = voltage rise · current. 
(10.3.2)
6. Ohm’s law: The voltage drop through an ohmic object is 
equal to the current fl owing through it times its electrical resist-
ance, or
 
voltage drop = current · electrical resistance. 
(10.3.4)
This equation does not apply to nonohmic devices.

Magnetism and 
Electrodynamics
 L
ike electricity, magnetism is an important part of daily life. We use it to post notes on the 
refrigerator and to fi gure out which way is north. The story of magnetism wouldn’t be complete, 
though, without including electricity. As we’ll see, these two topics are related to one another 
through change and motion. For example, moving electric charges give rise to magnetism, and 
changing magnetism gives rise to electricity.
 
In this chapter, we’ll examine magnetism itself, as well as several objects that use the relation-
ships between electricity and magnetism to perform useful tasks. Since the word dynamics covers 
change and motion, these relationships are part of a fi eld of physics known as electrodynamics. 
Brevity isn’t the only reason for omitting reference to magnetism in the title of this fi eld; the other 
reason is that most magnetism is actually produced by electricity. In other words, most magnetism 
is actually electromagnetism.
A Nail and Wire Electromagnet
To explore the relationships between electricity and 
magnetism, try building a simple electromagnet. For this 
project, you need a large steel nail or bolt, a meter or so 
of insulated wire, a fresh 1.5-V AA battery, and 
some small steel objects such as paper clips. The wire’s 
metal conductor should be at least 0.65 mm in diameter 
(22 gauge or larger) to carry the current you’ll send 
through it without becoming too hot.
 
Wind the wire tightly around the nail or bolt to form 
a coil. You should complete at least 50 turns of wire, all in 
the same direction. The exact number of turns isn’t impor-
tant, and you can make several layers. Be sure that the 
two ends of the wire are still accessible and remove the 
insulation from each end so that you can connect them to 
the battery.
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
WARNING
The electromagnet that you construct in this experiment will become hot during use. 
Be prepared to drop the electromagnet if it becomes uncomfortably hot. Don’t work 
near fl ammable materials.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
302
11

Household Magnets 303
Chapter Itinerary
This chapter will examine (1) household magnets and (2) 
electric power distribution. In Household Magnets, we look 
at the forces that bind magnets to refrigerators and see why 
compasses point northward. We also examine electromag-
nets to explain how electric doorbells work. In Electric 
Power Distribution, we see how electricity and magnetism 
are used to transport electric power from a distant power 
plant to your home and how that electric power differs from 
the power supplied by batteries. Although there are many 
other magnetic and electromagnetic objects that we encoun-
ter daily, these two topics are representative of most of the 
basic electromagnetic phenomena. For a more complete 
preview, turn ahead to the Chapter Summary and Important 
Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.
SECTION 11.1
 
We’re so used to having magnets around that we take 
them for granted. Along with being useful, household magnets 
also let us experiment with another of the basic forces in 
nature. Although we’ll see that magnetism is so intimately 
related to electricity that the two are ultimately a single unifi ed 
whole, we’ll fi nd it helpful to begin our study of magnetism by 
treating it as a separate phenomenon and bring electricity into 
the picture gradually.
Questions to Think About: Why do two magnets attract or repel 
each other, depending on how they’re oriented? If a magnet is 
attracted to two different refrigerators, why don’t those two 
refrigerators attract or repel one another? How can two strong 
magnets grip one another from opposite sides of your hand? 
Why isn’t your hand involved in that magnetic attraction? How 
can some magnets be turned on or off using electricity?
Experiments to Do: Find two button-type refrigerator mag-
nets—simple cylinders that resemble small hockey pucks. If 
you try to stack these magnets, you’ll fi nd that they either 
attract or repel one another. How do those forces depend on the 
orientations of the magnets? on their separation? See whether 
you can fl oat one magnet on top of the other using the repulsive 
force. What happens when you let go of the top magnet?
 
Now hold one of the button magnets near a refrigerator or 
another steel object and study the forces that arise. Can you 
fi nd a way to make the two objects repel one another? Will a 
magnet stick to things that aren’t made of steel? What about 
stainless steel?
How would a family stay organized without refrigerator mag-
nets? How would the doorbell ring if it couldn’t use a magnet 
to strike its bells? How would a scout navigate in the woods 
without a compass? How would you get cash or charge pur-
chases without magnetic strips on plastic cards?
Household Magnets
 
Now test your electromagnet. Connect one uninsu-
lated end of the coil to each terminal of the battery. You 
can either hold the wires on the terminals with your fi n-
gers or use tape. A 1.5-V battery can’t give you a shock 
unless your skin is broken, but you should be prepared 
for the wire to get hot as current fl ows through it. If it 
gets too hot to hold, let go and make sure that the wire 
detaches from the battery so that it doesn’t start a fi re. 
Don’t use a battery larger than AA or the wire may get 
dangerously hot.
 
While current is fl owing through the wire, the nail 
will act as a strong magnet, an electromagnet. Try picking 
up steel objects with this electromagnet. As you touch 
each object with the nail, it should stick to the nail’s sur-
face. Your electromagnet will temporarily magnetize the 
steel object and attract it. What happens when you touch 
this magnetized steel object to a second object? What 
happens when you stop the fl ow of electric current 
through the coil of the electromagnet? Why does the coil 
get hot while current is fl owing through it?

304 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
Button-Shaped Refrigerator Magnets
Refrigerator magnets come in all shapes and sizes, and some are more magnetically compli-
cated than others. It’s always best to start simple, so we’ll begin with button-shaped magnets.
 
As you bring two button magnets together, they begin exerting forces on one another. 
You’ll fi nd that those forces can be either attractive or repulsive, depending on how the 
magnets are oriented, but they always grow weaker with greater distance. Such magnetic 
forces resemble the electric ones you encounter while removing clothes from a hot dryer, 
but there are at least two important differences. First, reorienting two electrically charged 
garments won’t turn their attraction into repulsion or vice versa. Second, no matter how 
you arrange two button magnets, you can’t get a magnetic spark to jump from one to the 
other. Electricity and magnetism are evidently similar yet different. What’s the story?
 
Magnetism is a phenomenon that closely resembles electricity. Just as there are two 
types of electric charges that exert electrostatic forces on one another, so there are two types 
of magnetic poles that exert magnetostatic forces on one another. The word pole serves to 
distinguish magnetism from electricity; poles are magnetic, while charges are electric.
 
The two types of poles are called north and south, and in keeping with this geographical 
naming, they’re exact opposites of one another. Both types of poles carry just one physical 
quantity: magnetic pole. North poles carry positive amounts of magnetic pole, while south 
poles carry negative amounts. It should come as no surprise that like poles repel each other, 
while opposite poles attract. Furthermore, the magnetostatic forces between two poles grow 
weaker as they move apart and are inversely proportional to the square of the distance 
between them. So far, the similarities between electricity and magnetism are striking.
 
However, we now come to a crucial difference between electricity and magnetism: 
while subatomic particles that carry pure positive or negative electric charges are common, 
particles that carry pure north or south magnetic poles have never been found. Called mag-
netic monopoles, such pure magnetic particles may not even exist in our universe. That 
cosmic omission explains why there are no magnetic sparks: without monopoles, there is 
no magnetic equivalent of an electric charge that can leap from one place to another as a 
magnetic current, let alone a magnetic spark.
 
Although isolated magnetic poles aren’t available in nature, pairs of magnetic poles 
are. These pairs consist of equal north and south poles, spatially separated from one another 
in an arrangement called a magnetic dipole. Since the two opposite poles have equal mag-
nitudes, they sum to zero and the magnetic dipole has zero net magnetic pole.
 
A simple button magnet has both a north pole and a south pole, usually on opposite 
faces of the button (Fig. 11.1.1a). There are no purely north buttons or purely south buttons. 
Amazingly enough, even slicing that button magnet in half won’t yield separated north and 
south poles (Fig. 11.1.1b). Instead, new poles will appear at the cut edges and each piece 
of the original magnet will end up with zero net pole! Breaking the button magnet in half 
(Fig. 11.1.1c) will also produce pieces with zero net pole. For a discussion of why button 
magnets always have zero net magnetic pole, see 1 .
 
We can now explain why two of these magnets sometimes attract and sometimes repel. 
With two poles on each magnet, we have to consider four interactions: two repulsive inter-
actions between like poles (north-north and south-south) and two attractive interactions 
quite similar). Sprinkle some of this powder on your collection 
of magnets. Notice that it forms strands that seem to bridge 
the gaps between various points on the magnets. What is the 
powder bridging? If you sprinkle your powder on a credit card 
or magnetic ID card, you’ll fi nd that it also forms bridges. How-
ever, those bridges are tiny and spaced at irregular intervals. 
Could there be information encoded in these erratically spaced 
magnetic features?
 
Now fi nd two identical sheet-type refrigerator magnets—
fl exible strips that may have advertising printed on their surfaces. 
Experiment with their interactions. You’ll fi nd that simply fl ipping 
one over doesn’t change the forces from attraction to repulsion. 
Instead, you’ll have to slide the strips across one another. As they 
slide, they’ll alternately attract and repel. How is that possible?
 
Finally, obtain iron powder or make some by fi ling down a 
piece of steel (steel is mostly iron, and they are magnetically 
North
South
(b)
(a)
(c)
North
South
North
South
North
South
North
South
Fig. 11.1.1 (a) A typical 
button magnet has a north 
pole on one face and a 
south pole on the other. Its 
net pole is zero. (b) Slicing 
it between its poles or 
(c) breaking it through its 
poles always yields a pair 
of magnets, each with zero 
net pole.
1  Since magnetic 
monopoles apparently 
don’t exist, magnets and 
magnetic materials must 
obtain their magnetic 
poles through other 
means. As we’ll see later 
in this section, electric 
currents are magnetic and 
electric current loops act 
as magnetic dipoles. 
Circulating currents exist 
deep within all magnetic 
materials and are 
responsible for their 
magnetism. Some of those 
currents are associated 
with charged electrons 
orbiting atomic nuclei, but 
most are associated with 
the rotating nature of 
electrons, a fundamental 
characteristic known as 
spin. Every electron is a 
tiny magnetic dipole.

Household Magnets 305
between opposite poles (north-south and south-north). Although it might seem that all 
these forces should cancel, the distances separating the various poles and therefore the 
forces between them depend on the magnets’ orientations. Since the closest poles experi-
ence the strongest forces, they dominate. If you turn two like poles toward one another, the 
two magnets will push apart (Fig. 11.1.2a). If you turn their opposite poles toward one 
another, they’ll pull together (Fig. 11.1.2b). If you tip them at an angle, they’ll experience 
torques that tend to twist opposite poles together and like poles apart.
 
Because there are no monopoles, we’re going to need some imagination to understand 
magnetism well. Let’s start with units. Even though we can’t collect a unit of pure north 
pole, we can still defi ne such a unit and understand its behavior. The SI unit of magnetic 
pole is the ampere-meter (abbreviated A·m). That astonishing choice, an electric unit 
appearing in a magnetic unit, foreshadows the profound connections between electricity 
and magnetism that we’ll soon encounter.
 
Just as there is a Coulomb’s law for electric charges, there is a Coulomb’s law for mag-
netic poles. Coulomb’s magnetic experiments, which were complicated by the fact that he had 
to work with magnetic dipoles rather than individual poles, showed that the forces between 
magnetic poles are proportional to the amount of each pole and inversely proportional to the 
square of their separation. The exact relationship can be written as a word equation:
 
force = permeability of free space · pole1 · pole2
4π · (distance between poles)2
, 
(11.1.1)
in symbols:
F = μ0 · p1 · p2
4πr2
,
and in everyday language:
Don’t hold two strong magnetic poles near one another unless you’re prepared 
to be pushed around hard as they attract or repel each other.
The force on pole1 is directed toward or away from pole2, and the force on pole2 is directed 
toward or away from pole1. The permeability of free space is 4π × 10−7 N/A2. Consistent 
with Newton’s third law, the force that pole1 exerts on pole2 is equal in amount but oppo-
sitely directed from the force that pole2 exerts on pole1.
North
South
North
South
North
South
North
South
(a)
(b)
Net force
Net force
Net force
Net force
Fig. 11.1.2 (a) When like poles of two 
button magnets are turned toward one 
another, the magnets repel. (b) When 
opposite poles are turned toward one 
another, they attract.
COULOMB’S LAW FOR MAGNETISM
The magnitudes of the magnetostatic forces between two magnetic poles are equal to 
the permeability of free space times the product of the two poles divided by 4π times 
the square of the distance separating them. If the poles are like, then the forces are 
repulsive. If the poles are opposite, then the forces are attractive.

306 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
The Refrigerator: Iron and Steel
Two button magnets can push or pull on one another, but what if you have only one? The 
easiest way to observe magnetic forces in that case is to hold that single magnet near your 
refrigerator or another piece of iron or steel. The magnet is attracted to the refrigerator. 
However, if you fl ip the button magnet over, thinking that it will now be repelled by the 
refrigerator, you’ll be disappointed. Although the refrigerator is clearly magnetic, its mag-
netism somehow responds to the button magnet so that the two always attract.
 
Actually, the refrigerator’s behavior isn’t all that mysterious. Its steel is composed 
of countless microscopic magnets, each with a matched north pole and south pole 
(Fig. 11.1.3). Normally those individual magnetic dipoles are oriented semirandomly 
(Fig. 11.1.3a), so the refrigerator exhibits no overall magnetism. However, as you bring one 
pole of a button magnet near the refrigerator, its tiny magnets evolve in size, shape, and 
orientation (Fig. 11.1.3b). Overall, opposite poles shift closer to the button magnet’s pole 
and like poles shift farther from the button magnet’s pole. The steel develops a magnetic 
polarization and consequently attracts the pole of the button magnet.
 
This polarization remains strong only as long as the button magnet’s pole is nearby. 
When you remove the button magnet, most of the tiny magnets in the steel resume their 
semirandom orientations and the steel’s magnetic polarization shrinks or disappears. 
When you then bring the button magnet’s other pole close to the refrigerator, its steel 
develops the opposite magnetic polarization and again attracts the button magnet’s pole. 
No matter which pole or assortment of poles you bring near the refrigerator, its steel will 
polarize in just the right way to attract those poles.
Check Your Understanding #1: Two Halves Make a Whole
You have a disk-shaped permanent magnet. The top surface is its north pole and the bottom surface 
is its south pole. If you crack the magnet into two half circles, the two halves will push apart. Why? 
Answer: The top surfaces of both halves are still north poles, and the bottom surfaces are still south 
poles. The two tops repel, as do the two bottoms. 
Why: This puzzling phenomenon, in which a shattered permanent magnet opposes attempts to reas-
semble it, is an illustration of the potential energy contained in a permanent magnet. The magnet is 
a collection of many tinier magnets, all aligned with their north poles together and their south poles 
together. Like poles repel one another, so the tiny magnets are diffi cult to hold together. Given a 
chance, the magnet will push apart into fragments. Very strong permanent magnets release so much 
potential energy when they break that they practically explode when cracked. 
N
S
Balanced domains
Domain growth
Magnetized material
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 11.1.3 (a) The countless 
microscopic magnets in iron or steel 
are normally oriented somewhat 
randomly. (b) But when a strong 
magnetic pole is nearby, those 
tiny magnets reorient to attract it. 
In soft magnetic materials, this 
reorientation is only temporary. 
(c) Hard magnetic materials, however, 
remain magnetized long after the 
external pole has departed.

Household Magnets 307
 
If you try this trick with a plastic or aluminum surface, the button magnet won’t stick. 
What’s special about steel that allows it to develop such a strong magnetic polarization? 
The answer is that ordinary steel, like its constituent iron, is a ferromagnetic material—it 
is actively and unavoidably magnetic on the size scale of atoms.
 
To understand ferromagnetism, we must start by looking at atoms and the subatomic 
particles from which they’re constructed: electrons, protons, and neutrons. For complicated 
reasons, all those subatomic particles have magnetic dipoles, particularly the electrons, and 
the atoms they form often display this magnetism. Despite a tendency for the subatomic 
particles to pair up with opposite orientations so that their magnetic dipoles cancel one 
another, most isolated atoms have signifi cant magnetic dipoles.
 
Although most atoms are intrinsically magnetic, most materials are not. That’s because 
another round of pairing and canceling occurs when atoms assemble into materials. This 
second round of cancellation is usually so effective that it completely eliminates magne-
tism at the atomic scale. Materials such as glass, plastic, skin, copper, and aluminum retain 
no atomic-scale magnetism at all, and your button magnet won’t stick to them. Even most 
stainless steels are nonmagnetic.
 
However, there are a few materials that avoid this total cancellation and thus manage 
to remain magnetic at the atomic scale. The most important of these are the ferromagnets, 
a class of magnetic materials that includes ordinary steel and iron. If you examine a small 
region of ferromagnetic steel, you’ll fi nd that it is composed of many microscopic regions, or 
magnetic domains, that are naturally magnetic and cannot be demagnetized (Fig. 11.1.3a). 
Within a single domain, all the atomic-scale magnetic dipoles are aligned and together they 
give the overall domain a substantial net magnetic dipole.
 
While common steel always has these magnetic domains, magnetic interactions orient 
nearby domains so that their magnetic dipoles oppose one another and cancel. The micro-
scopic magnets balance one another so well that the steel appears nonmagnetic. That’s too 
bad; the appliance showroom would be a much more exciting place to visit if the cancella-
tion weren’t so good.
 
However, when you bring a strong magnetic pole near steel (Fig. 11.1.3b), the indi-
vidual domains grow or shrink, depending on which way they’re oriented magnetically. 
The steel undergoes magnetization and becomes magnetized (Fig. 11.1.3c). The atoms 
themselves don’t move during this process; the change is purely a reorientation of the 
atomic-scale magnetic dipoles. Domains that attract your button magnet’s pole grow 
while those that repel it shrink, and the button magnet sticks to the refrigerator.
Fig. 11.1.4 (a) Although 
these paper clips were 
initially unmagnetized, the 
pole of a strong permanent 
magnet magnetizes 
them as a chain. (b) 
After the magnetizing 
magnet is removed, the 
clips retain some of their 
magnetization.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
(a)
(b)

308 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
Fig. 11.1.5 Iron powder 
forms bridges between 
the magnetic poles of this 
plastic sheet magnet.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Check Your Understanding #2: Chain Links
If you touch the north pole of a permanent magnet to one end of a steel paper clip, the clip’s other 
end will become magnetic. What pole will that other end have? 
Answer: It will have a north pole. 
Why: The paper clip will become magnetically polarized with its south pole nearest the permanent 
magnet’s north pole. The other end of the paper clip will have a north pole and will be able to polar-
ize other paper clips. These polarized clips attract one another strongly enough to cling together in a 
long chain. 
Plastic Sheet Magnets and Credit Cards
When you remove your button magnet from the refrigerator, the steel returns to its original 
nonmagnetic state—it undergoes demagnetization and becomes demagnetized. Well, 
almost demagnetized. The demagnetization process isn’t perfect because some of the 
domains get stuck. Although magnetic forces within the steel favor a complete return to 
apparent nonmagnetism, chemical forces can make it hard for the domains to grow or 
shrink. Adjacent domains are separated by domain walls, boundary surfaces between one 
direction of magnetic orientation and another. These domain walls must move if the 
domains are to change size. However, fl aws and impurities in the steel can interact with a 
domain wall and keep it from moving. When that happens, the steel fails to demagnetize 
itself completely (Fig. 11.1.4). To remove the last bit of residual magnetism from steel, you 
must help the domain walls move, typically with heat or mechanical shock.
 
A soft magnetic material is one that demagnetizes itself easily when all nearby poles 
are removed. Chemically pure iron, which has few fl aws or impurities, is a soft magnetic 
material—easy to magnetize and easy to demagnetize. A hard magnetic material is one 
that does not demagnetize itself easily and that tends to retain whatever domain structure is 
imposed on it by its most recent exposure to strong nearby poles (Fig. 11.1.3c). Your button 
magnet is made from a hard magnetic material!
 
Like steel, the material in your button magnet is ferromagnetic (or closely related to 
ferromagnetic). Unlike steel, however, your button magnet’s domains do not shrink or 
grow easily. During its manufacture, the button magnet was magnetized by exposing it to 
such strong magnetic infl uences that its domains rearranged to give it permanent mag-
netic poles. It now has a north pole on one face and a south pole on the other. Unless you 
expose the button to extremely strong magnetic infl uences or heat it or pound it, it will 
retain its present magnetization almost indefi nitely. In that respect, the button is a per-
manent magnet.
 
Not all permanent magnets are as simple as button magnets. Depending on how they 
were magnetized, they can have their north and south poles located in unexpected places 
and even have more than one pair of poles. Plastic sheet magnets are a good example of 
multiple-pole magnets: each has a repeating pattern of alternate poles along its length. The 
exact patterns vary, but most have poles that form alternating parallel stripes. You can fi nd 
these stripes by letting them polarize and attract iron powder (Fig. 11.1.5) or by sliding two 
identical sheet magnets across one another. The sheets will attract and bind together most 
strongly when opposite poles are aligned across from each other. They’ll repel when you 
shift one of the magnets so that like poles are aligned.
 
A hard magnetic material’s ability to “remember” its magnetization can be useful for 
saving information. Once magnetized in a particular manner so as to represent a piece of 
information, the material will retain its magnetization and the associated information until 
something magnetizes it differently. Information retention in hard magnetic materials 
forms the basis for most magnetic recording and storage, including the magnetic strips 
on credit cards, magnetic tapes, computer disks, and magnetic random access memory 
(MRAM) (Fig. 11.1.6).
Fig. 11.1.6 Iron powder 
discloses the locations of 
magnetic poles on this 
credit card’s magnetic 
strip. Information is stored 
by choosing where those 
poles are located.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Household Magnets 309
Check Your Understanding #3: Now for the Flip Side
If you bring the north pole of a large strong magnet near the north pole of a small weak magnet that 
you are holding in place, what will happen to that small magnet? 
Answer: Its magnetic poles will interchange. 
Why: Even though the small magnet can’t move, its magnetic poles can. When the repulsion between 
the two north poles becomes strong enough, the poles of the small magnet will interchange and it 
will then present its south pole to the north pole of the large magnet. You will have permanently 
reversed the small magnet’s poles. 
Compasses
If you’ve spent time hiking, you may well own a magnetic compass. Like a button magnet, 
the needle of that compass is a simple permanent magnet with one north magnetic pole and 
one south magnetic pole. This needle aids navigation because Earth itself has a magnetic 
dipole and that dipole affects the orientation of the needle—the needle’s north magnetic 
pole tends to point northward.
 
Already, we can guess what must be located near Earth’s north geographic pole—a 
south magnetic pole. Attraction from that south magnetic pole is what draws the compass’s 
north magnetic pole toward the north. However, the full story is more complicated. To 
begin with, Earth’s magnetic poles are actually located far beneath its surface and aren’t 
perfectly aligned with the geographic poles. To make matters worse, magnetically active 
materials in everything from distant mountains to nearby buildings assert their own mag-
netic infl uences on the compass needle. Overall, the compass needle is responding to the 
infl uences of countless magnetic poles, both near and far. Given how diffi cult it would be 
to sum up all those separate infl uences, it is easier to view the compass needle as interacting 
with something local—a magnetic fi eld, an attribute of space that exerts a magnetostatic 
force on a pole. According to this new perspective, the compass needle responds to the 
local magnetic fi eld, a fi eld that’s created by all the surrounding magnetic poles.
 
As with an electric fi eld, the magnetic fi eld here appears to be acting merely as an 
intermediary; various poles produce the magnetic fi eld, and this magnetic fi eld affects our 
compass needle. As we’ll see, however, a magnetic fi eld is more than just an intermediary 
or a fi ction. It is quite real and can exist in space, independent of the poles that produce it. 
Just as electric fi elds can be created by things other than charge, so magnetic fi elds can be 
created by things other than pole.
 
The magnetic fi eld at a given location measures the magnetostatic force that a unit of 
pure north pole would experience if it were placed at that point. More specifi cally, the 
magnetostatic force is equal to the pole times the magnetic fi eld at the pole’s position. We 
can write this relationship as a word equation:
 
magnetostatic force = pole · magnetic field, 
(11.1.2)
in symbols:
F = pB,
and in everyday language:
If you place a strong magnet in a big magnetic fi eld, expect to be pushed around,
where the magnetostatic force is in the direction of the magnetic fi eld. Note that a negative 
amount of pole (a south pole) experiences a force opposite the magnetic fi eld. The SI unit 
of magnetic fi eld is the newton per ampere-meter, also called the tesla (abbreviated T).

310 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
 
Earth’s magnetic fi eld is relatively weak, about 0.00005 T in a roughly northward direc-
tion (see 2 ). (For comparison, the fi eld near your button magnet may be 0.1 T or more.) 
Earth’s fi eld pushes the compass needle’s north pole northward and south pole southward 
(Fig. 11.1.7). Unless the compass needle is perfectly aligned with that fi eld, it experiences a 
torque and undergoes angular acceleration. Since its mount allows the needle to rotate only 
horizontally and it experiences mild friction as it does, the needle soon settles down with its 
north pole pointing roughly northward. If its mount allowed it to rotate vertically as well as 
horizontally, the needle’s north pole would dip downward in the northern hemisphere and 
upward in the southern hemisphere. In general, the needle minimizes its magnetostatic 
potential energy by pointing along the direction of the local magnetic fi eld and is thus in a 
stable equilibrium when orientated that way. After a few swings back and forth, your com-
pass needle points along the local magnetic fi eld, which, we hope, points northward.
 
Because Earth’s magnetic fi eld is so uniform in the vicinity of your compass, its north-
ward push on the needle’s north pole exactly balances its southward push on the needle’s 
south pole and the needle experiences zero net force. However, if you bring your compass 
near a button magnet, the local magnetic fi eld will not be uniform and the needle may 
experience a net force. The magnetic fi eld gets stronger near one of the button’s poles and 
the compass needle will experience a net force toward or away from that pole, depending 
on which way it’s orientated.
 
When the needle is aligned with a nonuniform fi eld—its north pole pointing in the 
same direction as the local fi eld—the forces on its two opposite poles won’t balance and it 
will experience a net force in the direction of increasing fi eld. If it is aligned against the 
fi eld, it will experience a net force in the direction of decreasing fi eld. In practice, as you 
bring the compass near your button magnet, its needle will fi rst pivot into alignment with 
the local fi eld and then fi nd itself pulled toward increasing fi eld, toward the nearest pole of 
the button magnet. The same thing happens when you bring two button magnets together; 
each pivots into alignment with the other’s magnetic fi eld, and the two then leap at each 
other. Watch out for your fi ngers!
 
A piece of steel exhibits similar behavior when you hold it near a button magnet: it 
becomes magnetized along the direction of the local magnetic fi eld and then fi nds itself 
pulled toward increasing fi eld, toward the button magnet’s nearest pole. That’s how the 
button magnet holds your notes to the refrigerator!
2  Earth’s magnetic poles 
are not particularly well 
aligned with its geograph-
ical poles and have 
actually moved about 
1100 km over the past 
century. Earth’s south 
magnetic pole is presently 
drifting northwest across 
the Canadian arctic at 
about 40 kilometers per 
year. Moreover, Earth’s 
magnetic poles have been 
trading places about once 
every 700,000 years for 
the past 330 million years. 
The most recent reversal 
was about 780,000 years 
ago.
Earth's magnetic ﬁeld
N
S
Fig. 11.1.7 A compass 
needle aligns with the 
local magnetic fi eld. Its 
north pole experiences a 
magnetostatic force in the 
direction of the fi eld, and 
its south pole experiences 
a force opposite the fi eld.
Check Your Understanding #4: Crazy Compass
You lock the needle of your compass and move its north pole near the north pole of a powerful button 
magnet. Will the needle experience a magnetostatic force toward strong fi eld or weak fi eld? 
Answer: The needle will experience a force toward weak magnetic fi eld (away from the button magnet). 
Why: With its magnetic poles aligned opposite to the button’s magnetic fi eld, the compass needle 
experiences a force toward weaker magnetic fi eld. Actually, if you continue to push the needle closer 
to the button magnet, you can accidentally remagnetize that needle; its poles will permanently inter-
change and it will subsequently point south rather than north! Not to worry, though, because you can 
simply repeat this procedure to restore the compass to normal. 
Check Your Figures #1: Careful with That Wrench!
You mistakenly place a long steel wrench in the 1-T fi eld near a strong magnet. The fi eld magnetizes 
the wrench, and it develops a north pole of 1000 A·m at its near end and an equal south pole at its 
distant end. Only the near end of the wrench is in the 1-T fi eld and experiences a magnetic force. 
What force does the fi eld exert on the wrench and its north pole? 
Answer: It exerts almost 1000 N (225 lb) in the direction of the fi eld. 
Why: According to Eq. 11.1.2, the force exerted on the wrench’s north pole is equal to its 1000-A·m 
pole times the 1-T magnetic fi eld. Since 1 T = 1 N/A·m, that product is 1000 N and points in the 
direction of the fi eld. Such large forces are not unusual when steel or iron objects are exposed to a 
strong magnetic fi eld, so be careful working near big magnets!

Household Magnets 311
Iron Filings and Magnetic Flux Lines
Magnetic fi elds seem abstract; it would be helpful if you could see them. Remarkably 
enough, you can—just sprinkle iron fi lings into the fi eld! Although you’ll need to support 
their weight with paper or a liquid, an interesting pattern will form. Like tiny compass 
needles, the iron particles magnetize along the local magnetic fi eld and then stick together, 
north pole to south pole, in long strands that delineate the magnetic fi eld (Fig. 11.1.8)!
 
These strands map the magnetic fi eld in an interesting way. First, at each point on a 
strand, the strand points along the local magnetic fi eld. Second, the strands are most tightly 
packed where the local magnetic fi eld is strongest. In other words, the strands follow along 
the local magnetic fi eld direction and have a density proportional to that local fi eld. The 
lines highlighted by these strands are so useful that they have their own name, magnetic 
fl ux lines.
 
Flux lines are often helpful when exploring a magnetic fi eld. If you’re studying the 
magnetic fi eld in a large area, you probably don’t want to use iron fi lings. Instead, you can 
hold a compass in your hand and walk in the direction its needle is pointing—the direction 
of the magnetic fi eld. The path you’ll follow in this compass-guided walk is a magnetic fl ux 
line. If you repeat this trip from many different starting points, you’ll explore the whole 
magnetic fi eld, fl ux line by fl ux line. Since a magnetic fi eld tends to point away from north 
poles and toward south poles, these tours will typically take you from north poles to south 
poles. In fact, for our permanent magnets, every magnetic fl ux line begins at a north pole 
and ends at a south pole.
 
That last observation about fl ux lines is quite general: they never start at or end on 
anything other than a magnetic pole. While fl ux lines emerge in all directions from a north 
pole and converge from all directions on a south pole, that’s it; fl ux lines never begin or end 
in empty space. If you’re following a magnetic fl ux line with your compass, you will either 
reach a south pole or walk forever!
 
The possibility of that endless walk is somewhat disconcerting; if the fl ux line you’re 
following doesn’t end at a pole, what created its magnetic fi eld? The answer reveals a 
deep connection between magnetism and electricity. Some magnetic fi elds aren’t pro-
duced by magnetic poles at all; they’re produced by electricity! To see how that’s possi-
ble, let’s take a look at another common household magnet—the electromagnet in an 
ordinary doorbell.
Check Your Understanding #5: Building Bridges
If you sprinkle iron fi lings onto the magnetic strip of a credit card, a pattern of tiny iron bridges will 
form. Where are the magnetic poles relative to those bridges? 
Answer: The poles are at the ends of the bridges. 
Why: The iron fi lings follow the magnetic fl ux lines, which extend from north poles to south poles. 
Thus, one end of each bridge is a north pole and the other end is a south pole.
Electric Doorbells and Electromagnets
A classic electric doorbell uses a magnet and a spring to drive a piece of iron into two 
chimes, “ding-dong.” When you press the doorbell button, you close an electric circuit and 
the resulting electric current pushes the iron magnetically into the fi rst chime, “ding.” 
When you release the button, you open the circuit, stopping the current and its magnetism 
so that the spring can push the iron back into the second chime, “dong.”
 
The big news here is that electric currents can produce magnetic forces. In fact, there 
is nothing optional about this connection—electric currents are magnetic. More specifi -
cally, moving electric charge produces a magnetic fi eld.
Fig. 11.1.8 Supported by 
a liquid, this iron powder 
shows the magnetic fl ux 
lines around the magnet.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

312 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
 
Imagine the surprise of Danish physicist Hans Christian Oersted (1777–1851) when 
he observed in 1820 that current in a wire caused a nearby compass needle to rotate. 
Until that moment, electricity and magnetism had appeared to be independent phenom-
ena. Inspired by Oersted’s experiment, French physicist André-Marie Ampère 3  under-
took a 7-year study of the relationships between electricity and magnetism, and started 
the revolution that eventually unifi ed them within a single overarching conceptual 
framework.
 
When we use iron powder to disclose the magnetic fl ux lines surrounding a long, 
straight, current-carrying wire, we too are in for a surprise (Fig. 11.1.9). Those fl ux lines 
circle the wire like concentric rings, growing more widely separated as the distance from 
the wire increases. The wire is an electromagnet, a device that becomes magnetic when it 
carries an electric current. However, because an electromagnet has no true magnetic poles, 
the magnetic fl ux lines can’t stretch from north pole to south pole. Instead, each fl ux line of 
an electromagnet is a closed loop. If you took a compass-guided walk along one of these 
fl ux lines, you’d retrace your steps over and over.
 
Since the fl ux lines are packed tightest near the surface of the current-carrying wire, 
that’s where the magnetic fi eld is strongest. Recalling that a piece of iron is pulled toward 
increasing magnetic fi eld, we see that the wire will attract iron to it whenever it’s carrying 
a current.
 
The magnetic fi eld around a current-carrying wire is fairly weak, however, and a prac-
tical doorbell winds that wire into a coil to concentrate and strengthen its fi eld. Although 
the magnetic fi eld around a current-carrying coil is complicated, we can use iron powder to 
make it visible (Fig. 11.1.10). Remarkably enough, the fl ux lines outside the coil resemble 
those outside a button magnet of similar dimensions (Fig. 11.1.11). It’s as though the coil 
has a north pole at one end and a south pole at the other! Because there are no true poles 
present, however, the fl ux lines don’t end anywhere. Instead, they continue right through 
the middle of the coil and form complete loops.
 
When current fl ows through the coil, nearby iron fi nds itself magnetized along the 
local magnetic fi eld and then pulled toward increasing fi eld—toward the tightly packed 
fl ux lines at the coil’s end. But why stop there? Since the fl ux lines continue right into the 
coil and grow even more tightly packed inside, the iron will be pulled inward toward 
the very center of the coil!
 
That’s how the doorbell works. When you press the doorbell button, current fl ows 
through a coil of wire and the resulting magnetic fi eld yanks an iron rod into the center of 
FIRST CONNECTION BETWEEN ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
Moving electric charge produces a magnetic fi eld.
3  Self-educated before 
the French Revolution, 
during which his father 
was executed, French 
physicist André-Marie 
Ampère (1775–1836) 
became a science teacher 
in 1796. He served as a 
professor of physics or 
mathematics in several 
cities before settling at the 
University of Paris system 
in 1804. In 1820, only a 
week after learning of 
Oersted’s experiment 
showing that an electric 
current causes a compass 
needle to defl ect, Ampère 
published an extensive 
treatment of the subject. 
Evidently, he had been 
thinking about these ideas 
for a long time.
Fig. 11.1.9 Iron powder 
shows that fl ux lines 
around a current-carrying 
wire form concentric rings 
around that wire.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Fig. 11.1.10 Iron powder 
shows that fl ux lines pass 
straight through a current-
carrying coil and return 
outside it, much like the 
fl ux lines around a similarly 
shaped bar magnet.
Fig. 11.1.11 (a) The magnetic fi eld around a loop of current-carrying wire points up through 
the loop and down around the outside of the loop. The magnetic fi eld arrow passing through each 
black dot indicates the magnitude and direction of the force a north test pole would experience at 
the dot’s location. (b) The fi eld produced by a two-pole button magnet is almost identical to that 
of the loop.
Current
Current
loop
(a)
North
South
Magnetic
dipole
(b)

Electric Power Distribution 313
Check Your Understanding #6: Current Technology
In magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a patient is immersed in an intense magnetic fi eld. That fi eld 
is created entirely without permanent magnets or even iron. How is that possible? 
Answer: The magnetic fi eld is created by the current in a coil of wire. 
Why: MRI requires a magnetic fi eld that is intense, uniform, and spacious enough for a patient to fi t 
inside. The best way to create such a colossal fi eld is with a current-carrying coil. In fact, the fi eld is 
so enormous that its fl ux lines extend far from the magnet and can attract iron or steel objects from 
across the room. Understandably, magnetic materials are forbidden near MRI magnets.
that coil. About the time the rod reaches the center, part of it hits the fi rst chime. When you 
then open the switch, stopping the current and its magnetism, a spring pushes the iron rod 
back out of the coil and it hits the second chime. These two chimes make the familiar ding-
dong!
 
While current is fl owing through the coil and the iron rod is inside it, the two objects 
act as a single powerful electromagnet. The magnetic fi eld surrounding the pair is the sum 
of the coil’s modest magnetic fi eld and the magnetized iron’s much stronger fi eld. In effect, 
the current in the coil magnetizes the iron and the iron then creates most of the surrounding 
magnetic fi eld. Practical electromagnets, which control switches and valves in your fur-
nace or air conditioner and can lift cars at the scrap yard, generally use iron or related 
materials to dramatically enhance the magnetic fi eld produced by a current in a coil of 
wire (Fig. 11.1.12).
Questions to Think About: Why do power distribution systems 
use alternating current? What is the purpose of high-voltage 
wires? Why does the power company place large electric 
devices on the utility poles near homes or on the ground near 
neighborhoods? What are the advantages and disadvantages of 
120-V versus 230-V electric power?
Experiments to Do: Experiments with electric power distribu-
tion are rather dangerous, but you can observe the ways in 
which your local electric power is distributed. If your area is 
connected to a major electric power network, you’ll be able to 
fi nd an entire hierarchy of power-conversion facilities. The 
power should travel from the power plant to your town on high-
voltage wires, normally located overhead on tall pillars or 
pylons. These wires should end at a large power-conversion 
facility, where enormous devices transfer power to the lower-
voltage power lines that fan out across your town. In some 
places, these wires are overhead; in others, they’re under-
ground. However, this power is still not ready for household 
use. It goes through at least one more stage of conversion 
before it reaches individual homes.
 
All these conversion steps are performed by transformers. 
You can fi nd transformers as boxes or cylinders on utility poles 
or on the ground outside homes. In cities, transformers are 
often located inside buildings, out of sight. Even though you 
may have trouble fi nding these transformers, they’re there. In 
this section, we’ll see why they’re necessary.
Electricity is a particularly useful and convenient form of 
ordered energy. Because it’s delivered to our homes and offi ces 
as a utility, we barely think about it, except to pay the bills. The 
wires that bring it to us never plug up or need cleaning and 
work continuously except when there’s a power failure, blown 
fuse, or tripped circuit breaker.
 
Just how does electricity get to our homes? In this section, 
we’ll look at the problems associated with distributing electric-
ity far from the power plant at which it’s generated. To under-
stand these problems, we’ll examine the ways in which wires 
affect electricity and see how electric power is transferred and 
rearranged by devices called transformers.
Power plant
Step-up 
transformer
High-voltage 
transmission line
Step-down 
transformer 
(substation)
Pylon
Utility pole
Insulators
Insulators
Step-down 
transformer
Electricity
meter
Electric Power Distribution
SECTION 11.2
Fig. 11.1.12 This electric 
switch is controlled by 
an electromagnet and is 
called a relay.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

314 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
Direct Current Power Distribution
Batteries may be fi ne for powering fl ashlights, but they’re not very practical for lighting 
homes. Early experiments that placed batteries in basements were disappointing because 
the batteries ran out of energy quickly and needed service and fresh chemicals all too 
frequently.
 
A more cost-effective source for electricity was coal- or oil-powered electric genera-
tors. Like batteries, generators do work on the electric currents fl owing through them and 
can provide the electric power needed to illuminate homes. But although generators pro-
duce electricity more cheaply than batteries, early ones were large machines that required 
fresh air and attention. These generators had to be built centrally, with people to tend them 
and chimneys to get rid of the smoke.
 
This was the approach taken by the American inventor Thomas Alva Edison (1847–
1931) in 1882 when he began to electrify New York City following his development of a 
practical incandescent lightbulb 4 . Each of the Edison Electric Light Company’s genera-
tors acted like a mechanical battery, producing direct current (DC) that always left the 
generator through one wire and returned to it through another. Edison placed his generators 
in central locations and conducted the current to and from the homes he served through 
copper wires. However, the farther a building was from the generator, the thicker the cop-
per wires had to be. That’s because wires impede the fl ow of current and making them 
thicker allows them to carry current more easily.
 
Wire thickness is important because, like the fi lament of the fl ashlight bulb we studied 
in Chapter 10, wires have electrical resistance. In accordance with Ohm’s law (Eq. 10.3.4), 
the voltage drop through a wire is equal to its electrical resistance times the current passing 
through it. In the case of a wire conducting current from a generating plant to a home, our 
primary concern is how much power the wire wastes as thermal power. We can determine 
this wasted power by combining Ohm’s law with the equation for power consumed by a 
device (Eq. 10.3.1):
 
 power consumed = voltage drop · current
 
 = (current · electrical resistance) · current
 
 = current2 · electrical resistance.
 
(11.2.1)
WARNING
Electricity is dangerous, particularly when it involves high voltages. The principal haz-
ard is that an electric current will pass through your body in the vicinity of your heart 
and disrupt its normal rhythm. Very little current is needed to cause trouble, but your 
skin is such a poor conductor that it normally prevents harmful currents from passing 
through you. Be careful around high voltages, however, because they can propel dan-
gerous currents through your skin and put you at risk. Although your body usually has 
to be part of a closed circuit for you to receive a shock, don’t count on the absence of 
an identifi able circuit to protect you from injury—circuits have a tendency to form in 
surprising ways whenever you touch an electric wire. Be especially careful whenever 
you’re near voltages of more than 50 V, even in batteries, or when you’re near any 
voltages if you’re wet or your skin is broken. That said, voltages of 12 V or less are so 
unlikely to injure you that they are generally considered safe. Nearly all household 
batteries provide voltages in that safe range and can be handled individually with little 
risk of shock. Similarly, most power adapters for electronic devices provide 12 V or less 
and thus rarely cause shocks.
4  Lewis Howard Latimer 
(African American 
scientist and inventor, 
1848–1928) was only 8 
years old when the U.S. 
Supreme Court’s Dred 
Scott decision made his 
escaped-slave father a 
fugitive and forced him to 
disappear. Left behind 
with his mother, Latimer 
did well in school and 
became a skilled drafts-
man and engineer. While 
working for Edison’s 
rival, Hiram Maxim, 
Latimer became an expert 
in fabricating carbon 
fi laments for incandescent 
lamps. When Latimer 
later joined Edison’s team 
of inventors, the “Edison 
Pioneers,” his sturdy 
carbon fi laments quickly 
replaced Edison’s own 
fragile bamboo ones and 
provided the crucial 
ingredient necessary for 
Edison’s lamps to become 
a commercial success.

Electric Power Distribution 315
The wire’s wasted power is proportional to the square of the current passing through it! 
This relationship became all too clear to Edison when he tried to expand his power distri-
bution systems. The more current he tried to deliver over a particular wire, the more power 
it lost as heat. Doubling the current in the wire quadrupled the power it wasted.
 
Edison tried to combat this loss by lowering the electrical resistances of the wires. He 
used copper because only silver is a better conductor of current. He used thick wires to 
increase the number of moving charges. He also kept the wires short so that they didn’t 
have much chance to waste power. This length requirement forced Edison to build his gen-
erating plants within the cities he served. Even New York City contained many local power 
plants. (For an interesting tale about the early days of electric power, see 5 .)
 
Edison also tried to minimize waste by decreasing the currents in the wires while 
increasing the voltage differences between those wires. Delivered power is equal to the 
current times the voltage drop (see Eq. 10.3.1), so while less current fl owed through each 
home, the larger voltage drop left the delivered power unchanged.
 
The voltage difference between the two wires carrying current to and from a home is 
often referred to as the voltage of the electric power. Using that terminology, Edison needed 
to provide large-voltage or “high-voltage” DC electric power to his customers. High volt-
age power is dangerous, however, because it can cause fi re-starting sparks and nasty shocks. 
It could be handled safely outside a home, but bringing it inside was another matter. Edison 
used the highest voltage power that safety allowed.
 
Although scientists have discovered a number of materials that lose their electrical 
resistance at extremely low temperatures and become perfect electrical conductors, or 
superconductors (Fig. 11.2.1), these superconductors are still too impractical for power-
distribution systems. Their use is limited to local applications such as large electromagnets 
and specialized electronic devices.
Check Your Understanding #1: The Trouble with DC Electric Power
If Edison doubled the length of his delivery wires, while keeping the currents through them the same, 
what would happen to the power they consumed? 
Answer: The power would roughly double. 
Why: Doubling the length of a wire is like placing two identical wires one after the next. If each wire 
uses 1 unit of power, then two wires should use roughly 2 units of power. Electrical resistance is 
proportional to the length of a wire and inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area of that wire. 
Shortening and thickening a wire reduce its resistance.
Introducing Alternating Current
The real problem with distributing electric power via direct current is that there’s no easy 
way to transfer power from one DC circuit to another. Because the generator and the light-
bulbs must be part of the same circuit, safety requires that the entire circuit use low voltages 
and large currents. DC power distribution therefore wastes much of its power in the wires 
connecting everything together.
 
However, as we’ll soon see, alternating current (AC) makes it easy to transfer power 
from one AC circuit to another so that different parts of the AC power-distribution system 
can operate at different voltages with different currents. Most signifi cantly, the wires that 
carry the power long distances are part of a high-voltage, low-current circuit and therefore 
waste little power.
 
An alternating current is one that periodically reverses direction—it alternates. For exam-
ple, when you plug a toaster into an AC electrical outlet and switch it on, the current that fl ows 
through the toaster’s heating element reverses its direction of travel many times each second.
 
The power company propels this alternating current through the toaster by subjecting 
it to an alternating voltage drop, a voltage drop that periodically reverses direction. As you 
5  Love Canal is the most 
famous U.S. toxic waste 
dump. The dump was 
created in the 1920s at an 
abandoned section of 
canal constructed in 1892 
by William T. Love. 
Love intended his canal 
to connect the upper and 
lower Niagara Rivers so 
that the descending water 
could be used to generate 
DC electric power for the 
citizens of Niagara Falls, 
New York. The advent of 
AC power transmission 
systems in 1896 made the 
canal less useful, and it 
was never fi nished.
Fig. 11.2.1 A magnetic 
cylinder fl oats above the 
surface of a superconductor 
at 78 K. Currents fl owing 
freely in the superconductor 
make it magnetic and cause 
it to repel the magnetic 
cylinder.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

316 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
may recall from Section 10.3 on fl ashlights, current in a fi lament, heating element, or any 
other device that obeys Ohm’s law fl ows down a voltage gradient, from a higher voltage to 
a lower voltage, much as bicyclists roll down an altitude gradient from a higher altitude to 
a low altitude or as water fl ows down a pressure gradient from a higher pressure to a lower 
pressure. While a fl ashlight’s battery subjects the fl ashlight’s fi lament to a steady voltage 
drop and obtains a direct current, the power company subjects the toaster’s heating element 
to an alternating voltage drop and obtains an alternating current.
 
Alternating voltages are present at any AC electrical outlet. In the United States, an 
ordinary AC outlet offers three connections: hot, neutral, and ground (Fig. 11.2.2). In a 
properly installed outlet, the absolute voltage of neutral remains near 0 V, while the abso-
lute voltage of hot alternates above and below 0 V. Ground, which is an optional safety 
connection that we’ll discuss later, also remains near 0 V absolute.
 
One of the toaster’s wires is connected to hot and the other to neutral (Fig. 11.2.3). 
Since current always fl ows through the toaster’s heating element from higher voltage to 
lower voltage, it fl ows from hot to neutral when hot has a positive voltage (Fig. 11.2.3a). 
and from neutral to hot when hot has a negative voltage (Fig. 11.2.3b).
 
In normal AC electric power, the hot voltage varies sinusoidally—it’s proportional to the 
trigonometric sine function with respect to time (Fig. 11.2.4). This smoothly alternating volt-
age propels a smoothly alternating current through the toaster. During each reversal, the cur-
rent in the heating element gradually slows to a stop before gathering strength in the opposite 
direction. In the United States, AC voltages reverse every 120th of a second, yielding 60 full 
cycles of reversal (back and forth) each second (60 Hz). In Europe, the reversals occur every 
100th of a second, so AC voltages complete 50 full cycles of reversal each second (50 Hz).
 
Fortunately, these reversals have little effect on many household devices. Toasters, 
electric heaters, and incandescent lightbulbs consume power because of their electrical 
resistances and don’t care which way current passes through them. In fact, power consump-
tion in such simple ohmic devices is used to defi ne an effective voltage for AC electric 
power. An outlet’s nominal AC voltage—technically, its root mean square (RMS) volt-
age—is defi ned to be equal to the DC voltage that would cause the same average power 
consumption in an ohmic device. Thus, 120-V AC power delivers the same average power 
to a toaster as 120-V DC power.
 
However, the reversals of AC power aren’t without consequence. First, some electrical 
and most electronic devices are sensitive to the direction of current fl ow and must handle 
the reversals carefully. Second, the power available from an ordinary AC outlet rises and 
falls with each voltage reversal and is momentarily zero at the reversal itself. The toaster’s 
heating element actually varies slightly in temperature because of these power fl uctuations, 
and devices that can’t tolerate even an instant without power must store energy to avoid 
shutting down during the reversals.
 
Finally, AC power’s sinusoidally varying voltages peak well above their nominal val-
ues, exceeding those values by a factor of the square root of 2 (about 1.414). For example, 
the voltage of the hot connection in an ordinary 120-V AC power outlet actually swings 
between +170 V and −170 V. Those higher peak voltages are important for insulation and 
electrical safety.
Fig. 11.2.2 This electric 
outlet follows the U.S. 
standard for 120-V AC, 
15-A service. The wide 
slots (left) are neutral, the 
narrow slots (right) are 
hot, and the curved holes 
(center) are ground. This 
outlet provides ground-
fault circuit interruption 
(GFCI) protection; if any 
current leaving hot fails to 
return to neutral, or vice 
versa, the outlet shuts off 
instantly until it is reset. 
The test button simulates 
a current leak and will 
shut off the outlet if its 
protection is functioning 
properly.
Current
Current
Current
Current
(a)
(b)
Hot wire
Neutral wire
Fig. 11.2.3
When a 
toaster is plugged into a 
U.S. 120-V AC outlet, the 
voltage of its hot wire varies 
with time. The voltage of its 
neutral wire remains at 
0 V. Since current always 
fl ows through the toaster 
from higher voltage to lower 
voltage, that current reverses 
each time the voltage of the 
hot wire reverses.
Check Your Understanding #2: Timing Is Everything
Sticking your fi ngers into an electrical outlet is never a good idea, but is there a moment when you 
could do it without getting a shock?
Answer: Yes, you could do it at the moment the voltages are reversing.
Why: While the ground and neutral wires of the electrical outlet are normally without charge and 
therefore relatively safe, the hot wire is usually charged and dangerous. That hot wire’s voltage alter-
nates rapidly between high positive voltage and high negative voltage. Only when it’s passing through 
0 V can you touch it without risking a shock. However, that safe moment is so brief that you can’t 
realistically avoid a shock. Don’t try it! 

Electric Power Distribution 317
Magnetic Induction
Edison was adamantly opposed to alternating current, which he viewed as dangerous and 
exotic. Indeed, its fl uctuating voltages and moments without power don’t make alternating 
current look attractive at all.
 
The champion of alternating current was Nikola Tesla (1856–1943), a Serbian Ameri-
can inventor who was backed fi nancially by the American inventor and industrialist George 
Westinghouse (1846–1914). The advantage that Tesla and Westinghouse saw in alternating 
current was that its power could be transformed—it could be passed via electromagnetic 
action from one circuit to another by a device called a transformer.
 
A transformer uses two important connections between electricity and magnetism to 
convey power from one AC circuit to another. The fi rst is familiar: moving electric charge 
creates magnetic fi elds. This connection allows electricity to produce magnetism. The sec-
ond connection, however, is something new: magnetic fi elds that change with time create 
electric fi elds. Discovered in 1831 by Michael Faraday 6 , this relationship allows magne-
tism to produce electricity!
–150
–100
–50
50
100
150
Time (seconds)
Voltage (volts)
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.01
Fig. 11.2.4 The voltage of the hot wire of a U.S. 
120-V AC outlet varies sinusoidally in time and 
completes 60 full cycles per second. Although it 
peaks at 6170 V, its effective time average or root 
mean square (RMS) voltage is 120 V. The voltage 
of the neutral wire is always 0 V.
6  With only a primary 
education, English chemist 
and physicist Michael 
Faraday (1791–1867) 
apprenticed with a 
bookbinder at 14. At 21, 
he became a laboratory 
assistant to Humphry 
Davy, a renowned chemist. 
Faraday’s experiments 
with electrochemistry and 
his knowledge of work by 
Oersted and Ampère led 
him to think that, if 
electricity can cause 
magnetism, then mag-
netism should be able to 
cause electricity. Through 
careful experimentation, 
he found just such an 
effect. Toward the end of 
his career, Faraday 
became a popular lecturer 
on science and made a 
particular effort to reach 
children.
SECOND CONNECTION BETWEEN ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
Magnetic fi elds that change with time produce electric fi elds.
 
Whether you wave a permanent magnet back and forth, or switch an electromagnet on 
and off, you are changing a magnetic fi eld with time and thereby producing an electric 
fi eld. If there are mobile electric charges around to respond to that electric fi eld, they’ll 
accelerate and you’ll have created or altered an electric current and possibly done work on 
it as well. This process, whereby a time-changing magnetic fi eld initiates or infl uences an 
electric current, is called magnetic induction.
 
A transformer combines these two connections in sequence—electricity produces 
magnetism produces electricity. However, rather than returning electric power to where it 
started, the transformer moves that power from the current in one coil of wire through a 
magnetic fi eld to the current in a second coil of wire.
Check Your Understanding #3: Electric Phonographs
In the days of vinyl records, a phonograph reproduced sound by sliding a diamond stylus through a 
record’s undulating groove. A magnet attached to that stylus moved up and down with each undula-
tion and produced a current in a nearby coil of wire. Why did the magnet’s motion affect the coil? 
Answer: The moving magnet produced an electric fi eld, which pushed mobile charges through that 
wire coil. 
Why: The tiny vibrating magnet affected the coil’s current via magnetic induction. 

318 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
Alternating Current and a Coil of Wire
To help us understand the power transfer that takes place in a transformer, let’s start with a 
simpler case. What happens when you send an alternating current through a single coil of 
wire?
 
Because currents are magnetic, the coil becomes an electromagnet. However, since the 
current passing through it reverses periodically, so does its magnetic fi eld. Also, because a 
magnetic fi eld that changes with time produces an electric fi eld, the coil’s alternating mag-
netic fi eld produces an alternating electric fi eld.
 
This induced electric fi eld has a remarkable effect—it pushes on the very alternating 
current that produces it! Although it’s not obvious how this electric fi eld should affect that 
current, the result turns out to be simple (Fig. 11.2.5). As the coil’s current increases, 
the induced electric fi eld pushes that current backward and thereby opposes its increase 
(Fig 11.2.5b). As the coil’s current decreases, the induced electric fi eld pushes that current 
forward and thereby opposes its decrease (Fig 11.2.5d). No matter how the coil’s current 
changes, the induced electric fi eld always opposes that change!
 
This opposition to change is universal in magnetic induction, where it’s known as 
Lenz’s law: when a changing magnetic fi eld induces a current in a conductor, the magnetic 
fi eld from that current opposes the change that induced it. In other words, the effects of 
magnetic induction oppose the changes that produce them. In the present case, self-directed 
magnetic induction or “self-inductance” leads our coil to oppose its own changes in cur-
rent. A wire coil’s natural opposition to current change makes it quite useful in electrical 
equipment and electronics, where it’s called an inductor (Fig. 11.2.6).
Increasing
current
No
current
Magnetic
ﬁeld
Induced electric       ﬁeld
Induced emf
Constant
current
Magnetic
ﬁeld
Decreasing
current
Magnetic
ﬁeld
Induced electric       ﬁeld
Induced emf
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 11.2.5 (a) A 
current-free inductor has 
no magnetic fi eld. (b) As 
the inductor’s current and 
magnetic fi eld increase, 
its induced electric fi eld 
opposes the current increase 
and its induced emf takes 
energy from the current. 
(c) A constant current has a 
constant magnetic fi eld and 
zero induced emf. (d) As 
the inductor’s current and 
magnetic fi eld decrease, 
its induced electric fi eld 
opposes the current decrease 
and its induced emf gives 
energy to the current.
LENZ’S LAW
When a changing magnetic fi eld induces a current in a conductor, the magnetic fi eld 
from that current opposes the change that induced it.
 
However, our coil’s induced electric fi eld does more than just push the current around; 
it can also do positive or negative work on that current and thereby shift that current from 
one voltage to another. The coil’s overall voltage shift, from one end of the coil to the other, 
is known as its induced emf (short for electromotive force). Current enters the coil at one 
voltage and exits at another voltage, courtesy of the coil’s induced emf.
 
For comparison, a battery has an electrochemical emf; current enters the battery at one 
voltage and exits at another voltage, thanks to the battery’s electrochemical emf. But while 
a battery’s electrochemical emf is fi xed, a coil’s induced emf can change with time. When 
an alternating voltage difference is applied to the coil, its induced emf alternates and exactly 
matches the applied voltage difference.
 
A coil’s ability to shift an alternating current gracefully from one voltage to another 
makes it possible to plug a properly designed coil into an AC electric outlet without causing 
disaster. As the outlet’s voltage difference alternates, the coil’s induced emf follows that volt-
age difference perfectly. Magnetic induction keeps the coil’s current small and, if we neglect 
the coil’s tiny electrical resistance, none of the AC electric power is wasted as thermal power.
 
As the coil’s voltage difference and induced emf alternate, the coil’s current keeps 
trying to fl ow from higher voltage to lower voltage. The coil’s opposition to current change, 
however, delays the current’s response so that its alternating current lags a quarter of an AC 
cycle behind its alternating voltage difference. For example, the current reaches its peak 
fl ow toward the top of the coil a quarter of an AC cycle after the voltage at the top of the 
coil reached its peak positive value. Although the coil’s voltage difference and current both 
vary sinusoidally with time, the current has a phase shift or phase delay of 90° relative to 
the voltage difference.

Electric Power Distribution 319
 
Because of this phase shift, current fl ows through the coil from higher voltage to lower 
voltage only half the time. The other half, current fl ows from lower voltage to higher volt-
age. When current fl ows toward lower voltage, the induced emf removes electrostatic 
potential energy from the current. When current fl ow toward higher voltage, the induced 
emf returns electrostatic potential energy to the current. Energy alternately leaves the cur-
rent and returns, but where does that energy reside when it’s not in the current?
 
The missing energy is in the coil’s magnetic fi eld! Magnetic fi elds contain energy. The 
amount of energy in a uniform magnetic fi eld is half the square of the fi eld strength times 
the volume of the fi eld divided by the permeability of free space. We can write this relation-
ship as a word equation:
 
energy =
magnetic field2 · volume
2 · permeability of free space, 
(11.2.2)
in symbols:
U = B2 · V
2 · μ0
,
and in everyday language:
Strong permanent magnets store so much magnetic energy that they 
can be dangerous if you break them. The pieces will fl ip around violently, 
and you may get pinched.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Magnets as Limitless Sources of Energy
Misconception: Magnets are infi nite sources of energy that could provide electric or mechanical 
power forever!
Resolution: Although a magnet’s fi eld does contain energy, that energy is limited and was invested 
in it during its magnetization. To extract that energy, you’d have to demagnetize and thus destroy 
the magnet.
 
In effect, our coil is playing with the alternating current’s energy, storing it briefl y in 
the magnetic fi eld and then returning it to the current. The coil stores energy while the 
magnitude of the current increases—the fi eld strengthens and the current loses voltage. The 
coil returns energy while the magnitude of the current decreases—the fi eld weakens and 
the current gains voltage. Because the coil’s self-induced emf is responsible for bouncing 
this energy back to the current, it’s frequently called a back emf.
Check Your Understanding #4: Slow Fall
If you drop a strong magnet onto a nonmagnetic but highly conducting surface, the magnet will 
descend remarkably slowly. What’s delaying the magnet’s fall? 
Answer: The falling magnet is inducing currents and magnetism in the surface. In accordance with 
Lenz’s law, that induced magnetism opposes the change that produces it; it acts to slow the magnet’s 
descent. 
Why: A strong magnet induces such powerful magnetic opposition in a good conductor that moving 
the magnet is diffi cult. This effect is most evident with a superconductor, that is, a material that 
conducts electricity perfectly and can sustain induced currents forever. A superconductor can slow a 
falling magnet to a stop and hold it suspended indefi nitely (Fig. 11.2.1). 
Inductor
Magnetizable
core
Copper
coil
Symbol for inductor
(b)
(a)
Fig. 11.2.6 (a) An 
inductor is a coil of wire 
that stores energy in 
its magnetic fi eld. To 
increase its inductance, 
the coil may contain a 
magnetizable core of 
iron or ferrite. (b) In a 
schematic diagram of 
an electronic device, the 
inductor is represented by 
a stylized coil.

320 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
Two Coils Together: A Transformer
A single coil experiences only self-inductance. Any energy removed from the coil’s cur-
rent by its induced emf must eventually be returned to that same current; it has nowhere 
else to go. But when two coils share the same electromagnetic environment, they experi-
ence mutual inductance and can exchange energy via magnetic induction. Energy removed 
from one coil’s current by its induced emf can be given to the other coil’s current by its 
induced emf.
 
That possibility is the basis for a transformer, a device that transfers electric power 
from one circuit to another. In its simplest form, a transformer consists of two coils, pri-
mary and secondary, wrapped around a magnetizable core that enhances magnetic induc-
tion and allows them to share the same electromagnetic environment. When alternating 
current fl ows through the primary coil, it produces an induced electric fi eld that affects both 
coils and both coils develop induced emfs. The induced emf in the primary coil removes 
energy from its alternating current while the induced emf in the secondary coil gives that 
energy to its alternating current.
 
I’ll explain how this energy transfer works by starting with the transformer shown in 
Fig. 11.2.7a. A generator provides its primary coil with 120-V AC electric power, while its 
secondary coil is an open circuit.
 
With the generator subjecting the primary coil to an alternating voltage difference, the 
primary coil behaves like an inductor. It carries an alternating current and develops an 
induced emf that exactly matches the voltage difference imposed by the generator. Although 
the coil’s current naturally tries to fl ow from higher voltage to lower voltage, the coil’s 
self-inductance opposes current changes and delays the current’s response. As a result, the 
coil’s alternating current lags a quarter of an AC cycle or 90 degrees in phase behind the 
coil’s alternating voltage difference.
 
Because of its 90-degree phase lag, this alternating current conveys no average power 
from the generator to the primary coil. Nonetheless, it plays an important role in the trans-
former: it alternately magnetizes and demagnetizes the transformer’s core and thereby 
produces the induced emfs in both coils. For that reason, it is known as the magnetizing 
current.
 
The transformer’s secondary coil is identical to its primary coil, except for being 
upside down on the right side of the magnetizable core. The secondary coil’s induced emf 
is therefore identical to that of the primary coil, except for being upside down. Though it’s 
an open circuit and can’t carry a signifi cant current, the secondary coil has a voltage 
difference across it due to the induced emf and it can thus act as a source of 120-V AC 
electric power!
 
In Fig. 11.2.7b, the transformer’s secondary is connected to a lightbulb. Because the 
lightbulb’s fi lament obeys Ohm’s law, its current remains proportional to the voltage differ-
ence across it, even if that voltage difference alternates. With the secondary coil imposing 
an alternating voltage difference on the fi lament, that fi lament carries an alternating current 
Check Your Figures #1: Field the Energy
An MRI diagnostic unit fi lls about 0.1 m3 of space with a 4-T magnetic fi eld. How much energy is 
contained in that fi eld? 
Answer: The fi eld contains about 640,000 J. 
Why: Since 1 T is equivalent to 1 N/A·m, Eq. 11.2.2 gives us the energy of a 4-T fi eld occupying 
0.1 m3 as:
 energy = (4 N/A · m)2 · 0.1 m3
2 · (4π × 10−7 N/A2)
 = 640,000 N · m = 640,000 J.

Electric Power Distribution 321
that is synchronized with the voltage difference. That current always fl ows toward lower 
voltage in the fi lament, dropping off energy, and toward higher voltage in the secondary 
coil, picking up energy. Provided with 120-V AC power by the secondary coil, this partic-
ular lightbulb fi lament carries an AC current of 1 A.
 
The current that is now fl owing through the secondary coil has its own magnetic effect 
on the transformer. Fortunately, that effect is surprisingly simple: it causes an additional 
current to fl ow through the primary coil.
 
Known as the load current, this additional current shares the same conducting path as 
the magnetizing current, like two fl eets of cars sharing the same two-lane road. Unlike the 
magnetizing current, however, the load current is synchronized with the voltage difference 
across the primary coil and its two effects are different. It produces a magnetic fi eld that 
exactly cancels the magnetic fi eld of the secondary current and it conveys electric power 
from the generator to the primary coil.
 
I’ll start with the magnetic cancellation. When a current travels in a circle, the magnetic 
fi eld inside the circle is proportional to the current. A wire coil guides its current in a circle 
multiple times, effectively multiplying that current by the number of turns in the coil. 
The magnetic fi eld inside a coil of wire is thus proportional to the current in the wire times 
the number of turns in the coil.
Induced emf
Induced emf
Primary coil
Secondary coil
Primary
circuit
120 V AC
Secondary
circuit
120 V AC
Magnetizing
current
Magnetizable
core
Isolation transformer
Magnetic ﬁeld
10 turns
10 turns
Induced emf
Induced emf
Primary
circuit
120 V AC
Secondary
circuit
120 V AC
Isolation transformer
Magnetic ﬁeld
10 turns
10 turns
Load
current
1 A
Secondary
current
1 A
120 V bulb
120 W
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11.2.7 (a) When 120-
V AC electric power causes 
a magnetizing current to 
fl ow in the primary coil of 
this isolation transformer, 
both coils develop 120-V 
AC induced emfs. (b) When 
a lightbulb completes 
the secondary circuit, the 
resulting secondary current 
causes an additional load 
current to fl ow in the 
primary circuit. Overall, the 
transformer transfers power 
from its primary circuit to 
its secondary circuit.

322 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
 
Since the transformer’s primary and secondary coils are identical, they have the same 
number of turns. If the currents in those two coils are equal in amount but opposite in direc-
tion, their magnetic fi elds will cancel.
 
The transformer naturally adjusts its load current to achieve that magnetic cancella-
tion. Since the secondary coil has a 1-A alternating current fl owing through it toward higher 
voltage, the primary coil acquires a 1-A alternating load current fl owing through it toward 
lower voltage. Their magnetic fi elds cancel perfectly, leaving the magnetizing current 
solely responsible for the transformer’s magnetic fi eld and its induced emfs.
 
Because the coils are identical, their induced emfs are both 120-V AC. The negative 
work that the primary coil’s induced emf does on its 1-A current is therefore equal in 
amount to the positive work that the secondary coil’s induced emf does on its 1-A current. 
Overall, the transformer is transferring an AC power of 120 W from the current in its pri-
mary circuit to the current in its secondary circuit.
 
To maintain their magnetic cancellation, the load current automatically mirrors any 
changes in the secondary current. For example, if we add a second lightbulb to the second-
ary circuit and thereby double the current in the secondary coil, the load current will also 
double. Because of this mirroring effect, the transformer always consumes as much power 
from its primary circuit as is consumed by its secondary circuit.
Check Your Understanding #5: Use Only with AC Power
If you send direct current through the primary coil of a transformer, no power will be transferred to 
the secondary circuit. Explain. 
Answer: When direct current fl ows through the transformer’s primary coil, it creates a constant mag-
netic fi eld around the iron core. Since that fi eld doesn’t change, it doesn’t create any electric fi elds 
and doesn’t induce current in the transformer’s secondary coil. 
Why: The current through the primary coil must change so that the magnetic fi eld in the coils will 
change and current will be induced in the secondary coil. Transferring power from one circuit to 
another is so useful that there are many DC-powered devices that switch their power on and off to 
mimic alternating current so that they can use transformers.
Changing Voltages
When a source of AC electric power is connected to a transformer’s primary coil, the trans-
former’s primary and secondary coils both develop induced emfs. If the secondary coil is 
identical to the primary coil (Fig. 11.2.7), their induced emfs are equal and the secondary 
coil becomes a source of AC power at the same voltage as that received by the primary coil. 
For example, if you plug the transformer’s primary coil into a 120-V AC outlet, its second-
ary coil will provide 120-V AC electric power to the secondary circuit.
 
A transformer with identical coils is known as an isolation transformer and it provides an 
important measure of electrical safety. Since its primary and secondary circuits are electrically 
isolated, charge can’t move between those circuits and cause trouble. For example, when light-
ning strikes the power company’s wires, the resulting burst of charge on the primary circuit 
can’t pass to any appliances or instruments that are part of the secondary circuit. Not surpris-
ingly, hospitals often employ isolation transformers to protect patients from shocks.
 
Most transformers, however, have unequal coils and therefore different induced emfs 
in those coils. They provide AC power at voltages that are different from those they receive.
 
The primary coil’s induced emf naturally matches the voltage difference applied to it, 
but the secondary coil’s emf can vary. It depends on the number of secondary turns—the 
number of times the secondary coil’s wire encircles the magnetizable core. The more loops 
the secondary current makes around the core, the more positive or negative work the trans-
former’s induced electric fi eld does on that current and the larger the secondary coil’s 
induced emf.

Electric Power Distribution 323
 
Since the secondary coil’s induced emf is proportional to its number of turns, it acts as 
a source of AC power with a voltage equal to the voltage applied to the primary coil times 
the ratio of secondary turns to primary turns, or
secondary voltage = primary volatge · secondary turns
primary turns  
(11.2.3)
 
An isolation transformer is simply the special case in which the turn numbers are equal 
and their ratio is 1.
 
When a transformer has fewer secondary turns than primary turns (Fig. 11.2.8), it 
provides a secondary voltage that is less than the primary voltage and is called a step-down 
transformer. Step-down transformers are common in electronic devices and power adap-
ters, where they step household AC voltages down to much smaller AC voltages. For exam-
ple, if a transformer’s ratio of secondary turns to primary turns is 0.1 and you supply 120-V 
AC power to its primary coil, its secondary coil will act as a source of 12-V AC power.
 
Not surprisingly, there are also step-up transformers that have more secondary turns than 
primary turns and that provide secondary voltages that are greater than their primary voltages 
(Fig. 11.2.9). The transformer that powers a neon sign typically has 100 times as many turns 
in its secondary coil as in its primary coil. When its primary coil is supplied by 120-V AC 
power, its secondary coil provides the 12,000-V AC power needed to illuminate the neon tube.
 
Even when a transformer has unequal coils, the magnetic fi elds produced by the load 
current in its primary coil and the secondary current in its secondary coil must still cancel. 
Since each coil’s magnetic fi eld is proportional to its current times its number of turns, the 
coil with fewer turns must compensate by carrying a larger current. As a result, a transfor-
mer’s secondary current is equal to its primary load current times the ratio of primary turns 
to secondary turns, or
 
secondary current = primary load current ·
primary turns
secondary turns, 
(11.2.4)
where those currents fl ow in opposite directions; the primary load current fl ows toward 
lower voltage in the primary coil while the secondary current fl ows toward higher voltage 
in the secondary coil.
 
As you can see, changing a transformer’s ratio of secondary turns to primary turns 
affects both the voltage and the current in the secondary circuit. The secondary voltage is 
proportional to that ratio, while the secondary current is inversely proportional to that ratio.
Induced emf
Induced emf
Primary
circuit
120 V AC
Secondary
circuit
12 V AC
Step-down transformer
Magnetic ﬁeld
3 turns
30 turns
Load
current
1 A
Secondary
current
10 A
12 V bulb
120 W
Fig. 11.2.8 Because this 
step-down transformer has 
1/10th as many turns in 
its secondary coil as in its 
primary coil, its secondary 
coil provides 1/10th of the 
AC voltage provided to its 
primary coil. It transforms 
120-V AC power into 12-V 
AC power for the low-
voltage bulb. Its secondary 
current is 10 times its 
primary load current.

324 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
 
The product of those two quantities, secondary voltage and secondary current, no lon-
ger depends on the turn ratio and it’s the power provided to the secondary circuit. It’s also 
equal to the primary voltage times the primary load current, which is the power received 
from the primary circuit. The transformer is providing the same power to its secondary 
circuit as it’s receiving from its primary circuit!
 
With that in mind, we can look again at the three types of transformers. An isolation 
transformer (Fig. 11.2.7) transfers AC power without any change in voltage or current; the 
secondary circuit has the same voltage and the same current as in the primary circuit. With 
a step-down transformer (Fig. 11.2.8), the secondary circuit has a smaller voltage and a 
larger current than in the primary circuit. With a step-up transformer (Fig. 11.2.9), the 
secondary circuit has a larger voltage and a smaller current than in the primary circuit.
Induced emf
Induced emf
Primary
circuit
120 V AC
Secondary
circuit
12,000 V AC
Step-up transformer
Magnetic ﬁeld
300 turns
3 turns
Load
current
1 A
Secondary
current
0.01 A
Neon 
sign
Fig. 11.2.9 Because 
this step-up transformer 
has 100 times as many 
turns in its secondary coil 
as in its primary coil, its 
secondary coil provides 
100 times the AC voltage 
provided to its primary coil. 
It transforms 120-V AC 
power into 12,000-V AC 
power for the neon sign. 
Its secondary current is 
1/100th its primary load 
current.
Check Your Understanding #6: Travel Trouble
Your portable lava lamp operates on 120-V AC power, but you’re visiting a country with 240-V AC 
power. You plug a travel adapter into the 240-V AC outlet and its transformer provides your lamp with 
the 120-V AC power it expects. Compare the numbers of turns in the transformer’s two coils. 
Answer: The transformer’s secondary coil has half as many turns as its primary coil. 
Why: To step down the voltage, a transformer must have fewer turns in its secondary coil than in its 
primary coil. Fewer turns leads to a smaller emf in the secondary coil and a smaller output voltage 
for the transformer. 
Real Transformers: Not Quite Perfect
Although we’ve been pretending that inductors and transformers are fl awless and that their 
wires conduct electricity perfectly, that’s not quite true. In reality, the wires used in those 
devices have electrical resistances and waste power in proportion to the squares of the 
currents they carry. To minimize this wasted power, real inductors and transformers are 
designed to minimize their resistances. To the extent it is practical, they employ thick wires 
made of highly conducting metals and those wires are kept as short as possible.
 
Unfortunately, inductors and transformers built from wires alone can’t develop strong 
magnetic fi elds and large induced emfs unless they carry large magnetizing currents or 
have long, many-turn coils. To avoid those current or coil problems, many inductors and 
virtually all transformers wrap their coils around magnetizable cores. Those cores respond 
magnetically to the alternating currents around them, enhancing their magnetic fi elds 

Electric Power Distribution 325
and increasing the induced emfs. Aided by those magnetizable materials—typically iron or 
iron alloys—cored inductors and transformers work well even with short, few-turn coils.
 
A core provides another crucial benefi t to a transformer; it guides the transformer’s 
magnetic fl ux lines so that nearly all of them pass through both coils, even when those coils 
are somewhat separated in space. Sharing their fl ux lines in that manner gives the coils a 
common electromagnetic environment and permits them to exchange electric power easily.
 
Making two separate coils share their fl ux lines isn’t easy. Since a coil has no net mag-
netic pole, each fl ux line that emerges from it must ultimately return to it. Without a core, 
however, most fl ux lines leaving a coil return to it almost directly and remain nearby 
throughout their trip. Those unadventurous fl ux lines are unlikely to pass through a second, 
separate coil. Not surprisingly, a coreless transformer works well only when its two coils 
are wound so closely together that they can’t help but share the same fl ux lines.
 
Winding both coils around a ring-shaped magnetic core makes it easy for the fl ux lines 
to pass through both coils because those fl ux lines are drawn into the core’s soft magnetic 
material and follow it as if in a pipe. Although the fl ux lines leaving a coil must still return 
to it eventually, most of them complete that trip by way of the core—a journey that then 
takes them through the other coil. With nearly all the fl ux lines channeled by the core 
through both coils, power can fl ow easily from one coil to the other.
 
A core thus provides a transformer with great fl exibility; its coils can be practically 
anywhere as long as they encircle that core. However, cores aren’t quite perfect pipes for 
fl ux; they leak slightly. Therefore, the most effi cient transformers have coils that are wound 
nearby or on top of one another.
 
Although magnetizable cores make small effi cient transformers practical, they also 
introduce a few problems. First, the cores must magnetize and demagnetize easily to keep 
up with the magnetizing current in the primary coil. If they lag behind, they’ll waste power 
as thermal power. Sadly, perfect magnetic softness is unobtainable and all cores waste at 
least a little power through delays in their magnetizations.
 
Second, because these cores are subject to the same electric fi elds that push currents 
around in the coils, they shouldn’t conduct electricity. If they do, they’ll develop useless 
internal currents known as eddy currents and thereby waste power heating themselves up. 
Since most soft magnetic materials are electrical conductors, transformer cores are fre-
quently divided up into insulated particles or sheets so that little or no current can fl ow 
through them. Despite best efforts at minimizing resistive heating in their coils, and mag-
netization and eddy current losses in their cores, all transformers still waste some power. 
Even the best transformers are only about 99% energy effi cient.
Check Your Understanding #7: Winds of Change
Large power transformers have cooling fi ns and often fans to blow air across them. Why does a trans-
former need this cooling? 
Answer: Its magnetic core converts some of the electric power into thermal power. Unless that ther-
mal power is eliminated, the transformer will overheat. 
Why: Transformers aren’t perfectly energy effi cient; they convert a small fraction of the electric power 
they handle into thermal power. Their magnetic cores contribute to that ineffi ciency because their 
limited magnetic softness and electric conductivity cause them to heat up. Fins and fans are essen-
tial for keeping large transformers cool.
Alternating Current Power Distribution
We’re fi nally prepared to deal with the basic confl icts of power transmission. To minimize 
resistive heating in the power lines connecting a power plant with a distant city, electric 
power should travel through those lines as small currents at very high voltages. To be prac-
tical, though, as well as to avoid shock and fi re hazard, electric power should be delivered 
to homes as large currents at modest voltages.

326 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
 
Although there is no simple way to meet both requirements simultaneously with direct 
current, transformers make it easy to satisfy them both with alternating current. We can use 
a step-up transformer to produce the very-high-voltage AC electric power suitable for 
cross-country transmission and a step-down transformer to produce the low-voltage AC 
electric power that’s appropriate for delivery to communities (Fig. 11.2.10).
 
At the power plant, the generator pushes a huge alternating current through the 
primary circuit of a step-up transformer at a supply voltage of about 5000 V AC. The 
current fl owing through the secondary circuit is only about 1/100 the current in the 
Medium-voltage AC
local circuit
Medium-voltage AC
local circuit
High-voltage AC
cross-country circuit
Step-up transformer
at power plant
Step-down transformer
near communities
300 turns
300 turns
3 turns
3 turns
Fig. 11.2.10 Power from an AC generator is transmitted cross-country by stepping it up to very 
high voltage at the power plant, transmitting it long distance as a small current at very high voltage, 
and stepping it back down to medium voltage near the communities that are to be served. The three 
circuits used in this delivery system are electrical insulated from one another.
Very-high-voltage circuits
Medium-high-voltage
circuits
Transformer and cooling equipment
Fig. 11.2.11 This giant 
transformer transfers 
millions of watts of power 
from the very-high-voltage 
cross-country circuits 
above it to the medium-
high-voltage neighborhood 
circuits to its left. Fans 
keep the transformer from 
overheating.

Electric Power Distribution 327
primary circuit, but the voltage supplied by the secondary coil is much higher, typically 
about 500,000 V AC.
 
This transformer’s secondary circuit is extremely long, extending all the way to the 
city where the power is to be used. Since the current in this circuit is modest, the power 
wasted in heating the wires is within tolerable limits.
 
Once it arrives in the city, this very-high-voltage AC electric power passes through the 
primary coil of a step-down transformer (Fig. 11.2.11). The voltage provided by the sec-
ondary coil of this transformer is only about 1/100 the voltage supplied to its primary coil, 
but the current fl owing through the secondary circuit is about 100 times the current in its 
primary circuit.
 
Now the voltage is reasonable for use in a city. Before entering homes, this voltage is 
reduced still further by other transformers. The fi nal step-down transformers can frequently 
be seen as oil-drum-size metal cans hanging from utility poles (Fig. 11.2.12) or as green 
metal boxes on the ground (Fig. 11.2.13). Current enters the buildings at between 110 and 
240 V AC, depending on the local standards. Although 240-V AC electricity wastes less 
power in home wiring, it’s more dangerous than 110-V AC power. The United States has 
adopted a 120-V AC standard, and Europe has a 230-V AC standard.
Medium-high-voltage circuits
Transformers
Low-voltage
circuits
Fig. 11.2.12 The three metal cans on this utility 
pole are transformers. They transfer power from the 
medium-high-voltage neighborhood circuits above 
them to the low-voltage household circuits at the 
lower right.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Fig. 11.2.13 This transformer transfers power 
from a medium-voltage underground circuit 
to a low-voltage underground circuit used by 
nearby homes. It handles 50 kV·A or 50,000 
W of power.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

328 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
AC Electric Generators and Motors
As we’ve seen, a transformer “converts” electric power into electric power—it extracts 
electric power from a primary circuit and delivers electric power to a secondary circuit. 
However, electric power and mechanical power are physically equivalent, and mechanical 
power can substitute for electric power. What if we replace one of the electric circuits in a 
transformer with a mechanical system?
 
If we replace the transformer’s primary circuit with a mechanical system, we obtain a 
generator. A generator is a device that extracts mechanical power from machinery and 
delivers electric power to a circuit. Figure 11.2.14a shows a simple generator, one that 
Check Your Understanding #8: High-Voltage Wires
If a power utility were able to increase the voltage of its transmission line from 500,000 to 1,000,000 V, 
how would that affect the power lost to heat in the wires? 
Answer: It would reduce the amount of heat produced to only 25% of the previous value. 
Why: At 1,000,000 V, the transmission line would be able to carry the same power as a 500,000-V 
transmission line with only half the current. Since the power wasted by the transmission line itself is 
proportional to the square of the current, halving the current would reduce the power waste to 25%.
Induced emf
AC generator
Magnetic ﬁeld
Coil
current
Magnetic
rotor
AC synchronous motor
Magnetic ﬁeld
Magnetic
rotor
Induced emf
Load
current
Magnetizing
current
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11.2.14
(a) This AC 
generator resembles the 
transformer in Fig. 11.2.7, 
except that it receives 
power from the motion of 
its spinning magnetic rotor 
rather than from an electric 
current in a primary coil. 
(b) This AC synchronous 
motor also resembles the 
transformer, except that 
it provides power in the 
motion of its spinning 
magnetic rotor rather than 
in an electric current in a 
secondary coil.

Electric Power Distribution 329
looks strikingly like the transformer in Fig. 11.2.7. Both devices have a (secondary) coil 
wrapped around a magnetizable core. However, in place of the transformer’s primary coil, 
the generator has a spinning magnet, or rotor. As the generator’s magnetic rotor spins, it 
produces a sinusoidally alternating magnetic fi eld in the core. This alternating magnetic 
fi eld, in turn, produces an alternating electric fi eld and an alternating induced emf in the 
coil. That emf propels an alternating current through the circuit that delivers electric power 
to the lightbulb.
 
The current in the generator’s coil has consequences for its rotor. The rotor turns 
slightly ahead of the generator’s alternating magnetic fi eld, so that the rotor’s magnetic 
fi eld cancels the current’s magnetic fi eld. Because the rotor is a little ahead the generator’s 
alternating magnetic fi eld, it experiences a backward torque and has mechanical power 
extracted from it. To keep the rotor spinning, the machinery must continue to supply 
mechanical power to the generator. Overall, the generator is converting mechanical power 
into electric power.
 
If we replace the transformer’s secondary circuit with a mechanical system, we obtain 
a motor. A motor is a device that extracts electric power from a circuit and delivers mechan-
ical power to machinery. Figure 11.2.14b shows a simple motor, one that again resembles 
the transformer in Fig. 11.2.7. Like the transformer, the motor has a (primary) coil wrapped 
around a magnetizable core. In place of the transformer’s secondary coil, however, the 
motor has a spinning magnetic rotor. As an alternating current fl ows through the motor’s 
circuit and coil, it produces a sinusoidally alternating magnetic fi eld in the coil. That alter-
nating magnetic fi eld interacts with the magnetic rotor and delivers mechanical power to it.
 
The rotor’s motion has consequences for the current in the motor’s coil. If the rotor is 
spinning freely and remains perfectly synchronized with the core’s alternating magnetic 
fi eld, it has no effect on the core’s magnetic fi eld or the current in the coil. If the rotor is 
doing mechanical work, however, it needs a forward torque to keep it spinning and it 
obtains that torque by turning slightly behind the motor’s alternating magnetic fi eld. The 
rotor’s magnetic fi eld then causes a load current to fl ow through the motor’s coil. That load 
current delivers power to the motor and its magnetic fi eld cancels the rotor’s magnetic fi eld. 
Overall, the motor is converting electric power into mechanical power.
 
Notice that Figs. 11.2.14a and 11.2.14b are almost mirror images of one another. 
That’s because generators and motors are wonderfully similar devices. In fact, a single 
device can often act as either a generator or a motor. If you supply electric power to its 
circuit, its rotor will spin and provide mechanical power. If you supply mechanical power 
to its rotor, current will fl ow through its circuit and provide electric power.
Check Your Understanding #9: Electric Biking
When you pedal a high-tech exercise bicycle, you are probably spinning the rotor of an electric gen-
erator. That generator supplies power to a heating fi lament with an adjustable electrical resistance. 
How should the bicycle alter that electrical resistance to make pedaling more diffi cult? 
Answer: It should reduce the heater’s resistance. 
Why: By lowering the heater’s resistance, the bicycle increases the current fl owing through the cir-
cuit. That increased current carries more power from the generator to the heater, so the generator 
extracts more mechanical work from the bicyclist.
Epilogue for Chapter 11
In this chapter, we studied magnetism and the ways in which magnetism relates to electric-
ity. In Household Magnets, we looked at the concept of magnetic pole and the attractive or 
repulsive forces that poles exert on one another. We examined magnetic materials and saw 
how their magnetic properties make them useful for various purposes. We also encountered 
electromagnets and began to see that magnetism isn’t independent of electricity. In Electric 

330 
CHAPTER 11 Magnetism and Electrodynamics
Power Distribution, we saw how alternating electric currents make it possible to transfer 
power from one circuit to another by way of a transformer and its electromagnetic proper-
ties. We learned that transforming electric power to extremely high voltages and small 
currents minimizes the power wasted between power plants and cities.
Explanation: A Nail and Wire Electromagnet
When you connect the wire from one terminal of the battery to the other, a current fl ows 
from the positive terminal to the negative terminal through the wire. (In reality, negatively 
charged electrons move from the battery’s negative terminal, through the wire, to its posi-
tive terminal, but we’ve adopted a fi ction that positive charges are heading the other way.) 
This current produces a magnetic fi eld around the wire. Because the wire is coiled around 
the nail, this magnetic fi eld passes through the nail and causes its magnetic domains to 
resize until most of them are aligned with the fi eld. Without any current in the wire, the 
magnetic domains in the steel point in many different directions, so the nail appears non-
magnetic. However, with the current orienting the domains, they together produce a large 
magnetization. The nail becomes magnetic and exerts strong magnetic forces on other 
nearby objects.
1. Coulomb’s law for magnetism: The magnitudes of the mag-
netostatic forces between two magnetic poles are equal to the 
permeability of free space times the product of the two magnetic 
poles divided by 4π times the square of the distance separating 
them, or
force = permeability of free space · pole1 · pole2
4π · (distance between poles)2
. (11.1.1)
If the charges are like, then the forces are repulsive. If the 
charges are opposite, then the forces are attractive.
2. Force exerted on a pole by a magnetic fi eld: A pole experi-
ences a force equal to its pole times the magnetic fi eld, or
 
magnetostatic force = pole · magnetic field, (11.1.2)
where the force points in the direction of the fi eld.
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Household Magnets Work: Common refrigerator magnets are composed of hard mag-
netic materials that were permanently magnetized by their manufacturers. Simple button 
magnets have a single pair of magnetic poles, one north and one south, but plastic sheet 
magnets usually have many poles. These magnets stick to a refrigerator’s surface by tempo-
rarily magnetizing that surface’s soft magnetic materials and then becoming attracted to the 
opposite poles on that surface.
 
A compass is another permanent magnet, but one designed to align with Earth’s mag-
netic fi eld. In fact, that magnetic fi eld can be mapped out using a compass. The magnetic 
fi elds around smaller magnets can be made visible with iron fi lings instead. However, perma-
nent magnets aren’t the only sources of magnetic fi elds; we found that when current fl ows 
through the coil in a doorbell, it becomes a magnet as well—an electromagnet.
How Electric Power Distribution Works: To minimize power losses in the transmission lines 
between power plants and cities, power distribution systems use alternating currents and 
transformers. Near the power plant, relatively low-voltage, high-current electric power is trans-
formed into very-high-voltage, low-current power for transmission through cross-country power 
lines. Because the power consumed by these high-voltage wires depends on the square of the 
currents they carry, the power losses are greatly reduced by this technique. When the power 
arrives at a city, it’s transformed into medium-voltage, high-current power for distribution to 
neighborhoods. Finally, in neighborhoods, step-down transformers transform this power to 
low-voltage, very-high-current power for distribution to individual homes and offi ces.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 331
3. Lenz’s law: When a changing magnetic fi eld induces a cur-
rent in a conductor, the magnetic fi eld from that current opposes 
the change that induced it.
4. Power consumed by a wire or other ohmic device:
power consumed = current2 ∙ electrical resistance. (11.2.1)
5. Energy in a magnetic fi eld: The energy in a magnetic fi eld is 
equal to the square of that fi eld times its volume, divided by 
twice the permeability of free space, or
 
energy =
magnetic field2 · volume
2 · permeability of free space. 
(11.2.2)
6. Transformer voltages: A transformer’s secondary coil acts as 
a source of AC power with a voltage equal to the AC voltage 
applied to its primary coil times the ratio of secondary turns to 
primary turns or
secondary voltage = primary voltage · secondary turns
primary turns .
 
(11.2.3)
7. Transformer currents: The AC current in a transformer’s sec-
ondary coil is equal to the AC load current in its primary coil 
times the ratio of primary turns to secondary turns or
secondary current = primary load current · primary turns
secondary turns.
 
(11.2.4)

 E
lectric and magnetic fi elds are so intimately related that each can create the other even in 
empty space. In fact, the two fi elds can form electromagnetic waves, in which they recreate 
one another endlessly and head off across space at an enormous speed. These electromag-
netic waves are all around us and are the basis for much of our communications technology, for 
radiative heat transfer, and for our ability to see the universe in which we live.
A Disc in the Microwave Oven
You can experiment with electromagnetic waves using a 
microwave oven. As we’ll see in Section 12.2, microwaves 
are a type of electromagnetic wave that falls between radio 
waves and light. Because electromagnetic waves consist 
of electric and magnetic fi elds, they can propel electric 
currents through metal objects. Those currents can do 
some interesting things.
 
In this experiment, you’ll put metal in a microwave 
oven. There is always some risk associated with this 
activity, so if you cannot fully accept that risk yourself, 
skip this experiment and look at the photographs instead. 
If you’re young enough to require adult supervision or 
consent, obtain it or skip the experiment.
 
If you choose to conduct this experiment, make sure 
that there is nothing fl ammable in or near the oven and 
that the area around you is well ventilated. The plastic in 
the disc will heat up and release a mildly unpleasant smell 
that will dissipate. Do not leave the oven on for more than 
4 s or that smell will become truly unpleasant.
 
The metal for this experiment is the ultrathin refl ec-
tive fi lm located inside a CD or DVD. Although that metal 
layer’s electrical conductivity makes it refl ective, it 
wasn’t designed to carry large electric currents. When 
exposed to the microwave electric fi elds in the oven, that 
metal will carry large currents, heat up, tear, and spark.
 
To perform the experiment, you’ll need a CD or DVD 
that you are comfortable destroying. Place a microwave-safe 
ceramic mug near the center of the microwave oven. Lean 
the CD or DVD against the mug so that you can see the 
disc’s shiny face through the oven door. If the oven has a 
rotating tray, you may want to remove that tray temporarily 
for the experiment. You may also want to block the oven’s 
light temporarily with black tape. Be sure that you replace 
the tray and unblock the light when you’re done.
 
Close the oven door, and check that you can see the 
shiny surface of the CD or DVD clearly. Now prepare to 
turn the microwave oven on for no more than 4 s. You 
should know what to expect: 2 s during which the oven 
will build up its microwave power and 2 s during which 
the disc’s metal layer will spark wildly.
 
When you’re prepared and everything is safely 
arranged, turn the oven on for 4 s. You should see lots of 
sparking in that metal layer. Even if you don’t, turn the 
oven off after 4 s or the overheated plastic smell will 
become a serious problem. Let the disc cool and the smell 
dissipate. Discard the disc safely.
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
332
12
Electromagnetic Waves

Radio 333
Chapter Itinerary
In this chapter, we’ll discuss how electromagnetic waves are 
formed and detected in two common appliances: (1) radio and 
(2) microwave ovens. In Radio, we examine the ways in which 
charge moving in an antenna can emit or respond to electromag-
netic waves and how those waves can be controlled to send sound 
information from a radio transmitter to a radio receiver. In Microwave 
Ovens, we see how microwaves affect water molecules and met-
als, and also how they are produced in the oven’s magnetron tube. 
Although we can’t see the electromagnetic waves that these two 
devices use, these waves clearly play important roles in our world. 
For more about what we’ll study, turn to the Chapter Summary 
and Important Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.
 
Why did the microwaves heat the thin metal layer in 
the disc? What happened to the temperature of the plastic 
disc as the metal layer heated up? Which expands faster 
with increasing temperature: the metal or the plastic? 
Why did the metal layer tear? Once the metal layer had 
fragmented into many sharp islands, why did sparks jump 
between those islands?
 
This section describes how radio works. We’ll look at how 
radio waves are transmitted and how they’re received. We’ll also 
examine the common ways in which sound is represented by radio 
waves so that it can travel through space to a receiver far away.
Questions to Think About: How might the movement of elec-
tric charge in one metal antenna affect electric charge in a 
second antenna nearby? What about when the second antenna 
is far away from the fi rst antenna? What does it mean when a 
radio station claims to transmit 50,000 W? How does your 
radio select one channel from among all the possibilities?
Experiments to Do: Listen to a small AM radio and notice that 
the volume of the sound depends on the radio’s orientation or 
location. Radio waves are pushing electric charges back and 
forth along the radio’s hidden internal antenna. You can some-
times fi nd an orientation in which the radio is silent because 
in that orientation the radio waves are unable to move charges 
along the antenna. If you put the radio inside a metal box, it 
will also become silent. Can you explain why?
 
You can try similar experiments with a cordless telephone—
actually a radio transmitter and receiver. See how far you can 
go with the handset before you lose contact with the base unit. 
Notice that the antenna’s size and orientation affect its range. 
What happens to the reception if you stand behind a large 
metal object?
A fl uctuating electric current can represent sound information, 
and that’s what it does each time you speak into a microphone 
or listen to music through earphones. Currents need wires, 
however, so how can we send sound information to someone 
who is moving? We need a way to represent sound that doesn’t 
involve wires. We need radio.
Antenna
Transmission tower
Guy wire
Anchors
Volume controls
Collapsible antenna
Frequency indicator
Frequency selector
Transmitter
building
Transmission
line
SECTION 12.1
Radio
A Prelude to Radio Waves
Before we can examine radio and radio waves, let’s take a moment to fi nish the introduc-
tion to electrodynamics that we began in Chapters 10 and 11. Although we’ve already 
learned most of the fundamental relationships between electricity and magnetism, the 
remaining one is about to become important. To refresh your memory, we have observed so 
far that electric fi elds can be produced by electric charges, subatomic particles, and chang-
ing magnetic fi elds and that magnetic fi elds can be produced by subatomic particles and 

334 
CHAPTER 12 Electromagnetic Waves
moving electric charges (Table 12.1.1). If isolated magnetic poles exist, they produce mag-
netic fi elds and, when moving, electric fi elds.
 
In 1865, Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) discovered one addi-
tional source of magnetic fi elds: changing electric fi elds. That effect is subtle and scientists 
overlooked it for most of the nineteenth century. It wasn’t until Maxwell was trying to 
formulate a complete electromagnetic theory that he uncovered this additional connection 
between electricity and magnetism. This fi nal relationship completed the set shown in 
Table 12.1.1. Taken together, these relationships allowed Maxwell to understand one of the 
most remarkable phenomena in nature—electromagnetic waves!
TABLE 12.1.1 Sources of Electric and Magnetic Fields
Sources of Electric Fields
Sources of Magnetic Fields
Electric charges and subatomic particles
Magnetic poles and subatomic particles
Moving magnetic pole
Moving electric charge
Changing magnetic fi elds
Changing electric fi elds
Check Your Understanding #1: A Real Flux Capacitor
When a capacitor has separated charge on its plates, there is a strong electric fi eld between 
those plates. Connecting the plates with a wire will discharge the capacitor, and its electric fi eld 
will suddenly vanish. As the electric fi eld disappears, what other fi eld is present between the 
plates?
Answer: There is now a magnetic fi eld between the plates. 
Why: Since a changing electric fi eld produces a magnetic fi eld, the plates have a magnetic fi eld 
between them while their electric fi eld is disappearing.
THIRD CONNECTION BETWEEN ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
Electric fi elds that change with time produce magnetic fi elds.
 
Since electric fi elds can create magnetic fi elds and magnetic fi elds contain energy, it’s 
clear that electric fi elds must contain energy, too. The amount of energy in a uniform elec-
tric fi eld is the square of the fi eld strength times the volume of the fi eld divided by 8π times 
the Coulomb constant. We can write this relationship as a word equation:
 
energy = electric field2 · volume
8π · Coulomb constant, 
(12.1.1)
in symbols:
U = E2 · V
8π · k ,
and in everyday language:
When you charge a large capacitor, it stores a great deal of energy in the electric 
fi eld between its plates.
With these observations, we have fi nished the prelude and are ready to see how radio 
works.

Radio 335
Antennas and Tank Circuits
A radio transmitter communicates with a receiver via radio waves. These waves are pro-
duced by electric charge as it moves up and down the transmitter’s antenna and are detected 
when they push electric charge up and down the receiver’s antenna. What exactly are radio 
waves, and how does charge on the antenna produce them?
 
We’ve already seen that electric charge produces electric fi elds and that moving charge 
produces magnetic fi elds. However, something new happens when charge accelerates. 
Accelerating charge produces a mixture of changing electric and magnetic fi elds that can 
reproduce one another endlessly and travel long distances through empty space. These 
interwoven electric and magnetic fi elds are known generally as electromagnetic waves. In 
the case of radio, the electromagnetic waves have low frequencies and long wavelengths, 
and are known as radio waves.
 
Before we look at the structure of a radio wave and at how it travels through space, 
let’s start with a much simpler situation. We’ll look at how two nearby metal antennas 
affect one another. Figure 12.1.1 shows a radio transmitter and a radio receiver, side by 
side. Because of their proximity, electric charge on the transmitter’s antenna is sure to 
affect charge on the receiver’s antenna.
 
To communicate with the nearby receiver, the transmitter sends charge up and down its 
antenna. This charge’s electric fi eld surrounds the transmitting antenna and extends all the 
way to the receiving antenna, where it pushes charge down and up. Unfortunately, the 
resulting charge motion in the receiving antenna is weak and the receiver may have diffi -
culty distinguishing it from random thermal motion or from motion caused by other elec-
tric fi elds in the environment. Therefore the transmitter adopts a clever strategy—it moves 
charge up and down its antenna rhythmically at a particular frequency. Since the resulting 
motion on the receiving antenna is rhythmic at that same frequency, it’s much easier for the 
receiver to distinguish from unrelated motion.
Check Your Figures #1: Lightning in the Fields
During a thunderstorm, the charged clouds produce an electric fi eld of about 10,000 V/m near the 
ground. How much energy is contained in 1.0 cubic meter of that electric fi eld?
Answer: The electric fi eld in 1.0 m3 is about 0.00045 J. 
Why: Since 10,000 V/m is equivalent to 10,000 J/C · m, Eq. 12.1.1 gives us the energy of a 10,000 V/m 
fi eld occupying 1.0 m3 as: 
 energy = (10,000 J/C · m)2 · 1.0 m3
8π · 8.988 × 109N · m2/C2
 = 0.00045 J2
N · m
= 0.00045 J.
While that isn’t much energy per cubic meter, a single lightning strike may release the electric fi eld 
energy in almost a billion cubic meters. No wonder it produces such a bang!
Transmitter Tank
Tank
Receiving
antenna
Transmitting
antenna
Receiver
Fig. 12.1.1 Electric charge rushing on and 
off the transmitting antenna causes a similar 
motion of electric charge in the receiving 
antenna.

336 
CHAPTER 12 Electromagnetic Waves
 
Using this rhythmic motion has another advantage: it allows the transmitter and 
receiver to use tank circuits, resonant electronic devices consisting only of capacitors and 
inductors (Fig. 12.1.2). Charge can “slosh” back and forth through a tank circuit at a par-
ticular frequency, much as water can slosh back and forth in a water storage tank at a par-
ticular frequency (see Fig. 9.3.4). Just as you can get the water sloshing strongly by giving 
it gentle pushes that are synchronized with its rhythmic motion, so the transmitter can get 
charge sloshing strongly through its tank circuit by giving that charge gentle pushes that are 
synchronized with its rhythmic motion. Both are examples of resonant energy transfer (see 
Section 9.2). By helping the transmitter move larger amounts of charge up and down the 
antenna, the tank circuit dramatically strengthens the transmission.
 
A second tank circuit attached to the receiving antenna helps the receiver detect this 
transmission. Gentle, rhythmic pushes by fi elds from the transmitting antenna cause more 
and more charge to move through the receiving antenna and its attached tank circuit. While 
the motion of charge on this antenna alone may be diffi cult to detect, the much larger 
charge sloshing in the tank circuit is unmistakable.
 
We can understand how a tank circuit works by looking at how charge moves between 
its capacitor and its inductor. Let’s imagine that the tank circuit starts out with separated 
charge on the plates of its capacitor (Fig. 12.1.2a). Since the inductor conducts electricity, 
current begins to fl ow from the positively charged plate, through the inductor, to the nega-
tively charged plate. The current through the inductor must rise slowly and, as it does, it 
creates a magnetic fi eld in the inductor (Fig. 12.1.2b).
 
Soon the capacitor’s separated charge is gone and all the tank circuit’s energy is stored 
in the inductor’s magnetic fi eld (Fig. 12.1.2c). However, the current keeps fl owing, driven 
forward by the inductor’s opposition to current changes. The inductor uses the energy in its 
magnetic fi eld to keep the current fl owing, and separated charge reappears in the capacitor 
(Fig. 12.1.2d). Eventually, the inductor’s magnetic fi eld decreases to zero and everything is 
back to its original state—almost. While all the tank circuit’s energy has returned to the 
capacitor, the separated charge in that capacitor is now upside down (Fig. 12.1.2e).
 
This whole process now repeats in reverse. The current fl ows backward through the 
inductor, magnetizing it upside down, and the tank circuit soon returns to its original state. 
This cycle repeats over and over again, with charge sloshing from one side of the capacitor 
to the other and back again.
 
A tank circuit is an electronic harmonic oscillator, equivalent to the mechanical har-
monic oscillators we examined in Chapter 9. Like all harmonic oscillators, its period (the 
time per cycle) doesn’t depend on the amplitude of its oscillation. Thus, no matter how 
much charge is sloshing in the tank circuit, the time it takes that charge to fl ow over and 
back is always the same.
 
The tank circuit’s period depends only on its capacitor and its inductor. The larger the 
capacitor’s capacitance, the more separated charge it can hold with a given amount of 
energy and the longer it takes that charge to move through the circuit as current. The larger 
the inductor’s inductance, its opposition to current changes, the longer that current takes 
to start and stop. A tank circuit with a large capacitor and a large inductor may have a 
period of a thousandth of a second or more, while one with a small capacitor and a small 
inductor may have a period of a billionth of a second or less.
 
Inductance is defi ned as the voltage drop across the inductor divided by the rate at 
which current through the inductor changes with time. This division gives inductance the 
units of voltage divided by current per time. The SI unit of inductance is the volt-second 
per ampere, also called the henry (abbreviated H). While large electromagnets have induc-
tances of hundreds of henries, a 1-μH (0.000001-H) inductor is more common in radio.
 
Its resonant behavior makes the tank circuit useful in radio. That’s because small, 
rhythmic pushes on the current in a tank circuit can lead to enormous charge oscillations in 
that circuit. In radio, these rhythmic pushes begin when the transmitter sends an alternating 
current through a coil of wire. Fields from this coil push current back and forth through the 
nearby transmitting tank circuit, causing enormous amounts of charge to slosh back and 
Peak
electric ﬁeld
Capacitor
Inductor
induced emf
Increasing
magnetic ﬁeld
Decreasing
electric ﬁeld
Induced electric    ﬁeld
Current
Peak
magnetic ﬁeld
Decreasing
magnetic ﬁeld
Increasing
electric ﬁeld
Peak
electric ﬁeld
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 12.1.2 A tank circuit 
is an electromagnetic 
harmonic oscillator 
consisting of a capacitor 
and an inductor. This 
sequence shows half a cycle 
of its oscillation at fi ve 
equally spaced moments 
in time. Energy sloshes 
rhythmically back and forth 
between the capacitor’s 
electric fi eld and the 
inductor’s magnetic fi eld.

Radio 337
forth in it and travel up and down the transmitting antenna. That charge’s electric fi eld then 
pushes rhythmically on charge in the receiving antenna, causing substantial amounts of 
charge to travel down and up it and slosh back and forth in the receiving tank circuit. The 
receiver can easily detect this sloshing charge.
 
Energy fl ows from the transmitter to the receiver via resonant energy transfer: from the 
transmitter, to the transmitting tank circuit and antenna, to the receiving antenna and tank 
circuit, and fi nally to the receiver. This sequence of transfers can work effi ciently only if all 
the parts have resonances at the same frequency. Tuning a radio receiver to a particular 
station is largely a matter of adjusting its capacitor and inductor so that its tank circuit has 
the right resonant frequency.
Check Your Understanding #2: No Tanks
Why doesn’t the radio transmitter simply push electric charge directly on and off the antenna, 
without using a tank circuit?
Answer: The amount of charge that the transmitter can move directly on and off the antenna is too 
small to create a strong radio wave.
Why: The tank circuit is useful because it allows the transmitter to move much more charge. Just as 
a tuning fork is ineffi cient at emitting sound waves by itself, so a radio antenna is ineffi cient at emit-
ting radio waves by itself. You can make the tuning fork much louder by coupling it to an object that 
resonates at its frequency. Similarly, you can make the radio antenna emit a much stronger radio 
wave by coupling it to a tank circuit that resonates at its frequency.
Radio Waves
When the two antennas are close together, charge in the transmitting antenna exerts elec-
trostatic force directly on charge in the receiving antenna. However, when the antennas are 
far apart, the interactions between them are more complicated. Charge in the transmitting 
antenna must then emit a radio wave to push on charge in the receiving antenna. Like a 
water wave, a radio wave is a disturbance that carries energy from one place to another. But 
unlike a water wave, which must travel in a fl uid, a radio wave can travel through otherwise 
empty space, from one side of the universe to the other.
 
Like all electromagnetic waves, a radio wave consists only of a changing electric fi eld 
and a changing magnetic fi eld. These fi elds re-create one another over and over again as the 
wave travels through empty space at the speed of light—exactly 299,792,458 m/s (approx-
imately 186,282 miles per second).
 
The radio wave is created when electric charge in the antenna accelerates. Whereas 
stationary charge or a steady current produces constant electric or magnetic fi elds, acceler-
ating charge produces fi elds that change with time. As charge fl ows up and down the 
antenna, its electric fi eld points in alternating directions vertically, and its magnetic fi eld 
points in alternating directions horizontally. These changing fi elds then re-create one 
another again and again, and sail off through space as an electromagnetic wave. At each 
point along its path, the wave’s electric fi eld direction, magnetic fi eld direction, and direc-
tion of travel are mutually perpendicular.
 
The wave emitted by a vertical transmitting antenna has a vertical polarization, that 
is, its electric fi eld points alternately up and down (Fig. 12.1.3a). We identify those “ups” 
as crests, and the distance between adjacent crests is its wavelength. For radio waves, that 
wavelength is usually 1 m (3.3 ft) or more. The wave’s magnetic fi eld is perpendicular to 
its electric fi eld and points in alternating directions horizontally.
 
Had the transmitting antenna been tipped on its side, the wave’s electric fi eld would have 
pointed in alternating directions horizontally and the wave would have had a horizontal 
polarization (Fig. 12.1.4b). The wave’s magnetic fi eld would then point alternately up and 
down. Whatever the polarization, the electric and magnetic fi elds move forward together as a 
traveling wave, so the pattern of fi elds moves smoothly through space at the speed of light.

338 
CHAPTER 12 Electromagnetic Waves
Electric ﬁeld
Velocity
Wavelength
Magnetic ﬁeld
Electric ﬁeld
Magnetic ﬁeld
Velocity
Wavelength
(b)
(a)
Fig. 12.1.3 Electromagne-
tic waves traveling toward 
the right at the speed 
of light. The red arrows 
represent electric fi elds at 
points on the yellow path; 
the green arrows represent 
magnetic fi elds at those 
same points. At each 
point, the wave’s electric 
fi eld, magnetic fi eld, and 
direction of travel are 
mutually perpendicular. 
(a) In a vertically polarized 
electromagnetic wave, the 
electric fi eld is directed 
vertically and the magnetic 
fi eld is directed horizontally.
(b) In a horizontally 
polarized electromagnetic 
wave, the electric fi eld 
is directed horizontally 
and the magnetic fi eld is 
directed vertically.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Electromagnetic Waves and Undulations
Misconception: Since the fi elds of an electromagnetic wave appear wavy (Fig. 12.1.3), the light 
wave itself undulates; it actually undulates up and down or back and forth as it heads rightward!
Resolution: The arrows drawn to represent the fi elds in an electromagnetic wave are associated 
with points along the straight path of the wave. Each wave in Fig. 12.1.3 is heading directly 
rightward along the yellow path and the arrows indicate fi eld values at points along that path.
 
If you stood in one place and could watch this wave pass, you’d notice its electric fi eld 
fl uctuating up and down at the same frequency as the charge that created it. When the wave 
passes a distant receiving antenna, it pushes charge up and down that antenna at this fre-
quency. If the receiving tank circuit is resonant at this frequency, the amount of charge 
sloshing in it should become large enough for the receiver to detect.
 
A radio station can optimize its transmission by using a resonant transmitting antenna. A 
straight antenna is another electronic harmonic oscillator, with a period that depends only on 
its length. When that length is half the wavelength of the radio wave it’s transmitting, charge 
sloshes up and down the antenna in a natural resonance at the frequency of the radio wave.
 
Surprisingly, the antenna is actually a tank circuit (Fig. 12.1.4)—its tips act as the plates 
of a capacitor and its middle acts as the inductor. Despite its linear shape, the antenna has the 
Peak
electric ﬁeld
Peak
magnetic ﬁeld
antenna
Peak
electric ﬁeld
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 12.1.4
A straight 
antenna is a linear tank 
circuit, with ends that act 
as capacitor plates and 
a middle that acts as an 
inductor. This sequence 
shows half a cycle of 
its oscillation at fi ve 
equally spaced moments 
in time; compare a–e to 
Fig. 12.1.2a–e. Charge 
oscillates up and down the 
antenna and the antenna’s 
energy alternates between 
its electric fi eld and its 
magnetic fi eld.

Radio 339
same resonant behavior as the coiled tank circuit shown in Fig. 12.1.2. When the transmit-
ting tank circuit and antenna are resonant at the same frequency, there’s a resonant energy 
transfer from one to the other. These resonant effects help to produce a powerful radio wave.
 
Because it’s half a wavelength long and its ends are oppositely charged, this antenna is 
known as a halfwave dipole antenna. Many radio stations use such antennas. It’s possible, 
however, to omit the bottom half of the dipole antenna by placing the top half above an 
electrically conducting surface. The conducting surface is a mirror (Fig. 12.1.5) and its 
refl ection of the top half acts like the missing bottom half of the dipole antenna. Known as 
a quarter-wave monopole antenna, this shorter antenna is often more convenient, particu-
larly when the antenna projects upward from a metal surface or the ground.
 
The transmitting antenna sends the strongest portion of its radio wave out perpendicu-
lar to its length. That’s not unexpected because the motion of charge on the antenna is most 
obvious when viewed from a line perpendicular to its length. Thus, a vertical antenna sends 
most of its wave out horizontally, where people are likely to receive it. No wave emerges 
from the end of an antenna.
 
Both electric and magnetic fi elds contain energy, so as the electromagnetic wave 
travels through space, it carries energy away from the transmitter. When a radio station 
advertises that it “transmits 50,000 W of music,” it’s claiming that its antenna emits 50,000 J 
of energy per second or 50,000 W of power in its electromagnetic wave. The receiving 
antenna must absorb enough of this power to detect the wave. However, the farther the wave 
gets from the transmitting antenna, the more spread out and weaker it becomes. Trees and 
mountains also absorb or refl ect some of the wave and hinder reception.
 
For the best reception, a listener should be located where the radio wave is strong and 
where there’s an unobstructed path from the transmitting antenna to the receiving antenna. 
To be resonant, the receiving antenna should be a half-wave dipole or a quarter-wave 
monopole, and it should be oriented along the radio wave’s polarization: vertical for a ver-
tically polarized radio wave or horizontal for a horizontally polarized radio wave. Aligning 
the receiving antenna with the wave’s polarization makes certain that the wave’s electric 
fi eld pushes charge along the antenna, not across it.
 
To ensure good reception regardless of receiving antenna orientation, many radio sta-
tions transmit a complicated circularly polarized wave that combines both vertical and 
horizontal polarizations. To form this wave, they need several antennas. For wavelengths 
under a few meters, these antennas can all be attached inexpensively to a single mast. 
That’s why commercial FM and TV broadcasts, which use short-wavelength radio waves, 
are usually transmitted with circular polarization. However, commercial AM broadcasts, 
which use long-wavelength radio waves, are transmitted only with vertical polarization.
 
Because commercial FM radio waves usually include both polarizations, FM receiving 
antennas can be vertical or horizontal. Portable FM receivers often use vertical telescoping 
antennas, while home receivers frequently use horizontal wire antennas. All these antennas 
are approximately half-wave dipole antennas or quarter-wave monopole antennas.
 
A quarter-wave monopole antenna for commercial AM radio would have to be about 100 m 
(330 ft) long, so straight AM antennas (such as those on cars) are much shorter than optimal. 
That’s why many AM antennas are designed to respond to the radio wave’s horizontal mag-
netic fi eld rather than to its vertical electric fi eld. These magnetic antennas are horizontal coils 
of wire that experience induced currents when exposed to fl uctuating magnetic fi elds.
Mirror
Real
Virtual
Tilted 45°
Real
Mirror
Virtual
(a)
(b)
Fig. 12.1.5 (a) Side 
view of a quarter-wave 
monopole antenna above 
a conducting surface or 
mirror. The mirror refl ects 
a virtual image of the 
antenna, so the system 
acts like a half-wave dipole 
antenna. (b) The same 
monopole antenna and its 
refl ection viewed from a 
45° angle above the mirror.
Check Your Understanding #3: There’s No Place Like Home
Why do cordless telephones work only when they’re close to their base units? 
Answer: When the cordless telephone is too far from its base unit, the electromagnetic waves become 
so spread out that they have trouble communicating. 
Why: The powers emitted by the base unit and the handset are small, so their waves are relatively 
diffi cult to detect. As long as the handset and base unit are close, they are able to detect each other’s 
waves. When the distance between them becomes too great, the waves become too spread out to 
detect and the handset and base unit lose contact with one another.

340 
CHAPTER 12 Electromagnetic Waves
Representing Sound: AM and FM Radio
A radio transmitter does more than simply emit a radio wave. It uses that radio wave to 
represent sound. Because sound waves are fl uctuations in air density and radio waves are 
fl uctuations in electric and magnetic fi elds, a radio wave can’t literally “carry” a sound 
wave. However, a radio wave can carry sound information and instruct the receiver how to 
reproduce the sound.
 
To convey sound information, the radio station alters its radio wave to represent com-
pressions and rarefactions of the air. The receiver then recreates those compressions and 
rarefactions. There are two common techniques by which a radio wave can represent those 
density fl uctuations. One is called amplitude modulation and involves changing the overall 
strength of the radio wave. The other is called frequency modulation and involves small 
changes in the frequency of the radio wave.
 
In the amplitude modulation (AM) technique, air density is represented by the 
strength of the transmitted wave (Fig. 12.1.6). To represent a compression of the air, the 
transmitter is turned up so that more charge moves up and down the transmitting antenna. 
To represent a rarefaction, the transmitter is turned down so that less charge moves up and 
down the antenna. The frequency at which charge moves up and down the antenna remains 
steady, so only the amplitude of the radio wave changes. The receiver measures the strength 
of the radio wave and uses this measurement to re-create the sound. When it detects a 
strong radio wave, it pushes its speaker toward the listener and compresses the air. When it 
detects a weak radio wave, it pulls its speaker away from the listener and rarefi es the air.
 
In the frequency modulation (FM) technique, air density is represented by the fre-
quency of the transmitted wave (Fig. 12.1.7). To represent a compression of the air, the 
Pressure
Time
Air pressure
Average pressure
Charge
Electric charge on the antenna
+
−
Fig. 12.1.6 When sound is transmitted using amplitude 
modulation, air pressure is represented by the strength 
of the radio wave. A compression is represented by 
strengthening the radio wave and a rarefaction is 
represented by weakening it.
Air pressure
Average pressure
Electric charge on the antenna
Pressure
Time
Charge
+
−
Fig. 12.1.7 When sound is transmitted by frequency 
modulation, air pressure is represented by changing the 
frequency of the radio transmitter slightly. A compression is 
represented by increasing that frequency and a rarefaction 
by decreasing it.

Radio 341
transmitter’s frequency is increased slightly so that charge moves up and down the trans-
mitting antenna a little more often than normal. To represent a rarefaction, the transmitter’s 
frequency is decreased slightly so that the charge moves up and down a little less often than 
normal. These changes in frequency are extremely small—so small that charge continues 
to slosh strongly in all the resonant components and reception is unaffected. The receiver 
measures the radio wave’s frequency and uses this measurement to re-create the sound. 
When it detects an increased frequency, it compresses the air, and when it detects a 
decreased frequency, it rarefi es the air.
 
Although the AM and FM techniques for representing sound can be used with a radio 
wave at any frequency, the most common commercial bands in the United States are the 
AM band between 550 kHz and 1600 kHz (550,000 Hz and 1,600,000 Hz) and the FM 
band between 88 MHz and 108 MHz (88,000,000 Hz and 108,000,000 Hz). Elsewhere in 
the spectrum of radio frequencies are many other commercial, military, and public trans-
missions, including TV, shortwave, amateur radio, telephone, data, police, and aircraft 
bands. These other transmissions use AM, FM, and a few other techniques to represent 
sound and information with radio waves.
Check Your Understanding #4: Another Volume Control
When you are listening to the AM radio in a car and drive through a tunnel, the volume becomes very 
low. Explain. 
Answer: The tunnel blocks most of the radio wave. Since only a small fl uctuating wave reaches your 
radio, the radio produces only small fl uctuations in air density with its speaker.
Why: An AM radio has trouble distinguishing between a distant transmission representing loud music 
and a nearby transmission representing soft music. In both cases, the receiver detects only small 
variations in the current moving up and down its antenna. That’s why you must turn up the volume 
of an AM radio as you move farther from the transmitting antenna or as you enter a tunnel.
Bandwidth and Cable
A pure, single-frequency radio wave doesn’t carry any information. To represent sound, 
video, or any other form of information, the radio wave must vary with time. Think of 
smoke signals—a steady stream of smoke carries no information, but carefully timed puffs 
of smoke can send a message.
 
Once a radio wave is varying with time to carry information, it no longer has a single 
pure frequency. Regardless of which aspects of the radio wave are varying, that wave now 
includes a range of frequencies. The more information the radio wave carries each second, 
the broader that range of frequencies becomes.
 
When it’s representing sound, a radio wave has a range of radio frequencies that 
stretches from somewhat below the offi cial frequency of the radio wave, the carrier fre-
quency, to somewhat above that frequency. The wider the audio frequency range of the 
sound, the more sound information must be sent each second and the broader the range of 
radio frequencies needed to represent that sound. The range of frequencies needed to trans-
mit such a stream of information is known as the transmission’s bandwidth.
 
By international agreement, an AM radio station may use 10 kHz of bandwidth, 5 kHz 
above and below its carrier frequency. To stay within that bandwidth, the sound being 
represented can’t contain frequencies above 5 kHz. Although this restricted frequency 
range is bad for music, it allows competing stations to function with carrier frequencies 
only 10 kHz apart, so 106 different stations can operate between 550 kHz and 1600 kHz.
 
An FM radio station may use 200 kHz of bandwidth, 100 kHz on each side of its car-
rier frequency. This luxurious allocation permits FM radio to represent a very broad range 
of audio frequencies, in stereo, which is why an FM radio station can do a much better job 
of sending music to your radio than an AM station can. In recent years, FM stations have 

342 
CHAPTER 12 Electromagnetic Waves
begun using their 200-kHz bandwidths to carry digital information representing several 
programs of “high-defi nition” sound. (We’ll examine digital audio in Chapter 14.)
 
Because high-frequency radio waves travel in straight lines between antennas, it’s hard 
to receive a commercial FM station from more than about 100 km (60 mi) away. Even 
when the transmitting antenna sits on top of a tall tower, Earth’s curvature and surface 
terrain severely limit the range of FM reception.
 
Low-frequency radio waves, such as those used by commercial AM stations, are 
refl ected by charged particles in Earth’s outer atmosphere, so portions of the radio wave 
that would otherwise be lost to space bounce back toward the ground. This returning power 
allows you to receive AM stations over a considerable distance, even when you have no 
direct line of sight to the transmitter’s antenna. At sundown, these atmospheric layers 
become so effective at refl ecting AM radio that you can hear a transmission from thousands 
of kilometers away as clearly as if it were a hometown station.
 
The spectrum of electromagnetic waves is a limited resource, and if it could only be 
used once, it would quickly run out of bandwidth. Fortunately, distance and enclosures 
make it possible to reuse the spectrum many times. Cell phones that are far from one 
another can share the same carrier frequencies and bandwidth because their radio waves 
weaken with distance and essentially don’t overlap. However, even nearby radio trans-
missions can use the same carrier frequencies by enclosing their electromagnetic waves 
inside cables.
 
Cable radio, television, and data networks are similar to broadcast networks except 
that they send electromagnetic waves through cables rather than through empty space. A 
typical radio or television cable consists of an insulated metal wire inside a tube of metal 
foil or woven metal mesh. This wire-inside-a-tube arrangement is called coaxial cable 
because its two metal components share the same centerline or axis. In contrast, a typical 
computer-data cable consists of a number of insulated metal wires that are twisted into 
several pairs.
 
Electromagnetic waves can propagate easily through a coaxial or twisted-pair cable, 
following its twists and turns from the transmitter that produces the waves to the receiver 
that uses them. The fact that wires are assisting these waves in their travels makes them 
more complicated than waves in empty space. However, they still involve electric and mag-
netic fi elds and still propagate forward at nearly the speed of light.
 
Because the electromagnetic waves inside a cable don’t interact with those outside it, 
the transmitter and receiver can use whatever parts of the spectrum they choose, without 
concerns about sharing. A typical coaxial cable can handle frequencies up to about 1000 MHz 
and typical twisted-pair cable can reach 350 MHz, so either one can carry a great deal of 
information each second.
 
However, coaxial cables must now compete with optical fi ber cables that guide light 
from one place to another. We’ll examine optical fi bers in Section 14.2. Like radio waves, 
light is an electromagnetic wave and can be amplitude or frequency modulated to represent 
information. However, light’s frequency is extremely high; the frequencies of visible light 
range from 4.5 × 1014 to 7.5 × 1014 Hz. If we were to allocate FM radio channels 200 kHz 
apart throughout the visible spectrum, there would be about 1.5 billion channels available!
Check Your Understanding #5: Beaten by the Bandwidth
You’re playing piano for an AM radio station, and you strike the highest key on the piano. The pitch 
of the resulting sound is 4186 Hz. Can the listeners hear that note from their radios? 
Answer: Yes, they can hear it, at least in principle. 
Why: The bandwidth of an AM radio station extends to 5000 Hz above and below its carrier fre-
quency, so the station is offi cially permitted to represent sound frequencies as high as 5000 Hz. 
However, in practice the station probably begins to fi lter out sounds well below that frequency to 
avoid accidentally violating their license.

Microwave Ovens 343
Questions to Think About: Why do microwave ovens tend to 
cook food unevenly if you don’t move the food during cook-
ing? How can part of a frozen meal become boiling hot 
while another part remains frozen? Why must you be careful 
with metal objects placed inside the oven? Why do some 
objects remain cool in the microwave oven, while other 
objects become extremely hot? How does microwave pop-
corn work?
Experiments to Do: A microwave oven transfers power primarily 
to the water in food. You can see this effect by placing com-
pletely water-free food ingredients such as salt, baking 
powder, sugar, or salad oil on a microwave-safe ceramic dish 
in a microwave oven. Cook the ingredients briefl y. You will fi nd 
that the ingredients and dish remain relatively cool. Add just 
a little water to the collection. What happens when you cook 
them this time?
 
Now try cooking a very cold ice cube. The cube should 
come directly from the freezer on an ice-cold plate, so that its 
surface is solid and dry. What happens? If ice contains water 
and water is what absorbs power in a microwave oven, why 
doesn’t the ice absorb power and melt?
In addition to carrying sounds from one place to another, elec-
tromagnetic waves can carry power. One interesting example of 
such power transfer is a microwave oven. It uses relatively 
high-frequency electromagnetic waves to transfer power 
directly to the water molecules in food so that the food cooks 
from the inside out. This section discusses both how those 
waves are created and why they heat food.
Cooking
chamber
Glass 
window with
metal screen
Door
Controls
Door release
Power cord
Waveguide
High-voltage
power supply
Magnetron
Motor
Fan
SECTION 12.2
Microwave Ovens
Microwaves and Food
When studying thermal radiation in Section 7.3, we discussed the wavelengths of electro-
magnetic waves. While examining radio, we concentrated on the frequencies of electro-
magnetic waves. However, we know from Eq. 9.2.1 that the wavelength and frequency of a 
wave aren’t independent. A basic electromagnetic wave in empty space has both a wave-
length and a frequency, and their product is the speed of light. That relationship can be 
written as a word equation:
 
speed of light = wavelength · frequency 
(12.2.1)
in symbols:
c = λ · ν,
and in everyday language:
The higher the frequency of an electromagnetic wave, the shorter its wavelength 
becomes.
Like Fig. 7.3.2, Fig. 12.2.1 shows the approximate wavelengths of many types of electro-
magnetic waves, but it also shows their frequencies.
 
Radio broadcasts use the low-frequency, long-wavelength portion of the electromag-
netic spectrum. Commercial AM radio broadcasts at frequencies of 550 to 1600 kHz 
(wavelengths of 545 to 187 m) and commercial FM radio broadcasts at frequencies of 88 
to 108 MHz (wavelengths of 3.4 to 2.8 m). As long as their wavelengths are 1 m (3.3 ft) or 
longer, electromagnetic waves are called radio waves. Electromagnetic waves that have 

344 
CHAPTER 12 Electromagnetic Waves
wavelengths of 1 mm or longer, but less than 1 m, are called microwaves. Microwave 
ovens usually cook food with 0.122-m electromagnetic waves, so their name is appropriate.
 
To explain how a microwave oven heats food 1 , let’s begin by looking at water mole-
cules. Water molecules are electrically polarized—that is, they have positively charged 
ends and negatively charged ends. This polarization comes about because of quantum 
physics and the tendency of oxygen atoms to pull electrons away from hydrogen atoms. 
The water molecule is bent, with its two hydrogen atoms sticking up from its oxygen atom 
like Mickey Mouse’s ears. When the oxygen atom pulls the electrons partly away from the 
hydrogen atoms, its side of the molecule becomes negatively charged, while the hydrogen 
atoms’ side becomes positively charged. Water is thus a polar molecule.
 
In ice, these polar water molecules are arranged in an orderly fashion with fi xed posi-
tions and orientations. However, in liquid water, the molecules are more randomly oriented 
(Fig. 12.2.2). Their arrangements are constrained only by their tendency to bind together, 
positive end to negative end, to form a dense network of coupled molecules. This binding 
between the positively charged hydrogen atom on one water molecule and the negatively 
charged oxygen atom on another molecule is known as a hydrogen bond.
 
If you place liquid water in a strong electric fi eld, its water molecules will tend to rotate 
into alignment with the fi eld. That’s because a misaligned molecule has extra electrostatic 
potential energy and accelerates in the direction that reduces its potential energy as quickly as 
possible. In this case, the water molecule will experience a torque and will undergo an angu-
lar acceleration that makes it rotate into alignment. As it rotates, the molecule will bump into 
other molecules and convert some of its electrostatic potential energy into thermal energy.
 
A similar effect occurs at a crowded party when everyone is suddenly told to face the front 
of the room. People brush against one another as they turn, and sliding friction converts some 
of their energy into thermal energy. If the people are told to turn back and forth repeatedly, they 
will become quite warm. The same holds true for water. If the electric fi eld reverses its direc-
tion many times, the water molecules will turn back and forth and become hotter and hotter.
 
A microwave’s fl uctuating electric fi eld is well suited to heating water. A microwave 
oven uses 2.45-GHz (2.45-gigahertz or 2,450,000,000-Hz) microwaves to twist the food’s 
water molecules back and forth billions of times per second. As the water molecules turn, 
they bump into one another and heat up. The water absorbs the microwaves and converts 
their energy into thermal energy. This particular microwave frequency was chosen not 
because of any resonant effect but because it was not in use for communications and because 
it cooks food uniformly. If the frequency were higher, the microwaves would be absorbed 
too strongly by food and wouldn’t penetrate deeply into large items. If the frequency were 
lower, the microwaves would pass through food too easily and wouldn’t cook it effi ciently.
 
This twisting effect explains why only foods or objects containing water or other polar 
molecules cook well in a microwave oven. Microwave-safe ceramic plates, glass cups, and 
plastic containers are water-free and usually remain cool. Even ice has trouble absorbing micro-
wave power because its crystal structure constrains the water molecules so they can’t turn easily.
1  Although he was 
orphaned as a child and 
never completed grade 
school, American Percy 
Lebaron Spencer 
(1894–1970) had a 
brilliant career as a 
scientist and microwave 
engineer. In 1945, while 
visiting a magnetron 
testing laboratory, he 
leaned over an operating 
magnetron and the candy 
bar in his shirt pocket 
melted. Immediately 
recognizing what had 
happened, he soon had 
popcorn popping about 
the lab and even cooked 
an egg until it exploded. 
Cooking has never been 
the same since.
106
109
1012
1015
Frequency (hertz)
1018
1021
10 3
1
10–3
10–6
10–9
10–12
10–15
Wavelength (meters)
AM radio
Shortwave radio
FM radio
VHF television
VHF television
UHF television
Microwaves
Millimeter waves
Far infrared light
Infrared light
Visible light
Ultraviolet light
X-rays
Gamma rays
Fig. 12.2.1 The 
electromagnetic 
spectrum. Microwaves 
have wavelengths 
between about 1 m and 
1 mm, corresponding to 
frequencies from 300 MHz 
up to 300 GHz.

Microwave Ovens 345
 
Although ice melts slowly in a microwave oven, the liquid water it produces heats 
quickly. This peculiar heating behavior explains why it’s so easy to burn yourself on frozen 
food heated in a microwave oven. The portions of the food that defrost fi rst absorb most of 
the microwave power and overheat, while the rest of the food remains frozen solid. You 
never know whether your next bite will break your teeth or sear the roof of your mouth. To 
address this problem, many microwave ovens have defrost cycles in which microwave 
heating is interrupted periodically to let heat fl ow naturally through the food to melt the ice. 
Once the frozen parts have melted, all the food can absorb microwaves.
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
+
+
(a)
(c)
(b)
No electric ﬁeld
Electric ﬁeld
Electric ﬁeld
Fig. 12.2.2 (a) The water 
molecules in liquid water are 
randomly oriented when there’s no 
electric fi eld. (b, c) But an electric 
fi eld tends to orient them with their 
positive ends in the direction of the 
fi eld.
Check Your Understanding #1: Microwave Popcorn
A popcorn kernel contains moist starch trapped inside a hard, dry hull. You can scorch this hull by 
cooking the corn in hot oil but not when you cook it in a microwave oven. How can the microwave 
oven pop the corn without risk of overheating the hull?
Answer: The microwave oven transfers heat to water molecules in the starch so that the hull never 
becomes hotter than the material inside it. 
Why: A corn kernel cooked in oil is heated by contact with the hot oil and the pot. You can easily overheat 
the outer hull and burn it. However, microwaves transfer heat to the water molecules inside the kernel. 
The hull can’t overheat because the hottest thing it touches is the starchy insides of the kernel. When 
the pressure of steam inside the kernel becomes high enough, the hull breaks and the kernel “pops.” 

346 
CHAPTER 12 Electromagnetic Waves
Metal in a Microwave Oven
Contrary to popular lore, metal objects and microwave ovens aren’t always incom-
patible. In fact, the walls of the oven’s cooking chamber are metal, yet they cause no 
trouble when exposed to microwaves during cooking. Like most metal surfaces, the 
walls refl ect microwaves. They do this by acting as both receiving and transmitting 
antennas. Electric fi elds in the microwaves cause mobile charges in the metal surfaces 
to accelerate and absorb the original microwaves. As these charges accelerate, they 
emit new microwaves. The emitted microwaves have the same frequencies as the orig-
inal ones, but they travel in new directions. The original microwaves have been refl ected 
by the surface.
 
The cooking-chamber walls refl ect the oven’s microwaves and keep them bouncing 
around inside. Even the metal grid covering the window refl ects microwaves. That’s 
because charge has enough time during a microwave cycle to fl ow around each hole in the 
grid and compensate for the hole’s presence. As long as the wavelength of 
an electromagnetic wave is much larger than the holes in a metal grid, the 
wave refl ects perfectly from that grid. In fact, if there’s nothing inside the 
oven to absorb the microwaves, they’ll bounce around inside it until they 
return to their source, a vacuum tube called a magnetron (Fig. 12.2.3), and 
eventually cause it to overheat.
 
While metal surfaces help confi ne the microwaves inside the oven, 
cooking your food and not you, extra metal inside the microwave can 
cause trouble. If you wrap food in aluminum foil, the foil will refl ect the 
microwaves and the food won’t cook. However, food placed in a shallow 
metal dish cooks reasonably well because microwaves enter the open top, 
pass through the food, refl ect, and pass through the food again.
 
Sometimes metal’s mobile charges do more than just refl ect micro-
waves. If enough charge is pushed onto the sharp point of a metal twist-tie 
or scrap of aluminum foil, some of it will jump right into the air as a spark. 
This spark can start a fi re, particularly when the twist-tie is attached to 
something fl ammable, like a plastic or paper bag. As a rule of thumb, 
never put a sharp metal object in the microwave oven.
 
Some metal objects heat up in a microwave oven. When microwaves push charge 
back and forth in a metal, the metal experiences an alternating current. If the metal has a 
substantial electrical resistance, this alternating current will experience a voltage drop 
and heat up the metal. While thick oven walls and cookware have low resistances and 
remain cool, thin metal strips quickly overheat. Metallic decorations on porcelain dinner-
ware are particularly susceptible to damage in a microwave oven, so warming up coffee 
in Grandma’s gold-rimmed teacup is sure to be a disaster. When you put metal in a 
microwave oven, make sure that it is thick enough to conduct electricity well and that it 
has no sharp points.
Check Your Figures #1: Shopping for Food
The red light used by many grocery store checkout stations to scan product codes is produced by 
a helium–neon laser. This light is an electromagnetic wave with a wavelength of approximately 
633 nm. What is its frequency? 
Answer: The frequency is about 4.74 × 1014 Hz. 
Why: Since the product of frequency and wavelength for an electromagnetic wave is equal to the 
speed of light, its frequency is equal to the speed of light divided by its wavelength: 
 
299,792,458  m/s
0.000000633  m = 4.74 × 1014  Hz.
Microwave guide
Capacitor
Step-up transformer
Fan
Magnetron
Fig. 12.2.3 This oven’s 
magnetron microwave 
source is located in the 
middle of the picture, just 
to the left of its cooling 
fan. Microwaves travel 
to the cooking chamber 
through the rectangular 
metal duct on top of the 
oven. The high-voltage 
transformer at the bottom 
right provides power to the 
magnetron.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Microwave Ovens 347
 
Resistive heating in conducting objects can actually be useful at times. Since micro-
wave ovens cook food inside and outside at the same time, the food’s surface never gets 
particularly hot, and the food doesn’t brown or become crisp. To improve their textures and 
appearances, some foods come with special wrappers that conduct just enough current to 
become very hot in a microwave oven. These wrappers provide the high surface tempera-
tures needed to brown the foods.
 
Another peculiar feature of microwave ovens is that they don’t always cook evenly. 
That’s because the amplitude of the microwave electric fi eld isn’t uniform throughout 
the oven. As the microwaves bounce around the cooking chamber, they pass through 
the same spot from several different directions at once. When they do, they exhibit 
interference effects (see Section 9.3). At one location, the individual electric fi elds may 
point in the same direction and experience constructive interference so that food there 
heats up quickly. At another location, however, those fi elds may point in opposite 
directions and experience destructive interference so that food there doesn’t cook well 
at all.
 
If nothing is moving in the microwave oven, the pattern of microwaves inside it doesn’t 
move either. There are then regions in which the electric fi eld has very large amplitudes and 
regions in which the amplitudes are very small. The larger the amplitude of the electric 
fi eld, the faster it cooks food.
 
To heat food uniformly in such a microwave oven, you must move the food around as 
it’s cooking. Many ovens have turntables inside that move the food automatically. Another 
solution to this problem is to stir the microwaves around the oven with a rotating metal 
paddle. The pattern of microwaves inside the chamber changes as the paddle turns, and the 
food cooks more evenly. Still other microwave ovens use two separate microwave frequen-
cies to cook the food. Because these two frequencies cook independently, it’s unlikely that 
a portion of the food will be missed by both waves.
Check Your Understanding #2: Half and Half
You place a thick metal divider into your microwave oven so that it divides the cooking chamber 
exactly in half. The oven sends its microwaves into the right half of the chamber. If you put food in 
the left half of the chamber, will it cook? 
Answer: No, it won’t cook. 
Why: The metal divider will refl ect the microwaves and keep them from entering the left half of the 
oven. 
Creating Microwaves with a Magnetron
Clearly, changing electric fi elds cook the food as microwaves bounce around the inside of 
an oven. But how are these microwaves created? From the previous section on radio, you 
might guess that the oven creates an alternating current at 2.45 GHz and that this current 
causes charge to slosh in a tank circuit and move up and down an antenna. That’s pretty 
much what actually happens inside a magnetron tube.
 
A magnetron is a special vacuum tube—a hollow chamber from which all the air 
has been removed. Composed primarily of metal and ceramic parts, the magnetron 
uses beams of electrons to make charge slosh in a number of microwave tank circuits. 
These tank circuits have resonant frequencies of 2.45 GHz, the operating frequency of 
the oven. With the help of a tiny antenna, the magnetron emits the microwaves that 
cook the food.
 
The microwave tank circuits are arranged in a ring around the magnetron’s evacu-
ated chamber. For one of these tank circuits to oscillate naturally at 2.45 GHz, its 
capacitor must have an extremely small capacitance and its inductor must have an 

348 
CHAPTER 12 Electromagnetic Waves
extremely small inductance. These requirements can be met by a C-shaped 
strip of metal (Fig. 12.2.4). Its curve is the inductor, and its tips are the 
capacitor.
 
Electric charge sloshes back and forth on the C-shaped strip just as it does 
in a conventional tank circuit (Fig. 12.1.2). Known as a resonant cavity, this 
strip is another electronic harmonic oscillator and therefore has a period that 
doesn’t depend on the amount of charge that’s sloshing.
 
The magnetron of a microwave oven typically contains eight of these res-
onant cavities, each carefully adjusted in size and shape so that its natural 
resonance occurs exactly at 2.45 GHz. Because these cavities are arranged in 
a ring and each one shares its tips with those of its neighboring cavities, they 
tend to oscillate alternately (Fig. 12.2.5). At the start of an oscillatory cycle, 
half the metal tips are positively charged and half are negatively charged (Fig. 
12.2.5a). Currents begin to fl ow through the ring and produce magnetic fi elds 
in the resonant cavities (Fig. 12.2.5b). These magnetic fi elds propel the 
currents around the ring even after the charge separations have vanished. 
 Soon the charge separations reappear but with the positive and negative tips
interchanged (Fig. 12.2.5c).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Magnetic ﬁelds
Electric ﬁelds
Currents
Resonant cavities
Check Your Understanding #3: Large Economy Size
If a manufacturer made a magnetron that was slightly larger than normal in every dimension, how 
would that magnetron behave? 
Answer: It would operate at a frequency below 2.45 GHz. 
Why: The frequency of the microwaves emitted by a magnetron is determined exclusively by the 
natural resonances of its cavities. If those cavities are enlarged, both the inductances of their curves 
and the capacitances of their tips will increase. Their resonant frequencies will decrease, and the 
magnetron will emit lower-frequency microwaves.
Powering the Magnetron: The Lorentz Force
As currents oscillate back and forth around the cavities at 2.45 GHz, they fi ll the 
magnetron with alternating electric and magnetic fi elds. However, as the energy 
in these fi elds is extracted to cook the food or is lost to the imperfect conductivi-
ties of the cavities themselves, something must continuously replenish it. That 
replacement power is supplied to the cavities by four streams of energetic 
electrons.
 
At the center of the magnetron tube, surrounded only by empty space, is 
an electrically heated cathode that tends to emit electrons (Fig. 12.2.6a). A high-
voltage power supply pumps negative charge onto this cathode so that a strong 
electric fi eld points toward it from the positively charged cavity tips. If there were 
no other fi elds present in the magnetron, negatively charged electrons would 
emerge from the hot cathode and accelerate toward the positively charged tips as 
four beams of electrons (Fig. 12.2.6b).
 
However, the magnetron also includes a large permanent magnet. Why else 
would it be called a magnetron? This magnet creates a strong, steady magnetic 
fi eld that points upward along the axis of the magnetron, parallel to the cathode 
itself (Fig. 12.2.6c). The purpose of this magnetic fi eld is to alter the motions of 
Radio frequency tank circuit
Inductor
Capacitor
Microwave frequency tank circuit
(b)
Inductor
Capacitor
(a)
Fig. 12.2.4 (a) At radio 
frequencies, a tank circuit’s 
inductor is a coil of wire 
and its capacitor is a pair 
of separated plates. (b) At 
microwave frequencies, 
a tank circuit’s inductor 
is merely the curve of a 
C-shaped strip and its 
capacitor is the tips of that 
strip.
Fig. 12.2.5 A typical magnetron has eight C-shaped resonant cavities arranged in a ring. 
(a) Separated charge on the tips of the cavities (b) fl ows as currents through the ring and 
(c) becomes reversed. As the currents fl ow, magnetic fi elds appear in the eight cavities, 
pointing alternately up and down.

Microwave Ovens 349
the electrons. An electron has an electric charge but not a magnetic pole, and a stationary 
charge experiences a force from an electric fi eld but not from a magnetic fi eld. How then 
can the magnetron’s magnetic fi eld affect the motion of the electrons?
 
The key word in that last paragraph is stationary. Once a charge is moving through a 
magnetic fi eld, it does experience a force—the Lorentz force. Named after its discoverer, 
Dutch physicist Hendrik Antoon Lorentz (1853–1928), the Lorentz force affects a charge 
that is moving through a magnetic fi eld. This force pushes the charge at right angles to both 
the charge’s velocity and the magnetic fi eld (Fig. 12.2.7). The strength of the Lorentz force 
is proportional to the charge, to the velocity, to the magnetic fi eld, and to the sine of the 
angle between the velocity and the magnetic fi eld. Last, the direction of the Lorentz force 
on a positive charge follows a right-hand rule: when the extended index fi nger of your right 
hand points along the charge’s velocity and your bent middle fi nger points along the mag-
netic fi eld, the force on the charge points along your extended thumb. A negative charge 
experiences a force in the opposite direction. This relationship can be written as a word 
equation,
 
Lorentz force = charge · velocity · magnetic field · sine of angle, 
(12.2.2)
in symbols:
F = qvB ·  sin (angle),
and in everyday language:
When charged particles from the sun encounter Earth’s magnetic fi eld, 
they get pushed into spiral paths, producing the aurora borealis and the 
aurora australis,
where the angle involved is between the velocity and the magnetic fi eld, and the direction 
of the Lorentz force follows the right-hand rule.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Electric ﬁeld only
Magnetic ﬁeld only
Both ﬁelds
Heated
cathode
Electrons
Fig. 12.2.6 (a) Electrons are emitted by the hot cathode in the center of a magnetron’s ring of 
resonant cavities. (b) Electric fi elds alone would accelerate the electrons toward the positively charged 
cavity tips. (c) A magnetic fi eld alone (pointing upward) would make the electrons orbit the cathode 
in counterclockwise loops. (d) Together, these fi elds create spokelike electron beams that circle the 
cathode counterclockwise and always strike negatively charged tips of the cavities.
Lorentz force
Velocity
Moving
charge
Magnetic
ﬁeld
Fig. 12.2.7 A positive 
charge moving through a 
magnetic fi eld experiences 
a Lorentz force that’s 
perpendicular to both its 
velocity and the magnetic 
fi eld. A negatively charged 
particle experiences 
a Lorentz force in the 
opposite direction.

350 
CHAPTER 12 Electromagnetic Waves
 
The Lorentz force dramatically changes the paths of electrons in the magnetron. If 
there were no other fi elds inside the magnetron, electrons would experience only Lorentz 
forces perpendicular to their velocities and would circle around the magnetic fl ux lines in 
counterclockwise loops—a behavior known as cyclotron motion. The circling electrons 
would remain near the cathode and would never go near the cavities.
 
In a real magnetron, however, the electric fi eld of Fig. 12.2.6b and the magnetic fi eld 
of Fig. 12.2.6c are present simultaneously. Because both of these fi elds exert forces on 
moving electrons, the paths the electrons follow are extremely complicated (Fig. 12.2.6d). 
The outward-directed and circulating motions merge together into four electron beams that 
arc outward and rotate counterclockwise, like the spokes of a spinning bicycle wheel. An 
electron beam reaches each cavity, not at its positively charge tip, as it would without the 
magnetic fi eld, but at its negatively charged tip. The electron beams actually add to the 
charge separations in the cavities!
 
The electron beams sweep around the cathode in perfect synchronization with the 
oscillating charge on the cavities. The beams sweep from one tip to the next in the same 
amount of time it takes for the charge separation on the tips to reverse. As a result, 
the beams always arrive on the negatively charged tip. By adding to the charge separations, 
the electron beams provide power to the oscillations in the cavities, keeping them going 
and allowing them to transfer power to the food. The electron beams actually initiate the 
oscillation in the cavities by adding energy to tiny random oscillations that are always 
present in electric systems.
 
How does the oscillating charge inside the magnetron create microwaves inside 
the oven’s cooking chamber? There are many ways to extract microwaves from the 
ring of cavities. One extraction method is to insert a single-turn wire coil into one of 
the magnetron’s cavities. As the magnetic field in that cavity changes, it induces a 
2.45-GHz alternating current in the coil. One end of this coil is attached to the ring, 
but the other end passes out of the magnetron through an insulated, air-tight hole in 
the ring and connects to a quarter-wave monopole antenna. This 3-cm (1.2-in) antenna 
emits microwaves into a metal pipe attached to the cooking chamber. These micro-
waves reflect their way through the pipe and into the cooking chamber, where they 
cook the food.
Check Your Understanding #4: Lorentz Speaks
An ordinary audio speaker contains a wire coil immersed in a strong magnetic fi eld. When an audio 
system sends currents through the coil, the coil experiences a force proportional to that current. 
What force is pushing on the coil? 
Answer: The pushing force is the Lorentz force. 
Why: The moving charges in the coil’s current experience the Lorentz force as they pass through the 
magnetic fi eld. This force is conveyed to the wire coil, which is attached to a movable surface. That 
surface moves back and forth as the current fl uctuates and produces sound. Speakers are clearly an 
elegant and practical application of the Lorentz force in everyday life.
Check Your Figures #2: Lorentz Speaks with Precision
If the coil in an audio speaker experiences a Lorentz force of 1 N when it carries a current of 1 A, 
what force will it experience when it carries a current of 2 A and all the charges in it are thus travel-
ing twice as fast as before? 
Answer: It will experience a force of 2 N. 
Why: As indicated in Eq. 12.2.2, the Lorentz force is proportional to the velocity of a charge. Dou-
bling the current in the coil doubles the velocities of its mobile charges, and they experience twice 
the Lorentz force. 

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 351
Epilogue for Chapter 12
This chapter examined two common devices that are based on electromagnetic waves. 
In Radio, we saw that electromagnetic waves can be created by accelerating electric 
charge and that these waves can be detected by looking for their effects on other electric 
charges. We also examined the techniques that are used to send sound information 
through space by having them control either the amplitude or the frequency of electro-
magnetic waves.
 
In Microwave Ovens, we explored the ways in which electromagnetic waves can 
interact directly with polar water molecules and can transfer energy to those molecules. 
We saw how interactions between microwaves and a metal object can lead to refl ection, 
sparking, or heating. We also examined the technique used in ovens to create powerful 
microwave radiation.
Explanation: A Disc in the Microwave Oven
The fl uctuating electric fi eld in the microwave oven propels large currents back and forth 
through the disc’s metal layer. That layer is so thin that it has a large electric resistance and 
it heats up as the current fl ows through it. The temperature of the plastic also rises because 
of its intimate contact with the metal layer. Since the plastic has a larger coeffi cient of volume 
expansion than the metal, the expanding plastic tears the metal layer and reduces it to 
islands with sharp points and narrow bridges.
 
Once the metal layer has fragmented, the microwave-driven currents can put substan-
tial electric charges on the sharp points. Those charges can jump between islands as sparks. 
The currents passing through narrow conducting bridges can heat those bridges so hot that 
their metal vaporizes and they form glowing, current-carrying plasma arcs.
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Radio Works: A radio transmitter creates a radio wave when electric charge accelerates 
up and down its antenna. To get as much charge moving as possible, the transmitter attaches 
a tank circuit to the antenna and slowly adds energy to that tank circuit until an enormous 
amount of charge is fl owing up and down the antenna. If the antenna is one-quarter wave-
length long, it’s also resonant at the transmission frequency and boosts the amount of charge 
sloshing up and down.
 
The radio receiver detects this radio wave when it causes charge to accelerate up and 
down the receiving antenna. If both the receiving antenna and the receiver’s tank circuit are 
resonant at the transmission frequency, large amounts of charge will slosh back and forth in 
the receiver’s tank circuit and the receiver will detect the transmission.
 
This radio wave can represent sound using either the AM or FM technique. In the 
AM technique, the strength of the wave is increased or decreased to represent compres-
sions and rarefactions of the air, respectively. In the FM technique, the precise fre-
quency of the transmission is increased or decreased to represent those compressions 
or rarefactions.
How Microwave Ovens Work: A microwave oven uses microwaves to cook food. These micro-
waves bounce around the cooking chamber, where they transfer energy to water molecules in 
the food. Because a water molecule is polar, having a positive end and a negative end, it 
tends to align with an electric fi eld. The microwave’s fl uctuating electric fi eld causes the 
tightly packed water molecules to twist back and forth rapidly, and the ensuing collisions 
heat the water and cook the food.

352 
CHAPTER 12 Electromagnetic Waves
1. Energy in an electric fi eld: The energy in an electric fi eld is 
equal to the square of that fi eld times its volume, divided by 8π 
times the Coulomb constant, or
 
energy = electric field2 · volume
8π · Coulomb constant.  
(12.1.1)
2. Relationship between wavelength and frequency: The fre-
quency of an electromagnetic wave times its wavelength equals 
the speed of light, or
 
speed of light = wavelength · frequency. 
(12.2.1)
3. Lorentz force: When an electric charge moves through a mag-
netic fi eld, it experiences a force equal to its charge times its 
velocity times the magnetic fi eld times the sine of the angle 
between the velocity and the magnetic fi eld, or
Lorentz force = charge · velocity · magnetic field
 
· sine of angle, 
(12.2.2)
where that force is at right angles to both the velocity and the 
magnetic fi eld and follows a right-hand rule.
 
The oven’s microwaves are produced by a magnetron, a vacuum tube containing reso-
nant cavities and a heated cathode. By combining strong electric and magnetic fi elds, the 
magnetron produces powerful beams of electrons that add energy to the charge oscillating in 
the cavities. A loop of wire and a short antenna extract power from the resonant cavities and 
emit the microwaves that then cook the food.

 353
13
Light
 A
lthough radio waves and microwaves are useful for communications and energy transfer, 
there’s another portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that we fi nd far more important—
light. Light consists of very-high-frequency, very-short-wavelength electromagnetic waves. 
Light’s frequencies are so high that normal antennas can’t handle it. Instead, it’s absorbed and 
emitted by the individual charged particles in atoms, molecules, and materials. Because of its 
special relationship with the charged particles in matter, light is important to physics, chemistry, 
and materials science. Moreover, it’s one of the principal ways by which we interact with the world 
around us.
Splitting the Colors of Sunlight
We see light because it stimulates cells in our eyes. This 
stimulation is an example of light’s ability to infl uence 
chemistry. And because our eyes are able to distinguish 
among the different wavelengths of light, we perceive 
colors. Sunlight normally appears uncolored because it 
contains a rich mixture of wavelengths that our eyes 
interpret as whiteness. However, there are situations in 
which sunlight becomes separated into its constituent 
colors.
 
You can observe this separation of colors by looking 
at sunlight passing through a cut crystal glass or bowl, or 
by refl ecting sunlight from a CD or DVD. Hold the object 
in direct sunlight and observe the light that it redirects 
toward your eyes or projects onto a white sheet of paper 
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

354 
CHAPTER 13 Light
Chapter Itinerary
In this chapter, we’ll examine three sources of light: (1) sunlight, 
(2) discharge lamps, and (3) LEDs and lasers. In Sunlight, we 
see how sunlight travels to our eyes and how its passage through 
the atmosphere, raindrops, and soap bubbles can separate it 
into its constituent colors. In Discharge Lamps, we explore the 
ways in which atoms and molecules emit and absorb light, and 
how different atoms and molecules can be used to produce 
light of different colors. In LEDs and Lasers, we look at how 
electronic devices can produce light and at how atoms, mole-
cules, and solids can duplicate or amplify the light passing 
through them to produce intense beams of highly ordered light. 
In the process of studying these three light sources, we’ll also 
learn about three different types of light: thermal light, atomic 
resonance light, and coherent light. For additional preview 
information, fl ip to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws 
and Equations at the end of the chapter.
nearby. While some of the light you see will still be white, 
you should see colors as well.
 
Turn the object slowly in your hand and observe how 
the colors change. You will see gradual progressions from 
one color to the next. What should that sequence of colors 
be? How does this sequence relate to the colors of the rain-
bow? What is the relationship between this sequence and 
the wavelengths of light? Can you get some sense for the 
relative wavelength spacings of the classic rainbow colors: 
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet?
SECTION 13.1
life on Earth possible. Although the light in sunlight is really 
just another electromagnetic wave, and could be considered 
part of the previous chapter, it’s so important to everyday life 
that it deserves special attention. Therefore we’ll begin by look-
ing at how sunlight interacts with our world.
Questions to Think About: Why is the sky blue during the day? 
Why is the sun red at sunrise and sunset? Why do you see 
rainbows only when the sun is relatively low in the sky? Why do 
we see colors when sunlight passes through cut crystal or 
through a soap bubble?
Experiments to Do: Sunlight is actually composed of many dif-
ferent electromagnetic waves. These waves differ in frequency 
and wavelength like the radio waves from your two favorite sta-
tions. You don’t need a machine to help you distinguish among 
the various wavelengths of light; you can use your eyes. Take a 
look at a soap bubble on a bright sunny day. You see the bubble 
because it refl ects light. In fact, the clear bubble appears 
colored, even though the sunlight hitting it is white. That’s 
because the bubble separates sunlight according to wavelength 
and sends only certain wavelengths toward your eyes.
For thousands of years, people have marked the passage of 
time by the rising and setting of the sun over the horizon. The 
sun fi rst appears as a red disk in the east every morning, rises 
white in the blue sky, and then sets once again as a red disk in 
the west. The sunlight that we see takes about 8 minutes to 
travel the 150,000,000 km (93,000,000 mi) from the sun to 
our eyes and provides most of the energy and heat that make 
Sunlight
Red setting sun
Pool of water
Reflection of sky
Soap 
bubbles
Blue sky
Sunlight and Electromagnetic Waves
Electromagnetic waves can have any wavelength, from thousands of kilometers to a frac-
tion of the width of an atomic nucleus. The radio waves and microwaves that we examined 
in Chapter 12 have wavelengths longer than 1 mm. In the present chapter, we turn our 
attention to shorter-wavelength radiation. In particular, we’ll study electromagnetic waves 
with wavelengths between 400 nm and 750 nm (recall that 1 nm, or 1 nanometer, is 10–9 m). 
These are the electromagnetic waves that we perceive as visible light and the principal 
components of sunlight.

Sunlight 355
 
Because the electromagnetic waves in sunlight have such short wave-
lengths, their frequencies lie between 1014 and 1015 Hz (Fig. 13.1.1). As one of 
these waves of sunlight passes by, its electric fi eld fl uctuates back and forth 
almost 1,000,000,000,000,000 times each second. Since producing micro-
waves, which have much longer wavelengths and much lower frequencies, 
already requires specialized components and tiny antennas, what can possibly 
emit or absorb light waves? The answer is the individual charged particles in 
atoms, molecules, and materials. These tiny particles can move extremely rap-
idly, often vibrating about at frequencies of 1014 Hz, 1015 Hz, or even higher. As these 
charged particles accelerate back and forth, they emit light waves. Similarly, passing light 
waves cause individual charged particles in atoms, molecules, and materials to accelerate 
back and forth, thereby absorbing the light waves as well.
 
Sunlight originates at the outer surface of the sun, in a region called the photosphere. 
There, atoms and other tiny charged systems (mostly atomic ions and electrons) jostle 
about at 5800 K. Since these charged particles accelerate as they bounce around, they emit 
electromagnetic waves.
 
Because the sun’s surface emits light through the random, thermal motions of its 
charged particles, the distribution of wavelengths it emits is determined only by its 
temperature. It emits a blackbody spectrum, as we discussed in Section 7.3. Because 
the photosphere’s temperature is 5800 K, the jostling motions are extremely rapid 
and most of the sunlight falls in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum 
(Fig. 13.1.2).
 
However, not all sunlight is visible. On the long-wavelength, low-frequency side of 
visible light is infrared light. We can’t see infrared light with our eyes, but we feel it when 
we stand in front of a hot object. In sunlight, infrared light is produced by charges that are 
accelerating back and forth more slowly than average.
 
On the short-wavelength, high-frequency side of visible light is ultraviolet light. 
We can’t see ultraviolet light either, but we’re aware of its presence because it induces 
chemical damage in molecules. It causes sunburns and encourages skin to tan. In sun-
light, ultraviolet light is produced by charges that are accelerating back and forth more 
rapidly than average.
4
5
6
7
8
9
700
600
500
400
Infrared
Red
Orange
Yellow
Green
Blue
Indigo
Violet
Ultraviolet
Frequency (× 1014 Hz)
Wavelength (nanometers)
Fig. 13.1.1 The visible 
portion of the spectrum of 
sunlight. Each wavelength 
of visible light has a 
particular frequency and is 
associated with a particular 
color. At the ends of 
the visible spectrum are 
invisible infrared and 
ultraviolet lights.
2
1.00
0.50
0.00
3
4
6
810
2000
1600
1200
800
400
Frequency (× 1014 Hz)
Intensity
Wavelength (nanometers)
Visible
Ultra-
violet
Infrared
5800 K
The sun
Fig. 13.1.2 Sunlight comes from 
the sun’s photosphere, where the 
temperature is 5800 K. This light 
has a blackbody distribution of 
wavelengths, with much of its intensity 
concentrated in the visible portion of 
the overall electromagnetic spectrum.
Check Your Understanding #1: The Rosy Glow of Candlelight
Why does a burning candle emit reddish or yellowish light?
Answer: Charged particles in the hot fl ame accelerate back and forth and emit electromagnetic waves 
that include the low-frequency end of the visible spectrum.
Why: The accelerating charged particles in hot objects emit light. The hotter the object, the faster 
the charged particles move and accelerate and the higher the frequencies of light they emit. A 
candle isn’t hot enough to emit the whitish light of the sun, so it emits mostly reddish or yellow-
ish light.

356 
CHAPTER 13 Light
Sunlight’s Passage to Earth
Sunlight travels from the sun to Earth at the speed of light—but what sets the speed of 
light? Actually, as we learned in Section 4.2, it’s one of the fundamental constants of nature, 
with a defi ned value of 299,792,458 m/s in empty space. Although we could argue that the 
speed of light is set by the relationships between the electric and magnetic fi elds, that 
observation simply passes the buck. If you were then to ask what sets the relationships 
between the electric and magnetic fi elds, the answer would be the speed of light.
 
Rather than justifying why sunlight travels as fast as it does in empty space, let’s look 
at what happens to it when it enters a region that’s not empty. After all, sunlight eventually 
reaches Earth’s atmosphere and, when it does, several interesting things happen.
 
First, the sunlight slows down as its electric and magnetic fi elds begin to interact with 
the electric charges and magnetic poles in the atmosphere. Light polarizes the molecules it 
encounters—its electric fi eld displaces positive charges from negative charges, and its 
magnetic fi eld displaces north poles from south poles. These polarization effects delay 
light’s passage so that it travels more slowly. Since most transparent materials respond 
much more strongly to light’s electric fi eld than to its magnetic fi eld, we’ll concentrate on 
only electric effects.
 
The factor by which light slows down in a material is known as the material’s 
index of refraction. Light travels particularly slowly through materials that are easy to 
polarize, and some of them have indices of refraction of 2 or even 3. Because air near 
sea level is only slightly polarizable, however, its index of refraction is just 1.0003. 
Although this reduction in light’s speed is too small to notice directly, we do notice the 
polarized air particles that cause it. These polarized air particles are what makes the 
sky blue (Fig. 13.1.3).
 
The particles in air consist of individual atoms and molecules, small collections of 
atoms and molecules, water droplets, and dust. As a wave of sunlight passes through one of 
these particles, the particle becomes polarized. Its electric charges accelerate back and 
forth as the sunlight’s electric fi eld pushes them around, and they reemit a new electromag-
netic wave of their own.
 
This new wave draws its energy from the original wave. In effect, the particle acts as a 
tiny antenna, temporarily receiving part of the electromagnetic wave and immediately 
retransmitting it in a new direction. This process, whereby a tiny particle redirects the path 
of a passing light wave, is called Rayleigh scattering, after the English physicist Lord 
Rayleigh (John William Strutt, 1842–1919), who fi rst understood it in some detail.
Fig. 13.1.3 (a) During the day, the sky above Monument Valley appears blue because Earth 
atmosphere scatters mostly blue sunlight toward us. (b) At night, the scattered sunlight is gone and 
the atmosphere is a clear window through which to observe the stars.
© Kevin Moloney/Aurora Photos, Inc.
(a)
(b)
©Tetra Images/Aurora Photos, Inc.

Sunlight 357
 
Although most sunlight travels directly to our eyes, some of it undergoes Rayleigh 
scattering and reaches us by more complicated paths. We see the direct light as coming 
from the brilliant disk of the sun, but the scattered light gives the entire sky a fairly uniform 
blue glow (Fig. 13.1.4). Why is this glow blue?
 
The sky’s blue color comes about because the tiny air particles that Rayleigh-scatter 
sunlight are too small to make good antennas for that light. We observed in Section 12.1 
that a dipole antenna works best when it is about half as long as the wavelength of its elec-
tromagnetic wave. The air particles make particularly bad antennas for long-wavelength 
red light, so very little red sunlight undergoes Rayleigh scattering on its way through the 
atmosphere. However, the air particles make less poor antennas for short-wavelength blue 
light. Some of the violet, indigo, and blue sunlight does Rayleigh-scatter and reaches our 
eyes from all directions. We see this Rayleigh-scattered light as the bluish glow of the sky.
 
Rayleigh scattering not only makes the sky blue; it also makes the sunrises and sunsets 
red. As the sun rises or sets, its light must travel long distances through Earth’s atmosphere 
to reach your eyes. Its path is so long that most of the violet, indigo, and blue light Rayleigh-
scatters away miles to your east or west and all you see is the remaining red light. Some-
times the whole local sky appears reddish because there simply isn’t any bluish light left to 
scatter toward you. Sunrises and sunsets are particularly colorful when extra dust or ash is 
present in the atmosphere to enhance the Rayleigh scattering. Air pollution, forest fi res, and 
volcanic eruptions tend to create unusually red sunrises and sunsets.
 
In contrast, clouds and fog appear white because they’re composed of relatively large water 
droplets. These droplets are larger than the wavelengths of visible light and scatter all of sun-
light’s wavelengths equally well. Although this scattering is often so effective that you can’t see 
the sun’s disk through a cloud, it doesn’t give the cloud any color. The cloud simply looks white.
Rayleigh
scattering
Sunlight
Fig. 13.1.4 As sunlight 
passes through the 
atmosphere, some of its 
violet, indigo, and blue 
light undergoes Rayleigh 
scattering from particles 
in the air. We see this 
redirected light as the 
diffuse bluish sky. The 
remaining light reaches our 
eyes directly from the sun 
and tends to be reddish, 
particularly at sunrise and 
sunset.
Check Your Understanding #2: Seeing the Blues
The air in a dark, smoky room often looks bluish when illuminated by white light. What creates this 
bluish appearance?
Answer: Rayleigh scattering from the microscopic smoke particles scatters more blue light than red 
light and gives the air a bluish glow.
Why: When smoky air in a dark room is illuminated by a bright spotlight or another white light source, 
the tiny particles in the air Rayleigh-scatter some of the light. When you look at the air against a dark 
background, you can see this glow. Since Rayleigh scattering affects blue light most strongly, the air 
appears bluish.
Rainbows
Sometimes water droplets do separate the colors of sunlight. When sunlight shines on clear 
round raindrops as they fall during a storm, these raindrops can create a rainbow. To under-
stand how clear spheres of water can bend sunlight’s path and separate it according to 
wavelength, we must understand three important optical effects: refraction, refl ection, and 
dispersion. We encountered those same wave phenomena while studying water surface 
waves in Section 9.3, but now they appear in a new context—light waves!
 
Let’s begin by looking at what happens when a wave of sunlight passes directly 
through a raindrop. Because water is more polarizable than air, the wave slows down inside 
the raindrop and its cycles bunch together (Fig. 13.1.5). This bunching effect reduces the 
light’s wavelength inside the drop. Light’s frequency remains unchanged because the 
cycles can’t disappear, but they move more slowly.
 
If a narrow wave of sunlight is aimed directly through the center of the raindrop, it will 
follow a straight path and emerge essentially unaffected from the other side (Fig. 13.1.6a). 
However, if that wave strikes the raindrop near the top, it will bend as it enters the water 
(Fig. 13.1.6b). This occurs because the lower edge of the wave will reach the water fi rst and 

358 
CHAPTER 13 Light
slow down, the upper edge will then overtake it and the wave will bend downward. The 
wave will head more directly into the water.
 
As the wave in Fig. 13.1.6b leaves the raindrop, its upper edge emerges fi rst and speeds 
up while the lower edge lags behind. The wave bends downward even further and heads 
less directly into the air and away from the water.
 
This bending of sunlight at the boundaries between materials is refraction. It occurs 
whenever sunlight changes speeds as it passes through a boundary at an angle. If sunlight 
slows down at a boundary (Fig. 13.1.7a), it bends toward the line perpendicular to the bound-
ary and heads more directly into the new material. If sunlight speeds up at a boundary 
(Fig. 13.1.7a), it bends away from the line perpendicular to the boundary and heads less 
directly into the new material. The amount of the bend increases as the speed change increases.
 
However, part of the sunlight striking a boundary doesn’t pass through the boundary at 
all. Instead, it refl ects. In Section 9.3, we attributed wave refl ection specifi cally to changes 
in wave speed at a boundary. However, the more general cause of wave refl ections is an 
impedance mismatch, an abrupt change in how the wave moves through its environment. 
In general, impedance measures a system’s opposition to the passage of a current or a 
wave. For an electric current, impedance measures how much voltage is needed to propel a 
given current. For an electromagnetic wave, impedance measures how much electric fi eld 
is needed to produce a given magnetic fi eld. Impedance effects are common in nature (see 
1 ) and also apply to mechanical waves and mechanical currents. When sound and water 
waves encounter impedance mismatches, they partly refl ect as echos.
Wavelength in air
Air
Raindrop
Air
Wavelength in water
Velocity
Fig. 13.1.5 As an 
electromagnetic wave 
enters a material, its speed 
decreases and the waves 
bunch up together. Its 
wavelength decreases.
Sunlight
(a)
Raindrop
Air
Air
Sunlight
(b)
Raindrop
Air
Air
Fig. 13.1.6 A side view 
of two narrow waves of 
sunlight entering and 
leaving raindrops. The lines 
drawn across each light 
wave represent upward 
electric fi eld maxima and 
are bunched together as 
light slows down in water.
1  When electromagnetic 
waves travel through 
cables and wires, they 
refl ect from impedance 
mismatches. These 
mismatches occur 
whenever the relationship 
between electric and 
magnetic fi elds changes, 
and should be avoided in 
television and data 
communication systems. 
Using cables, wires, or 
adapters with the wrong 
impedances or leaving 
open ports on cable 
splitters will produce 
refl ections that may 
interfere with reception.
Incident
Reflected
Transmitted
Perpendicular
Air
Glass
Incident
Reflected
Transmitted
Air
Glass
Perpendicular
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13.1.7
When a light wave is incident 
on a glass surface, part of it refl ects and 
the rest refracts. The incident wave and 
refl ected wave are at equal but opposite 
angles from the line perpendicular 
to the surface. The transmitted wave 
refracts (bends) toward or away from the 
perpendicular. (a) Light that slows down 
when moving from air to glass refracts 
toward the perpendicular. (b) Light that 
speeds up when moving from glass to air 
refracts away from the perpendicular.

Sunlight 359
 
The impedance of empty space is high because there an electric fi eld has nothing to aid 
it in producing a magnetic fi eld. Inside most materials, however, the electric fi eld has help. 
The electric fi eld polarizes the material, which then helps to create the magnetic fi eld. 
Because of this assistance, the impedance of most materials is much less than that of empty 
space. Since air is almost empty space, the boundary between air and water is an impedance 
mismatch for light.
 
Passing through an impedance mismatch upsets the balance between a light wave’s 
electric and magnetic fi elds. To compensate for this imbalance, part of the incoming wave 
refl ects off the boundary. Thus some sunlight refl ects each time it enters or leaves a water 
droplet. The fraction of light that refl ects depends on the severity of the impedance mis-
match, but it is typically 4% between air and most transparent materials, including water 
(for refl ection from sand, see 2 ). In contrast, metals polarize so easily that their imped-
ances are essentially zero and they refl ect light almost perfectly.
 
There is one more important point about sunlight’s passage through water: red light 
travels about 1% faster through water than violet light does. That’s because higher-frequency 
violet light polarizes the water molecules a little more easily than lower-frequency red light 
does and that increased polarization slows down the violet light. This frequency depen-
dence of light’s speed in a material is dispersion. Dispersion affects refraction. The more 
light slows as it enters a raindrop, the more it bends at the boundary. Since violet light 
slows more than red light, violet light also bends more and the different colors of sunlight 
follow somewhat different paths through the raindrop.
 
A rainbow is created when raindrops separate sunlight according to color (Fig. 13.1.8). 
To see the rainbow, you stand with the sun at your back and look up at the sky. When sun-
light hits the raindrops, they redirect some of that light back toward you. Since each rain-
drop redirects light only in a narrow range of angles, you can’t see light from every rain-
drop. Only the raindrops in a narrow arc of the sky redirect visible light toward you. This 
arc appears brightly colored because raindrops at the inner edge of the arc send violet light 
toward you while raindrops at the outer edge of the arc send red light toward you. In 
between, you see all the colors of the rainbow.
 
Figure 13.1.9 shows how a raindrop redirects different colors of light in different 
directions. Although there are many possible paths light can take through the raindrop, this 
path is the one that produces rainbows. Sunlight enters near the top of the raindrop and 
bends inward. Violet light bends more than red light, so the sunlight begins to separate 
according to color. Some sunlight is also refl ected from the raindrop but doesn’t contribute 
to rainbows.
 
When the light inside the raindrop strikes the back surface, most of it leaves the drop and 
is lost. A small fraction of the light refl ects from that surface, however, and continues to travel 
2  Sand appears white 
because it redirects 
sunlight in all directions. 
One explanation for this 
effect is that the sand 
grains act as tiny antennas 
that respond to and reemit 
light’s electromagnetic 
waves. A second explana-
tion is that the sand grains 
present the sunlight with 
thousands of air-sand 
boundaries from which to 
refl ect. However, both 
explanations are descrip-
tions of exactly the same 
physics—the charged 
particles in the sand grains 
are electrically polarized 
by the waves passing 
through them. These 
waves are randomly 
redirected without being 
absorbed, and they give 
the sand its white 
appearance.
Fig. 13.1.8 A 
rainbow forms when 
water droplets refl ect 
sunlight back toward 
your eyes. Because the 
different wavelengths 
of light follow slightly 
different paths, we see 
the different colors 
coming from slightly 
different directions 
and observe bands of 
color.
© Hollandse Hoogte/Redux Pictures
Sunlight
Violet light
Red light
Fig. 13.1.9 As sunlight 
passes through spherical 
raindrops, its colors 
separate. Violet light bends 
more at each air-water 
boundary than does red 
light, and the two emerge 
from the raindrops heading 
in different directions. 
You see red light coming 
toward you from the upper 
raindrops and violet light 
from the lower raindrops.

360 
CHAPTER 13 Light
through the raindrop. When this light reaches the raindrop’s front surface, most of it leaves 
the drop. Violet light bends more strongly than red light as they reenter the air, so the different 
colors of light leave the drop heading in different directions. Since violet light is redirected 
more upward than red light, you see violet light coming toward you from the lower raindrops. 
Red light is redirected more downward so you see it coming toward you from the upper rain-
drops. Thus the upper arc of the rainbow is red, while the lower arc is violet.
Check Your Understanding #3: The Look of Diamonds
A diamond pendant sparkles with color when you look at it in sunlight. From where do the colors 
come?
Answer: A diamond exhibits dispersion, so different frequencies of sunlight follow somewhat differ-
ent paths through the diamond’s polished facets. The different colors of sunlight emerge from the 
diamond traveling in slightly different directions, so you can see them individually.
Why: One of the delightful aspects of a diamond is its strong dispersion. It bends violet light much 
more than red light, so sunlight is separated into its different colors as it passes through the stone. 
Cleverly cut facets help to isolate the individual colors.
Soap Bubbles
Soap bubbles also separate sunlight into its various colors (Fig. 13.1.10), but they use 
another wave phenomenon—interference. We encountered interference of mechanical 
waves in Section 9.3 when we studied wave beat at the seashore and interference of elec-
tromagnetic waves in Section 12.2 when we considered the unevenness of microwave 
cooking. Now we’ll look at interference in another type of electromagnetic wave, light.
 
Light’s interference effects stem from the summing or superposition of its electromag-
netic waves. When several light waves overlap at a particular location, their electric fi elds 
sum together and so do their magnetic fi elds. If their individual fi elds all point in the same 
direction, the waves experience constructive interference—they sum together in a mutually 
assisting way and the light intensity at that location is enhanced (Fig. 13.1.11a). However, 
when their individual fi elds point in opposing directions, the waves experience destructive 
interference—they sum together in a canceling way and the light intensity at that location 
is reduced (Fig. 13.1.11b).
 
Both forms of interference occur when sunlight refl ects from the outer skin of a soap 
bubble. As each wave of sunlight hits that thin fi lm of soapy water, the fi lm’s front surface 
refl ects about 4% of the wave and the fi lm’s back surface refl ects another 4% (Fig. 13.1.12). 
Since both refl ections travel in the same direction, the refl ected light that you see reaches 
your eyes via two different paths, one from each refl ection. If these two waves arrive in 
phase—that is, with their electric fi elds synchronized and assisting one another—you see 
the particularly bright refl ection of constructive interference. If the two waves arrive out of 
Fig. 13.1.10 Light refl ected by the front 
and back surfaces of this soap fi lm interferes 
with itself and gives the fi lm its colorful 
appearance. Since the colors are determined 
by fi lm thickness and since the fi lm’s 
thickness increases in the downward direction, 
the fi lm displays horizontal bands of color.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Sunlight 361
phase—with their electric fi elds canceling one another—you see the particularly dim 
refl ection of destructive interference.
 
Whether you see constructive or destructive interference depends on the wavelength of 
the sunlight. The back-surface refl ection has to travel twice through the soap fi lm, so it’s 
delayed relative to the front-surface refl ection. If the delay is just long enough for the wave 
to complete an integral number of cycles, then the two refl ected waves are in phase with 
one another as they head toward your eye and you see a bright refl ection. If the delay allows 
the back-surface refl ection to complete an extra half cycle, then the two refl ected waves are 
out of phase with one another and you see a dim refl ection.
 
Sunlight contains many different wavelengths of light, and these wavelengths behave 
differently during the refl ection process. You see a colored refl ection, consisting mainly of 
those wavelengths of light that experience constructive interference. Because the delay 
experienced by the back-surface refl ection depends on the thickness of the soap fi lm, you 
can actually determine the fi lm’s thickness by studying its colors.
Transmitter
Receiver
Constructive interference
Destructive interference
Transmitter
Transmitter
Receiver
Transmitter
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13.1.11 (a) When waves from two separate paths 
arrive in phase at the receiver, constructive interference 
produces a particularly large effect on the receiver. 
(b) When waves arrive out of phase, destructive interference 
produces a particularly weak effect on the receiver.
Red light wave
in sunlight
Soap film
Top reflection
Bottom reflection
Blue light wave
in sunlight
Soap film
Top reflection
Bottom reflection
(b) Destructive intereference
(a) Constructive intereference
Fig. 13.1.12 Sunlight partially 
refl ects from both the top and bottom 
surfaces of a soap fi lm, but the 
bottom-surface refl ection is delayed 
relative to the top-surface refl ection. 
Phase differences between those two 
partial refl ections lead to interference 
effects when they both enter your eye. 
For this soap fi lm and viewing angle, 
(a) a red light wave’s refl ections enter 
your eye in phase and experience 
constructive interference, so you see 
the red light. However, (b) a blue light 
wave’s refl ections enter your eye out 
of phase and experience destructive 
interference, so you see no blue light.

362 
CHAPTER 13 Light
Sunlight and Polarizing Sunglasses
All sunglasses absorb some of the sunlight passing through them, but the best ones absorb 
horizontally polarized light much more strongly than vertically polarized light. These 
polarizing sunglasses dramatically reduce glare by eliminating most of the light refl ected 
from horizontal surfaces.
 
When light strikes a transparent surface at right angles, about 4% of that light is 
refl ected, regardless of its polarization. When light strikes a horizontal surface at a shallow 
angle, however, its polarization profoundly affects its refl ection. A light wave that has a 
horizontal electric fi eld (essentially horizontally polarized light) refl ects strongly from the 
surface (Fig. 13.1.13a). In contrast, a light wave that has a horizontal magnetic fi eld (essen-
tially vertically polarized light) barely refl ects at all (Fig. 13.1.13b).
 
When the wave’s electric fi eld is horizontal, it pushes electric charges back and forth 
along a horizontal surface. Charges shift relatively easily in that direction, so the surface 
polarizes well and refl ects the wave strongly. The shallower the angle between the surface 
and the incident light wave, the larger the surface’s polarization and the greater the refl ec-
tion. Horizontally polarized light thus refl ects strongly from horizontal surfaces and its 
refl ection increases as its angle to the surface becomes shallower.
 
When the wave’s electric fi eld is vertical or nearly vertical, it pushes electric charges 
in and out of a horizontal surface. Since the charges can’t leave the surface, the surface 
Check Your Understanding #4: A Slick-Looking Oil Slick
A thin layer of oil or gasoline fl oating on water appears brightly colored in sunlight. From where do 
these colors come?
Answer: They come from interferences between light refl ected by the top and bottom surfaces of the 
fl oating layer of oil.
Why: A thin fi lm of almost anything on water will appear colored because of interference. Part of each 
light wave striking the fi lm refl ects from the top surface, and part refl ects from the bottom surface. 
These two refl ected waves interfere with one another in a wavelength-dependent manner and make the 
layer appear brightly colored. Different colors correspond to different thicknesses of the thin fi lms.
Glossy surface
Horizontal
electric field
Reflected wave
(strong)
Transmitted wave
(weak)
Incident wave
Horizontal
magnetic field
Reflected wave
(weak or zero)
Incident wave
Transmitted wave
(strong or 100%)
Glossy surface
(b)
(a)
Fig. 13.1.13
When a light wave 
heading toward you encounters a 
glossy horizontal surface at a shallow 
angle, the strength of its partial 
refl ection depends on its polarization. 
(a) When the incident wave’s electric 
fi eld is horizontal, the refl ection 
is strong. (b) When the incident 
wave’s magnetic fi eld is horizontal, 
the refl ection is weak. This wave is 
incident at precisely Brewster’s angle, 
so there is zero refl ection and all of 
the wave enters the glossy surface.

Discharge Lamps 363
polarizes ineffectually and refl ects the wave weakly. The polarization and refl ection become 
even weaker as the angle becomes shallower until, at Brewster’s angle, the wave doesn’t 
refl ect at all. Vertically polarized light thus refl ects weakly from horizontal surfaces and 
that refl ection drops to zero at Brewster’s angle. For angles shallower than Brewster’s 
angle, however, the refl ection becomes stronger as the angle becomes shallower.
 
Although direct sunlight is an even mixture of vertically and horizontally polarized 
waves, the shallow-angle glare refl ecting from the horizontal surfaces of water, pavement, 
or painted car hoods is mostly horizontally polarized waves. Polarizing sunglasses are 
designed to absorb horizontally polarized light, which is why they are so effective at reduc-
ing glare (Fig. 13.1.14).
Fig. 13.1.14 (a) The horizontal surface of water refl ects light strongly at shallow angles, making it 
diffi cult to see the coins on the bottom of this dish. (b) When you look through a fi lter that blocks 
horizontally polarized light, the main component of glare from horizontal surfaces, you can see the 
coins lying beneath the water’s surface.
(a)
(b)
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Check Your Understanding #5: Looking into the Refl ecting Pool
When you look into a pool of water, you see mostly a refl ection of the sky. When you wear polarizing 
sunglasses, however, you see into the water clearly. Explain.
Answer: Most of the light that refl ects from the water is horizontally polarized. The sunglasses block 
horizontally polarized light, so you see mostly light from within the pool of water.
Why: Sunlight refl ecting from a horizontal surface is mostly horizontally polarized waves. By blocking 
horizontally polarized light, polarizing sunglasses virtually eliminate this refl ected light, and you see 
mostly light from below the surface. If you turn the sunglasses sideways, they will block the wrong 
polarization of light and you will see mostly the refl ected light. Try it.
SECTION 13.2
Energy effi ciency is crucial to modern lighting. Incandescent 
lamps provide pleasant, warm illumination, but most of the 
power they consume is wasted as invisible infrared light. Fluo-
rescent and other gas discharge lamps produce far more visible 
light with the same amount of electric power and now domi-
nate offi ce, industrial, and street lighting. In this section we’ll 
explore several types of discharge lamps—fl uorescent, mercury 
vapor, sodium vapor, and metal-halide lamps—that all share a 
common theme: current passing through a gas.
Questions to Think About: Why are incandescent lightbulbs 
being phased out? Why do different fl uorescent lamps often 
Discharge Lamps
White 
reﬂector
Heated 
electrodes
Mercury 
vapor
Phosphor 
coating
Ballast
Fluorescent
lamp tubes

364 
CHAPTER 13 Light
the colors of various lamps, including several different fl uores-
cent lamps. Are their lights identical?
 
Both fl uorescent and neon lamps start almost immediately—
but watch how long it takes a streetlight to start. Fluores-
cent and neon lamps remain cool during operation, but the 
mercury, sodium, and metal-halide lamps used in street 
lighting get hot. Watch a streetlight warm up. Does its color 
change? If the streetlight loses power even for a moment, it 
must wait about 5 minutes before it can start again. Why 
must it wait?
have slightly different colors? Why is the light from a neon sign 
red? Why shouldn’t you turn a fl uorescent lamp on and off 
frequently? Why are streetlights so dim when they fi rst turn 
on? Why are some highway lights orange?
Experiments to Do: Examine the discharge lamps around you, 
particularly the white fl uorescent tube lamps. Where do their 
lights originate? In a fl uorescent lamp, light comes from the 
white phosphor coating on the tube’s inner surface. What 
about in a neon lamp or a mercury vapor streetlight? Compare 
How We See Light and Color
Before examining discharge lamps, let’s look at how our eyes recognize color. It might 
seem that they actually measure the wavelengths of light, but that’s not the case. Instead, 
our retinas contain three groups of light-sensing cone cells that respond to three different 
ranges of wavelengths. One group of cone cells responds to light near 600 nm and lets us 
see red, another responds to light near 550 nm and lets us see green, and a third responds 
to light near 450 nm and lets us see blue (Fig. 13.2.1). These cone cells are most abundant 
at the center of our vision. Our retinas also contain rod cells, which are more light-sensitive 
than cone cells, but rod cells can’t distinguish color. They are most abundant in our periph-
eral vision and provide us with night vision.
 
Having only three types of color-sensing cells doesn’t limit us to seeing just three 
colors. We perceive other colors whenever two or more types of cone cells are stimulated 
at once. Each type of cell reports the amount of light it detects, and our brains interpret the 
overall response as a particular color.
 
Although light of a certain wavelength will stimulate all three types of cone cells 
simultaneously, the cells don’t respond equally. If the wavelength is 680 nm, the red cone 
cells will respond much more strongly than the green or blue cells. Because of this strong 
red response, we see the light as red.
 
Other wavelengths of light stimulate the three types of cells somewhat more 
evenly. Light with a wavelength of 580 nm is in between red and green light. Both the 
red-sensitive and the green-sensitive cone cells respond about equally to this light, and 
we see it as yellow.
 
We also see yellow when looking at an equal mixture of 640-nm light (red) and 525-nm 
light (green). The 640-nm light stimulates the red-sensitive cone cells and the 525-nm light 
stimulates the green-sensitive ones. Even though there is no 580-nm light entering our 
eyes, we see the same yellow color as before.
 
In fact, mixtures of red, green, and blue light can make us see virtually any color. For 
that reason, these three are called the primary colors of light or the primary additive 
700
600
500
400
Infrared
Red
Orange
Yellow
Green
Blue
Indigo
Violet
Ultraviolet
Red
Green
Blue
Pure light colors:
Cone cell sensitivity:
Wavelength (nanometers)
Fig. 13.2.1 The 
red-sensitive cells in 
our retina detect light 
near 600 nm, the 
green-sensitive cells 
near 550 nm, and the 
blue-sensitive cells 
near 450 nm. The 
red-sensitive cells also 
respond near 440 nm, 
so that we see violet.

Discharge Lamps 365
colors (Fig. 13.2.2a). Color televisions and computer screens use tiny sources of red, green, 
and blue light to produce their full-color images.
 
Although the idea of mixing primary colors also applies to paints, inks, and pigments, 
the palette is different. The primary colors of pigment or the primary subtractive colors 
are cyan, magenta, and yellow (Fig. 13.2.2b). When you apply one of these primary pig-
ments to a white surface, it absorbs or subtracts one of the primary colors of light from the 
surface’s refl ection. Cyan subtracts the refl ection of red, magenta subtracts the refl ection 
of green, and yellow subtracts the refl ection of blue. Color printers, photographs, maga-
zines, and books use tiny patches of cyan, magenta, and yellow pigments to produce their 
full-color images.
(a) Additive colors (light)
(b) Subtractive colors (pigment)
Red
Green
Blue
Cyan
Magenta
Yellow
Fig. 13.2.2 (a) The 
primary colors of light or 
additive colors, red, green, 
and blue, can be combined 
to form any colors of light. 
(b) The primary colors of 
pigment or subtractive 
colors, cyan, magenta, 
and yellow, subtract 
red, green, and blue, 
respectively, from refl ected 
or transmitted light and 
can be combined to form 
any colors of pigment.
More Light, Less Heat: Gas Discharges
When all three of our color-sensing cells respond about equally, we see white light. That’s 
because our vision evolved under a single incandescent light source—the sun. Sunlight 
stimulates the red-, green-, and blue-sensitive cells in our eyes about evenly, so any other 
source of “white light” must do the same.
 
Most of the twentieth century’s white-light illumination came from incandescent light-
bulbs, but that won’t be true for the twenty-fi rst century. Although an incandescent light-
bulb makes a good attempt at producing white light, it suffers from two serious drawbacks. 
First, because its fi lament can’t reach the temperature of the sun’s surface (5800 K), its 
blackbody spectrum contains too little blue light and appears redder than sunlight. Second, 
because most of its electromagnetic radiation is invisible infrared light, it doesn’t use 
energy effi ciently to produce visible light. It produces only about 15 lumens per watt, 
where the lumen is a standard measure of usable illumination. (For comparison, the dis-
charge lamps that we’re about to discuss can easily exceed 100 lumens per watt.)
 
Fortunately, modern science has given us some alternative sources of light, sources 
that don’t use heat and thermal radiation to produce their light. Among these sources are 
gas discharge lamps, which emit light when electric currents pass through their gases. 
Some discharge lamps are colored, and others do excellent jobs of producing white light. 
Also, many of them are far more energy effi cient at producing visible light than are incan-
descent lightbulbs.
 
To get an understanding of gas discharges and the lights they emit, let’s start with one 
of the simplest examples, a neon sign tube. Although neon’s rich red glow isn’t suitable for 
lighting and isn’t particularly energy effi cient, it’s great for signs and also relatively easy to 
understand.
 
A neon sign tube is a sealed glass tube that contains pure neon gas at a density less than 
1% that of the atmosphere outside the tube. It has metal electrodes at each end so that elec-
tric current can enter the gas through one electrode and leave through the other. Of course, 
gases are normally electrical insulators, and neon is no exception. To transform the tube’s 
neon into a conductor, a large voltage difference is applied between its two electrodes. As 
we saw in Section 10.2, a gas breaks down when exposed to large voltage gradients; its few 
naturally occurring ions initiate a cascade of ionizing collisions that quickly fi ll the gas 
with charged particles and render it conducting.
Check Your Understanding #1: Mixed Up Light
If you look at a mixture of 70% red light and 30% green light, what color will you see?
Answer: You will see orange.
Why: Your red-, green-, and blue-sensitive cone cells have the same response to this light mixture as 
they would have to pure 600-nm light. Such light appears orange, so you see orange when viewing 
the mixture.

366 
CHAPTER 13 Light
 
Whereas ordinary air breaks down at a voltage gradient of about 30,000 V/cm, 
low-density neon breaks down at a much lower voltage gradient. That’s because 
in a low-density gas, charged particles can travel farther and accumulate more 
kinetic energy before each collision. When about 10,000 V is applied between 
the electrodes of a neon sign tube, the gas breaks down and begins to emit its 
familiar red glow.
 
The lamp is then experiencing a discharge; that is, current is fl owing through the neon 
gas. This current consists mostly of electrons, fl owing from the tube’s negatively charged 
electrode to its positively charged electrode (Fig. 13.2.3). Although these electrons collide 
frequently with neon atoms, they have so little mass that they usually just bounce off the 
atoms without losing much energy. Like Ping-Pong balls rebounding from elephants, the 
electrons do most of the bouncing and then continue on their way.
 
Every so often, however, an electron will collide with a neon atom and something 
different will happen; the neon atom will rearrange internally and absorb part of the elec-
tron’s kinetic energy. The electron will rebound with less energy than it had before, and 
the neon atom will go on to emit light, probably red light. To understand why that light 
is probably red, however, we’ll have to look at quantum physics and the structure of the 
neon atom.
Negative
electrode
Neon gas
Positive
electrode
Electrons
Neon ions
Fig. 13.2.3 A neon 
sign tube sends electrons 
through low-pressure 
neon gas. These electrons 
collide with neon atoms, 
transferring energy to 
them and causing them 
to emit primarily red 
light. Positively charged 
neon ions, created by 
particularly energetic 
collisions, keep the 
electrons from repelling 
one another to the walls of 
the tube.
Check Your Understanding #2: Making Whiter Light
Some photographic lamps simulate sunlight by placing a blue fi lter in front of an incandescent bulb. 
This fi lter absorbs some of the red light so that the lamp appears whiter. Does this fi lter increase or 
decrease the lamp’s energy effi ciency?
Answer: It decreases the lamp’s energy effi ciency.
Why: Although the bluish fi lter changes the spectrum of wavelengths so that the amount of blue light 
leaving the lamp increases relative to the red light, it does this by absorbing some of the red light. 
The fi lter gets hot, and less electric power used by the bulb leaves as visible light.
Particles, Waves, and Quantum Physics
As quantum physics gradually revealed itself to the scientists of the early twentieth century, 
they found the experience both exhilarating and disorienting. Prior to that era, the physical 
world seemed to divide neatly into particles and waves: scientists viewed an electron only 
as a particle and light only as a wave. However, one of the most basic observations of quan-
tum physics, and the one most relevant to our present topic, is that everything has both 
particle and wave characteristics. Put simply, everything begins and ends as a particle, but 
travels as a wave.
 
For an electron, the quantum surprise is that it travels as a wave. For light, the quantum 
surprise is that it is emitted and absorbed as a particle. Called the wave-particle duality, 
this observation that everything in nature has both particle and wave characteristics has left 
few areas of physics unaffected. But although quantum physics is now a basic and essential 
part of nearly all modern physics research, its effects are subtle and often nonintuitive. 
They are most apparent in the microscopic world and are visible to us only indirectly. No 
wonder they seem so strange.
 
We’ll encounter quantum physics and its effects throughout the remainder of this 
book. It fi gures prominently in the light emitted by atoms, the electronic properties of semi-
conductors, the operation of lasers, and the radioactive decays that release nuclear energy. 
Our examination of atoms will acquaint us with the wave nature of electrons and show us 
how the wave phenomena that we studied in Chapter 9 reappear in quantum physics. In 
discharge lamps, LEDs, and lasers, we’ll explore the particle nature of light and see how 
the collision effects we studied in Chapters 1–3 are infl uenced by quantum physics. In our 
examination of radioactivity, we’ll uncover particle and wave effects that we would not 

Discharge Lamps 367
even have anticipated without quantum physics. With each encounter, we’ll take another 
small bite of the quantum apple—looking at how quantum effects manifest themselves in 
our everyday world.
Check Your Understanding #3: Wavy Atoms
Do atoms ever exhibit wave properties?
Answer: They certainly do.
Why: Like everything else in nature, atoms have both particle and wave properties. Atoms travel as 
waves and have recently been shown to exhibit many of the wave effects we studied in Chapter 9, 
including refraction, refl ection, and interference.
Electron Standing Waves in Atoms: Orbitals
According to the wave-particle duality, electrons have both particle and wave characteris-
tics. Like all objects in our universe, electrons travel as waves when they move from place 
to place, and it’s only when you go looking for them that you fi nd them as particles at 
particular locations (see 3 ). When they reside in atoms and you leave them alone, elec-
trons are best understood as waves.
 
In a nonquantum world, an electron would exist only as a particle and would be able 
to move at any speed along any path, even in an atom. However, ours is a quantum world 
and the electron does not travel as a particle at all; it travels as a wave. The electron is 
therefore constrained by the rules that govern waves, some of which we encountered in 
Chapter 9. Like the confi ned mechanical waves on a violin string, drumhead, or basin of 
water, the confi ned electron waves in an atom have limited possibilities.
 
We observed in Chapter 9 that the most basic mechanical waves on a limited object are 
all standing waves—waves that effectively oscillate in place. This rule also applies to quan-
tum waves in limited objects. An atom is a limited object, and the electrons in an atom are 
best understood as standing waves in that atom. Each electron wave extends across the 
atom and has such wave characteristics as wavelength and frequency.
 
Unlike a vibrating string or drumhead, however, the electron is a three-dimensional 
wave and its oscillation is internal. Instead of vibrating back and forth, each point of the 
wave cycles invisibly around a quantum phase. Since that quantum phase is rather myste-
rious, you can think of an electron standing wave as a fuzzy cloud in which each point 
cycles endlessly through a series of colors: red, yellow, green, blue, red, yellow, and so on 
(Fig. 13.2.4). All those points cycle at the same quantum frequency, but they’re not neces-
sarily the same color at the same time. When the electron is in a three-dimensional standing 
wave, the electron cloud’s spatial structure is constant as the wave oscillates internally and 
the electron exhibits no motion at all.
 
This wave character has profound effects on the electronic structure of atoms. 
Most signifi cantly, it limits what electrons can do in those atoms. As we saw in Section 
9.2, a violin string’s one-dimensional standing waves consist only of its fundamental 
mode (Fig. 9.2.3) and its harmonic modes (Fig. 9.2.5), and a drumhead’s two-dimensional 
standing waves consist only of its fundamental mode and overtones (Fig. 9.2.11). Sim-
ilarly, an electron’s three-dimensional standing waves in an atom consist only of a 
fundamental mode (Fig. 13.2.4a) and overtone modes (Figs. 13.2.4b–d). Although 
there are a great many overtone modes available to the electron, their possibilities are 
nonetheless limited.
 
The electron standing waves in atoms are known as orbitals—a nod to the orbits that 
electrons would make around atomic nuclei if this were a nonquantum world. Electrons in 
solids are less focused on specifi c atomic nuclei, so the standing waves in solids are instead 
called levels—a recognition that each standing wave has an amount, or level, of energy 
associated with it. We’ll see when we examine LEDs in Section 13.3 that each solid’s 
3  In 1927, American 
physicists Clinton Joseph 
Davisson (1881–1958) 
and Lester H. Germer 
(1896–1972) showed that 
electrons travel as waves 
by observing interference 
effects when electrons 
were refl ected from 
different atomic layers in 
a crystal of nickel metal. 
When the various electron 
waves arrived at a detector 
in phase, the detector 
found many electrons. 
When the waves arrived 
out of phase, the detector 
found few electrons. Their 
work was aided by a 
fortuitous accident in 
which air entered the 
experiment’s glass 
vacuum tube. While 
carefully eliminating 
oxygen from their nickel 
sample after that leak, 
they managed to perfect 
its crystalline structure, 
making it possible to 
observe the interferences.

368 
CHAPTER 13 Light
limited level choices determine whether it’s a conductor, an insulator, or a semiconductor—
the basis for modern electronics. In the present section, we’ll see that an atom’s limited 
orbital choices determine the colors of light it can emit or absorb and therefore the charac-
teristics of most discharge lamps.
(a) 1s orbital (fundamental mode)
(c) 2p orbital (overtone mode)
(d) 3d orbital (overtone mode)
(b) 2s orbital (overtone mode)
1 node surface (a hollow sphere)
1 node surface (a plane)
2 node surfaces (planes)
Time
Atomic
nucleus
Electron
standing wave
Fig. 13.2.4 In an atom, an electron normally exists in a three-dimensional quantum standing wave 
or orbital. As time passes, that wave undergoes an internal oscillation, depicted here as the color 
sequence red, yellow, green, blue, and so on. (a) The 1s orbital is the electron’s fundamental mode in 
an atom. It has the lowest energy and slowest quantum frequency of all the atom’s electron modes. 
(b) The 2s orbital is an overtone mode with somewhat more energy and a faster quantum frequency 
than the 1s orbital. It has one node surface—a hollow sphere. (c) One of three possible 2p orbitals; 
these are overtone modes that have energies and quantum frequencies similar to those of the 2s 
orbital. Each 2p orbital has one node surface—a plane. (d) One of fi ve possible 3d orbitals; these are 
overtone modes with still greater energies and faster quantum frequencies. Each 3d orbital has two 
node surfaces—both are planes.
Check Your Understanding #4: Going Nowhere Fast
When an electron is in an atomic orbital, how often does it shift from one side of the atom to the 
other?
Answer: An electron in an atomic orbital doesn’t move at all, so it never shifts from one side of the 
atom to the other.
Why: An atomic orbital is an electron standing wave that is spread across the atom. Although that 
wave is oscillating internally, it makes no spatial motion at all and therefore doesn’t shift from one 
place to another. The electron wave simply oscillates in place.

Discharge Lamps 369
Assembling Atoms
Another remarkable observation of quantum physics is that every indistinguishable elec-
tron must have its own orbital or level, its own unique quantum wave. This law is called the 
Pauli exclusion principle, after its discoverer, Wolfgang Pauli 4 . The principle applies to 
a whole class of subatomic particles, the Fermi particles, that includes all the basic con-
stituents of matter: electrons, protons, and neutrons. For reasons that lie deep in what is 
known as quantum fi eld theory, two indistinguishable Fermi particles can never be in the 
same quantum wave.
4  Austrian physicist 
Wolfgang Pauli (1900–
1958) rose to fame at 21 
by writing an article on 
relativity that impressed 
even Einstein. He went on 
to discover the exclusion 
principle, a fundamental 
part of quantum theory. 
He was renowned for his 
intensely critical attitude 
toward new ideas, 
considering them all 
“rubbish” until convinced 
otherwise. Pauli was also 
quite interested in 
psychology, correspond-
ing with Carl Gustav Jung 
and writing a number of 
articles on the subject.
THE PAULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE
No two indistinguishable Fermi particles ever occupy the same quantum wave.
 
However, a peculiar property of electrons allows two of them to share an orbital or 
level. Electrons have two possible internal states, usually called spin-up and spin-down. 
Because a spin-up electron is distinguishable from a spin-down electron, one spin-up elec-
tron and one spin-down electron can share a single orbital or level. However, two electrons 
is the absolute maximum allowed by quantum physics and the Pauli exclusion principle.
 
Despite being a wave, an electron in an orbital has a specifi c total energy—the sum of 
its kinetic and potential energies. That energy, which depends on the shape and structure of 
the electron wave, also determines the wave’s oscillation frequency. According to quantum 
physics, the electron’s total energy and the oscillation frequency of its wave are exactly 
proportional to one another; a low-energy electron oscillates slowly, while a high-energy 
electron oscillates quickly. Each orbital, each quantum standing wave in an atom, has a 
specifi c frequency and energy. The electron’s fundamental mode (the 1s orbital, Fig. 13.2.4a) 
has the lowest frequency and energy, while the overtone modes have progressively higher 
frequencies and energies (Figs. 13.2.4b–d).
 
Although these orbitals are three-dimensional standing waves, they resemble the 
two-dimensional standing waves of the drumhead shown in Fig. 9.2.9. Like the drumhead’s 
vibrational modes, the orbitals are distinguished from one another by their patterns of 
nodes—surfaces along which the electron wave has no amplitude. An electron’s fundamen-
tal mode has no nodes (Fig. 13.2.4a) and has the lowest quantum frequency. Each of the 
overtone modes, however, has at least one node (Figs. 13.2.4b–d). In general, the more 
nodes an orbital has, the greater its quantum frequency.
 
Physicists have come to view these standing waves as abstract placeholders, indepen-
dent of the electrons that may or may not exhibit them at a given moment. The orbitals are 
then analogous to seats in an stadium, each of which may or may not be occupied by elec-
trons. Instead of saying that the electron exhibits a particular standing wave or orbital, we 
often say that the orbital is occupied by an electron.
 
At suffi ciently low temperature, electrons occupy those orbitals that have the least 
energy and fi ll the atom’s orbitals from lowest energy on up. In accordance with the Pauli 
exclusion principle, each orbital accommodates two electrons, one spin-up and one spin-
down, until all the atom’s electrons have been placed. The chemical nature of a particular 
atom, and its location in the periodic table of the elements (Fig. 13.2.5), is determined by 
how many electrons it has and how those electrons fi ll the available orbitals. Atoms are 
electrically neutral, so the number of negatively charged electrons in an atom is the same 
as the number of positively charged protons in its nucleus, its atomic number.
 
There are patterns to orbitals; orbitals may share the same number of nodes or be 
rotated versions of one another. These patterns among orbitals give rise to the shells, that 
is, groups of orbitals that have similar energies and tend to fi ll with electrons at about the 
same time. Although the orbital patterns and shells are complicated by the fact that charged 

370 
CHAPTER 13 Light
electrons infl uence one another and distort one another’s standing waves, many atomic 
properties are determined simply by which orbitals are occupied by an atom’s electrons.
 
The atomic orbitals are identifi ed primarily by an integer and a letter, both of which 
relate to their node patterns (Fig. 13.2.4). The integer (1, 2, 3,…) is one more than the 
number of node surfaces in the orbital (0, 1, 2,…) and the letter (s, p, d, f, g, h,…) indicates 
how many of those node surfaces pass through the atom’s center (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,…). 
Although s orbitals appear one at a time, p orbitals appear in groups of three, d orbitals in 
groups of fi ve, f orbitals in groups of seven, and so on.
H
Li Be
He
B
C
N
O
F Ne
Na Mg
Al Si
P
S
Cl Ar
K Ca Sc Ti
V
Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
Rb Sr
Y
Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te
I
Xe
Cs Ba
Hf Ta W Re Os Ir
Pt Au Hg Tl Pb Bi Po At Rn
Fr Ra
Lu
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
56
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
88
103
3
11
19
37
55
87
Lr
La
Ac
57
89
104
Rf
105
Db
106
Sg
107
Bh
108
Hs
109
Mt
110
Ds
111
Rg
Alkali Metals: Highly reactive, tend to donate lone s electron so as to empty outer shell
Alkaline Earth Metals: Moderately reactive, tend to donate s electrons
Transition Metals: Common metals with similar properties, differ only in numbers of d electrons 
Poor metals: Additional metals with differing properties
Metaloids: Intermediate between metals and nonmetals
Non-metals: Semiconductors and insulators
Halogens: Highly reactive, tend to steal one p electron so as to complete outer shell
Noble gases: Non-reactive gases with completed outer shells
Lanthanides: Moderately reactive metals, differ only in number of 4f electrons
Actinides: Moderately reactive metals, differ only in number of 5f electrons
Filling 1s orbital
Atomic number
Filling d orbitals
Filling p orbitals
Filling f orbitals
Filling s orbital
Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb
Th Pa U Np Pu AmCm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
Fig. 13.2.5 The periodic 
table of the elements is 
organized by the fi lling of 
electron orbitals. Major 
shells of orbitals fi ll with 
electrons from left to right. 
The number of electrons in 
a neutral atom is equal to 
its atomic number.
Check Your Understanding #5: Three’s a Crowd
Suppose that electrons had three different internal states: spin-up, spin-down, and spin-off. How 
would that change affect the way electrons arrange themselves in atoms?
Answer: Each orbital could then accommodate up to three electrons, so atoms would have fewer 
occupied orbitals.
Why: The Pauli exclusion principle prevents two indistinguishable electrons from occupying the same 
quantum wave. With three distinguishable electron states, each orbital could accommodate up to 
three electrons: a spin-up electron, a spin-down electron, and a spin-off electron. With more elec-
trons settling into the low-energy orbitals, atoms would have fewer occupied orbitals and quite differ-
ent behaviors.

Discharge Lamps 371
Neon’s Red Glow
A neon atom has 10 electrons, so it takes 5 orbitals to accommodate them. The fi rst two 
electrons go into the 1s orbital, the fundamental mode with zero nodes (Fig. 13.2.4a). Fill-
ing the 1s orbital completes the fi rst major shell. The next two electrons go into the 2s 
orbital, which has one node surface, a hollow sphere (Fig. 13.2.4b). Finally, neon’s last six 
electrons go into the three 2p orbitals, each of which has one node surface, a plane passing 
through the atom’s center (Fig. 13.2.4c). Since fi lling the 2s and 2p orbitals completes the 
second major shell, the neon atom (Ne in Fig. 13.2.5) is chemically inert. That is why neon 
exists as a gas of individual atoms!
 
An arrangement of occupied orbitals is called a state, and the state we have just 
described is neon’s ground state, the state with the lowest possible total energy. The neon 
atom has other states available, but they all involve additional energy. That’s where the 
discharge enters the picture. When a charged particle collides with a ground-state neon 
atom, there’s a chance that the collision will knock an electron out of its usual orbital into 
one of the empty orbitals. The neon atom will then be in an excited state—it will have 
extra energy.
 
Suppose, for example, that a collision has just shifted one of the neon atom’s elec-
trons from a 2p orbital to a 3p orbital. The atom will quickly undergo a series of state-
to-state transitions that eventually return it to its ground state. With each transition, the 
atom will drop to a lower energy state and emit a photon, a particle, or quanta, of light. 
The photon carries away the energy released in transitioning from the higher-energy 
state to the lower-energy state. In all likelihood, one of those transitions will shift the 
electron from its 3p orbital to the 3s orbital and produce a photon of red light, the red of 
a neon sign!
 
As long as the electron remains in the 3p orbital—a particular standing wave—it can’t 
emit an electromagnetic wave. That standing wave has a quantum oscillation; however, the 
oscillation is internal to the electron and neither the electron wave nor its charge has any 
overall motion. Since charge must accelerate to emit electromagnetic waves (see Section 
12.1), without such overall motion there can be no emission of electromagnetic waves.
 
When the 3p electron begins its transition to the empty 3s orbital, however, its quan-
tum wave starts to move. That wave is no longer one motionless standing wave but is, 
instead, composed of two partial waves: part 3p orbital and part 3s orbital. Because those 
two partial waves have different energies and different quantum frequencies, they experi-
ence time-dependent interference effects. The patterns of constructive and destructive 
interference change so that the overall electron wave moves rhythmically back and forth 
and the atom begins to emit an electromagnetic wave. By the time the transition is complete 
and the electron is entirely in the 3s orbital, the atom has emitted a photon of red light. Like 
an electron, light travels as a wave but behaves as a particle when you try to locate it. While 
it’s being emitted or absorbed by an atom, light exhibits its particle nature.
 
We’ve seen that hot objects emit light, a process called incandescence, but here the 
neon atom emits light without heat, a process called luminescence. That luminescence is 
the result of a radiative transition, a transition between quantum states in which a pho-
ton of light is emitted or absorbed. In this case, the radiative transition emits a photon 
that carries away the energy released when the excited neon atom’s 3p electron shifts 
into the empty 3s orbital. The difference in energy between those two states determines 
the photon energy, which in turn determines the frequency and color of the photon’s 
light wave.
 
According to quantum physics, a photon’s frequency is proportional to its energy. 
Specifi cally, the photon’s energy is equal to the frequency of its electromagnetic wave 
times a fundamental constant of nature known as the Planck constant. This relationship 
between energy and frequency can be written as a word equation:
 
energy = Planck constant · frequency, 
(13.2.1)

372 
CHAPTER 13 Light
in symbols:
E = h · υ,
and in everyday language:
Ultraviolet light and X-rays can injure your skin and tissues because each 
particle of high-frequency light carries a great deal of energy.
First used by German physicist Max Planck (1858–1947) in 1900 to explain the light spec-
trum of a hot object, the Planck constant has a measured value of 6.626 × 10–34 J ∙ s. Also, 
although we have just encountered the Planck constant and Eq. 13.2.1 in the context of 
light waves, it actually applies to all quantum waves. For example, the quantum frequency 
of an electron is related to its energy by Eq. 13.2.1.
 
The value of the Planck constant is so tiny that even a photon of 1015-Hz ultraviolet 
light has an energy of only 6.626 × 10–19 J. A typical beam of light thus contains so many 
photons that you can’t see that they’re arriving as particles. However, the energy in a single 
ultraviolet photon is substantial on a molecular scale. It can damage a molecule in your 
skin, contributing to a sunburn and inducing your skin to tan as a defensive response. 
X-rays have even higher frequencies, and their energetic photons can cause more severe 
molecular damage.
 
A neon atom can only emit photons corresponding to energy differences between two 
of its states, a constraint that severely limits its light spectrum. Neglecting nuclear issues 
that we’ll discuss in Chapter 15, all neon atoms are identical and emit the same character-
istic spectrum of light. The visible part of that spectrum is dominated by the warm red glow 
of photons emitted when electrons shift from 3p to 3s orbitals, which is why a neon sign 
glows red.
 
Since atoms of different elements have different numbers of electrons and different 
states, each emits its own unique spectrum of light after being excited. Copper atoms emit a 
blue-green spectrum, strontium atoms a deep red, and sodium a bright yellow-orange. Chem-
ists, astronomers, and manufacturers rely on those emission spectra for information and 
applications. As we will soon see, so do scientists and engineers working on illumination.
Check Your Understanding #6: Colorful Atoms
Many fi reworks involve brilliantly colored lights. How do the atoms in burning chemicals produce 
particular colors of light?
Answer: When fi re adds energy to an atom and shifts it to an excited state, it emits photons in order 
to return to its ground state. Each photon’s energy, frequency, and color are determined by energy 
differences between the atom’s states.
Why: Each color in fi reworks is produced by a particular type of atom. Some atoms, such as strontium 
and lithium, emit mostly red light as they return to their ground states. Barium atoms emit green 
light, copper atoms emit blue-green light, and sodium atoms emit yellow-orange light.
Check Your Figures #1: The Particles in a Radio Wave
How much energy is carried by a photon from a 1000-kHz AM radio station?
Answer: The photon carries 6.626 × 10–28 J.
Why: Since the Planck constant is 6.626 × 10–34 J · s and the frequency of the radio wave is 106 Hz 
or 106 cycles/second, the energy per photon is given by Eq. 13.2.1 as
energy = (6.626 × 10−34 J · s) · (106 cycles/s) = 6.626 × 10−28 J.
This energy is so small that it’s virtually impossible to observe the particulate character of radio 
waves.

Discharge Lamps 373
Fluorescent Lamps
If neon tubes appeal to you for illumination, you probably march to your own drummer. 
Most people opt for a somewhat better simulation of sunlight in their discharge lamps. As 
an energy-effi cient source of artifi cial sunlight, though, it’s hard to beat fl uorescent lamps.
 
At the heart of a fl uorescent lamp is a narrow glass tube fi lled with argon, neon, and/or 
krypton gases at about 0.3% of atmospheric density and pressure. The tube also contains a 
few drops of liquid mercury metal, some of which evaporates to form mercury vapor. About 
1 in every 1000 gas atoms inside the tube is a mercury atom, and it’s these mercury atoms 
that are responsible for the light.
 
Like a neon sign tube, a fl uorescent lamp uses a discharge in its gas to produce light. 
Although fl uorescent lamps occasionally use high voltages to initiate their discharges, most 
operate their discharges at household voltages and must rely on alternative techniques to 
render their gases conducting. These low-voltage lamps normally heat their electrodes so 
that thermal energy ejects electrons from their surfaces into the gas. Regardless of how the 
discharge is started, however, the result is current fl owing through the gas and the emission 
of light.
 
The fl uorescent lamp has a problem, though. While its mercury atoms emit most of the 
light in its discharge, that light is almost entirely ultraviolet. The fi nal radiative transition 
that returns each mercury atom to its ground state (6p → 6s) releases a large amount of 
energy and produces a photon with a wavelength of 254 nm. This light can’t go through the 
glass walls of the tube, and you couldn’t see it if it did. So the fl uorescent lamp converts it 
into visible light with the help of phosphor powder on the inside of the glass tube.
 
Phosphors are solids that luminesce—they emit light—when something transfers 
energy to them. Their behavior is similar to that of an atom; an energy transfer shifts the 
phosphor from its ground state to an excited state, and it then undergoes a series of transitions 
that return it to its ground state. Some of those transitions are radiative ones and emit light.
 
In a fl uorescent lamp, the phosphor is excited by ultraviolet light. This excitation or 
energy transfer is actually a radiative transition, but one in which the photon is absorbed by 
the phosphor; one of its electrons makes a transition from a lower-energy level to a higher-
energy level. During this absorption, the light’s electric fi eld pushes the electron’s wave 
back and forth rhythmically until it shifts to the new level. The photon disappears, and the 
phosphor receives its energy.
 
Once the phosphor is in an excited state, its electrons begin to make transitions back to 
their ground-state levels. Most of those transitions radiate visible light, the light that you 
see when you look at the lamp. However, some of the transitions radiate invisible infrared 
light or cause useless vibrations in the phosphor itself. Despite this wasted energy, phos-
phors are relatively effi cient at turning ultraviolet light into visible light, a process called 
fl uorescence.
 
The phosphors in a fl uorescent lamp are carefully selected and blended to fl uoresce 
over a broad range of visible wavelengths. That blending is necessary because, like atoms, 
each phosphor fl uoresces with a characteristic spectrum of light that’s determined by the 
energy differences between its levels. Several different phosphors are needed to produce 
the rainbow spectrum of white light. While some advertising and novelty lamps use brightly 
colored, unblended phosphors, fl uorescent lighting tubes use phosphor mixtures that imi-
tate white thermal radiation sources such as the sun or incandescent lightbulbs.
 
Because compact fl uorescent lamps typically produce 60 to 100 lumens per watt, 
about 4 to 6 times the luminous effi ciency of incandescent lightbulbs, you can save a great 
deal of energy by replacing incandescent lightbulbs with compact fl uorescents. In fact, 
incandescent lightbulbs are being phased out because of their poor energy ineffi ciency. To 
ease the acceptance of compact fl uorescent lamps by a reluctant public, scientists and engi-
neers have had to improve the quality of their light.
 
Early fl uorescent lamps used a phosphor blend known as “daylight,” which emitted far 
too much blue light and made everything look cold and medicinal. Daylight lamps rarely 

374 
CHAPTER 13 Light
found their way into homes. The fi rst improvement came with the developments of the 
“cool white” and “warm white” phosphor blends. Cool white resembled sunlight, and 
warm white resembled light from an incandescent lightbulb. However, even these improved 
lamps didn’t emit true white-light spectra—the blackbody spectra of the hot sun or the hot 
fi lament of an incandescent lightbulb. Objects looked a little off-color when illuminated by 
these lamps, so people were hesitant to use them in place of incandescent lightbulbs. Pho-
tographers and cinematographers wanting to capture true colors were particularly troubled 
by fl uorescent lighting of that era.
 
However, the latest generation of fl uorescent lamps uses phosphor blends that produce 
nearly perfect blackbody spectra. Many of those blends are even sold according to their 
color temperatures (see Section 7.3). For example, a 5100 K compact fl uorescent lamp 
emits light that is almost indistinguishable from the thermal radiation emitted by a black 
object heated to 5100 K. That 5100 K color temperature is approximately the color temper-
ature of sunlight averaged over a day. (Sunlight’s color temperature is affected by the atmo-
sphere and is highest at noon and lowest at dawn and dusk.) If you like the color of sunlight, 
use 5100 K compact fl uorescents.
 
People who prefer the warm look of incandescent lighting should choose compact 
fl uorescent lamps with a 2700 K color temperature. These lamps imitate the blackbody 
spectrum of a 2700 K tungsten fi lament almost perfectly. Because this 2700 K blackbody 
spectrum is richer in reds and oranges, it has a comforting, warm character to it. If you 
can’t make up your mind between 5100 K sunlight and 2700 K incandescent light, you can 
choose many color temperatures in between. Even photographers and cinematographers 
are now using fl uorescent lights, to the delight of actors and news anchors who used to 
sweat under the intense heat of powerful, energy-ineffi cient incandescent lamps.
Check Your Understanding #7: Sorry, We Forgot the Coating
If there were no phosphor coating on the inside of a fl uorescent tube, what would you see when the 
lamp operated?
Answer: You would see only a dim (blue-white) glow from the lamp because most of the light pro-
duced by the mercury discharge is invisible ultraviolet light.
Why: Without its phosphor coating, a fl uorescent tube produces very little visible light. The phos-
phor coating is needed to convert the discharge’s ultraviolet light into visible light. Even if you 
could see ultraviolet light, you would see very little of it leaving the tube. The tube is made of glass, 
which absorbs virtually all ultraviolet light with wavelengths shorter than 350 nm. Even in a normal 
fl uorescent tube, any ultraviolet not converted to visible light by the phosphors is absorbed by the 
glass tube.
A Few Practical Issues
A fl uorescent tube needs a substantial electric fi eld inside it to keep its electrons moving 
forward. Since this electric fi eld is proportional to the voltage drop through the tube, longer 
tubes need higher voltages. Power-line voltages (110 to 240 V) are appropriate for tubes up 
to 3 m (10 ft) in length, but the longer and frequently colored fl uorescent tubes used in 
artwork or advertising require much higher voltages.
 
To keep electrons from pushing one another into its walls, a fl uorescent tube must 
also contain positively charged mercury ions. The discharge naturally produces these 
ions during particularly energetic collisions. The result, a gaslike mixture of positively 
charged ions and negatively charged electrons, is called a plasma. A plasma is distinct 
from a gas because its charged particles exert forces on one another over considerable 
distances. All operating discharge lamps contain plasmas, including the neon sign that 
we discussed earlier.
 
Since a typical fl uorescent lamp must heat its electrodes red-hot to form its plasma, it 
runs current through fi laments at each end of its tubes (Fig. 13.2.6). Once the discharge is 

Discharge Lamps 375
operating, impacts by electrons may keep the fi laments hot enough to sustain 
the plasma and allow the heating current to be switched off. However, some 
fl uorescent fi xtures can be dimmed, in which case electron heating alone won’t 
sustain the plasma. Dimmable fl uorescent fi xtures must continue to pass heat-
ing currents through their fi lament/electrodes.
 
Each fi lament/electrode is coated with a material that helps it emit electrons into the 
gas. Unfortunately, that coating is thin and easily damaged by a process called sputtering, 
in which positive mercury ions from the plasma collide with the coating and chip away its 
atoms. Once enough of the coating has been removed, the lamp won’t be able to sustain a 
discharge and it will need to be replaced. Because sputtering is particularly severe during 
start-up, most fl uorescent lamps fail after 10,000 to 40,000 starts. Since it takes energy to 
construct each fl uorescent lamp, turning a lamp off for only a short period, a few minutes 
or less, won’t actually save energy in the long run. When you’ll be returning to the room in 
a couple of minutes, leave the fl uorescent lights on. Otherwise, turn them off.
 
Fluorescent lamps operate most effi ciently and are at their brightest when their internal 
temperatures reach about 40 °C. Below that temperature, the vapor pressure of mercury is 
too low and too much of the lamp’s tiny store of mercury is liquid rather than gas. That’s 
why most fl uorescent lamps are somewhat dim when you fi rst turn them on and they 
brighten as they warm up from room temperature to about 40 °C. It takes time for the mer-
cury vapor to reach its optimum density. Although this warm-up period is objectionable to 
some people, it’s a small price to pay for a vastly more energy-effi cient lighting.
 
It would be great if fl uorescent lamps could be based on a substance less toxic than 
mercury. However, mercury is uniquely well-suited to those lamps: its vapor pressure near 
room temperature is nearly ideal for an electric discharge, it converts electric energy into 
ultraviolet light with great effi ciency, and it isn’t damaged or consumed as the lamp oper-
ates. Much more important than eliminating mercury from fl uorescent lamps is recycling 
those lamps after they fail. It’s not hard to extract and reuse the mercury, and it should be 
done routinely.
Electrode
and heater
Electrode
and heater
Phosphor
Glass
Mercury
vapor
Fig. 13.2.6 In a hot-
electrode fl uorescent 
tube, the electrodes are 
actually fi laments and are 
heated by running currents 
through them.
Check Your Understanding #8: Getting Red-y
Why do the ends of some fl uorescent lamps glow red during starting?
Answer: To start many lamps, their electrodes must be heated red-hot. You can often see light emit-
ted by these hot fi laments/electrodes.
Why: In most fl uorescent fi xtures, the fi laments are heated to high temperatures just before the dis-
charge starts. Thermal energy then ejects electrons from the fi lament so that they can carry current 
through the gas.
Mercury, Metal-Halide, and Sodium Lamps
Whereas a low-pressure mercury discharge emits mostly ultraviolet light, a high-pressure 
mercury discharge emits more visible light than ultraviolet light. This change occurs 
because ultraviolet light becomes trapped in densely packed mercury atoms and only visi-
ble light is able to escape from the discharge.
 
Known as radiation trapping, this effect occurs because mercury atoms absorb 254-nm 
photons just as well as they emit them. The same radiative transition that causes a mercury 
atom to emit a 254-nm photon (6p → 6s) can also run backward to absorb that photon 
(6s → 6p). In a dense gas of mercury, whenever one mercury atom emits a 254-nm photon, 
another mercury atom snaps that photon up. So while the discharge keeps pouring energy 
into the mercury atoms, they can’t get rid of it as 254-nm photons. Instead, they emit most 
of their energy through radiative transitions between other excited states. Since this light is 
much less likely to be captured by other mercury atoms, it emerges from the lamp as bluish 
visible light.

376 
CHAPTER 13 Light
 
When you fi rst turn on a high-pressure mercury lamp, most of the mercury is liquid 
and the pressure is low. The lamp starts like a small fl uorescent tube without phosphor, so 
you see very little visible light. However, the tube is designed to heat up during operation 
so that the liquid mercury evaporates to form a dense gas. As the gas pressure rises, the 
tube’s color changes. The 254-nm photons become trapped and photons emitted by many 
other radiative transitions begin to dominate. The lamp emits brilliant, blue-white light.
 
To make a lamp that’s a little less bluish, some high-pressure mercury lamps contain 
additional metal atoms. These atoms are introduced into the lamps as metal-iodide com-
pounds, so they are often called metal-halide lamps. Sodium, thallium, indium, and scan-
dium iodides all contribute their own emission spectra to the outgoing light and help to 
strengthen the red end of its spectrum. They give metal-halide lamps a warmer color than 
pure mercury lamps. Both high-pressure mercury and metal-halide lamps produce about 50 
to 60 lumens per watt, making them almost as energy effi cient as fl uorescent lamps.
 
Pure sodium lamps resemble mercury lamps, except that they use sodium atoms. 
Sodium is a solid at room temperature, so both low- and high-pressure sodium lamps must 
heat up before they begin to operate properly. A low-pressure sodium lamp is extremely 
energy effi cient because its 590-nm light comes directly from a sodium atom’s strongest 
radiative transition. That transition is from sodium’s lowest excited state to its ground state 
(3p → 3s). Low-pressure sodium lamps produce almost 200 lumens per watt, which is why 
highways were frequently illuminated by their yellow-orange glow.
 
However, this monochromatic illumination is unpleasant and permits no color vision 
at all. Although it’s marginally acceptable on a highway, you wouldn’t want it near your 
home. That’s why people buy high-pressure sodium lamps for home use (Fig. 13.2.7). For 
a small decrease in energy effi ciency, to about 150 lumens per watt, you get a big improve-
ment in color.
 
Remarkably enough, the 590-nm emission itself smears out at high pressure to cover a 
wide range of wavelengths, from yellow-green to orange-red. This spreading occurs 
because of the many collisions suffered by the densely packed sodium atoms as they try to 
emit 590-nm light. These collisions distort the atomic orbitals so that the photons emerge 
with somewhat shifted energies. Overall, a high-pressure sodium lamp emits remarkably 
little light exactly at 590 nm because the ground-state sodium atoms trap that light; they run 
the (3p → 3s) transition backward and absorb the photons (3s → 3p). This trapping is so 
effective that there is actually a hole in the lamp’s spectrum right at 590 nm.
Protective glass
envelope
Electrodes
Glass tube
containing
sodium and
inert gases
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13.2.7 (a) The active 
component of a high-
pressure sodium vapor 
lamp is a small translucent 
tube. (b) As the lamp 
warms up, sodium metal in 
the tube evaporates to form 
a brilliant yellow discharge. 
The dense vapor of sodium 
atoms in the tube traps 
the 590-nm light so that 
the lamp emits a richer 
spectrum of wavelengths 
and a less monochromatic 
glow than a low-pressure 
sodium lamp.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

LEDs and Lasers 377
 
High-pressure discharge lamps suffer from a problem not found in low-pressure lamps: 
they’re diffi cult to start when hot. It’s much harder to initiate a discharge in a high-pressure 
gas than in a low-pressure gas, so they all start at low pressure and then evolve to high 
pressure. If the discharge in a high-pressure mercury, sodium vapor, or metal-halide lamp 
is interrupted and loses its plasma, the lamp must cool down before it can be restarted.
Check Your Understanding #9: Slow Glowing
At dusk, a mercury streetlight turns on. It glows dimly at fi rst and gradually increases in brightness. 
What is happening during this warm-up period?
Answer: The small high-pressure discharge tube is heating up, vaporizing more mercury.
Why: When the streetlight fi rst turns on, the pressure of mercury atoms inside it is low and it emits 
very little visible light. As the discharge heats the tube, more mercury atoms evaporate until eventu-
ally all the mercury inside the tube is gaseous.
SECTION 13.3
fl uorescent lamps, and its properties make it particularly useful 
for many applications. In this section, we’ll examine the nature 
of this new light and the ways in which lasers produce it.
Questions to Think About: Why is laser light usually brightly 
colored? Why does laser light often appear as a narrow beam? 
In movies, “lasers” are often shown to emit bright streaks of 
light that can be dodged if one jumps quickly enough; is that 
view realistic?
Experiments to Do: Although lasers are household objects, the 
ones in CD or DVD players and laser printers are relatively inac-
cessible. If you don’t own a laser pointer, look at a store barcode 
scanner. The scanning system contains a gas or solid-state laser 
that emits a very narrow beam of bright red light. This system 
also contains a rotating mirror or holographic disk that directs 
the beam as a pattern of thin stripes onto anything that passes 
through the scanner. A light sensor inside the window watches 
for this moving beam of light to travel across a label. If you look 
down at the laser light emerging from the scanner’s window or 
observe the spot of a laser pointer on the wall, you’ll see both 
the purity of its color and its strange speckled character; the 
light appears to consist of tiny light and dark speckles. These 
speckles are caused by interference effects, which are extremely 
pronounced in the ordered laser light. This light also appears 
unusually bright and, as when looking at the sun, you should 
keep your gaze brief to avoid eye injury.
Today’s electronic devices have so many LEDs (light-emitting 
diodes) that our homes are ablaze with tiny colored lights at night. 
LEDs are quickly replacing lightbulbs in fl ashlights, and LED illu-
mination is on the rise. LEDs combine the light-producing quan-
tum transitions of discharge lamps with the solid-state physics of 
modern electronics. In this section, we’ll see how electrons 
behave in solids and how those solids can be tailored to emit light.
 
We’ll also take a look at lasers. Since their invention in the 
late 1950s, lasers have found countless uses, from cutting 
metal and clearing human arteries to surveying land and playing 
CDs and DVDs. However, lasers are more than just novel appli-
cations of old ideas. Instead, they bring together quantum and 
optical physics to produce a new type of light. This light is 
radically different from the light produced by incandescent and 
LEDs and Lasers
Highly 
reﬂective
mirror
Reﬂective
chamber
Laser 
discharge
capacitor
Flashlamp
Flashlamp
Partially 
reﬂective
mirror
Q-switch
(electronic shutter)
Laser 
oscillator 
rod
Dust
protector
Laser 
ampliﬁer 
rod
Laser beam
WARNING
Laser light is dangerous. Because laser light can be extremely bright and can focus so 
tightly, it presents a serious eye hazard. A laser beam entering your eye will focus to a 
tiny spot on your retina and may cause rapid and permanent injury. Although lasers up 
to Class III are relatively eye-safe, they rely on your natural blink refl ex to protect you. 
You should never stare into any laser. Class IV lasers are not eye-safe, and their light 
should never enter your eyes at all.

378 
CHAPTER 13 Light
Electrons in Solids
An LED is a solid-state device—that is, it’s a solid object that luminesces. Like light from 
a neon sign, light from an LED is produced when an electron shifts from a higher-energy 
quantum state to a lower-energy quantum state by way of a radiative transition. In the neon 
sign, those quantum states involve orbitals, the electron standing waves of an atom. In an 
LED, however, those quantum states involve levels, the electron standing waves of a solid. 
To understand how an LED emits light, we must start by understanding levels.
 
Solids are limited objects, and the basic quantum waves for electrons in limited objects 
are always standing waves. The electron standing waves in atoms are called orbitals because 
the positively charge nucleus wraps the negatively charged waves around itself in a manner 
suggesting orbits. The electron standing waves in solids are less focused on specifi c atomic 
nuclei and are called levels instead. Although the nuclei are present, of course, each elec-
tron is attracted to all the nuclei at once and that changes the nature of the standing waves.
 
As we did with orbitals, we’ll view levels as abstract placeholders, independent of the 
electrons that may or may not exhibit them at a given moment. The levels in a solid are then 
analogous to seats in a theater, each of which may or may not be occupied right now. 
Instead of saying that the electron is experiencing a particular standing wave or level, we 
say that the level is occupied by an electron. In this reversed perspective, the level plays the 
more important role.
 
Like an electron in an orbital, an electron in a level has a specifi c total energy—the sum 
of its kinetic and potential energies. That energy, which depends on the shape and structure 
of the electron wave, also determines the wave’s quantum frequency (see Eq. 13.2.1).
 
A solid contains an enormous number of electrons, and there are always plenty of 
levels around to accommodate those electrons. But which levels do they occupy?
 
At suffi ciently low temperature, electrons occupy those levels that have the least 
energy. For thermodynamic reasons, the electrons settle into the lowest-energy levels avail-
able, two electrons per level (recall the Pauli exclusion principle). By the time all the elec-
trons have been accommodated, they fi ll the levels up to a certain maximum energy. Half-
way between the highest fi lled level and lowest unfi lled level is the Fermi level, a 
hypothetical level that defi nes the top of this Fermi sea of electrons. The energy an electron 
would have in that hypothetical level is called the Fermi energy.
 
Our theater analogy can again provide insight into this level-fi lling process. It is anal-
ogous to what happens at a popular show: the seats fi ll from the orchestra level on up—
everyone wants to sit in the lowest (and closest) seat. When the show starts, people have 
fi lled all the seats up to a certain highest seat. Halfway between that last fi lled seat and the 
next unfi lled seat is the hypothetical Fermi seat.
 
If we represent the levels graphically by boxes and arrange them vertically according 
to energy (Fig. 13.3.1), then the levels (boxes) below the Fermi level contain two electrons 
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
Energy
Position
(more filled levels below)
(more empty levels below)
140 positive charges
Fermi level
Levels in a solid
Fig. 13.3.1
A conceptual 
representation of the 
levels (electron quantum 
standing waves) in a solid. 
Each level is a box holding 
at most one spin-up 
electron (blue) and one 
spin-down electron (red). 
The horizontal axis is 
position and the vertical 
axis is the energy of an 
electron in a level. Because 
levels form out of atomic 
orbitals, levels made from 
similar orbitals have similar 
energies and group into 
bands. For this portion of 
the solid to be electrically 
neutral, 140 positive 
charges in its nuclei must 
be cancelled by electrons 
in these levels, so 140 
electrons settle into them.

LEDs and Lasers 379
each, while those above the Fermi level are empty. Although thermal energy complicates 
this picture somewhat by shifting electrons about near the Fermi level, we can ignore that 
detail near room temperature or below.
 
Since levels are standing waves, they don’t have sharply defi ned locations in space. 
However, we can safely imagine that each level places its electrons near a particular loca-
tion in the solid, as shown in Fig. 13.3.1. Although this picture is somewhat oversimplifi ed, 
it’s accurate enough to illustrate much of the physics of charge motion in materials.
 
Of course, electrons aren’t the only charged particles in a solid. The atoms also have 
positively charged nuclei. But those nuclei are essentially immobile and rarely participate 
in the fl ow of electricity.
Check Your Understanding #1: Taking It to a Higher Level
If you add one extra electron to an otherwise neutral metal ball, into which level will that electron go?
Answer: The electron will go into the lowest-energy empty level, the one just above the Fermi level.
Why: Since each electron goes into the lowest-energy level that’s available, this new electron will fi ll 
the level just above the Fermi level. Actually, if the neutral metal ball has an odd number of elec-
trons, then the Fermi level contains only one electron. In that case, the new electron will fi ll the other 
opening in the Fermi level.
Metals, Insulators, and Semiconductors
The levels in a solid occur in groups called bands. Each band corresponds to standing 
waves with a particular type of structure. Since the levels in a band involve similar waves, 
they also involve similar energies. Between these bands of levels there are sometimes band 
gaps, ranges of energy in which no levels exist. The solid does not and cannot contain 
electrons with energies that lie within a band gap.
 
Bands and band gaps are what distinguish metals, insulators, and semiconductors. 
When the Fermi level is located in a band gap, it can prevent the electrons in a solid from 
responding to outside forces. To see how that happens, let’s examine fi rst a metal and then 
an insulator.
 
In a metal, the Fermi level lies in the middle of a band (Fig. 13.3.2). Because the 
band’s empty levels are just above its fi lled levels, very little energy is needed to shift elec-
trons from the fi lled levels to empty levels. This feature allows the metal to conduct elec-
tricity. When you subject the metal to a voltage difference, giving its left side a higher 
voltage than its right side, the resulting electric fi eld points toward the right. That fi eld 
pushes the metal’s negatively charged electrons toward the left and they being to move left. 
They move by shifting from fi lled levels to empty levels (Fig. 13.3.2), obtaining the energy 
needed to reach those empty levels from the work done on them by the electrostatic forces. 
Overall, electrons enter the metal from its right and leave from its left, so the metal con-
ducts electricity!
140 positive charges
Fermi level
Energy
Position
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
Levels in a metal
Fig. 13.3.2
In a metal, 
electrical neutrality is 
reached while electrons are 
still fi lling a band of levels 
and the Fermi level lies in 
that partially fi lled band. 
Electrons near the Fermi 
level can shift easily to 
nearby empty levels. When 
a voltage gradient produces 
an electric fi eld in the 
metal, electrons in the 
partially fi lled band move 
opposite the fi eld and the 
metal conducts electric 
current.

380 
CHAPTER 13 Light
 
In our theater analogy, a metal is a theater in which only about half the ground-fl oor 
seats are fi lled. If you ask people in the theater to begin shifting left, those near the top of 
the occupied seats can shift about easily. Each fi nds an empty seat nearby on the left and 
moves over. New people are then able to enter the theater from the right while others leave 
the theater from the left. This metal theater is conducting people.
 
Unlike the situation in a metal, in an insulator the Fermi level lies in the middle of a 
band gap, between the top of one band and the bottom of another band (Fig. 13.3.3). With no 
easily accessible empty levels available, a great deal of energy is required to shift electrons 
from the fi lled levels to empty levels. When you subject the insulator to a voltage difference, 
higher voltage on the left, the resulting electric fi eld points toward the right and pushes the 
insulator’s electrons toward the left. Those electrons, however, have no empty levels nearby 
and are thus unable to move. To shift into one of the empty levels in the upper band, an elec-
tron in the lower band would need more energy than it can get from the electrostatic forces. 
Since no net charge fl ows through the insulator, it doesn’t conduct electricity!
 
In our theater analogy, an insulator is a theater in which all the ground-fl oor seats are full 
and the balcony seats are empty. When you ask people in this theater to begin shifting left, 
they can’t do it. All the ground-fl oor seats to the left are fi lled, and people can’t reach the 
balcony to make use of its empty seats. This insulator theater is unable to conduct people.
 
In a metal, the band of levels containing the Fermi level is only partially fi lled, and 
electrons can easily shift from fi lled to unfi lled levels. In an insulator, the band below the 
Fermi level—the valence band—is full and the band above the Fermi level—the conduc-
tion band—is empty, making such shifts extremely diffi cult.
 
Even in an insulator, however, an electron can shift from a valence level (a level in the 
valence band) to a conduction level (a level in the conduction band) if something provides 
the necessary energy. One such energy source is light. When an insulator is exposed to the 
right type of light, that light can shift electrons from the material’s valence band to its con-
duction band (Fig. 13.3.4).
160 positive charges
Fermi level
Energy
Position
Valence band
Conduction band
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
Levels in an insulator
Fig. 13.3.3 In an 
insulator, electrical 
neutrality is reached just 
as electrons fi nish fi lling 
a band of levels and the 
Fermi level lies between 
that fi lled conduction band 
and the empty valence 
band well above it in 
energy. Electrons in the 
conduction band don’t 
have enough energy to 
shift into empty levels in 
the valence band. When a 
voltage gradient produces 
an electric fi eld in the 
insulator, electrons in the 
full valence band can’t 
move and the insulator 
doesn’t conduct electric 
current.
160 positive charges
Fermi level
Energy
Position
Valence band
Conduction band
Photon
Photon
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
Levels in a photoconductor
Fig. 13.3.4
When light 
strikes an insulator, its 
photons may carry enough 
energy to shift electrons 
from the insulator’s 
valence band to the 
conduction band. If so, 
electrons can then use the 
two partially fi lled bands to 
move through the material 
in response to an electric 
fi eld. The illuminated 
insulator becomes an 
electrical conductor, 
photoconductor.

LEDs and Lasers 381
 
Once electrons appear in the normally empty conduction band and empty levels appear 
in the normally full valence band, electrons can respond to electric fi elds. They can shift from 
fi lled levels to nearby empty levels and thus travel through the material. Electrons can then 
enter the material from one side and leave from the other, so the material conducts electricity. 
Because light has made this insulator a conductor, we call the material a photoconductor.
 
Turning again to our analogy, light’s role in the insulator theater is performed by a 
playful gorilla that walks about the ground fl oor, tossing patrons into the balcony. With 
some of the ground-fl oor seats suddenly empty and some of the balcony seats suddenly 
occupied by dazed theatergoers, the crowd can now respond to your request to move left. 
The gorilla has made the insulator theater a conductor of people—what you might call a 
“gorillaconductor.”
 
Not all light causes photoconductivity in an insulator. As we saw in Section 13.2, light is 
emitted and absorbed as particles called photons. Each photon’s energy is proportional to its 
frequency; the higher the frequency of light, the more energy each of its photons contains. To 
shift an electron across the large band gap in a typical insulator, high-energy, high-frequency 
light is needed; the insulator must be exposed to violet or even ultraviolet light.
 
Nature also provides materials with smaller band gaps that can be crossed with the 
help of low-energy, low-frequency red or even infrared light. These materials are called 
semiconductors because their properties lie somewhere between those of conductors and 
insulators. Semiconductors have small band gaps, making it relatively easy for light, heat, 
or other types of energy to shift electrons between valence and conduction levels. In our 
analogy, a semiconductor theater is an insulator theater with a low balcony, so that even a 
baby gorilla can toss people into it.
 
For more than half a century, scientists and engineers have worked with semiconduc-
tors to produce an astonishing array of electronic devices. By carefully tailoring the shapes 
and chemical compositions of semiconducting materials such as silicon, germanium, and 
gallium arsenide, they have created virtuoso instruments for electron waves in solids that 
are every bit as remarkable as the instruments for musical waves found in great orchestras. 
Of all these electronic instruments, the simplest is the semiconductor diode.
Check Your Understanding #2: Stop and Go Shopping
In many grocery checkout counters, a conveyor belt carries food to the register but stops when the 
food reaches the end and blocks a beam of light. How might a photoconductor be used to sense this 
blockage?
Answer: The beam of light shines on the photoconductor, allowing it to carry current and turn on the 
conveyer belt’s motor. When food blocks the light beam, the photoconductor becomes an electrical 
insulator and the belt stops moving.
Why: Photoconductors are commonly used in light sensors. Light allows the photoconductor to carry 
current, and that current can be used to operate machinery, trigger a burglar alarm, or turn lights on 
or off. In the present case, it turns on the conveyor belt’s motor.
Diodes
A diode is a one-way device for current; it allows current to fl ow through it in one direction 
but not in the other. Although diodes have taken many forms over the years, the diodes in 
virtually all modern electronic devices are built from semiconductors.
 
A basic semiconductor diode is made by joining together two different semiconduc-
tors. These two semiconductors have been modifi ed so that they don’t have perfectly fi lled 
valence levels and perfectly empty conduction levels. Instead, they’re doped with atomic 
impurities that either create a few empty valence levels (p-type semiconductor, 
Fig. 13.3.5a) or place a few electrons in the conduction levels (n-type semiconductor, 
Fig. 13.3.5b). These empty valence levels or conduction-level electrons allow p-type and 
n-type semiconductors to conduct electricity.

382 
CHAPTER 13 Light
 
When a piece of p-type semiconductor touches a piece of n-type semiconductor, how-
ever, something remarkable happens—a p-n junction forms at the place where the two 
meet (Fig. 13.3.5c). To reduce their potential energies, higher-energy conduction-level 
electrons from the n-type semiconductor migrate across the p-n junction to fi ll empty lower-
energy valence levels in the p-type semiconductor. It’s an example of static electricity (see 
Section 10.1); when two dissimilar materials touch, the material that is hungrier for elec-
trons (the p-type semiconductor) steals some electrons from its partner (the n-type semi-
conductor).
 
As the electron migration proceeds, the n-type semiconductor acquires a positive net 
charge because it now has fewer electrons than positive charges. The p-type semiconduc-
tor acquires a negative net charge because it now has more electrons than positive 
charges. Electrostatic forces from this separated charge oppose the further migration of 
electrons across the junction and gradually bring that migration to a halt. Everything is 
then in equilibrium.
 
Near the p-n junction, there is now a depletion region, an area in which electron 
migration has emptied all the conduction levels and fi lled all the valence levels. With no 
conduction-level electrons or empty valence levels left, the depletion region can’t conduct 
electricity and charge can’t move across the p-n junction. The depletion region is an insu-
lator, and the two pieces of semiconductor have become a diode.
 
In our theater analogy, the p-n junction is analogous to a theater with two halves. In the 
left or “p-type” half, the balcony is empty and even the ground fl oor has some empty seats. 
In the right or “n-type” half, the ground fl oor is fi lled and there are even a few people in the 
balcony. Since these two halves touch, people in the right balcony notice the empty seats in 
the left ground fl oor, and a few of them near the center of the theater clamber down from 
the right balcony to the left ground fl oor to take advantage of the better seats. Near the 
center of the theater, the ground fl oor is now fi lled and the balcony is empty, forming a 
depletion region in which no one can move left or right. The central part of the theater can’t 
conduct people!
75 positive charges
85 positive charges
Energy
Position
Valence band
Conduction band
(a) P-type semiconductor
(b) N-type semiconductor
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
Energy
(c) P-N junction
Position
Negative
net charge
Positive
net charge
Depletion region
Valence band
Conduction band
75 positive charges
85 positive charges
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
Fig. 13.3.5 (a) A p-type 
semiconductor has slight 
shortage of positive 
charges in its nuclei and 
becomes electrically 
neutral before its valence 
band fi lls completely with 
electrons. (b) An n-type 
semiconductor has a slight 
excess of positive charges 
in its nuclei and becomes 
electrically neutral after 
partly fi lling its conduction 
band with electrons. 
(c) When the p- and n-type 
semiconductors touch, 
conduction-level electrons 
migrate from the n-type 
semiconductor to the 
p-type semiconductor, 
creating a thin, electrically 
polarized depletion region 
at the p-n junction.

LEDs and Lasers 383
 
Let’s now look at what happens when we attach wires to each semiconductor half and 
use a battery to impose a voltage difference between those two halves. In Fig. 13.3.6a, the 
voltage of the p-type side (left) is higher than the voltage of the n-type side (right), so the 
resulting electric fi eld points toward the right and pushes electrons toward the left. Elec-
trons migrate toward the p-n junction in the n-type side’s conduction levels and away from 
the p-n junction in the p-type side’s valence levels. At the same time, some electrons enter 
the n-type side from its wire and some electrons exit the p-type side to its wire. The deple-
tion region becomes thinner and, when the voltage difference is large enough, vanishes 
altogether. Once that happens, electrons begin to cross the p-n junction and the entire 
device and it conducts electric current.
 
In the theater analogy, we’re adding people on the right to the n-type balcony and 
removing them on the left from the p-type ground fl oor. The new people in the n-type bal-
cony can move about the empty seats and migrate toward the center of the theater. Simi-
larly, the empty seats in the p-type ground fl oor allow people to shift about so that empty 
seats become available near the center of the theater. At that point, people in the n-type 
balcony can cross over to the p-type balcony and then jump down to the ground fl oor. There 
is a net leftward fl ow of people through the theater; the theater is conducting people from 
right to left.
 
What happens if we reverse the battery? In Fig. 13.3.6b, the voltage of the n-type side 
(right) is higher than the voltage of the p-type side (left), so the resulting electric fi eld points 
toward the left and pushes electrons toward the right. In this case, the depletion region 
becomes thicker as the electrons fi ll in the empty valence levels in the p-type side and leave 
the conduction levels in the n-type side. The widening depletion region prevents charge from 
moving and no current fl ows across the p-n junction. The device remains an insulator.
 
In the theater analogy, we’re removing people on the right from the n-type balcony and 
adding them on the left to the p-type ground fl oor. Soon the n-type balcony is virtually 
empty and the p-type ground fl oor is essentially full. The entire theater is now a depletion 
region and behaves like the insulator theater. No one can move and the theater can’t con-
duct people.
75 positive charges
85 positive charges
Energy
Position
Valence band
Conduction band
P-type (anode)
N-type (cathode)
(a) Forward biased p-n junction
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
Energy
(b) Reverse biased p-n junction
Position
Negative
net charge
Positive
net charge
Depletion region
Valence band
Conduction band
75 positive charges
85 positive charges
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
Fig. 13.3.6 (a) When 
a p-n junction’s p-type 
anode has a higher voltage 
than its n-type cathode, 
the resulting electric fi eld 
causes electrons to migrate 
toward the junction in the 
cathode and away from the 
junction in the anode. The 
depletion region shrinks or 
vanishes, electrons cross 
the junction, and current 
fl ows through the device. 
(b) When a p-n junction’s 
p-type anode has a lower 
voltage than its n-type 
cathode, the resulting 
electric fi eld causes 
electrons to migrate away 
from the junction in the 
cathode and toward from 
the junction in the anode. 
The depletion region grows, 
no electrons cross the 
junction, and no current 
fl ows through the device.

384 
CHAPTER 13 Light
 
Since it allows current to fl ow in one direction but not the other, the p-n junction is a 
diode. For historical reasons, the diode’s p-type side is called the anode and its n-type side 
is called the cathode. Current, which is the fl ow of positive charge, can pass through a 
diode only from its anode to its cathode. Since current naturally fl ows from higher voltage 
to lower voltage, a diode carries current only when it is forward biased, that is, when its 
anode has a higher voltage than its cathode. When it is reverse biased, when its anode has 
a lower voltage than its cathode, no current fl ows through the diode.
Check Your Understanding #3: It’s a One-Way Street
What will happen if you include a p-n junction (a diode) in the AC circuit that connects the power 
company to your table lamp?
Answer: Current will fl ow through the circuit only half the time, and your lamp will be dim.
Why: If you include a diode in an AC circuit, it will prevent current from fl owing in one direction. 
Current will fl ow through the circuit only during the half of each power-line cycle when the diode’s 
cathode is negatively charged and its anode positively charged. Since the lamp will receive only about 
half of its normal power, its fi lament won’t reach normal operating temperature. The lamp will glow 
dimly but the bulb will last an extraordinarily long time. Diodes are often used in this manner to 
create dim light levels in lamps or appliances.
Light-Emitting Diodes
Even when a diode is forward biased, its depletion region doesn’t vanish until the voltage 
of its anode is signifi cantly higher than the voltage of its cathode. For the ordinary silicon 
diodes commonly used in AC adapters and computer power supplies, a voltage drops of 
0.6 V is required before they’ll conduct current. Since the current passing through the diode 
is then experiencing a voltage drop, the diode is consuming electric power. Because the 
diodes used in adapters and power supplies serve only as switches to control the direction 
of current fl ow, the electric power consumed by these diodes is simply converted into ther-
mal power. But some specialized diodes are designed to convert much of the electric power 
they consume into optical power—they emit light!
 
When a diode is forward biased and current fl ows from its anode to its cathode, 
conduction-level electrons in the n-type cathode travel across the p-n junction to become 
conduction-level electrons in the p-type anode. In effect, the anode is then in an excited 
state; it has conduction-level electrons and empty valence levels (Fig. 13.3.6a).
 
What happens next depends on the characteristics of the diode. In a normal silicon 
diode, those conduction-level electrons shift to empty valence levels without producing 
signifi cant light. Silicon’s band structure has characteristics that discourage light emission, 
so most of these electron transitions produce internal vibrations and heat the diode instead 
of producing light.
 
In specialized diodes made from more exotic semiconductors, conduction-level elec-
trons injected from the n-type cathode into the p-type anode frequently undergo radiative 
transitions to empty valence levels and thereby emit light (Fig. 13.3.7). Composed primar-
ily from combinations of gallium, indium, aluminum, arsenic, phosphorus, and nitrogen, 
they are known as light-emitting diodes, or LEDs. LEDs now come in just about any color 
of the rainbow, including infrared, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, and ultraviolet 
(Fig. 13.3.8). Although white LEDs are also common, they’re actually violet or ultraviolet 
LEDs with built-in phosphors that fl uoresce white.
 
An LED’s color is directly related to the energy released when an electron in its p-type 
anode shifts from a conduction level to a valence level. The most convenient unit in which 
to measure that energy is the electron volt (abbreviated eV), the energy released when 1 
elementary unit of electric charge experiences a 1-V decrease in voltage (1 eV is equal to 
1.6021 × 10–19 J). In a typical red LED, an electron releases 1.9 eV as it shifts from a con-
duction level to a valence level and can produce a photon with an energy of 1.9 eV. Since 

LEDs and Lasers 385
energy and frequency are related by Eq. 13.2.1 and frequency and wavelength are related by 
Eq. 9.2.1, that 1.9-eV photon has a frequency of 4.6 × 1014 Hz and a wavelength of 650 nm.
 
To operate and produce these 1.9-eV photons, the red LED must be forward biased 
with a voltage drop of at least 1.9 V. The current-carrying diode uses that voltage drop to 
inject electrons into the anode’s conduction band, where they have energies 1.9 eV above 
the valence band. Many of those electrons subsequently release their excess energies as 
1.9-eV photons of light.
 
The shorter the wavelength of the light an LED emits, the more energy each electron 
must release as it shifts from a conduction level to a valence level and the larger the 
semiconductor’s band gap must be. A violet LED that emits 400-nm light requires a band 
gap of about 3.1 eV to produce its 3.1-eV photons. That LED also needs a forward-bias 
voltage in excess of 3.1 V. The larger voltage drops required by LEDs near the violet end 
of the spectrum explain why those LEDs need higher-voltage power sources or more 
batteries.
 
Unfortunately, at most about half of the electrons sent across an LED’s p-n junction 
succeed in lighting the room. Although a substantial fraction of those electrons emit pho-
tons, most of the photons are reabsorbed by the semiconductor before they leave the LED; 
the same radiative transitions that emit this light (conduction level → valence level) can 
also absorb it (valence level → conduction level). Despite those diffi culties, modern LEDs 
can produce visible light with energy effi ciencies comparable to those of fl uorescent lamps. 
LED effi ciencies continue to rise along with their operating lifetimes, and they are gradu-
ally becoming a primary form of illumination.
75 positive charges
85 positive charges
Energy
Position
Valence band
Photon
Conduction band
P-type (anode)
N-type (cathode)
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
Light-emitting diode or LED
Fig. 13.3.7 When current fl ows through the p-n junction of light-emitting diode, conduction-level 
electrons from the n-type cathode are injected into conduction levels of the p-type anode. In the 
anode, those conduction-level electrons can shift to empty valence levels and release energy. About 
half the time, a radiative transition converts that energy into a photon of light.
Fig. 13.3.8
These LEDs are 
connected in series so that the same 
current fl ows sequentially through 
each of them. However, their different 
band gaps cause them to emit 
different colors of light.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

386 
CHAPTER 13 Light
Lasers and Laser Light
To understand lasers, you must understand how laser light differs from the normal light emit-
ted by hot objects or by individual atoms in an electrical discharge. Each particle of normal 
light, each photon, is emitted willy-nilly without any relationship to the other light particles 
being emitted nearby. Because of this light’s independent and unpredictable character, it’s 
called spontaneous light and its creation is called spontaneous emission of radiation.
 
Theoretical work by Albert Einstein and others in the 1920s and 1930s predicted the 
existence of a second type of light, stimulated light, that can be created when an excited 
atom or atomlike system duplicates a passing photon. Although this stimulated emission 
of radiation can occur only when the excited atom is capable of emitting the duplicate 
photon spontaneously, the copy that it produces is so perfect that the two photons are abso-
lutely indistinguishable. Together, these two photons form a single electromagnetic wave.
 
To get a slightly better picture of how such stimulation occurs, think about an isolated 
atom in an excited state. That atom will eventually return to its ground state, but it must 
emit one or more photons for this to happen. That atom waits around in the excited state 
until it begins a spontaneous radiative transition. During the transition, one of the atom’s 
electrons accelerates back and forth, and the atom emits a photon.
 
If a similar photon passes through the atom as it’s waiting in the excited state, that 
photon’s electric fi eld can stimulate the radiative transition process through sympathetic 
vibration. The fi eld pushes and pulls on the atom’s electrons and makes them accelerate 
back and forth. Although this effect is small, it may be enough to trigger the emission of 
light. If the atom does emit light, the photon it produces will be a perfect copy of the stim-
ulating photon.
 
When this stimulated emission process was fi rst discovered, people immediately rec-
ognized that it made light amplifi cation possible. If enough excited systems could be 
assembled together, a single passing photon could be duplicated exactly over and over 
again. Instead of a single particle of light, you would soon have thousands, or millions, or 
even trillions of identical light particles.
 
Implementing this idea had to wait until the late 1950s, however, when the technical 
details of how to actually achieve light amplifi cation were worked out. In 1960, the fi rst 
laser oscillators were constructed. These were devices that emitted intense beams of light 
in which each particle of light was identical to every other particle of light. A single particle 
of light had been duplicated by the stimulation process into countless copies.
 
When individual excited atoms or atomlike systems emit light through spontaneous 
emission, the particles of light head off separately as many independent electromagnetic 
waves (Fig. 13.3.9a). Light consisting of many independent electromagnetic waves is 
called incoherent light.
 
However, when that same collection of excited atoms or atomlike systems emit light 
by stimulated emission, all of the light particles are absolutely identical and form a single 
electromagnetic wave (Fig. 13.3.9b). Unlike electrons, which are Fermi particles, many 
identical photons can have the same quantum wave because photons are Bose particles and 
Check Your Understanding #4: Lighten Up
When you increase the current fl owing through an incandescent lightbulb, it brightens and its color 
shifts toward the blue end of the spectrum. If you increase the current fl owing through an LED, what 
happens to its brightness and color?
Answer: The diode becomes brighter, but its color doesn’t change signifi cantly.
Why: The diode’s brightness depends on how many electrons cross its p-n junction each second, and 
increasing that number increases the brightness. However, the color of light the diode emits depends 
mostly on its band gap and therefore doesn’t change much when you increase the current in the 
diode.
Incoherent radiation 
from excited atoms
Coherent radiation
from excited atoms
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13.3.9 (a) Photons 
of incoherent light are 
created independently and 
have somewhat different 
wavelengths and directions 
of travel. (b) Photons of 
coherent light are produced 
by stimulated emission and 
are identical in every way.

LEDs and Lasers 387
Bose particles don’t obey the Pauli exclusion principle. Light consisting of many identical 
photons and a single electromagnetic wave is called coherent light. Because of its single-
wave nature, coherent light exhibits remarkable interference effects. These effects are eas-
ily seen in the coherent light emitted by lasers.
Dim light
Laser medium
Bright light
Fig. 13.3.10 A laser 
amplifi er uses excited 
atoms or atomlike systems 
to increase the number of 
light particles leaving the 
laser medium. Incoming 
light is duplicated by 
stimulated emission.
Semitransparent
mirror
Mirror
Laser medium
Fig. 13.3.11 A laser 
oscillator is a laser 
amplifi er enclosed in 
mirrors. Oscillation occurs 
when the laser medium 
spontaneously emits one 
photon in just the right 
direction. This photon 
bounces back and forth 
between the two mirrors 
and is duplicated many 
times. Some of the light is 
extracted from this laser by 
making one of the mirrors 
semitransparent.
Check Your Understanding #5: A Light Dusting of Photons
If you were to measure the electric fi eld in the light from a fl ashlight, you would fi nd that it fl uctuates 
about randomly. Why is the light’s electric fi eld so disorderly?
Answer: The fl ashlight produces incoherent light, with many independent light waves contributing 
their individual electric fi elds to the overall electric fi eld. When you were to measure that overall fi eld, 
you fi nd it very disorderly.
Why: Because the photons of incoherent light are independent, their individual electric fi elds don’t 
fl uctuate together. At any place and time, the individual electric fi elds will add in a complicated, 
random fashion. As time passes, this overall fi eld will fl uctuate randomly. In contrast, coherent light, 
in which each photon is the same as all the others, has a much more orderly electric fi eld because 
all of the photons contribute equally.
Light Amplifi ers and Oscillation
Producing coherent light requires amplifi cation. You must start with only one particle of light 
and duplicate it many times. The basic tool for this duplication of light is a laser amplifi er 
(Fig. 13.3.10). When weak light enters an appropriate collection of excited atoms or atomlike 
systems—the laser medium—that light is amplifi ed and becomes brighter. The new light has 
exactly the same characteristics as the original light, but it contains more photons.
 
When we think of lasers, however, we rarely imagine a device that duplicates photons 
from somewhere else. We usually picture one that creates light entirely on its own. To do 
that, the laser must produce the initial particle of light that it then duplicates to produce 
others. A laser oscillator is a device that uses the laser medium itself to provide the seed 
photon, which it then duplicates many times (Fig. 13.3.11). If a laser medium is enclosed 
in a pair of carefully designed mirrors, it’s possible for the stimulation process to become 
self-initiating and self-sustaining. However, the mirrors must be curved properly and must 
have the correct refl ectivities. One mirror must normally be extremely refl ective, while the 
other must transmit a small fraction of the light that strikes its surface.
 
When the laser medium is placed between the two mirrors, there is a chance that a 
photon, emitted spontaneously by one of the excited systems, will bounce off a mirror and 
return toward the laser medium. As that returning photon passes through the laser medium, 
it’s amplifi ed. Because the photon was emitted by one of the excited systems, it has the 
right wavelength to be amplifi ed by other excited systems. (For a discussion of a photon’s 
properties, see 5 .)
 
By the time the original photon leaves the laser medium, it has already been duplicated 
many times. This group of identical photons then bounces off the second mirror and returns 
for another pass through the laser medium. It continues to bounce back and forth between 
the mirrors until the number of identical photons in the collection is astronomical.
 
Eventually there are so many identical photons that the laser medium is no longer able 
to amplify them. The laser medium has only so much stored energy and only so many 
excited systems in it. If the laser medium continues to receive additional energy, it may 
continue to amplify the light somewhat. If it doesn’t receive more energy, light amplifi ca-
tion will eventually cease.
 
To let the light out of this laser oscillator, one of its mirrors is normally semitransparent—
that is, some of the photons that strike the surface of the mirror travel through it rather than 
refl ecting. (The one-way glass used for surveillance is actually a semitransparent mirror.) 
This transmission creates a beam of outgoing light, a laser beam. The laser beam continues 
to emerge from the mirror as long as the amplifi cation process can support it.
5  Although it might seem 
that a photon should have 
an exact wavelength and 
frequency, and travel in 
only one direction, that’s 
not the case. Photons 
travel as electromagnetic 
waves and spread in more 
than a single direction. 
Also, because each photon 
has a beginning and an 
end, its wave contains 
more than a single 
wavelength or a single 
frequency. Thus, while 
lasers can produce some 
of the most perfect 
electromagnetic waves 
imaginable, those waves 
still spread outward 
slightly and still have a 
range of wavelengths and 
frequencies.

388 
CHAPTER 13 Light
 
Because this laser beam consists of duplicates of one original photon, it is coherent 
light. For technical reasons, many lasers duplicate more than one original photon simulta-
neously, so their laser beams are a little less coherent than they might be. However, with 
suitable fi ne-tuning, one original photon can usually be made to dominate the laser beam.
 
When you focus a fl ashlight’s beam with a lens, its independent photons won’t end up 
exactly together at the focus of the lens. That’s because the photons leave the fl ashlight 
heading in somewhat different directions and because their broad range of wavelengths 
leads to dispersion problems in the lens. However, since virtually all the photons in a laser 
beam are identical—they travel along the same path, and their wavelengths are the same—
they can all focus together to an extremely small spot. That’s why a laser printer employs 
a laser; a laser beam can illuminate a very small spot on the photoconductor drum that is 
used in the xerographic process (Section 10.2) to produce a printed image.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Laser Beams
Misconception: A laser beam is a narrow glowing cylinder that travels through space at the speed 
of an arrow.
Resolution: A laser beam is light, and it travels through space at the speed of light. To be visible 
from the side, a laser beam must scatter off something in its path, such as dust, mist, or air 
molecules. In empty space, a laser beam is invisible except when it directly illuminates your eyes.
Check Your Understanding #6: More of a Good Thing
If you take the laser beam from a particular laser oscillator and send it through a similar laser ampli-
fi er, what will happen to the laser beam?
Answer: It will become even brighter.
Why: A laser oscillator normally emits as intense a beam of light as it can, based on the amount of 
stored energy in the laser medium. This beam of light can be amplifi ed further by sending it through 
a separate laser amplifi er. Most high-powered lasers use a laser oscillator and one or more laser 
amplifi ers to create particularly bright beams of light.
How a Laser Medium Works
Obtaining the excited systems needed to amplify light is a critical issue for lasers. Ideally, 
a laser involves four different states of an atom or atomlike system: the ground state, an 
excited state, the upper laser state, and the lower laser state. The reason for having four 
separate states should become clear in a moment.
 
Let’s consider an atom that acts as an ideal laser amplifi er (Fig. 13.3.12). The atom 
starts in its ground state. A collision or the absorption of a photon shifts it to the excited 
state, giving it the energy it needs to amplify light. The atom then shifts to the upper laser 
state, either by emitting a photon or as the result of a collision. This preliminary shift is 
important because it prevents the excited atom from returning directly to the ground state 
and avoiding the amplifi cation process. Once it has shifted to the upper laser state, the atom 
is stuck there and will wait around long enough to amplify light.
 
The atom is poised to duplicate a passing photon. But not any old photon will do; it 
must match the photons that the atom is capable of emitting. For example, a neon atom 
with an excited 3p electron (Section 13.2) can duplicate a red photon but not a blue 
photon. This color selectivity of a laser amplifi er is why most laser beams have a single, 
pure color.
 
When a suitable photon passes through the atom, that photon stimulates the emission 
of a duplicate photon and the atom undergoes a radiative transition to the lower laser 
state. So far, so good. However, if the atom remains in the lower laser state, it might 
Excited state
Excitation
Upper laser state
Laser 
transition
Lower laser state
Ground state
Fig. 13.3.12 An ideal 
laser system passes 
through four different 
states during the laser’s 
operation.

LEDs and Lasers 389
absorb a photon of the laser light and return to the upper laser state. To prevent this sort 
of radiation trapping, the atom must quickly shift to the ground state, either by emitting 
a photon or as the result of another collision. The atom is then ready to begin the cycle 
all over again.
 
This four-state cycle, or something close to it, is found in nearly all lasers. The 
cycle helps the laser develop a population inversion between its upper and lower laser 
states, a situation in which there are more atoms in the upper laser state prepared to emit 
the laser light than there are atoms in the lower laser state prepared to absorb that light. 
Developing a population inversion is critical to laser amplifi cation because, without it, 
the laser medium is more absorbing than amplifying and there can’t be a buildup of light 
intensity.
 
In each laser, something provides the energy needed to shift atoms or atomlike systems 
in the laser medium from their ground states to their excited states in order to develop a pop-
ulation inversion. This transfer of energy into the laser medium to prepare it for amplifying 
light is called pumping. How a particular laser medium is pumped depends on the laser.
 
The most common pumping mechanisms are electronic and optical. In electronic 
pumping, currents of charged particles use their kinetic or electrostatic energies to excite 
the medium’s atoms or atomlike systems from their ground states to their excited states. In 
optical pumping, intense light is shone on the laser medium, causing a similar excitation.
 
The most important examples of optical pumping are ion-doped solid-state lasers. 
These lasers are based on atomic ions embedded in transparent solids. Common ions are 
titanium (Ti), neodymium (Nd), and erbium (Er), and they are often embedded in sapphire, 
yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG), or glass. Ti:sapphire, Nd:YAG, and Er:glass lasers are 
important in modern research, technology, and optical communications systems. When 
these laser media are exposed to extremely bright light, their ions become excited and they 
can act as laser oscillators or amplifi ers (Figs. 13.3.13 and 13.3.14).
 
A laser diode is quite similar to an LED, except that a laser diode uses its radiative 
transitions to amplify light. Since that amplifi cation can occur only when light emission 
exceeds light absorption, the laser diode must produce a population inversion between an 
upper laser state and a lower laser state.
 
The laser diode achieves such an inversion by concentrating current into a very narrow 
p-n junction made from heavily doped semiconductors. The intense current injects an enor-
mous density of electrons into the anode’s conduction band, where they quickly settle into 
the lowest-energy conduction levels—the upper laser state. The heavy doping empties most 
of the anode’s highest-energy valence levels—the lower laser state. With many electrons in 
the upper laser state and few in the lower laser state, the diode has a population inversion 
and can amplify light.
Dim
light
Flash lamp
Solid state or
liquid medium
–
+
Bright
light
Fig. 13.3.13 In an 
optically pumped laser, 
intense light from a 
fl ashlamp, an arc lamp, 
or even another laser 
transfers energy to the 
laser medium. Atoms or 
atomlike systems inside 
the medium store this 
energy and use it to 
amplify light.
Gold mirrors
Flashlamp
Neodymium:YAG rod
Cooling water
Fig. 13.3.14 This fl ashlamp-pumped laser 
amplifi er contains a purple neodymium:YAG 
rod. The rod is in the bottom half of the 
opened, gold-lined amplifi er box and is 
protected by a glass tube. Light from a long 
fl ashlamp in the top half of the box excites 
the neodymium ions so that they can amplify 
infrared light passing horizontally through 
the rod.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

390 
CHAPTER 13 Light
 
Most laser diodes act as laser oscillators (Fig. 13.3.15), amplifying their own sponta-
neously emitted light until it forms an intense coherent beam. The ends of the anode itself 
are usually refl ective enough to act as mirrors and form a complete laser oscillator. How-
ever, to concentrate the laser light in one direction and to control its beam characteristics, 
many laser diodes have complicated structures and coatings.
© GIPhotoStock Z/Alamy
Fig. 13.3.15 This tiny semiconductor chip 
is a diode laser that emits an intense beam of 
coherent light when a current fl ows through it.
Check Your Understanding #7: Not So Fast, 007
A secret agent in a movie uses a tiny hand-held laser to burn a hole through a thick metal plate. From 
the point of view of power, why is such a laser essentially impossible to make?
Answer: The light in such a laser beam would carry an enormous amount of power. Something must 
transfer that power to the laser medium, an impossible task in a tiny hand-held unit.
Why: The power in a laser beam comes from the laser medium. The laser medium must have gotten 
it from somewhere else. Since batteries aren’t up to delivering thousands of watts of electric power, 
it’s unlikely that powerful hand-held lasers will ever be developed. Even if a suitable power source 
were available, these lasers would tend to overheat. The conversion of power to light is not perfectly 
effi cient, and most of the energy ends up as thermal energy in the laser’s components. Lasers require 
cooling to remove this wasted energy.
Epilogue for Chapter 13
In this chapter, we explored the creation and movement of light. In Sunlight, we looked at 
how light is scattered during its passage through the atmosphere and at how it bends and 
refl ects when it moves from one material to another. We also examined the interference 
effects that occur when a light wave follows more than one path to a particular destination 
and learned how polarizing sunglasses can diminish glare.
 
In Discharge Lamps, we examined electrical discharges in gases. We saw that atoms 
excited by collisions with charged particles can subsequently emit light through radiative 
transitions. We studied the primary colors of light to see how the phosphors on the inside 
surface of a fl uorescent tube are able to produce a reasonable facsimile of white sunlight.
 
In LEDs and Lasers, we looked at how electrons can emit light after crossing a junc-
tion between two different types of semiconductor, and we looked at the difference between 
common incoherent light and the unusual coherent light emitted by a laser. We saw that 
lasers use stimulated emission to duplicate photons so that a small number of initial pho-
tons can be amplifi ed into an enormous number.
Explanation: Splitting the Colors of Sunlight
Light bends as it passes through the cut facets of the crystal glass or bowl. Because of dis-
persion, the angle of each bend depends slightly on the wavelength of the light involved, so 
the different colors of sunlight follow slightly different paths through the crystal. When the 

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 391
light emerges from the crystal, its various wavelengths head in somewhat different direc-
tions; you see colors. Color sequences progress from long wavelength to short wavelength, 
or vice versa. You see red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet, or the reverse—
the colors of the rainbow.
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Sunlight Works: Sunlight originates at the 5800 K outer surface of the sun when 
electrically charged particles there accelerate back and forth rapidly and emit electro-
magnetic waves. This sunlight travels at the speed of light through empty space until it 
reaches Earth’s atmosphere. There it slows slightly and some of it Rayleigh-scatters. 
Short-wavelength light is Rayleigh-scattered more strongly than long-wavelength light, 
so the sky appears blue.
 
As the sunlight passes through various objects, it slows down and its colors sepa-
rate. When sunlight passes through falling raindrops, its different wavelengths follow 
different paths and create rainbows. As sunlight reflects from thin films such as soap 
bubbles, its waves are divided and may follow several different paths to the same desti-
nation. These light waves then interfere with one another so that some waves appear 
strong and bright while others are weak and dim. Interference depends on the wave-
lengths of light, so thin films appear brightly colored.
How Discharge Lamps Work: Discharge lamps produce light by passing electric currents 
through gases. Those gases are turned into electrical-conducting plasmas by filling 
them with charged particles, either by exposing them to strong voltage gradients or by 
injecting electrons into them from heated electrodes. Once a plasma is formed, current 
can pass through it and collisions within that current-carrying plasma cause the gas 
particles to emit light.
 
A fl uorescent lamp emits visible light when the phosphor coating on the inside of its 
tube is exposed to 254-nm ultraviolet light produced inside the tube by a low-pressure 
mercury vapor discharge. This ultraviolet light excites the phosphor coating and causes 
it to emit visible light. In contrast, mercury, metal-halide, and sodium lamps use dis-
charges to produce visible light directly and don’t employ phosphors. By operating at 
high pressures, those discharge lamps produce relatively broad light spectra and provide 
energy-efficient illumination.
How LEDs and Lasers Work: In an LED, light is emitted when conduction-level electrons 
from the diode’s cathode cross the p-n junction into the anode and undergo radiative 
transitions to empty valence levels. The color of light produced by the LED is deter-
mined primarily by the anode’s band gap.
 
Lasers amplify light through the process of stimulated emission. In this process, 
energy is transferred to atoms or atomlike systems contained in a laser medium. These 
excited systems might emit light spontaneously, and they can be stimulated into emit-
ting duplicates of a passing photon. When a photon with just the right wavelength 
passes through an excited system, that system is likely to give up its stored energy by 
emitting an exact copy of the initial photon. In a laser oscillator, two mirrors cause light 
to bounce back and forth through the laser medium. An initial photon is duplicated 
endlessly to produce coherent light. One of the mirrors is semitransparent so that part 
of the light emerges from the laser as a laser beam.
1. Pauli exclusion principle: No two indistinguishable Fermi 
particles ever occupy the same quantum wave.
2. Relationship between energy and frequency: The energy in 
a photon of light is equal to the Planck constant times the 
frequency of the light wave, or
 
energy = Planck constant · frequency. 
(13.2.1)

 M
any of the devices around us perform useful tasks by manipulating light, charge, or both. 
The techniques of optics deal with light and allow cameras to record images of the objects 
in front of them, our eyes to observe those objects directly, and eyeglasses and magnifying 
glasses to help us see details we’d miss with our eyes alone. The techniques of electronics deal 
with charge and permit an audio player’s memory to store sound information, its computer to 
retrieve that information, and its amplifi er and headphones to re-create the sound at the push of 
a button.
 
Optical tools such as lenses and prisms have been around for hundreds of years, and electronic 
devices such as resistors, capacitors, and inductors also have a long history. Advances of modern 
technology, however, have accelerated developments in both fi elds. The invention of lasers has sped 
the growth of the optics industry and the invention of transistors has revolutionized the world of 
electronics. Rapid progress in both fi elds, optics and electronics, has brought them closer together 
and has given birth to the combined fi eld of optoelectronics. There is even hope that one day com-
puters will be as much optical devices as they are electronic.
Magnifying Glass Camera
There are many household devices that manipulate light, 
and one of the most familiar is a magnifying glass. A magni-
fying glass bends light rays toward one another as they 
pass through it. In this chapter, we’ll see how a simple 
converging lens of this sort can magnify an object or cast 
its image onto a light-sensitive surface. For the moment, 
we’ll use it to cast the image of a window onto a wall.
 
Take a magnifying glass to a room with a bright 
window and turn off the lights. Hold the magnifying glass 
near the wall opposite the window and move the glass 
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
392
14
Optics and Electronics
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Cameras 393
Chapter Itinerary
This process of bringing light together to form a small spot or an 
image of a distant object is a common theme in optics. Repre-
senting information as charge and then storing, manipulating, 
and using that information is typical of electronics. In this 
chapter, we’ll examine a number of systems that are based on 
these sorts of manipulation of light and charge: (1) cameras, 
(2) optical recording and communication, and (3) audio players. 
In Cameras, we see how lenses bend light to form images and 
how those images are used to create photographs. In Optical 
Recording and Communication, we explore the roles of lasers in 
optics while investigating several novel optical effects. In Audio 
Players, we see how a small assortment of basic electronic com-
ponents is brought together to build a computer and an audio 
amplifi er, and how those two devices have been merged together 
into a single unit so that you can listen to thousands of songs as 
you lounge on the beach. For additional preview information, 
turn to the Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equa-
tions at the end of the chapter.
toward or away from the wall until you see a window-
shaped pattern of light appear on the wall. Once that 
pattern is visible, carefully adjust the magnifying glass’s 
orientation and distance from the wall to obtain the sharp-
est image of the window. You’ll probably also see images 
of objects outside that window, but you’ll have to move 
the magnifying glass to sharpen those images. Which 
way must you move the glass, and why can’t all the 
images be sharp at the same time?
 
You can project images of other brightly illumi-
nated objects on a sheet of white paper. What features 
of the lens determine the sizes of those images? What 
determines their orientations? Block part of the lens, 
and notice how it affects the images. Try to form 
images of objects at different distances from you. Do 
they all form images simultaneously, or do you have to 
adjust the lens somehow to bring each image into sharp 
focus?
does a longer lens seem to bring the objects nearer to you? 
What does a camera’s aperture do? Why do nearsighted and 
farsighted people wear different eyeglasses?
Experiments to Do: The basic activity of a camera—projecting 
an image of the scene in front of you onto its image sensor—
requires nothing more than a simple magnifying glass. In fact, 
you can use almost any simple lens that’s bowed outward in 
the middle, including the eyeglasses of a farsighted person 
with no astigmatism or drugstore reading glasses. Stand in a 
darkened room across from a single bright lamp. Hold a sheet 
of white paper so that it faces the lamp and move the lens 
back and forth in front of the paper. Make sure that the lens 
itself is also facing the lamp.
 
You should fi nd a distance at which the lens casts a clear 
image of the lamp onto the sheet of paper. You’ll fi nd that the 
lamp appears upside down and backwards and that the image 
becomes fuzzy if you move the lens toward or away from the 
paper. You’ll also fi nd that, when the lamp’s image is sharp, the 
images of things in front of or behind the lamp are fuzzy, and 
vice versa. Which way must you move the lens to bring more 
distant or less distant objects into focus?
 
Cut a hole in a piece of cardboard and use it to cover all 
but the center portion of the lens. The image of the lamp will 
now be substantially darker, but it will also be sharper over a 
wider range of distances from lens to paper. If the hole is nar-
row enough, virtually everything is in focus at once. Evidently, 
the diameter of the lens and its ability to focus on several 
things at once are closely related. Why?
In the two centuries since their invention, cameras have become 
extremely easy to use. What started as a hobby for a few dedi-
cated enthusiasts has evolved into an everyday activity. Despite 
all the technological improvements, however, photography still 
employs many of the same principles it did in the 1800s. 
Cameras still use lenses to project images onto light-sensitive 
surfaces, and photographers still have to worry about getting 
the exposure right, focusing properly, and avoiding the blur of 
rapid motion. In this section, we’ll explore some of the principles 
that make cameras work.
Questions to Think About: Why are expensive camera lenses 
so complicated, with so many separate pieces of glass? Why 
Viewing prism
Flash
Control dial
Back cover
latch
Lens-release button
Zoom ring
Manual focusing ring
Variable aperture
Objective lens
Self-timer 
button
LCD panel
Flash button
Electronic input 
dial
Shutter button
Grip/battery
housing
Auxiliary light 
emitter
SECTION 14.1
Cameras

394 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
Lenses and Real Images
When you take a picture of the scene in front of you, the lens of your camera bends light 
from that scene into a real image on a light-sensitive surface. A real image is a pattern of 
light, projected in space or on a surface, that exactly reproduces the pattern of light in the 
original scene. Since the real image that’s projected looks just like the scene you’re photo-
graphing, recording the light in that image is equivalent to recording the appearance of the 
scene itself.
 
That light-sensitive surface was at one time always photographic fi lm, but now digital 
cameras have almost completely replaced fi lm with electronic image sensors. Fortunately, 
the two light-sensing surfaces are essentially interchangeable, so we can refer to them both 
as image sensors: one is electronic, and one is photochemical.
 
Real images don’t occur without help. When light from a candle falls directly on an 
image sensor, it produces only diffuse illumination (Fig. 14.1.1a). Similarly, you can’t tell 
by looking at a sheet of paper what a candle looks like because the light that leaves the 
candle travels in all directions and is as likely to hit the top of the paper as it is to hit the 
bottom (Fig. 14.1.1b).
 
That’s why a camera needs a lens, a transparent object that uses refraction to form 
images. The light passing through a lens bends twice, once as it enters the glass or 
plastic and again as it leaves. In a camera lens, this bending process brings much of the 
light from one point on the candle back together at one point on the sensor. As you can 
see in Fig. 14.1.2, the real image that forms is upside down and backward. This inversion 
of the real image relative to the object always happens when a single lens creates a 
real image.
 
The curved shape of the camera lens allows it to form a real image. Light passing 
through the upper half of the lens is bent downward, while light passing through the lower 
half is bent upward. Because the camera lens bends light rays toward one another, it’s a 
converging lens. You can see how it forms an image in Fig. 14.1.2b by following some of 
the rays of light leaving one point on the candle.
 
The upper ray from the candle fl ame travels horizontally toward the top of the lens. As 
it enters the lens and slows down, this ray of light bends downward. It bends downward 
again as it leaves the lens and travels downward toward the bottom of the image sensor.
 
The lower ray from the candle fl ame travels downward toward the bottom of the lens 
and bends upward as it enters the lens. It bends upward again as it leaves the lens and trav-
els horizontally toward the bottom of the image sensor.
 
These two rays of light reach the image sensor at the same point. They are joined there 
by many other rays from the same part of the candle fl ame so that a bright spot forms on 
the sensor. Overall, each part of the candle illuminates a particular spot on the image sen-
sor, so the lens creates a complete image of the candle on the sensor.
Real
image
Lens
Object
Object
(a)
(b)
Fig. 14.1.1 (a) Without 
a lens, light from a candle 
uniformly illuminates an 
image sensor. (b) When a 
lens is introduced between 
the candle and the sensor, 
it brings light from each 
point on the candle back 
together on the sensor’s 
surface, forming an upside 
down and backward real 
image of the candle. The 
distance between the lens 
and the sensor must be 
chosen correctly or the 
image will be blurry.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 14.1.2 (a) When candlelight falls directly on a sheet of paper, it produces no image. (b) A lens 
inserted between the candle and paper forms an inverted real image of the fl ame on the paper.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Cameras 395
 
However, the lens can bring the light back together to form a sharp image on the sensor 
only if the lens and sensor are separated by just the right distance (Fig. 14.1.3). If the sensor 
is too close to the lens, then the light doesn’t have room to come together. If the sensor is 
too far from the lens, then the light begins to come apart again before reaching the sensor. 
In either case, the image on the sensor is blurry. The candle’s real image is only in focus at 
one distance from the lens.
 
If the candle moves toward or away from the camera lens, the distance between the 
lens and the image sensor must also change (Fig. 14.1.4). When the candle is far away, all 
its light rays that pass through the lens arrive traveling almost parallel to one another and 
the inward bend caused by the lens makes those rays converge together quickly. The rays 
come into focus relatively near the lens, and that’s where the sensor must be (Fig. 14.1.4a). 
The candle’s image on the sensor is much smaller than the candle itself because the light 
rays have only a short distance over which to move up or down after leaving the lens.
 
When the candle is nearby, its light rays that pass through the lens are diverging rap-
idly and the inward bend caused by the lens is just barely enough to make those rays con-
verge at all. As a result, the rays come into focus relatively far from the lens (Fig. 14.1.4b). 
The candle’s image on the sensor is quite large because the light rays have considerable 
distance over which to move up or down after leaving the lens.
 
Because distant and nearby objects form real images at different distances from the 
camera lens, they can’t both be in focus on the same image sensor. When you take a picture 
of a person standing in front of a mountain, only one of them can be in sharp focus. How-
ever, if you’re willing to compromise a little bit on sharpness, a lens can sometimes form 
acceptable images of both objects.
Blurry
Focus
Blurry
Sensor
Lens
Object
Fig. 14.1.3 The real 
image is in focus only 
when the image sensor is 
just the right distance from 
the lens. If the sensor is 
too near or too far from the 
lens, the image is blurry.
(a)
(b)
Real
image
Lens
Object
Real
image
Lens
Object
Fig. 14.1.4 (a) The light 
from a distant candle is 
traveling in almost the 
same direction, and the 
lens focuses it easily. The 
real image forms close to 
the lens. (b) The light from 
a nearby candle diverges, 
and the lens has more 
diffi culty bending it back 
together. The real image 
forms far from the lens. 
If the candle is too close 
to the lens, no real image 
forms at all.
Check Your Understanding #1: Seeing the Lights
If you hold a magnifying glass at the proper distance above a sheet of white paper, you will see an 
image of the overhead room lights on the paper. Explain.
Answer: It is a real image of the room lights, created by the converging magnifying glass.
Why: A magnifying glass is a converging lens and can form a real image. It brings light spreading 
outward from the room lights together onto the sheet of paper as a real image.
Focusing and Lens Diameter
A disposable camera is little more than a box with a lens. The lens projects a real image of 
the scene in front of it onto the camera’s image sensor. Light in the real image exposes the 
image sensor, which records the image permanently. While it may also have a shutter that 
starts and stops the exposure, a fl ash to provide extra light, and a mechanism that prepares 
for the next photograph, there’s little else to this simple camera.
 
However, there are limitations to the disposable camera design. One of the most severe 
limitations is that you can’t focus it—the camera has a fi xed distance between the lens and image 
sensor. Nonetheless, it manages to form relatively sharp real images on the sensor, even when 
there are objects at various distances from the camera. These simple cameras work because they 
use narrow (small-diameter) lenses. A narrow lens gathers less light than a wide lens, but it 
doesn’t require focusing, adjusting the distance between the lens and the image sensor.
 
Because a wide (large-diameter) lens brings rays together from many different direc-
tions, you must focus it (Fig. 14.1.5a); if the image sensor is even slightly too near or too 
far from the lens, the recorded image will be blurry. In contrast, a narrow lens forms a 
reasonably clear image even without focusing. Any rays from one part of the scene that 
succeed in passing through the narrow lens must already be fairly close together. Their 
initial closeness means that these converging rays illuminate only a small part of the image 
sensor even when the sensor isn’t exactly the right distance from the lens (Fig. 14.1.5b). 

396 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
Since the image sensor can’t record every minute detail anyway, the image that forms on it 
doesn’t have to be in absolutely perfect focus. As a result, a camera with a narrow lens and 
no focus adjustment manages to take pretty good pictures.
 
Unfortunately, these simple cameras collect very little light and need extremely light-
sensitive image sensors. These high-speed sensors can’t record photographs that are as 
sharp as low-speed sensors can. Furthermore, the pictures produced by simple cameras 
lack fi ne details; although everything is almost in focus, most things are a bit fuzzy if you 
look carefully or make enlargements.
 
More sophisticated cameras use wider lenses that gather more light and expose the image 
sensors much more rapidly. They also automatically adjust the distance between the lens and 
the sensor. They identify the object you are photographing and position the camera lens so that 
it projects a sharp image on the sensor. As the camera focuses, you can usually see components 
in the lens moving backward or forward to arrive at the correct distance from the sensor.
 
Even a camera with a wide lens can take advantage of the narrow lens trick for focusing. 
Its lens contains an internal diaphragm that reduces its aperture, or effective diameter. The 
diaphragm is a ring of metal strips with a central opening. These strips can swing in or out, chang-
ing the diameter of the diaphragm’s opening and with it the aperture of the lens (Fig. 14.1.6).
 
When its lens aperture is narrow, the sophisticated camera imitates a simple camera—
nearly everything is essentially in focus simultaneously. In such a situation, the camera has 
a large depth of focus. Actually, the sophisticated camera can bring the most important 
object into perfect focus, so it produces pictures that are superior to those from simple 
cameras. However, narrowing the aperture of the lens also reduces the amount of light 
reaching the image sensor. The scene in front of the camera must either be very bright or 
the exposure must be relatively long. You don’t get something for nothing.
 
Although widening the aperture of a large lens makes full use of its light-gathering 
capacity, focusing then becomes crucial. Even a small error in the lens-to-sensor distance 
produces a blurry picture, so the depth of focus is very small. This trade-off between light 
gathering and depth of focus is a continual struggle for photographers. However, photogra-
phers sometimes take advantage of the small depth of focus in wide lenses to blur the 
background or foreground of a photograph deliberately. A camera’s portrait setting adopts 
this strategy to produce sharp images of people against blurred backgrounds.
 
At other times, photographers choose long exposures at narrow apertures to bring an 
entire scene into sharp focus. A camera’s landscape setting takes this route, so everything in 
the photograph shows full detail. To capture fast motion while retaining a large depth of 
focus, photographers use a fl ash to brighten the scene and shorten the exposure. Unfortu-
nately, a camera fl ash is ineffective at brightening a distant scene, and it can produce unpleas-
ant refl ections from windows and eyes. A camera’s sports setting emphasizes brief exposures 
to avoid speed blur, even though that may require a wide aperture and small depth of focus.
(a)
Blurry
Object
Focus
Blurry
Large
lens
(b)
Blurry
Small
lens
Object
Usable focus
Usable focus
Focus
Blurry
Fig. 14.1.5 (a) A large 
lens collects lots of light 
but its focus is critical. 
The image is blurry except 
at the actual focus. (b) A 
small lens collects less 
light but its image is 
relatively sharp anywhere 
near the focus.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 14.1.6 The aperture 
of this lens can be reduced 
by closing its internal 
diaphragm, dimming its 
image but increasing its 
depth of focus.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Check Your Understanding #2: Portrait Photos
While taking a photograph of your friend, with the diaphragm of your large camera lens wide open, 
you notice that the background is blurry. Explain.
Answer: Light from the more distant background focuses closer to the lens than light from your 
friend. Since the camera is focusing on your friend, the background appears out of focus.
Why: When the aperture of your camera lens is wide open, focusing becomes critical. Objects in front 
of or behind your friend are out of focus on the image sensor and appear blurry.
Focal Lengths and f-Numbers
Lenses are characterized by two quantities: focal length and f-number. The focal length of 
a lens is the distance between the lens and the real image it forms of a very distant object. 
For example, if a real image of the moon forms 100 mm (4 in) behind a particular lens, then 

Cameras 397
that lens has a focal length of 100 mm. The focal lengths of camera lenses 
range from less than 10 mm (0.4 in) in many cell phones and compact cameras 
to about 2 m (7 ft) in cameras used for nature photography.
 
When light from a scene passes through a short-focal-length lens, it 
comes to a focus near that lens and produces a relatively small image on the 
image sensor. Because a long-focal-length lens permits the light passing 
through it to spread out more before coming to a focus, it produces a larger 
real image on the sensor.
 
The “normal” lens for a particular camera has a focal length that allows 
all the objects in your central fi eld of vision to fi t onto the image sensor (see 
Table 14.1.1). When you hold the fi nished photograph about 30 cm (1 ft) 
from your eyes, the objects in the picture appear about the same size they did 
when the photograph was taken. The focal length of a camera’s normal lens 
is about 1.5 times the horizontal width of its image sensor.
 
A wide-angle lens has a shorter focal length than the normal lens 
(Fig. 14.1.7a). The image it projects onto the image sensor is smaller but brighter, and 
most of the objects in your entire fi eld of vision appear in the photograph. A telephoto lens 
has a longer focal length than the normal lens (Fig. 14.1.7b). The image it projects onto 
the sensor is larger but dimmer, with only objects at the center of the scene appearing in 
the photograph.
 
In addition to indicating where the image of a distant object forms, the focal length of 
the camera lens relates the object distance to the image distance. The object distance is the 
distance between the lens and the object you’re photographing. The image distance is the 
distance between the lens and the real image it forms (Fig. 14.1.8). The relationship is 
called the lens equation and can be written in a word equation:
 
1
focal length =
1
object distance +
1
image distance, 
(14.1.1)
in symbols:
1
f = 1
o + 1
i ,
and in everyday language:
The farther away an object is, the closer to the lens its image forms.
Real image
dim & large
Telephoto
lens
Object
Real image
bright & small
Wide-angle
lens
Object
(b)
(a)
Fig. 14.1.7 (a) A wide-
angle lens has a short focal 
length and forms a small, 
bright real image near the 
lens. (b) A telephoto lens 
has a long focal length 
and forms a large, dim real 
image far from the lens.
TABLE 14.1.1 Several Cameras, the Widths of the Image Sensor 
They Use, and Their Normal Lenses
Type of Camera
Sensor Width
Normal Lens
Typical digital camera
8 mm
12 mm
35-mm camera
36 mm
50 mm
2¼-inch medium-format camera
2¼ inches
80 mm
5-inch portrait camera
5 inches
180 mm
Real
image
Lens
Object
Object distance Image distance
Fig. 14.1.8 The 
relationship between the 
object distance, the image 
distance, and the focal 
length of the lens is given 
by the lens equation.
THE LENS EQUATION
One divided by the focal length of a lens is equal to the sum of one divided by the 
object distance and one divided by the image distance.

398 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
 
According to the lens equation, the image distance for a distant object is equal to the 
focal length of the lens. That agrees with our earlier discussion of focal length. However, 
when the object is nearby, the image distance becomes larger than the focal length. That’s 
why a camera lens moves away from the image sensor as you focus closer. When the object 
distance becomes less than the focal length, the image distance becomes negative and no 
real image forms at all. That’s why you can’t focus on an object that’s too close to the lens.
 
A lens’s f-number characterizes the brightness of the real image that it forms on the 
image sensor, with smaller f-numbers indicating brighter images. The f-number is calcu-
lated by dividing the lens’s focal length by its diameter, or
f-number = focal length
diameter .
Since long focal length lenses naturally produce larger and dimmer images on the image 
sensor, the f-number takes into account both the light-gathering capacity of the lens and its 
focal length. Increasing a lens’s diameter increases its light-gathering capacity and 
decreases its f-number. Increasing a lens’s focal length decreases the brightness of its real 
image and increases the f-number. Doing both at once, increasing the lens diameter and 
focal length equally, leaves the brightness and f-number unchanged.
 
Most sophisticated cameras use large-diameter lenses so that their f-numbers are gen-
erally less than 4. Since it’s diffi cult to fabricate a lens that’s larger in diameter than its focal 
length, the smallest practical f-number is about 1. Also, because long-focal-length lenses 
need large apertures to keep their f-numbers small, some telephoto lenses are huge.
 
The diaphragm inside a lens allows you to decrease the lens’s aperture and thus 
increase its f-number. A factor of 2 increase in f-number corresponds to a factor of 
2 decrease in the lens’s effective diameter and a factor of 4 decrease in the lens’s light-
gathering area. Thus when you double the f-number of the lens, you must compensate by 
quadrupling the exposure time. Although closing the aperture increases the lens’s depth of 
focus, it requires a longer exposure.
Check Your Understanding #3: Bright and Sharp Photographs
On bright, sunny days, your automatic camera takes photographs with large depths of focus, while 
on dark, overcast days its pictures have much smaller depths of focus. What causes this difference?
Answer: On a bright day, your camera needs only a small aperture to gather enough light for an expo-
sure, so the depth of focus is large. On a dark day, it uses the largest aperture available to gather light 
and has a small depth of focus.
Why: Light gathering and depth of focus go hand in hand. If you must open the aperture of your 
camera’s lens to gather enough light for an exposure, focusing will become critical and your photo-
graphs will have small depths of focus.
Check Your Figures #1: The Image of an Apple
If the distance from an apple to a converging lens is twice the focal length of that lens, where will 
the real image of the apple form?
Answer: The image will form at a distance twice the focal length behind the lens.
Why: Since the object distance is twice the focal length, we can use Eq. 14.1.1 to fi nd the image 
distance:
 
1
image distance =
1
focal length −
1
object distance
 =
1
focal length −
1
2 · focal length
 =
1
2 · focal length.
The image distance is twice the focal length of the lens.

Cameras 399
Improving the Quality of a Camera Lens
A high-quality camera lens isn’t a single piece of glass or plastic. Instead, it’s 
composed of many separate elements that function together as a single lens. This 
complexity improves the quality of the real image. To begin with, dispersion in a 
single-element lens causes different colors of light to bend differently and focus 
at different distances behind that lens. Known as chromatic aberration, this prob-
lem can be fi xed by using several lens elements made of different types of glass 
or plastic with different amounts of dispersion. These elements compensate for 
one another so that the overall lens, known as an achromat, has very little disper-
sion and almost no color-focusing problems.
 
After correcting for color and other technical image problems, a sophisti-
cated camera lens may contain more than 10 individual elements. For the purposes of the 
lens equation, this complicated lens has an effective center from which to calculate object 
and image distances. However, having so many separate elements creates refl ection 
problems; each time light passes from air to glass or vice versa, some of it refl ects. To 
avoid fogging the photographs with this bouncing stray light, the individual elements are 
antirefl ection coated with thin layers of transparent materials. The best coatings use 
interference effects to cancel out the refl ected light waves and give the lens only a weak 
violet refl ection.
 
Many modern cameras are equipped with zoom lenses. A zoom lens is a complicated 
lens that can change the size of the real image it projects onto the image sensor. By care-
fully moving its lens elements relative to one another, the zoom lens can adjust its effective 
focal length.
 
A common type of zoom lens contains three separate groups of lens elements and 
produces a sequence of three images (Fig. 14.1.9). The fi rst lens group forms a fi rst image 
of the scene in front of the camera. The second lens group forms a second image of that fi rst 
image. The third lens group projects a third, real image of the second image onto the image 
sensor. Zooming the lens—that is, changing its focal length—involves altering the spac-
ings between the lens groups to vary the second lens group’s object and image distances 
and thus the relative sizes of the fi rst and second images.
 
As the zoom lens changes from short focal length to long focal length, the image it 
projects on the sensor becomes larger. This effect allows you to compose the picture so that 
the scene fi lls the photograph completely. A lens that can change its focal length while 
retaining the same f-number and still keep the real image in focus on the sensor is a truly 
remarkable achievement.
Object
Main
zoom
motion
Lens group 1
Image 1
Image 2
Image 3
Sensor
Lens group 2
Lens group 3
Main
focus
motion
Fig. 14.1.9 A common 
type of zoom lens uses 
three lens groups to project 
a variable-size real image 
on the image sensor. 
Zooming is done mostly 
by moving the second lens 
group to change its image 
and object distances. 
The fi rst lens group is 
responsible for focusing, 
and the third lens group 
projects the real image on 
the sensor.
Check Your Understanding #4: Not Such a Good Picture
If you use a large magnifying glass to form a real image of an overhead fl uorescent light fi xture, you 
will fi nd that the corners of the light fi xture are blurry and have rainbow colors in them. Why is the 
image quality so poor?
Answer: The magnifying glass has only one glass element and suffers from chromatic aberration (and 
many other image imperfections).
Why: A single converging lens can’t form a high-quality image on a fl at surface because it has 
chromatic aberration, spherical aberration, coma, and astigmatism. If the lens is small, these failings 
are often invisible. In a large magnifying glass, however, they are all readily apparent and you can’t 
form a sharp image of the entire light fi xture.
The Viewfi nder and Virtual Images
SLR (single lens refl ex) cameras permit you to change their lenses so that you can choose 
a lens that’s optimized for the task at hand. When you peer through the viewfi nder of an 
SLR camera (Fig. 14.1.10), you’re looking at the same real image that will be projected 

400 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
onto the image sensor during the exposure. The light you see travels through the camera’s 
main lens, refl ects off a mirror, and projects onto a translucent screen inside the top of the 
camera. You’re simply inspecting this screen and the real image through a magnifying lens 
in the eyepiece. During the exposure, the mirror fl ips out of the way and the real image 
projects briefl y onto the image sensor.
 
Since the screen and real image are only an inch or two from your eye, you can’t focus 
on them without the help of the eyepiece lens. The eyepiece lens is converging, but in this 
case it doesn’t form a real image. Instead, it forms a virtual image, an image located at a 
negative image distance—that is, on the wrong side of the lens!
 
The screen displaying the scene that you’re photographing is so close to the eyepiece 
lens that the object distance is less than that lens’s focal length. According to the lens equa-
tion, the image distance should be negative, and it is; the image is located on the screen side 
of the eyepiece lens (Fig. 14.1.11). You can’t put your fi ngers in the light and project this 
image on your skin because the image is virtual rather than real.
 
You can, however, see this image through the eyepiece. It’s located farther away than 
the screen itself, so your eye can comfortably focus on it. Also, the image is magnifi ed—
the eyepiece lens is acting as a magnifying glass (Fig. 14.1.12). This lens provides magni-
fi cation because, when you look at the screen through it, the screen image covers a wider 
portion of your fi eld of vision. This magnifi cation increases as the eyepiece lens’s focal 
length decreases. That’s because a shorter-focal-length eyepiece lens must be quite close to 
the screen, where it can bend light rays coming from a smaller region so that they fi ll your 
fi eld of vision. The eyepiece lens in a typical camera has been chosen so that the screen fi lls 
a comfortable portion of your visual fi eld, allowing you to examine the virtual image in 
great detail and adjust the lens and camera settings until you have just the right picture in 
your view. Then all you have to do is take the photograph.
 
Cameras with fi xed lenses often have two separate viewfi nder systems. A typical digi-
tal camera has an electronic viewfi nder, which displays the real image being projected onto 
its image sensor. Many digital and most fi lm cameras also have optical viewfi nders. 
Fig. 14.1.10 The mirror in the center 
of this refl ex camera directs light from 
the lens (removed for this photograph) 
onto the focusing screen above it. During 
the exposure, the mirror swings upward 
to permit light from the lens to strike the 
image sensor at the back of the camera.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
(a)
(b)
Object
Object
Focal
length
Lens
Lens
No real
image
Virtual
image
Fig. 14.1.11 (a) Light 
from an object very near a 
converging lens diverges 
after passing through the 
lens and no real image 
forms. (b) Your eye sees a 
virtual image that is large 
and far away.
Fig. 14.1.12 This magnifying glass creates an enlarged 
virtual image located far behind the printed text. You 
can’t touch the image or put your fi ngers in its light, but 
you can see it clearly with your eyes.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Cameras 401
Although optical viewfi nders vary in style and sophistication, the best combine real and 
virtual images. In a real-image optical viewfi nder, a system of lenses, mirrors, and/or 
prisms produces an erect real image of the scene and you then examine that real image 
through an eyepiece magnifying glass. The lenses projecting the real image zoom along 
with the camera’s main lens so that what you see through the viewfi nder is similar to what 
the camera’s image sensor will record.
Check Your Understanding #5: Real and Virtual Images
As you move a magnifying glass slowly toward the photograph in front of you, you see an inverted 
image that grows larger and nearer to your eye. This image eventually becomes blurry, and then a new 
upright and enlarged image appears on the photograph’s side of the lens. What’s happening?
Answer: The lens is initially creating a real image near your eye. This real image moves past you as 
the lens approaches the photograph. Finally, the lens is close enough to create an enlarged virtual 
image of the photograph.
Why: A magnifying glass forms either a real or virtual image, depending on object distance and the 
lens’s focal length. If the lens and photograph are separated by more than the focal length, the image 
is real and you see it near your eye. You can touch this inverted image or project it on a piece of 
paper. If the lens and picture are separated by less than the focal length, the upright image is virtual 
and you see it on the far side of the lens.
Image Sensors
Once the lens has projected its real image onto the image sensor, it’s the image sensor’s job 
to record that pattern of light. Interestingly enough, both fi lm and electronic image sensors 
use semiconductors, and both detect light when its photons shift electrons from valence 
levels to conduction levels. However, how those two image sensors act on the electron 
transitions is quite different.
 
Photographic fi lm detects light photochemically. Embedded in the fi lm are tiny crys-
tals of silver salts. Composed primarily of silver and halogen atoms, these semiconductor 
crystals are extremely sensitive to light. When a silver halide crystal absorbs a photon of 
visible light, it can undergo a radiative transition that shifts an electron from a valence level 
to a conduction level and eventually frees one silver atom from a silver halide molecule. 
After several nearby silver atoms have been freed by light, they can form a tiny particle of 
silver metal. When the fi lm is developed, this silver particle transforms the entire silver 
halide crystal into metallic silver. The microscopically rough structure of that silver makes 
it appear black rather than shiny.
 
In black-and-white photography, the silver particles themselves form a negative image 
on the developed fi lm. Wherever the fi lm was struck by light, it acquires a dense, black 
pattern of silver particles. Wherever light was absent, the fi lm becomes clear once the unex-
posed silver salts are washed away. Although the image on the developed fi lm itself is 
negative—light is dark and dark is light—the process of preparing photographic prints 
reverses light and dark a second time so that the image on the prints is positive.
 
In color photography, the silver halide crystals are exposed to light through color 
fi lters and sensitizers, so that the fi lm separately records its exposure to the three pri-
mary colors of light (see Section 13.2). During development, the silver itself is washed 
away, but a negative color image remains in the fi lm. For example, wherever blue light 
struck the fi lm, it acquires a yellow tint and therefore absorbs blue light. Again, the 
photographic printing process reverses the colors a second time so that the prints have 
positive images.
 
Electronic image sensors are based on photodiodes, diodes that are optimized to 
detect light. They combine the light-sensing behavior of photoconductors (see Fig. 13.3.4) 
with the current-controlling behavior of diodes (see Fig. 13.3.6). A vast array of these 

402 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
photodiodes record the pattern of light in the real image, and the camera subsequently 
reads that pattern by measuring the accumulated charges on each of its photodiodes. To 
obtain color information, the image sensor’s photodiodes are covered with a pattern of 
red, green, and blue fi lters so that each photodiode measures the intensity of only one 
primary color of light.
Check Your Understanding #6: Foggy Photos
Airport screening devices often use X-rays to search for hidden items. These high-energy photons can 
damage fi lm. How?
Answer: X-rays cause radiative transitions in the silver salt crystals.
Why: X-rays can penetrate through normally opaque objects and reach the fi lm. If a silver salt crystal 
in the fi lm absorbs an X-ray, it will respond as though it was exposed to visible light. Although most 
modern screening devices use such weak X-ray sources that the effects are minimal, repeated 
screenings of high-speed fi lm will gradually ruin it.
Eyes and Eyeglasses
Not all cameras involve modern technology. Most people are born with 
two of them—their eyes. Like the cameras we have discussed, each eye 
consists primarily of a converging lens and an image sensor (Fig. 
14.1.13). In this case, the lens is a combination of the front surface of 
the eyeball, its cornea, and the internal lens just beneath the cornea. The 
image sensor is the retina, a vast pattern of light-sensitive cells and nerves at the back 
of the eyeball.
 
When you look at the scene in front of you, the cornea and lens of your eye project a 
real image of that scene onto your retina and your retina reports the resulting pattern of 
light to your brain. As usual, the real image is inverted and reversed left to right, but your 
brain compensates for that effect.
 
Since your eyeball can’t alter the distance between the lens and the 
image sensor, it focuses the real image by adjusting the focal length of the 
lens. When you look at nearer objects, the lens in your eye becomes more 
highly curved and its focal length decreases. The light rays from that nearer 
object thus converge more sharply and form a real image on your retina. 
When you view a more distant object, the lens becomes less curved and its 
focal length increases.
 
Like a sophisticated camera, your eye has an iris within its lens system. 
When you view a bright scene, that iris shrinks to limit the amount of light 
striking your retina. As a side effect, your depth of focus increases and every-
thing appears sharper. It’s easier to focus when you read or work in a well-
lighted environment.
 
However, not all eyes are perfect, and many need help forming sharp real 
images on their retina. Although modern laser surgical techniques can reshape 
corneas to improve image sharpness, the classic approach to better vision is to 
wear eyeglasses or contact lenses. An eye’s lens system already consists of two 
components, the cornea and the lens, so adding a third component, eyeglasses, is no big deal.
 
A person who is farsighted can’t see nearby objects sharply because her lens system 
has too long a focal length (Fig. 14.1.14a). Although it can project real images of distant 
objects on her retina, nearby objects focus too far away from the front of her eye and the 
light strikes her retina before it forms a real image.
 
To compensate for farsightedness, she wears eyeglasses with converging lenses 
(Fig. 14.1.14b). These lenses begin the task of bending light rays together even before they 
Object
Image
Retina
Cornea
Iris Lens
Fig. 14.1.13 An eye is 
a camera, with its cornea 
and lens forming a real 
image on the retina. The 
eye focuses by changing 
the curvature of its lens. 
The iris changes the eye’s 
f-number.
Nearby
object
Image
Nearby
object
Image
Converging
lens
(a)
(b)
Farsighted eye
Fig. 14.1.14 (a) A 
farsighted eye bends light 
too weakly to focus on a 
nearby object. The real 
image forms beyond the 
retina. (b) A converging 
lens shifts the real image 
forward so that it focuses 
on the retina.

Optical Recording and Communication 403
enter her eyes. Her own lens system completes the bending, and the real images 
form closer to the front of her eyes. She is thus able to see nearby objects clearly.
 
In contrast, a person who is nearsighted is unable to focus on distant 
objects because his lens system has too short a focal length (Fig. 14.1.15a). 
The real images of those distant objects form too close to the front of his 
eye, and the light has already begun to spread apart by the time it reaches 
his retina.
 
To compensate for nearsightedness, he wears eyeglasses with diverging 
lenses (Fig. 14.1.15b). A diverging lens is one that bends light rays apart and 
therefore has a negative focal length. Typically thinner at its middle than at its 
edge, a diverging lens bends the nearly parallel rays of light from a distant 
object so that they diverge more rapidly. Those rays then appear to come from 
a much nearer object, actually a nearby virtual image, and his eyes are able to 
focus them properly on his retina.
Distant
object
Image
Distant
object
Image
Diverging
lens
(a)
(b)
Nearsighted eye
Fig. 14.1.15 (a) A 
nearsighted eye bends 
light too strongly to focus 
on a distant object. The 
real image forms before 
the retina. (b) A diverging 
lens shifts the real image 
backward so that it focuses 
on the retina.
Check Your Understanding #7: Keeping Up Your Image
The eyeglasses of a farsighted person can project a real image of a distant scene on a white wall. 
However, the eyeglasses of a nearsighted person produce no real image. Why not?
Answer: Nearsighted eyeglasses use diverging lenses, which bend light rays apart and don’t focus 
them together into a real image.
Why: To form a real image of a distant scene, you need to bring light rays together with a converging 
lens. Diverging lenses spread light rays apart and can’t form real images on their own.
this section, we’ll look at how optical devices use light to 
manipulate information.
Questions to Think About: Where is a CD’s or DVD’s information 
stored? How do CD or DVD players ignore fi ngerprints, dust, and 
other surface contamination during playback? Why is a laser 
involved in recording and playing back a CD or DVD? Why can a 
Blu-ray disc hold more information than a DVD and a DVD more 
than a CD? Why are CDs and DVDs so free of noise? How can a 
glass fi ber direct light in a curving path? How can light travel 
through kilometers of glass fi ber without becoming dim?
Experiments to Do: Hold a prerecorded CD, DVD, or Blu-ray 
by its edges, and look at its unlabeled surface. Beneath the 
clear plastic face is a smooth, shiny layer that refl ects a rain-
bow of colors. Tiny pits in this layer cause this coloration. 
These pits form a spiral track around the center of the disc, 
and adjacent arcs of this track are so closely spaced that light 
waves refl ecting from them interfere, as from a soap fi lm. The 
refl ective layer is so thin that you can see through it if you hold 
it in front of a bright light. Can you see the refl ections of dust 
particles on the unlabeled surface? How deep below the plas-
tic surface is the shiny layer?
Using light to convey information is as old as signal fi res and 
as natural as sight itself. Over the years, advances in light 
sources, optical materials, and electronics have radically 
increased the possibilities for optical information systems. 
Optics and information go so well together that they’re partly 
responsible for the current information revolution. The intro-
duction of compact disc players in the early 1980s trans-
formed the music industry virtually overnight, and optical 
fi bers are knitting our world together at an astonishing pace. In 
Previous track
Next
Stop
Play/pause
Volume
Line output
Headphone jack
Tone control
LCD display
Compact 
disc
Cover latch
Cover
SECTION 14.2
Optical Recording and Communication
Representing Sound and Light: Analog and Digital
A CD doesn’t store sound any more than a DVD or Blu-ray stores fl ickering light. Instead, 
these discs store representations of sound and light that it can use to recreate them on demand. 

404 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
Embedded in each disc is enough information to reproduce a concert or a movie, and to do so 
almost perfectly. Between the microphones or camera that originally collected that informa-
tion and the headphones or home theater that fi nally reconstructs the sound or light are a 
number of fascinating processes, some optical and some electronic. In this section, we con-
centrate on the optical processes. In Section 14.3, we’ll look at the electronic ones.
 
In Section 12.1, we saw that a radio wave can be used to represent sound. Sound waves 
are fl uctuations in air’s density, and the AM technique represents those density changes by 
changes in the amplitude of a radio wave. The FM technique is similar, but it represents 
those density changes by small changes in the frequency of a radio wave. Both techniques 
are analog representations of the sound, meaning that a continuously variable physical 
quantity (a radio wave’s amplitude or frequency) represents another continuously variable 
physical quantity (air’s density). Like any analog representation, the radio transmitter is 
drawing an analogy between two continuously variable physical quantities—amplitude or 
frequency is serving as an analog for air density. The radio receiver draws the reverse anal-
ogy and thereby recreates the sound itself.
 
Although parts of the CD player use analog representations for sound, the optical 
recording and playback part uses a different representation—digital. In digital representa-
tions, a continuously variable physical quantity is fi rst represented by a series of numbers 
and then each of those numbers is represented by a set of physical quantities—a set of 
digits—each of which can have only a limited number of discrete values. Those discrete 
values are known as symbols, and symbols can be just about anything, as long as you can 
tell them apart. As we’ll see in a moment, the numerals 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 are such 
symbols, and the set of numerals 392 is a digital representation of the number three hundred 
ninety-two.
 
Suppose that you’re recording your band and want a digital representation of its sound. 
The fi rst step is to represent that sound’s density fl uctuations as a series of numbers. With 
the help of a microphone and some other equipment, you measure the air density many 
times per second and obtain the series of numbers. Let’s assume that one of those numbers 
is one hundred twenty-four, meaning that the air density during that measurement was 124 
units above the normal density.
 
The second step is to represent each number by a set of digits. We’ll allow each digit 
to hold 1 of 10 possible symbols. Those symbol choices could be , ‚ , , , , , , , 
and 
, but let’s use a more familiar collection, the numerals 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. 
Note that the symbol 5 isn’t actually a number; it’s just a shape consisting of two straight 
lines and partial circle.
 
With a single digit and our set of 10 symbols, we can represent the numbers zero 
through nine. With 2 digits and those same 10 symbols, we can represent the numbers zero 
through ninety-nine. With three digits, we can represent zero through nine hundred ninety-
nine. Since we’re trying to represent the number one hundred twenty-four, we clearly need 
at least three digits. When we place the symbols 1, 2, and 4 in those three digits, as 124, we 
are representing the number one hundred twenty-four.
 
The convention that we are following when letting 124 represent one hundred twenty-
four is known as decimal. In decimal, we break numbers into ones, tens, hundreds, thou-
sands, and so on—the powers of 10—and use 1 digit and a set of 10 symbols to represent 
how much of each power of 10 is present in the number we’re representing. The decimal 
representation of one hundred twenty-four is 124, meaning that it contains 1 hundred (102), 
2 tens (101), and 4 ones (100). When these pieces are added together, they sum to one hundred 
twenty-four.
 
What if, instead of 10 symbols, our collection had only 2 symbols: 0, 1? We could still 
represent large numbers, but we would need many more digits than before. We would have 
to break numbers into ones, twos, fours, eights, sixteens, and so on. Instead of using the 
powers of 10 (as in decimal), we would be using the powers of 2. This system for represent-
ing numbers using the powers of 2 is called binary.

Optical Recording and Communication 405
 
In binary, one hundred twenty-four is written as 1111100, meaning that it contains 1 
sixty-four (26), 1 thirty-two (25), 1 sixteen (24), 1 eight (23), 1 four (22), 0 twos (21), and 0 
ones (20). When these pieces are added together, they again sum to one hundred twenty-
four. This apparently complicated way to represent even a fairly small number is actually 
quite useful. The number has been broken into pieces that have only two possible values; 
there is either a thirty-two in the number being represented or there isn’t.
 
Binary representations require only two different symbols, and those symbols can be any 
distinguishable objects. We’ve been using (1 and 0), but we could use (heads and tails), (smoke 
and no-smoke), (dot and dash), (shiny and dull), (charged and uncharged), and so on. Inside an 
optical disc, for example, there is a surface covered with shiny and dull spots, and those spots 
are a binary representation of numbers. Similarly, in a computer, there are capacitors that are 
charged or uncharged, and those capacitors are a binary representation of numbers.
 
There are good reasons for using digital representation to record your band’s sound 
and for using binary. Analog representations are inherently noisy because every accidental 
change in the physical quantity doing the representing is interpreted as a change in the 
physical quantity being represented. That’s why a phonograph record, which uses height 
fl uctuations in a groove to represent the density fl uctuations of sound, can’t re-create that 
sound perfectly. Whenever dust settles into the groove on the record and introduces its own 
height fl uctuations, the phonograph reproduces inaccurate sound, full of pops and snaps.
 
In contrast, digital representations are noise free. Dust and other imperfections have no 
effect on digital representations as long as the symbols can still be distinguished for one 
another. For example, even without brushing the cracker crumbs off your book, laptop, or 
tablet, you can still read 5049 or 101001 with perfect accuracy, unless you’re a total slob. 
Even when some of the symbols are so badly obscured that they cannot be read, extra sym-
bols can be incorporated into the digital representation to correct for such reading errors.
 
The reason that binary is so useful in both optical and electronic devices is that work-
ing with 2 symbols is much easier than working with 10 of them. The symbols used in these 
devices aren’t shapes on a sheet of paper or computer screen, they’re things like the shini-
ness of a surface or the charge on a capacitor. It’s easy to distinguish a dull spot (0) from a 
shiny spot (1) inside an optical disc, but it’s much harder to distinguish between dull (0), 
not quite dull (1), slightly shiny (2), . . . , very shiny (8), and extremely shiny (9) spots. 
Although there are modern technologies that use more than two symbols, notably digital 
television transmission, binary is much more common.
Check Your Understanding #1: New Math
What number does binary 10000001 represent?
Answer: One hundred twenty-nine.
Why: Binary 10000001 contains only 1 one hundred twenty-eight (27) and 1 one (20). All the other 
powers of 2 are not present. Since 128 + 1 is 129, that is the number represented by this binary 
value.
Digital Recording
In the conventional CD format, density measurements are made 44,100 times each second 
for two independent audio channels and these measurements are recorded on the disc in 
binary form, using 16 bits for each measurement (Fig. 14.2.1). Since the air density can go 
down as well as up, these bits represent the positive and negative integers from –32,768 to 
32,767, which in turn represent how much the air density is above or below the average 
density. Density measurements with 16 bits of precision are suffi cient to reproduce both 
loud and soft music with almost perfect fi delity.
 
Like CDs, DVDs record information digitally. But DVDs are a newer technology and 
therefore more sophisticated. Audio DVDs can choose from several measurement rates, bits per 

406 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
measurement, and numbers of channels. A typical DVD might have fi ve audio channels: left-
front, center-front, right-front, left-rear, and right-rear. The three front channels might have 
96,000 density measurements per second at 24 bits per measurement, and the two rear channels 
might have 48,000 measurements per second at 20 bits per measurement. All these samples, 
bits, and channels involve far more information than is stored on a CD, and a DVD compresses 
that information before storing it. In contrast, a conventional CD’s information is uncompressed 
although some more modern formats (e.g., mp3) do employ compression techniques.
 
In either case, air density measurements aren’t simply recorded one after another on a 
disc’s surface. Instead, these numbers are extensively reorganized before they’re stored. 
This reorganization allows the player to reproduce the sound perfectly even if the disc can’t 
be read completely. As we’ll see shortly, reading these discs is a technological tour de force 
and susceptible to various failures. To be sure that the sound (and video) can be reproduced 
completely and without interruption, the numbers are recorded in an encoded manner. They 
appear redundantly so that, even if one copy of a number is illegible, there is still enough 
legible information along the same arc of the disc’s spiral track to completely re-create that 
missing number. This duplication of information reduces the playing time of both CDs and 
DVDs, but it is essential for reliability.
 
Its encoding scheme leaves a CD or DVD almost completely immune to all but the 
most severe playback problems. In principle, you can damage or obscure a 2-mm-wide 
swath of the disc, from its center to its edge, and the player will still be able to reproduce 
the sound (and video) perfectly. However, damage along an arc of the spiral track is far 
more threatening to the data. If the player can’t read a long stretch of a single arc, it won’t 
be able to recover the information. That’s why you should always clean a CD or DVD from 
its center outward to its edge.
Binary
representation
(base 2)
Digital
representation
Air density
Time
0000000001111010
0000000010000101
0000000010001111
0000000010011000
0000000010100000
0000000010100111
0000000010101101
0000000010110010
0000000010110110
0000000010111001
0000000010111011
0000000010111100
0000000010111100
0000000010111011
0000000010111000
0000000010110011
0000000010101110
0000000010101000
0000000010100000
0000000010010111
0000000010001100
0000000010000010
122
133
143
152
160
167
173
178
182
185
187
188
188
187
184
179
174
168
160
151
140
130
Fig. 14.2.1 Sound can be 
represented as a series of numbers. 
Each number corresponds to the air 
density at a particular moment in 
time.
Check Your Understanding #2: Cordless Clarity Away from Home
Cell phones transmit your voice in digital form. In general terms, how does this digital transmission 
work?
Answer: Your cell phone’s microphone converts the sound of your voice into a fl uctuating current. 
This current is measured periodically and represented as a sequence of numbers. These numbers are 
then represented by radio waves and transmitted through space. The numbers eventually work their 
way to a receiving cell phone, where the radio waves are converted back into numbers and the numbers 
are converted back into a fl uctuating current. Finally, the current is amplifi ed and sent through a 
speaker to create sound.
Why: Many modern communication devices use a digital representation of sound. In radio-wave 
communication, digital representations are particularly useful because they are immune to the noise 
that plagues analog radio transmissions and also permit more effi cient use of the radio bandwidth.

Optical Recording and Communication 407
The Structure of CDs, DVDs, and Blu-rays
Standard CDs, DVDs, and Blu-rays are 120 mm (4.72 in.) in diameter and 1.2 mm (0.05 
in.) thick. One side of a CD is clear and smooth but the other side contains a sandwich of 
layers: a thin fi lm of aluminum, a protective lacquer, and a printed label (Fig. 14.2.2a). In 
contrast, a DVD is laminated from two 0.6-mm-thick clear plastic discs, with one, two, or 
four refl ective layers of aluminum, gold, or silicon stacked up in between them (Fig. 
14.2.2c). The more layers in the DVD, the more information it holds. A Blu-ray disc (BRD) 
also has 1 to 4 refl ective layers, but they are so near the BRD’s surface that a hard protective 
coating is applied to prevent scratches.
 
The refl ective layers are the recording surfaces. These layers are so thin that they actu-
ally transmit a small amount of light. In the gold or silicon DVD layers, this semitranspar-
ency is essential because it allows the optical system that reads information to send light 
through the semitransparent layer to the aluminum layer beyond it. The aluminum layers 
also transmit some light. Although aluminum’s electrons accelerate in response to the 
light’s electric fi eld and normally refl ect that light completely, there aren’t enough elec-
trons in these 50- to 100-nm-thick layers to do the job and some light gets through.
 
The refl ective layers aren’t perfectly smooth. Instead, each has a narrow spiral track 
formed in its surface (Figs. 14.2.2b,d). This track is a series of microscopic pits, as short as 
0.83 𝜇m long on a CD, 0.40 𝜇m long on a DVD, and 0.15 𝜇m long on a Blu-ray. Adjacent 
arcs in the spiral track are only 1.6 𝜇m apart on a CD, 0.74 𝜇m apart on a DVD, and just 
0.32 𝜇m apart on a Blu-ray. The lengths of the pits and the fl at “lands” that separate them 
represent numbers. The player examines these pits and lands as the disc turns and converts 
their lengths into numbers, sound, and video.
1.6-  m 
spacing
0.83-  m
minimum
CD
(b)
0.40-  m
minimum
μ
DVD
0.74-  m
spacing
μ
(d)
Polycarbonate
plastic
(Air)
Label
Lacquer
Aluminum
1.2 mm
Laser beam
(a)
Polycarbonate
plastic
Polycarbonate
plastic
Gold or silicon
Gold or silicon
UV cure plastic
UV cure plastic
Aluminum
Aluminum
Glue
0.6 mm
0.6 mm
Laser
beam
(c)
Laser
beam
Laser
beam
Laser
beam
μ
μ
Fig. 14.2.2 (a,b) A CD contains a thin layer of aluminum on one side of a clear plastic disc. The 
aluminum layer has tiny pits that are detected by a 780-nm laser beam. (c,d) A DVD contains up to four 
aluminum, gold, or silicon layers sandwiched between two clear plastic discs. The gold or silicon layers 
are semirefl ective. Pits in those layers are detected by a 650-nm laser beam. The beam can focus either 
on the semirefl ective layer or, by passing through that layer, on the aluminum layer beyond it.
1.6-  m 
spacing
CD
(b)
DVD
(d)
μ
0.83-  m 
minimum
μ
0.40-  m 
minimum
μ
0.74-  m
μ
spacing
Fig. 14.2.2 (repeated) 
(b) A CD’s aluminum layer 
has tiny pits that are 
detected by a 780-nm 
laser beam. (d) A DVD’s 
refl ective and semirefl ective 
layers have pits that are 
detected by a 650-nm laser 
beam. Using a shorter-
wavelength laser allows the 
DVD player to focus its light 
to a smaller spot and observe 
the DVD’s narrower, more 
closely spaced refl ective 
features.

408 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
 
The pit lengths and the spacings between arcs weren’t chosen arbitrarily. Since elec-
tromagnetic waves are unable to detect structures much smaller than their wavelengths (see 
Section 12.2), the laser beam’s wavelength limits the size of the smallest features on a disc. 
In a CD player, that beam’s wavelength is 780 nm in air and 503 nm in polycarbonate plas-
tic—short enough to detect the pits of a CD easily. In a DVD player, the laser beam’s 
wavelength is between 635 and 650 nm in air and between 410 and 420 nm in plastic—just 
short enough to detect the pits in a DVD. The wavelength reduction inside the disc occurs 
because polycarbonate plastic has an index of refraction of 1.55, meaning that the light’s 
speed in that plastic is reduced from its vacuum speed by a factor of 1.55. Its wavelength is 
reduced by the same factor. In a Blu-ray player, the laser beam’s wavelength is 405 nm in 
air and about 260 nm in plastic, and it is just able to observe the tiny pits.
 
The player detects a pit by bouncing light from the disc and determining how much of 
it refl ects. As the focused laser beam passes over a pit, the refl ection becomes dim, in part 
because the curved pit scatters light in all directions and in part because of interference 
effects. Light that’s refl ected back from a pit travels farther than light that’s refl ected from 
the fl at region around it, so electric and magnetic fi elds in the two waves are shifted relative 
to one another. The pit depth was chosen so that the two refl ected waves are approximately 
out of phase and they interfere destructively. Overall, the player’s light sensors detect rela-
tively little light when the laser beam is located over a pit.
 
A CD, DVD, or Blu-ray player uses a laser diode to produce its light. The 780-nm 
standard for CD players was adopted in 1980, when 780-nm infrared laser diodes were 
reliable but still fairly expensive. Technology advanced by the mid-1990s, however, and the 
635- to 650-nm standard for DVD players refl ects the development of inexpensive red laser 
diodes. New standards follow technology, so with the development of reliable blue laser 
diodes, new optical recording systems appeared. Blu-ray players and discs, which fi rst 
appeared in 2006, are based on a 405-nm laser. Because a Blu-ray player can focus its blue 
laser beam to a much smaller spot than either a CD or a DVD player, a Blu-ray disc holds 
far more information than either of the earlier formats.
Check Your Understanding #3: The Blue-Light Special
Blu-ray disc players use blue lasers with a wavelength of 405 nm in air or vacuum. A CD player uses 
an infrared laser with a wavelength of 780 nm. How must the pit depths in the refl ective layer of a 
Blu-ray disc compare to the pit depths in a CD?
Answer: The pits in a Blu-ray disc must be about half as deep as those in a CD.
Why: The pits in the refl ective layer should be about a quarter of a wavelength deep so that light 
refl ected from the bottom of a pit interferes destructively with light refl ected from an adjacent fl at 
region. Halving the wavelength of the laser light requires halving the depth of the pits to achieve 
destructive interference.
The Optical System of a CD, DVD, or Blu-ray Player
A CD, DVD, or Blu-ray player’s optical system measures the lengths of the tiny pits as they 
move by on a spinning disc. That reading process requires incredible precision. Not only 
must the player focus its spot of laser light exactly on the refl ective layer, but it must also 
follow the spiral track as it moves by. The disc itself is neither perfectly fl at nor perfectly 
round, so the player must continuously adjust its reading unit during playback. The optical 
system must keep its laser beam focused on the refl ective layer (autofocusing) and must 
follow the track as it passes (autotracking). These two automatic processes are beautiful 
examples of the use of feedback.
 
The basic structure of a typical CD, DVD, or Blu-ray player is shown in Fig. 14.2.3. 
Light from a laser diode passes through several optical elements on its way to the disc’s 
refl ective layer. It comes to a tight focus on that layer, where it illuminates only a single 

Optical Recording and Communication 409
track. Some light refl ects from the layer and returns through the optical elements. Finally, 
the refl ected light turns 90° at a special mirror called a polarization beam splitter and 
focuses on an array of light detectors. The player measures the electric currents fl owing 
through the detectors and uses those measurements both to obtain data from the disc and to 
control the focusing and tracking systems.
 
Let’s examine this optical system one element at a time. After leaving the laser diode, 
light passes through a polarization beam splitter. This device analyzes the light’s polariza-
tion. As we saw in Section 13.1, different polarizations of light refl ect differently when they 
strike a transparent surface at an angle. In this case, polarized light from the laser passes 
through the 45° surface, but light of the other polarization refl ects. The beam splitter is 
specially coated to separate the two polarizations almost perfectly.
 
Light from the laser diode diverges rapidly as it passes through the beam splitter. 
It’s not that the laser diode is broken or poorly designed; it’s that a light wave emerging 
from a small opening naturally spreads outward, like ripples on a pond. This spreading 
is known as diffraction and occurs whenever a light wave is truncated by passing 
through an opening. The smaller the opening, the worse is the spreading. Because the 
emitting surface of the laser diode is essentially a very small opening, the laser beam 
spreads rapidly as it heads away from the diode. The player uses a converging lens 
located after the beam splitter to stop this spreading. At that point, the light beam is 
already wide enough that diffraction causes little additional spreading. The beam leaves 
the lens collimated, meaning that it maintains a nearly constant diameter after passing 
through the lens.
 
The laser light then passes through a quarter-wave plate. This remarkable device per-
forms half the task of converting horizontally polarized light into vertically polarized light 
or vice versa. Horizontally and vertically polarized lights are said to be plane polarized 
because their electric fi elds always oscillate back and forth in one plane as they move 
through space. The quarter-wave plate turns plane polarized light into circularly polarized 
light. We encountered circular polarization before in the radio transmissions from FM sta-
tions. In circularly polarized light, the electric fi eld actually rotates about the direction in 
which the light is traveling.
 
Now the light passes through an objective lens that focuses it onto the refl ective layer 
of the disc. On its way to the refl ective layer, the light enters the plastic surface of the disc. 
At its entry point, the beam is still more than 0.5 mm in diameter, which explains why dust 
or fi ngerprints on the disc’s surface don’t cause much trouble. While contamination may 
block some of the laser light, most of it continues onward to the refl ective layer.
 
The light comes to a tight focus just as it arrives at the refl ective layer. Although it 
might seem that all the light should converge together to a single point on that surface, it 
actually forms a spot roughly 1 wavelength in diameter. This spot size is limited by the 
Laser
diode
Polarization
beam splitter
Collimating
lens
Photodiodes
Quarter-
wave plate
Objective
lens
Compact
disc
Fig. 14.2.3 In the optical system 
of a CD, DVD, or Blu-ray player, 
light from a laser diode passes 
through a polarization beam splitter, 
a collimating lens, a quarter-wave 
plate, and an objective lens before 
focusing on the refl ective layer inside 
the disc. Refl ected light turns 90° 
at the polarization beam splitter and 
focuses on an array of photodiodes.

410 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
wave nature of light. No matter how perfectly you try to focus light, you can’t 
make a spot that’s much smaller than the light’s wavelength. Instead, the beam 
forms a narrow waist and then spreads apart (Fig. 14.2.4). This beam waist is 
about 1 wavelength of the light in diameter and a few wavelengths long, 
depending on the f-number of the converging lens. Since that waist is less than 
2 𝜇m long, the player’s autofocusing system must keep the objective lens just 
the right distance from the refl ective layer.
 
This fundamental limitation on how tightly a beam of light can be focused is another 
example of diffraction; the focusing lens truncates the light wave and inevitably introduces 
spreading. However, even reaching this ideal focusing limit requires careful design and 
fabrication of the optical elements. Although most other optical systems fall short of their 
ideal limits, a CD, DVD, or Blu-ray player’s optical system does as well as can be done 
within the constraints of diffraction itself. Its optics are essentially perfect and are said to 
be diffraction limited.
 
The amount of light that refl ects from the layer depends on whether or not the laser 
spot hits a pit. This refl ected light follows the optical path in reverse. The light is collimated 
by the objective lens and then passes through the quarter-wave plate again. The plate now 
fi nishes the job it started earlier; the light ends up plane polarized but with the opposite 
polarization it had when it left the laser. Horizontally polarized light is now vertically 
polarized, and vice versa.
 
The refl ected light then passes through the collimating lens, which makes the light con-
verge, and then strikes the polarization beam splitter. Because the light’s polarization has 
changed, the beam splitter no longer allows the beam to pass directly through. Instead, it turns 
this refl ected beam 90° and directs it toward the detector array. This clever redirection scheme 
is important for two reasons. First, it conserves laser light by allowing most of it to travel from 
the laser diode to the detector. Second, it prevents refl ected light from returning to the laser 
diode, where that light would be amplifi ed and cause the laser diode to misbehave.
 
The light comes to a focus on an array of photodiodes. This array allows the player to 
detect pits via the refl ected light intensity and also to determine whether the objective lens 
is properly positioned relative to those pits. For generality, Fig. 14.2.3 omits optical ele-
ments involved in autofocusing and autotracking. However, because of those elements, the 
pattern of light hitting the detector array indicates which way the objective lens should 
move, if necessary. That lens is attached to coils of wire that are suspended near permanent 
magnets. By varying the currents fl owing through those coils, the player uses Lorentz 
forces to move its objective lens about rapidly and keep it in the right place over the disc.
Converging
lens
Beam
waist
Laser beam
Fig. 14.2.4 When a 
converging lens focuses 
a laser beam, the light 
doesn’t meet at a single 
point in space. Instead, it 
reaches a narrow waist with 
a diameter roughly equal to 
the wavelength of the light.
Check Your Understanding #4: That’s Why It’s Called a Laser Disc
Why must the CD, DVD, or BRD player use a laser diode rather than a more conventional light source 
such as an incandescent bulb?
Answer: The light in a CD, DVD, or BRD player must be coherent so that it can be focused to a single 
diffraction-limited spot on the refl ective layer and experience destructive interference when it 
encounters a pit.
Why: You can’t focus light from an incandescent bulb to a diffraction-limited spot. Each photon 
leaving the bulb is independent and will focus at a somewhat different point in space. The bulb’s 
incoherent light also doesn’t experience the strong interference effects of laser light.
Optical Fibers
Optical playback of prerecorded discs is fi ne for music and movies, but it isn’t of much use 
when you want up-to-the-minute information. The Internet and World Wide Web require 
communication links that operate at lightning speed. Yet, even here, optics and light have 
an important role to play. The fastest way to send enormous amounts of information is to 
use optical fi bers.

Optical Recording and Communication 411
 
An optical fi ber is a glass conduit that guides light from one place to another. Nearly 
every photon that enters the fi ber at one end emerges from the other end moments later. In 
its simplest form, the fi ber is made from two different glasses: a solid core of one glass sur-
rounded by a cladding of the other glass. Both glasses are so incredibly transparent that light 
can travel through them for kilometers with little loss. For comparison, look through the 
edge of an ordinary piece of window glass and you’ll see how dark the glass looks. It absorbs 
far too much light to be suitable for optical fi bers. They’re made of the purest glasses known.
 
If both glasses are almost perfectly transparent, what keeps the light from leaking out 
of the sides of the fi ber? The answer is a phenomenon known as total internal refl ection. As 
light tries to move from the inner glass core to the outer glass cladding, it’s refl ected per-
fectly and thus can’t escape.
 
Total internal refl ection is an extreme case of refraction. When light encounters the 
boundary between two materials with different indices of refraction, refraction causes that 
light to bend (Fig. 14.2.5). If the material it enters has a smaller index of refraction than the one 
it leaves, the light bends away from a line perpendicular to the boundary. The amount of this 
bend depends on the two indices of refraction and on the angle at which the light approaches 
the boundary. As long as the approach angle is steep enough, light will succeed in entering the 
second material. However, if the approach angle is too shallow, the light won’t enter the second 
material at all. Instead, it will refl ect perfectly from the boundary. In fact, total internal refl ec-
tion is far more effi cient at refl ecting light than a conventional metal mirror.
 
To keep the light inside the fi ber’s core, the core glass must have a higher index of 
refraction than the cladding glass. As light in the high-index core encounters the boundary 
with the low-index cladding, it experiences total internal refl ection and bounces back into 
the core (Fig. 14.2.6a). As long as the fi ber doesn’t bend too sharply, the light bounces back 
and forth inside the core and can’t escape. As a result, light entering the fi ber core through 
one of its cut ends follows the fi ber all the way to its other cut end.
 
A large-diameter fi ber (typically 50 𝜇m or more) has a problem. Light rays bouncing 
through it at slightly different angles travel different distances during their passage through 
the fi ber. Light heading almost straight down the center of the fi ber rarely bounces and takes 
less time to complete its trip than light that bounces many times. Because this wide fi ber 
has many bouncing paths or “modes” in which light can travel through it, a short pulse of 
light going through the fi ber gets stretched out in time (Fig. 14.2.6a). This pulse-broadening 
severely limits the rate at which information can be sent through a multimode fi ber.
High refractive
index
Total internal
reﬂection
Light
Low refractive
index
Refraction
Fig. 14.2.5 When light 
traveling through one 
material enters a second 
material with a lower 
refractive index, it bends 
toward the boundary 
between those materials. 
If its approach angle is too 
shallow, the light will bend 
so much that it will simply 
refl ect from the boundary. 
This effect is called total 
internal refl ection.
Incoming
light
pulse
Incoming
light
pulse
Incoming
light
pulse
Outgoing
light
pulse
Core
Core
Core
Cladding
Cladding
Cladding
Cladding
Cladding
Cladding
Outgoing
light
pulse
Outgoing
light
pulse
(a)
(b)
(c)
Multimode fiber
Graded index multimode fiber
Graded index single-mode fiber
Fig. 14.2.6 Light trying to 
leave the high-index core of 
an optical fi ber at a shallow 
angle undergoes total 
internal refl ection at the 
boundary with the low-index 
cladding. (a) In an ordinary 
multimode fi ber, a pulse 
of light can follow many 
paths through the core and 
becomes spread out in time. 
(b) A core with a graded 
refractive index exhibits 
less temporal spreading 
because the refl ection 
process is more gradual. 
(c) The least spreading 
occurs in a single-mode 
fi ber. The small core diameter 
of this fi ber provides light 
with only one mode of travel 
so that the only spreading 
occurs because of ordinary 
dispersion.

412 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
 
To reduce stretching problems, the core of a better-performance optical fi ber has a 
graded refractive index. The core glass is specially treated so that its index of refraction 
decreases smoothly away from its center toward the cladding. Instead of bouncing abruptly 
when it reaches the boundary between core and cladding, light in this graded-index envi-
ronment turns smoothly back toward the core (Fig. 14.2.6b). The path differences between 
the modes in a graded-index multimode fi ber aren’t so different, and a short pulse of light 
isn’t stretched very much in a fi ber of moderate length.
 
In very long fi bers, however, even small path differences add up, and short pulses 
become blurred in multimode fi bers. Therefore, the highest-performance optical conduits 
are single-mode fi bers. These fi bers have very narrow graded-index cores that permit light 
to travel only in one mode—effectively right down the center of the fi ber (Fig. 14.2.6c). 
The core is typically only 9 𝜇m in diameter. A pulse of light entering this narrow core 
broadens very little in time during its passage.
 
What little broadening occurs in a single-mode fi ber isn’t caused by the light taking 
different paths; it’s caused by ordinary dispersion in the glass. To carry information, the 
light wave must change with time and thus must have a range of frequencies and wave-
lengths. As usual, the shorter wavelengths travel slower than the longer wavelengths and 
the pulses get stretched out in time. To minimize these dispersion effects, the highest-speed 
optical fi bers operate at wavelengths that minimize dispersion. They also operate at wave-
lengths that minimize the loss of light through absorption in the glass. These two wave-
lengths coincide at 1550 nm in dispersion-shifted fi bers, so this infrared wavelength is 
commonly used in long-haul optical communication.
Check Your Understanding #5: If It Looks like a Mirror . . .
When you look into an aquarium from the front, the sides of the aquarium often look like mirrors. 
Those sides are actually clear glass, so why do they refl ect light so well?
Answer: The light you see is experiencing total internal refl ection as it tries to leave the glass at a 
shallow angle. You see perfect refl ections of the fi sh inside the aquarium.
Why: Light has trouble passing from water or glass into the air at a shallow angle. When it tries, it 
experiences total internal refl ection and bounces off the surface without losing any intensity at all.
Optical Communication
A typical optical communication transmitter uses a 1550-nm laser diode to generate short 
pulses of light. These pulses carry information from the transmitter to a receiver some-
where far away. The transmitter produces its pulses by varying the current passing through 
the laser diode. Light emerging from the laser diode is focused into the exposed core of a 
single-mode optical fi ber, and it follows the core all the way to the other end of the fi ber. 
When the light emerges, it’s gathered by a lens and focused onto the receiver’s photodiode. 
Each pulse of light causes a pulse of current to fl ow through the photodiode, allowing the 
receiver to begin processing the information.
 
A laser diode and a single-mode optical fi ber can send billions of bits of data per sec-
ond for 50 km or 100 km without signifi cant errors. At longer distances, the gradual absorp-
tion of light in the glass makes it diffi cult to receive the information reliably. The easiest 
solution to this problem is to receive the data before the light becomes too weak and then 
to retransmit it with another laser diode.
 
Instead of interrupting the optical transmission with a receiver and retransmitter, some 
long-haul communication systems employ erbium-doped fi ber amplifi ers (EDFAs). An 
EDFA is a piece of optical fi ber that has about 0.01% erbium ions in its glass core. When 
the EDFA is exposed to 980-nm or 1480-nm light, it becomes a laser amplifi er for 1550-nm 
light. As the weakened pulses of light from a long fi ber pass through the fi ber amplifi er, the 
amplifi er duplicates photons and brightens the pulses. These amplifi ed pulses then continue 

Audio Players 413
through ordinary fi ber before being amplifi ed again. Undersea optical cables often splice 
fi ber amplifi ers into the fi bers every 50 km or so. These amplifi ers allow light to travel 
thousands of kilometers through a continuous path, from one side of an ocean to the other.
 
To get the most out of a single optical fi ber, many communication systems use several 
laser diodes operating at somewhat different wavelength ranges around 1550 nm. Light from 
these diodes is merged together and focused into the fi ber. When the light emerges at the far 
end of the fi ber, its different wavelength ranges are split apart and directed onto individual 
receivers. The different wavelength ranges are like different channels, so that this wave-
length-division multiplexing allows one fi ber to carry far more information than it could 
with light from a single laser. Remarkably enough, an EDFA can amplify all of these differ-
ent channels at once because erbium ions can copy a wide range of wavelengths.
Check Your Understanding #6: Making Something Out of Nothing
If light weakens gradually as it passes through a long optical fi ber, why can’t you simply wait until the 
very end of the fi ber to amplify what little light remains and then send the amplifi ed light into a receiver?
Answer: As the light is absorbed, the number of photons in a pulse gradually diminishes. When that 
number gets to zero, there’s nothing left to amplify.
Why: Each pulse of light in the fi ber contains a limited number of photons. The glass absorbs many 
of these photons during their long passage through a fi ber, so they must be amplifi ed before their 
numbers become so small that there’s a chance that none of them makes it at all.
 
To understand how audio players work, we need to look at 
how sound can be represented electronically and at how those 
electronic representations can be stored, retrieved, and ulti-
mately used to re-create the sound itself. That exploration will 
take us all the way from the digital world of computers to the 
analog world of amplifi ers and headphones.
 
It will also expose us to that workhorse of modern elec-
tronics—the transistor. Early audio electronic devices were 
built with vacuum tubes, which were relatively bulky compo-
nents that wasted power and aged quickly. Transistors have 
made audio electronics much more practical. They have also 
made computers so small and inexpensive that every audio 
player can have its own computer.
Questions to Think About: What does it mean to store songs? 
How can a computer use numbers to represent music? Why 
does an audio player need electric power to operate? Why does 
an audio player become warm as it operates? Does the volume 
of the sound affect the battery life? What does an audio ampli-
fi er’s power rating mean? How are electric power and sound 
volume related? How do the treble and bass controls of an 
audio player affect the sound?
Experiments to Do: Find an audio player or a smartphone. 
Turn it on, and notice that it takes a short time to “wake up.” 
You’re observing the boot process of a computer. But if all of 
the computer’s information is already inside it, why does it 
need to do so much work as its starts? As we’ll soon see, the 
device’s computer uses different types of memory, some of 
Audio players have revolutionized portable music systems. 
Everywhere you look, people are sporting earpieces and listening 
to their favorite tunes with these little electronic marvels or their 
smartphone siblings. Part computer and part stereo system, an 
audio player is a spectacular synthesis of some of the highest 
forms of modern electronic technology. Because they contain 
such a broad range of electronic components, audio players offer 
an excellent introduction to much of modern electronics.
iPod
Music
Extras
Settings
>
>
>
Backlight
Shuffle Songs
MENU
Previous
track
Liquid
crystal
display
Play
Next
track
Menu
access
SECTION 14.3
Audio Players

414 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
Transistors
The story of audio players begins with the story of transistors. Invented in 1948 by three 
American physicists, William Shockley (1910–1989), John Bardeen (1908–1991), and 
Walter Brattain (1902–1987), transistors are key elements in nearly all modern electronic 
equipment. Like the diodes we examined in Section 13.3, transistors are built from doped 
semiconductors—semiconductors such as silicon to which chemical impurities have been 
added. However, unlike diodes, which operate in only a single circuit, transistors allow the 
current in one circuit to control the current in another circuit.
 
There are many types of transistors, but the simplest and most important type is the 
fi eld-effect transistor. Actually, even here there are several varieties, so we’ll focus on the 
one that’s most widely used in audio players, cell phones, video equipment, 
and computers: the n-channel metal-oxide-semiconductor fi eld-effect transis-
tor (or n-channel MOSFET). Despite its complicated name, the n-channel 
MOSFET is a relatively simple device, consisting principally of three semicon-
ductor layers and a nearby metal or metal-like surface (Fig. 14.3.1). The three 
layers are called the drain, the channel, and the source, and the metal surface 
is called the gate.
 
The drain and the source consist of a strongly doped n-type semiconductor 
(many conduction-level electrons) and the channel between them consists of a 
lightly doped p-type semiconductor (a few empty valence levels) (Fig. 14.3.2a). 
When those three layers touch, they form two back-to-back p-n junctions, and 
conduction-level electrons from the drain and source migrate into the channel to 
fi ll its few empty valence levels (Fig. 14.3.2b). The completed transistor is thus 
left with a vast depletion region (a region devoid of empty valence levels or occu-
pied conduction levels) extending all the way from its drain to its source. With 
nothing to convey charge through its channel, the transistor can’t conduct current 
between its drain and source. The MOSFET is effectively Off.
 
However, if more electrons could be coaxed into the channel somehow, 
those electrons would have to go into the channel’s conduction levels and the 
channel would then behave like an n-type semiconductor. With an n-type chan-
nel sandwiched between an n-type drain and an n-type source, the p-n junc-
tions would vanish and so would the depletion region. The three layers would 
become, in effect, a single piece of n-type semiconductor, and the transistor would then 
be able to conduct current between its drain and source. The MOSFET would be effec-
tively On.
 
Drawing extra electrons into the channel is the task of the metal-like gate. Sepa-
rated from the channel by an incredibly thin insulating layer, the gate controls the chan-
nel’s ability to carry current. When a tiny positive charge is placed on the gate through 
a wire, it attracts extra electrons into the channel’s conduction levels from the source, 
drain, and their wires and the transistor begins to conduct current (Fig. 14.3.2c). The 
more positive charge there is on the gate, the more extra electrons are drawn into the 
channel and the more current can fl ow through the transistor. In effect, the transistor 
behaves like an adjustable resistor with a resistance that decreases as the positive charge 
on its gate increases.
the player and the earpiece, what happens to the volume? 
Where did the lost power go?
 
Now experiment with the bass and treble controls. If the 
player has any other audio effects, try them. Are you still hearing 
sound as it was originally performed? How do the player’s tone 
settings infl uence the sound reproduction? Is the most perfect 
imitation of the original sound always what you want to hear?
which are wiped clean when the audio player is turned off. 
With that tidbit in mind, try to imagine what is happening 
during the boot process.
 
Play some music and experiment with the sound controls. 
The volume control determines how much power reaches the 
headphones. Recall that a fl ashlight with a poor connection 
produces dim light. If you create a poor connection between 
Drain
Source
Metal
Gate
Insulator
Inside of n-channel MOSFET 
Symbol for n-channel MOSFET 
Drain
Gate
Source
N-type 
semiconductor
N-type 
semiconductor
P-type
semiconductor
Electrons
Current
Channel
(a)
(b)
Fig. 14.3.1 (a) In an 
n-channel MOSFET, the 
channel is normally a 
depletion region that cannot 
carry current between the 
source and drain. But 
when positive charge on 
the gate attracts electrons 
into the channel, however, 
the channel becomes an 
n-type semiconductor and 
allows current to fl ow. (b) 
The symbol representing 
an n-channel MOSFET in a 
schematic diagram.

Audio Players 415
 
We can now understand the n-channel MOSFET’s name. N-channel refers to the chan-
nel’s n-type behavior when its gate is positively charged and the transistor can carry cur-
rent. Although the channel is chemically p-type (Fig. 14.3.2a), it becomes electrically 
n-type when extra electrons are drawn into it and it acquires a negative net charge (Fig. 
14.3.2c). Metal-oxide-semiconductor indicates that the metal or metal-like gate is sepa-
rated from the semiconductor channel by a thin insulating layer of oxide. This insulator can 
be as little as 1.2 nm thick and agonizingly easy to puncture, so modern electronic devices are 
heavily protected against the damaging effects of static electricity. Field-effect transistor 
indicates that the electric fi eld from charge on the gate is what draws electrons into the 
channel and controls the current fl ow through the transistor.
52 positive charges
52 positive charges
44 positive charges
Energy
Position
Valence band
Conduction band
N-type source
N-type drain
P-type channel
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
(a) N-channel MOSFET (unassembled)
Energy
Position
Gate
Depletion region
Valence band
Conduction band
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
(b) N-channel MOSFET Off (nonconducting)
Depleted channel
Energy
Position
Gate
Valence band
Conduction band
Band
Band
Gap
Gap
Band
(c) N-channel MOSFET On (conducting)
N-type source
N-type drain
N-type channel
Fig. 14.3.2 (a) An n-channel MOSFET is formed from three pieces of semiconductor: a n-type drain, 
p-type channel, and n-type source. (b) When those pieces touch, conduction-level electrons from the 
n-type source and drain fi ll the empty valence levels of the p-type channel and form a vast insulating 
depletion region. The depleted channel is nonconducting and the MOSFET is Off. (c) When positive 
charge is placed on the nearby gate, however, it attracts extra electrons into the channel’s conduction 
levels and the negatively charged channel then behaves as n-type semiconductor. The entire structure 
is conducting and the MOSFET is On.

416 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
Storing Digital Sound Information
An audio player is half computer and half stereo system. It stores and manipulates sound 
information in digital form like a computer but then amplifi es that information for the head-
phones in analog form like a stereo system. We’ll mirror that sequence when examining the 
player’s electronics: we’ll start with its digital memory and processing systems and fi nish 
with its audio amplifi er.
 
Inside the digital portion of the audio player, air pressure measurements and other 
numbers are represented in binary form. How large or precise those numbers are deter-
mines how many binary digits are needed to represent them. Each binary digit is called a 
bit, and using more bits allows you to represent larger or more precise numbers. In general, 
the more detailed the information, the more bits are needed to represent it.
 
Eight bits can be used to represent any number from 0 (which is 00000000) to 255 
(which is 11111111). Since there are fewer than 256 of many common objects, these 
objects can be identifi ed by groups of 8 bits. For example, the symbols used in ordinary text 
have been assigned numbers between 0 and 255, with 65 denoting the letter A. Since the 8 
bits 01000001 represent 65, they also specify an A. Groups of 8 bits are so common and 
useful that they are called bytes.
 
Although it’s possible to store sound information using 1 byte per air pressure measure-
ment, a byte usually doesn’t provide enough precision for quality sound reproduction. More 
often, digital audio is saved using 2 bytes per pressure measurement. These pressure mea-
surements are made tens of thousands of times per second, usually from several microphones 
simultaneously to provide stereo or surround sound. Even when sophisticated data compres-
sion techniques are used to eliminate redundant or inconsequential information, a great many 
bits are still needed to represent an album. Thus an audio player needs a lot of memory.
 
There are several ways in which the audio player, like any computer, stores a bit. In its 
main working memory (often called random access memory, or RAM), each bit is a tiny 
capacitor that uses the presence or absence of separated electric charge to denote a 1 or a 0. 
The player stores a bit by producing or removing separated charge and recalls the bit by 
checking for that charge.
 
Each capacitor is built right at the end of its own n-channel MOSFET. That MOSFET 
controls the fl ow of charge to or from the capacitor. To store or recall a bit, the audio player 
places positive charge on the gate of the MOSFET so that the MOSFET becomes electri-
cally conducting. The memory system can then transfer charge to or from the bit’s capacitor.
 
Storing the bit is relatively easy; the player simply sends the appropriate charge 
through the MOSFET to the capacitor. Recalling the bit is harder because the charge on the 
capacitor is extremely small. Sensitive amplifi ers in the memory system detect any charge 
fl owing through the MOSFET from the capacitor and report what they fi nd to the audio 
player. Since this reading process removes charge from the capacitor, the memory system 
must immediately store the bit again.
Check Your Understanding #1: Power and Control
Widening the channel of an n-channel MOSFET allows it to handle more current between its source 
and drain. However, the enlarged transistor needs more positive charge on its gate to control that 
current. Explain.
Answer: The larger transistor also has a larger gate. With more surface over which to spread its 
charge, the gate needs more positive charge to draw conduction-level electrons into the channel.
Why: MOSFETs range in size from remarkably small (less than 0.01 𝜇m2) to relatively large (several 
square millimeters). The smallest ones are used in computer chips, where millions of MOSFETs are 
created on a single wafer of silicon only a centimeter square. A tiny charge on the gate of one of these 
MOSFETs will allow it to conduct current. The largest MOSFETs are used in power-control devices 
such as amplifi ers and power supplies. These transistors have large gates, and much more charge is 
needed to allow one of them to conduct current.

Audio Players 417
 
Unfortunately, these tiny capacitors can’t hold separated charge forever because it 
leaks out to their surroundings. Memory that uses charged capacitors to store bits is called 
dynamic memory and must be refreshed (read and restored) hundreds of times each second 
to ensure that a 1 doesn’t accidentally switch to a 0 or vice versa.
 
Dynamic memory is also volatile—its contents are lost when the audio player turns 
off. To conserve its batteries, the player keeps its music information in nonvolatile memory, 
memory that doesn’t need power to retain its information. New possibilities for nonvolatile 
memory appear almost every year, but at present the three leading forms are fl ash, magnetic 
disk, and optical disc memories.
 
Flash memory resembles dynamic memory in that each bit is stored as the presence or 
absence of charge associated with a MOSFET. In fl ash memory, though, that charge resides 
on the MOSFET’s fl oating gate—a second, unattached gate located in the insulating layer 
between the channel and the normal gate. Since this fl oating gate is surrounded by insula-
tor, it can keep its charge for decades. As long as that charge is present, it will determine 
the MOSFET’s conductivity and whether the bit is a 0 or a 1.
 
Reading bits from fl ash memory is easy, but storing them is a challenge. The same isolation 
that traps charge on the fl oating gate for years makes that charge diffi cult to change. To add or 
remove electrons from the fl oating gate, the memory system applies relatively large voltages to 
the MOSFET’s source, drain, and normal gate and the resulting strong electric fi elds permit 
electrons to cross through the insulation separating the channel from the fl oating gate.
 
To add electrons to the fl oating gate, the electric fi elds are arranged so they accelerate 
channel electrons to such high speeds that those electrons simply burrow right through the 
insulating layer to the fl oating gate. To remove electrons from the fl oating gate, the electric 
fi elds are arranged so that the fl oating gate’s electron standing waves are distorted into the 
insulator. When these distorted waves reach far enough into the insulator, electrons begin 
to leak through it into the channel via a process known as quantum tunneling. (We’ll return 
to explore quantum tunneling in Chapter 15.)
 
Flash memory is fast to read but relatively slower to write. Moreover, the electron 
burrowing process causes cumulative damage to the insulating layer and limits the number 
of times fl ash memory can be written. An audio player uses a mixture of dynamic memory 
and fl ash memory; it does its computational work in dynamic memory but retains its long-
term information in fl ash memory.
 
However, there’s another memory concept that remains more cost-effective than fl ash 
memory for storing vast amounts of information—magnetic disk memory. Although fl ash 
memory has largely replaced magnetic disks in audio players, computers still depend 
extensively on magnetic disks.
 
Just as the magnetic strip on a credit card (Fig. 11.1.6) can store information in the 
locations of its magnetic poles, the surface of a magnetic disk can store information in the 
orientations of its magnetic poles. Actual hard disks are smooth aluminum platters that 
have been coated with hi-tech hard magnetic materials. Using microscopic electromagnets 
to write magnetic poles and sophisticated semiconductor magnetic sensors to read them, 
modern hard disks can pack over 1 billion bits into a square millimeter of surface (over 80 
gigabytes per square inch). Simply locating those microscopic bits on platters that rotate 
over 100 times per second is an electromechanical tour de force, yet these disks do it rou-
tinely even while you are moving your laptop around the room.
Check Your Understanding #2: Like Sending a Letter to Yourself
Every few thousandths of a second, a computer’s memory system stops briefl y to read and then 
rewrite every bit in its dynamic memory. What is going on?
Answer: The computer is making sure that the charge stored on each capacitor in the dynamic mem-
ory adequately represents that bit’s contents.
Why: Since charge leaks quickly from the capacitors in dynamic memory, the contents of each bit 
must be refreshed many times a second. This refreshing process, reading each bit and storing it back 
into memory, slows the computer down slightly.

418 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
The Audio Player’s Computer
We’ve seen how sound information can be represented and stored as bits, so now let’s look 
at how an audio player’s computer works with those bits. This digital processing is done by 
electronic devices that take groups of bits as their inputs and produce new groups of bits as 
their outputs. Since their output bits are related to their input bits by the rules of logic, these 
electronic devices are called logic elements.
 
The simplest logic element is the inverter, which has only one input bit and one output 
bit. Its output is the inverse of its input (Fig. 14.3.3). If an inverter’s input bit is a 1, then its 
output bit is a 0, and vice versa. Inverters are used to reverse an action—turning a light on 
rather than off or starting a song rather than stopping it. Inverters are also used as parts of 
more complicated logic elements.
 
But inverters aren’t just abstract logic elements; they’re real electronic devices. They 
act on electrical inputs and create electrical outputs. In an audio player’s computer, invert-
ers and other logic elements represent input and output bits with electric charge. Positive 
charge represents a 1, and negative charge represents a 0. Thus when positive charge arrives 
at the input of an inverter, the inverter releases negative charge from its output.
 
Inverters and other logic elements are usually constructed from both n-channel and 
p-channel MOSFETs. We’ve already seen that n-channel MOSFETs conduct current only 
when their gates are positively charged. P-channel MOSFETs do just the reverse, conduct-
ing current only when their gates are negatively charged. The drain and source of a p-channel 
MOSFET are made from p-type semiconductor, and the channel is made from n-type semi-
conductor. Since n-channel and p-channel MOSFETs are exact complements to one 
another, logic elements built from them are called complementary MOSFET or CMOS 
elements. An audio player’s computer is built almost entirely from CMOS elements.
 
A CMOS inverter consists of one n-channel MOSFET and one p-channel MOSFET 
(Fig. 14.3.4). The n-channel MOSFET is connected to the negative terminal of the compu-
ter’s power supply and controls the fl ow of negative charge to the inverter’s output. The 
p-channel MOSFET is connected to the power supply’s positive terminal and controls the 
fl ow of positive charge to the output. When negative charge arrives at the inverter’s input 
and moves onto the gates of the MOSFETs, only the p-channel MOSFET conducts current 
and the output becomes positively charged. When positive charge arrives at the input, only 
the n-channel MOSFET conducts current and the output becomes negatively charged.
 
A computer, however, needs logic elements that are more complicated than inverters. 
One such element is the Not-AND or NAND gate. This logical element has 2 input bits and 
1 output bit, and its output bit is 1 unless both input bits are 1s (Fig. 14.3.5). It’s called a 
Not-AND gate because it’s the inverse of an AND gate. An AND gate produces a 0 output 
unless both input bits are 1s. Simple memoryless logic elements are often called gates.
 
A CMOS NAND gate uses two n-channel MOSFETs and two p-channel MOSFETs 
(Fig. 14.3.6). The two n-channel MOSFETs are arranged in series—one after the next—so 
that current passing through one must also pass through the other. If either transistor has 
negative charge on its gate, no current can fl ow through the series. Components arranged in 
series all carry the same current, but they may experience different voltage drops.
 
The two p-channel MOSFETs are arranged in parallel—one beside the other—so that 
current can fl ow through either one of them to the output. If either transistor has negative 
charge on its gate, current can fl ow from one side of the pair to the other. Components 
arranged in parallel share the current they receive through one wire and deliver it together 
to the second wire. Although parallel components may share the current unevenly among 
themselves, they all experience the same voltage drop.
 
If negative charge arrives at either input of the CMOS NAND gate, the series of n-chan-
nel MOSFETs will be nonconducting and one of the p-channel MOSFETs will deliver pos-
itive charge to the output. However, if positive charge arrives at both inputs, both p-channel 
MOSFETs will be nonconducting and the series of n-channel MOSFETs will deliver nega-
tive charge to the output. Thus the CMOS NAND gate has the correct logic behavior.
Input
0 V
+3 V
N-channel
MOSFET
P-channel
MOSFET
Output
Fig. 14.3.4 When 
negative charge arrives 
at the input of a CMOS 
inverter, its p-channel 
MOSFET (top) permits 
positive charge to fl ow to 
the output. When positive 
charge arrives at the input, 
the n-channel MOSFET 
(bottom) sends negative 
charge to the output.
Input
Output
Input
1
0
0
1
Output
Fig. 14.3.3 An inverter, 
shown here symbolically, 
produces 1 output bit 
that is the inverse of its 
1 input bit.
Input 1
Input 1
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
Input 2
Input 2
Output
Output
Fig. 14.3.5 The output 
bit of a Not-AND or 
NAND gate, shown here 
symbolically, is a 1 unless 
both input bits are 1s.

Audio Players 419
 
These two logic elements, inverters and NAND gates, can be combined to produce any 
conceivable logic element. For example, they can be used to build an adder, a device that 
sums the numbers represented by two groups of input bits and produces a group of output 
bits representing that sum. These adders can themselves be used to build multipliers, and 
multipliers can be built into still more complicated devices. In this fashion, the simplest 
logic elements can be used to construct an entire computer.
 
Actually, a computer isn’t built exclusively from NAND gates and inverters. To 
improve its speed and reduce its size, it uses a few other basic logic elements as well. Like 
the CMOS NAND gate and inverter, these elements are constructed directly from n-chan-
nel and p-channel MOSFETs.
 
All these logic elements are wired together in an intricate pattern to create a complete 
computer (Fig. 14.3.7). In an audio player, this computer retrieves and organizes music 
information and prepares it for the playback electronics, which are not digital. The compu-
ter’s last act is to deliver the digital music information, the air pressure measurements, to a 
digital-to-analog converter, or DAC. This electronic device is the interface between the two 
representations of information: digital and analog. The music information leaves the DAC 
as a voltage that’s proportional to air pressure. This voltage is the input for the audio play-
er’s main analog component, its audio amplifi er. Actually, the player has two complete 
analog audio systems so that it can produce stereo sound. But since those systems are 
identical, we’ll focus on only one of them.
Input 1
Input 2
0 V
+3 V
Output
Fig. 14.3.6 A CMOS 
NAND gate has two input 
bits. When negative 
charge arrives through 
either input, the chain 
of n-channel MOSFETs 
(bottom) stops conducting 
current and one of the two 
p-channel MOSFETs (top) 
permits positive charge to 
reach the output. Only if 
both inputs are positively 
charged will negative 
charge reach the output.
Fig. 14.3.7 This microscope photograph 
shows an integrated circuit microprocessor—
approximately a computer on a chip. 
Aluminum strips connect millions of 
MOSFETs and other components that have 
been formed by photographic techniques on 
the surface of a thin wafer of silicon.
© Michael W. Davidson/Photo Researchers, Inc.
Check Your Understanding #3: Getting It Together
How could you use inverters and NAND gates to create an AND gate, a logic element that has two 
inputs and one output, with the output being 1 only if both of the inputs are also 1s?
Answer: You could connect an inverter to a NAND gate so that the output signal of the NAND gate is 
the input signal of the inverter. When both of the NAND gate’s input signals are 1s, it will produce 
an output of 0. This 0 will arrive at the inverter, which will invert it and yield an output of 1.
Why: Connecting logic elements together one after the next is the standard method for producing 
more complicated logic elements. In this case, two elements connected together produce a third.
The Audio Player’s Audio Amplifi er
The fl uctuating voltage provided by the audio player’s DAC is often called an audio signal 
because it represents audio information. Many analog or digital representations of informa-
tion are called signals, including video signals, data signals, and even turn signals. But 
although the player’s audio signal contains all the information needed to reproduce the 
original sound, in convenient analog format, it doesn’t have the power that the headphones 
need to produce that sound at a reasonable volume. Something must fi rst enlarge the audio 
signal; it needs to be amplifi ed.

420 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
 
Devices that enlarge various characteristics of signals are called amplifi ers. An audio 
amplifi er is an amplifi er that’s designed to boost signals in the frequency range that we hear 
or feel (20 to 20,000 Hz). It has two separate circuits—an input circuit and an output cir-
cuit—and it uses the small current passing through its input circuit to control a much larger 
current passing through its output circuit. In this manner, the amplifi er provides more 
power to its output circuit than it receives from its input circuit. Since energy is conserved, 
an amplifi er needs a separate power source to provide its amplifi cation—in this case, the 
9-V battery.
 
Figure 14.3.8 shows the schematic diagram for a simple audio amplifi er, built from the 
components we’ve just studied. This amplifi er has only fi ve components: an n-channel 
MOSFET, two resistors, and two capacitors. It draws power from a 9-V battery (or an 
equivalent power adapter) and amplifi es a tiny alternating current in its input circuit into a 
large alternating current in its output circuit.
 
To understand how this amplifi er works, let’s fi rst remove everything but the MOSFET 
and the 50-Ω resistor (Fig. 14.3.9). These two components are in series, so any current that 
passes through one must also pass through the other. When the MOSFET doesn’t conduct 
current, no current fl ows through the 50-Ω resistor and it experiences no voltage drop. So 
the voltage at A is 9 V. However, if the transistor does conduct current, a voltage drop will 
appear through the 50-Ω resistor and the voltage at A will decrease.
 
The transistor will conduct current only if positive charge is put on its gate. That can 
be done by connecting the gate to A with a 100-kΩ resistor (Fig. 14.3.10). Since A is at 
9 V, it is positively charged and pushes charge toward anything at lower voltage. Current 
fl ows slowly through the resistor from A to the gate. However, as positive charge accumu-
lates on the gate, the transistor begins to conduct current and the voltage at A drops. When 
the voltage at A reaches the voltage on the gate, current stops fl owing through the resistor.
 
The amplifi er is then in a stable equilibrium; A has a voltage of approximately 5 V and 
the transistor’s gate has a modest amount of charge on it. The 100-kΩ resistor provides the 
transistor with feedback; that is, it provides the transistor with information about the pres-
ent situation at A that the transistor can use to correct or improve that situation. Although 
the feedback is slowed by the resistor’s large electrical resistance, it perpetually acts to 
return the voltage at A to its equilibrium value. If the transistor conducts too little current, 
charge fl ows onto its gate and makes it conduct more. If the transistor conducts too much 
current, charge fl ows off its gate and makes it conduct less.
 
The amplifi er is now exquisitely sensitive to small changes in the charge on the transis-
tor’s gate. If you add just a tiny bit more positive charge to the gate, down goes the voltage 
at A. If you remove just a tiny bit of positive charge from the gate, up goes the voltage at A. 
Although current in the feedback resistor tries to undo these changes, it acts too slowly to 
oppose short-timescale variations. The amplifi er’s input signal successfully adds or sub-
tracts positive charge from the gate, and the amplifi er’s output signal emerges from A.
Input
+9 volts
0 volt
Output
50 Ω
100 kΩ
1   F
μ
100   F
μ
Fig. 14.3.8 A simple audio amplifi er can be built with one 
n-channel MOSFET, two resistors, and two capacitors. A 9-V 
battery powers the device.
50 Ω
+9 volts
A
0 volt
Fig. 14.3.9 The voltage at 
A depends on the resistance 
of the MOSFET. The lined 
triangle at the bottom 
signifi es connection to 
ground (often Earth itself).
50 Ω
100 kΩ
+9 volts
0 volt
A
Fig. 14.3.10 The 100-kΩ 
resistor transfers positive 
charge to the gate until the 
voltage at A drops to about 
5 V.

Audio Players 421
 
The amplifi er has two input wires. An analog audio signal’s current fl ows into 
the amplifi er through one wire and returns through the other. However, the audio 
signal is not connected directly to the gate. Instead, it’s connected to the gate 
through a capacitor (Fig. 14.3.11). In addition to storing charge and energy, a 
capacitor can transfer current between two wires that have different voltages. 
Such voltage fl exibility is important in battery-powered audio amplifi ers that must 
do their amplifying exclusively with positive voltages. Aided by input and output 
capacitors, our audio amplifi er can have an average operating voltage of about +5 
V while it also has average input and output voltages of 0 V.
 
To see how a capacitor passes along current, let’s watch input current fl ow 
rightward into our amplifi er’s input capacitor. As that current’s positive charge 
accumulates on the capacitor’s left plate, it attracts negative charge onto the capac-
itor’s right plate and away from the gate. The capacitor remains electrically neutral, 
but the gate becomes more positively charged. Overall, the capacitor has conveyed 
input current to the gate even though no charge has actually passed through its insulating 
layer and its two plates remain at different voltages.
 
With the help of the input capacitor, the amplifi er’s fl uctuating input current produces 
a fl uctuating charge on the transistor’s gate, and the voltage at A fl uctuates as a result. Even 
a tiny fl uctuating current on the input wires creates a large fl uctuating voltage at A.
 
This fl uctuating voltage is responsible for sending a fl uctuating current 
through the headphones. Although headphones are not truly ohmic devices, they 
respond to fl uctuating voltages by carrying fl uctuating currents. By applying a 
fl uctuating voltage drop across the headphone’s two wires, the amplifi er can 
cause it to carry a fl uctuating current and produce corresponding pressure fl uctu-
ations and sound.
 
However, the voltage at A averages about 5 V, while the headphones expect 
an average voltage drop of 0 V. To convey the fl uctuating voltages and currents 
from A to the headphones, while eliminating their large voltage difference, our 
amplifi er connects them via an output capacitor (Fig. 14.3.12). As before, the 
fl uctuations in current and voltage on the output capacitor’s left plate are mir-
rored by current and voltage fl uctuations on its right plate. Even though the 
amplifi er operates at a high average voltage, the output signal for the head-
phones has an average voltage of 0 V.
 
Tiny fl uctuating currents in our amplifi er’s input circuit produce large fl uctuating cur-
rents in its output circuit. This amplifi er works remarkably well, given its simplicity. If you 
connect a microphone to the input wires and headphones to the output wires, the head-
phones will do a surprisingly good job of reproducing the sound in the microphone.
 
However, our simple amplifi er isn’t perfect. It distorts the sound somewhat, and it 
doesn’t handle all frequencies or amplitudes of sound equally. It also wastes a large amount 
of electric power heating the 50-Ω resistor. The amplifi ers in audio players carefully correct 
for these problems. Most use feedback to make sure that their output signals are essentially 
perfect replicas of their input signals, only larger. They sense their own shortcomings and 
correct for them.
 
Perfect replication of the input signal isn’t always desirable. Sometimes you want to 
boost the volume for part of the sound. The treble and bass controls on an audio player 
allow you to selectively change the loudnesses for the high- and low-frequency portions of 
the sound, respectively.
 
An amplifi er is typically rated according to the peak power it can supply to the head-
phones (or speakers) and its average power should never reach that value. Yet the amplifi er 
can reach its peak power during a passage that’s not particularly loud. That’s because sound 
waves often interfere with one another (see Section 9.3 to review wave interference), and 
when their crests and troughs coincide at the microphone, constructive interference can 
briefl y produce enormous pressure fl uctuations.
100 kΩ
Input
current
Output
current
+9 volts
0 volt
50 Ω
1   F
μ
100   F
μ
Fig. 14.3.12 The 
amplifi er causes currents 
to fl ow back and forth 
through the two output 
wires. The alternating 
current in the output wires 
is a good replica of the 
alternating current in the 
input wires, only larger.
50 Ω
100 kΩ
Input
current
+9 volts
0 volt
A
1   F
μ
Fig. 14.3.11 Because 
current fl owing back and 
forth through the two input 
wires affects the charge on 
the transistor’s gate, it also 
affects the voltage at A.

422 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
 
To reproduce those overlapping waves properly, the audio amplifi er must be able to 
provide several times its average power, though only for a moment. If the amplifi er can’t 
deliver that much power, the audio signal it sends to the headphones or speakers will be 
distorted and the sound will be unpleasant. That’s why audiophiles often use powerful 
amplifi ers even when they’re playing quiet music. Most modern amplifi ers are designed 
cleverly so that they consume only a little more electric power than they actually need to 
produce their outputs. They consume little power during quiet passages but can still pro-
vide great power during the loud moments.
 
As for the headphones themselves, they generally use electromagnetic effects to move 
a surface back and forth in sync with the amplifi er’s current fl uctuations. In most cases, the 
amplifi er’s current is sent through a coil of wire that’s immersed in a strong magnetic fi eld 
and attached to a movable surface. This current experiences a Lorentz force due to the 
magnetic fi eld, and that force drives the current, coil, and surface back and forth as the 
current fl uctuates. The moving surface alternately compresses and rarefi es the air, thereby 
reproducing the original sound. The electric power in the circuit becomes sound power for 
your ears.
Check Your Understanding #4: Sound Control
When you connect a microphone to the input of a MOSFET-based amplifi er, the microphone sends 
current back and forth through the input wires. As a result, charge moves onto or off what critical 
control element in the amplifi er?
Answer: The critical control element is the gate of a MOSFET.
Why: In all likelihood, the input current adds or removes charges from the gate of a MOSFET in the 
amplifi er’s fi rst stage of amplifi cation.
Epilogue for Chapter 14
In this chapter we looked at several common objects and studied the ways in which they 
use optics. In Cameras, we saw how a converging lens can form a real image of an object 
and how that real image can be used to record a scene on a piece of fi lm or an image sensor 
chip. We learned about the roles of focal length and f-number in determining the size and 
brightness of the real image and explored some of the complications that must be consid-
ered when designing lenses.
 
In Optical Recording and Communication, we studied the ways in which sound and 
other information can be represented in digital form and stored as structural features on 
optical discs. We looked at how laser light is affected by various optical devices and looked 
at what happens to it when it’s focused to a small spot. We learned about total internal 
refl ection and how this effect makes it possible to send light hundreds or thousands of 
kilometers through a fi ber of ultraclear glass.
 
In Audio Players, we looked at the electronic techniques used to represent sound and 
other information in digital and analog forms. We also examined the most important 
modern electronic component—the transistor, a semiconductor device that allows the 
current in one circuit to control the current in another circuit. We saw how an audio 
player uses transistors and other electronic components in both its digital computer and 
its analog amplifi er.
Explanation: Magnifying Glass Camera
The magnifying glass forms a real image of the window on the wall. All the light rays pass-
ing through the lens from one point on the window converge together to one point on the 
wall. Since each point on the window illuminates one point on the wall, you see a pattern 

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 423
of light on the wall that looks just like the window itself. The real image on the wall, how-
ever, is fl ipped upside down and its sides are reversed.
 
Because the window is closer to the lens than any of the objects outside the window, 
the real image of the window itself forms farthest from the lens. When you hold the mag-
nifying glass so that the window appears sharp on the wall, the objects outside the window 
are blurry. To bring those more distant objects into sharp focus, you must move the lens 
toward the wall. Very distant objects, such as a mountain or the moon, will form sharp 
images on the wall when the distance between the magnifying glass and wall is equal to the 
focal length of the lens.
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Cameras Work: A camera lens projects a real image of the scene in front of the 
camera onto the image sensor inside the camera. This real image is formed when the 
lens bends all the light reaching it from one part of the scene onto one part of the sen-
sor. For this imaging process to work well, the distance between the lens and the image 
sensor must be adjusted so that the light converges together (focuses) just as it reaches 
the sensor. If the sensor is too close to or too far from the lens, the image is blurry. The 
depth of focus depends on the effective diameter of the lens—its aperture. The smaller 
the lens’s aperture, the less critical the focus but the less light the lens gathers. A long-
focal-length lens brings the light to a focus far behind it, forming a relatively large but 
dim real image on the image sensor. To brighten this image, the long-focal-length lens 
must have a large aperture so that it gathers lots of light. The f-number, the ratio of a 
lens’s focal length to its aperture, characterizes the brightness of the lens’s image.
How Optical Recording and Communication Work: A CD, DVD, or Blu-ray represents 
sound or video information in digital form as a pattern of pits on a thin reflective layer 
inside the disc. The player uses a beam of laser light to read that pattern. As the disc 
rotates, the pits pass through the focused laser beam and the amount of reflected 
light fluctuates up and down. The player monitors the reflected light and uses it both 
to recreate the music and to keep its optical system properly aligned. This continual 
realignment allows the player to follow the spiral track of pits as the disc turns and to 
keep the laser beam tightly focused on the reflective layer. The optical system, which 
includes a laser diode, several photodiodes, and a variety of lenses and other optical 
elements, is so well designed and executed that the spot it creates on the reflective 
layer is limited in how small it can be only by diffraction effects due to the wave na-
ture of light.
 
Laser light can also carry information long distances through an optical fiber. Made 
from a core of extremely transparent glass that is clad in a second glass, this fiber con-
fines light via total internal reflection. As light attempts to leave the core at a shallow 
angle, it is perfectly reflected from the boundary with the cladding and continues 
through the fiber for great distances.
How Audio Players Work: An audio player combines a computer and an audio amplifier 
into a single unit. The player’s computer stores and retrieves the sound information in 
digital form, with each air pressure measurement represented by a collection of binary 
bits. These bits can take only values of 0 or 1. For long-term storage, the player places 
its digital sound information in flash memory and/or magnetic disk memory. For tempo-
rary storage while playing a song or working on its song collection, it uses dynamic 
memory.
 
After the player’s computer has manipulated that information digitally, using logic 
elements built primarily from MOSFETs, it passes the digital information to a digital-
to-analog converter and that information then takes analog form. This analog signal 

424 
CHAPTER 14 Optics and Electronics
represents sound as a current that’s proportional to the sound’s shift in air pressure 
away from atmospheric pressure.
 
The analog sound signal enters the input circuit of the player’s audio amplifier, 
which makes use of MOSFETs. This amplifier uses power obtained from the battery 
to produce an output signal that represents the same sound but with increased voltage 
and current. This amplified output signal has enough power to produce loud sound in 
the headphones.
1. Lens equation: One divided by the focal length of a lens is 
equal to the sum of one divided by the object distance and one 
divided by the image distance, or
1
focal length =
1
object distance +
1
image distance. (14.1.1)

 425
15
Modern Physics
 I
n recent years, scientists have been looking deeper into the atom to see how it’s made, farther 
into space to see how the universe works, and more carefully into matter and motion to see how 
complicated things can be understood in terms of simple laws. Among the most important tools 
that these scientists have to work with are quantum theory and the theory of relativity. This chapter 
will look at some of the ways in which modern physics affects our lives.
Radiation-Damaged Paper
One path of modern physics involves the control and use 
of high-energy radiation. Although our access to most 
forms of high-energy radiation is restricted, there’s one 
source that anyone can use—the sun. Because the sun’s 
ultraviolet light is energetic enough to damage chemical 
bonds and rearrange molecules, it can provide us with a 
glimpse of the effects that occur with X-rays and 
beyond.
 
To see sun damage for yourself, expose some sheets 
of colored construction paper to direct sunlight for a few 
days. Cover the paper with some opaque objects such as 
coins and place it outdoors. Don’t cover the paper with 
glass because glass absorbs enough ultraviolet light to 
slow the damage process. After a day or two, you should 
fi nd that the exposed portions of the paper have lightened; 
the sun’s ultraviolet radiation has destroyed some of the 
dye molecules in the paper. If you fi nd that nothing hap-
pens, the dye is evidently robust enough to tolerate ultra-
violet light for a while.
 
Try the experiment again with different papers and 
different colors. Which papers fade fastest? Do they seem 
to have a half-life? How could you tell?
 
This same optical bleaching appears on items that are 
displayed in shop windows and on outdoor furniture. It 
was once the only method people had for whitening 
fabrics. The sun’s ultraviolet light also damages your skin 
when you sit in the sun—a sunburn isn’t thermal damage; 
it’s radiation damage.
ACTIVE LEARNING 
EXPERIMENTS
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld
Chapter Itinerary
Fortunately ultraviolet light can’t penetrate far into your body. In 
Nuclear Weapons, we look at more penetrating forms of radia-
tion. We also explore the structures of atomic nuclei and see how 
taking them apart or joining them together can release enormous 
amounts of energy. In Nuclear Reactors, we study the approaches 
used to extract nuclear energy and convert it into electric energy. 
We also look at the safety and health issues relating to nuclear 
energy. In Medical Imaging and Radiation, we examine high-
energy radiation and see how it’s used to help rather than hurt. 
We study the ways in which X-rays and gamma rays are produced 

426 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
SECTION 15.1 
nuclear weapons release nuclear energy? Why are nuclear 
weapons so diffi cult to build? Why do we associate uranium 
and plutonium with nuclear weapons? How much uranium or 
plutonium does it take to build a bomb?
Experiments to Do: Since uranium and plutonium aren’t sold 
in hardware stores, you won’t be able to build your own bomb. 
However, you can get a feel for the way a chain reaction works 
by playing with a box of dominoes. If you stand the dominoes 
on end on a level table, each of them will have extra gravita-
tional potential energy that it can release by tipping over. If 
you spread the dominoes widely about the table and then give 
the table a gentle shake, they’ll tip over one by one.
 
However, if you pack the dominoes tightly together, so 
that one falling domino can knock over others, they’ll no longer 
be independent. As you jiggle the table, nothing will happen 
until the fi rst domino falls, but then many or even all of the 
dominoes will tip over in quick succession. You will have cre-
ated a chain reaction, where a single event triggers an ever-
increasing number of subsequent events. What characteristics 
of the dominoes and their arrangement determine whether or 
not such a chain reaction occurs? Can you envision a scenario 
in which a single tipping domino could trigger the release of an 
enormous amount of stored energy? Another chain reaction, 
this time in the decay of atomic nuclei, is what makes nuclear 
weapons possible.
The atomic bomb is one of the most remarkable and infamous 
inventions of the twentieth century. It followed close on the 
heels of various developments in the understanding of nature, 
developments that in many ways made the invention of nuclear 
weapons inevitable. By the late 1930s, scientists had discov-
ered most of the principles behind nuclear energy and were 
well aware of how those principles might be applied. The 
onset of World War II prompted concern that Germany would 
choose to follow the military path of nuclear energy. Propelled 
by fear, curiosity, and temptation, the scientists, engineers, 
and politicians of that time brought nuclear weapons into exis-
tence. The world has lived in the shadow of these terrible 
devices ever since.
Questions to Think About: Where is nuclear energy stored in 
the atoms? From where did this nuclear energy come? How do 
Nuclear Weapons
Fins
Radio trigger
High explosive lens
Plutonium (239Pu) sphere
Uranium (238U) sphere
Background
At the end of the nineteenth century, classical physics reigned supreme. Here classi-
cal physics means the rules of motion and gravitation identified by such people as 
Galileo, Newton, and Kepler, and the rules of electricity and magnetism developed by 
others, including Ampère, Coulomb, Faraday, and Maxwell. It was generally felt that 
most of physics was well understood. Physicists knew all the laws governing the 
behavior of objects in our universe, and all that was left to do was to apply those laws 
to more and more complicated examples. It was a time when physicists didn’t know 
what they didn’t know.
 
However, a few nagging problems remained—specifi c diffi culties that couldn’t be 
explained by the rules of classical physics. Among these were the spectrum of light emitted 
by a blackbody, the photoelectric effect in which electrons are ejected from metals by light, 
and the apparent absence of an ether or medium in which light traveled. At the beginning 
of the twentieth century, the whole of classical physics collapsed under the weight of these 
seemingly trivial diffi culties, and a largely new understanding of the universe emerged. The 
major advances took 25 years, from 1901 to 1926, and the time since has largely been spent 
applying those new laws to more and more complicated examples.
and how they interact with the atoms and molecules in a patient. 
We also look at the particle accelerators that produce high-
energy particles for radiation therapy. Finally, we discuss the bases 
for computed tomography (CT) imaging and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), which make it possible to prepare detailed maps 
of patients’ insides without ever touching their bodies. For addi-
tional preview information, see the Chapter Summary and 
Important Laws and Equations at the end of the chapter.

Nuclear Weapons 427
 
The two main developments, both essential to the making of the atomic bomb, were 
the discoveries of quantum physics and relativity. Often these are called quantum theory 
and the theory of relativity. But while the word theory might imply that they’re somehow 
on shaky ground, they’re not theories in the sense of hypotheses waiting to be tested. In 
fact, they’ve been confi rmed countless times since they were developed and have been 
shown to have enormous predictive power. Rather, they’re theories in the sense of being 
carefully constructed and codifi ed rules that model the behavior of the physical universe in 
which we live. Between them, these two theories made the discovery of nuclear forces and 
nuclear energy unavoidable. Finally, given people’s love for gadgets and power, they also 
made nuclear weapons inevitable.
Check Your Understanding #1: In Theory, It Means That . . .
If something is referred to as a theory, how likely is it to be true?
Answer: That depends completely on the theory and the extent to which it has been compared to the 
real world.
Why: A great many theories have been formulated to explain the world around us. Each of these 
theories is an attempt at describing some particular behavior of our universe in terms of various rules 
or mechanisms. However, until a theory has been tested by comparing it carefully to the system it’s 
trying to explain, you can’t tell whether it’s true or not. Some theories are eventually proven true, 
others false, and many remain uncertain. The theories of relativity and quantum physics have long 
since been proven true, although there is always the possibility that they may be only parts of a more 
complete theory.
The Nucleus and Radioactive Decay
Though the name atomic bomb has stuck for more than half a century, the more 
correct name would be nuclear bomb. The items that are responsible for the 
energy released by nuclear weapons are not atoms but tiny pieces of atoms—
their nuclei (plural of nucleus). Before we can discuss nuclei, though, let’s put 
them into context. Let’s start by looking at atoms.
 
To get an idea of just how tiny atoms are, imagine magnifying a grain of 
table salt, which is 1 mm (0.04 in) on a side, until it is the size of the state of 
Colorado. That grain would then appear as an orderly arrangement of spherical 
particles, each about the size of a grapefruit (Fig. 15.1.1). These spherical par-
ticles would be single atoms, and there would be about 7.2 million of them 
along each edge of the grain.
 
Like most solids, table salt is a crystal and its atoms are bound to one 
another by their outermost components, their electrons. Electrons dominate the 
chemistry of atoms and molecules. Sodium is a reactive metal because of its 
electrons, and chlorine is a reactive gas because of its electrons. When mixed, 
these two chemicals react violently to form table salt and release a consider-
able amount of light and heat. This, then, is a true “atomic bomb.”
 
Obviously, something is missing here. If a crazy person could buy a kilo-
gram or two of sodium and a tank of chlorine from a chemical company and destroy an 
entire city, rural living would be a whole lot more popular. Fortunately the energy released 
by chemical reactions is fairly limited. A kilogram of chemical atomic explosives just can’t 
do that much damage. However, nuclear bombs tap an entirely different store of energy 
deep within the atoms.
 
Although all nuclear weaponry is often attributed to Einstein’s famous equation, E = mc2, 
that notion is vastly oversimplifi ed. Nonetheless, this equation is quite signifi cant. As we 
noted in Section 4.2, one of Einstein’s discoveries at the beginning of the twentieth century 
was that matter and energy are in some respects equivalent. In certain circumstances, mass 
Table salt crystal
(Sodium chloride)
Chlorine negative ion
Diameter: 1.81 x 10–10 meter
Sodium positive ion
Diameter: 0.97 x 10–10 meter
Fig. 15.1.1 A salt crystal 
is an orderly array of 
positively charged sodium 
ions and negatively charged 
chlorine ions. These ions 
are held together by the 
attractive forces between 
oppositely charged ions. 
The ions are so small that 
there are about 7.2 million 
ions on the edge of a 
1-mm-wide salt crystal.

428 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
can become energy or energy can become mass. This equivalence is part of the theory of 
relativity and has some interesting consequences. It implies that an object can reduce its 
mass by transferring energy to its surroundings. Thus, if you weigh an object before and 
after it undergoes some internal transformation, you can use any weight loss to determine 
how much energy was released from the object by that transformation.
 
Because of this equivalence, mass and changes in mass can be used to locate energy 
that’s hidden within normal matter. This technique is important in nuclear physics, but it 
also applies to chemistry. When sodium and chlorine react to form table salt, their com-
bined mass decreases by a tiny amount. What’s missing is some chemical potential energy, 
which becomes light and heat and escapes from the mixture. In leaving, this chemical 
potential energy reduces the mass of the sodium and chlorine mixture by about 1 part in 10 
billion. That tiny change in mass is too small to detect with present measuring devices, 
although scientists are working on techniques that will soon make it possible to measure 
mass changes due to forming chemical bonds.
 
Electrons are, however, by far the lightest part of an atom and thus have relatively little 
mass to release as energy. Most of an atom’s mass is located in its nucleus. The nucleus is 
fantastically small—only a little more than 10−15 m in diameter. If you were to peer into 
one of the grapefruit-size sodium ions of our giant salt crystal, you would see a tiny particle 
at its center. There, just at the threshold of visibility, would be the ion’s nucleus, only 1 μm 
(0.00004 in) in diameter. The remaining 99.9999999999999% of the ion is occupied only 
by its 10 electrons in their orbitals.
 
The sodium nucleus contains 11 protons and 12 neutrons (Fig. 15.1.2). Each of these 
nuclear particles, or nucleons, has about 2000 times as much mass as an electron, so 
99.975% of the sodium ion’s mass is in this nucleus. Thus, while the electrons are certainly 
important to chemistry and matter as we know it, their contribution to the ion’s mass is 
insignifi cant. The ion is mostly empty space, lightly fi lled with fl uffy electrons and having 
a tiny nuclear lump at its center.
 
The nucleons that make up this nucleus experience two competing forces. The fi rst of 
these forces is the familiar electrostatic repulsion between like electric charges. Because 
each proton in the nucleus has a single positive charge, they’re constantly trying to push 
one another out of the nucleus. However, the second of these forces is attractive and holds 
the nucleus together. This new force is called the nuclear force, and at short distances it 
dominates the weaker electrostatic repulsion. However, the nuclear force attracts the nucle-
ons toward one another only when they’re touching. As soon as they’re separated, they’re 
on their own.
 
The competition between these two forces—the repulsive electrostatic force between 
like charges and the attractive nuclear force between nucleons—is analogous to what hap-
pens in a familiar toy (Figs. 15.1.3 and 15.1.4). This hopping toy has a suction cup attached 
to a spring, and the spring tries to separate the toy’s top from its base while the suction cup 
tries to keep the two parts together. When the two parts are well separated, only the spring 
exerts a force. But when the two parts touch, the suction cup begins to act and holds the two 
parts together.
 
What makes the hopping toy exciting is that its suction cup leaks. Eventually, the 
suction cup lets go and allows the spring to toss the toy into the air. Suppose, however, 
that the suction cup didn’t leak. Once pushed together, the pieces would never separate 
and the spring would retain its stored energy indefi nitely. To get the suction cup to let go, 
you would have to pull it away from the base. Only then could the spring release its 
stored energy.
 
In effect, an energy barrier would be preventing the leak-free toy from hopping. Until 
you did a little work on it by pulling the suction cup off the base, it wouldn’t be able to 
release its stored energy. Another example of a system that needs energy to release energy 
is a bottle of champagne, where you must push on the cork to help it out of the neck. After 
that initial investment of energy, a great deal of energy is released as gas inside the bottle 
blasts the cork across the room.
Sodium nucleus
(11 protons, 12 neutrons)
Neutron
Diameter: 1 x 10–15 meter
Proton
Diameter: 1 x 10–15 meter
Fig. 15.1.2 At the center 
of a sodium ion is a tiny 
nucleus containing about 
99.975% of the ion’s mass. 
It consists of 11 positively 
charged protons and 12 
uncharged neutrons. The 
protons repel one another 
at any distance, but the 
protons and neutrons are 
bound together by the 
highly attractive nuclear 
force as long as they touch 
one another.
Fig. 15.1.3 This hopping 
toy stores energy as its 
spring is compressed and 
retains that energy while 
its suction cup grips its 
base. When the suction 
cup lets go, the toy leaps 
into the air.
Courtesy Lou Bloomfi eld

Nuclear Weapons 429
 
The nucleus is in a similar situation. The attractive nuclear force prevents the nucleus 
from coming apart, despite the enormous amount of electrostatic potential energy it con-
tains. The nuclear force creates an energy barrier that prevents the nucleons from separat-
ing. Unless something adds energy to the nucleus to help the nucleons break free of the 
nuclear force, the nucleus will remain together forever. At least, that’s the prediction of 
classical physics.
 
Quantum physics, however, has an important infl uence on the behavior of the nucleus. 
One of the many peculiar effects of quantum physics is that you can never really tell exactly 
where an object is located, or at least not for long. That fuzziness is a manifestation of the 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which observes that some pairs of physical quantities, 
such as position and momentum or energy and time, are not entirely independent and can-
not be determined simultaneously beyond a certain accuracy. This principle is a result of 
the partly wave and partly particle nature of objects in our universe (Section 13.2). Since 
waves are normally broad things that occupy a region of space rather than a single point, 
objects in our universe normally don’t have exact locations.
 
The smaller an object’s mass, the fuzzier it is and the more uncertain its location. 
Although the fuzzy nucleons in a nucleus will normally stay in contact with one another for 
an extremely long time, there’s always a tiny chance that they’ll fi nd themselves temporar-
ily separated by a distance that’s beyond the reach of the nuclear force. The nucleons will 
then suddenly be free of one another, and electrostatic repulsion will push them apart in a 
process called radioactive decay. The quantum process that allows the nucleons to escape 
from the nuclear force without fi rst obtaining the energy needed to surmount the energy 
barrier is called tunneling because the nucleons effectively tunnel through the barrier. We 
fi rst encountered quantum tunneling in Section 14.3, when we saw that erasing fl ash mem-
ory requires that electrons tunnel through an insulating barrier.
 
Natural radioactive decay is a perfectly random process. Although half of a large pop-
ulation of identical radioactive nuclei will decay in a certain amount of time, you abso-
lutely cannot predict in advance which of the original nuclei will have survived. Because of 
this randomness, radioactive decay is characterized simply by a half-life, the time required 
for half of the nuclei to decay. After one half-life, only half the original nuclei will remain 
intact. If you wait a second half-life, only a quarter of the original nuclei will remain (half 
of the remaining half). After a third half-life, only an eighth will remain (half of the remain-
ing half of a half). And so on.
 
This halving of the population with each additional half-life is a type of exponential 
decay. In general, the fraction of nuclei remaining after a given amount of time is one-half 
raised to the power of the time divided by the half-life. Written as a word equation, that 
relationship is:
 
fraction remaining = (
1
2)
elapsed time∕half-life
 
(15.1.1)
in symbols:
N
N0
= (
1
2)
t/T1/2
and in everyday language:
Radioactivity goes away, but you have to wait it out.
 
Although most radioactive nuclei have short half-lives and don’t linger long in our 
environment, there are a few with half-lives of billions of years. It is those long-lived radio-
active nuclei, particularly uranium and thorium nuclei, that have survived since the forma-
tion of Earth, remain abundant in nature, and gave rise to nuclear weapons.
Top
Suction
cup
Spring
Top
Suction
cup
Spring
Base
Base
Hopping toy with
suction cup released
Hopping toy with
suction cup holding
Fig. 15.1.4 A spring and 
a suction cup combine 
to form a toy that hops 
suddenly after a long 
wait. The spring tries to 
separate the top from the 
base, while the suction cup 
tries to hold the two parts 
together. Energy you store 
in the spring is released 
when the leaking suction 
cup eventually allows the 
spring to expand.

430 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
Fission and Fusion
The more protons there are in a nucleus, the more they repel one another and the more 
likely they are to cause radioactive decay. Adding additional neutrons to the nucleus reduces 
this proton-proton repulsion by increasing the size of the nucleus without adding to its 
positive charge. However, adding too many neutrons also destabilizes the nucleus for rea-
sons that we’ll discuss in Section 15.3. Thus, constructing a stable nucleus is a delicate 
balancing act.
 
In nuclei with only a few protons, the attractive nuclear force wins big over the repul-
sive electrostatic force and the nucleons stick like crazy. These nuclei resemble hopping 
toys with weak springs and big suction cups; once brought together, the pieces never come 
apart. In fact, the average binding energy of the nucleons (the energy required to separate 
them from one another divided by the number of nucleons) would increase if these nuclei 
had even more protons and neutrons.
 
In nuclei with many protons, the electrostatic repulsion is so severe that the nuclear 
force can’t hold the nucleons together for long. These nuclei decay rapidly. They resemble 
hopping toys with strong springs and small suction cups. The average binding energy of the 
nucleons would increase if these nuclei had fewer protons and neutrons.
 
In nuclei with roughly 26 protons, in between the two extremes we’ve just considered, 
the attractive nuclear force and repulsive electrostatic force are nicely balanced. These 
nuclei are extremely stable, and you can’t increase the average binding energy of their 
nucleons by adding or subtracting nucleons. Smaller nuclei can release potential energy by 
growing to reach this intermediate size, while larger nuclei can release potential energy by 
shrinking toward the same goal.
Check Your Understanding #2: Who Hid the Energy?
When a large nucleus breaks apart into fragments, it releases a great deal of energy. In what form was 
that energy stored in the intact nucleus?
Answer: It was stored as electrostatic potential energy in the repulsion between protons.
Why: Although it is routinely called nuclear energy, much of the energy stored in radioactive nuclei 
is actually electrostatic potential energy. Assembling a giant nucleus out of positively charged parti-
cles requires a considerable amount of work against electrostatic forces, and it is that stored work 
that’s released when the nucleus decays.
Check Your Figures #1: A Real Hand-Me-Down
A small fraction of the carbon found in Earth’s atmosphere is carbon 14, a rare, radioactive form that’s 
synthesized by cosmic rays and has a half-life of 5730 years. While plants and animals are alive, they 
incorporate carbon 14 into their tissues along with ordinary carbon. Once they die, the fraction of 
carbon 14 in their tissues begins to decrease as the carbon 14 nuclei decay. If you are a museum 
curator and someone donates a garment that is supposed to be 1001 years old, what fraction of the 
original carbon 14 should you expect to fi nd in that garment when you examine its carbon content?
Answer: The fraction of the original carbon 14 that remains should be about 0.886.
Why: According to Eq. 15.1.1, the fraction of carbon 14 nuclei remaining after 1001 years should be
 fraction remaining = (
1
2)
1001 years∕5730 years
                                         
 = (
1
2)
0.1747
 = 0.886
If you fi nd that fraction of carbon 14 when you test the garment, that indicates that the fi bers in the 
garment come from plants or animals that died approximately 1001 years ago, although you can’t tell 
exactly when the fabric itself was woven. If you fi nd a larger fraction, that proves that the garment is 
less than 1001 years old.

Nuclear Weapons 431
 
For a small nucleus to grow, something must push more nucleons 
toward it. Electrostatic repulsion will initially oppose this growth, but once 
everything touches, the nuclear force will bind the particles together and 
release a large amount of potential energy. This coalescence process is 
called nuclear fusion.
 
For a large nucleus to shrink, something must separate its pieces 
beyond the reach of the nuclear force. Electrostatic repulsion will then 
push the fragments apart and release a large amount of potential energy. 
This fragmentation process is called nuclear fi ssion.
 
The energies released when small nuclei undergo fusion or when large 
nuclei undergo fi ssion are enormous compared to chemical energies. Ura-
nium, a large nucleus, converts about 0.1% of its mass into energy when it 
breaks apart. Hydrogen, a tiny nucleus, converts about 0.3% of its mass 
into energy when it fuses with other hydrogen nuclei. Kilogram for kilo-
gram, nuclear reactions release about 10 million times more energy than 
chemical reactions. Fortunately, they’re much harder to start.
 
With that scientifi c background, let’s follow a sequence of discover-
ies near the start of the twentieth century. Natural radioactive decay was 
discovered accidentally by French physicist Antoine-Henri Becquerel 
(1852–1908) in 1896. Intrigued by the recent discovery of X-rays, he began looking for 
materials that might emit X-rays after exposure to light. To his surprise, he found that 
uranium fogged photographic plates, even through an opaque shield and even without 
exposure to light. His discovery was soon confi rmed and elaborated on by Polish-born 
French physicist Marie Curie (1867–1934) and French chemist Pierre Curie (1859–
1906). This wife and husband team discovered several new radioactive elements, includ-
ing polonium (named after Marie’s homeland) and radium.
 
In 1911, British physicist Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937) discovered that atoms have 
nuclei. He subsequently found that nuclei sometimes shatter when struck by energetic helium 
nuclei. In 1932, British physicist James Chadwick (1891–1974) discovered a fragment of the 
nucleus, the neutron, that has no electric charge and can thus approach a nucleus without any 
electrostatic repulsion. It was soon discovered that neutrons stick to the nuclei of many atoms.
 
The crucial discovery that made the atomic bomb possible was neutron-induced fi s-
sion of nuclei. In 1934, Italian physicist Enrico Fermi (1901–1954) and his colleagues were 
trying to solve a particular riddle about the nucleus, a radioactive decay process called beta 
decay. They were adding neutrons to the nuclei of every atom they could get hold of. When 
they added neutrons to uranium, with its huge nucleus, they observed the production of 
some very short-lived radioactive systems. They thought that they had formed ultraheavy 
nuclei and even went so far as to give these new elements tentative names.
 
Four years later, however, Austrian physicists Lise Meitner (1878–1968) and Otto 
Frisch (1904–1979) and German chemists Otto Hahn (1879–1968) and Fritz Strassmann 
(1902–1980) collectively showed 1  that what Fermi’s group had actually done was to 
fragment uranium into lighter nuclei (Fig. 15.1.5). Many of the fragments created by this 
induced fi ssion were neutrons, which could themselves cause the destruction of other ura-
nium nuclei.
Check Your Understanding #3: A Sticky Nuclear Problem
If you take two intermediate-size nuclei and combine them to make a single uranium nucleus, will 
the process release or consume energy?
Answer: It will consume energy.
Why: To merge two smaller nuclei and form a uranium nucleus, you will have to push the two together 
with considerable force because they contain many protons. You will have to do considerable work to 
bring these nuclei close enough for the nuclear force to bind them. The energy you invested in this 
new nucleus is the same energy that is released when it undergoes fi ssion.
= Neutron
= Proton
Fission
fragments
Incoming
neutron
Free
neutrons
235U
90Rb
143Cs
Fig. 15.1.5 When a 
neutron strikes a uranium 
nucleus, there’s a good 
chance that the nucleus will 
fall apart into fragments. 
This process is called 
induced fi ssion. Among the 
fragments of induced fi ssion 
are other neutrons.

432 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
Chain Reactions and the Fission Bomb
Physicists quickly realized that a chain reaction was possible, a reaction in which the fi s-
sion of one uranium nucleus would induce fi ssion in two nearby uranium nuclei, which 
would in turn induce fi ssion in four other uranium nuclei, and so on (Fig. 15.1.6). The result 
would be a catastrophic nuclear process in which many or even most of the nuclei in a piece 
of uranium would shatter and release fantastic amounts of energy.
 
In a sense, the remaining work toward both the atomic bomb and the hydrogen bomb 
was a matter of technical details. Only four conditions had to be satisfi ed for an atomic or 
fi ssion bomb to be possible:
1. 
A source of neutrons had to exist in the bomb to trigger the explosion.
2. 
The nuclei making up the bomb had to be fi ssionable; that is, they had to fi ssion 
when hit by a neutron.
3. 
Each induced fi ssion had to produce more neutrons than it consumed.
4. The bomb had to use the released neutrons effi ciently so that each fi ssion induced 
an average of more than one subsequent fi ssion.
Meeting the fi rst condition was easy. Many radioactive elements emit neutrons. Meeting the 
second and third conditions was more diffi cult. Here is where uranium fi t into the picture. It 
was known to be fi ssionable, and it was known to release more neutrons than it consumed.
 
However, not all uranium nuclei are the same. Although a uranium nucleus must con-
tain 92 protons, so that it forms a neutral atom with 92 electrons and has all the chemical 
characteristics of uranium (U in Fig. 13.2.5), the number of neutrons in that nucleus is 
somewhat fl exible. Nuclei that differ only in the numbers of neutrons they contain are 
called isotopes, and natural uranium nuclei come in two isotopes: 235U and 238U, where the 
number specifi es how many nucleons are in each nucleus. The 235U nucleus contains 92 
protons and 143 neutrons, for a total of 235 nucleons. In contrast, the 238U nucleus contains 
238 nucleons: 92 protons and 146 neutrons.
Incoming
neutron
235U
98Zr
135Te
141Xe
89Br
144La
92Sr
142Cs
91Rb
141Ba
92Kr
137I
96Y
235U
235U
235U
235U
235U
Fig. 15.1.6 A chain reaction occurs when the fragments of one fi ssioning nucleus induce fi ssion in 
at least one additional nucleus. Such a chain reaction is particularly easy in 235U, the light isotope of 
uranium, where each fi ssioning nucleus releases an average of 2.5 neutrons.
1  Austrian-born physicist 
Lise Meitner moved to 
Berlin in 1907 and soon 
began a 30-year collabora-
tion with chemist Otto 
Hahn. In 1934, she 
convinced Hahn to join 
her in studying nuclear 
processes, and they made 
great progress. Unfortu-
nately, Meitner’s Jewish 
ancestry made her a target 
of Nazi academic 
restriction and she fl ed to 
Sweden in 1938. Meitner 
continued to guide their 
collaboration through 
letters. Only months after 
she left, Hahn and his 
assistant Fritz Strassmann 
found that neutron 
irradiation of heavy 
elements was creating 
smaller rather than larger 
nuclei. Meitner and her 
nephew Otto Frisch soon 
developed a model of 
nuclear fi ssion based on 
these measurements. 
Hahn, however, published 
the results without 
Meitner’s name on the 
paper, ostensibly to avoid 
Nazi interference. As a 
result of this omission, the 
1944 Nobel Prize in 
Chemistry was awarded to 
Hahn alone. Hahn went 
on to claim that Meitner 
was simply his assistant, 
rather than the leader of 
their joint effort. In 
recognition of this gross 
injustice, element 109 was 
named meitnerium in 
1994.

Nuclear Weapons 433
 
It turns out that only 235U is suitable for a bomb. It’s marginally stable, with too many 
protons for the nuclear force to keep together, even with the diluting effects of 143 neu-
trons. Like many proton-rich nuclei, 235U eventually undergoes alpha decay; it emits a 
helium nucleus (4He) and thereby loses two protons and two neutrons. 235U has a radioac-
tive half-life of 710 million years. However, when struck by a neutron, 235U shatters imme-
diately into fragments, and this induced fi ssion releases about 2.5 neutrons.
 
238U is slightly more stable than the lighter isotope, and its half-life is 4.51 billion years. 
The 238U nucleus absorbs most neutrons without undergoing fi ssion. Instead, it undergoes a 
series of complicated nuclear changes that eventually convert it into plutonium, an element 
not found in nature. It becomes 239Pu, which has a nucleus with 94 protons and 145 neutrons. 
As we’ll see later on, plutonium itself is useful for making nuclear weapons.
 
Thus 238U actually slows a chain reaction rather than encouraging it. Since only 235U can 
support a chain reaction, natural uranium has to be separated before it can be used in a bomb. 
235U is quite rare, however. Earth’s store of uranium nuclei was created long ago, in the explo-
sion of a dying star. That supernova heated the nuclei of smaller atoms so hot that they col-
lided together and stuck. Uranium nuclei were formed, with the supernova’s energy trapped 
inside them. They were incorporated in the Earth during its formation about 4 or 5 billion 
years ago and have been decaying ever since. The only uranium isotopes that remain in any 
quantity are 235U and 238U. Since 235U is less stable, its percentage of the naturally occurring 
uranium nuclei has dwindled to only 0.72%. The remaining 99+% of the uranium is 238U.
 
Separating 235U from 238U is extremely diffi cult. Since atoms containing these two 
nuclei differ only in mass, not in chemistry, they can be separated only by methods that 
compare their masses. Because the mass difference is relatively small, heroic measures are 
needed to extract 235U from natural uranium. During World War II and the Cold War era, 
the U.S. government developed enormous facilities for separating the two uranium iso-
topes. The need for such installations is one of the major obstacles to the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons.
 
The last condition for sustaining a chain reaction is that the bomb must use neutrons 
effi ciently, so that each fi ssion induces an average of more than one subsequent fi ssion. 
That means that the bomb’s contents can’t absorb neutrons wastefully and that it can’t let 
too many of them escape without causing fi ssion. A lump of relatively pure 235U wouldn’t 
absorb neutrons wastefully, but it might allow too many of them to escape through its sur-
face. For a chain reaction to occur, the lump must be large enough that each neutron has a 
good chance of hitting another nucleus before it leaves the lump. The lump also should 
have a minimal amount of surface. It should be a sphere.
 
How large must that sphere be? Since atoms are mostly empty space, a neutron can 
travel several centimeters through a lump of uranium without hitting a nucleus. Thus a golf 
ball–size sphere of uranium would allow too many neutrons to escape. For a bare sphere of 
235U, the critical mass required to initiate a chain reaction is about 52 kg (115 lbm), a ball 
about 17 cm (7 in) in diameter. At that point, each fi ssion will induce an average of one 
subsequent fi ssion. For an explosive chain reaction, in which each fi ssion induces an aver-
age of much more than one fi ssion, additional 235U is needed—a supercritical mass. About 
60 kg (132 lbm) will do it.
 
By 1945, the scientists and engineers of the Manhattan Project had found ways to meet 
these four conditions and were prepared to initiate an explosive chain reaction. They had 
accumulated enough 235U to construct a supercritical mass. Carefully machined pieces of 
235U would be put into the bomb so that they would join together at the moment the bomb 
was to explode. When the critical mass was reached, a few initial neutrons would start the 
chain reaction. When the uranium became supercritical, catastrophic fi ssion would quickly 
turn it into a tremendous fi reball.
 
However, assembly was tricky. The supercritical mass had to be completely assembled 
before the chain reaction was too far along; otherwise the bomb would begin to overheat 
and explode before enough of its nuclei had time to fi ssion. In pure 235U, the time it takes for 
one fi ssion to induce the next fi ssion is only about 10 ns (10 nanoseconds or 10 billionths of 

434 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
a second). In a supercritical mass, each generation of fi ssions is much larger 
than the previous generation, so it takes only a few dozen generations to shatter 
a signifi cant fraction of the uranium nuclei. The whole explosive chain reaction 
is over in less than a millionth of a second, with most of the energy released in 
the last few generations (about 30 ns).
 
To make sure that the assembly was complete before the bomb exploded, it 
had to be done extraordinarily quickly. For the 235U bomb called “Little Boy” 
(Fig. 15.1.7a) that was exploded over Hiroshima, Japan, on August 6, 1945, at 
8:15 am and was responsible for the deaths of about 200,000 Japanese citizens, 
the supercritical mass was assembled when a cannon fi red a cylinder of 235U through a hole 
in a sphere of 235U (Fig. 15.1.8). When the cylinder was centered in the hole, it completed 
a 60-kg sphere of uranium, housed in a tungsten carbide and steel container. This container 
confi ned the uranium, holding it together with its inertia as the explosion began. An explo-
sive chain reaction started immediately, and by the time the uranium blew itself apart, 1.3% 
of the 235U nuclei had fi ssioned. The energy released in that event was equal to the explo-
sion of about 15,000 tons of TNT.
 
But Little Boy was actually the second nuclear explosion. Its concept was so foolproof 
and its 235U so precious that Little Boy was dropped without ever being tested. However, 
the Manhattan Project had also developed a plutonium-based bomb that involved a much 
more sophisticated concept. This bomb was much less certain to work, so it was tested once 
before it was used.
 
“The Gadget,” as the fi rst atomic bomb was called, didn’t use 235U. Instead, it used 
plutonium that had been synthesized from 238U in nuclear reactors. A nuclear reactor car-
ries out a controlled chain reaction in uranium, and neutrons from this chain reaction can 
convert 238U into 239Pu.
 
Like 235U, 239Pu meets the conditions for a bomb. The 239Pu nucleus is relatively unsta-
ble, with a half-life of only 24,400 years. It fi ssions easily when struck by a neutron and 
releases an average of three neutrons when it does. Thus 239Pu can be used in a chain reac-
tion. For a bare sphere of 239Pu, the critical mass is about 10 kg (22 lbm)—a ball about 
10 cm (4 in) in diameter.
 
There is a problem with 239Pu, however. It’s so radioactive and releases so many neu-
trons when it fi ssions that a chain reaction develops almost instantly. There is much less 
time to assemble a supercritical mass of plutonium than there is with uranium. The cannon 
assembly method won’t work because the plutonium will overheat and blow itself apart 
before the cylinder can fully enter the sphere.
 
Thus a much more sophisticated assembly scheme was employed for the Gadget. At 
5:29 am on June 16, 1945, over 2000 kg (4400 lbm) of carefully designed high explosives 
crushed or imploded a sphere of plutonium (Fig. 15.1.9) inside The Gadget (Fig. 15.1.10) 
at Alamogordo, New Mexico. By itself, the 6.1-kg (13.4-lbm) sphere wasn’t large enough 
to be a critical mass; it was a subcritical mass. However, it was surrounded by a tamper of 
238U whose massive nuclei refl ected many neutrons back into the plutonium like marbles 
High
explosives
Cannon
Steel and tungsten
carbide tamper
235U
235U
Fig. 15.1.8 The concept 
behind Little Boy was 
simple. A sphere of 235U 
was divided into two 
parts so that neither 
was a critical mass on 
its own. One part was a 
hollow sphere, and the 
other part was a cylinder 
that would complete that 
sphere. When the bomb 
was detonated, a cannon 
fi red the cylinder into the 
hollow sphere, creating 
a supercritical mass and 
initiating an explosive 
chain reaction.
Fig. 15.1.7 The Little Boy (a) used a cannon to fi re a cylinder of uranium into an incomplete sphere 
of uranium. The Fat Man (b) used high explosives to crush a sphere of plutonium to extreme density. 
Little Boy destroyed Hiroshima, and Fat Man destroyed Nagasaki.
© Gamma-Keystone/Getty 
Images, Inc.
© JT Vintage/Glasshouse/
Aurora Photos, Inc.

Nuclear Weapons 435
bouncing off bowling balls. The implosion process compressed the plutonium well beyond 
its normal density. With the plutonium nuclei packed more tightly together, they were more 
likely to be struck by neutrons and undergo fi ssion.
 
The scheme worked. The chain reaction that followed caused 17% of the plutonium 
nuclei to fi ssion and released energy equivalent to the explosion of about 22,000 tons of 
TNT. The tower and equipment at the Trinity test site disappeared into vapor, and the desert 
sands turned to glass for hundreds of meters in all directions. A nearly identical device 
named “Fat Man” (Fig. 15.1.7b) was dropped over Nagasaki, Japan, on August 9, 1945, at 
11:02 am, where it ultimately killed about 140,000 people.
 
In the years following the fi rst fi ssion bombs, development focused on how best to 
bring the fi ssionable material together. The longer a supercritical mass could be held 
together before it overheated and exploded, the larger would be the fraction of its nuclei 
that would fi ssion and the greater the explosive yield. The crushing technique of The Gad-
get and Fat Man became the standard, and bombs grew smaller and more effi cient at using 
their nuclear fuel. The implosion process reduced the amount of plutonium needed to reach 
a supercritical mass, so very small fi ssion bombs were possible. The smallest atomic bomb, 
the “Davy Crockett,” weighed only about 220 N (50 lbf).
© Sueddeutsche Zeitung Photo/The Image Works
Fig. 15.1.9 The fi rst atomic bomb, 
nicknamed “The Gadget,” was 
detonated on a tower at a remote 
desert site near Alamogordo, New 
Mexico, on June 16, 1945. Here 
employees of the top-secret Manhattan 
Project are seen hoisting parts of the 
plutonium bomb onto the tower before 
the explosion.
239Pu
238U
High
explosives
Fig. 15.1.10 The concept 
used in The Gadget and 
Fat Man was relatively 
sophisticated. Carefully 
shaped high explosives 
crushed a baseball-sized 
sphere of 239Pu inside a 
neutron-refl ecting shell 
of 238U. The plutonium 
was compressed to high 
density and quickly reached 
supercritical mass, initiating 
an explosive chain reaction.
Check Your Understanding #4: Tickling the Dragon’s Tail
What would happen if you slowly moved two 30-kg (66-lbm) hemispheres of 235U together to form a 
single sphere?
Answer: Before they actually touched, a chain reaction would occur.
Why: As soon as the hemispheres became close enough that each fi ssion began to induce an average 
of one subsequent fi ssion, a chain reaction would occur. You would have assembled a critical mass. 
The hemispheres would begin to get hotter and hotter and would eventually melt or explode. Because 
they would blow apart before most of the nuclei could fi ssion, any explosion would be rather small. 
But you would suffer severe radiation injury. Just such an accident killed Louis Slotin during the 
Manhattan Project.
The Fusion or Hydrogen Bomb
Since fi ssionable material begins to explode as soon as it exceeds critical mass, this critical 
mass limits the size and potential explosive yield of a fi ssion bomb. In search of a way 
around this limit, bomb scientists took a look back at small nuclei and fi gured out how to 
extract energy by sticking them together.
 
The fi ssion bomb brought to Earth, for the fi rst time, temperatures that had previ-
ously been observed only in stars. Stars obtain most of their energy by fusing hydrogen 

436 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
nuclei together to form helium nuclei, a process that releases a great deal of 
energy. Because hydrogen nuclei are protons and repel one another with tre-
mendous forces, hydrogen doesn’t normally undergo fusion here on Earth. 
To cause fusion, something must bring those protons close enough for the 
nuclear force to stick them together. The only practical way we know of to 
bring the nuclei together is to heat them so hot that they crash into each 
other. That is what happens in a fusion bomb, also called a thermonuclear or 
hydrogen bomb.
 
In a fusion bomb, an exploding fi ssion bomb heats a quantity of hydro-
gen to about 100 million degrees Celsius (Fig. 15.1.11). At that tempera-
ture, hydrogen nuclei begin to collide with one another. To ease the nuclear 
fusion processes, heavy isotopes of hydrogen are used: deuterium (2H) and 
tritium (3H). While the normal hydrogen nucleus (1H) contains only a pro-
ton, the deuterium nucleus contains a proton and a neutron. The tritium 
nucleus contains a proton and two neutrons. When a deuterium nucleus col-
lides with a tritium nucleus, they stick to form a helium nucleus (4He) and a 
free neutron. Because this process converts about 0.3% of the original mass 
into energy, the helium nucleus and the neutron fl y away from one another 
at enormous speeds.
 
Since hydrogen won’t explode spontaneously, even in huge quantities, 
a hydrogen bomb can be extremely large. A fi ssion bomb is used to set it off, 
but after that, the sky’s the limit. Some enormous fusion bombs were con-
structed and tested during the early days of the Cold War. These bombs 
usually consisted of a fi ssion starter and a hydrogen follower, all wrapped 
up in a tamper of 238U. The tamper confi ned the hydrogen as the fusion 
began. Once fusion was underway, converting deuterium and tritium into 
helium and neutrons, the neutrons collided with 238U nuclei in the tamper. These fusion 
neutrons were so energetic that they were able to induce fi ssions even in 238U nuclei and 
release still more energy. Overall, this structure is sometimes called a fi ssion–fusion–
fi ssion bomb.
 
A variation on this bomb is the so-called neutron or enhanced radiation bomb. 
That bomb has no 238U tamper, so the energetic neutrons from the fusion process travel 
out of the explosion and irradiate everything in the vicinity. This bomb is lethal to 
humans, but because its blast is relatively weak, it is not particularly destructive to 
property.
 
Tritium is a radioactive isotope created in nuclear reactors. It has too many neutrons to 
be a stable nucleus and slowly decays into a light isotope of helium (3He). Because tritium 
has a half-life of 12.3 years, fusion bombs containing tritium require periodic maintenance 
to replenish their tritium.
 
Many fusion bombs use solid lithium deuteride instead of deuterium and tritium gases. 
Lithium deuteride is a salt containing lithium (6Li) and deuterium (2H). When a neutron 
from the fi ssion starter collides with a 6Li nucleus, the two fragment into a helium nucleus 
(4He) and a tritium nucleus (3H). In the bomb, lithium deuteride is quickly converted into a 
mixture of deuterium, tritium, and helium, which then undergoes fusion.
Deuterium,
tritium,
or lithium deuteride
239Pu
238U
238U
High
explosives
Fig. 15.1.11 A fusion 
bomb releases energy by 
fusing deuterium (2H) and 
tritium (3H) nuclei together 
to form helium (4He) and 
neutrons. This fusion is 
initiated by heating the 
hydrogen to more than 
100 million degrees Celsius 
with a fi ssion bomb. High-
energy neutrons released 
by the fusion process then 
induce fi ssion in the 238U 
tamper, releasing still 
more energy. Lithium 
(6Li) produces tritium when 
exposed to neutrons.
Check Your Understanding #5: It’s Hard to Get Together
Why must hydrogen be heated to an extremely high temperature to initiate fusion?
Answer: The protons in hydrogen nuclei repel one another quite strongly at short distances. They 
must be moving very quickly with lots of thermal energy for them to touch.
Why: In a gas, thermal energy takes the form of kinetic energy. The hotter the gas, the faster the 
particles are moving. At 100 million degrees Celsius, the hydrogen nuclei are moving so fast that 
they can overcome their electrostatic repulsion and touch. When they do, the nuclear force pulls 
them together and they fuse.

Nuclear Weapons 437
Heat, Radiation, and Fallout
Once a nuclear weapon has exploded—after its fi ssionable material has fi ssioned and its 
fusible material has fused—what then? First, a vast number of nuclei and subatomic parti-
cles emerge from the explosion at enormous speeds, many at nearly the speed of light. 
These particles crash into nearby atoms and molecules, heating them to fantastic tempera-
tures and producing a local fi reball around the bomb itself. They also cause extensive radi-
ation damage in the surrounding area.
 
Second, a fl ash of light emerges from the explosion, caused partly by the fi ssion and 
fusion processes themselves and partly by the ultrahot fi reball that follows. This light is not 
only visible light, but also every portion of the electromagnetic spectrum from infrared to 
visible to ultraviolet to X-rays to gamma rays. It burns things nearby, inside and out.
 
Third, the explosion creates a huge pressure surge in the air around the fi reball. A 
shock wave propagates outward from the fi reball at the speed of sound, knocking over 
everything in its path for a considerable distance. Fourth, the rarefi ed and superheated air 
rushes upward, lifted by buoyant forces, to create a towering mushroom cloud.
 
However, the most insidious aftereffect of a nuclear explosion is fallout, the creation 
and release of radioactive nuclei. Fission converts uranium and plutonium nuclei into 
smaller nuclei. Each new nucleus has several dozen protons and its share of neutrons from 
the nucleus that fi ssioned. These new nuclei attract electrons and become seemingly nor-
mal atoms like iodine or cobalt. But while large nuclei such as uranium need extra neutrons 
to dilute their protons and reduce their electrostatic repulsions, intermediate and small 
nuclei like those of iodine and cobalt don’t need as many neutrons. The new nuclei wind up 
with too many neutrons and are radioactive. They have half-lives that are anywhere from 
thousandths of a second to thousands of years.
 
Until they decay, the atoms that contain these nuclei are almost indistinguishable from 
normal atoms. They are radioactive isotopes of common atoms, and our bodies naively incorpo-
rate them into our tissues. There they sit, performing whatever chemical tasks our bodies require 
of them. Eventually, however, these radioactive atoms fall apart and release nuclear energy. 
Because each radioactive decay that occurs near us or inside us releases perhaps a million times 
more energy than is present in a chemical bond, these decays cause chemical changes in our 
cells. They can kill cells or damage the cells’ genetic information, potentially causing cancer.
 
This transmutation of elements, the restructuring of nuclei to transform atoms of one 
element into another, occurs in an uncontrolled fashion in nuclear weapons and produces a 
lethal mix of unstable isotopes. Those isotopes take years to decay out of the environment, 
and all anyone can do is wait. Even nuclear weapons with poor explosive yields, so-called 
dirty bombs, can litter the surrounding landscape with radioactive debris. Nuclear reactors 
produce similar mixtures of radioactive isotopes in their fuel assemblies and core struc-
tures, which is why disposing of spent nuclear fuel remains so problematic.
 
On the other hand, radioactive isotopes have been a boon to medicine and biochemis-
try, where many of them have found valuable and life-saving applications. Moreover, in 
controlled circumstances, elements can be transmuted systematically to generate primarily 
desirable isotopes rather than a random assortment. Such transmutation is diffi cult and 
expensive, and it involves nuclear rather than chemical processes. Although the alchemists’ 
dream of transmuting lead into gold is fi nally possible, it’s not a path to riches.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS: Radiation and Radioactivity
Misconception: When a material such as food is exposed to microwave, radio wave, infrared, or 
ultraviolet radiation, it may become radioactive.
Resolution: To render a material radioactive, something must alter its nuclei so that they are no 
longer stable. Such an alteration requires vastly more energy than one of those low-energy pho-
tons can provide. The only forms of electromagnetic radiation with enough energy per photon to 
affect nuclei are gamma rays and, occasionally, X-rays.

438 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
Check Your Understanding #6: Not So Good to Eat
Normal iodine (127I) is stable forever. But the fi ssion product 131I is radioactive and has a half-life of 
about 8 days. What are the consequences of eating 131I?
Answer: The 131I is incorporated into your body and exposes you to radiation, particularly during the 
fi rst few weeks before most of it has decayed away.
Why: Your body can’t distinguish 127I from 131I because they’re chemically identical. Since your body 
uses iodine in its functions, any 131I that you ingest is likely to become part of your body’s iodine 
supply. Over the next 8 days, about half of this iodine will decay and expose you to radiation. The 
remaining 131I is also radioactive, and half of this amount will decay in the next 8 days. Thus after 
16 days, only one-quarter of the original amount will remain. After 24 days, only one-eighth will 
remain. And so on.
SECTION 15.2
power remains an elusive goal, but efforts continue to har-
ness this form of nuclear energy as well. Competing con-
cerns about nuclear safety, nuclear weapons proliferation, 
and climate change will no doubt infl uence the future of 
these technologies.
Questions to Think About: Why doesn’t a nuclear reactor 
explode once it reaches a critical mass? How is the energy 
released in a nuclear reactor turned into electricity? What 
caused the famous accidents at Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, 
and Fukushima Daiichi? How can hydrogen fusion be initiated 
in a container? How is hydrogen held together at the tempera-
tures needed for fusion?
Experiments to Do: A nuclear reactor operates very close to 
critical mass. Below critical mass, each spontaneous fi ssion 
induces a limited number of subsequent fi ssions. Above criti-
cal mass, the number of subsequent fi ssions becomes unlim-
ited. A similar effect occurs in a sand pile as it becomes 
steeper. If you pour sand slowly onto the pile, its shape will 
change and its steepness will increase. Initially, the grains will 
stay where they land, but once the pile becomes quite steep, 
they will begin to roll down the pile’s sides. If the pile becomes 
too steep, a single grain of sand can trigger an avalanche. That 
same behavior occurs in a reactor that’s near critical mass—a 
single spontaneous fi ssion can trigger an enormous number of 
subsequent fi ssions.
Making weapons weren’t the only possibilities open to 
nuclear scientists and engineers at the end of the 1930s. 
While nuclear fi ssion chain reactions and thermonuclear 
fusion were clearly ways to unleash phenomenal destructive 
energy, they could also provide virtually limitless sources of 
useful energy. By controlling the same nuclear reactions 
that occur in nuclear weapons, people have since managed 
to extract nuclear energy for constructive uses. In the half 
century since their conception, nuclear fi ssion reactors 
have developed into a fairly mature technology and have 
become one of our major sources of energy. Nuclear fusion 
Nuclear Reactors
Concrete
containment
building
Control rods
Fuel rods
Reactor core
Electric motor
Coolant pump
Steam
Heat
exchanger
Feedwater
Steam-powered
electric generators
Nuclear Fission Reactors
Assembling a critical mass of uranium doesn’t always cause a nuclear explosion. In fact, 
it’s rather hard to cause a big explosion. The designers of the atomic bomb had to assemble 
not just a critical mass but a supercritical mass, and they had to do it in much less than a 
millionth of a second. That rapid assembly is not something that happens easily or by acci-
dent. It’s much easier to reach a critical mass slowly, in which case the uranium will simply 
become very hot. It may ultimately explode from overheating, but it will not vaporize 
everything in sight.

Nuclear Reactors 439
 
This slow assembly of a critical mass is the basis for nuclear fi ssion reactors. Their 
principal product is heat, which is usually used to generate electricity. Fission reactors are 
much simpler to build and operate than fi ssion bombs because they don’t require such 
purifi ed fi ssionable materials. In fact, with the help of some clever tricks, nuclear reactors 
can be made to operate even with natural uranium.
 
Let’s begin by showing that a fi ssion chain reaction doesn’t always lead to an explo-
sion. What’s important is just how fast the fi ssion rate increases. In an atomic bomb, it 
increases breathtakingly quickly. At detonation, the fi ssionable material is far above the 
critical mass, so the average fi ssion induces not just one but perhaps two subsequent fi s-
sions. With only about 10 ns (10 nanoseconds) between one fi ssion and the two it induces, 
the fi ssion rate may double every 10 ns. In less than a millionth of a second, most of the 
nuclei in the material undergo fi ssion, releasing their energy before the material has time 
to blow apart.
 
However, things aren’t as dramatic right at critical mass, where the average fi ssion 
induces just one subsequent fi ssion. Since each generation of fi ssions simply reproduces 
itself, the fi ssion rate remains essentially constant. Only spontaneous fi ssions cause it to 
rise at all. The fi ssionable material steadily releases thermal energy, and that energy can be 
used to power an electric generator.
 
A nuclear reactor contains a core of fissionable material. Because of the way in 
which this core is assembled, it’s very close to a critical mass. Several neutron-
absorbing rods, called control rods, which are inserted into the reactor’s core, deter-
mine whether it’s above or below critical mass. Pulling the control rods out of the core 
increases the chance that each neutron will induce a fission and moves the core toward 
supercriticality. Dropping the control rods into the core increases the chance that each 
neutron will be absorbed before it can induce a fission and moves the core toward 
subcriticality.
 
A nuclear reactor uses feedback to maintain the fi ssion rate at the desired level. If the 
fi ssion rate becomes too low, the control system slowly pulls the control rods out of the 
core to increase the fi ssion rate. If the fi ssion rate becomes too high, the control system 
drops the control rods into the core to decrease the fi ssion rate. It’s like driving a car. If 
you’re going too fast, you ease off the gas pedal. If you are going too slowly, you push 
down on the gas pedal.
 
The car-driving analogy illustrates another important point about reactors. Both cars 
and reactors respond relatively slowly to adjustments of their controls. It would be hard to 
drive a car that stopped instantly when you lifted your foot off the gas pedal and leaped to 
supersonic speed when you pushed your foot down. Similarly, it would be impossible to 
operate a reactor that immediately shut down when you dropped the control rods in and that 
instantly exploded when you pulled the control rods out.
 
But reactors, like cars, don’t respond quickly to movements of the control rods. 
That’s because the fi nal release of neutrons following some fi ssions is slow. When a 
235U nucleus fi ssions, it promptly releases an average of 2.47 neutrons which induce 
other fi ssions within a thousandth of a second. However, some of the fi ssion fragments 
are unstable nuclei that decay and release neutrons long after the original fi ssion. On 
average, each 235U fi ssion eventually produces 0.0064 of these delayed neutrons, which 
then go on to induce other fi ssions. It takes seconds or minutes for these delayed neu-
trons to appear, and they slow the response of the reactor. The reactor’s fi ssion rate 
can’t increase quickly because it takes a long time for the delayed neutrons to build up. 
The fi ssion rate can’t decrease quickly because it takes a long time for the delayed 
neutrons to go away.
 
To further ease the operation of modern nuclear reactors, they are designed to be stable 
and self-regulating. This self-regulation ensures that the core automatically becomes sub-
critical if it overheats. As we’ll see later on, this self-regulation was not present in the 
design of Chernobyl Reactor Number 4 and that led to disaster.

440 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
Thermal Fission Reactors
The basic concept of a nuclear reactor is simple: assemble a critical mass of fi ssionable 
material and adjust its criticality to maintain a steady fi ssion rate. But what should the fi s-
sionable material be? In a fi ssion bomb, it must be relatively pure 235U or 239Pu. In a fi ssion 
reactor, however, it can be a mixture of 235U and 238U. It can even be natural uranium. The 
trick is to use thermal neutrons, slow-moving neutrons that have only the kinetic energy 
associated with the local temperature.
 
In a fi ssion bomb, 238U is a serious problem because it captures the fast-moving neutrons 
emitted by fi ssioning 235U nuclei. Natural uranium alone can’t sustain a chain reaction because 
its many 238U nuclei gobble up most of the fast-moving neutrons before they can induce more 
fi ssions in the rare 235U nuclei. The uranium must be highly enriched—most of its 238U nuclei 
must be removed so that it contains far more than the natural abundance of 235U.
 
Slow-moving neutrons have a different experience as they travel through natural ura-
nium. For complicated reasons, the 235U nuclei seek out slow-moving neutrons and capture 
them with remarkable effi ciency. 235U nuclei are so good at catching slow-moving neutrons 
that they easily win out over the more abundant 238U nuclei. Even in natural uranium, a 
slow-moving neutron is more likely to be caught by a 235U nucleus than it is by a 238U 
nucleus. As a result, it’s possible to sustain a nuclear fi ssion chain reaction in natural ura-
nium if all of the neutrons are slow moving.
 
Because 235U nuclei emit fast-moving neutrons when they fi ssion, natural or slightly 
enriched uranium alone can’t use the slow-moving-neutron effect to maintain a chain reac-
tion. However, most nuclear reactors contain something else besides uranium, natural or 
otherwise. Along with uranium, they use a material called a moderator that slows the neu-
trons down so that 235U nuclei can grab them. A fast-moving neutron from a fi ssioning 235U 
nucleus enters the moderator, rattles around for about a thousandth of a second, and emerges 
as a slow-moving neutron, one with only thermal energy left. It then induces fi ssion in 
another 235U nucleus. Once the moderator is present, even natural uranium can sustain a 
chain reaction! Reactors that carry out their chain reactions with slow-moving, or thermal, 
neutrons are called thermal fi ssion reactors.
 
To be a good moderator, a material must remove energy and momentum from the neu-
trons without absorbing them. A fast-moving fi ssion neutron entering that moderator 
should leave with only thermal energy. The best moderators are small nuclei that rarely or 
never absorb neutrons and don’t fall apart during collisions with them. Hydrogen (1H), 
deuterium (2H), helium (4He), and carbon (12C) are all good moderators. When a fast-
moving neutron hits the nucleus of one of these atoms, the collision resembles that between 
two bumper cars (Section 2.3). Because the fast-moving neutron transfers some of its 
energy and momentum to the nucleus, the neutron slows down while the nucleus speeds 
up. That collision is most effective when the neutron and nucleus have similar masses, so 
small nuclei are better moderators than large ones.
Check Your Understanding #1: No Delayed Decays
If the fi ssion of 235U produced only stable fi ssion fragments, would a nuclear reactor be easier or 
harder to operate?
Answer: It would be much harder to operate.
Why: Without any delayed neutrons, one generation of fi ssions would fi nish inducing the next gener-
ation of fi ssions in about a thousandth of a second and the response of the reactor core to changes 
in the criticality would become extremely rapid. When the reactor core became supercritical, its fi s-
sion rate would skyrocket and when it became subcritical, its fi ssion rate would plummet. Trying to 
keep the fi ssion rate steady would be a wild roller coaster ride, and the reactor would be impossible 
or impractical to control. Fortunately the delayed neutrons slow the reactor’s response to changes in 
criticality, so it can be controlled fairly easily.

Nuclear Reactors 441
 
Water, heavy water (water containing the heavy isotope of hydrogen, deuterium or 2H), 
and graphite (carbon) are the best moderators for nuclear reactors. They slow neutrons 
down to thermal speeds without absorbing many of them. Of these moderators, heavy 
water is the best because it slows the neutrons quickly yet doesn’t absorb them at all. How-
ever, heavy water is expensive because only 0.015% of hydrogen atoms are deuterium and 
separating that deuterium from ordinary hydrogen is diffi cult.
 
Graphite moderators were used in many early reactors because graphite is cheap and 
working with it is easy (see 2 ). However, graphite is a less effi cient moderator than heavy 
water, so graphite reactors had to be big. Furthermore, graphite can burn and was partly 
responsible for two of the world’s four major reactor accidents. Normal, or “light,” water is 
cheap, safe, and an effi cient moderator, but it absorbs enough neutrons that it can’t be used 
with natural uranium. For use in a light-water reactor, uranium must be enriched slightly, 
to about 2–3% 235U.
 
The core of a typical thermal fi ssion reactor consists of small 
uranium oxide (UO2) fuel pellets separated by layers of modera-
tor (Fig. 15.2.1). A neutron released by a fi ssioning 235U nucleus 
usually escapes from its fuel pellet, slows down in the moderator, 
and then induces fi ssion in a 235U nucleus in another fuel pellet. 
By absorbing some of these neutrons, the control rods determine 
whether the whole core is subcritical, critical, or supercritical. 
The 238U nuclei are basically spectators in the reactor since most 
of the fi ssioning occurs in the 235U nuclei.
 
In a practical thermal fi ssion reactor, something must extract 
the heat released by nuclear fi ssion. In many reactors, cooling 
water passes through the core at high speeds. Heat fl ows into this 
water and increases its temperature. In a boiling water reactor, the 
water boils directly in the reactor core, creating high-pressure 
steam that drives the turbines of an electric generator (Fig. 
15.2.2). In a pressurized water reactor, the water is under enor-
mous pressure, so it can’t boil (Fig. 15.2.3). Instead, it’s pumped to a heat exchanger out-
side the reactor. This heat exchanger transfers heat to water in another pipe, which boils to 
create the high-pressure steam that drives a generator (Fig. 15.2.4).
 
When properly designed, a water-cooled thermal fi ssion reactor is inherently stable. 
The cooling water is actually part of the moderator. If the reactor overheats and the water 
escapes, there will no longer be enough moderator around to slow the fi ssion neutrons 
down. The fast-moving neutrons will be absorbed by 238U nuclei, and the chain reaction 
will slow or stop.
2  The fi rst nuclear reactor 
was CP–1 (Chicago 
Pile–1), a thermal fi ssion 
reactor constructed in a 
squash court at the 
University of Chicago. 
Each of the graphite bricks 
used in this pile contained 
two large pellets of natural 
uranium. By December 2, 
1942, the pile was 
complete and would reach 
critical mass once the 
control rods were 
removed. As Enrico 
Fermi, the project leader, 
directed the slow removal 
of the last control rod, the 
pile approached criticality 
and the neutron emissions 
began to mount. It was 
noon, so Fermi called a 
famous lunch break. When 
everyone returned, they 
picked up where they had 
left off. At 3:25 pm, the 
pile reached critical mass 
and the neutron emissions 
increased exponentially. 
The reactor ran for 28 
minutes before Fermi 
ordered the control rods to 
be dropped back in.
Uranium
Uranium
Uranium
Uranium
Uranium
Uranium
Uranium
Uranium
Moderator
Uranium
Moderator
Moderator
Moderator
Moderator
Moderator
Moderator
Moderator
Moderator
Moderator
Control rods
Reactor coolant
Fig. 15.2.1 The core of a thermal fi ssion reactor consists of uranium pellets interspersed with a moderator 
that slows the fi ssion neutrons to thermal energies. Neutron-absorbing control rods are inserted into the 
core to control the fi ssion rate. A cooling fl uid such as water fl ows through the core to extract heat.
Steam
High-
pressure
steam
Water
Low-
pressure
steam
Water
Coolant
pump
Reactor
core
Steam
turbines
Cooling
towers
Fig. 15.2.2 In a boiling 
water reactor, cooling water 
boils inside the reactor core. 
It creates high-pressure 
steam that drives steam 
turbines and an electric 
generator. The spent steam 
condenses in a cooling 
tower and is then pumped 
back into the reactor.

442 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
High-
pressure
steam
Water
Low-
pressure
steam
Steam
Cool
Water
Water
Hot
Water
Coolant
pump
Water
pump
Steam
turbines
Cooling
towers
Heat
exchanger
Reactor
core
Fig. 15.2.3 In a pressurized water reactor, liquid water under great pressure extracts heat from the 
reactor core. A heat exchanger allows this cooling water to transfer heat to the water used to generate 
electricity. Water in the generating loop boils to form high-pressure steam, which then powers the 
steam turbines connected to the electric generators. The steam condenses back into liquid water and 
returns to the heat exchanger to obtain more heat.
Check Your Understanding #2: Nuclear Candles
Would wax made from hydrogen and carbon atoms be a good moderator?
Answer: Yes.
Why: Paraffi n wax is made up of carbon and hydrogen atoms, both of which are good moderators. The 
fast fi ssion neutrons don’t care what molecules the carbon or hydrogen nuclei are inside. They just 
collide with those nuclei and lose energy and momentum. The problem with using wax as a reactor 
moderator is that it decomposes chemically in the intense radiation. However, wax can safely slow 
small numbers of neutrons in a laboratory situation.
Low-pressure
steam return
Power
lines
Shaft
Insulators
Stationary 
armature
Magnetic
rotor
AC generator
Steam
turbines
Turbine
blade
High-pressure
steam inlet
Fig. 15.2.4 High-pressure steam from a boiling water reactor core or the heat exchanger of a 
pressurized water reactor enters a series of turbines. There it does work on the turbine blades, losing 
pressure and temperature in the process. It emerges from the turbines as low-pressure steam and 
goes to the cooling towers to condense back into liquid water for reuse. The rotary mechanical power 
provided by the turbines turns generators that produce AC electric power.

Nuclear Reactors 443
Fast Fission Reactors
Thermal reactors require simple fuel and are relatively straightforward to construct. How-
ever, they consume only the 235U nuclei and leave the 238U nuclei almost unaffected. Antic-
ipating the day when 235U will become scarce, several countries have built a different kind 
of reactor that contains no moderator. Such reactors carry out chain reactions with fast-mov-
ing neutrons and are thus called fast fi ssion reactors.
 
A fast fi ssion reactor operates much like a controlled fi ssion bomb and requires highly 
enriched uranium fuel as well. While a thermal fi ssion reactor can get by with natural uranium 
or uranium that has been enriched to about 2–3% 235U, a fast fi ssion reactor needs 25–50% 
235U fuel. That way, there are enough 235U nuclei around to maintain the chain reaction.
 
There is a side effect to operating a fast fi ssion reactor. Many of the fast fi ssion neu-
trons are captured by 238U nuclei, which then transform into 239Pu nuclei. Thus the reactor 
produces plutonium as well as heat. For that reason, fast fi ssion reactors are often called 
breeder reactors—they create new fi ssionable fuel. The 239Pu can eventually replace the 
235U as the principal fuel used in the reactor.
 
A thermal fi ssion reactor makes some plutonium, which is usually allowed to fi ssion 
in place, but a fast fi ssion reactor makes a lot of it. Because plutonium can be used to make 
nuclear weapons, fast fi ssion reactors are controversial. However, because they convert 
otherwise unusable 238U into a fi ssionable material, they use natural uranium far more effi -
ciently than thermal fi ssion reactors.
 
One interesting complication of the unmoderated design is that fast fi ssion reactors 
can’t be water-cooled. If they were, the water would act as a moderator and slow the neu-
trons down. Instead, they are usually cooled with liquid sodium metal. The sodium nuclei 
of 23Na rarely interact with fast-moving neutrons, so they don’t slow them down.
Check Your Understanding #3: A Mix-Up at the Uranium Plant
What would happen if someone tried to fuel a fast fi ssion reactor with natural uranium?
Answer: It would not sustain a chain reaction.
Why: Fast neutrons aren’t good at inducing fi ssion in 235U. If the reactor doesn’t slow down the neu-
trons, most of them will zip right by the 235U nuclei and be captured by the more abundant 238U 
nuclei of the natural uranium.
Fission Reactor Safety and Accidents
One of the greatest concerns with nuclear fi ssion reactors is the control of radioactive 
waste. Anything that comes in contact with the reactor core or the neutrons it emits becomes 
somewhat radioactive. The fuel pellets themselves are quickly contaminated with all sorts 
of fi ssion fragments that include radioactive isotopes of many familiar elements. Some of 
these radioactive isotopes dissolve in water or are gases, and all of them must be handled 
carefully.
 
The fi rst line of defense against the escape of radioactivity is the large and sturdy con-
tainment vessel around the reactor. Because most of the radioactive materials remain in the 
reactor core itself or in the cooling fl uid, they are trapped in the containment vessel. When-
ever the nuclear fuel is removed for reprocessing, care is taken not to allow radioactive 
materials to escape.
 
The other great concern is the safe operation of the reactors themselves. Like any 
equipment, reactors experience failures of one type or another, and a safe reactor must not 
respond catastrophically to such failures. Toward that end, reactors have emergency cool-
ing systems, pressure-relief valves, and many ways to shut down the reactor. For example, 
injecting a solution of sodium borate into the core cools it and stops any chain reactions. 
The boron nuclei in sodium borate absorb neutrons extremely well and are the main con-

444 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
tents of most control rods. However, the best way to keep reactors safe is to design them so 
that they naturally stop their chain reactions when they overheat.
 
There have been fi ve major reactor accidents since the dawn of the nuclear age. The 
fi rst of these accidents began on October 7, 1957, during a maintenance procedure at Wind-
scale Pile 1, one of Britain’s two original plutonium production reactors. The reactor was 
cooled by air rather than water and had a graphite moderator. The reactor’s intense radia-
tion modifi ed the graphite’s crystalline structure so that it gradually accumulated large 
amounts of chemical potential energy. That potential energy had to be released periodically 
by heating the graphite to about 250 °C so that it recrystallized. During the accident, how-
ever, hot spots developed unexpectedly in the moderator and fuel rods, the metallic ura-
nium in those rods ignited, and the burning reactor core distributed radioactive debris 
across the British countryside.
 
The second serious accident occurred at Three Mile Island on March 28, 1979. This 
pressurized water thermal fi ssion reactor shut down appropriately when the pumps that 
circulated water in the power-generating loop stopped unexpectedly. Although this water 
loop wasn’t directly connected to the reactor, it was important for removing heat from the 
reactor core. Even though the reactor shut down immediately, its neutron-absorbing control 
rods swiftly stopping its chain reaction, the radioactive nuclei created by recent fi ssions 
were still decaying and releasing energy. The core continued to release heat, and it eventu-
ally boiled the water in the cooling loop. This water escaped from the loop through a pres-
sure-relief valve, and the top of the reactor core became exposed. With nothing to cool it, 
the core became so hot that it suffered permanent damage. Some of the water from the 
cooling loop found its way into an unsealed room, and the radioactive gases it contained 
were released into the atmosphere.
 
The third and most serious accident occurred at Chernobyl Reactor Number 4 on April 
26, 1986. This water-cooled, graphite-moderated thermal fi ssion reactor was a cross 
between a pressurized water reactor and a boiling water reactor. Cooling water fl owed 
through the reactor at high pressure but didn’t boil until it was ready to enter the steam-
generating turbines.
 
The accident began during a test of the emergency core-cooling system. To begin the 
test, the operators tried to reduce the reactor’s fi ssion rate. However, the core had accumulated 
many neutron-absorbing fi ssion fragments, which made it incapable of sustaining a chain 
reaction at a reduced fi ssion rate. The chain reaction virtually stopped. To get the chain reac-
tion running again, the operators had to withdraw a large number of control rods. These 
control rods were motor-driven, and it would take about 20 seconds to put them back in again.
 
The operators now initiated the test by shutting off the cooling water. That should have 
immediately shut down the reactor by inserting the control rods, but the operators had 
overridden the automatic controls because they didn’t want to have to restart the reactor a 
second time. With nothing to cool it, the reactor core quickly overheated and the water 
inside it boiled. The water had been acting as a moderator along with the graphite. How-
ever, the reactor was overmoderated, meaning it had more moderator than it needed. Get-
ting rid of the water actually helped the chain reaction because the water had been absorb-
ing some of the neutrons. The fi ssion rate began to increase.
 
The operators realized they were in trouble and began to shut down the reactor manu-
ally. However, the control rods moved into the core too slowly to make a difference. As 
water disappeared from the core, the core went “prompt critical.” The chain reaction no 
longer had to wait for neutrons from the decaying fi ssion fragments because prompt neu-
trons from the 235U fi ssions were enough to sustain the chain reaction on their own. The 
reactor’s fi ssion rate skyrocketed, doubling many times each second. The fuel became 
white hot and melted its containers. Various chemical explosions blew open the contain-
ment vessel, and the graphite moderator caught fi re.
 
The fi re burned for 10 days before fi refi ghters and pilots encased the wreckage in con-
crete. Many of these heroic people suffered fatal exposures to radiation. The burning core 

Nuclear Reactors 445
released all its gaseous radioactive isotopes and many others into the atmosphere, forcing 
the evacuation of more than 100,000 people and leading to thousands or perhaps tens of 
thousands of premature cancer deaths in the millions of people exposed to the radioactive 
debris. The accident site remains dangerously radioactive and will need careful tending for 
centuries.
 
Although not a true reactor accident, the September 30, 1999, disaster in Tokai-mura, 
Japan, did involve a critical mass and a resulting chain reaction. At about 10:35 am, employ-
ees of the Conversion Test Facility of JCO Co., Ltd. Tokai Works were pouring a solution 
of uranyl (uranium) nitrate into a precipitation tank. Destined for an experimental fast fi s-
sion reactor, this uranium had been enriched to about 18.8% 235U. Although the equipment 
and facilities were designed to prevent the assembly of a critical mass, the workers decided 
to save time by circumventing the safeguards and combining many small batches into one 
large one.
 
After they had poured six or seven batches of uranyl nitrate solution into the stainless 
steel tank through a sampling hole, the solution suddenly reached critical mass. There was 
about 16.6 kg of enriched uranium in the tank, and a sudden burst of radiation was released. 
The water temperature leapt upward, and the solution’s resulting expansion dropped the 
mixture below critical mass. However, as heat fl owed from the solution to the water-cooled 
jacket around the tank, the solution again approached critical mass. An episodic chain reac-
tion continued in the tank for about 20 hours, until draining the cooling jacket of its neu-
tron-refl ecting water fi nally put an end to the critical mass.
 
The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident north of Tokyo, Japan (the fi fth reactor acci-
dent), began on March 11, 2011, following the 9.0-magnitude Tohoku earthquake and the 
resulting tsunami. The Fukushima nuclear facility housed six separate boiling water reac-
tors, but only reactors 1, 2, and 3 were operating at the time, and they shut down automat-
ically after the earthquake. Even after stopping their chain reactions, however, those reactor 
cores continued to generate heat through the decay of their vast accumulations of radioac-
tive nuclei, and they needed to be water-cooled to avoid overheating. Emergency genera-
tors began supplying power to maintain that cooling.
 
When the tsunami struck the Tohoku coast less than an hour after the earthquake, it 
inundated the nuclear facility, fl ooded its generators and switching equipment, and detached 
the entire area from the Japanese electric power grid. Reactor cooling soon ceased, and 
despite heroic efforts by emergency workers, it wasn’t restored for days. By then, the reac-
tors were damaged beyond repair, and the world’s second worst nuclear accident was well 
underway.
 
Lacking adequate cooling, the cores of reactors 1, 2, and 3 gradually overheated and 
then melted. Explosions, pressure venting, and discharges of cooling water into the sea all 
contributed to an enormous release of radioactive nuclei into the environment. Even spent 
fuel in storage pools at the facility contributed to the overall accident because it also suf-
fered overheating and damage when cooling was lost. The Fukushima Daiichi plant will 
never reopen and will remain a radioactive disaster area for years to come.
Check Your Understanding #4: A Breath of Not-So-Fresh Air
One of the common fi ssion fragments of 235U is 131I, a radioactive isotope of iodine. Iodine easily 
becomes a gas. Why shouldn’t you sit in a room full of used uranium pellets?
Answer: The 131I will enter the room air, and you will breathe it in. It will be incorporated into your 
body’s iodine supply.
Why: The fi ssion products of 235U include radioactive isotopes of almost every element. Some of 
these isotopes are gaseous and can be absorbed by your lungs. Others can be carried away in water. 
To safely contain the fi ssion fragments from used nuclear fuel, these fragments must be carefully 
separated and stored. Because the radioactive isotopes may continue to change from one element to 
another, such storage is particularly tricky.

446 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
Nuclear Fusion Reactors
Nuclear fi ssion reactors use a relatively rare fuel—uranium. Although Earth’s supply of 
uranium is vast, most of that uranium is distributed broadly throughout Earth’s crust. There 
are only so many deposits of high-grade uranium ores that are easily turned into pure ura-
nium or uranium compounds. Fission reactors also produce all sorts of radioactive fi ssion 
fragments that must be disposed of safely. There is still no comprehensive plan for the 
safekeeping of spent reactor fuels. These must be kept away from any contact with people 
and animals virtually forever. No one really knows how to store such dangerous materials 
for hundreds of thousands of years.
 
An alternative to nuclear fi ssion is nuclear fusion. By joining hydrogen nuclei together, 
heavier nuclei can be constructed. The amount of energy released in such processes is 
enormous. Recall, however, that fusion is much harder to initiate than fi ssion because it 
requires that at least two nuclei be brought extremely close together. These nuclei are both 
positively charged, and they repel one another fi ercely. To make them approach one another 
closely enough to stick, we must heat the nuclei to temperatures of more than 100 million 
degrees Celsius.
 
The sun combines four hydrogen nuclei (1H) to form one nucleus of helium (4He), a 
very complicated and diffi cult nuclear fusion reaction. For fusion to occur on Earth, it must 
be done between the heavy isotopes of hydrogen: deuterium and tritium. These are the 
isotopes used in thermonuclear weapons. If a mixture of deuterium and tritium are mixed 
together and heated to about 100 million degrees Celsius, their nuclei will begin to fuse and 
release energy. The deuterium and tritium become helium and neutrons.
 
In contrast to fi ssion reactions, there are no radioactive fragments produced in fusion. 
Tritium itself is radioactive, but it can easily be reprocessed into fuel and retained within 
the reactor system. The dangerous neutrons can be caught in a blanket of lithium metal, 
which then breaks into helium and tritium. It’s convenient that new tritium is created by the 
reaction because tritium isn’t naturally occurring and must be made using nuclear reac-
tions. Thus, fusion holds up the promise of producing relatively little radioactive waste. If 
the neutrons that are released by fusion events are trapped by nuclei that don’t become 
radioactive, then there will be no radioactive contamination of the fusion reactor either. 
This is easier said than done, but it’s better than in a fi ssion reactor.
 
Unfortunately, heating deuterium and tritium and holding them together long enough 
for fusion to occur isn’t easy. There are two main techniques that are being tried: inertial 
confi nement fusion and magnetic confi nement fusion.
 
Inertial confi nement fusion uses intense pulses of laser light to heat and compress a 
tiny sphere containing deuterium and tritium (Fig. 15.2.5). The pulses of light last only a 
few trillionths of a second, but in that brief moment they vaporize and superheat the surface 
of the sphere. The surface explodes outward, pushing off the inner portions of the sphere. 
The sphere’s core experiences huge inward forces as a result, and it implodes. As the core 
is compressed, its temperature rises to that needed to initiate fusion. In effect, it becomes a 
tiny thermonuclear bomb, with the laser pulses providing the starting heat.
 
To date, inertial confi nement fusion experiments have observed fusion in a small frac-
tion of the deuterium and tritium nuclei. The technique is called inertial confi nement fusion 
because there is nothing holding or confi ning the ball of fuel. The laser beams crush it while 
it’s in free fall, and its own inertia keeps it in place while fusion takes place. Unfortunately, 
Laser
beam
Laser
beam
Target
Lens
Lens
Fig. 15.2.5 In inertial confi nement fusion experiments, 
several laser beams are focused onto a tiny sphere 
containing deuterium and tritium. These ultra-intense 
pulsed beams compress and heat the sphere so that 
fusion occurs.

Nuclear Reactors 447
the lasers and other technologies needed to carry out inertial confi nement fusion 
are suffi ciently complex and troublesome that this may never be viable as a 
source of energy. Nonetheless, these experiments provide important informa-
tion on the behaviors of fusion materials at high temperatures and pressures.
 
The other technique being developed to control fusion is magnetic confi nement. When 
you heat hydrogen atoms hot enough, they move so quickly and hit one another so hard that 
their electrons are knocked off. Instead of a gas of atoms, you have a gas of free, positively 
charged nuclei and negatively charged electrons—a plasma. A plasma differs from a nor-
mal gas because it’s affected by magnetic fi elds.
 
Because of the Lorentz force (see Section 12.2), charged particles that are moving in a 
magnetic fi eld tend to circle around magnetic fi eld lines (Fig. 15.2.6). This cyclotron 
motion occurs, for example, in the magnetron of a microwave oven. If the magnetic fi eld 
surrounding a charged particle is carefully shaped in just the right way, the charged particle 
will fi nd itself trapped by the magnetic fi eld. No matter what direction it heads, the charged 
particle will spiral around the magnetic fi eld lines and will be unable to escape.
 
Magnetic confi nement makes it possible to heat a plasma of deuterium and tritium to 
fantastic temperatures with electromagnetic waves. Since the heating is done relatively 
slowly, it’s important to keep heat from leaving the plasma. Magnetic confi nement prevents 
the plasma from touching the walls of the container, where it would quickly cool off.
 
One of the most promising magnetic confi nement schemes is the tokamak. The main 
magnetic fi eld of the tokamak runs around in a circle to form a magnetic doughnut, or tor-
oid (the geometrical name for a doughnut-shaped object) (Fig. 15.2.7). The magnetic fi eld 
is formed inside a doughnut-shaped chamber by running an electric current through coils 
that are wrapped around the chamber. Plasma nuclei inside the chamber travel in spirals 
around the magnetic fi eld lines and don’t touch the chamber walls. They are confi ned inside 
the chamber and race around the doughnut endlessly. The nuclei can then be heated to the 
extremely high temperatures they need to collide and fuse.
 
Magnetic confi nement fusion reactors have observed considerable amounts of fusion. 
They can briefl y achieve scientifi c break-even, the point at which fusion is releasing enough 
energy to keep the plasma hot all by itself. However, much more development is needed to 
meet and exceed practical break-even, the point at which the entire machine produces more 
energy than it needs to operate.
North
South
North
South
Fig. 15.2.6 When a 
charged particle moves in 
the magnetic fi eld between 
two magnetic poles, it 
experiences the Lorentz 
force and undergoes 
cyclotron motion. It travels 
in a spiral path around 
the magnetic fi eld lines 
connecting them. The 
particle is confi ned to a 
particular region of space.
M
a
g
n
et
ic
 fi
el
d 
Spiral path of 
charged particles
Tokamak fusion reactor
Fig. 15.2.7 A tokamak magnetic 
confi nement fusion reactor consists 
of a doughnut-shaped chamber with a 
similarly shaped magnetic fi eld inside 
it. Plasma particles moving inside the 
tokamak’s chamber travel in spirals and 
circle around the fi eld lines inside the 
chamber. Because the plasma doesn’t 
touch the walls of the tokamak, it retains 
heat well enough to reach temperatures 
at which fusion can occur.
Check Your Understanding #5: Trying for Fusion in Your Basement
Why can’t you initiate fusion by running an electric discharge through deuterium and tritium in a 
glass tube?
Answer: The gases will lose heat to the glass tube and will never reach the temperatures needed to 
start fusion.
Why: Very hot gases lose heat extremely easily. The hotter the gas, the faster heat fl ows out of it. 
Without something to keep the gas from touching the walls of the glass tube, it will never get close 
to the 100 million degrees Celsius needed for fusion.

448 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
SECTION 15.3 
a cross-sectional view of a living person without touching that 
person? If X-rays are a form of electromagnetic radiation, why 
don’t opaque materials absorb them? Why does a CT scan 
show primarily bone, while an MRI image shows primarily tis-
sue? The subatomic particles used in radiation therapy often 
have enormous energies. From where do these energies come?
Experiments to Do: One triumph of medical imaging is its 
ability to locate objects inside a person without actually enter-
ing the body. This is often done using X-rays to look through 
the person from several different angles. From each vantage 
point, the imaging machine determines which objects are to 
the left or right of one another, but it can’t tell how far away 
those objects are. Nonetheless, by piecing together informa-
tion from many different observations, the imaging machine 
can locate each object exactly.
 
You can experiment with this process by sprinkling a num-
ber of coins onto the surface of a small table, without looking 
to see where they come to rest. Close your eyes, and bring your 
head to the height of the table’s surface. Open only one eye, 
and take a brief look at the coins. If the lighting is bright and 
uniform, and you don’t move your head, you’ll have trouble 
telling how far the coins are from your eye. Although you’ll 
know something about where each coin is, you won’t know 
enough to locate one exactly on the table’s surface. Now move 
your head to a new position around the table, and take a sec-
ond brief look. Again, you won’t be able to tell how far away the 
coins are, but you’ll learn more about their relative positions. 
How many such views will it take for you to learn exactly where 
the coins are? How does the presence of many opaque coins 
complicate the problem? Why does opening both eyes at once 
make it much easier for you to locate the coins?
Some of the most important recent advances in health care 
have occurred at the border between medicine and physics. As 
scientists have refi ned their understanding of atomic and 
molecular structure and learned to control various forms of 
radiation, they have invented tools that are enormously valu-
able for diagnosing and treating illness and injury. The devel-
opments continue, with new applications of physics appearing 
in clinical settings almost every time you turn around. In this 
section, we’ll examine two of the most signifi cant examples of 
medical physics: the imaging techniques that are used to 
detect problems and the radiation therapies that are used to 
treat them.
Questions to Think About: What’s different about bones and 
tissue that makes bones appear light in an X-ray image while 
tissue appears dark? How can a CT scan or an MRI image show 
Medical Imaging and Radiation
Magnetic resonance
imaging machine
Superconducting
magnet
Liquid helium coolant
Coolant container
Thermal insulation
Patient support
X-Rays
Since their discovery in 1895, X-rays have played an important role in medical treatment. 
Their usefulness was obvious from the very evening they were discovered. It was Novem-
ber 8, and German physicist Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen (1845–1923) was experimenting 
with an electric discharge in a vacuum tube. He had covered the entire tube in black card-
board and was working in a darkened room. Some distance from the tube, a phosphored 
screen began to glow. Some kind of radiation was being released by the tube, passing 
through the cardboard and the air, and causing the screen to fl uoresce. Roentgen put vari-
ous objects in the way of the radiation, but they didn’t block the fl ow. Finally, he put his 
hand in front of the screen and saw a shadowed image of his bones. He had discovered 
X-rays and their most famous application at the same time.
 
The fi rst clinical use of X-rays was on January 13, 1896, when two British doctors 
used them to fi nd a needle in a woman’s hand. In no time, X-ray systems became common 
in hospitals as a marvelous new technique for diagnosis. However, this imaging capability 
was not without its side effects. Although the exposure itself was painless, overexposure to 
X-rays caused deep burns and wounds that took some time to appear. Evidently the X-rays 
were doing something much more subtle to the tissue than simply heating it.

Medical Imaging and Radiation 449
 
X-rays are a form of electromagnetic radiation, as are radio waves, microwaves, and 
light. These different forms of electromagnetic radiation are distinguished from one another 
by their frequencies and wavelengths—while radio waves have low frequencies and long 
wavelengths, X-rays have extremely high frequencies and short wavelengths. They’re also 
distinguished by their photon energies. Because of its low frequency, a radio wave photon 
carries little energy. A medium-frequency photon of blue or ultraviolet light carries enough 
energy to rearrange one bond in a molecule. But a high-frequency X-ray photon carries so 
much energy that it can break many bonds and rip molecules apart.
 
In a microwave oven, the microwave photons work together to heat and cook food. The 
amount of energy in each microwave photon is unimportant because they don’t act alone. 
In radiation therapy, however, the X-ray photons are independent. Each one carries enough 
energy to damage any molecule that absorbs it. That’s why X-ray burns involve little heat 
and appear long after the exposure—the molecular damage caused by X-rays takes time to 
kill cells.
Check Your Understanding #1: Forms of Radiation
Which is more closely related to X-rays: the beam of electrons traveling through a microwave oven’s 
magnetron tube or the infrared light from the hot fi lament of a toaster?
Answer: The infrared light from the hot fi lament is more closely related to X-rays.
Why: Infrared light and X-rays are both forms of electromagnetic radiation. All that distinguishes 
them is their frequencies and wavelengths, and the energy of their photons. The beam of electrons 
in a magnetron tube is also a form of radiation, but it involves particles of matter, not electromag-
netic waves.
Making X-Rays
Medical X-ray sources work by crashing fast-moving electrons into heavy atoms. These 
collisions create X-rays via two different physical mechanisms: bremsstrahlung and X-ray 
fl uorescence.
 
Bremsstrahlung occurs whenever a charged particle accelerates. This process is noth-
ing really new, since we know that radio waves are emitted when a charged particle accel-
erates on an antenna. In a radio antenna, however, the electrons accelerate slowly and emit 
low-energy photons. Bremsstrahlung usually refers to cases in which a charged particle 
accelerates extremely rapidly and emits a very high-energy photon. In X-ray tube 
bremsstrahlung, a fast-moving electron arcs around a massive nucleus and accelerates so 
abruptly that it emits an X-ray photon (Fig. 15.3.1). This photon carries away a substantial 
fraction of the electron’s kinetic energy. The closer the electron comes to the nucleus, the 
more it accelerates and the more energy it gives to the X-ray photon. However, the electron 
is more likely to miss the nucleus by a large distance than to almost hit it, so bremsstrahlung 
is more likely to produce a lower-energy X-ray photon than a higher-energy one.
 
In X-ray fl uorescence, the fast-moving electron collides with an inner electron in a 
heavy atom and knocks that electron completely out of the atom (Fig. 15.3.2). The collision 
leaves the atom as a positive ion, with a vacant orbital close to its nucleus. An electron in 
that ion then undergoes a radiative transition, shifting from an outer orbital to this empty 
inner one and releasing an enormous amount of energy in the process. This energy emerges 
from the atom as an X-ray photon. Because this photon has an energy that’s determined by 
the ion’s orbital structure, it’s called a characteristic X-ray.
 
To discuss the energies carried by X-ray photons, we’ll use the energy unit we encoun-
tered in Section 13.3—the electron volt (eV). Photons of visible light carry energies of 
between 1.6 eV (red light) and 3.0 eV (violet light). Because the ultraviolet photons in 
sunlight have energies of up to 7 eV, they are able to break chemical bonds and cause sun-
burns. X-ray photons have much larger energies than even ultraviolet photons.
Outbound
electron
Nucleus
X-ray
photon
Atom
Inbound
electron
Fig. 15.3.1 When a 
fast-moving electron arcs 
around a massive nucleus, 
it accelerates rapidly. 
This sudden acceleration 
creates a bremsstrahlung 
X-ray photon, which carries 
off some of the electron’s 
energy.

450 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
 
In a typical medical X-ray tube, electrons are emitted by a hot cathode and accelerate 
through vacuum toward a positively charged metal anode (Fig. 15.3.3). The anode is a 
tungsten or molybdenum disk, spinning rapidly to keep it from melting. The energy of the 
electrons as they hit the anode is determined by the voltage difference across the tube. In a 
medical X-ray machine, that voltage difference is typically about 87,000 V, so each elec-
tron has about 87,000 eV of energy. Since an electron gives a good fraction of its energy to 
the X-ray photon it produces, the photons leaving the tube can carry up to 87,000 eV of 
energy. No wonder X-rays can damage tissue!
 
When the electrons collide with a target of heavy atoms, they emit both bremsstrahlung 
and characteristic X-rays (Fig. 15.3.4). The characteristic X-rays have specifi c energies, so 
they appear as peaks in the overall X-ray spectrum. The bremsstrahlung X-rays have differ-
ent energies but are most intense at lower energies. Because lower-energy X-ray photons 
injure skin and aren’t useful for imaging or radiation therapy, medical X-ray machines use 
absorbing materials, such as aluminum, to fi lter them out.
(a)
Outbound
electron
Ejected
K-shell
electron
Atom
Inbound
electron
(b)
X-ray
photon
Atom
Fig. 15.3.2 (a) When 
a fast-moving electron 
collides with an electron in 
one of the inner orbitals of 
a heavy atom, it can knock 
that electron out of the 
atom. (b) An electron from 
one of the atom’s outer 
orbitals soon drops into the 
empty orbital in a radiative 
transition that creates a 
characteristic X-ray.
High-voltage
power supply
+
–
Vacuum tube
Induction
motor
Stator
Stator
Rotor
Filter
X-ray photons
Hot cathode
Tungsten
anode
Electrons
Fig. 15.3.3 In a medical X-ray machine, electrons from 
a hot fi lament accelerate toward a positively charged 
metal disk. They emit X-rays when they collide with the 
disk’s atoms. A motor spins the disk to keep it from 
melting. The fi lter absorbs useless low-energy X-rays.
Characteristic
X-rays
Brems-
strahlung
Filter
effect
X-ray energy (×1000 eV)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
X-ray intensity
Fig. 15.3.4 When electrons with 87,000 eV of 
energy collide with tungsten metal, they emit X-rays via 
bremsstrahlung and X-ray fl uorescence. Although the 
bremsstrahlung X-rays have a broad range of energies, 
an absorbing fi lter blocks the low-energy ones. X-ray 
fl uorescence produces characteristic X-rays with specifi c 
energies.
Check Your Understanding #2: The Origins of Synchrotron Radiation
The giant particle accelerators used in high-energy physics are often built as rings so that they can 
use the same electrically charged particles over and over again. As these particles travel in circles 
around the rings, they emit X-rays. Explain.
Answer: Because a particle traveling in a circle is accelerating, it emits electromagnetic waves. In 
this case, those waves are X-rays.
Why: A rapidly accelerating charged particle will emit an X-ray, whether it’s accelerating around the 
nucleus of a heavy atom or around the ring of a particle accelerator. In an accelerator, these X-rays 
are called synchrotron radiation. Synchrotron radiation is useful in research and industry and is often 
deliberately enhanced by adding special magnets to the ring of the accelerator.

Medical Imaging and Radiation 451
Using X-Rays for Imaging
X-rays have two important uses in medicine: imaging and radiation therapy. In 
X-ray imaging, X-rays are sent through a patient’s body to a sheet of fi lm or 
an X-ray detector. Some of the X-rays manage to pass through tissue, but most 
of them are blocked by bone. The patient’s bones form shadow images on the 
fi lm behind them. In X-ray radiation therapy, the X-rays are again sent through 
a patient’s body, but now their lethal interaction with diseased tissue is what’s 
important.
 
X-ray photons interact with tissue and bone through four major processes: 
elastic scattering, the photoelectric effect, Compton scattering, and electron-
positron pair production. Elastic scattering is already familiar to us as the cause of 
the blue sky; an atom acts as an antenna for the passing electromagnetic wave, absorb-
ing and reemitting it without keeping any of its energy (Fig. 15.3.5). Because this 
process has almost no effect on the atom, elastic scattering isn’t important in radiation 
therapy. However, it’s a nuisance in X-ray imaging because it produces a hazy back-
ground; some of the X-rays passing through a patient bounce around like pinballs and 
arrive at the fi lm from odd angles. To eliminate these bouncing X-ray photons, X-ray 
machines use fi lters to block X-rays that don’t approach the fi lm from the direction of 
the X-ray source.
 
The photoelectric effect is what makes X-ray imaging possible. In this effect, a pass-
ing photon induces a radiative transition in an atom; one of the atom’s electrons absorbs the 
photon and is tossed completely out of the atom (Fig. 15.3.6). If the atom were using the 
X-ray photon to shift an electron from one orbital to another, that photon would have to 
have just the right amount of energy. However, because a free electron can have any amount 
of energy, the atom can absorb any X-ray photon that has enough energy to eject one of its 
electrons. Part of the photon’s energy is used to remove the electron from the atom, and the 
rest is given to the emitted electron as kinetic energy.
 
The likelihood of such a photoemission event decreases as the ejected electron’s energy 
increases. This decreasing likelihood makes it diffi cult for a small atom to absorb an X-ray 
photon. All its electrons are relatively weakly bound, and the X-ray photon would give the 
ejected electron a large kinetic energy. Rather than emitting a high-energy electron, a small 
atom usually just ignores the passing X-ray photon.
 
In contrast, some of the electrons in a large atom are quite tightly bound and require 
most of the X-ray photon’s energy to remove them. These electrons would depart with 
relatively little kinetic energy. Because the photoemission process is most likely 
when low-energy electrons are produced, a large atom is likely to absorb a pass-
ing X-ray. Thus, whereas the small atoms found in tissue (carbon, hydrogen, 
oxygen, and nitrogen) rarely absorb medical X-rays, the large atoms found in 
bone (calcium and phosphorus) absorb X-rays frequently. That’s why bones 
cast clear shadows onto X-ray fi lm. Tissue shadows are also visible, but they’re 
less obvious.
 
Although one shadow image of a patient’s insides may help to diagnose a 
broken bone, more subtle problems may not be visible in a single X-ray image. For 
a better picture of what’s going on inside the patient, the radiologist needs to see 
shadows from several different angles. Better yet, the radiologist can turn to a computed 
tomography (CT) scanner. This computerized device automatically forms X-ray shadow 
images from hundreds of different angles and positions and produces a detailed three-di-
mensional X-ray map of the patient’s body.
 
The CT scanner works one “slice” of the patient’s body at a time. It sends X-rays 
through this narrow slice from every possible angle, including the two shown in Fig. 15.3.7, 
and determines where the bones and tissues are in that slice (Fig. 15.3.8). The scanner then 
shifts the patient’s body to work on the next slice.
Fig. 15.3.5 When an 
X-ray photon scatters 
elastically from an atom, 
the whole atom acts as 
an antenna. The passing 
photon jiggles all the 
charges in the atom, and 
these charges absorb the 
photon and reemit it in a 
new direction.
Outgoing
X-ray photon
Atom
Incoming
X-ray
photon
Fig. 15.3.6 In the 
photoelectric effect, an 
absorbed photon ejects 
an electron from an atom. 
Part of the photon’s energy 
is used to remove the 
electron from the atom, 
and the rest becomes 
kinetic energy in the 
electron.
Outgoing
electron
Atom
Incoming
X-ray
photon

452 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
Using X-Rays for Therapy
Radiation therapy also uses X-rays, but not the ones used for medical imaging. Even 
though tissue absorbs fewer imaging photons than bone, most imaging photons are 
absorbed before they can pass through thick tissue. For example, only about 10% of the 
imaging photons make it through a patient’s leg even when they miss the bone. That per-
centage is good enough for making an image, but it wouldn’t do for radiation therapy 
because most imaging X-rays would be absorbed long before they reached a deep-seated 
tumor. Instead of killing the tumor, intense exposure to these X-rays would kill tissue near 
the patient’s skin.
X-ray detectors
X-ray source
(a)
X-ray detectors
X-ray source
(b)
Fig. 15.3.7 A computed tomography (CT) scan image is formed by analyzing X-ray shadow images 
taken from many different angles and positions. An X-ray source and an array of electronic X-ray 
detectors form a ring that rotates around the patient as the patient slowly moves through the ring.
Check Your Understanding #3: Aluminum X-Ray Windows
Aluminum atoms are much smaller than calcium atoms. Although aluminum metal blocks visible 
light, it’s relatively transparent to high-energy X-rays. Explain.
Answer: The electrons in an aluminum atom are so weakly bound that they are unlikely to absorb 
high-energy X-ray photons through the photoelectric effect.
Why: Like the small atoms in biological tissue, aluminum atoms rarely use the photoelectric effect 
to absorb high-energy X-rays. This result makes it possible to use thin fi lms of aluminum as windows 
and fi lters for X-ray sources.
Fig. 15.3.8 (a) The CT scanner on the left uses X-rays to image layer after layer of the patient’s 
body. With the help of a computer, it produces a three-dimensional (3D) map of heavy elements in the 
patient. (b) Part of that map, showing the patient’s head.
© Steve Allen/Brand X Pictures/Getty Images, Inc.
© Alfred Pasieka/Photo Researchers, Inc.

Medical Imaging and Radiation 453
 
To attack malignant tissue deep beneath the skin, radiation therapy uses 
extremely high-energy photons. At photon energies near 1,000,000 eV, the 
photoelectric effect becomes rare in tissue and bone, and the photons are much 
more likely to reach the tumor. Photons still deposit lethal energy in the tissue 
and tumor, but they do this through a new effect—Compton scattering.
 
Compton scattering occurs when an X-ray photon collides with a single 
electron so that the two particles bounce off one another (Fig. 15.3.9). The 
X-ray photon knocks the electron right out of the atom. This process is differ-
ent from the photoelectric effect because Compton scattering doesn’t involve 
the atom as a whole and the photon is scattered (bounced) rather than absorbed. 
The physics behind this effect resembles that of two billiard balls colliding, 
although it’s complicated by the theory of relativity. The fact that it occurs at all is proof 
that a photon carries both energy and momentum and that these quantities are conserved 
when a particle of light collides with a particle of matter.
 
Compton scattering is crucial to radiation therapy. When a patient is exposed to 
1,000,000-eV photons, most of the photons pass right through, but a small fraction undergo 
Compton scattering and leave some of their energy behind. This energy kills cells and can 
be used to destroy a tumor. By approaching a tumor from many different angles through the 
patient’s body, the treatment can minimize the injury to healthy tissue around the tumor 
while giving the tumor itself a fatal dose of radiation.
 
Compton scattering isn’t the only effect that occurs when high-energy photons encoun-
ter matter. X-rays with slightly more than 1,022,000 eV can do something remarkable 
when they pass through an atom; they can cause electron-positron pair production. A 
positron is the antimatter equivalent of an electron. Our universe is symmetrical in many 
ways, and one of its nearly perfect symmetries is the existence of antimatter. Almost every 
particle in nature has an antiparticle with the same mass but opposite characteristics. A 
positron, or antielectron, has the same mass as an electron, but it’s positively charged. 
There are also antiprotons and antineutrons.
 
Antimatter doesn’t occur naturally on Earth, but it can be created in high-energy colli-
sions. When an energetic photon collides with the electric fi eld of an atom, the photon can 
become an electron and a positron. In the previous section, we discussed matter becoming 
energy; pair production is an example of energy becoming matter. It takes about 511,000 eV 
of energy to form an electron or a positron, so the photon must have at least 1,022,000 eV 
to create one of each. Any extra energy goes into kinetic energy in the two particles.
 
The positron doesn’t last long in a patient. It soon collides with an electron and the two 
annihilate one another—the electron and positron disappear, and their mass becomes 
energy. They turn into photons with a total of at least 1,022,000 eV. Thus energy became 
matter briefl y and then turned back into energy. This exotic process is present in high-
energy radiation therapy and becomes quite signifi cant at photon energies above about 
10,000,000 eV. Not surprisingly, it also helps to kill tumors.
Outgoing
X-ray photon
Outgoing
electron
Atom
Incoming
X-ray photon
Fig. 15.3.9 In Compton 
scattering, an X-ray photon 
collides with a single 
electron and the two 
bounce off one another. 
The electron is knocked 
out of the atom.
Check Your Understanding #4: More of a Good Thing
About how much energy would a photon need to create a proton-antiproton pair?
Answer: It would need about 2,000,000,000 eV.
Why: A proton has about 2000 times the mass of an electron, so producing a proton-antiproton pair 
should take about 2000 times the 1,000,000-eV energy required to produce an electron-positron pair.
Gamma Rays
Producing very high-energy photons isn’t quite as easy as producing those used in X-ray 
imaging. In principle, a power supply could create a huge voltage difference through an 
X-ray tube so that very high-energy electrons would crash into metal atoms and produce 

454 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
very high-energy photons. However, million-volt power supplies are complicated and dan-
gerous, so other schemes are used instead.
 
One of the easiest ways to obtain very high-energy photons is through the decay of 
radioactive isotopes. The isotope most commonly used in radiation therapy is cobalt 
60 (60Co). The nucleus of 60Co has too many neutrons and, like many neutron-rich nuclei, 
60Co undergoes beta decay; that is, one of its neutrons breaks up into a proton, an electron, 
and a neutrino (or more precisely, an antineutrino). Beginning with that beta decay, 60Co 
undergoes a series of transformations that produce two high-energy photons: one with 
1,170,000 eV and one with 1,330,000 eV. These photons penetrate tissue well and are quite 
effective at killing tumors.
 
Although the process by which 60Co produces those two high-energy photons is com-
plicated, beta decay itself shows that protons, electrons, and neutrons are not immutable 
and that there are other subatomic particles in our universe. Neutrons that are by them-
selves or in nuclei with too many neutrons are radioactive and experience beta decay. When 
that beta decay process occurs in a 60Co nucleus, the negatively charged electron and neu-
tral neutrino quickly escape from the nucleus but the newly formed proton remains. The 
nucleus thus becomes nickel 60 (60Ni).
 
The neutrino is a subatomic particle with no charge and little mass. Neutrinos 
aren’t found in normal atoms. Although important in nuclear and particle physics, neu-
trinos are diffi cult to observe directly because they travel near the speed of light and 
hardly ever collide with anything. Without charge, they don’t participate in electromag-
netic forces and, unlike the electrically neutral neutron, they don’t experience the 
nuclear force. They experience only gravity and the weak force, the last of the four 
fundamental forces known to exist in our universe. (The other three fundamental forces 
are the gravitational force; the electromagnetic force; and the strong force, which is a 
more complete version of the nuclear force that we discussed in Section 15.1.) Because 
it’s weak and occurs only between particles that are very close together, the weak force 
rarely makes itself apparent. One of the few occasions on which it plays an important 
role is in beta decay.
 
With almost no way to push or pull on another particle, a neutrino can easily pass right 
through the entire Earth. Neutrinos are detected occasionally, but only with the help of 
enormous detectors. That’s why physicists fi rst showed that neutrinos are emitted from 
decaying neutrons by measuring energy and momentum before and after the decay. The 
proton and electron produced by the decay don’t have the same total energy and momen-
tum as the neutron had before the decay. Something must have carried away the missing 
energy and momentum, and that something is the neutrino.
 
Once 60Co has turned into 60Ni, the decay isn’t quite over. The 60Ni nucleus that forms 
still has extra energy in it. Nuclei are complicated quantum physical systems, just as atoms 
are, and they have excited states, too. The 60Ni nucleus is in an excited state, and it must 
undergo two radiative transitions before it reaches the ground state. These radiative transi-
tions produce very high-energy photons or gamma rays that are characteristic of the 60Ni 
nucleus: one with 1,170,000 eV of energy and the other with 1,330,000 eV. The gamma 
rays are what make 60Co radiation therapy possible.
Check Your Understanding #5: A Visit from the Snake Oil Salesman
If someone offered to sell you a bottle of neutrinos, you’d be foolish to buy it. What’s wrong with the 
idea of a bottle of neutrinos?
Answer: The bottle couldn’t confi ne neutrinos because it barely interacts with them.
Why: Because neutrinos experience only gravity and the weak force, the bottle couldn’t trap them for 
long. Actually, you’re being bathed in neutrinos from the sun all the time without even noticing it. 
They’re as common as dirt and you can’t do anything with them anyway.

Medical Imaging and Radiation 455
Particle Accelerators
Electromagnetic radiation isn’t the only form of radiation used to treat patients. Energetic 
particles such as electrons and protons are also used. Like tiny billiard balls, these fast-
moving particles collide with the atoms inside tumors and knock them apart. As usual, this 
atomic and molecular damage tends to kill cells and destroy tumors.
 
However, obtaining extremely energetic subatomic particles isn’t easy. High-voltage 
power supplies can be used to accelerate an electron or proton to about 500,000 eV, but that 
isn’t enough. When a charged particle enters tissue, it experiences strong electric forces 
and is easily defl ected from its path. To make sure that it travels straight and true, all the 
way to a tumor, the particle must have an enormous energy. Giving each charged particle 
the millions or even billions of electron volts it needs for radiation therapy takes a particle 
accelerator.
 
Particle accelerators use resonant cavities, the microwave-frequency tank circuits we 
encountered in Section 12.2. Each of these metal chambers acts simultaneously as a capac-
itor and an inductor and thus has a natural resonance for sloshing charge. In the resonant 
cavities of a particle accelerator, this sloshing charge creates huge electric fi elds that change 
with time. Those electric fi elds push charged particles through space until they reach 
incredible energies.
 
One important type of particle accelerator is the linear accelerator. In this device, 
the electric fi elds in a series of resonant cavities push charged particles forward in a 
straight line (Fig. 15.3.10). Each of these cavities has charge sloshing back and forth 
rhythmically on its wall. When a small packet of charged particles enters the fi rst cavity 
through a hole, it’s suddenly pushed forward by the strong electric fi eld inside that cavity 
(Fig. 15.3.10a). The packet accelerates forward and leaves the fi rst resonant cavity with 
more kinetic energy than it had when it arrived—the electric fi eld in that cavity has done 
work on the packet.
 
If the fi elds in the cavities were constant, the electric fi eld in the second cavity would 
slow the packet down. In Fig. 15.3.10a, you can see that the electric fi eld in the second 
cavity points in the wrong direction. By the time the packet reaches the second cavity, the 
charge sloshing in its walls has reversed and so has the electric fi eld (Fig. 15.3.10b). The 
packet is again pushed forward, and it emerges from the second cavity with still more 
kinetic energy.
Microwave cavities
(a)
(b)
Electric
fields
Velocity
Acceleration
Fig. 15.3.10
In a linear accelerator, 
moving charged particles are pushed 
forward by electric fi elds that change 
with time. (a) While the positive 
charge is moving toward the right 
through the fi rst of a series of 
microwave cavities, the electric fi eld 
there pushes it toward the right. (b) 
By the time the charge has entered 
the second cavity, however, the 
electric fi elds have reversed and the 
electric fi eld there pushes it toward 
the right again.

456 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
 
Each resonant cavity in this series adds energy to the packet, so that a long string of 
cavities can give each of the packet’s charged particles millions or even billions of electron 
volts. This energy comes from microwave generators that cause charge to slosh in the 
accelerator’s resonant cavities. The linear accelerator then has only to inject charged parti-
cles into the fi rst cavity, using equipment resembling the insides of a television picture 
tube, and those charged particles will come fl ying out of the last cavity with incredible 
energies (Fig. 15.3.11).
 
This acceleration technique, however, has a few complications. Most important, each 
cavity must reverse its electric fi eld at just the right moment to keep the packet accelerating 
forward. For simplicity of operation, all the cavities have the same resonant frequency and 
reverse their electric fi elds simultaneously. Since the packet spends the same amount of 
time in each cavity and since it speeds up as it goes from one cavity to the next, each cavity 
must be longer than the previous one.
 
As the packet approaches the speed of light, something strange happens. The packet’s 
energy continues to increase as it goes through the cavities, but its speed stops increasing very 
much. This effect is a consequence of special relativity, the rules governing motion at speeds 
comparable to the speed of light. As we saw in Section 4.2, the simple relationship between 
kinetic energy and speed given in Eq. 2.2.1 isn’t valid for objects moving at almost the speed 
of light; we must use Eq. 4.2.4 instead. As a further consequence of relativity, the packet can 
approach the speed of light but can’t actually reach it. Although each charged particle’s 
kinetic energy can become extraordinarily large, its speed is limited by the speed of light.
 
Because the packet’s speed stops increasing signifi cantly after it has gone through the 
fi rst few cavities of the linear accelerator, the lengths of the remaining cavities can be con-
stant. Only the fi rst few cavities have to be specially designed to account for the packet’s 
increasing speed inside them. The charged particles emerge from the accelerator traveling 
at almost the speed of light. They pass through a thin metal window that keeps air out of the 
accelerator and enter the patient’s body. They have so much energy that they can penetrate 
deep into tissue before coming to a stop.
© Doug Martin/Photo 
Researchers, Inc.
Fig. 15.3.11 This 
radiation therapy unit uses 
a linear accelerator to 
produce extremely high-
energy subatomic particles. 
These particles penetrate 
deep inside the patient to 
destroy a cancerous tumor. 
The linear accelerator 
itself is hidden from view 
in the room behind this 
one. Its beam is steered by 
magnets in the rotatable 
arm toward a particular 
spot in the patient. The 
arm moves periodically 
during treatment so 
that its beam intersects 
the tumor from many 
different directions and 
causes less damage to 
healthy tissue nearby. That 
multidirectional strategy is 
also widely used in X-ray 
and gamma-ray therapies.
Check Your Understanding #6: Particle Recycling
Many research accelerators send each packet of electrons through the same series of resonant cavi-
ties several times. After the packet leaves the last cavity, magnets steer it around in a circle and send 
it back through the cavities again. With each pass through the cavities, the packet acquires more 
energy, so how can it possibly stay synchronized with the reversing electric fi elds in the cavities?
Answer: The packet is traveling at almost the speed of light, so its speed barely changes as its energy 
increases.
Why: If the packet were speeding up with each trip through the cavities, it wouldn’t stay synchronized 
with the reversing electric fi elds inside them. However, the packet’s speed is so nearly constant once it 
nears the speed of light that it can travel through the cavities over and over again without any problem.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Although X-rays do an excellent job of imaging bones, they aren’t as good for imaging 
tissue. A better technique for studying tissue is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This 
technique locates hydrogen atoms by interacting with their magnetic nuclei. Since hydro-
gen atoms are common in both water and organic molecules, fi nding hydrogen atoms is a 
good way to study biological tissue.
 
The nucleus of an ordinary hydrogen atom, 1H, is a proton. Protons, like electrons, 
have two possible internal quantum states, usually called spin-up and spin-down. Calling it 
spin is appropriate because spin-up and spin-down protons have equal but oppositely 
directed angular momentum. When electric charge and rotation are both present, it’s not 
surprising that magnetism is, too; electric currents are magnetic, after all. Sure enough, 
protons have magnetic dipoles—equal north and south poles at a distance from one another. 

Medical Imaging and Radiation 457
A spin-up proton acts as though it has its north pole on top, while a spin-down proton acts 
as though it has its south pole on top.
 
When a proton is immersed in a magnetic fi eld, it tends to align its magnetic dipole 
with that fi eld. Doing so minimizes its magnetic potential energy. But although protons 
would align perfectly with the fi eld at absolute zero, they are less successful near room 
temperature. Thermal energy agitates the protons so that, even in a strong, upward-pointing 
magnetic fi eld, spin-up protons only slightly outnumber spin-down protons.
 
In that upward-pointing magnetic fi eld, each proton has two possible quantum states: 
alignment with the fi eld (spin-up) or anti-alignment (spin-down). Because alignment 
reduces the proton’s magnetic potential energy, it’s the ground state—the lower energy of 
the two possible states. The anti-aligned state is the excited state.
 
With its two possible states, ground and excited, a proton in a magnetic fi eld can 
exhibit many of the behaviors we explored when looking at atoms in Section 13.2. Most 
important, the proton can experience radiative transitions between its two states. A ground-
state proton can absorb a photon while making a radiative transition to its excited state, and 
an excited-state proton can emit a photon while transiting to its ground state.
 
In Section 13.2, we saw that a given atom can absorb or emit only certain photons, 
photons carrying exactly the right amount of energy to shift the atom from one quantum 
state to another. For example, neon signs are red because neon atoms have states that are 
separated in energy by the energy of red photons. Similarly, a proton in a magnetic fi eld can 
absorb or emit only certain photons, photons carrying exactly the right amount of energy to 
shift the proton from one quantum state to the other.
 
However, unlike a neon atom, which always interacts with red photons, a proton in a 
magnetic fi eld interacts with photons that vary in “color” according to the strength of the 
magnetic fi eld. That’s because the energy separating the proton’s two states is proportional 
to the magnetic fi eld in which it resides. As a result, the photon energy needed to cause 
radiative transitions between the proton’s two states is also proportional to the magnetic 
fi eld. If the fi eld changes, so does the photon energy.
 
When a patient enters the strong magnetic fi eld of an MRI machine (Figs. 15.3.12 and 
15.3.13), the protons in the patient’s body respond to the fi eld and a small excess of aligned 
protons develops. Only these excess aligned protons matter to the MRI machine because effects 
due to the remaining protons, which are equally aligned and anti-aligned, cancel completely. 
The excess aligned protons are in their ground state, and they are what the MRI machine studies.
 
The MRI machine interacts with these ground-state protons using radio wave photons, 
photons with energies equal to the energy difference between their ground and excited 
states. The protons can absorb and subsequently emit those radio wave photons, and they 
can also exhibit a variety of fascinating and useful quantum interference effects.
Magnetic
field
Fig. 15.3.12 A magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) 
machine places the patient 
in a strong magnetic fi eld. 
This fi eld varies spatially, 
so that protons at different 
places in the patient’s body 
experience different fi elds 
and absorb different radio 
wave photons.
Fig. 15.3.13 (a) The patient is entering the intense magnetic fi eld of an MRI system. Using the 
interactions between electromagnetic waves and protons that take place in magnetic fi elds, MRI 
produces a three-dimensional map of hydrogen atoms in the patient’s body. (b) A portion of this map, 
showing the patient’s head.
© Pasieka/Science Photo Library/Getty 
Images, Inc.
© Lefkowitz/Photographer’s Choice/Getty 
Images, Inc.

458 
CHAPTER 15 Modern Physics
 
If the protons in the patient’s body were all experiencing exactly the same magnetic 
fi eld, they would all interact with the same radio wave photons—but the protons don’t all 
experience the same fi eld. The MRI machine introduces a slight spatial variation to its 
magnetic fi eld. Because the magnetic fi eld is different for different protons, only some of 
them can interact with radio wave photons of a particular energy. This selective interaction 
is how the MRI imager locates protons within a patient.
 
In its simplest form, an MRI machine applies a spatially varying magnetic fi eld to the 
patient’s body. It then sends various radio waves through the patient and looks for the radio 
wave photons to interact with protons. Since only a proton that is experiencing the right 
magnetic fi eld can interact with a particular radio wave photon, the MRI machine can 
determine where each proton is by the photons with which it interacts. By changing the 
spatial variations in the magnetic fi eld and adjusting the energies of the radio wave pho-
tons, the MRI machine gradually locates the protons in the patient’s body. It builds a 
detailed three-dimensional map of the hydrogen atoms. A computer manages this map and 
can display cross-sectional images of the patient from any angle or position.
Check Your Understanding #7: Major Magnets
Some of the most modern MRI machines use extremely strong magnetic fi elds. As a machine’s mag-
netic fi eld gets stronger, what must happen to the radio waves that are used to interact with protons 
in a patient?
Answer: Each radio wave photon must carry more energy (the radio waves must have higher frequencies).
Why: The stronger the magnetic fi eld in which a proton is immersed, the more energy separates the 
proton’s two states. The MRI machine must use higher-frequency, more energetic radio waves to 
cause radiative transitions between those two states. There are many advantages to using extremely 
strong magnetic fi elds, including lower noise and better spatial resolution in the image. However, the 
magnetic fi elds of these advanced MRI machines are so strong that they can erase credit cards from 
across the room and rip steel objects right out of your pockets.
Epilogue for Chapter 15
In this chapter we examined some of the applications of modern physics. In Nuclear 
Weapons, we examined nuclear fi ssion to see how nuclear chain reactions can be used to 
release electrostatic potential energy stored in the large nuclei of uranium and plutonium 
atoms. We also studied nuclear fusion and found that when small nuclei of hydrogen bind 
together, they release a potential energy associated with the nuclear force. We learned 
about radioactive isotopes and fallout.
 
In Nuclear Reactors, we studied the techniques used to harness nuclear energy for less 
destructive purposes. We saw that natural or slightly enriched uranium can support a chain 
reaction if the fi ssion neutrons are slowed in a moderator. We reviewed reactor and safety 
issues and looked at the world’s most signifi cant nuclear accidents.
 
In Medical Imaging and Radiation, we learned how X-rays are produced and why 
those X-rays pass more easily through tissue than through bone. We saw how X-rays can 
be used to make images and explored the uses of gamma rays for radiation therapy. We 
looked at particle accelerators and concluded by examining magnetic resonance imaging.
Explanation: Radiation-Damaged Paper
The paper fades because the ultraviolet light photons in sunlight have enough energy to 
shift electrons out of the orbitals that bond the dye molecules together. These dye molecules 
then fall apart and leave the paper without color. In some cases, the photons of light com-
pletely remove the electrons from the dye molecules. The process is the same photoelectric 
effect that makes it possible to distinguish tissue from bone in X-ray imaging.

Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations 459
Chapter Summary and Important Laws and Equations
How Nuclear Weapons Work: A fi ssion bomb releases nuclear energy through a chain reac-
tion in the fi ssionable isotopes of uranium or plutonium. In a chain reaction, each fi ssion 
induces, on average, at least one subsequent fi ssion. Assembling a supercritical mass must 
be done rapidly so that the bomb doesn’t blow itself apart before most of the nuclei have 
undergone fi ssion.
 
A fusion bomb uses heat from a fi ssion bomb to initiate fusion in the heavy isotopes of 
hydrogen: deuterium and tritium. Because tritium has a short half-life, it must be replaced 
frequently. In some fusion bombs, the tritium is created during the explosion by neutron 
collisions with lithium.
How Nuclear Reactors Work: A thermal fi ssion reactor can sustain a controlled chain reac-
tion in natural or slightly enriched uranium. By slowing its fi ssion neutrons to thermal veloc-
ities in a moderator, the reactor is able to make those neutrons interact almost exclusively 
with the rare 235U nuclei and leave the more common 238U nuclei almost unaffected. The 
235U nuclei fi ssion in a chain reaction and release heat that is used to power electric gener-
ators. The presence of some delayed fi ssion neutrons makes it easy to control the chain re-
action using neutron-absorbing control rods.
 
To use the 238U nuclei, a fast fi ssion or breeder reaction uses more highly enriched ura-
nium and no moderator. Although the chain reaction initially proceeds primarily among the 
235U nuclei, the fast fi ssion neutrons gradually transform the 238U nuclei into 239Pu nuclei. 
Like 235U nuclei, those 239Pu nuclei are fi ssionable and can participate in the chain reaction, 
so the fast fi ssion reaction can ultimately extract energy from all the original uranium nuclei. 
239Pu is also chemically separable from uranium and can be used to manufacture nuclear 
weapons. Fast fi ssion reactors therefore pose the danger of nuclear proliferation.
 
Although the goal of obtaining energy from the fusion of hydrogen nuclei on Earth re-
mains elusive, gradual progress is being made. The main challenge is to contain and heat the 
hydrogen nuclei to the enormous temperatures needed to make them collide and fuse.
How Medical Imaging and Radiation Work: Because X-rays pass more easily through tissue 
than they do through bone, X-rays form shadow images of a patient’s bones. These X-rays are 
produced when energetic electrons accelerate near metal nuclei and when they knock other 
electrons out of the metal atoms.
 
Radiation therapy is done with very high-energy X-rays and gamma rays because they 
pass more easily through tissue. These electromagnetic waves kill tumor cells by depositing 
energy in the atoms and molecules of those cells. Gamma rays are usually obtained from 
radioactive nuclei. Some radiation therapy is done with energetic particles that are given 
enormous energies by particle accelerators.
 
Magnetic resonance imaging uses the magnetic nature of hydrogen nuclei (protons) to 
locate hydrogen atoms in a patient’s body. The patient is put in a strong magnetic fi eld, and 
the protons tend to align with this fi eld. The imaging machine then uses radio waves to re-
verse the alignments of those protons. By making the magnetic fi eld vary slightly from place 
to place, the machine is able to locate the protons in the patient’s body. A computer records 
and analyzes the results so that it can present cross-sectional images of the hydrogen atoms 
in a patient’s body.
1. Exponential decay of radioactive nuclei and particles: The 
fraction of a large original population of identical radioactive 
systems remaining is equal to one-half raised to the power of the 
elapsed time divided by the half-life of those systems, or
 
fraction remaining = (
1
2)
elapsed time/half-life
 (15.1.1)

Vectors
Some physical quantities are simply numbers (e.g., 0, −1.5, and 𝜋) 
or numbers with units (e.g., 10 s, 5 kg, and 1 m3). These are 
known as scalar quantities, that is, quantities that have only 
magnitudes (amounts). Many other physical quantities, how-
ever, are vectors—they have both magnitudes and directions. 
In our three-dimensional world, vector quantities are quite 
common and useful, and they include position, velocity, ac-
celeration, force, torque, momentum, and angular momentum. 
Because vector quantities include both magnitude and direction, 
they convey more information than scalar quantities and they’re 
also a bit more diffi cult to understand.
 
Position is probably the easiest vector quantity to visualize: 
you specify an object’s position by giving its position vector—
its distance and direction from a reference point. For example, 
you can specify the library’s position with respect to your home 
by giving both its distance from your home (say 3.162 km, or 
1.965 miles) and its direction from your home (18.43° east of 
due north). That position vector is all the information someone 
would need to travel from your home to the library.
 
In illustrations, such as Fig. A.1, vector quantities are 
drawn as arrows. The length of each arrow indicates the vector’s 
magnitude, while the direction of the arrow indicates which way 
the vector points. Suppose that you live in a city with major 
east-west and north-south streets spaced 1 km apart. Figure A.1 
shows four aerial views of your city. The vector A in Fig. A.1a 
shows the position of the library with respect to your home. It 
begins at your home and ends at the library, thus indicating both 
the magnitude and direction of the library’s position.
 
Let’s look at another position vector. The vector B in Fig. 
A.1b begins at the library and ends at your friend’s home. This 
position vector shows the position of your friend’s home with 
respect to the library and is 2.828 km long and points 45° east of 
south. If you happen to be at the library, you can use this vector 
to fi nd your friend’s home.
 
But how can you go from your home to your friend’s 
home? To make this trip, you must add two vectors: you fi rst 
follow vector A from your home to the library and then follow 
vector B from the library to your friend’s home. This combined 
trip is shown as the upper path in Fig. A.1c. But you could also 
go directly from your home to your friend’s home by following 
a new vector in Fig. A.1c—vector C. This vector from your home 
to your friend’s home is the sum of vectors A and B, and is 3.162 
km long and points 18.43° north of east. Using bold letters to 
indicate that A, B, and C are vectors, we can write A + B = C, 
meaning that vector C is the sum of vectors A and B.
 
Another interesting path from your home to your friend’s 
home is shown in Fig. A.1d; you fi rst travel along vector B 
460
Appendix A
and then along vector A. On this path, you will arrive at your 
friend’s home without visiting the library. The fi rst leg of this 
journey will take you into new territory, but the second leg will 
leave you at your friend’s home. The sum of vectors B and A is 
still vector C, or B + A = C. Thus vectors added in any order 
yield the same sum.
 
While you can estimate the sum of two vectors by drawing 
arrows on a sheet of paper, obtaining an accurate sum requires 
some thought. Adding their magnitudes is unlikely to give you 
the magnitude of the sum vector, and adding their directions 
doesn’t even make sense. To add two vectors, it helps to specify 
them in another form: as their components along two or three 
directions that are at right angles with respect to one another. In 
our example of travel in a city, two right-angle directions are all 
N
Library
Friend's
home
Your
home
Your
home
(0,0)
(1,3)
(0,0)
(3,1)
(2,–2)
W
E
S
A
A
B
Library
Friend's
home
(2,–2)
(0,0)
B
Library
Friend's
home
Your
home
(1,3)
(0,0)
(3,1)
A
B
C
C
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. A.1. Four aerial views of your city, showing the major 
north-south and east-west streets that are spaced 1 km apart. 
(a) To go from your home to the library, you must travel 3.162 
km in the direction 18.43° east of north, which is vector A. 
(b) To go from the library to your friend’s home, you must travel 
2.828 km in the direction 45° east of south, which is vector B. 
(c) You can go from your home to your friend’s home by two 
routes: you can go fi rst to the library along vector A and then go 
to your friend’s home along vector B, or you can travel directly 
along vector C, which is the sum of vectors A and B. (d) You can 
also reach your friend’s home by going fi rst along vector B and 
then along vector A. The sum of these two vectors is still vector 
C. However, you will not visit the library on that trip.

Appendix A 461
we need. If height were also important, we’d need three right-an-
gle directions.
 
For the two right-angle directions we need in the city, 
let’s choose east and north. We can then specify vector A as its 
component toward the east and its component toward the north. 
Its east component is 1 km and its north component is 3 km, so 
vector A, the position of the library with respect to your home, 
is 1 km to the east and 3 km to the north.
 
This new form for vector A, a pair of distances, is often 
more convenient than the old form, a distance and a direction. 
If you go to the library by walking 3.162 km in the direction 
18.43° east of north, you’ll have to pass through a lot of other 
buildings and backyards. Walking to the library by heading 1 km 
east and 3 km north allows you to travel on the sidewalks.
 
If we designate the position of your home as 0 km east and 
0 km north, then the position of the library is 1 km east and 3 km 
north. These positions are labeled in Fig. A.1a as (0,0) and (1,3), 
respectively. The fi rst number in the parentheses is the distance 
east, measured in kilometers, and the second number is the 
distance north, also in kilometers.
 
To go from the library to your friend’s home, you must 
go 2 km east and 2 km south. That’s the new form of vector B. 
Because a southward position has a negative component along 
the northward direction, the position of your friend’s home with 
respect to the library is 2 km east and −2 km north. In Fig. A.1b, 
the library is at (0,0) and your friend’s home is at (2,−2).
 
Now adding these vectors A and B is relatively easy. To 
go from your home to your friend’s home by way of the library, 
you must move east fi rst 1 km and then 2 km for a total of 3 km, 
and you must move north 3 km and then −2 km for a total of 
1 km. Thus the position of your friend’s home with respect to 
your home, vector C, is 3 km east and 1 km north. In Fig. A.1c, 
your home is at (0,0) and your friend’s home is at (3,1).
 
Similarly, you can go from your home to your friend’s 
home by following fi rst vector B and then vector A, as shown in 
Fig. A.1d. This trip will take you through unknown regions, but 
you’ll still arrive at the right place. You move east fi rst 2 km and 
then 1 km, and you move north fi rst −2 km and then 3 km. In 
the end, you’ll be 3 km east and 1 km north of your home, the 
position of your friend’s home. Thus the sum of vectors B and 
A is still vector C.
 
As you can see, vectors are useful for specifying physical 
quantities in our three-dimensional world. When you encounter 
vectors, remember that their directions are just as important as 
their magnitudes and that these directions must be taken into 
account when you add two vectors together.

Units, Conversion of Units
When you return from a camping trip and begin to describe it to 
your friends, there are a number of physical quantities that you 
may fi nd useful in your conversation. Distance, weight, temper-
ature, and time are as important in everyday life as they are in 
a laboratory. And when you explain to your friends how far you 
hiked, how much your backpack weighed, how cold the weather 
was, and how long the trip took, you’ll have to relate those quan-
tities to standard units or your friends won’t appreciate just how 
diffi cult the trip was.
 
Most physical quantities aren’t simple numbers like 7 or 
2.9. Instead, they have units like length or time, and are specifi ed 
in multiples of widely accepted standard units such as meters or 
seconds. When you say a door is 3.0 meters tall, you’re comparing 
the door’s height to the meter, a widely accepted standard unit 
of length. With this comparison, most people can determine just 
how tall the door is, even though they’ve never seen it.
 
But the meter isn’t familiar to everyone; many people prefer 
to measure length in multiples of another standard unit—the 
foot. These people might be more comfortable hearing that 
the door is 9.8 feet tall. These two quantities, 3.0 meters and 
9.8 feet, are the same length.
 
Determining the door’s height in feet doesn’t require a new 
measurement because we can convert the one in meters to one 
that’s in feet. To perform this conversion, we need to know how 
to express one particular length in both units. Any length will 
do. For example, Table B.1 states that 1 foot is the same length 
as 0.30480 meters. Because of that equality, we know that the 
following equation is true:
1 foot
0.30480 maters = 1.
 462
Appendix B
We can multiply 3.0 meters, the height of the door, by this 
version of 1 and obtain the door’s height in feet: 
3.0 meters ·
1 foot
0.30480 meters = 9.8425 feet.
Notice that the original units (meters) cancel and are replaced 
by the new units (feet). Since we knew the door’s height only to 
2 digits of precision in meters, we can’t report the door’s height 
to any more than 2 digits of precision in feet. So, we round the 
result to 9.8 feet.
 
You can change the units of almost any physical quantity 
by multiplying that quantity by a version of 1. You should form 
this 1 by dividing new units by old units, where the number of 
new units in the numerator is equivalent to the number of old 
units in the denominator. You can obtain these pairs of equiva-
lent quantities from Table B.1. When you do this multiplication, 
the old units will cancel and you’ll be left with the physical 
quantity expressed in the new units.
 
One last note about units: When you use physical quantities 
in a calculation, make sure that you keep the units throughout 
the process. They’re as important in the calculation as they are 
anywhere else. Some of the units may cancel, but in all like-
lihood the result of the calculation will have some units left, and 
these units must be appropriate to the type of result you expect. 
If you’re expecting a length, the units of your result should be 
meters or feet or another standard unit of length. If the units you 
obtain are seconds or kilograms, you’ve made a mistake in the 
calculation.

Appendix B 463
TABLE B.1 Conversion of Units
This table lists pairs of equivalent quantities, one in SI units and one in other units. Each pair can be used to convert measure-
ments expressed as multiples of one unit into measurements expressed as multiples of the other unit. These pairs are grouped 
according to physical quantity and are given to a precision of 5 digits. 
1. Acceleration: (SI unit: 1 meter/second2 or 1 m/s2)
 
1 foot/second2 
= 0.30480 m/s2
2. Angle: (SI unit: 1 radian)
 
1 degree (1°) 
= 0.017453 radians
3. Area: (SI unit: 1 meter2 or 1 m2)
 
1 foot2 
= 0.092903 m2
 
1 inch2 
= 6.4516·10−4 m2
4. Density: (SI unit: 1 kilogram/meter3 or 1 kg/m3)
 
1 pound/foot3 
= 16.018 kg/m3
5. Energy: (SI unit: 1 joule or 1 J)
 
1 Btu 
= 1054.7 J
 
1 calorie, thermochemical 
= 4.1840 J
 
1 electron-volt (1 eV) 
= 1.6022·10−19 J
 
1 foot-pound 
= 1.3558 J
 
1 kilocalorie (food Calorie) 
= 4,186.8 J
 
1 kilowatt-hour 
= 3,600,000 J
6. Force: (SI unit: 1 newton or 1 N)
 
1 pound-force (1 lbf) 
= 4.4482 N
7. Length: (SI unit: 1 meter or 1 m)
 
1 angstrom (1 Å) 
= 10−10 m
 
1 centimeter (1 cm) 
= 0.01 m
 
1 fermi (1 fm) 
= 10−15 m
 
1 foot 
= 0.30480 m
 
1 inch 
= 0.02540 m
 
1 kilometer (1 km) 
= 1000 m
 
1 light year 
= 9.4606·1015 m
 
1 micron (1 𝜇m) 
= 10−6 m
 
1 mil 
= 2.5400·10−5 m
 
1 mile 
= 1609.3 m
 
1 millimeter (1 mm) 
= 0.001 m
 
1 nanometer (1 nm) 
= 10−9 m
 
1 picometer (1 pm) 
= 10−12 m
8. Mass: (SI unit: 1 kilogram or 1 kg)
 
1 gram (1 g) 
= 0.001 kg
 
1 metric ton 
= 1000 kg
 
1 pound-mass (1 lbm) 
= 0.45359 kg
 
1 slug 
= 14.594 kg
 9. Power: (SI unit: 1 watt or 1 W)
 
1 Btu/hour 
= 0.29307 W
 
1 horsepower 
= 745.70 W
10. Pressure: (SI unit: 1 pascal or 1 Pa)
 
1 atmosphere 
= 101,325 Pa
 
1 millimeter of mercury (1 torr) 
= 133.32 Pa
 
1 pound/inch2 (1 psi) 
= 6894.8 Pa
11. Temperature: (SI units: degree Celsius or °C; kelvin or K)
Because temperature in the three common units, °C, K, and °F 
(degree Fahrenheit), aren’t multiples of one another, you must 
use special formulas to convert between them:
 
Temperature in °C = 5/9·(Temperature in °F − 32)
 
Temperature in °C = Temperature in K − 273.15
 
Temperature in K = Temperature in °C + 273.15
12. Time: (SI unit: 1 second or 1 s)
 
1 day 
= 86,400 s
 
1 femtosecond (1 fs) 
= 10−15 s
 
1 hour 
= 3600 s
 
1 microsecond (1 𝜇s) 
= 10−6 s
 
1 millisecond (1 ms) 
= 0.001 s
 
1 minute 
= 60 s
 
1 nanosecond (1 ns) 
= 10−9 s
 
1 picosecond (1 ps) 
= 10−12 s
13. Torque: (SI unit: 1 newton-meter or 1 N·m)
 
1 inch-pound 
= 0.11298 N·m
 
1 foot-pound 
= 1.3558 N·m
14. Velocity: (SI unit: 1 meter/second or 1 m/s)
 
1 foot/second 
= 0.30480 m/s
 
1 kilometer/hour (1 km/h) 
= 0.27778 m/s
 
1 knot 
= 0.51444 m/s
 
1 mile/hour (1 mph) 
= 0.44704 m/s
15. Volume: (SI unit: 1 meter3 or 1 m3)
 
1 cup 
= 2.3659·10−4 m3
 
1 fl uid ounce 
= 2.9574·10−5 m3
 
1 foot3 
= 0.028317 m3
 
1 gallon 
= 0.0037854 m3
 
1 liter (1 l) 
= 0.001 m3
 
1 milliliter (1 ml) 
= 10−6 m3
 
1 quart 
= 0.00094635 m3


absolute temperature scale A scale for 
measuring temperature in which 0 K 
corresponds to absolute zero.
absolute zero The temperature at which 
all thermal energy has been removed 
from an object or system of objects. 
Because it’s impossible to fi nd and 
remove all the thermal energy from 
an object, absolute zero can be ap-
proached but is not actually attainable.
acceleration A vector quantity that mea-
sures the rate at which an object’s 
velocity is changing: the greater the 
acceleration, the more the object’s ve-
locity changes each second. It consists 
of both the amount of acceleration and 
the direction in which the object is ac-
celerating. This direction is identical 
to the direction of the force causing 
the acceleration. The SI unit of accel-
eration is the meter per second2.
acceleration due to gravity A physical 
constant that specifi es how quickly a 
freely falling object accelerates and 
also relates an object’s weight to its 
mass. At Earth’s surface, the accel-
eration due to gravity is 9.8 m/s2 (or 
9.8 N/kg).
activation energy The energy required 
to initiate a chemical reaction. This 
energy serves to break or weaken 
the bonds in the starting chemicals 
so that the reaction can proceed to 
form the reaction products.
adverse pressure gradient A region of 
fl uid fl ow in which the fl uid must 
fl ow toward higher pressure. The 
fl uid’s momentum and kinetic en-
ergy carry it through this situation, 
although the fl uid does slow down.
aerodynamic forces The forces exerted 
on an object by the motion of the 
air surrounding it. The two types of 
aerodynamic forces are lift and drag.
aerodynamics The study of the dynamic 
(moving) interactions of air with 
objects.
airfoil An aerodynamically engineered 
surface designed to obtain particu-
lar lift and drag forces from the air 
fl owing around it.
airspeed An object’s speed relative to 
the air through which it moves.
alpha decay A radioactive decay in 
which a helium nucleus (two protons 
and two neutrons) escapes from a 
larger proton-rich nucleus via quan-
tum tunneling.
alternating current (AC) An electric 
current that periodically reverses its 
direction of fl ow.
ampere (A) The SI unit of electric cur-
rent (synonymous with the coulomb 
per second). One ampere is de-
fi ned as the passage of 6.25 × 1018 
charged particles per second and is 
roughly the current fl owing through 
a 100-W lightbulb operating on 
household electric power.
ampere-meter (A ∙ m) The SI unit of 
magnetic pole.
amplifi er A device that replicates an in-
put signal as a larger output signal.
amplitude The maximal displacement 
of an oscillator away from its equi-
librium position.
amplitude modulation (AM) A tech-
nique for representing sound or data 
by changing the amplitude (strength) 
of a wave.
analog representation The representa-
tion of numbers directly as contin-
uous values of physical quantities 
such as voltage, charge, or pressure.
angle of attack The angle at which an 
airfoil is tilted relative to the airfl ow 
around it.
angular acceleration A vector quantity 
that measures how quickly an ob-
ject’s angular velocity is changing; 
the greater the angular acceleration, 
the more the object’s angular veloc-
ity changes each second. It consists 
of both the amount of angular accel-
eration and the direction about which 
the angular acceleration occurs. This 
direction is identical to the direction 
of the torque causing the angular ac-
celeration. The SI unit of angular ac-
celeration is the radian per second2.
angular impulse The mechanical means 
for transferring angular momentum. 
One object gives an angular impulse 
to a second object by exerting a cer-
tain torque on the second object for 
a certain amount of time. In return, 
the second object gives an equal but 
oppositely directed angular impulse 
to the fi rst object.
angular momentum A conserved vector 
quantity that measures an object’s ro-
tational motion. It is that object’s ro-
tational mass times its angular veloc-
ity. The SI unit of angular momentum 
is the kilogram-meter2 per second.
angular position A quantity that de-
scribes an object’s orientation rela-
tive to some reference orientation.
angular speed A measure of the angle 
through which an object rotates in a 
certain amount of time.
angular velocity A vector quantity that 
measures how rapidly an object’s 
angular position is changing; the 
greater the angular velocity, the far-
ther the object turns each second. It 
consists of both the object’s angular 
speed and the direction about which 
the object is rotating. This direction 
points along the axis of rotation 
in the direction established by the 
right-hand rule. The SI unit of angu-
lar velocity is the radian per second.
anharmonic oscillator An oscillator 
in which the restoring force on an 
object is not proportional to its 
displacement from a stable equilib-
rium. The period of an anharmonic 
oscillator depends on the amplitude 
of its motion.
 465
Glossary

antimatter Matter resembling normal 
matter, but with many of its character-
istics such as electric charge reversed.
aperture The diameter or effective 
diameter of a lens or opening.
apparent weight The sum of a person’s 
weight plus their feeling of accel-
eration. All three quantities are vec-
tors, so apparent weight can be quite 
large if the weight and feeling point 
in the same direction or quite small 
if they point in opposite directions.
Archimedes’ principle The observation 
that an object partially or wholly 
immersed in a fl uid is acted on by an 
upward buoyant force equal to the 
weight of the fl uid it’s displacing.
atmospheric pressure The pressure of air 
in Earth’s atmosphere. Atmospheric 
pressure reaches a maximum of about 
100,000 Pa near sea level and dimin-
ishes with increasing altitude.
atom The smallest portion of a chemical 
element that retains the chemical 
properties of that element.
atomic number The number of protons 
present in an atomic nucleus and 
equal to the number of electrons in 
a neutral atom.
axis of rotation The straight line in 
space about which an object or 
group of objects rotates. More spe-
cifi cally, the axis of rotation points 
in a particular direction along that 
line to refl ect the sense of rotation 
according to the right-hand rule.
back emf The self-induced electromo-
tive force that develops in an in-
ductor when its current changes or 
in the coil of an electromechanical 
system such as a motor when its cur-
rent causes magnets to move.
balanced Experiencing 
zero 
overall 
torque due to gravity.
band A group of levels in a solid that 
involve similar standing waves and 
thus have similar energies.
band gap A range of energies over 
which a solid has no levels available.
bandwidth The range of frequencies 
involved in a group of electromag-
netic waves.
base of support A surface outlined on 
the ground by the points at which an 
object is supported.
Bernoulli’s equation An equation relat-
ing the total energy of an incom-
pressible fl uid in steady-state fl ow 
to the sum of its pressure potential 
energy, kinetic energy, and gravita-
tional potential energy.
beta decay A radioactive decay in which 
the weak force allows a neutron in a 
neutron-rich nucleus to disintegrate 
into an electron, a proton, and an 
antineutrino. The proton remains 
in the nucleus, but the electron and 
antineutron escape.
binary The digital representation of 
numbers in terms of the powers of 
two. The number 6 is represented in 
binary as 110, meaning 1 four (22), 
1 two (21), and 0 ones (20).
black hole A region of space, normally 
spherical, within which the gravita-
tional distortions of space and time 
are so severe that not even light can 
escape.
blackbody spectrum The distribution 
of thermal electromagnetic radia-
tion emitted by a black object. This 
distribution is the amount of radia-
tion emitted at each wavelength and 
depends only on the temperature of 
the black object.
blunt Not streamlined. Fluid fl owing 
around a blunt object stalls and expe-
riences fl ow separation and pressure 
drag.
boiling Accelerated evaporation that oc-
curs when stable gas-phase bubbles 
form and grow inside a material’s 
liquid phase.
boiling 
temperature The 
threshold 
temperature at which gas-phase 
bubbles fi rst become stable within a 
material’s liquid phase.
Boltzmann constant The constant of 
proportionality relating a gas’s pres-
sure to its particle density and tem-
perature. It has a measured value of 
1.381 × 10−23 Pa ∙ m3/(particle ∙ K).
boundary layer A thin region of fl uid 
near a surface that, because of viscous 
drag, is not moving at the full speed 
of the surrounding airfl ow.
bremsstrahlung The process in which 
a rapidly accelerating charge emits 
electromagnetic radiation, usually 
an X-ray or gamma-ray photon.
Brewster’s angle The angle at which 
no vertically polarized light refl ects 
from a transparent surface that is 
oriented horizontally. The precise 
angle depends on the surface’s index 
of refraction.
buoyant force The upward force exerted 
by a fl uid on an object immersed 
in that fl uid. The buoyant force is 
actually caused by pressure from the 
fl uid. That pressure is highest below 
the object, so the force exerted 
upward on the object’s bottom is 
greater than the force exerted down-
ward on the object’s top.
byte Eight binary bits that collectively 
can represent a number from 0 to 
255. Bytes are often used to represent 
letters and other characters, where a 
convention associates each character 
with a specifi c number.
calibration The process of comparing a 
local reference object to a generally 
accepted standard.
capacitance The amount of separated 
charge on the plates of a capacitor 
divided by the voltage difference 
across those plates. The SI unit of 
capacitance is the farad.
capacitor An electronic component that 
stores separated electric charge on a 
pair of plates that are separated by 
an insulating layer.
Celsius (°C) A temperature scale in 
which 0 °C is defi ned as the melting 
point of water and 100 °C is defi ned 
as the boiling point of water at sea 
level. Absolute zero is −273.15 °C.
center of gravity The unique point 
about which all of an object’s weight 
is evenly distributed and therefore 
balanced. Because weight is propor-
tional to mass, the center of mass 
is identical to the center of gravity 
for objects that are much smaller 
than Earth. For larger objects, the 
centers of mass and gravity differ 
slightly. An object suspended from 
its center of gravity will balance and 
will experience no net torque due to 
gravity. In many situations, you can 
accurately predict an object’s behav-
ior by assuming that all the object’s 
weight acts at its center of gravity.
center of mass The unique point about 
which all the object’s mass is balanced. 
466 
Glossary

Glossary 467
The center of mass is the natural pivot 
point for a free object. In the absence 
of outside forces or torques, a rigid 
object’s center of mass travels at con-
stant velocity while the object rotates 
at constant angular velocity about this 
center of mass.
center of percussion The special spot 
on a bat or racket where a collision 
with a second object will not cause 
any acceleration of the bat’s handle.
center of rotation The point around 
which all the physical quantities of 
rotation are defi ned.
centripetal acceleration An accelera-
tion that is always directed toward 
the center of a circular trajectory.
centripetal force A centrally directed 
force on an object. A centripetal 
force is not an independent force 
but, rather, the sum of other forces 
such as gravity acting on the object.
chain reaction A process in which one 
event triggers an average of one 
or more similar events so that the 
process becomes self-sustaining.
chaos Unpredictable behavior in which 
minute changes in a system’s initial 
arrangement lead to very different 
fi nal arrangements. These differ-
ences grow more dramatic with each 
passing second.
chaotic system A dynamic system that 
is exquisitely sensitive to initial con-
ditions. Minute changes in how you 
set up a chaotic system can lead to 
wildly different fi nal confi gurations.
characteristic X-ray An X-ray emit-
ted by X-ray fl uorescence from an 
atom. The energy of the charac-
teristic X-ray is determined by the 
atom’s orbital structure.
charges Objects, 
particularly 
small 
particles, that carry electric charge.
chemical bond An energy defi cit that 
holds two or more atoms together 
to form a molecule and that must be 
repaid to separate the atoms. Chem-
ical bonds form when chemical 
potential energy is released during a 
molecule’s assembly.
chemical 
potential 
energy Energy 
stored in the chemical forces between 
atoms. Those chemical forces are 
electromagnetic in origin.
chemical reaction An encounter between 
two or more atoms and molecules 
that results in a rearrangement of the 
atoms to form different atoms and 
molecules.
circularly polarized The quality of a 
light wave in which the electric and 
magnetic fi elds rotate about the direc-
tion in which that wave is heading.
closed circuit A complete electric circuit 
through which electric current can 
fl ow continuously.
coast To travel at a steady speed along 
a straight-line path in accordance 
with inertia and the constant-veloc-
ity motion of an object that is expe-
riencing zero net force.
coeffi cient of restitution The measure 
of a ball’s liveliness, determined 
by bouncing the ball from a rigid, 
immovable surface. It’s the ratio of 
the ball’s rebound speed to its col-
lision speed.
coeffi cient of volume expansion The 
fractional change in an object’s 
volume caused by a temperature 
increase of 1 °C.
coherent light Light consisting of iden-
tical photons that together form a 
single electromagnetic wave.
collision energy The amount of kinetic 
energy removed from two objects as 
they collide.
color temperature The temperature at 
which a black object will emit thermal 
electromagnetic radiation with this 
particular distribution of wavelengths.
components The portions of a vector 
quantity that lie along particular 
directions.
compressible Changing density signifi -
cantly as the pressure changes. A 
gas is compressible, since its density 
is proportional to its pressure.
Compton scattering The process in 
which a photon bounces off a 
charged particle, usually an elec-
tron. The photon and charged parti-
cle exchange energy and momentum 
during the collision.
condensation The phase transformation 
in which a gas becomes a liquid.
conduction band The group of quantum 
levels in an insulator that lies above 
the Fermi level.
conduction level A quantum level in an 
insulator that requires more energy 
than the Fermi level and that is nor-
mally unoccupied by electrons.
conserved quantity A physical quantity, 
such as energy, that is neither cre-
ated nor destroyed within an isolated 
system when that system undergoes 
changes. A conserved quantity may 
pass among the objects within an 
isolated system, but its total amount 
remains constant.
constructive interference Interference 
in which two or more waves arrive 
at a location in space and time in 
phase with one another and produce 
a particularly strong effect.
convection The transmission of heat by 
the movement of a fl uid. Convection 
normally entails the natural circu-
lation of the fl uid that accompanies 
differences in temperatures and 
densities.
convection cell A loop of fl uid fl ow that 
is propelled by convection. Fluid in 
a convection cell normally rises in 
a hotter region and descends in a 
colder region.
convection current A fl uid fl ow propelled 
by convection.
converging lens A lens that bends the 
individual light rays passing through 
it toward one another so that they 
either converge more rapidly than 
before or at least diverge less rapidly 
from one another. A converging lens 
has a positive focal length and often 
produces real images.
corona discharge A faintly glowing dis-
charge that surrounds a small, highly 
charged object in the presence of a 
gas. In the discharge, electric charge 
is transferred from the object to the 
gas molecules.
coulomb (C) The SI unit of electric charge. 
One coulomb is about 1 million times 
the charge you acquire by rubbing 
your feet across a carpet in winter.
Coulomb constant The fundamental 
constant of nature that determines 
the electrostatic forces two charges 
exert on one another. Its measured 
value is 8.988 × 109 N ∙ m2/C2.
Coulomb’s law The magnitudes of the 
electrostatic forces between two 
objects are equal to the Coulomb 

468 
Glossary
constant times the product of their 
two electric charges, divided by 
the square of the distance separat-
ing them. If the charges are like, 
then the forces are repulsive. If the 
charges are opposite, then the forces 
are attractive.
Coulomb’s law for magnetism The mag-
nitudes of the magnetostatic forces 
between two objects are equal to the 
permeability of free space times the 
product of their two magnetic poles, 
divided by 4π times the square of the 
distance separating them. If the poles 
are like, then the forces are repulsive. 
If the poles are opposite, then the 
forces are attractive.
crest A peak positive excursion of an 
extended system that is experiencing 
a wave.
critical mass A portion of a fi ssionable 
material that is able to sustain a 
fi ssion chain reaction. The amount 
of material required depends on its 
mass, shape, and density.
crystalline Having its atoms arranged in an 
orderly pattern that extends for many 
atomic spacings in all directions.
current The amount of electric charge 
fl owing past a point or through a 
surface per unit of time. The SI unit 
of current is the ampere.
cycle per second (1/s) The SI unit of 
frequency (synonymous with hertz).
cyclotron motion The circular or spiral 
motion of a charged particle in a mag-
netic fi eld. The charged particle tends 
to loop around the magnetic fl ux lines.
decimal The digital representation of 
numbers in terms of the powers of 
10. The number 124 is represented in 
decimal as 124, meaning 1 hundred 
(102), 2 tens (101), and 4 ones (100).
demagnetized The quality of a material 
when its magnetic polarization has 
been reduced, typically to zero.
density The mass of an object divided 
by its volume. The SI unit of density 
is the kilogram per meter3.
density gradient A gradual change in 
density near a given position; a vec-
tor quantity that points in the direc-
tion of fastest increase in density 
and has a magnitude that is the rate 
of that increase.
depletion region The nonconducting re-
gion around a p-n junction in which 
all of the valence levels are fi lled 
with electrons and there are no con-
duction-level electrons.
deposition The phase transformation in 
which a gas becomes a solid.
destructive interference Interference in 
which two or more waves arrive at 
a location in space and time out of 
phase with one another and produce 
a particularly weak effect.
diffraction A wave phenomenon that 
limits the focusability of light and 
alters the way in which it travels af-
ter passing through an opening.
digital representation The representa-
tion of numbers by decomposition 
into digits that are then individually 
represented by discrete values of 
physical quantities such as voltage, 
charge, or pressure.
direct current (DC) An electric current 
that always fl ows in one direction.
direction The line or course on which 
something is moving, is aimed to 
move, or is pointing or facing.
discharge A fl ow of electric current 
through a gas.
dispersion The dependence of light’s 
speed through a material on the 
frequency of that light.
distance The length between two posi-
tions in space. The SI unit of distance 
is the meter.
diverging lens A lens that bends the in-
dividual light rays passing through it 
away from one another so that they 
either converge less rapidly than 
before or don’t converge at all. A 
diverging lens has a negative focal 
length and often produces virtual 
images.
domain wall A boundary surface between 
magnetic domains having different 
directions of magnetic orientation.
doped Modifi ed by adding chemical 
impurities that change its physical 
properties.
Doppler effect A difference between 
the frequency at which a wave is 
sent and the frequency at which that 
wave is received caused by relative 
motion between the sender and re-
ceiver.
drag forces The friction-like forces ex-
erted by a fl uid and a solid on one 
another as the solid moves through 
the fl uid. These forces act to reduce 
the relative velocity between the two.
dynamic stability An object’s stability 
when it’s in motion.
dynamic variation Change in a physi-
cal quantity such as pressure that is 
caused by motion.
elastic collision A collision in which all 
the kinetic energy present before the 
impact is again present as kinetic 
energy after the impact.
elastic limit The most extreme distortion 
of an object from which it can return 
to its original size and shape without 
permanent deformation.
elastic potential energy The energy 
stored by the forces within a distorted 
elastic object.
elastic scattering The process in which 
two particles bounce off one another 
without losing any of their kinetic 
energies.
electric charge An intrinsic property of 
matter that gives rise to electrostatic 
forces between charged particles. 
Electric charge is a conserved physical 
quantity. A specifi c charge can have a 
positive amount of electric charge (a 
positive charge) or a negative amount 
(a negative charge). The SI unit of 
electric charge is the coulomb.
electric circuit A complete loop of con-
ductors, loads, and power sources 
through which an electric current 
can fl ow continuously.
electric current The movement or fl ow 
of electric charge.
electric fi eld An attribute of each point in 
space that exerts forces on electrically 
charged particles. An electric fi eld has 
a magnitude and direction propor-
tional to the force it would exert on a 
unit of positive charge at that location. 
While electric fi elds are often created 
by nearby charges, they can also be 
created by other electromagnetic phe-
nomena. The SI unit of electric fi eld is 
the volt per meter or, equivalently, the 
newton per coulomb.
electric polarization A distribution of 
electric charge that is nonuniform 
so that the object has a region of 

Glossary 469
positive charge and a region of neg-
ative charge.
electrical conductor A material that 
allows electric charge to move 
through it.
electrical insulator A material that 
prevents any net movement of elec-
tric charge through it.
electrical resistance The measure of 
how much an object impedes the 
fl ow of electric current. The SI unit 
of electrical resistance is the ohm.
electromagnet A coil of wire, with or 
without an iron core, that becomes 
a magnet when an electric current 
fl ows through the coil.
electromagnetic spectrum The entire 
range of possible frequencies and 
wavelengths 
of 
electromagnetic 
waves.
electromagnetic waves Waves consist-
ing of electric and magnetic fi elds 
that travel through empty space 
at the speed of light. These waves 
carry energy and momentum and 
are emitted and absorbed as parti-
cles called photons. Radio waves; 
microwaves; infrared, visible, and 
ultraviolet light; X-rays; and gamma 
rays are examples of electromag-
netic waves.
electron volt (eV) A unit of energy 
equal to the energy obtained by an 
elementary charge (electron or pro-
ton) as it moves through a voltage 
difference of 1 V. One electron volt 
is equal to about 1.602 × 10−19 J.
electron-positron pair production The 
formation of an electron and a pos-
itron during an energetic collision.
electrons The tiny negatively charged par-
ticles that make up the outer portions 
of atoms and that are the main carri-
ers of electricity and heat in metals.
electrostatic force The force experi-
enced by a charged particle in the 
presence of other charged particles.
electrostatic potential energy Energy 
stored in the forces between electric 
charges.
elementary unit of electric charge The 
basic quantum of electric charge, 
equal to about 1.6 × 10−19 C.
emissivity A surface’s capacity to emit 
or absorb thermal radiation relative 
to that of a perfectly black object at 
the same temperature.
energy The capacity to do work. Each 
object has a precise quantity of 
energy, which determines exactly 
how much work that object can do 
in an ideal situation. The SI unit of 
energy is the joule.
English system of units An assortment 
of antiquated units that were used 
throughout the English colonies and 
remain in common use in the United 
States today. Units in this system in-
clude feet, ounces, and miles per hour.
entropy The physical quantity measur-
ing the amount of disorder in a sys-
tem. The system’s entropy would be 
zero at absolute zero.
equilibrium The state of an object in 
which zero net force (or zero net 
torque) acts on it. An object that is 
stationary or in uniform motion is in 
equilibrium.
equilibrium length The natural length 
of a spring or springlike object 
when it is free of external forces and 
motionless.
equilibrium position The point at which 
an object experiences zero net force 
and doesn’t accelerate.
escape velocity The speed a spacecraft 
needs to follow a parabolic orbital 
path and escape forever from a 
particular celestial object.
evaporation The phase transformation 
in which a liquid becomes a gas.
excited state A confi guration of a sys-
tem having excess energy; its elec-
trons (or other particles) are in an ar-
rangement of quantum waves (e.g., 
orbitals or levels) that has more than 
the least possible energy.
exhaust velocity The velocity of exhaust 
gas relative to the rocket engine from 
which it emerged.
explosive chain reaction A chain reac-
tion in which each fi ssion induces 
an average of much more than one 
subsequent fi ssion and the fi ssion 
rate skyrockets.
Fahrenheit (°F) A temperature scale in 
which 32 °F is defi ned as the melting 
point of water and 212 °F is defi ned 
as the boiling point of water at sea 
level. Absolute zero is −459.67 °F.
farad (F) The SI unit of electric capaci-
tance. A 1-farad capacitor will have a 
voltage difference between its plates 
of 1 volt when storing 1 coulomb 
each of separated positive and nega-
tive charge.
feedback The process of using informa-
tion about a system’s current situa-
tion to control changes you are mak-
ing in that system.
feeling of acceleration A person under-
going acceleration experiences a 
weightlike sensation in the direction 
exactly opposite the direction of ac-
celeration. The amount of this feel-
ing of acceleration is proportional to 
the amount of the acceleration.
Fermi energy The energy of an electron 
in the Fermi level.
Fermi level A hypothetical level located 
halfway between the highest occu-
pied level and the lowest unoccu-
pied level in a solid.
Fermi particles A class of fundamen-
tal particles that includes electrons, 
protons, and neutrons and that obeys 
the Pauli exclusion principle.
ferromagnetic Composed of magnetic 
atoms that all have the same mag-
netic orientation within a magnetic 
domain.
fi eld A structure that associates a physi-
cal quantity with each point in space 
and time.
fi rm Having a large spring constant and 
thus experiencing large restoring 
forces in response to small distortions.
fi rst law of thermodynamics The law 
of conservation of energy.
fi ssionable Able to undergo induced 
fi ssion.
fl uid A substance that has mass but 
no fi xed shape. A fl uid can fl ow 
to match its container. Gases and 
liquids are both fl uids.
fl uorescence An emission of light that 
immediately follows an absorption 
of light.
f-number The ratio of a lens’s focal 
length to its effective aperture.
focal length The distance after a con-
verging lens at which the real image 
of a distant object forms. The focal 
length of a diverging lens is negative 
and is the distance before the lens at 

470 
Glossary
which the virtual image of a distant 
object forms.
forward biased A p-n junction in which 
the voltage of the p-type semicon-
ductor has been raised relative to the 
voltage of the n-type semiconductor.
freezing The phase transformation in 
which a liquid becomes a solid.
frequency The number of cycles com-
pleted by an oscillating system in a 
certain amount of time. The SI unit 
of frequency is the hertz.
frequency modulation (FM) A tech-
nique for representing sound or data 
by changing the exact frequency of 
a wave.
friction The force that resists relative 
motion between two surfaces in 
contact. Frictional forces are exerted 
parallel to the surfaces in the direc-
tions opposing their relative motion.
fundamental forces The four basic 
forces that act between objects in 
the universe: the gravitational force, 
the electromagnetic force, the strong 
force, and the weak force.
fundamental vibrational mode The 
slowest and often broadest vibration 
that an extended object can support.
gamma rays Extremely high-energy 
photons of electromagnetic radia-
tion, often produced during radioac-
tive decays.
gas A form of matter consisting of tiny 
individual particles (atoms or mol-
ecules) that travel around indepen-
dently. A gas takes on the shape and 
volume of its container.
gaseous In a gas phase.
general theory of relativity The physi-
cal rules governing all motion, even 
motion involving speeds comparable 
to the speed of light and occurring in 
the presence of massive objects.
gradient A gradual change in some phys-
ical quantity near a given position; 
a vector quantity that points in the 
direction of fastest increase in that 
physical quantity and has a magni-
tude that is the rate of that increase.
gravitational constant The fundamen-
tal constant of nature that deter-
mines the gravitational forces two 
masses exert on one another. Its 
value is 6.6720 × 10−11 N ∙ m2/kg2.
gravitational mass The mass associated 
with the gravitational attraction be-
tween objects.
gravitational 
potential 
energy The 
potential energy stored in the gravi-
tational forces between objects.
gravity The gravitational attraction of 
the mass of Earth, the moon, or a 
planet for bodies at or relatively near 
its surface. All objects exert gravita-
tional forces on all other objects.
greenhouse effect An increase in sur-
face temperature that occurs when a 
material impedes radiative heat loss 
by that surface or its environment.
ground state The lowest energy confi gura-
tion of a system; its electrons (or other 
particles) are in the arrangement of 
quantum waves (e.g., orbitals or lev-
els) that has the least possible energy.
half-life The time needed for half the 
nuclei of a particular radioactive iso-
tope to undergo radioactive decay.
hard magnetic material A material 
that is relatively diffi cult to mag-
netize and that retains its magneti-
zation once the magnetizing fi eld is 
removed. Hard magnetic materials 
are suitable for permanent magnets.
harmonic An integer multiple of the 
fundamental frequency of oscilla-
tion for a system. The second har-
monic is twice the frequency of the 
fundamental, and the third harmonic 
is three times the frequency of the 
fundamental. In principle, harmon-
ics can continue forever.
harmonic oscillator An oscillator in 
which the restoring force on an object 
is proportional to its displacement 
from a stable equilibrium. The period 
of a harmonic oscillator doesn’t de-
pend on the amplitude of its motion.
heat The energy that fl ows from one ob-
ject to another as a result of a differ-
ence in temperature between those 
two objects.
heat capacity The amount of heat that 
must be added to an object to cause 
its temperature to rise by 1 unit.
heat engine A device that converts ther-
mal energy into work as heat fl ows 
from a hot object to a cold object.
heat exchanger A device that allows heat 
to fl ow naturally from a hotter ma-
terial to a colder material without any 
actual exchange of those materials.
heat pump A device that pumps heat 
against its natural direction of fl ow, 
transferring it from a cold object to a 
hot object. To satisfy the second law 
of thermodynamics, a heat pump 
normally converts some ordered 
energy into thermal energy.
Heisenberg uncertainty principle A 
quantum physical law that states 
that an object’s position (a particle 
characteristic) and momentum (a 
wave characteristic) can’t be sharply 
defi ned at the same time. This 
principle gives objects with small 
masses a fuzzy character.
henry (H) The SI unit of inductance. A 
1-henry inductor will experience a 
1-ampere change in the current fl ow-
ing through it each second when sub-
jected to a 1-volt voltage drop.
hertz (Hz) The SI unit of frequency (syn-
onymous with cycle per second).
higher-order 
vibrational 
mode A 
vibrational mode that is more com-
plicated than the fundamental mode 
and in which different parts of the 
extended system move in opposite 
directions.
Hooke’s law The general law covering 
spring and elastic behavior. Hooke’s 
law states that a spring exerts a 
restoring force that is proportional 
to the distance the spring is distorted 
from its equilibrium length.
horizontal polarization An electromag-
netic wave in which the electric fi eld 
always points left or right (horizon-
tally). The magnetic fi eld always 
points vertically.
ideal gas law The law relating the pres-
sure, temperature, and particle den-
sity of an ideal gas. An ideal gas is 
one that is composed of perfectly 
independent particles. The particles 
don’t stick, and they bounce perfectly 
from one another.
image distance The distance between 
the lens and the image that the lens 
creates. Real images form at positive 
image distances, while virtual images 
form at negative image distances.
impedance A measure of a system’s 
opposition to the passage of a cur-
rent or a wave.

Glossary 471
impedance mismatch An abrupt change 
in the opposition to a wave’s passage, 
typically accompanied by refl ections.
impulse The mechanical means for 
transferring momentum. One object 
gives an impulse to a second object 
by exerting a certain force on the 
second object for a certain amount 
of time. In return, the second ob-
ject gives an equal but oppositely 
directed impulse to the fi rst object.
in phase The relationship between two 
waves in which they complete the 
same portions of their oscillatory 
cycles at the same time and place.
incandescence The emission of thermal 
radiation from a hot object.
incoherent light Light consisting of 
individual photons, each its own in-
dependent electromagnetic wave.
incompressible A substance that doesn’t 
change density signifi cantly as its 
pressure changes. Liquids and sol-
ids are incompressible, since their 
densities change very little as their 
pressures change dramatically.
index of refraction The factor by which the 
speed of light in a material is reduced 
from its speed in empty space, equal 
to the speed of light in empty space 
divided by light’s speed in the material.
induced drag The drag force that occurs 
when a wing defl ects the stream of 
air passing across it to obtain lift.
induced emf (electromotive force) An 
overall voltage difference between 
the ends of a coil produced by a 
changing magnetic fi eld in that coil 
and the resulting electric fi eld.
induced fi ssion A fi ssion event that’s 
caused by a collision, usually with 
a neutron.
inductance The voltage drop across 
an inductor divided by the rate at 
which current through that inductor 
is changing with time. The SI unit of 
inductance is the henry.
inductor An electronic component that 
stores magnetic energy in a coil of 
wire and opposes changes in current 
in that wire.
inelastic collision A collision in which 
some of the kinetic energy present 
before the impact is no longer pres-
ent as kinetic energy after the impact.
inert gas A gas consisting of atoms that 
are chemically inactive and rarely 
bond permanently with other atoms 
or molecules. Inert gases include 
helium, neon, argon, krypton, and 
xenon.
inertia A property of matter by which it 
remains at rest or in uniform motion 
in the same straight line unless acted 
on by some outside force.
inertial Moving because of inertia alone 
and therefore not accelerating.
inertial frame of reference A frame of 
reference that is not accelerating 
and is thus either stationary or trav-
eling at constant velocity. The laws 
of motion accurately describe any 
situation that is observed from an 
inertial frame of reference.
inertial mass The mass associated with 
an object’s inertia, its resistance to 
acceleration.
infrared light Invisible light having 
wavelengths longer than about 750 
nanometers.
insulator A solid in which the Fermi 
level falls within a band gap.
interference A wave phenomenon in 
which waves passing through the 
same location from different direc-
tions reinforce or oppose one another.
interference pattern A pattern of inten-
sity variations in time and space that 
occurs when two or more waves are 
superposed and experience construc-
tive and destructive interferences.
internal energy The sum of an object’s 
thermal energy and any additional 
potential energy stored entirely 
within the object.
internal kinetic energy The portion of 
an object’s kinetic energy that in-
volves only the relative motion of 
particles within the object and that 
excludes the object’s overall transla-
tion or rotation.
internal potential energy The portion 
of an object’s potential energy that 
involves only forces between par-
ticles within the object and that 
excludes the object’s interactions 
with its surroundings.
isotopes Chemically 
indistinguishable 
atoms containing nuclei that differ 
only in their numbers of neutrons.
joule (J) The SI unit of energy and work 
(synonymous with newton-meter). 
Lifting 1 liter of water upward 10 
centimeters near Earth’s surface 
requires about 1 joule of work.
joule per kilogram-kelvin (J/kg ∙ K) The 
SI unit of specifi c heat.
joule per second (J/s) The SI unit of 
power (synonymous with watt).
Kelvin (K) The SI scale of absolute tem-
perature, in which 0 K is defi ned as 
absolute zero. The spacing between 
units is the same as that used in the 
Celsius scale.
Kepler’s fi rst law All planets move in 
elliptical orbits, with the sun at one 
focus of the ellipse.
Kepler’s second law A line stretching 
from the sun to a planet sweeps out 
equal areas in equal times.
Kepler’s third law The square of a plan-
et’s orbital period is proportional to 
the cube of that planet’s mean dis-
tance from the sun.
kilogram (kg) The SI unit of mass. (The 
standard kilogram is a platinum–
iridium cylinder kept at the Interna-
tional Bureau of Weights and Mea-
sures near Paris.) A liter of water has 
a mass of about 1 kilogram.
kilogram per meter3 (kg/m3) The SI 
unit of density. One kilogram per 
meter3 is about the density of air 
at 2000 m (about 1 mile) above sea 
level.
kilogram-meter per second (kg ∙ m/s) 
The SI unit of momentum. One kilo-
gram-meter per second is about the 
momentum in a baseball traveling 
25 km/h (16 mph).
kilogram-meter per second2 (kg ∙ m/s2) 
The SI unit of force (synonymous 
with newton).
kilogram-meter2 (kg ∙ m2) The SI unit 
of rotational mass. One kilogram-
meter2 is roughly the rotational mass 
of your forearm as it pivots about 
your elbow.
kilogram-meter2 per second (kg ∙ m2/s) 
The SI unit of angular momentum. 
One kilogram-meter2 per second is 
about the angular momentum of a 
7.3 kg (16 lbm) bowling ball spin-
ning 34 times/second as it rolls 
down the lane.

472 
Glossary
kinetic energy The form of energy con-
tained in an object’s translational 
and rotational motion.
laminar fl ow Smooth, predictable fl uid 
fl ow in which nearby portions of the 
fl uid remain nearby as they travel 
along.
laser amplifi er A device that amplifi es 
weak incoming light to produce 
brighter outgoing light. The outgo-
ing light is a brighter copy of the 
incoming light.
laser medium An assembly of excited 
atoms or other quantum systems 
that is capable of amplifying passing 
light through stimulated emission.
laser oscillator A laser amplifi er that is 
surrounded by mirrors so that it can 
amplify one or more spontaneously 
emitted photons to form an intense 
beam of coherent light.
latent heat of evaporation The heat re-
quired to transform a unit mass of 
material from liquid to gas without 
changing its temperature.
latent heat of fusion Latent heat of 
melting.
latent heat of melting The heat required 
to transform a unit mass of material 
from solid to liquid without chang-
ing its temperature.
latent heat of vaporization Latent heat 
of evaporation.
law of conservation of energy The 
change in a stationary object’s inter-
nal energy is equal to the heat trans-
ferred into that object minus the work 
that object does on its surroundings. 
This fi rst law of thermodynamics is 
a restatement of energy conservation.
law of entropy The entropy of a thermally 
isolated system of objects never de-
creases. This second law of thermo-
dynamics recognizes that creating dis-
order is easy; restoring order is hard.
law of thermal equilibrium Two ob-
jects that are each in thermal equi-
librium with a third object are also 
in thermal equilibrium with one an-
other. This zeroth law of thermody-
namics is the basis for a meaningful 
system of temperatures.
laws of thermodynamics The four laws 
that govern the movement of heat 
between objects.
lens A transparent optical device that 
uses refraction to bend light, often 
to form images.
lens equation The equation relating a 
lens’s focal length to the object and 
image distances.
Lenz’s law When a changing magnetic 
fi eld induces a current in a conduc-
tor, the magnetic fi eld from that 
current opposes the change that in-
duced it.
lever arm The directed distance from 
the pivot or axis of rotation to the 
point at which the force is exerted.
lift forces Forces exerted by a fl uid on a 
solid that are at right angles to the 
fl uid fl ow around that solid.
light Short-wavelength electromagnetic 
waves, including visible, infrared, 
and ultraviolet light.
linear momentum A conserved vector 
quantity that measures an object’s 
motion. It is the object’s mass times 
its velocity. The SI unit of linear 
momentum is the kilogram-meter 
per second.
liquid A form of matter consisting of 
particles (atoms or molecules) that 
are touching one another but are free 
to move relative to one another. A 
liquid has a fi xed volume but takes 
the shape of its container.
longitudinal wave A wave in which the 
underlying oscillation is parallel to 
the wave itself.
Lorentz force The force experienced 
by a charged particle when it moves 
through a magnetic fi eld.
lumen A common unit of total radiated 
light as perceived by a human eye.
luminescence The emission of light by any 
means other than thermal radiation.
magnetic dipole A pair of equal but op-
posite poles separated by a distance.
magnetic domains Regions of uniform 
alignment within a magnetic ma-
terial.
magnetic fi eld An attribute of each point 
in space that exerts forces on mag-
netic poles. A magnetic fi eld has a 
magnitude and direction propor-
tional to the force it would exert on 
a unit of north magnetic pole at that 
location. The SI unit of magnetic 
fi eld is the tesla.
magnetic fl ux lines Abstract strands 
following along the local magnetic 
fi eld direction and having a density 
proportional to that local fi eld. Flux 
lines can only begin at north poles 
and end at south poles.
magnetic induction The process whereby 
a time-changing magnetic fi eld initi-
ates or infl uences an electric current.
magnetic monopole An isolated mag-
netic pole, either north or south. 
None has ever been observed.
magnetic polarization A distribution of 
magnetic poles that is nonuniform so 
that the object has a region of north 
pole and a region of south pole.
magnetic pole A property of nature that 
gives rise to magnetostatic forces 
between magnetic poles. A specifi c 
pole can have a positive amount 
of magnetic pole (a north pole) or 
a negative amount (a south pole). 
The SI unit of magnetic pole is the 
ampere-meter.
magnetized When a material’s magnetic 
polarization is nonzero.
magnetostatic force The force expe-
rienced by a magnetic pole in the 
presence of other magnetic poles.
magnitude The amount of some physi-
cal quantity.
Magnus force A lift force experienced by 
a spinning object as it moves through 
a fl uid. The Magnus force points 
toward the side of the ball moving 
away from the onrushing airstream.
mass The property of a body that is a 
measure of its inertia or resistance to 
acceleration, that is commonly taken 
as a measure of the amount of ma-
terial it contains, and that causes it to 
have weight in a gravitational fi eld. 
The SI unit of mass is the kilogram.
mechanical 
advantage The 
process 
whereby 
a 
mechanical 
device 
redistributes the amounts of force 
and distance that go into performing 
a particular amount of mechanical 
work.
mechanical wave A natural and often 
rhythmic motion of an extended 
object about its stable equilibrium 
shape or situation.
melting The phase transformation in 
which a solid becomes a liquid.

Glossary 473
melting 
temperature The 
tempera-
ture at which a material’s solid and 
liquid phases can coexist in stable 
equilibrium.
metal A solid in which the Fermi level 
falls within a band of levels.
meter (m) The SI unit of length or dis-
tance. (One meter is formally defi ned 
as the distance light travels through 
empty space in 1/299,792,458 of a 
second.) One meter is about the length 
of a long stride, or about 3.28 feet.
meter per second (m/s) The SI unit of 
velocity or speed. One meter per 
second is a typical walking pace, or 
about 2.2 mph.
meter per second2 (m/s2) The SI unit of 
acceleration. One meter per second2 
is about the acceleration of an eleva-
tor as it fi rst begins to move upward.
meter2 (m2) The SI unit of area. One 
square meter is about twice the area 
of an opened newspaper.
meter3 (m3) The SI unit of volume. One 
cubic meter is about the volume of a 
four-drawer fi le cabinet.
microwaves Electromagnetic waves with 
wavelengths between about 1 meter 
and 1 millimeter.
mode A basic pattern of distortion or 
oscillation.
molecule A particle formed from two 
or more atoms. A molecule is the 
smallest portion of a chemical com-
pound that retains the chemical 
properties of that compound.
moment of inertia Rotational mass.
momentum Linear momentum.
MOSFET A transistor in which the 
electric charge on a surface affects 
the electrical resistance of a channel 
for electric current. An abbrevia-
tion of metal-oxide-semiconductor 
field-effect transistor.
natural resonance A mechanical pro-
cess in which an isolated object’s 
energy causes it to perform a certain 
motion over and over again. The 
rate at which this motion occurs is 
determined by the physical charac-
teristics of the object.
net electric charge The sum of all 
charges on an object, both positive 
and negative. Positive charges in-
crease the net charge and negative 
charges decrease it. Net charge can 
be negative.
net force The sum of all forces acting on 
an object, considering both the mag-
nitude of each individual force and 
its direction. The magnitude of the 
net force is often less than the sum 
of the magnitudes of the individual 
forces, since they often oppose one 
another in direction.
net magnetic pole The sum of all poles 
on an object, both north and south. 
Since there are no isolated magnetic 
poles, an object’s net magnetic pole 
is always zero.
net torque The sum of all torques acting 
on an object, considering both the 
magnitude of each individual torque 
and its direction. The magnitude of 
the net torque is less than the sum 
of the magnitudes of the individual 
torques, since they often oppose one 
another in direction.
neutral Having zero net electric charge.
neutral equilibrium A state of equilib-
rium to which the object has no ten-
dency to return or not return if it’s 
disturbed. At equilibrium, the object 
is free of net force or torque. If the 
object is moved away from a neutral 
equilibrium, it will still be in equi-
librium.
neutrinos Chargeless and nearly mass-
less particles created during radioac-
tive decays and other nuclear events. 
They rarely interact with matter.
neutrons The electrically neutral sub-
atomic particles that, together with 
protons, make up atomic nuclei.
newton (N) The SI unit of force (syn-
onymous with the kilogram-meter 
per second2). The weight of 18 U.S. 
quarters is equal to about 1 newton. 
The common English unit of force, 
the pound, is about 4.45 newtons.
newton per ampere-meter (N/A ∙ m) 
The SI unit of magnetic fi eld (syn-
onymous with tesla).
newton per coulomb (N/C) The SI unit 
of electric fi eld (synonymous with 
volt per meter).
newton per meter2 (N/m2) The SI unit of 
pressure (synonymous with pascal).
newton-meter (N ∙ m) The SI unit of 
energy and work (synonymous with 
the joule). Also the SI unit of torque, 
exerted by a 1-newton force located 
1 meter from the axis of rotation. 
One newton-meter is about the 
torque exerted on your shoulder by 
the weight of a baseball held in your 
outstretched arm.
Newton’s fi rst law of motion An object 
that is free from all outside forces 
travels at a constant velocity, cov-
ering equal distances in equal times 
along a straight-line path.
Newton’s fi rst law of rotational mo-
tion An object that is not wobbling 
and is free from all outside torques 
rotates with constant angular velocity, 
spinning steadily about a fi xed axis.
Newton’s second law of motion An ob-
ject’s acceleration is equal to the force 
exerted on that object divided by the 
object’s mass. This equality can be 
manipulated algebraically to state 
that the force on the object is equal to 
the product of the object’s mass times 
its acceleration (Eq. 1.1.2).
Newton’s second law of rotational mo-
tion An object’s angular accelera-
tion is equal to the torque exerted on 
that object divided by the object’s 
rotational mass. This equality can be 
manipulated algebraically to state 
that the torque on the object is equal 
to the object’s rotational mass times 
its angular acceleration (Eq. 2.1.2). 
The law doesn’t apply to nonrigid or 
wobbling objects.
Newton’s third law of motion For every 
force that one object exerts on a sec-
ond object, there is an equal but op-
positely directed force that the sec-
ond object exerts on the fi rst object.
Newton’s third law of rotational motion 
For every torque that one object 
exerts on a second object, there is an 
equal but oppositely directed torque 
that the second object exerts on the 
fi rst object.
normal Directed exactly away from 
(perpendicular to) a surface. A line 
that is normal to a surface meets that 
surface at a right angle.
normal force Support force.
n-type semiconductor A semiconduc-
tor such as silicon that contains 
impurity atoms such as phosphorus, 
arsenic, antimony, or bismuth that 

474 
Glossary
place electrons in the semiconduc-
tor’s conduction level.
nuclear fi ssion The shattering of a 
heavy nucleus into smaller frag-
ments. During fi ssion, the positively 
charged fragments repel one another 
and release energy.
nuclear force An attractive force that 
binds nucleons together once they 
touch one another.
nuclear fusion The merging of two small 
nuclei to form a larger nucleus. Dur-
ing fusion, the nuclear force binds 
the nucleons together and releases 
energy.
nucleation The formation of an initial 
seed of one material phase in the 
midst of another material phase.
nucleon A general name given to the 
particles that make up atomic nuclei: 
protons and neutrons.
nucleus The positively charged central 
component of an atom, containing 
most of the atom’s mass and about 
which the electrons are arranged. 
Plural is nuclei.
object distance The distance between the 
lens and the object that it is imaging.
ohm (Ω) The SI unit of electrical resis-
tance. A 1-ohm resistor exhibits a 
voltage drop of 1 volt when 1 ampere 
of current fl ows through it.
ohmic Exhibiting a voltage drop that’s 
proportional to current, consistent 
with Ohm’s law.
Ohm’s law The observation that the volt-
age drop across an ordinary electrical 
conductor is proportional to both the 
electric current passing through it 
and to its electrical resistance.
open circuit An incomplete electric cir-
cuit where a gap in the electrical con-
ductors stops electric current from 
fl owing.
orbit The path an object takes as it moves 
in the presence of a centripetal force.
orbital An electron standing wave in 
an atom, one of the basic electron 
wave modes allowed in an atom by 
quantum physics.
orbital period The time required to 
complete one full orbit.
ordered energy Energy that can easily 
be used to do work.
oscillation A repetitive and rhythmic 
movement or process that usually 
takes place about an equilibrium 
situation.
out of phase The relationship between 
two waves in which they complete 
opposite portions of their oscillatory 
cycles at the same time and place.
parallel circuit (wiring arrangement) 
An arrangement in which the cur-
rent reaching two or more electric 
devices divides into separate parts 
to fl ow through those devices and 
then joins back together as it leaves 
them. Current experiences the same 
change in voltage in each device.
pascal (Pa) The SI unit of pressure (syn-
onymous with newton per meter2). 
Atmospheric pressure at sea level is 
about 100,000 pascals. A 1-millime-
ter-high water droplet exerts a pres-
sure of about 10 pascals on your hand.
Pascal’s principle A change in the pres-
sure of an enclosed incompressible 
fl uid is conveyed undiminished to 
every part of the fl uid and to the 
surfaces of its container.
Pauli exclusion principle An observed 
property of nature that indistinguish-
able Fermi particles must each have 
their own unique quantum wave.
period The time required to complete 
one full cycle of a repetitive motion.
permanent magnet An object that can 
be magnetized and that retains that 
magnetization for a long time.
permeability of free space The defi ned 
constant that relates two poles and 
the magnetostatic forces they exert 
on one another. Its value is 4π × 
10−7 N/A2.
phase A form of matter—notably solid, 
liquid, gas, and plasma.
phase equilibrium A situation in which 
two material phases coexist stably, 
neither one growing at the expense 
of the other.
phase transition A transformation from 
one material phase to another.
phosphor A solid that luminesces (emits 
light) when energy is transferred to 
it by light or by a collision with a 
particle.
photoconductor A solid that is an elec-
trical insulator in the dark but that 
becomes an electrical conductor 
when exposed to light of the correct 
wavelength.
photodiode A diode that permits cur-
rent to fl ow backward across the 
p-n junction when exposed to light. 
Light provides the energy needed to 
move charges across the junction’s 
depletion region in the wrong direc-
tion. The current fl owing in the re-
verse direction through a photodiode 
is proportional to the light intensity.
photoelectric effect The process in 
which an atom absorbs a photon in a 
radiative transition that ejects one of 
the electrons from the atom.
photon A particle or quantum of light 
having energy and momentum but 
no mass.
pitch The frequency of a sound.
Planck constant The fundamental con-
stant of quantum physics, equal to 
the energy of an object divided by 
the frequency of its quantum wave. 
It is about 6.626 × 10−34 J ∙ s.
plane polarized The quality of a light 
wave in which the electric fi eld (and 
the magnetic fi eld) fl uctuates back 
and forth in a plane as the light trav-
els through space.
plasma A gaslike phase of matter con-
sisting of electrically charged parti-
cles, such as ions and electrons. The 
strong electromagnetic interactions 
between its particles distinguish a 
plasma from a gas.
p-n junction The interface between an 
n-type semiconductor and a p-type 
semiconductor that gives the diode 
its unidirectional characteristic for 
electrons.
Poiseuille’s law The volume of fl uid 
fl owing through a pipe each second 
is equal to π/128 times the pressure 
difference across that pipe times the 
pipe’s diameter to the fourth power, 
divided by the pipe’s length times 
the fl uid’s viscosity.
poles Objects that carry a magnetic pole.
population inversion A nonequilibrium 
population of quantum systems in 
which more are in a higher energy 
state than in a lower energy state.
position A vector quantity that specifi es 
the location of an object relative to 

Glossary 475
some reference point. It consists of 
both the length and the direction from 
the reference point to the object.
positron The antimatter counterpart of 
the electron. The positron is posi-
tively charged.
potential energy The stored form of 
energy that can produce motion. 
Potential energy is stored in the 
forces between or within objects.
potential gradient The rate at which 
an object’s potential energy would 
increase if it were to move toward 
increasing potential energy along 
the steepest slope.
precession The change in orientation of 
a spinning object’s rotational axis 
that occurs when it’s subject to an 
outside torque.
pressure The average amount of force that 
a fl uid exerts on a certain region of sur-
face area. Pressure is reported as the 
amount of force divided by the surface 
area over which that force is exerted. 
The SI unit of pressure is the pascal.
pressure drag The drag force that 
results from higher pressures at the 
front of an object than at its rear.
pressure gradient A distribution of pres-
sures that varies continuously with 
position.
pressure potential energy  A fl uid’s 
volume times its pressure. However, 
this energy isn’t really stored in the 
fl uid. Instead, it’s energy that’s pro-
vided by a pump (or other source) 
when the fl uid is delivered.
primary colors of light The three col-
ors of light (red, green, and blue) 
that are sensed by the three types 
of color-sensitive cone cells in our 
eyes. Mixtures of these three colors 
of light can make our eyes perceive 
any possible color.
primary colors of pigment The three 
colors of pigment (cyan, magenta, 
and yellow) that absorb the three 
primary colors of light (red, green, 
and blue, respectively). Mixtures of 
these three pigments can be applied 
to a white surface to make it refl ect 
any possible mixture of the three pri-
mary colors of light and thus to make 
our eyes perceive any possible color.
principle of equivalence The principle 
that gravitational mass and inertial 
mass are truly identical and there-
fore that no experiment you can per-
form in a small region of space can 
distinguish between free fall and the 
absence of gravity.
protons The positively charged subatomic 
particles found in atomic nuclei.
p-type semiconductor A semiconductor 
such as silicon that contains impu-
rity atoms such as boron, aluminum, 
gallium, indium, or tellurium that 
remove electrons from the semicon-
ductor’s valence levels.
quanta The fundamental, discrete units in 
which an item is emitted, absorbed, 
or otherwise observed, refl ecting the 
particulate character of that item.
quantized Existing only in discrete units 
or quanta. Quantized physical quan-
tities are observed only in integer 
multiples of the elementary quantum.
radian The natural unit in which angles 
are measured. There are 2π radians 
in a full circle, so 1 radian is 180/π 
degrees or approximately 57.3°.
radian per second (1/s) The SI unit of 
angular velocity or angular speed. 
An object turning at 1 radian per 
second completes a full revolution 
in just less than 6.3 seconds.
radian per second2 (1/s2) The SI unit of 
angular acceleration.
radiation The transmission of heat 
through the passage of electromag-
netic radiation between objects.
radiation trapping The phenomenon 
in which a particular wavelength 
of light has trouble propagating 
through a material that eagerly ab-
sorbs and emits it. The light passes 
from one atom or atomlike system 
to the next and makes little headway.
radiative transition The shift of an 
atom or atomlike system from one 
state to another through the emis-
sion or absorption of an electromag-
netic wave.
radio 
waves Electromagnetic 
waves, 
usually with wavelengths longer than 
about 1 m.
radioactive 
decay The 
spontaneous 
decay of a nucleus into fragments.
Rayleigh scattering The redirection of 
light due to its interaction with small 
particles of matter.
real image A pattern of light, projected 
in space, that exactly reproduces the 
pattern of light at the surface of the 
original object. A real image forms 
after the lens that creates it and can 
be projected onto a surface.
rebound energy The amount of kinetic 
energy returned to two objects as 
they push apart following a collision.
refl ection The redirection of all or part 
of a wave so that it returns from a 
boundary between media.
refraction The bending of a wave’s path 
that occurs when the wave crosses a 
boundary between media and expe-
riences a change in speed.
relative humidity The actual humidity 
as a percentage of the humidity re-
quired to achieve phase equilibrium 
between liquid and gaseous water.
relative motion The movement of one 
object from the perspective of an-
other object. Two objects that are 
moving relative to one another have 
different velocities.
relativistic energy An object’s energy 
according to the relativistic laws of 
motion and including its rest energy.
relativistic laws of motion The laws of 
motion in the special theory of rel-
ativity. They correct defi ciencies in 
the Newtonian laws of motion that 
appear primarily at speeds compara-
ble to the speed of light.
relativistic 
momentum An 
object’s 
momentum according to the relativ-
istic laws of motion.
resistor An electronic component that 
impedes the fl ow of electric current, 
converting some of its energy into heat.
resonant cavity A simple resonant cir-
cuit consisting of a carefully shaped 
conducting strip or shell and equiv-
alent to a capacitor and an induc-
tor. Energy fl ows back and forth 
between the cavity’s electric and 
magnetic fi elds.
resonant energy transfer The gradual 
transfer of energy to or from a natu-
ral resonance caused by small forces 
timed to coincide with a particular 
part of each oscillatory cycle.
restoring force A force that acts to return 
an object to its equilibrium shape. A 
restoring force is directed toward 

476 
GLOSSARY
the position the object occupies 
when it’s in its equilibrium shape.
reverse biased A p-n junction in which 
the voltage of the p-type semiconduc-
tor has been lowered relative to the 
voltage of the n-type semiconductor.
Reynolds 
number A 
dimensionless 
number that characterizes fl uid fl ow 
through a system. At low Reynolds 
numbers, a fl uid’s viscosity domi-
nates the fl ow, while at high Reynolds 
numbers, a fl uid’s inertia dominates.
right-hand rule The convention that 
establishes the specifi c direction 
of an object’s angular velocity. Ac-
cording to this rule, if the fi ngers of 
your right hand are curled to point in 
the direction of the object’s rotation, 
your thumb will point in the direc-
tion of the angular velocity.
root mean square (RMS) voltage A 
measure of AC voltage defi ned as 
the DC voltage that would cause the 
same average power consumption in 
an ohmic device.
rotational equilibrium The state of an 
object in which zero net torque acts 
on it. An object that has constant 
angular momentum is in rotational 
equilibrium.
rotational inertia A property of matter 
by which it remains at rest or in 
steady rotation about the same rota-
tional axis unless acted on by some 
outside torque.
rotational mass The property of a body 
that is a measure of its rotational 
inertia. An object’s rotational mass 
is determined by its mass and by 
how far that mass is from the axis 
of rotation. The SI unit of rotational 
mass is the kilogram-meter2.
rotational motion Motion in which an 
object rotates about an axis. The ori-
entation of an object undergoing only 
rotational motion will change, but its 
position will remain unchanged.
saturated In phase equilibrium with an-
other material phase. The gaseous 
phase of a material is saturated when 
it is in phase equilibrium with that 
material’s liquid and/or solid phase.
scalar quantity A quantity, characteriz-
ing some aspect of a physical sys-
tem, that consists only of a magni-
tude. It has no direction in space.
second (s) The SI unit of time. (One sec-
ond is formally defi ned as the dura-
tion of 9,192,631,770 periods of the 
radiation corresponding to the tran-
sition between two hyperfi ne levels 
of the ground state of the cesium 
133 atom.)
second law of thermodynamics The 
law of entropy.
semiconductor An insulator with a small 
band gap, so only a modest amount 
of energy is needed to shift an elec-
tron from an occupied valence level 
to an unoccupied conduction level.
series circuit (wiring arrangement) An ar-
rangement in which the current reach-
ing two or more electric devices fl ows 
sequentially through one device after 
the next before leaving them. Current 
may experience different changes in 
voltage in the different devices.
shell A group of atomic orbitals having 
similar energies.
shock wave A narrow region of high 
pressure and temperature that forms 
when the speed of an object through 
a medium exceeds the speed at 
which sound, waves, or other vibra-
tions travel in that medium.
short circuit A defect in a circuit that 
allows current to bypass the load it’s 
supposed to operate.
SI 
units 
(Systéme 
Internationale 
d’Unités) A system of units that 
carefully defi nes related units accord-
ing to powers of 10. SI units are now 
used almost exclusively throughout 
most of the world, with the notable 
exception of the United States.
signal An electrical or optical represen-
tation of information.
simple harmonic motion The regular, 
repetitive motion of a harmonic 
oscillator. The period of simple 
harmonic motion doesn’t depend on 
the amplitude of oscillation.
sliding friction The forces that resist 
relative motion as two touching 
surfaces slide across one another.
soft Having a small spring constant and 
thus experiencing small restoring 
forces in response to large distortions.
soft magnetic material A material that 
is relatively easy to magnetize and 
that loses its magnetization once the 
magnetizing fi eld is removed. Soft 
magnetic materials are suitable for 
electromagnets.
solid A form of matter consisting of 
particles (atoms or molecules) that 
touch and that are not free to move 
relative to one another. A solid has a 
fi xed volume and shape.
sound In air, sound consists of density 
waves, patterns of compressions and 
rarefactions that travel outward from 
their source at the speed of sound.
space The three spatial dimensions in 
our universe that separate events 
from one another according to dis-
tances and directions.
special theory of relativity The physi-
cal rules governing all motion, even 
motion involving speeds compara-
ble to the speed of light.
specifi c heat The amount of heat that 
must be added to a 1-unit mass of a 
material to cause a 1-unit rise in its 
temperature. The SI unit of specifi c 
heat is the joule per kilogram-kelvin.
speed A measure of the distance an ob-
ject travels in a certain amount of 
time. The SI unit of speed is the me-
ter per second.
speed of light The speed with which 
an electromagnetic wave travels 
through space. In empty space, a 
vacuum, the speed of light is exactly 
299,792,458 m/s.
speed of sound The speed at which 
sound’s compressions and rarefactions 
travel in a medium such as air or water.
spontaneous emission of radiation 
Light emission that occurs when 
an excited atom or atomlike system 
releases stored energy randomly 
through a radiative transition. The 
photon that results is independent 
and unique.
spring constant A measure of the stiff-
ness of an elastic object; the spring 
constant relates the object’s distor-
tion to the restoring force it exerts. 
The larger the spring constant, the 
stiffer the spring.
springlike force A force that is propor-
tional to displacement, consistent 
with Hooke’s law.
sputtering Ejection of atoms from a 
surface caused by the impact of 

Glossary 477
energetic ions, atoms, or other tiny 
projectiles.
stable equilibrium A state of equilibrium 
to which an object will tend to return 
if it’s disturbed. At equilibrium, the 
object is free of net force or torque. 
If the object is moved away from its 
stable equilibrium state, however, 
the net force or torque that will then 
act on it will tend to return it to that 
equilibrium state.
stall Condition in which a fl uid fl ow 
stops and spoils steady-state fl ow. 
In the aerodynamic fl ow around an 
airfoil, stalling refers to airfl ow sep-
aration triggered by a stall in the 
fl ow near the airfoil’s surface.
standard 
units Agreed-on 
amounts 
of various physical quantities that 
defi ne a system in which those 
quantities are subsequently measured.
standing wave A wave in which all the 
nodes and antinodes remain in place.
state A possible arrangement of elec-
trons (or other particles) in a quan-
tum system.
static friction The forces that resist rel-
ative motion as outside forces try to 
make two touching surfaces begin to 
slide across one another.
static stability An object’s stability 
when it’s not in motion.
static variation Change in a physical 
quantity such as pressure that is not 
caused by motion.
steady-state fl ow A situation in a fl uid 
where the characteristics of the fl uid 
at any fi xed point in space don’t 
change with time.
Stefan–Boltzmann constant The con-
stant of proportionality relating 
a surface’s radiated power to its 
emissivity, temperature, and surface 
area. It has a measured value of 5.67 
× 10−8 J/(s ∙ m2 ∙ K4).
Stefan–Boltzmann law The equation 
relating a surface’s radiated power 
to its emissivity, temperature, and 
surface area.
stiffness A measure of how rapidly a 
restoring force increases as the sys-
tem exerting that force is distorted.
stimulated emission of radiation Light 
emission that occurs when an excited 
atom or atomlike system releases 
stored energy through a radiative 
transition by duplicating a photon 
passing through that system.
streamline The path followed by a par-
ticular portion of a fl owing fl uid.
streamlined Carefully tapered so that 
the fl uid fl owing around it doesn’t 
stall and doesn’t experience fl ow 
separation or pressure drag.
strong force The fundamental force that 
gives structure to nuclei and nucleons 
and is the basis for the nuclear force.
subatomic particles The fundamen-
tal building blocks of the universe, 
from among which atoms and mat-
ter are constructed.
subcritical mass A portion of fi ssion-
able material that is too small to sus-
tain a chain reaction.
sublimation The process by which at-
oms or molecules go directly from 
a solid to a gas.
superconductor An electrical conductor 
that permits electrons to fl ow with-
out losing any of their kinetic energy 
to thermal energy. Electrons will 
continue to fl ow in a superconduc-
tor indefi nitely. Materials become 
superconducting only at extremely 
low temperatures.
supercritical mass A portion of fi ssion-
able material that is well in excess of 
a critical mass so that it undergoes 
an explosive chain reaction.
superheated Above 
the 
temperature 
at which a phase transition should 
have occurred. Superheating results 
from a failure to nucleate the new 
phase.
superposition The overlapping of two 
or more waves so that their ampli-
tudes add together and they form a 
combined wave.
support force A force that is exerted 
when two objects come into con-
tact. Each object exerts a force on 
the other object to keep the two 
from passing through one another. 
Support forces are always normal, 
or perpendicular, to the surfaces of 
objects.
surface area The extent of a two-dimen-
sional surface bounded by a partic-
ular border. The SI unit of surface 
area is the meter2.
surface waves Disturbances in the sta-
ble equilibrium shape of a surface.
sympathetic vibration The transfer of 
energy between two natural reso-
nances that share a common fre-
quency of oscillation.
tank circuit A simple resonant circuit con-
sisting of a capacitor and an inductor. 
Energy fl ows back and forth between 
these two devices repetitively.
temperature A measure of the average 
internal kinetic energy per particle 
in a material. In a gas, temperature 
measures the average kinetic energy 
of each atom or molecule.
tension Outward forces on an object that 
tend to stretch it.
terminal velocity The velocity at which 
an object moving through a fl uid 
experiences enough drag force to 
balance the other forces on it and 
keep it from accelerating.
tesla (T) The SI unit of magnetic fi eld 
(synonymous with newton per 
ampere-meter).
test charge An idealized positive charge 
that has no electric fi eld of its own and 
thus no infl uence on its surroundings.
thermal conductivity The measure of a 
material’s capacity to transport heat 
by conduction from its hotter end to 
its colder end.
thermal energy A disordered form of 
energy contained in the kinetic and 
potential energies of the individual 
atoms and molecules that make up 
a substance. Because of its random 
distribution, this disordered energy 
can’t be converted directly into useful 
work. Other names for thermal en-
ergy include internal energy and heat.
thermal equilibrium A situation in 
which no heat fl ows in a system 
because all the objects in the system 
are at the same temperature.
thermal motion The random motions of 
individual particles in a material due 
to the internal or thermal energy of 
that material.
thrust A forward, propulsive force ob-
tained when a rocket pushes stored 
fuel backward; a forward propulsive 
force obtained when a propeller, jet 
engine, or other device pushes sur-
rounding fl uid or material backward.

478 
GLOSSARY
tidal forces The differences between 
one celestial object’s gravity at par-
ticular locations on the surface of 
a second object and the average of 
that gravity for the entire second ob-
ject. Tidal forces tend to stretch the 
second object into an egg shape.
timbre The mixture of tones in an in-
strument’s sound that are character-
istic of that instrument.
torque An infl uence that if exerted on 
a free body results chiefl y in an 
angular acceleration of the body. A 
torque is a vector quantity, consist-
ing of both the amount of torque and 
its direction. The SI unit of torque is 
the newton-meter.
total internal refl ection Complete refl ec-
tion of a light wave that occurs when 
that wave tries unsuccessfully to 
leave a material with a large refractive 
index for a material with a small re-
fractive index at too shallow an angle.
traction The largest frictional force that 
an object can obtain in its present 
situation.
trajectory The path taken by an object 
as it moves.
transformer A device that uses mag-
netic fi elds to transfer electric power 
from one circuit to another circuit. 
The two circuits are electrically 
isolated since no charges actually 
travel between the two circuits.
transistor An electronic component that 
allows a tiny amount of electric charge, 
either moving or stationary, to control 
the fl ow of a large electric current.
translational motion Motion in which 
an object moves as a whole along a 
straight or curved line.
transmutation 
of 
elements Chang-
ing the atoms of one element into 
another via nuclear processes that 
alter the numbers of protons in their 
nuclei.
transverse wave A wave in which the 
underlying oscillation is perpendic-
ular to the wave itself.
traveling wave A wave that moves 
steadily through space in a particu-
lar direction.
trough A peak negative excursion of an 
extended system that is experienc-
ing a wave.
tunneling The quantum process in 
which small objects (which, be-
cause of the Heisenberg uncertainty 
principle, have somewhat ill-defi ned 
positions) 
occasionally 
move 
through energy barriers to places 
they can’t reach classically.
turbulence The unpredictable swirls 
and eddies of turbulent fl uid fl ow.
turbulent fl ow Irregular, fl uctuating, 
unpredictable fl uid fl ow in which 
nearby portions of the fl uid quickly 
become widely separated.
ultraviolet light Invisible light having 
wavelengths shorter than about 400 
nanometers.
uniform circular motion Motion at a 
constant speed around a circular tra-
jectory. An object undergoing uni-
form circular motion is accelerating 
toward the center of the circle.
unstable equilibrium A state of equi-
librium to which the object will 
tend not to return if it’s disturbed. 
At equilibrium, the object is free of 
net force or torque. If the object is 
moved away from its unstable equi-
librium state, however, the net force 
or torque that will then act on it will 
tend to accelerate it further away 
from that equilibrium state.
valence band The group of quantum 
levels in an insulator that lies below 
the Fermi level.
valence level A quantum level in an 
insulator that requires less energy 
than the Fermi level and that is nor-
mally occupied by electrons.
vector fi eld A structure that associates 
a vector quantity with each point in 
space and time.
vector quantity A quantity, charac-
terizing some aspect of a physical 
system, that consists of both a mag-
nitude and a direction in space.
velocity A vector quantity that measures 
the rate at which an object’s position 
is changing: the greater the velocity, 
the farther the object travels each sec-
ond. It consists of both the object’s 
speed and the direction in which the 
object is traveling. The SI unit of 
velocity is the meter per second.
vertical polarization An electromag-
netic wave in which the electric 
fi eld always points up or down (ver-
tically). The magnetic fi eld always 
points horizontally.
vibration A spontaneous repetitive and 
rhythmic movement about an equi-
librium position.
vibrational antinode A region of a vibrat-
ing object that is experiencing max-
imal motion.
vibrational node A region of a vibrating 
object that is not moving at all.
virtual image A pattern of light that 
appears to come from a particu-
lar region of space and reproduces 
the pattern of light at the surface of 
the original object. A virtual image 
forms before the lens that creates it 
and can’t be projected onto a surface.
viscosity The measure of a fl uid’s resis-
tance to relative motion within that 
fl uid.
viscous drag A drag force that results 
from viscous forces on a moving 
surface immersed in a fl uid.
viscous forces The forces exerted within 
a fl uid that oppose relative motion. 
Layers of fl uid that are moving 
across one another exert viscous 
forces on each other.
visible light Light having wavelengths 
between about 400 nanometers (vi-
olet) and 750 nanometers (red). This 
small portion of the electromagnetic 
spectrum is all that we are able to 
detect with our eyes.
volt (V) The SI unit of voltage (synony-
mous with joule per coulomb). The 
voltage on the positive terminal of a 
common battery is about 1.5 volts 
above that on its negative terminal.
volt per meter (V/m) The SI unit of 
electric fi eld (synonymous with 
newton per coulomb).
voltage drop The amount of electro-
static potential energy that each 
coulomb of positive charge loses in 
passing through a device. It’s equal 
to the voltage of the charges enter-
ing the device minus the voltage of 
the charges leaving that device.
voltage gradient A gradual slope in the 
voltage across a region of space. A 
voltage gradient is an electric fi eld.
voltage rise The amount of electrostatic 
potential energy that each coulomb 

Glossary 479
of positive charge receives in pass-
ing through a device. It’s equal to 
the voltage of the charges leaving 
the device minus the voltage of the 
charges entering that device.
volume The extent of a three-dimen-
sional region of space bounded by a 
particular enclosure. The SI unit of 
volume is the meter3.
vortex A whirling region of fl uid that is 
moving in a circle above a central 
cavity.
wake The trail left behind by an object 
as it moves through a fl uid.
wake defl ection force A lift force experi-
enced by a spinning ball when it de-
fl ects its turbulent wake to one side. 
The wake defl ection force points 
toward the side of the ball moving 
away from the onrushing airstream.
water hammer The impact of a moving 
mass of water that is suddenly 
stopped.
watt (W) The SI unit of power, equal to 
the transfer of 1 joule per second. 
One watt is the power used by the 
bulb of a typical fl ashlight.
wave velocity The speed and direction 
of the moving crests of a wave.
wavelength A structural characteristic of 
a wave, corresponding to the distance 
separating adjacent crests or troughs.
wave-particle duality The observation 
that everything in nature has both 
particle and wave characteristics. An 
item is primarily particle-like when 
it is emitted, absorbed, or otherwise 
observed and primarily wavelike as 
it travels through time and space.
weak force The fundamental force that 
allows electrons and neutrinos to 
interact and that’s responsible for 
beta decay.
weight (near Earth’s surface) The down-
ward force exerted on an object due 
to its gravitational interaction with 
Earth. An object’s weight is equal 
to that object’s mass times the accel-
eration due to gravity. The direction 
of the weight is always toward the 
center of Earth.
work The mechanical means of transfer-
ring energy. Work is defi ned as the 
force exerted on an object times the 
distance that object travels in the di-
rection of the force. A large force ex-
erted for a short distance or a small 
force exerted for a long distance can 
perform the same amount of work. 
The SI unit of work is the joule.
X-ray fl uorescence The process in 
which an electron in one of the outer 
orbitals of an atom undergoes a ra-
diative transition to an empty inner 
orbital, emitting an X-ray photon.
X-rays Very high-energy photons of 
electromagnetic radiation.
zeroth law of thermodynamics The 
law of thermal equilibrium.


 481
Index
A
Absolute temperature scales, 123
Absolute zero, 123
Acceleration
angular, 40
carousels and, 86–88
centripetal, 87
deceleration and, 6
defi ned, 5, 8
due to gravity, 13
examples, 6
experience of, 89–90
feeling of, 90
magnitude, 5
net force and, 8
in Newton’s second law of motion, 7
potential energy and, 69
roller coaster, 91
SI unit of, 11
Access ramps, 31
Achromat, 399
Action and reaction, 23
Activation energy, 178
Active learning experiments
Cartesian diver, 119–120, 140–141
disc in microwave oven, 332–333, 351
fog in a bottle, 208, 228
high-fl ying balls, 96, 117
magnifying glass camera, 392–393, 
422–423
moving water without touching, 
266–267, 300
nail and wire electromagnet, 
302–303, 330
radiation-damaged paper, 425, 458
removing a tablecloth from a table, 
1–2, 31
ruler thermometer, 173, 206
singing wineglass, 230–231, 263–264
spinning pie dish, 33, 70
splitting colors of sunlight, 353–354, 
390–391
swinging water overhead, 72, 94
vortex cannon, 142–143, 171
Adverse pressure gradient, 155
Aerodynamic forces, 153
Aerodynamics, 153
Aiming high, 21
Air
circulating, 169
as compressible, 121
as gas, 121
heat moving with, 180
sound in, 250–252
thermal motion, 121
vibrating, 247–248
volumes, 121
Air conditioners
chlorofl uorocarbons, 219
compressor and condenser coils, 218
cooling of indoor air, 216–217
experiments, 209
how they work summary, 228–229
ideal effi ciency and, 215
overview, 209
pumping heat against it’s natural fl ow, 
214–215
thermodynamics and, 209–212
warming of outdoor air, 217–219
window, in middle of room, 219
Air ducts, 146
Air guitar, 253
Airfoil, 161
Airplanes
experiments, 161
how they work summary, 172
jet engines, 169–171
lift production, 162–165
overview, 161
propellers, 167–169
stalling a wing, 165–167
streamlined wing, 161–162
stunt fl ying, 166
wings, 161–165
Airspeed, 154
Alpha decay, 433
Alternating current
coil of wire and, 17–18
defi ned, 315
electric motors, 328–329
generators, 326, 328–329
outlets, 316
power distribution, 325–327
power reversals, 316
Aluminum, X-rays and, 452
Ampere, 289
Ampère, André-Marie, 312
Amplifi ers
audio, 419–422
defi ned, 420
feedback, 420
input wires, 421
MOSFET-based, 422
rating, 421
voltage, 421
Amplitude, harmonic oscillator, 234
Amplitude modulation (AM), 340, 342
Analog representation, 404
AND gates, 419
Angle of attack, 164–165
Angular acceleration, 40
Angular impulses
angular momentum and, 66
defi ned, 65, 66
equation, 65
Angular momentum
angular impulse and, 66
defi ned, 64, 66
illustrated, 65
SI unit, 64
Angular position, 36
Angular speed, 36
Angular velocity, 36
Anharmonic oscillator, 237
Anode, 384
Antennas
halfwave dipole, 339
quarter-wave monopole, 339
receiver, 337–338
straight, 338
transmitter, 337, 339
Antimatter, 453
Antirefl ection coating, 399
Aperture, 396
Apogee, 110
Apparent weight, 90
Aquarium, 412
Archimedes’ principle, 126
Aristotle, 3
Atkinson cycle engine, 224
Atmosphere, Earth’s, 124–125
Atmospheric pressure, 125
Atomic bomb, 427
Atomic number, 369
Atoms
assembling, 369–370
collision, 176
defi ned, 121
electron standing waves in, 367–368
electrons, 269, 368
forces between, 175–176
neutrons, 269
nucleus, 269, 428, 430
protons, 269
Audio players
audio amplifi er, 419–422
computer, 418–419
digital sound information storage, 
416–417
experiments, 413–414
how they work summary, 423–424
overview, 413
transistors, 414–415
Audio signals, 419
Audio speakers, 350

482 
Index
Automobiles
batteries, 291, 293
diesel engines, 226
electric defrosters, 298
engine effi ciency, 223–224
engine effi ciency, improving, 224–225
experiments, 220
heat engines, 220–221
how they work summary, 229
internal combustion engine, 222–223
multicylinder engines, 227–228
overview, 219
power, cutting, 289
Axis of rotation, 37
B
Back emf, 319
Balance clocks, 237–239
Balanced forces, 25
Balanced objects, 44
Balanced seesaw, 44–45
Ball sports (air)
curveballs and knuckleballs and, 159–160
experiments, 153
fast moving ball, 155–157
golf ball dimples and, 157–159
how they work summary, 171–172
overview, 153
slow moving ball, 153–155
Ballooning weather, 128
Balloons
air/air pressure and, 121–122
experiments, 120
helium, 129–130
hot-air, 127–128
how they work summary, 141
lifting force on, 125–127
overview of, 120
what not to put in, 130
Balls
bouncing, 79
energy ratios, 81
falling, 12–21
golf, 157–159
high-fl ying, 96, 117
kinetic energy, 82
positively charged, 271
speed ratios, 81, 82
thrown, movement of, 19
tossing upward, 18–19
Band gaps, 379
Bandwidth, 341
Banked curves, 88
Banneker, Benjamin, 239
Bardeen, John, 414
Base of support, 99
Bathroom scales, 74, 78–79
Batteries
alkaline, 291
car, 291, 293
fl ashlight, 290–291
perspectives on, 290
radio, 294
Beam waist, 410
Becquerel, Antoine-Henri, 431
Bell, Jocelyn, 233
Bernoulli, Daniel, 135
Bernoulli’s equation, 135, 138, 152
Beta decay, 431, 454
Bicycle pedaling, 57
Bicycles
dynamic stability and, 100–101
exercise, 212, 329
experiments, 97
how they work summary, 117
leaning while turning, 101–102
overview, 97
pedaling, 102–104
slicing through air, 162
tricycles and, 97–99
Binary, 404–405
Black holes, 116
Blackbody spectrum, 197
Blacksmith, 199
Blending cold water, 211
Blu-ray players, 408–410
Boats, shifting cargo, 45
Boiling
defi ned, 190
temperature, 190
temperature, changing, 190–191
water, 189–191
Boltzmann constant, 130
Bottle, blowing across, 248, 249
Bouncing balls
bats and, 85–86
coeffi cient of restitution, 82
elastic/inelastic collisions, 81
experiments, 79
how they work summary, 95
lively, 81
moving surface and, 83
overview, 79
shape, 79
surface and, 82–83
Boundary layer, 153–155
Bowing strings, 245–246
Bowling balls, 9
Brahe, Tycho, 111
Brattain, Walter, 414
Breath, seeing, 189
Bremsstrahlung, 449
Brewster’s angle, 362–363
Bricks, 195
Bulbs, fl ashlight
choosing, 295–297
fi lament, 292–293
fi lament and current fl ow, 296
voltage drop, 295
Bumper cars
conserved quantities, 67
exchanging momentum in collisions, 
62–63
experiments, 59–60
glancing blows, 65–66
how they work summary, 71
linear momentum, 60–61
overview of, 59
spinning in circles, 64–65
Bungee jumping, 18
Buoyant force, 125–126
Burning rubber, 53
C
Calculus, 17
Calibration, spring scales, 77–78
Cameras
depth of focus, 396
experiments, 393
eyes and, 402–403
f-number, 398
focal length, 396–397
focusing, 395–396
how they work summary, 423
image sensors, 401–402
lens quality, 399
lenses and real images, 394–395
overview, 393
sunny versus overcast days and, 398
viewfi nder, 399–401
Candlelight, 355
Canoeing, 156
Capacitance, 287
Capacitors, 421
Capillary waves, 256
Carbohydrates, 178
Carbon, 430
Cardboard, cutting up, 43
Carlson, Chester F., 277
Carousels, 86–89, 95
Carrier frequency, 341
Cartesian diver, 119–120, 140–141
Cathode, 384
Cavendish, Henry, 108
CDs
aluminum layer, 407
density measurements, 405
encoding schemes, 406
player optical system, 408–410
Celsius, 123, 177
Center of gravity, 44, 45
Center of mass, 38, 45
Center of percussion, 85
Center of rotation, 38
Centripetal acceleration, 87
Centripetal force, 87, 88
Chadwick James, 431
Chain reactions, 432–433
Chandelier oscillation, 239
Chaotic system, 152
Characteristic X-ray, 449–450
Charge
on conducting object, 282
defi ned, 268
electric fi elds and, 283
elementary unit of, 269
net, 269
quantized, 269
separated, 287
SI unit, 268

Index 483
transferring, 271–272
voltage gradients and, 283
Chemical bonds, 121, 175–176
Chemical potential energy, 175–176, 271
Chemical reactions, 178
Chernobyl reactor, 444–445
Chlorofl uorocarbons, 219
Chromatic aberration, 399
Circular motion, 87
Circularly polarized, 409
Classifi ed physics, 426
Cleaning house, 150
Clocks
balance, 237–239
egg-timer, 233
electronic, 239–240
experiments, 231
how they work summary, 264
natural resonance, 232–233
overview, 231
pendulum, 233–237
time and, 232
Closed circuits, 288
CMOS NAND gate and inverter, 418–419
Coasting, 2, 3–4
Coaxial cable, 342
Coeffi cient of restitution, 82
Coeffi cient of volume expansion, 204
Coffee mug shape, 99
Coherent light, 387
Coin toss, 19
Collision energy, 80
Collisions
of atoms, 176
elastic, 81
exchanging momentum in, 62–63
inelastic, 81
speed, 84
Color temperature, 198
Colors
eye recognition of, 364–365
fi rework production of, 372
mixture of, 365
primary additive, 364–365
primary subtractive, 364–365
Compasses, 309–310
Components
defi ned, 19
forward, 19, 20
upward, 19–20
Compressible, 121
Compton scattering, 451, 453
Computed tomography (CT) scanner, 
451–452
Condensation, 187
Conduction
defi ned, 179
electrical, 275
thermal, 193–195
Conduction band, 380
Conduction level, 380
Cone cells, 364
Conserved quantities
angular momentum, 67
defi ned, 25
energy, 67
momentum, 62, 63, 67
Constructive interference, 263, 360
Convection
defi ned, 180
staying warm by impeding, 195–196
Convection cell, 180
Convection current, 180
Converging lens, 394
Conveyor belts, 276
Cooling, 216–217
Cordless telephones, 339
Corona discharge, 278–279, 284–285
Coulomb, 268
Coulomb constant, 270, 334
Coulomb’s law, 270
Coulomb’s law for magnetic poles, 305
Credit cards, 311
Critical mass, 433
Crocodile fl oating, 127
Crystalline, 184
Curie, Marie, 431
Curie, Pierre, 431
Current
alternating, 315–316
defi ned, 288, 289
direct, 314–315
direction, 289
eddy, 325
in fl ashlights, 289–290, 293–294
load, 321–322
magnetizing, 320–321
secondary, 323
SI unit, 289
Curveballs, 159–160
Cycle per second, 240
Cyclotron motion, 350
D
Davisson, Clinton Joseph, 367
de Cisternay du Fay, Charles-François, 268
de Coulomb, Charles-Augustin, 269
de Laval, Carl Gustaf, 106
de Laval nozzle, 106
Deceleration, 5
Decimal, 404
Degree of freedom, 182
Demagnetization, 308
Density
air pressure and, 122
particle, 129
SI unit, 123
Density gradients, 125
Depletion region, 382
Deposition, 189
Depth of focus, 396
Destructive interference, 263
Deuterium, 446
Diesel, Rudolph Christian Karl, 226
Diesel engines, 226–227
Diffraction, 409, 410
Digital representation, 404
Digital-to-analog converter (DAC), 419
Diodes
defi ned, 381
forward biased, 384
laser, 389–390
light-emitting, 384–385
photodiodes, 401–402
reverse biased, 384
Direct current (DC), 314–315
Direction, 3
Disc in microwave oven, 332–333, 351
Discharge lamps
defi ned, 365–366
experiments, 364
fl uorescent, 373–375
high-pressure, 375–377
how they work summary, 391
mercury, metal-halide, and sodium, 
375–377
neon, 371–372
overview, 363
plasma, 375
radiation trapping, 375
Discharges
corona, 278–279, 284–285
defi ned, 279
gas, 365–366
Dispersion
defi ned, 259, 263
refraction and, 359
Distance, 3
Diverging lens, 403
Domain walls, 308
Doppler effect, 252
Drag
induced, 163
pressure, 155, 156
propeller, 168
viscous, 154
Drag forces, 153
Drinking fountains, 218
Drop tower, 91
Drums, 249–250, 252–253
DVDs
encoding schemes, 406
layers, 407
player optical system, 408–410
structure of, 407–408
technology, 405–406
Dynamic memory, 417
Dynamic pressure variations, 147–148
Dynamic stability, 100
Dynamic variation, 132
E
Earth
atmosphere, 124–125
greenhouse effect, 205
magnetic poles, 309–310
moon distance measurement, 232
orbiting, 108–111
sunlight passage to, 356–357
temperature, 204–205
tidal forces, 254–255

484 
Index
Eddy currents, 325
Eiffel, Gustave, 156
Einstein, Albert, 114, 116, 386, 427
Elastic collisions, 81
Elastic limit, 76
Elastic potential energy, 76
Elastic scattering, 451
Electric charge. See Charge
Electric circuits
closed, 288
current, 289
defi ned, 288
open, 288
parallel, 298, 300
short, 288
Electric current. See Current
Electric defrosters, 298
Electric doorbell, 311–313
Electric fi elds
in conducting object, 282
defi ned, 279
fl ashlight light, 387
fl uorescent lamp, 283
microwave, 344
in microwave oven, 346
of motionless positive charge, 280
SI unit, 280, 283
sources of, 334
Electric phonographs, 317
Electric polarization, 270
Electric power distribution
AC electric generators and motors, 
328–329
alternating current, 315–316, 
325–327
alternating current and coil of wire, 
318–319
direct current, 314–315
experiments, 313
how it works summary, 330
magnetic induction, 317
overview, 313
transformers, 320–325
Electrical conductors, 275
Electrical insulators, 275
Electrical resistance
defi ned, 288
fi lament, 296
SI unit, 296
skin, 297
Electricity, 266–301
high voltages, 272–273
magnetism and, 334
static, 267–276
Electrochemical emf, 318
Electromagnetic spectrum, 197
Electromagnetic waves
defi ned, 180, 335
impedance mismatch, 358
propagation, 342
spectrum of, 342
sunlight and, 354–355
superposition of, 360
types of, 181
undulations and, 338
wavelengths, 197, 343–344
Electromagnets, 312
Electron standing waves, 367–368
Electron volt, 384
Electronic clocks, 239–240
Electron-positron pair production, 451, 453
Electrons
adding to fl oating gate, 417
arrangement in atoms, 370
defi ned, 179
electric charge and, 269
Fermi sea of, 378
medical, 281
migration, 382
as orbital, 368
in solids, 378–379
transfer of, 272
Electrostatic forces, 268, 270
Electrostatic potential energy, 272–273
Elementary unit of electric charge, 269
Elevator, 25
Energy
activation, 178
collision, 80
as conserved, 25, 27
defi ned, 25, 27
Fermi, 378
friction and, 52–53
gravitational potential, 26, 28–29
internal, 53
jet engines and, 171
kinetic, 26, 27, 57–58
law of conservation of, 210–211
magnetic fi elds and, 319
ordered, 51
potential. See potential energy
pressure and, 134–136
rebound, 80
relativistic, 115
thermal, 51–52, 174–175
Energy ratios, 81–82
Engines. See also Automobiles
Atkinson cycle, 224
cold, starting, 294
compression stroke, 223
diesel, 226–227
effi ciency, 223–224
effi ciency, improving, 264–265
four-stroke, 222
fuel-injected, 222
heat, 220–221
ignition temperatures for grades of 
gasoline, 225
intercoolers, 226
internal combustion, 222–223
multicylinder, 227–228
power stroke, 223, 224
premium fuel and, 225
steam, 222
supercharged, 226
turbocharged, 226
warm, starting, 295
English system of units, 10–12
Enhanced radiation bomb, 435–436
Enriched uranium, 440–442
Entropy
defi ned, 212
disorder and, 212–213
law of, 213
redistribution, 214
time and, 232
Equilibrium
defi ned, 75
motionlessness and, 79
neutral, 99
phase, 186–187
position, 75
rotational, 98–99
shape, 80
stable, 75, 98–99
thermal, 176–177
unstable, 99
Erbium-doped fi ber amplifi ers (EDFAs), 
412–413
Escape velocity, 111
Evaporation, 187
Excited state, 371
Exercise bicycles, 212, 329
Exhaust velocity, 106
Explosive chain reaction, 433
Exponential decay, 429
Eyeglasses, 402–403
Eyes, 402
F
Fahrenheit, 123, 177
Falling balls
acceleration, 13
experiments, 12
how they work summary, 32
overview, 12
position of, 16–17
projectile motion, 19–21
tossing ball upward and, 18–19
velocity of, 15–16
weight and gravity and, 13–14
Farad, 287
Faraday, Michael, 317
Fast fi ssion reactors, 443
Feeling of acceleration, 90
Fermi, Enrico, 431, 441
Fermi energy, 378
Fermi level
defi ned, 378
empty, 379
in insulators, 380
in metals, 379
Fermi particles, 369
Ferromagnetic material, 307
Field-effect transistor, 414, 415
Fields, 279. See also Electric fi elds
File cabinet, moving, 49–50
Fingers in electrical outlet, 316
Fireworks, 372
Firm springs, 76
First law of thermodynamics, 210–211

Index 485
Fission, nuclear, 431
Fission bomb, 432–435
Fission reactors
Chernobyl, 444–445
fast, 443
Fukushima Daiichi, 445
nuclear, 438–439
safety and accidents, 443
thermal, 440–442
Three Mile Island, 444
Windscale, 444
Fissionable, 432
Flash memory, 417
Flashlights
batteries, 290–291
bulbs, 292–293, 295–297
current, 293–294
electric circuit, 288
electric current, 288, 289–290
electric fi eld, 387
electricity and, 287–289
experiments, 287
how they work summary, 301
LED, 297–299
metal strips, 293
overview, 287
power, 293–294
voltage, 293–294
Flow
in bent hose, 147–149
heat, 194, 214
laminar, 150, 151, 153–155
smooth, in a stream, 155
in straight hose, 145–147
through nozzle, 149–150
turbulent, 150, 151, 155–157
Fluids
analysis of, 119
defi ned, 125
Earth’s atmosphere as, 125
motion and, 142–172
speed and pressure in, 149
steady-state fl ow, 135
viscosities of, 144
Fluorescence, 373
Fluorescent lamps
defi ned, 373
early, 373–374
phosphor blends, 374
plasma, 375
practical issues, 374–375
sputtering, 375
Flux lines, magnetic, 311, 312
F-numbers, 398
Focal lengths, 396–397
Focusing, 395–396
Fog in a bottle, 208, 228
Foil wrapping, 201
Food labeling, 74
Forces
aerodynamic, 153
affect on skaters, 7–8
between atoms, 175–176
balanced, 25
buoyant, 125–126
centripetal, 87, 88
defi ned, 4
drag, 153
electrostatic, 268, 270
equal, 8
frictional, 50
fundamental, 454
impact, 62
lift, 153
Lorentz, 349–350, 447
magnetostatic, 304, 309
Magnus, 159
momentum and, 63
net, 7
normal, 24
nuclear, 428–429
potential gradients and, 69
restoring, 75
SI unit of, 11
springlike, 242
strong, 454
support, 23–24
thrust, 105, 167
tidal, 254–255
torques and, 42–43
viscous, 144, 145, 147
wake, 159
weak, 454
Forward biased, 384
Four-stroke engines, 222
Frames of reference, 9–10
Franklin,, Benjamin, 268
Free space, permeability of, 305
Freezing, 186
Frequency
defi ned, 240
SI unit, 240
of sound, 241
of waves, 258
Frequency modulation (FM), 340–341
Friction
defi ned, 49
energy and, 52–53
microscopic view of, 50
sliding, 51
static, 51
traction and, 51
weight and, 51
Frictional forces, 50
Frisch, Otto, 431
Frozen fi ngers, 177
Fuel-injected engines, 222
Fukushima Daiichi reactor, 445
Fundamental forces, 454
Fusion
latent heat of, 186
nuclear, 431
Fusion bomb, 435–436
G
Galilei, Galileo, 3
Gamma rays, 453–454
Garden watering
dynamic pressure variations, 147–148
experiments, 143–144
fl ow in bent hose, 147–149
fl ow in straight hose, 145–147
fl ow through nozzle, 149–150
how it works summary, 171
overview, 143
turbulence and, 150–152
Gas discharges, 365–366
Gaseous, 184
Gases
defi ned, 121
helium, 130
ideal gas law, 130
inert, 121
pressure of, 130
General theory of relativity, 116
Geostationary satellites, 110
Germain, Sophie, 249
Golf balls, dimples on, 157–158
Gradients
defi ned, 68
density, 125
potential, 68–69
pressure, 125
voltage, 282–283
Gravitational constant, 109
Gravitational mass, 116
Gravitational potential energy
defi ned, 26
equation, 28
in water distribution, 138
Gravity
acceleration due to, 13
center of, 44–45
defi ned, 13
mass and, 14
moving water and, 138–140
pendulums and, 236
thermal energy and, 205
water pressure and, 136–138
Gravity waves, 256
Greenhouse effect, 205
Ground state, 371
H
Hahn, Otto, 431, 432
Half a fall, 15, 17
Half-life, 429
Halfwave dipole antenna, 339
Hanging grocery scales, 77–78
Hard disks, 417
Hard magnetic material, 308
Hard to turn, 42
Harmonic oscillators
amplitude, 234
balance clocks, 238
defi ned, 234, 235
importance of, 78
pendulum, 235–236
period, 234
stiffness, 234
violin strings as, 242

486 
Index
Harmonics, 245
Harrison, John, 239
Heat
defi ned, 177
fl ow, 194, 214
latent, 186
metal tray and cookies, 183
movement from fi re to room, 178
moving as light, 180–182
moving it around, 209–211
moving through metal, 179
moving with air, 180
pumping against natural fl ow, 214–215
SI unit, 182
specifi c, 182–183
steam, 227
temperature and, 176–177
wind and, 180
Heat capacity, 182
Heat engines, 220–221
Heat exchanger, 178
Heat packs, 179
Heat pumps
in appliances, 218–219
in cold weather, 215
defi ned, 219
diagram, 214
energy consumption, 216
heat engines and, 221
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, 429
Helium balloons, 129–130, 252
Henry, 336
Hertz, 240
Hertz, Heinrich Rudolph, 240
High dive, 16, 39
Higher-order vibrational modes, 244
High-fl ying balls, 96, 117
High-voltage wires, 328
Hooke, Robert, 75
Hooke’s law, 75, 76
Horizontal polarization, 337
Hot potatoes, 194
Hot-air balloons, 128–129
Humphry, Davy, 317
Hurricane kinetic energy, 59
Hydrogen, 227
Hydrogen bomb, 435–436
Hydrogen bond, 344
I
Ice. See also Water
as crystalline, 185
formation, 185
melting, 185
as solid, 184
stuck on, 61
subliming, 189
turning on, 48
Ice water, 187
Ideal gas law, 130
Image distance, 397
Image sensors, 401
Impedance, 358, 359
Impedance mismatch, 358, 359
Impulses
angular, 65–66
defi ned, 62, 63
equation, 62
Incandescence, 371
Incoherent light, 386
Incompressible, 133
Index of refraction, 356
Induced drag, 163
Induced emf, 318
Induced fi ssion, 431
Inductance, 336
Inductors, 318, 324
Inelastic collisions, 81
Inertia, 3, 36
Inertial frame of reference, 9
Inertial mass, 116
Infrared light, 355
Infrared sensors, 199
Insert gases, 121
Insulation. See also Warmth
electrical, 275
glass wool, 202–203
house, 202–203
how it works summary, 206–207
importance of, 192–193
materials, 202
windows, 203–204
Insulators, 380, 381
Interference
constructive, 263, 360
defi ned, 262, 263
destructive, 263, 360
pattern, 263–264
wave, 262–263
Internal combustion engines, 222–223
Internal energy, 53
Internal kinetic energy, 123
Internal potential energy, 123
Iron fi lings, 311
Isolation transformers, 323
Isotopes, 432
J
Jet engines. See also Airplanes
energy and, 171
ramjet, 170
turbofan, 170
turbojet, 169
Jewel movements, 56
Jones, David, 100
Joule, 28
Joule per kilogram-kelvin, 182
Joule per second, 56
Jump rope, 245
K
Kelvin scale, 123, 177
Kepler, Johannes, 111
Kepler’s fi rst law, 111–112
Kepler’s second law, 112–113
Kepler’s third law, 113
Kilogram per meter3, 123
Kilogram-meter per second, 60
Kilogram-meter per second2, 11
Kilogram-meter2, 39
Kilogram-meter2 per second, 64
Kilograms, 11
Kinetic energy. See also Energy
balls, 82
calculating, 57–58
defi ned, 26, 27
equation, 58
internal, 123
of rotational motion, 58
thermal, 204
Kneading energy, 57
Knuckleballs, 159–160
Kutta, M Wilhelm, 163
L
Laminar fl ow, 150, 151, 153–155
Laser amplifi er, 387, 388
Laser diodes, 389–390
Laser oscillator, 387, 388
Lasers
beam, 387–388
how they work summary, 391
ideal system, 388
laser light and, 386–387
medium, 387, 388–390
overview and experiments, 377
population inversion, 389
pumping, 389
warning, 377
Latent heat
of evaporation, 187
of fusion, 186
of melting, 186
of vaporization, 187
Latimer, Lewis Howard, 314
Law of conservation of energy, 210–211
Law of entropy, 213
Law of thermal equilibrium, 210
Law of universal gravitation, 109
Laws of thermodynamics, 210
LEDs
colors of, 384
defi ned, 384
fl ashlights, 297–299
how they work summary, 391
overview and experiments, 377
series, 385
as solid-state device, 378
wavelengths, 385
Lens equation, 397
Lenses. See also Cameras
antirefl ection coated, 399
aperture, 396
collimated, 409–410
converging, 394
defi ned, 394
diameter, 395–396
diverging, 403

Index 487
f-number, 398
focal length, 396–397
quality, improving, 399
real images and, 394–395
zoom, 399
Lenz’s law, 318
Lever arm, 43
Levers, 46
Lift
limits of, 165–167
wing production of, 162–165
Lift forces, 153
Light, 353–391
black objects and, 181
candlelight, 355
coherent, 387
cool, 204
heat moving as, 180–182
how we see, 364–365
incoherent, 386
index of refraction and, 356
infrared, 355
laser, 386–387
in optical fi ber, 412, 413
primary colors of, 364–365
speed of, 114, 115–116
spontaneous, 386
stimulated, 386
sunlight, 354–363
travel, 356
ultraviolet, 355
visible, 354
wavelengths of, 364
Lightning, 273, 283, 286–287, 334
Lightning rods, 285, 286
Linear accelerator, 455–456
Linear momentum, 60. See also Momentum
Lint, 281
Liquids, 184, 185
Load current, 321–322
Longitudinal wave, 248
Loop-the-loops, roller coaster, 91–94
Lorentz, Hendrik Antoon, 349
Lorentz force
in audio speakers, 350
cyclotron motion, 350
defi ned, 349
equation, 349
nuclear fusion reactors and, 447
Love, William T., 315
Lumen, 365
Luminescence, 371
M
Magnetic confi nement fusion reactors, 447
Magnetic cores, 325
Magnetic dipoles, 304
Magnetic domains, 307
Magnetic fi elds
defi ned, 309
energy and, 319
SI unit, 309
sources of, 334
Magnetic fl ux lines, 311, 312
Magnetic induction, 316
Magnetic monopoles, 304
Magnetic polarization, 306
Magnetic poles
Coulomb’s law for, 305
defi ned, 304
net, 304
SI unit, 305
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
defi ned, 456
functioning of, 456–457
illustrated, 457
magnetic fi eld, 313, 320
protons and, 457–458
spatial variation, 458
Magnetism
Coulomb’s law for, 305
defi ned, 304
electricity and, 334
Magnetizing current, 320–321
Magnetostatic force, 304, 309
Magnetron
creating microwaves with, 347–348
large, behavior of, 348
magnet, 348
powering, 348–349
Magnets
compasses and, 309–310
dropping, 319
electric doorbell, 311–313
experiments, 303–304
how they work summary, 330
iron fi lings and, 311
as limited energy sources 
misconception, 319
magnetron, 348
north pole, 309
overview, 303
permanent, 308
plastic sheet, 308
refrigerator, 304–305
two halves, 306
Magnifying glass, 395, 399, 401
Magnifying glass camera, 392–393, 422–423
Magnitude, 3, 5
Magnus force, 159
Manhattan Project, 433–434
Marbles, 82, 83, 84, 85
Mass
acceleration and, 8
center of, 38
critical, 433
defi ned, 5
gravitational, 116
gravity and, 14
inertial, 116
marbles and, 85
in Newton’s second law of motion, 7
rotational, 39
subcritical, 434–435
supercritical, 433
Mechanical advantage, 30, 46
Medical imaging and radiation
experiments, 448
gamma rays, 453–454
how it works summary, 459
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
456–458
overview, 448
particle accelerators, 455–456
X-rays, 448–453
Medical linear accelerator, 281
Meitner, Lise, 431, 432
Melting
defi ned, 185
latent heat of, 186
in microwave oven, 345
temperature, 185
Mercury lamps, 375–377
Merry-go-round, 42, 59, 67
Metal
Fermi level, 379
heat moving through, 179
in microwave oven, 346–347
rod, as harmonic oscillator, 240
small low-temperature emissivities, 201
Metal strips, fl ashlight, 293
Metal-halide lamps, 375–377
Metal-oxide semiconductor, 415
Meter per second, 11
Meter per second squared, 11
Meter2, 122
Meter3, 123
Meters, 11
Microwave ovens
disc in, 332–333, 351
electric fi elds in, 346
experiments, 343
how they work summary, 351–352
ice melting in, 345
magnetron, 347–350
metal in, 346–347
overview, 343
uneven cooking, 347
Microwave popcorn, 345
Microwaves
creating with magnetron, 347–348
defi ned, 344
electric fi eld, 344
food and, 343–345
Moderator, 440
Momentum
angular, 64–65
conservation of, 62, 63
defi ned, 60, 63
force and, 63
relativistic, 114
SI unit, 60
zero, 60
Moon, 14, 232
MOSFETs
conductivity, 417
fl ow of charge control, 416
n-channel, 414–416, 418
p-channel, 418–419
presence or absence of charge, 417
Mothballs, 189

488 
Index
Motion
circular, 87
of dangling seesaw, 36–37
fl uids and, 142–172
relative, 49
relativistic laws of, 114
rotational, 35, 37, 56–57
simple harmonic, 234
thermal, 121
translational, 35
Motors, electric, 328–329
Mountain biking, 29
Mountain travel, 125
Moving water
gravity and, 138–140
pressure and energy and, 134–136
without touching, 266–267, 300
Multicylinder engines, 227–228
Music, 241–242
Musical instruments
drum, 249–250
experiments, 241
how they work summary, 264
organ pipe, 247–249
overview, 241
piano strings, 263
sound and, 241–242
sound in air, 250–252
turning vibrations into sound, 252–253
vibrations from, 246
violin string, 242–246
N
Nail and wire electromagnet, 302–303, 330
NAND gates, 418–419
Natural resonance, 232–233
n-channel MOSFET, 414–416, 418
Neon, 371–372
Net electric charge, 269
Net force, 7, 75
Net magnetic pole, 304
Net torque, 40, 41
Neutral equilibrium, 99
Neutrinos, 454
Neutron bomb, 435–436
Neutrons, 269
Newton, 11
Newton, Sir Isaac, 4, 17
Newton per ampere-meter, 309
Newton per meter2, 122
Newton-meter, 28, 39
Newton’s fi rst law of motion, 4
Newton’s fi rst law of rotational motion, 37
Newton’s second law of motion, 7–8
Newton’s second law of rotational motion, 41
Newton’s third law of motion
balanced forces and, 25
defi ned, 22
universality of, 23
Newton’s third law of rotational motion, 
47–48
Normal forces, 24
Nozzle, fl ow through, 149–150
n-type semiconductors, 381
Nuclear candles, 442
Nuclear fi ssion, 431
Nuclear fi ssion reactors, 438–439
Nuclear force, 428–429
Nuclear fusion, 431
Nuclear fusion reactors, 446–447
Nuclear reactors
experiments, 438
fast fi ssion reactors, 443
how they work summary, 459
nuclear fi ssion reactors, 438–439
nuclear fusion reactors, 446–447
overview, 438
safety and accidents, 443–445
thermal fi ssion reactors, 440–442
Nuclear weapons
atomic bomb, 427
background, 426–427
chain reactions and fi ssion bomb, 
432–435
E = mc2 and, 427
experiments, 426
fi ssion and fusion and, 430–431
fi ssion bomb, 432–435
heat, radiation, fallout and, 437
how they work summary, 459
hydrogen bomb, 435–436
Manhattan Project, 433–434
overview, 426
radioactive decay and, 429
transmutation of elements, 437
Nucleation, 191
Nucleons, 428
Nucleus, atoms, 269, 428, 430
O
Object distance, 397
Octaves, 242
Oersted, Hans Christian, 312
Ohm, 296
Ohm, Georg Simon, 296
Ohmic, 296
Ohm’s law, 296–297
Oil slick, 362
Open circuits, 288
Open fi res, 178
Opera, 242
Optical fi ber
communication with, 412–413
core, 412
defi ned, 411
light in, 412, 413
technology, 410–412
total internal refl ection, 411
Optical technology
CDs, DVDs, Blu-rays, 407–408
communication, 412–413
digital recording, 405–406
digital representation, 404
experiments, 403
fi bers, 410–412
how it works summary, 423
overview, 403
player optical system, 408–410
Orbital area, 112–113
Orbital period, 108, 112
Orbitals. See also Atoms
defi ned, 367
electrons, 368, 369
identifi cation of, 370
shells, 369–370
Orbits
defi ned, 108
Earth, 108–111
elliptical, 111–112
geosynchronous, 110
Kepler’s fi rst law and, 111–112
lunar, 111
sun, 111–113
Ordered energy, 51
Organ pipe. See also Musical instruments
playing, 248–249
turning vibrations into sound, 253
vibrating air, 247–248
Oscillation, 233
P
Parallel circuits, 298, 300
Particle accelerators, 455–456
Particle density, 129
Pascal, 122
Pascal’s principle, 133–134
Pauli exclusion principle, 369
p-channel MOSFET, 418–419
Pedaling bicycles, 102–104
Pendulum clocks, 236–237
Pendulums
gravity and, 236
as harmonic oscillator, 235
motion illustration, 234, 235
as natural resonance, 233
oscillation, 233
period, 235–236
Perigee, 110
Period
harmonic oscillator, 234
pendulum, 235–236
Periodic table of elements, 370
Permanent magnets, 308
Permeability of free space, 305
Phase equilibrium, 186–187
Phase transition, 185
Phases of matter, 184–185
Phosphors, 373
Photoconductors, 276–277, 278, 381
Photodiodes, 401–402
Photoelectric effect, 451
Photoemission, 451
Photons, 371, 387, 388, 453
Piano
energy and, 25–26
lifting, 26–27
lifting with ramp, 29–31
on the sidewalk, 22–23
strings, 263

Index 489
Piezoelectric material, 240
Pitch, 241
Pitching, 27
Planck, Max, 372
Planck constant, 371–372
Plane polarized, 409
Plasma, 374
Plastic sheet magnets, 308
Plucking strings, 246
Plumbing, old, 147
p-n junction, 382, 384, 385
Poiseuille’s law, 145–146
Polarization
circular, 409
electric, 270
horizontal, 337
magnetic, 306
plane, 409
refl ection and, 362–363
vertical, 337
Polarization beam splitter, 409
Polarizing sunglasses, 362–363
Poles, 304
Population inversion, 389
Position
angular, 36
defi ned, 3
equilibrium, 75
of falling ball, 16–17
initial, 16
present, 16, 17
Positrons, 453
Pot handles, hot and cool, 180
Potential energy
acceleration and, 69
chemical, 175–176, 271
defi ned, 26, 27
elastic, 76
electrostatic, 272–273
examples of, 52
forms of, 52
gravitational, 26, 28–29, 138
internal, 123
pressure, 134
stable equilibrium and, 99
storage, 69
unstable equilibrium and, 99
Potential gradients, 68, 69
Power
equations, 57
in fl ashlights, 293–294
rotational work and, 56–57
SI unit, 56–57
water, 139
Prandtl, Ludwig, 155
Precession, 100
Pressure
atmospheric, 125
defi ned, 122
density and, 122
dynamic variation in, 132
energy and, 134–136
equation, 122
in fl uids, 149
of gases, 130
inside hot-air balloons, 128
SI unit, 122
static variation in, 132
water, 131–134, 136–138
Pressure drag, 154, 156
Pressure gradient, 125, 155
Pressure potential energy, 134
Primary colors of light, 364–365
Primary colors of pigment, 365
Principle of equivalence, 116
Product code scanning, 346
Projectile motion, 19–21
Propellers, 167–169
Protons, 269, 457–458
p-type semiconductors, 381
Pulling nails, 47
Pumping, laser, 389
Pumpkin chucking, 69
Pythagoras, 242
Q
Quanta, 371
Quantum physics, 366–367, 429
Quantum theory, 427
Quantum tunneling, 417
Quarter-wave monopole antennas, 339
Quarter-wave plate, 409
Quartz crystals, 240
Quartz oscillator, 239–240
R
Racing cars
airborne, 94
banked turns, 88
tight turns, 90
Radian per second, 36
Radian per second2, 40
Radians, 36
Radiation
defi ned, 181
forms of, 449
nuclear, 437
synchrotron, 450
thermal, 196–201
X-rays, 448–453
Radiation trapping, 375
Radiation-damaged paper, 425
Radiative transition, 371
Radio
AM, 340, 342
antennas, 335–337, 338–339
broadcasts, 343
experiments, 333
FM, 340–341
how it work summary, 351
overview, 333
reception, 339
transmitter, 337
volume control, 341
Radio waves
best reception and, 339
carrier frequency, 341
circularly polarized, 339
defi ned, 335, 343
high-frequency, 342
horizontal polarization, 337
particles in, 372
prelude to, 337–339
vertical polarization, 337
Radioactive decay, 429
Rainbows, 357–360
Raindrops, 359–360
Ramps
access, 31
benefi t of, 30
defi ned, 22
devices, 30–31
experiments, 22
how they work summary, 32
lifting piano with, 29–31
mechanical advantage, 30
overview, 21
Rayleigh scattering, 356–357
Reactors. See Nuclear reactors
Rebound energy, 80
Refl ecting pool, 363
Refl ection
defi ned, 260, 263, 358
polarization and, 362–363
total internal, 411
Refraction
defi ned, 260, 263, 358
dispersion and, 359
Refrigerators, 218
Relative humidity and, 188
Relative motion, 49
Relativistic energy, 115
Relativistic laws of motion, 114
Relativistic momentum, 114
Research accelerators, 456
Resistive heating, 347
Resistors, 296
Resonant cavities, 348
Resonant energy transfer, 246
Restoring force, 75
Reverse biased, 384
Reynolds number, 150, 157
Right-hand rule, 37
Rockets. See also Spacecraft
action and reaction in, 107
de Laval nozzle, 106
exhaust velocity, 106
how they work summary, 117
propulsion, 105–107
thrust, 105–107
Rod cells, 364
Roller coasters
acceleration, 91
experiments, 86
free fall, 91
how they work summary, 95
loop-the-loops, 91–94
with multiple cars, 93–94
overview, 86
tracks, 93
Rollers, 54, 55

490 
Index
Rolling coins, 101
Root mean square (RMS) voltage, 316
Rotation, center of, 38
Rotational equilibrium, 98–99
Rotational inertia, 36
Rotational mass, 39
Rotational motion
center of rotation, 38
defi ned, 35
kinetic energy of, 58
Newton’s fi rst law, 37
Newton’s second law, 41
Newton’s third law, 47–48
physical quantities of, 42
power and, 56–57
Rubbing, 272
Ruler thermometer, 173, 206
Rutherford, Ernest, 431
S
Sails, 165
Sandglass, 233
Satellites, 64, 65, 67, 110
Scalar quantity, 5
Screws, removing, 44
Sea
experiments, 254
how it works summary, 264–265
overview, 254
rhythm of the surf, 262–263
tidal resonances, 255–256
tides, 254–255
traveling waves, 257–258
water wave structure, 258–260
waves at shore, 260
Second harmonic mode, 245
Second law of thermodynamics, 213
Secondary current, 323
Seconds, 11
Seesaws
angular position, 36
angular velocity, 42–43
axis of rotation, 37
balancing and unbalancing, 44–45
center of mass, 38
dangling, motion of, 36–37
experiments, 34
heavy child-light child problem, 35
how they work summary, 70
lever arm, 43
levers and mechanical advantage and, 46
overview, 34
rotational motion, 35
torques and, 39–42
Seiches, 256
Semiconductors, 381
Separated charge, 287
Shells, 369
Shock waves, 169
Shockley, William, 414
Short circuits, 288
SI units
acceleration, 11
angular acceleration, 40
angular momentum, 64
angular position, 36
angular velocity, 36
capacitance, 287
current, 289
defi ned, 10–11
density, 123
electric charge, 268
electric fi eld, 280, 283
electrical resistance, 296
English units conversion, 12
English units versus, 11
force, 11
frequency, 240
heat, 182
inductance, 336
magnetic fi eld, 309
magnetic pole, 305
momentum, 60
power, 56
pressure, 122
surface area, 122
velocity, 11
voltage, 273
volume, 123
Signals, 419
Simple harmonic motion, 234
Singing wineglass, 230–231, 263–264
Skating
acceleration, 5–6
coasting, 2, 3–4
experiments, 2
forces affecting, 7–9
frames of reference, 9–10
gliding forward, 3–4
how it works summary, 31
overview, 2
Skidding, 52
Skiing, 102
Skin, electrical resistance, 297
Sliding friction
charge transfer and, 271–272
defi ned, 51
static friction versus, 51
Smoke jumpers, 201
Soap bubbles, 360–361
Sodium lamps, 375–377
Soft magnetic material, 308
Soft springs, 76
Solids, 184
Sound
in air, 250–252
defi ned, 241
envelope, 246
frequency of, 241
speed of, 251
turning vibrations into, 252–253
underwater, 252
Spacecraft
experiments, 104
orbiting Earth, 108–111
overview, 104
rocket propulsion, 105–107
space shuttle, 108
thrust, 105
travel to the starts, 114–116
ultimate speed of, 107–108
Special theory of relativity, 114
Specifi c heat, 182–183
Speed
angular, 36
collision, 84
defi ned, 3–4
in fl uids, 149
of light, 114, 115–116
ratios, 81, 82
spacecraft, 107–108
water pressure and, 149
Speed of sound, 169, 251
Spencer, Percy Lebaron, 344
Spinning
basketball, 38
in circles, 64–65
marbles, 41
merry-go-round, 40, 67
pie dish, 33, 70
satellites, 64, 65, 67
Splitting colors of sunlight, 353–354, 
390–391
Spontaneous emission of radiation, 386
Spontaneous light, 386
Sports car design, 159
Spray paint, 205
Spring constant, 75–76
Spring scales
bathroom, 74, 78–79
calibration, 77–78
experiments, 73–74
hanging, 77–78
how they work summary, 95
overview, 73
standing still on, 74
stretching springs and, 74–76
Springlike forces, 242
Springs, 76
Sputtering, 375
Stability
dynamic, 100–101
static, 97
Stable equilibrium, 75, 98–99
Stall, 155
Standard units, 10
Standing waves, 257, 258
States, 371
Static charge on car, 283
Static cling, Coulomb’s law and, 
269–271
Static electricity
accumulating huge static charges and, 
274–275
controlling, 275–276
defi ned, 268
electric charge, 268–269
experiments, 267
how it works summary, 301
overview, 267
separating clothes and, 272–273
shock, avoiding, 285

Index 491
sliding friction, 271–272
static cling, 269–271
Static friction
defi ned, 51
sliding friction versus, 51
wheels, 54, 55
Static stability
defi ned, 97
rotational, 97–98
translational, 97
Static variation, 132
Steady-state fl ow, 135, 148
Steam. See also Water
bubbles of, 190
condensing, 187–188
depositing, 189
as gaseous, 184
heat, 227
heat release, 188
saturated, 190
Steam engines, 222
Steel, magnetized, 307
Stefan-Boltzmann constant, 199
Stefan-Boltzmann law, 199, 200
Stellar tugboats, 115
Step-down transformers, 323, 324
Step-up transformers, 323, 324
Sticky tape, 272
Stiffness, 234
Stimulated emission of radiation, 386
Stimulated light, 386
Strassmann, Fritz, 431, 432
Streamline, 135
Strong force, 454
Stunt fl ying, 166
Subcritical mass, 434–435
Sublimation, 189
Suction, 122
Sun, orbiting, 111–113
Sunlight. See also Light
bending of, 358
electromagnetic waves and, 
354–355
experiments, 354
how it works summary, 391
oil or gasoline and, 362–363
overview, 354
passage to Earth, 356–357
polarizing sunglasses and, 362–363
rainbows and, 357–360
simulation of, 366
sky blue color and, 357
soap bubbles and, 360–361
splitting colors of, 353–354, 
390–391
wavelengths, 361
Superchargers, 226
Superconductors, 315
Supercritical mass, 433
Superheated, 191
Supernova, 433
Superposition, 245, 360
Support forces, 23–24
Surf, rhythm of, 262–263
Surface
bouncing, twisting, and bending, 85–86
bouncing balls and, 82–83
moving, bouncing balls and, 83–84
traveling waves on, 257–258
Surface area, 122
Surface waves. See also Sea; Waves
defi ned, 256
depth, 259
traveling, 257–258
Swing set, 236, 237
Swinging, 23
Swinging water overhead, 72, 94
Swings, 69
Sympathetic vibration, 246
Synchrotron radiation, 450
T
Tablecloth, removing from table, 1–2, 31
Tacoma Narrows Bridge, 246
Tank circuits, 336
Tea kettle, 188
Temperature
boiling, 190–191
color, 198
defi ned, 123
Earth, 204–205
emissivity and, 201
heat and, 176–177
ignition, grades of gasoline, 225
melting, 185
room, warming to, 124
Tennis, topspin lob, 160
Tension, 242, 244
Terminal velocity, 158
Tesla, 309
Test charges, 279–280
Thales of Miletus, 275–276
Theories, 427
Theory of relativity, 427
Thermal conductivity
defi ned, 179
different, 193
of materials, 194
staying warm by limiting, 193–195
Thermal energy
defi ned, 51–52
gravity and, 205
heat engines, 220–221
woodstove production of, 174–175
work and, 51
Thermal equilibrium, 176–177
Thermal fi ssion reactors, 440–442
Thermal kinetic energy, 204
Thermal motion, 121
Thermal radiation
electromagnetic waves, 197
in front of fi re, 196
staying warm by controlling, 200–201
Thermodynamics, 208–229
fi rst law of, 210–211
laws of, 210
second law of, 213
zeroth law of, 210
Thompson, Benjamin, 177
Three Mile Island reactor, 444
Throwing fastballs, 59
Thrust, 105, 167
Tidal forces, 254–255
Tidal resonances, 255–256
Tides. See also Waves
defi ned, 254
giant, 256
variation, 255
Timbre, 245, 258
Time, 232
Torques
angular impulse and, 65–66
bicycles and, 101
defi ned, 37
equation, 43
forces and, 42–43
impact, 66
net, 40, 41
seesaw response to, 39–42
SI unit of, 39
Tossing ball upward, 18–19
Total internal refl ection, 411
Traction, 51
Trains, 6, 61
Trajectory, 20
Trampolines, 250
Transformers. See also Electric power 
distribution
cooling fi ns, 325
defi ned, 317
illustrated, 326, 327
isolation, 323, 324
load current, 321–322
magnetizing current, 320–321
real, 324–325
secondary circuit, 327
step-down, 323, 324
step-up, 323, 324
as two coils together, 320–322
voltages, changing, 322–324
Transistors, 414–415
Translational motion, 35
Translational velocity, 40
Traveling waves
defi ned, 251
on surface of water, 257–258
Tricycles, 97–99, 102–103
Tritium, 435–436, 446
Troughs, 251
Tsunamis, 259
Tunneling, 429
Turbochargers, 226
Turbulence
defi ned, 150
onset of, 150–152
Turbulent fl ow
chaos, 152
defi ned, 150
determination, 151
pressure drag, 155
vortex, 152
Turning on ice, 48

492 
Index
U
Ultraviolet light, 355
Underwater sound, 252
Uniform circular motion, 87
Unstable equilibrium, 99
Uranium (U), 432–434, 440–442, 443
235 uranium (U), 432–434, 439, 440, 443
238 uranium (U), 432–433, 443
V
Valence band, 380
Valence level, 380
Van de Graaff generator, 274
Vaporization, 187
Vector fi eld, 279
Vector quantity, 3, 43
Velocity
angular, 36
average, 16
defi ned, 3–4, 8
escape, 111
exhaust, 106
of falling ball, 15–16
forward, 21
initial, 15, 19
present, 15
SI unit of, 11
terminal, 158
translational, 40
wave, 251
Vertical polarization, 337
Vibrational nodes, 85
Vibrations
defi ned, 239
drum, 249–250, 252–253
organ pipe, 247–248
overtone, 249
sympathetic, 246
turning into sound, 252–253
violin string, 242–246
Viewfi nders, 399–401
Views, 10
Violin bridge, 253
Violin strings. See also Musical instruments
bowing and plucking, 245–246
harmonics, 244–245
perpendicular oscillation, 243
tension, 242
turning vibrations into sound, 253
Virtual images, 400, 401
Viscosity
defi ned, 144
effect of, 145–146
of fl uids, 144
water, 144
Viscous drag, 154
Viscous forces, 144, 145, 147
Visible light, 354
Volt, 273
Voltage
amplifi er, 421
battery, 290
on conducting object, 282
defi ned, 273
drop, 293
equation, 273
in fl ashlights, 293–294
lightening, 273
rise, 294
root mean square (RMS), 316
SI unit, 273
transformer, changing, 322–324
Voltage gradients, 282–283
Voltage per meter, 283
Volume
air, 121
SI unit, 123
Vortex, 152, 166
Vortex cannon, 142–143, 171
W
Wake, 153
Wake force, 159
Walking, 12
Warmth. See also Insulation
by controlling thermal radiation, 200–201
by impeding convection, 195–196
by limiting thermal conduction, 193–195
on a windy day, 145
Warm-up pitches, 175
Water. See also Ice; Steam
boiling, 189–191
evaporating, 187–188
experiments, 184
freezing, 186
how it works summary, 206
as incompressible, 133
as liquid, 184, 185
moving, 134–136, 138–140
moving without touching, 266–267, 300
overview, 184
phases of, 184–185
relative humidity and, 188
steady-state fl ow, 135
streamline, 135
in strong electric fi eld, 344
superheated, 191
viscosity, 144
Water distribution
experiments, 131
gravity and, 136–140
how it works summary, 141
moving water and, 134–136
overview, 131
pressure and, 131–134
requirements, 131
Water hammer, 152
Water power, 139
Water pressure
in bent house, 147, 148
dynamic variation in, 132
energy and, 134–136
in the garden, 132
gravity and, 136–138
speed and, 149
static variation in, 132
up or out, 140
in water distribution, 131–132
with water pumps, 133–134
Water pumps, 133–134
Watts, 56
Watts, William, 17
Wave velocity, 251
Wavelengths, 197, 251
Wave-particle duality, 366
Waves. See also Tides
beneath, 259
breaking, 261
capillary, 256
dispersion, 259, 263
electron standing, 367–368
frequency of, 258
gravity, 256
interference, 263
out of phase, 263
in phase, 263
phenomena summary, 263
refl ection, 260, 263
refraction, 260, 263
seiches, 256
at shore, 260–262
slope of sea bottom and, 261
standing, 257, 258
structure of, 258–259
surface, 256
tsunamis, 259
Weak force, 454
Weight
apparent, 90
feeling of, 90
friction and, 51
gravity and, 13
“Weightlessness,” 111
Wheels
experiments, 49
fi ling cabinet movement and, 53–55
friction and, 49–53
how they work summary, 70–71
overview, 48
power and, 56–57
rollers, 54, 55
sliding friction, 54
static friction, 54, 55
Wind
heat and, 180
heat loss and, 196
on open road, 152
urban, 152
Windows, insulating, 203–204
Windscale reactor, 444
Wings, airplane
airfoil, 161
angle of attack, 164–165
blunt, 165
leading edge, 161
lift production, 162–165
stalling, 165–167
streamlined wing, 162
trailing edge, 161
vortex, 166

Index 493
Woodstoves
burning log, 174–175
conduction, 179
convection, 180
experiments, 174
how they work summary, 206
open fi res and, 178
overview, 174
radiation, 180–182
thermal energy, 174–175
warming the room, 182–183
Work
calculating, 26–27, 28
defi ned, 25, 27
equation, 26
thermal energy and, 51
Wrapper, negatively charged, 
271
Wrench magnetism, 310
Wright, Orville and Wilber, 168
X
Xerographic copiers
capacitors, 286–287
charging by induction, 285–286
corona discharge, 278–279, 
284–285
electric fi elds, 279–280
experiments, 276
getting ready to use, 285–286
how they work summary, 301
overview, 276
photoconductors, 276–277, 278
precharging, 277
sticky copies, 278
test charges, 279–280
xerography, 276–278
X-ray fl uorescence, 449
X-rays. See also Medical imaging and 
radiation
aluminum and, 452
characteristic, 449–450
defi ned, 449
for imaging, 451–452
making, 449–450
overview, 448–449
for therapy, 452–453
Z
Zero net force, 75
Zeroth law of thermodynamics, 210
Zoom lenses, 399

