How to Get Massive YouTube Traffic
Note:  The example quote in this guide is regarding adult files, but do not upload any adult file 
on ShareCash, it is against the ToS. You can use these tips and tricks on your normal video  
uploads, these can be implement on games video, fashion industry, cheats, keygens, music 
video etc. infact you can use this guide for all kind of videos you gonna upload on youtube..  
(read this guide 2-3 times and I am sure it will help you a lot In terms of gaining traffic from  
youtube. This guide is not partially written by me, or you can say that I just edited it little bit 
to make it understand easily, that is why this guide is Free of Cost ! Good Luck making money)
I  will try to be as short as possible, without any bullshit techniques, i have seen paid youtube 
reports trying to explain how to watermark a video, or 20 pages of explanations how to upload 
a video on youtube, that's lame.
I will not include here simple things like how to download videos from youtube, how to 
watermark them, or how to upload videos to youtube. If you feel that you need help with these 
ones, please ask and I will do my best to help you out.
Gaining views to your video
Importance of Titles:
Make money online - very bad title
Make 100 000 $ online - it is better
How i made 100 000$ online - it is even better
How i made 101 437$ online in just 2 weeks - i would say this is the best
Sexy girl - very bad title
Sexy girl stripping - better
Sexy girl stripping for you - even better
Sexy girl stripping in front of a policemen - i would say this is the best
Keep in mind: do not use generic terms or generic numbers for a title, since that would not be 
credible. Use more exact details and people will pay more attention.
Other catchy phrases: Oh my god, THIS is insane, the WORST signer ever, usually demand 
attention from user. Be sure to include capitalization in your title, but not a full title written in 
caps letters. Just highlight the most important ones.

You can also use misleading titles: For instance you upload a trailer, but say:
“See the FULL movie here” People will enter to see the video like crazy.
Or, lets say you have a simply sexy strip video: You use phrases like the one mentioned above:
“Sexy girl stripping in front of a policemen” even if your video may be just a simple strip one. 
The idea is to make the visitors watch the video. Later in the report you will see how you can 
benefit from it.
Importance of Tags
Write as many tags till they will tell you that you have reached the maximum number of 
characters possible. Simple as that. You can search for an existing video according to your 
niche/video over the youtube and here you can use the Tags used by others. So this will give 
you a idea that how you can shuffle good tags to get your video go viral which will produce 
more and more views for you.
Importance of Description
First thing your description should contain your url with http://www in front of him Then press 
enter 4-5 times.
Shitload of text here, take one of those keyword research tools that generates results on an 
input keyword and copy paste plenty of text here. So far, youtube search engine is based on 
descriptions but it does not penalize word spam so to speak. This will drastically improve your 
rankings in the youtube search engine.
Importance of Video Thumbnail
At youtube the thumbnail is just the picture from exactly the middle of the video. Pay attention 
to this, a bad thumbnail can spoil your video. On the other hand, there are people who got 
thousands of views just from the fact that they used a misleading but appealing picture in the 
middle of the video, which appeared as their thumbnail.
Be the first to upload
One of the secret of gaining youtube views is to be the first one to upload a potential viral 
video. For instance, be the first one to upload a new trailer of a movie or of a game. Be the first 
one to upload the highlights from champion leagues. Be the first one to upload the latest 
celebrities’ spoofs. Try to take new videos from other websites and upload them fast to 
youtube.

Use the youtube search feature and choose to rank the videos by the most recent uploaded. 
There you can see potential gem videos. Take them and reupload them and use proper tags 
description and titles to make them viral and surpass the original video.
You can use the same method but at another websites: see the most recent uploaded videos 
and reupload them at youtube with proper tags.
What i do. I search youtube for new sexy videos, when i see something good i download them 
and reupload them using extremely well defined tags, titles, and descriptions. After this, I go 
back and flag the original uploaded video from different accounts as being adult and breaking 
youtube TOS. Youtube removes that video and there is plenty of space for me to gain the views. 
Another trick from here: Have an established youtube account, old and with plenty of views. 
This way, if you upload a shady video, your account is not going to get banned, just the video 
will be removed.
If a new account uploads an adult video and is flagged, youtube tends to ban the account as 
well not only the video. If an established account uploads an adult video and is flagged, the 
video is removed, but the account is not deleted.
Another benefit of established youtube accounts is that you appear more often on related 
videos, or more videos by this user and you get more exposure.
How to get honours on youtube?
I have seen recently this only technique being sold for 19$. It is very simple and can be made in 
2 different ways:
The first one is to purchase a software on the market that auto comments and auto rates on 
your video. Tube automator, or tubeinator as I remember where doing this. You may want to 
check out in the forum for these scripts as well. You will get plenty of comments and 5 star 
rates on your video, so your video is going to be honoured as the most voted and the most 
discussed within its category.
The second one is too make multiple accounts and comment and rate your video manually. This 
might sound very hard, but the reality is that you need very less comments and stars to get 
featured as many people do not bother with this. It is useful sometimes as it can give your video 
straight thumbs up, but it is not an earth shaker.
Another thing that you can do is to appeal to the people sentiments in order to comment and 
star your video. For instance, if you have made a video about your dog, say in the video, if you 
liked this dog please rate and comment. If you put a sexy video say, if you like her, please rate 

and comment. If you have put a movie trailer, say if you have seen the movie, please rate and 
comment. This will increase the conversions to your website.
Now, as a matter of fact what are the videos that are usually viewed and go viral:
-sexy
-funny, comedy
-drama = shock, bad accidents, stuff like that
-cute = babies, pets, etc..
-latest games, movies, shows etc.
Why ONLY youtube? There are plenty of other videos websites.
How to convert viewers into visitors:
There are several facts that need to be keep in mind
-First one: COMPLETELY watermark the video with your url. This means from beginning till the 
end, not just beginning, not just the end, not just in the middle.
Completely. Because there will be other people who will just take your video, edit it and 
remove your credits, and then add their own credits in order to gain traffic. By completely 
watermarking the url, you avoid this.
-Second one: Make use of the TOS restrictions in order to drive traffic to your website. For 
instance youtube videos forbids the adult videos. You can just take a soft sexy video, and at the 
end of the video, say: “Youtube TOS forbids us from showing more. Please visit our site to see 
more”
Or you can just take an adult video, cut the introduction part where there is no nudity, and 
upload that one, with the same message. This is REALLY a killer, you will get plenty of traffic 
using it. Most of the users are looking for adult videos on youtube, but they can not find them. 
When you will display such a message, be sure they will become your visitors. You will learn 
more how to monetize the traffic and this kind of traffic later on in the report.
Or, another example: upload a trailer of a movie, this is legally, and at the end say:
“In order to see the full movie online, visit www.etc.com”. You will later learn how to monetize 
this kind of traffic.

-Third one: Give them just a little of what they want, and at the end of the video redirect them 
to your website to see everything. For instance, let s say you just upload a video of a kid walking 
on a street, when a bus is coming towards him. STOP it before the end, and display the 
message: YOU wanna see what happens next? Visit www. Etc. com
Another example: Upload a video of a people near a lion, crocodile, elephant, everything. 
Suddenly, the animal is getting nervous,- you can get plenty of such video on youtube, - and 
starts to attack the owner. You stop the video before the attack and say: You wanna see what is 
next? Visit www. Etc. com
Another example: lets say you just downloaded the highlights from a famous soccer game, all 
the goals and misses everything. Lets say the score was 3-2 . Cut the video and make separate 
video for each goal. And then upload each goal with the message at the end: if you want to see 
the full highlights and the other goals, visit us.
The examples are countless. You can check in the forum and share ideas with other people 
about what work, and what does not.
-Fourth one: Prolong the end of the video and watermark it with your url. What does that 
means? It means that at the end of the video , there will be like 30 seconds of a background 
and just your url displayed there. Why is this useful? Since at the end of the video, youtube and 
other websites display advertisements or related videos thumbnails. IF you just made a video 
trying to send your visitor to your website, and he sees those advertisments, he may be 
distracted. By putting a black blackground just with your url on it, you assure that nothing will 
distract your viewer, at least for the time he is looking there.
Thanks for reading this guide, I hope now you can give it a try according to this guide and can 
gain traffic. Make more and more youtube accounts, upload n re-upload the same video on all 
of your accounts with different title and tags. Keep your Comments settings (Approved Only) or 
you may completely close it. 
Good luck, From kse-101 (All time Top Earner on ShareCash.org)
Join under my Ref link to get more Tips on making money online 
Join SharCash.org with this link:      http://sharecash.org/index.php?ref=2886

