www.ebook3000.com

R0ll 10lll$ [AU[ Cop3lf;1l

OIllEl| UOHI$ BU
Ro]l lollt$ fllt[ mw G0D8Hn[
How to Succeed with Women (1998, Prentice-Holl Press)
How lo Succeed with Men (2000, Prentice-Holl Press)
Ihe Sex Lover's Book of Lists t2001, Prentice-Holl Press)
The Moslery Progrom: Your Step By St p Course in Meeting, Flirting
wilh, Doting ond Seducing the Women of Your Dreoms (Mostery
Technologies, lnc., 2001 )
The lnlernet Seduction Talkit (Mostery Technologies, lnc., 2001)
Avercoming ffie Nice Guy Syndrome: How to Stop Being Shy with-
out Bxoming o Je*Audio Course (Mostery Technologies, lnc.,
20021
Doting odvice ond free newsletter ot
www. howtosucceedwithwomen.com
The How to Talk to Women Companion CD
You moy be interested in the How to Tolk to Women Companion CD.
To moke this CD, we brought women into ihe studio ond flirted with
them, creoting Romontic Conversotions using the techniques from this
book. We then odded our commentory ond "ploy by ploy'' so you
cqn heor whot we ore thinking, ond how we ore deciding our nexl
streps os we do it! Check outwwwhowtosucceedwithwomen.com/tolk
to find out more obout this useful product!
RGfill0u10ru0ln01l[$
Our fomilies, Jim Lemmer, Deboroh Lowyer, Theophilus, Poul Schlegel,
Pele, Hotcher, Mike Krokolovich, Gene Brissey, Chod Gorcio,
Kirk Bromley, A. Gile, Dr. K, Scotlworld, Cliff Borry Allen Thompson,
Kristyn Kolnes, Chip Rowe, Leslie lshige, Suson Shermon, Mohommed
Ali, Dmitri Bilgere, Roon Koufrnon, ond Koren Krizonovich.
We'd olso like to thonk our friends ot Ployboy, Moxim, Stuff,
Cosmopoliton, Ployboy, Men's Heolth, Men's Fitness, ond YM mogo-
zines. Also to our friends ot fie Som Adoms Breweqy-thonks for the
good times!
R $p0$lt[ "Illillll u0ll"
Fl|Oln R0ll t0llt$ am 0il0 crDSlaIlD
We'd like to thonk you for reoding this book. To listen to o new, not-
tronscribed-in-this-book reol-life exomple of Louis & Copelond using
these flirting skills, go to
http://www. howlosucceedwithwomen.com/tol 
k
n
www.ebook3000.com

@ Copyright (2002) Mostery Technologies, lnc.
All rights reserved. No port of this book moy be reproduced in ony monner
whotever, including informotion storoge, or retrievol, in whole or in port
(except for brief quototions in orticles or reviews), without written permission
from the publisher.
For more informotion write to:
MosteryTechnologies, P.O. Box 55094, Modison, Wl 53705
Emqil: outhors@howtosucceedwilhwomen.com
Web: www. howtosucceedwithwomen.com
Louis, Ron
How to tolk to women / Ron Louis & Dovid Copelond. -
l st ed.
p.cm.
rsBN 0-971 9076-0-9
l. Doting (sociol customs)-United Stotes. 2. Women
- United Stotes- Psychology. 3. mon -womon relotionships
- United Stotes. 4. lnterpersonol communicostion - United
Stotes. L Copelond, Dovid, 1963- ll. Tide.
HA80r .168 2002
First printing 2002
Printed in Conodo
646.7',7
oBr33-726
ItBlE 0F C0ll[BllE$
cilaDEel| I
cilaDEBn 2
c[aDmP 3
SnaDEEn I
cilaDEEn 5
cilflp[Gl| 0
0[aD[8l| r
0[aDr8l| I
c[aDE8F g
0[tD[8I r0
c[00[0|| il
cil0DE0|| u
cltSDE0I t$
lntroduction
lnterrupting Women, Risk, Curiosity
ond Self-Expression
The Hi Progrom & Vitolity
The lnner Gome of Tqlking lo Women
Hondling Ponic ond Reiection
Around Women
Flirting,'lVhol,s the Story Behind Thot?"
Romontic Moves, Goodbye lntroduction
Situotionol Flirting
Deepening
Advonced Deepening
Romontic Questions, Port 1
Romontic Questions, Port 2
Toking Tolking Further
Conclusion
ll
55
77
r0r
127
141
163
l8'l
205
239
261
293
313
t
&,.

lllil'0[ll0il0ll
Mony men ore iust one skill owoy from hoving the kind of interoctions with
women thot they wont. Jocob wos on exomple of this. Thirty-four yeors
old, successfi.rl in his business, fit ond o shor;c dresser, he didn't understrcnd
why he wosn't more successful with women. He noticed thot his friends-
some of whom were sloppier, fotter ond less finonciolly successful-
seemed to be oble trc get women, but somehow he couldn't. He could tolk
tc women but olwoys ended up "iust friends." h wos discouroging.
Jocob thought he wqs miles ond miles owoy from his gool of being suc-
cessful with women; in focf, he wosn'l. He hod iust obout every skill he
needed to succeed with women ond o lot more, but he didn't know how
to tolk to women so they felt he wos "romontic moteriol." Thot wos the
one skill he wos missing. Once we tought him the bosic Flirting Moves
ond the skills of tolking to women, his level of success with them rose
dromoiicolly.
You moy hove o similor problem. Secretly, like Jocob, you moy hove
wondered if there wos something wrong with you. You moy hove
thought thot there's something obout you thot you couldn't see but thot
women could which drove them owoy. Or, like Jocob, you moy feor thot
you hove some bosic flow *rot continuolly sets you up lo be "iust friends"
wilh women.
The good news is thot nothing could be further from the hulh. Sure,
you've got problems. Eveqybody does. But os you've probobly seen,
plcnty of men with more problems thon you succeed with women. The
t
www.ebook3000.com

lll}lll $0 $ls T{ ls{t|l,en
good news is lhere's no bosic flow inside of you thot keeps you from
hoving the relotionship you desire. lf you con communicote ot oll, you
con creote romontic connections wifi women. You moy simply be one
skillowoy.
When you're one skill owoy from being o good seducer,you're like o cor
with one flot tire. A cor with one flot tire drives os though it hos some-
thing seriously wrong with it. lt's impossible to control, the ride is rough,
ond chonces ore you'll never gel where you wont to go in it. Driving it,
you'd be likely to conclude thot it hos serious, serious problems.
Once you reolize thot the problem is o flot tire, though, you see thot iust
becouse the problem wos noticeoble didn't necessorily meon thot it wos
fotol. By fixing the flot-o simple l0-minute procedure once you know
how to do it-you tronsform the entire cor ond con gel where you wont
to go eosily.
When Jocob leorned thot the flot tire in his doting system wos his inobil-
ity to tolk trc women in o woy thot mode them think romontic thoughts
obout him, he wos oble to correcl the problem ond his interoctions with
women improved instontly. He hod the missing piece ond wos qble to
seduce women.
Your problems, loo, moy not be os big os you thought. A simple set of
new skills moy moke oll the difference. lf you've ever leorned ony skill
then you con leorn how to tolk to women; you've simply never been
tought how before. l/s like leorning ony new procedure. Once you mos-
ter fie bosics, the rest seems eosy. This book will teoch you whot you
need to know
tr*sr!!*{iB&ifti
ullau u0ll'11 $al|ll tl'0ln IllH 800[
ln Chopter l, you'll leorn obout whot it tokes to initiote interqctions with
women. You'll leorn obout the imporlonce of "interrupting" women ond
being oble to redirect their ottenlion toword you. Mosl men foil ot this
becouse fiey don't know whot lo do once they hove o womon's otten-
tion; don't worry, we'll cover thot, too. You'll olso leorn qbout opportu-
nities ond the surprising lruth thot not toking opportunilies with women
con noturolly leod to toking them, if you do it our woy. You'll leorn obout
curiosity ond how you con top inlo your noturol curiosity with o womqn
to eosily creote slress-free conversotions in which you both experience o
reql connection with eqch other.
ln Chopbr 2,you'll leorn obout the Hi Progrom, which is the perfoct ploce
to sicrt building your skills in tolking to women. You'll olso leorn woys irc
increose your sense of vitolity ond excitement with women, including
simple woys to moke the sound of your voice something fiol women
enioy heoring.
However, only knowing whot to soy to women is not enough. You must
olso understond the "inner gome" of tolking to women, or you won't be
oble to get yourself to toke oction with them. ln Chopter 3, you'll leorn
how trc overcome your tendencies toword being defensive with women
ond opologizing for your inlerest in them, os well os woys of communi-
coting with women thot don't require worrying or strotegizing. ln
Chopter 4, yov'll enhonce your grosp of the inner gome of tolking to
women by leorning once ond for oll how to overcome the feor of being
rciected by women. You'll olso leorn how to hondle ponic oround
womon so you con use the skills in this book, even if you gel nervous.

fi8llr t0 nfi 10 lgom8n
ln Chopter 5, you'll leorn how lo leveroge the hidden seduciive power
of the simple queslion "Whofs the story behind thot?" You'll olso leorn
the three time-fromes of on interoction with o womon so you'll olwoys
know how much you need to risk with o womon ol ony given momenl.
ln Chopter 6, you'll leorn obout the Romontic Moves thot ore o criticol
port of tolking seduclively wilh women. You'll leorn obout looking inio o
womon's eyes "too long," checking out her body so she feels compli-
mented, winking ot her ond more. You'll leorn how o mqn who does
these Romontic Moves olmost never ends up "iust friends" with o
womon, ond you'll leorn why o womon lends to put o mon who mokes
these moves into the potentiol lover cotegory in her mind. You'll olso
leorn the Goodbye lntroduction, which is o simple, powerful, romontic
ond incredibly low-risk woy lo infoduce yourself to beoutiful women.
ln Chopter 7, yov'll leorn the specifics of Situotionol Fli*ing. You moy
hove noticed lhot men who ore successfi.rlwith women ore often good ot
ioking oround with women. They ore oble to kid with women obout dif-
brenl ospects of he situotions thot they find themselves in or obout obiects
in the immedioie environment. This is Situotionol Fli*ing. ln Choflrer 7,
you'll leorn the specific sleps of ioking oround with women ond wcys of
creoting romonlic, flirutious running iokes. You'll see specific exomples of
Situotionol Flirting ond leorn how tc do it yourself with the women you
encounler.
ln Chopters 8 ond 9, you'll leorn how to use the incredibly powerful
romonlic conversotion tool colled Deepening. Deepening is o converso-
tionol mode thot ollows you to get into o womqn's world ond find out
whol she's possionote obout. Deepening ollows q womon to open up to
you right owoy in o woy she moy nol open up to mony people in her
life. You'll leorn how to use Deepening to odmire o womon's possions,
which mony other people moy never see, lhus creoting o deep connec-
tion between you. You'll reod numerous octuol tronscripts of us hoving
Deepening Conversolions with reol women olongside our comments on
these exomples, so you con leorn how to opply this skill in your own li[e.
ln Chopters l0 ond 't I , you'll ieorn obout osking Romontic Questions
ond conducting Romontic Conversotions. You'll leorn how to osk
Romontic Questions in woys thot don't seem corny or intrusive but $ol
move lhe conversolion in o romontic direction. You'll reod numerous
octuol tronscripts of us osking Romonlic Questions ond conducting
Romonlic Conversolions. Our comments on these exomples will help you
leorn to proctice these skills when you flirt ond go on dotes.
ln Choptrer 12, you'll leorn obout toking tolking further: moving from o
flirting conversolion to getting o womon's phone number ond emoil
oddress to setting up o dote. You'll olso leorn importont secrets obout
going for the first kiss.
By the time you're through with this book, you will hove on entire tool-
box for tolking lo women in romonlic, flirtotious ond fun woys. These
skills ore specific ond they ore leqrnqble. With procfice, you will be oble
b use them successfully.
utuu,Iu!0motdufiunlh*--_
uus:10$til0ilrdultir!0lllil,0tr{ltll 
www.ebook3000.com

ll0ur t0 ftllr l0 lllmsn
il01[ il ll$0 ilil$ 800fi
There ore two types of communicotors. You must figure out which type
of communicotor you ore, becouse eoch type must proctice ond use the
skills in this book differently.
rflB lll[l|0uG||leD $0ln|nllnruam||
Most of our studenls, ond most of lhe men who ore ottrocled lo our work,
ore inlroverled communicotors. These ore men who cotegorize them-
selves os shy. They hove o hord time tolking with women ond ore more
likely to end up o wollflower thon the lih of the porty. These men often
hove no clue qbout whot to soy lo women ond need lo slort very slow-
ly, toking one smoll slep ot o lime ond building from there.
The primoqy chollenge for the introverled communicotor is leorning to
express himself. He needs lo intensify ond escolote his signols by 500
percenl. He needs ic focus on tolking more loudly, moking more eye
conloct, overcoming his shyness, being curious, osking queslions, show-
ing romontic interest ond toking risks. ln short, he doesn't need to worry
obout toning himself down; he needs to worry obout turning himself up.
ile Hr[1|0u0l|m[ c0nlnffilcauol|
The extroverted communicotor tends to be enthusiostic, silly ond fun.
These ore often men who ore in soles, teoching or other fields thot
involve lots of interoctions wifi people.
lr,&r${N8tsi!!e
Extroverted communicoicrs odore being the center of ottention. They
oren'l necessorily scored to tolk to women, but they often don'l know whot
trc soy. They often think thot the woy trc seduce o womon is trc turn up the
volume of their personolity. This is whot the introverted communicotor
needs trc do-but for the extroverted communicoicr; il's o reol mistrrke.
lf you're on exlroverled communicolor, ky listening more, tolking more
solty ond chilling out. Don't try so hord. ln short, the exlroverted com-
municotor doesn'l need to worry obout turning himself up; he needs to
worry obout toning himself down.
As you reod this book, keep in mind which type of communicotor you
ore. This will influence your decisions obout how oggressively you use
this moteriol.
0ll[ llt0[fi
We ore olso the quthors of the book How lo Succeed wilh Women.Thql
book provides o slep-by-step opprooch to finding, meeting, doting ond
seducing women ond hos been veqy successful. The one thing thot wos
missing from How to Succeed wilh Women, however, wos detoiled
informolion on how to tolk to women. We hod o few porogrophs on the
bpic, but thoi wos not enough.
This book rectifies thol problem ond exhoustively explores the lopic of
tolking to women. Whot it does not do is repeot the informotion from
How to Succeed with Women lf you wont lo leorn obout where to meet
women, seiling up successful Priming Dotes ond Seduction Dotes, hon-
urllu ftouborlllo$dulbigQHns** . .
&.. 
uuu,ltul!fl!0niufi[ut0mrmtf,,|tfi

[0u !0 tillft lu lfl0lnsll
dling the problems ond trouble women couse, getting the first kiss, pro-
ceeding to sex with women ond o lol more, we suggest you get thot
book.
We ore olso the creotors of o step-by-step 32-doy oudio course, The
Maslery Program, which you might be interesled in. This course, ovoil-
oble on 16 CDs or 16 cossettes, lokes you doy by doy through o pro-
grom designed to instoll the doting fundomentols in your life ond help
you tolk to ond be successful with women. For more informotion on The
Mostery Progrom, check out our web site, www.howlosucceedwith-
women.com, or write us of the oddresses below
You olso moy be inleresled in our 4-cossette or 4-CD course,
Overcoming ffie 'Nice Guy' Syndrome: How to Stop being Shy withoul
Becoming a Jerk.ln this progrom you will leorn skills ond porticipote in
exercises thot will help you overcome being shy, ond ollow you to feel
good obout showing your romonlic interest lo women.
And, of course, you might be interested in the How to Talk lo Women
CD. To moke this compocl disc, we brought women into the studio ond
flirted with them, creoting Romontic Conversolions using the techniques
you will leorn in this book. We then went over lhese conversotions ond
odded our commentory ond "ploy by ploy" so you con heor us flirting
with women, ond olso leorn whot we ore thinking ond how we ore
deciding our next sleps os we do it! These Romontic Conversotions ore
oll new. While the techniques we use ore tought in this book, fie con-
versotions on the CD ore not lrqnscribed in it. Check oul www.howto-
succeedwithwomen.com/tolk to find out more obout this useful product!
'llsi,*$i!*ai*'i
We olso do one-on-one doting cooching with o select group of highly
motivoted men. lf you ore interested, emoil us ot Authors@howtosuc-
ceedwithwomen.com.
You con find out obout ony of our products ond services, sign up for our
free emoil newsletter ond leorn more obout seduction by visiting our
web site ot www.howtosucceedwithwomen.com. You con emoil us ot
Authors@howtosucceedwithwomen.com. Our U.S. moil oddress is
MosteryTechnologies, P.O. Box 55094, Modison, W|53705.
And now, pleose enioy How lo Talk lo Women.
lr
www.ebook3000.com

cllil[0l'r
ilt[Et't'ltD[lllg u0ln8ll, Rt$fi, cllll0$Iru
ilil $$m-Hlpl'$ff$l0ll
lf you ore like most of our sfudenls, tolking to women seems complicot-
ed, confusing ond difficult. Yes, there will be chollenges os you leorn to
tolk to women, but if you're willing to slort ot the beginning ond do the
work involved, over time you'll succeed. Unfodunotel, mony of us think
thot fie best woy to go obout leorning is to skip the first slep, or even
the first few steps, ond to go directly lo "lhe good stuff." Building o firm
foundotion in the first few simple steps of tolking to women will help dro-
moiicolly once you stort opplying those steps to the more complex skills
we will present loter in this book.
A bod seducer-let's coll him Bob-hos trouble becouse he hosn't mqs-
tered the bosics. lf you ore like Bob, you wont to ovoid soying hi to
women, ond you only wont to osk the one fool-proof (ond mythicol)
seduction question thot will moke ony womon strip ond hove sex with
you in 30 seconds or less. lf you ore like Bob, you expect to overcome
25 yeors of shyness ond foilure with women ofter reoding five poges of
this book.
We wish we could teoch you thot one question thot would get ony
womon to foll in love wifh you ond hove sex with you in 30 seconds or
less. We wish we could help you overcome feor ond shyness oher reod-
,a.'*A'

ll0u, $0lalll ls lts8len
ing five poges of this book*butwe con'i. We con, however, teoch you
o series of progressive steps you con use to leorn to tolk trc women. We
con teoch you questions, opprooches ond conversotionol modes thot will
help you be seducilve-but you must be willing to stort ot the beginning.
Once ogoin: lf you wont fic become good ot tolking ic women*thot is, if
you wont to leorn how trc tolk to women seductively-you hwe trc stort ot
the beginning.
Seducing women by tolking to them is o process. The first step of thot
process is onswering the question "How do you get thot initiol conloct
with o womon?" Aftrer we hove onswered thot question, we will go on to
leorn woys of tolking with her, woys of flirting with her ond woys of con-
strucling ond conducling romonlic, seductive conversotions. Get
reody-this plone's obout to toke off.
'illlffi BB u0llr$$F"
We hotre lrite, useless odvice like "Just be yourselP' or "Just go tolk to
her!" This kind of odvice is worse thon useless becouse it offers nothing
specific to do yet leoves you feeling bod obout yourself for not following
it. Sure, being yourself is o good thing, but how should you do thot with
women? More specificolly, which port of yourself should you be? We oll
weor mony hots in our lives. When you opprooch o womon, should you
be the self you ore ot work? The self you ore ot church? The self you ore
ot o strip club? We oll need lo cultivote the romontic ports of ourselves-
the ports thot ore noturolly fun ond seducfive, but iusl soying you should
do so is nol enough. lf iust being yourself hod worked, you wouldn't be
reoding this book. "Just be yourselP' is pretty worthless odvica.
',lgl:Fr8$&i'lE 
lsirtl}$,;. *iillr. gr!{tie$&!r sn* *s{t-"{,ip|ls$$;ul}
The some goes for "Just go tolk to her." We've oll been given this lome
odvice, but most of us hove no clue whot fo tolk to o womqn obout. The
o$er doy, o shockingly beoutiful young womon we know wos wonder-
ing oloud to us why our books, oudio courses ond other moteriol ore
necessory ot oll. 'All you hove to do is go up to people ond tolk ond iust
be yourself," she told us. "lt olwoys works for me!" As she soid this, her
full breosts rose ond fellwith eoch breoth ond her beoutiful blonde hoir
swoyed os she moved her heod.
We olso know o mon who is o model in o lorge city. When we go out
with him, we're olwoys omozed*hol women opprooch him ond give
him their phone numbers. He olso likes to tell us his "secrel": "Just be
yourself qnd tolk trc women! lt's reolly not o big deql!"
Obviously, both these people moke most of us wont to vomit with roge.
You don't hove to work hord ot leorning how to tolk to the opposile sex
if you ore in the top .01 percent of beoutiful people; if you're thot hot,
the world will beot o poth to your door. For the rest of us, lhere ore spe-
cific skills to leorn, which ore much more effective thon "Just be yourselP'
ond "Just go tolk lo her."
Our work hos olwoys been obout breoking complex sociql interoctions
infic teochoble steps so lhose who employ our methods con succeed. Our
ctudents hove discovered o new level of eose ond freedom with women
when they've leorned lo use this moteriol. We'll stort smoll, so thot no
mqller how shy you hove been, no motler how shut down you've been,
no motter how mony problems you've hod with women, you will be oble
b bke oction ond move forword.
I
llruur[!utw$mn
www.ebook3000.com

ll0r,l te leli ln lly8|n*n
We remember how hord it wos to tolk to women ond how much couroge
it took for us to lronsform our skills ond our obilities. We remember how
we wished we hod help in figuring out whqt to do, ond we remember
how we hod to stort with very smoll steps before we could move on to
longer conversotions. We hod to figure out tolking to women firough
triol ond error. At first we constontly foiled. We were eoch os uncom-
fortoble ond owkword when tolking to women os ony guy we've ever
met. We foiled more often thon you've foiled, ond we mode fools out of
ourselves time ofter time-but we stuck with it ond tronsformed our dot-
ing lives. We mention this not to tool our own horns but to give you
hope. No motler where you ore in your life, no motler how little experi-
ence you hove with women, there is hope. You con leorn to seduce
women. You con leorn how to tolk to women. And you con hove the suc-
cess you wonl.
$0lF-HtD]|B$$nll
You con'l be on effective seducer unless you feel self-expressed oround
women. A mon who is self-expressed hos chorocter. By thot we meon
thot he's on individuolwho follows his own poth. He feels confideni mok-
ing decisions obout where he wonts to toke his life. He embroces fie
woys in which he is similor to os well os ihe woys in which he is differ-
enl from others. He is oble to be himself without being overly concerned
obod how women will respond-ond he's not tqying to control or fix
women. He is outhentic ond honest. He doesn'l squelch himself, suppress
himself or hide from life.
lil&|'r}'l!i3*ii;* igtl':r*:!1. *!s&. 8ii,ri{itli&s {i,r}N, $e'!,-*t$p*:i$is,}
When we soy thot you should be selFexpressed, this olso meons thot you
must find your own woy with the moteriol in this book. None of our
books or oudio courses ore designed to be o set of rules lo box you in.
We oll hove different opprooches with this moleriol-even we, Ron Louis
ond Dovid Copelond, hove very different opprooches from one onoth-
er. We ogree on the fundomentols bui we opprooch them differently.
The moin commonolity omong oll effective seducers is thot eoch
embroces his unique opprooch ond style. The best woy for you to com-
municote with women is to find your unique style. Otherwise you'll seem
foke qnd feel qwkwqrd when tolking lo women.
l-e/s digress for o second ond look ol the opposite of selFexpression:
withholding, feeling bottled up ond unoble to tolk to women. We've
bund thot men ore most upset, frustroted ond ploin ol' nuts when they
oren't self-expressed. Not getting loid doesn't drive guys nuts; o guy con
go months without getting loid. Whot drives men nuts is nol interocting
wiih women, not tolking lo women, hiding oul ol home ond not being in
lhc gome. Whot drives men nuls is hoving the desire to moke conlocl
wilh women ond not doing onything obout it.
Avoiding the risks of life drives men crozy-not foiling or being reiect-
rd, When you're engoged in life, toking risks ond interocting with
womon, women will find you ottroclive. Whot foils every time, however,
lr rioying on the sidelines of life feeling bottled up ond depressed.
$ru$il|uil[[umil,!on/ilI
ururuiou!firylq[lfl ,.

llsur tr|} Trll l0 l{snfn
ln[Bl|Fllp[ns u0ln8ll
Your first tosk on the poth to becoming o seducer is lo underslond ond
occepl thot you, the mon, ore going to hove to interrupt women in order
to get their ottention ond stort o conversolion.
Le/s exomine the word "intrerruption." h's o horsh word. Most of us osso-
ciole interrupting people with being rude, obnoxious or disrespectful.
For mony of us, this is especiolly true regording interrupting women.
When we soy interruplion, we don't meqn to imply being rude or
obnoxious ot oll. We use the word inlerruption, though, becouse it com-
municoles o horsh truth obout tolking to women: when you first interoct
with o womon, you will probobly hove lo do something specific to direct
her otlenlion owoy from whotever else is going on in her life ond toword
you. You ore going to hove to toke some oclion-though os you will see
it doesn't hove to be o big oction-to get her ottention. There's forceful-
ness oboul the word interruption thot describes the energy you will need
to do this.
As you hove no doubt noticed, women ore usuolly not thinking obout
you. They ore off in their own world, on their own vector, in their own
flow. Hot women ore not likely to come up to you ond soy, "Hey, yov
look like on interesting guy. lwould love to hove o conversolion with you
ond then seduce you." Therefore, if you ore going to interoct with
women, your first tosk is to get their ottention. And you get their otten-
tion by interrupting fiem.
'l]ssfixl:!&1!,!] 
ws'l}**;. gi$g:. gflfl issi$gi e{!$ *{}{f"{ll$ps$$ii3|!
ln o certoin sense/ you ore interrupting women on o deeper ond deep-
er level with every stoge of o seduclion. You inlerrupt her when you first
soy hi to her. You inlerrupt her on increosingly deeper levels when you
tolk for the first lime, when you osk for her number ond emoil oddress,
when you hove Romontic Conversotions, when you osk her for ond con-
duct the first dote, when you go for the first kiss ond so on. You ore
olwoys interrupting her ond initioting something deeper. The burden of
initioting ond interrupting women will be on your shoulders until you
die. The tools in this book will help you corry thot lood. ln foct, they con
turn this burden into o boon for you - not iusl with women but with every
oreo of your life.
lllilu ca]lt u0ln81l n[El|l|llD[ u0ll?
Sometimes o mon will osk us, '!Vhy should I risk reiection? lsn'l this the
oge of equolity? Why don't women initiote with me, ond interrupt me?"
You know, it/s funny-women tolk o lot obout how men don't feel
enough. They comploin thoi men oren't more sensilive ond bemoon how
oll thot "mole privilege" ond "mole power" hove mode men shut down
emotionolly. Well, you know the truth os well os we do. Men's egos
oren'l o mess becouse men ore so oll-powerful or becouse men live lives
of complete ond totol privilege qnd eose. Men's egos ore o mess
becouse they don't hove ony tools for hondling relection, ond they hove
tc throw their ego in the sewer every lime they opprooch-ond risk
bcing reiected by-o womon. So of course men oren'l going to be emo-
tionolly sensitive. Constonl reiection mokes you wont to be o little less
cmotionolly sensitive, right? Whot on oslonishing surprise.
:
www.ebook3000.com

llllu 18 lslll l0 l{s$8n
Here's the bottom line: women don'l opprooch you becouse doting is not
foir. Thot's why. They don't wonl to throw their egos in the sewer, ond
they don't hove io becouse they're women. They ore ollowed to demond
equolity os much os they wont ond still leove oll the risking of initiotion
to you (ot leost in the eorly ports of doting).
We suggest thot you occepl thot this is the woy it is qnd thot insteod of
being upset obout it, you reolize thot this octuolly gives you o certoin
kind of power. lf you hove to do oll the interrupting ond initioting, you
gei to soy when you will opprooch o womon. You get to soy when you
will osk her ouf you get to soy when you will fli* with her. Once you
stort seeing thot hoving to do oll the initioting ond hoving to toke oll the
risks gives you the power to go ofter whot you wonl, lhe fqct fhot women
don't hove to initiote with men will not bother you so much.
Okoy, our little men's rights speech is over. We ogree thot you hove
every right to be mod obout this stote of offoirs-but stoying mod does-
n't work. lt won't get you the girl. The good news is thqt when you know
how trc toke the proper risks with women, one step ot o time, you don't
hove to shut down your emotions ond become on unfeeling ierk in order
lo initiqte with women. And once you know how to do it, you'll be qble
to go ofter the women you wont with o lot more freedom thon most
women feel they hove lo go ofter the men they desire.
Your obility to initiote with ond interrupt women is criticol. Everything in
this book is built on thot skill. Successful seducers understond the stoges
of seduction ond ore willing lo stort ot the beginning. Before we give you
specific woys to stort inlerrupting women, it will be helpful for you to
i't[,df':'Uirl*iii, W!,'ltif;1. frlH- r{i]'lUlili:{ ilil0 !Sifuipfft5lttl:
leorn o little obout o few core concepls: the numbers gome, opporluni-
lies not token, ond giving ond receiving risks.
ffi0 ]lll]llB0F$ 0alnB
As you leorn to interrupt ond initiote with women, you must remember
rhot oll your interoctions with women bosicolly boil down lo o numbers
gome. A certoin omounl of the time you will succeed; the resl of the time
you won't. The greot thing is thot if you hove enough interocfions, your
success is oll but qssured.
lfs like the insuronce solesmon who knows thot he needs to moke 75
cold colls to get one oppointment ond thot it trckes four oppointments to
get one sole. Therefore, he knows thqt he needs to moke 300 cold colls,
give or toke, lo get one sole. He knows ifs o numbers gome ond thot oll
he hos to do is to continue moking those colls. Eventuolly the numbers
willwork in his fovor ond he'll mqke o sole. With women, it might toke
l0 interruplions to get one conversotion, 10 conversotions to gel one
phone number qnd l0 numbers to get one dote. This is good to know
becouse eqch "foiled" interoction brings you closer trc success.
ln How lo Succeed wilh Women, we wrote time ond ogoin fiot doting
ir o numbers gqme. We're soying it ogoin now. l/s empowering to know
thot doting is o numbers gome becouse knowing thot will help keep you
going ficword your eventuol success. Every time on interruption or initi-
otion with o womon doesn't work, remind yourself thot fiot "fqiled"
inlcrrupiion brings you one step closer to the inevitoble success.
':i
l:l
&
wr
i.-!,:i
I
uuuhoutirnrtlltl

[08r 6s Islll t8 wemsn
The key difference between successful seducers ond unsuccessful ones is
thot the successful ones know il's o numbers gome ond keep going no
motler whot. Unsuccessful seducers whine to their friends, hide in their
bedrooms or feel upset ond give up opprooching women entirely. Troin
yourself to see thqt opprooching women is o numbers gome.
0DD0rullnEn$ ll0[ rflfi0ll
Men olten feel bod obout themselves when they see on opportunity to
opprooch or tolk to o womon ond they don't toke it. They don't toke the
opportunity becouse they ore scored or upset or becouse they simply
don't know whot to soy. This leods to missed opportunities ond plenty of
good old-foshioned self-criticism. "l wos such on idiot not to tolk to her,"
hese guys will soy tc themselves. 'Whot o moron I om. I con't believe how
stupid I wos not to tolk to her. lt wos o perfe'ct opportunity. She wos so hot.
l'll probobly never gel on opportunity like thot ogoin, ond I blew itl"
There ore lots of times in life when beoting up on yourself to get your-
self to behove better is o good ideo. There ore lots of times when it
works. Unbrtunotely, this is not one of those times. When you don't toke
on opportunity with o womon ond then punish yourself for not toking it,
you lusl ottoch o lot of poin to the whole ideo of toking opportunities to
tolk to women. This mokes you less likely to tolk to o womon the next
time on opporfunify comes up/ nol more.
There's o sequence in the woy most men treot opportunities with women.
First, you don'l see opporfunities ot oll. h seems like there ore no women
on his plonet for you trc interoct with. Second, you stort to see opporfuni-
l{}*syyr!$&iil!; l**e!s{}.'{iri&, Eiif i*si*$ {gl, **tt -fxpllsssi'3}!
ties but don'l yet hqve the obility to trrke them. lf you ollow yourself to let
thot be okoy, in time you simply find yourself storting to toke those oppor-
tunities thot life presents to you. Howeve4 if you beot yourself up for not
trcking opportunities, this sequence is disrupted. Beoting yourself up for not
toking opporlunities iust mokes it horder to see ond trcke them in the future.
People who troin group focilitotors know thot this is true. At first, students
moy hwe no ideo ot oll obout how to leod o certoin type of process in
o group; they simply wotch in owe qs other people leod. ln time, they
stort to understond how to leod but they don't quite know the process
well enough to step oul ond octuolly leod; they wotch from the sidelines,
full of good ideos obout how they would leod o process but not quite
reody to toke chorge themselves. lf they ollow this to hoppen without
beoting up on themselves, in time they simply nolice thot they ore step-
ping out ond leoding*ond nothing speciol needs to hoppen for thot to
occur. lf they beot lhemselves up, however, they stoll the entire leorning
process ond moke it horder to toke oction when the time comes.
Once you breok the link between seeing on opportunity ond feeling bod
obout not toking it, you cqn breok the hold thot this cycle hos over you.
Wc suggest thot you let yourself go through o phose of purposely not
toking opportunities with women. Just observe them ond let yourself feel
good obout yourself even when you oren't toking them. Soy lo yourself,
'l'm oble to see opportunifies, ond thot/s on importont step. l'll toke
opporfunities loter." ln time, your nervous systrem will be so used to spot-
llng opportunities thot it will be much eosier to trrke them.
Sroing opportunities to interruptwomen is o little like slowing down reol-
lly, Wc hod o studenl who wos on experi in the field of stock troding.
t
uuu,hul'rryggflf[. 
^
www.ebook3000.com

ll0{, [8 T8llr ft l$8N1$R
He wos oble to see ond toke odvontoge of finonciol opportunities thot
just seemed to flosh by too quickly for us to see or understond whot wos
hoppening. He hod o completely different relotionship with morkets thon
we did. To us, the stock morkels ore iust one big mess; we con't see
opportunities in them. Becouse of his yeors of experience wotching the
morkel, this guy wos oble to slow things down. He told us thot he did
this by not beoting himself up when he missed opportunities. This is whot
you must do too.
0rurils all[ R$c$M|lg RHil$
ln this book we ore going to teoch you effuctive trcols thot con help you hwe
deep, romontic ond seductive conversotions with women. But lc wield these
tools effectMely you musl underslrcnd the noture of risking with women.
Doing ony of the things we tolk obout in this book will require toking
some risk. Most men ore exlremely overse to risking with women; they
live their lives trying to ovoid it. Mony men who oren'l successful with
women ore committed to eliminqting risk with women; tho/s their unsuc-
cessful strotegy for.success.
Men ore obsessed with not risking with women moinly for two reosons.
Firsl, they don't wont to be hurt by o risk gone wrong. lt totolly sucks to
toke some big risk with o \ /omon only to be shot down in one of the
olmost infinite number of woys women hove of shooting down men.
Second, men-especiolly shy men-wont to eliminote risk with \/omen
becouse they ore ofroid thot they will somehow hurt the womon they risk
ill9G,_,'Ulsiilt itg$lvrr" S{I{. LOrtUIlUts {Ut i{lt "{fprgJniuf
with. They ore ofroid thot if they toke o risk, the womon will be upset,
offended or emotionolly domoged in some woy.
For ihese men, the opporent onswer to both of these problems is
decreosing risk ond increosing control over their interoctions with
women. They stort looking for the foolproof, olwoys-completely-in-con-
trol, no-risk system for seducing women. Like o bod solesmon who seeks
thot "mogic close" thot will force o customer to buy, buy,buy, o guy who
con't risk with women will look for psychologicol tools thot con force o
womon to be ottrocted to him. He'll buy pig-pheromone colognes, hop-
ing the scent will owoken o womon's inner vixen. He'll ploy "subliminol
seduclion" oudiotopes for her, hoping it will somehow creote chemistqy
between them. Or he'll tqy to leorn hypnosis, hoping to use it to bom-
boozle o womon into toking her ponts off. He does oll this in on ottempt
ic eliminote oll risk with o womon ond to estoblish in its ploce complete
conhol over qll of his interoctions with her.
There ore severol problems with this. First, eliminoting oll risk with o
womon ond estoblishing complete control over your interoctions with her
doesn't work. ln foct, il's the opposite of whot works with women. Think
obout how you feel when you're wilh someone who's committed to com-
plebly controlling your interoction with him ond the outcome of thot inter-
oction: you con't get owoy fost enough. Well, thof's exoctly how women
belwih o mon who's committed to eliminoting risk, controlling the inter-
oction ond forcing o cerloin outcome. (solesmen ore sometimes like this.)
h doesn't motler how good o pre-scripted rop you come up with; i/s
Fooky for o womon to be with o guy who is trying to conhol her.
I
uwlrut[nrffa

lll0r ts !il[ lll ll{0ms[
Second, most men get discouroged with me$ods of seducing women in
which the monlrq seems lo be "control, iontrol, control." Men wonl to
be oble to express themselves ond creote successful, seductive interoc-
tions wifi women. As one mon told us, "lf I wonted to hide behind o
'foke self,' fien I might os well go to o proslitule." lf you wont onything
deep or spontoneous with women, eliminoting qll risk ond controlling
everything is not the woy to get it.
At the some time, it olso doesn'l work to "iust do if'-to toke huge risks
with women oll of the time. We used to know o guy whose life's philos-
ophy wos "Go for lhe roor." This meont thot every time he sow some-
thing scoqy or risky, he hod to do it-becouse if he didn't, os he put it,
he "wosn'f reolly living his life." We think this is ridiculous, ond the trou-
ble it creoted in his life bocks us up on thot. Just becouse you con toke
o huge risk with o womon doesn't meqn thot you should.
Just os risking becouse you con isn'l the onswer, letting go of qll control
in your inleroctions with women is probobly o bod ideo trco. Letting go
of guiding or directing conversqlion in ony woy will oll too often gel you
onother femole "triend," ond we've qll hod quite enough of thot.
lf eliminoting risk entirely ond controlling every'hing doesn't work with
women, ond toking oll the risks you con ond letting go of oll control
doesn't work, whol does? The onswer is thot you must loke risks, but you
musl toke them in o sensible, oppropriote ond orderly foshion.
Surprisingly ond porodoxicolly, you octuolly provide more of o sense of
both sofety ond excitement to women when you toke intelligent ond
oppropriote risks with lhem one step ol o lime. Tho/s whot creotes both
chemistry ond trust.
lil**i!l!{il}*i!}9r l#s!?}s}r. l?ie&. Suritt$&|} fix8 $slf"gx{}i,*s$i{i'1
IAfi|llg fl|l[ 0M1lg RHfi$
Mony men think thot when they toke o risk with o womon they ore some-
how toking something from her, but the iruth is this: when you toke on
oppropriofie risk with o womon you ore giving something to her. Your
risk with her creotes o spoce for her fo toke o risk bock with you, which
builds trust, sofety ond ottroclion with you. lf you don't ioke o risk with
her there's no spoce for her to risk with you, qnd she con't hove o relo-
tionship with you, even if she wonis one.
Think of it this woy: often o guy will woit oround for o womon to risk
with him before he risks with her. He wonts her to soy hi, he wonts her
trc osk him out, he wonts her to go for the first kiss. But why should o
womon do something you oren't willing to do? Remember, most of the
lime q womon is looking to you to set the poce ond feel for your inter-
oction. lf you toke q smoll risk with her, she will see on opening to do
lhe some wiih you. lf you toke no risks ot oll, try to keep conlrol of every-
thing ond work lo force o certoin outcome with her, she will do the some
with you-ond itwon't be the outcome you wont. She will be controlling
ond defensive, ond her gool will be to get owoy from you.
Ar o generol rule, women will only risk os much os you do, if thot much.
When you toke on oppropriole risk with o womon, it octuolly provides
on opening for her to be self-expressed ond hove fun with you. This is
whot we meon when we soy thot you must provide risks for women.
Whcn you toke on oppropriote risk with o womon, you give her the
opportunity trc risk bock with you. Thot's providing o risk, ond it's the
foundotion for creoting chemistqy ond trust with women.
I
www.ebook3000.com

li0lr! &s lsix ls ll{eilNsrl
When the two of you toke o smoll risk together-for instonce, you moy
provide o risk by winking qt her ond she moy risk smiling bock-o little
trust is built between you. You con then build on thot trusl to provide o
slightly lorger risk. For instonce, you moy provide o risk by osking her
'Whofs the story behind lhot?" obout her neckloce, ond she moy toke
o risk by telling you obout how she got it on o trip to Centrol Americo.
When thot risk hos gone well, there is even more trust between you. You
con then provide the next lorger risk ond she con risk bock. ln lime, o
sense of trust ond sofety develops.
Simultoneously, this process creotes o reol sense of excitement ond
chemistry between you. The two of you ore constontly in the process of
being "on the edge" with eoch other, constontly reveoling o little more
of yourselves with every risk, olwoys trusting ond risking o little more
eoch time. Thot process is where excitement ond chemistry come from.
Thot process is where o lot of oilroclion comes from. And thot is o
process you con leorn how to monoge without being conlrolling, trying
to eliminote risk or ottempting to force on oulcome.
R11-0l|-]l0[llt[g lll8ll
Building o relotionship with o womon is o lot like building o house in which
your intimocy ond connection con live. You build thot house one brick ol o
time. Every lime you fiake o risk ond she trckes one bock ond it works, you
put onolher brick in the wolls of the house. After o while you've built four
wolls of trust thot con contnin the relotionship you hwe with her.
;{}s*n***}}}9r w{}}s*{}. *1,**. ,;{pi*$it}lq $*l} $i*if"f}i$risiii'it}tx
lf you risk too much loo fosl, you ore trying to live in the house before it
is built, ond trouble will come if ony problems occur. At the some time,
if you don't risk ot oll, you never even build o foundotion for o relotion-
ship, much less the four wolls ond roof. The level of risk you should toke
is reloted to how much of this house you hove built. lf you hove o lot of
trust built up from toking mony risks together you con proceed lo some
bigger risks. lf you don't hove o lol of trust built up you need to toke
smoller risks.
lfs importont to underscore thot trust is built over lime ond thot chemistry
ond ottroction ore not the some os trust. A mon who doesn't hove much
hcility or experience with risk will trust o womon woy too fost. He'll trusl
hcr utterly ond completely with his entire heort the moment he experi-
onces ony chemistry with her. Thofs o reolly bod ideo.
Wc hod one student who wos doting o women whom he wos cerloin
wq3 "fhe one" ofter only one dote. He wos hoving tremendous success
wih her os he meosured it: she seemed to like him, it wos very exciting
ond delightful to be with her ond they were hoving omozing sex togeth-
rr, He iumped in deep, reolly opening his heort lo her in o motler of
doyr, totolly risking himself emotionolly. After oll, whot could possibly go
Yvrpng in such o whirlwind romonce?
Wrll, plenty could go wrong ond plenty did go v/rong. After o couple of
vrtkr, this "perfect womon" disoppeored. She rorely returned his colls
qnd rtrcrted blowing off their dotes. Finolly she told him, "l like you, but
wlfi my lib the woy it is, ifs iust too much of o hqssle to hove o relo-
T
tlillll[!0bilrulntrfillr

ll0u 80Tall T0 $|0lnm
iionship right now. Besides, l'm sort of seeing this other guy..." He wos
devostoted, heodbroken ond even more ofroid of toking risks with
women thon he hod been before.
When you meet o hot womon with whom you hove greof chemislry, yovr
tendency might be to toke big emotionol risks with her os quickly os you
con. Thot is o big mistoke. h's insone to risk your entire heort right owoy.
Toke smoll risks one ot o time ond build fust over time. lf you risk too
much too quickly you'll hove your heort sploftered oll over the povement,
ond you'll hove short, possionole offoirs thot end with you being heort-
broken qnd olone.
Thot hoppens when you iump in too deep too fost, ond you do thot when
you misfoke chemistqy for truslworthiness. Just becouse you hove chem-
istry with o womon doesn't meon she won't floke out on you. lt doesn't
meon she won't hove emotionol problems thot will couse her to leove. lt
doesn'l meon you con counl on her. But when you hove greot chemistry
with o womon, you're oll too likely to think thot it meons you con count
on her, ond you'll end up risking too much with her.
The solution is trc go sloily ond build trust with o womon before you give
her your heort fully. ln other words, you must risk slowly, over time, in
the woy we will show you. lf you ore going trc foll in love with o womon
you ore reolly ottrocted lo, you need to toke risks one slep ol o lime to
find out if you con lrust her. You need to know if she's o psycho who's
going trc go nuls ond toke off on you, breoking your heort. You con only
find this out by risking the proper omount ot the proper tempo.
{ss*r,,irs&i{:s i#r}'}}*i}" *l8l{. ${l|,i8&i&s *r}i' $s'riNrp},ss$i8l}
On the up side, most women ore incredibly ottrocted to o mon who con
sey, "l reolly like you, ond I wont us to toke the time to leorn to reolly
trust eoch olher so we con truly open up ond be intimqte. I wont to toke
things slowly ond build o connection \ /e con trust." Soying this sort of
thing tends to moke o womon feel reolly sofe wifi you ond desire you
oll the more. After oll, you oren't just trying to get os much sex out of
her os you con, like oll those other guys. She likes this; therefore, she
wonls lo hove sex with you. A mon slowing things down ond risking with
her one step ot o time con be on incredible ophrodisioc to o womon.
Slowing down o romontic relotionship with o womon you ore oftrocted
to might suck, bul il doesn'l suck os much os I ) hoving o short offoir thot
ends in heortbreok or 2) being so ofrqid of heortbreok thot you devel-
op o mossive feor of toking ony risks with women.
Ill$ r0oll0lnu 0F Rr$[$
Le/s look ot how to provide risks for women. Mosl nice guys do not toke
enough risks qnd they do not provide enough risks for women, so
women hove loo few opportunities to toke risks bock. How do you pro-
vide risks lo o womon? You provide risks by toking risks. Thofs impor-
lonl, so lefs soy it ogoin: You provide risks by toking risks.
It helps t'c think of risk os o currency thot you exchonge with o womon.
You put up o penny ond she puts up o penny. You put up o dollor, she
puts up o dollor. You put up tren dollors, she puts up len dollors. You're
o<chonging these quontities. The exchonge con gel bigger os you leorn
from eoch other thot it will be o foir exchonge, on exchonge you con
I
I
uuu [oubiNroiltdulli$;Ill,
&.
www.ebook3000.com

ll0ut !0llllt lb t|,0ln0n
trust. lf you put up your penny ond she tokes it ond runs, you know not
trc put up o hundred dollors. But if she puts up o penny bock, you know
you con tqke the risk to put up o nickel. lf she gives you o nickel bock,
you con then put up o dime.
Let's give some specific exomples now of the kinds of risks you con toke
ot different levels: penny risks, dollor risks ond $10 dollor risks.
l"Greet," we heor you soying-"now lolking wilh women is like bonk-
ing ond investing." Who would've known?)
Bizorrely, though, thot is whot tolking lo women is like. Successful
investors leorn lo toke intelligent finonciol risks; most of fie time they
leorn how fo do thqt by toking smoll risks ond moving up to lorger ones
os they gei better ot it. As o resuh, they get better returns thon do peo-
ple who never invest their money, who never firke ony risks with it ond
who leove it in the bonk eorning interest ot three percent or less. By
leorning obout intelligent risk, successful inveslors ore oble to leveroge
lheir ossets, toking the risks thot deliver the best returns.
Penny Risks. You con think of the first risks you toke with o womon-
the interruptions thol ollowyou to speokwith her-os penny risks. Soying
hi is o penny risk. So is moking eye contocl, winking ot her, smiling ot
her, checking out her body ond the other Flirting Moves. Eoch one of
these smoll octions tokes o risk with o womon ond gives her the oppor-
tunity to risk bock with you by being responsive in some woy. lf she does
respond with o risk of her own, you ore in business ond con move on lo
the dollor risks.
irl$sr,,{r,i8*'ls w8r,!s8. &is}{. gsr:f}$$s a{.|$ $s',r"gi;prsssi',r}
Dollor R.isks. The dollqr risks ore lorger, but if the penny risks went
well, why not move on? Complimenting o womon is o dollor risk, os is
osking o question we'll teoch you, 'lVho/s the story behind rhot?" The
Goodbye lntroduclion, which you'll leorn, is o dollor risk, os is Situotionol
Flirting, Deepening ond osking Romontic Questions. These risks oll pro-
vide her with the opportunity to risk more by shoring more obout herself
with you. So she storts to risk liking you, which meons she could get hurt.
These risks ore whot generote the excilement in o relotionship.
$ t O Oollqr R.isks. Asking for her number ond emqil oddress, setting
up o dote, showing up for the dole, doing somelhing together on the
dote, touching her, going for the first kiss ond being even more sexuol
ore oll bigger risks. These risks ond oll the risks thot leod up lo her shor-
ing her life with you, even if only for o little while. She slorts to risk thot
you might chonge her life in woys she did not plon on.
This is on exciting process for both of you. And with eoch new risk you
evoluote how it went before toking the next one. lf o smoll risk did not
pon oul, don't go on to toke o bigger risk. lnsteod, you might wonl to
toke o smoller risk ond see if thot works. This is oll o motter of risking
step by step.
lfs importont for you to reolize the risks you provide when deoling with
women. Eoch risk offers o spoce for mogic to hoppen between the two
of you, ond it's o gift thot you os o mon provide. You're not perpetroF
ing evil or hurting someone else; you're providing thot excitement thot
women need so much.
I
&

ll$ril $o l$l{ b $,omfir
il[BllrgBll[ RFfi$ r0flD [0 RBUAl|ffi
Everything we will teoch you in this book is to some degree o risk you
will hove lo toke with women. By knowing thot ond by being oble to tqke
those risks one step ot o lime, you will hove the power to creole excite-
menl ond trust in your inleroctions with women. Of course, some of
those risks won't work out, but we'll teoch you how to hondle reiection
too. ll/s oll port of leorning how to tolk to women.
As you use the tools in this book, your monlro should not be "control, con-
hol, conhol." Thot will only get you intrr trouble. Your monlro should be
"risk, risk, risk." lntelligent risks, token step by step. By using these tools
to risk being romontic rother thon to conhol the interoction, you will be
oble to mqnqge the orderly unfolding of o relotionship. lt moy be short-
term, il moy be long term. lt moy be deeply intimote, it moy be purely
sexuol. But there will be o reol connection-ond you won't hove to sell
yourself out to get it.
cltlT0$tIu
An importont ospect of self-expression is curiosity. h's similor to enthusi-
osm: you've goi lo use it or lose it. Once you've repressed your curiosi-
ty long enough, it tokes time to gel it bock.
Mony of us were tought os children not lo osk questions, to ovoid being
loo curious. We qll know the expression "curiosity killed the cot." Asking
questions ond being curious were often soid to couse trouble.
N,l$*Nr|jp$i;i$ &XsrNr*ll_ *is&, $[!8i']$i&i| *il$ &{}ls"*lrsFesfi i*ii
Another "problem" with curiosity is thot when you stort osking questions
you slop being in conhol of the interocfion. When you osk o womon
questions obout herself, suddenly you're nol in control of whot she might
soy. As we've soid, most guys come to us wonting o line or rouline.
They're looking for o structure they con impose on on interoction thot
will keep them in control ond get her romonticolly interested. But when
you loke the risk of not knowing whot is going to hoppen, ond surren-
der to the choos of interoctions ond conversotions with women, you're
more likely to connect with them ond more likely to come ocross os fun
ond ottroclive.
You con stort the process of letting out your curiosity by osking \ /omen
questions ond simultoneously letting go of ony oufcome. Let go of trying
to get into her ponls ond getting her number (for o second) ond iust see
if it feels different. We're not soying thot trying to get info her ponts is o
bod thing ot oll-we're iust soying thqt when you concentrotre on getting
into her ponts os your sole oulcome ifs very difflcult to moinloin o con-
versotion ond therefore hord to get into her ponls.
You never know where q conversotion is going to go wifi o womon, but
if you've got to stoy in control ond reslroin your own curiosity ond never
osk o queslion you don't olreody know the onswer tc you'll never be suc-
cessful. Most men lusl give up becouse not knowing where on interoc-
tion is going is iust too scory.
Another odvontoge of leorning to be curious is thot i/s not the leost bit
monipulotive or scom-oriented. When you toke risks with women ond
they risk with you, reol intimocy con develop.
I
uuu,hrub$ll0litilUliltE..
ft
tw,hrhil!lil0iltMmm,m
www.ebook3000.com

ll8u $s l$|i }t! $$smslt
lf being curious is difficult for you right now, don't worry. After you stort
experimenting with being curious it will become o lot eosier.
fl0ut m n$il u0ilt$ll m$$il01t8
We're now going tc explore how to osk women questions. This is not
rocket science. So mony men feel like they need trc know the right things
to soy to o womon. The truth is thot you don't need speciolized esoteric
queslions; you iust need to know how to be curious ond osk questions.
Le/s look ot the different kinds of questions you con osk. There qre ini-
tiol questions, the first questions you osk someone. Then there ore fol-
low-up queslions, which follow up on the response to your first question.
Pretty simple so for, right? You got it. The bosic sequence is you osk o
question, she responds ond you osk onolher question. lt s olmost like
hoving o reol live conversotion where you ore opening your mouth ond
tolking! One question leods to onother ond before you know it women
ore reveoling themselves to you. They ore risking themselves to you ond
you ore risking with them by osking questions ond reveqling yourself.
Here ore some hondy, eosy-fo-use rules for osking queslions ond hoving
good conversotions with women.
R$[I]lg [[8$[l0[$ H ll0$ [ltB $0tn8
fl$ 0Fr8rlll0 [ c0lllpilIn$Ilr
l/s greot to compliment women, but most of our students find it intimidoF
ing trc compliment o womon right owoy. Luckily, you don'f hove to strcrl o
i:,!i*f{r{}$*ili!g w*ssl}. *is&- i}$t il}si&$ *1lti E$lr $ssry*!ii!}{!
conversotion with o compliment. lnsteod, you con osk questions. Of
course/ you shouldn't insult women either. lf you osk o womon "How did
you get your hoir so ugly?" or "How did you get so slupid?," you oren'l
going to go onyraAere good. We include these only for comic relief.
When you first meet o womon it usuolly mokes sense lo slort with o sim-
ple question.
R$H[g B[8$il0[$ ffi ll0[ ilt$ $m$
a$ lnafilll$ $[flE$1ll8ll[$
Mony of our students moke the error of moking siotements rother thon
osking questions. For exomple, o student recently told us thot he'd osked
o womon o question the other doy. Here's how he described it: 'lVe
were qt o concert ond I soid to her, 'The floor sure is sticky."'Well, tho/s
not o queslion, ond thot doesn't offer much of on opening for her to
respond. You need to osk questions thot evoke o response from her, not
simply mqke slotemenls.
R$filll$ !ll0$ilm$ H nFF01|0ll[
Fl'0ln [ilffng fl[0lru u0llt'$$lF
lf you were ol o concert ond you wolked up to o womon ond soid, "l
sure like the bond," Louis ond Copelond would come to your house ond
breok your finger. This is o slotrement obout yourself, not o question
obout her. You must leqrn the difference. This point seems simple, bul
mony guys mess it up. You need to osk her something thot will engoge
her in o bock-ond-forth conversotion, noi spew your opinions obout life.
!qu:!!!"loq!$!dl{!blry|l
. :,
ft 
wu.hubmilrd$itrmmiltit
t

ll0rx b0 lrllt T0 $rolnen
At firsl, o womon won'l be interested in you or your opinions. lnsteod,
she'll be inlerested in tolking obout herself. This meons thol your focus
should be osking questions thot let her do iust thot. Rother thon tolking
oboul your fovorite color, osk her whol her fovorite color is. Rother thon
roving obout the greot new CD you iust brought, osk her whot sort of
music she likes. Rqther thon tolking obout your fovorite seoson, osk her
whot her fovorite seoson is.
m llm a$il $ru[l[, $ll8B$u [ll$$il0lt$
When you're interocting wiih o womon ond osking questions you ore
not ollowed to osk "Do you come here often?" You ore olso prohibited
from osking obout the weolher. Those two questions ore so clichgd thot
you will come ocross os o totol boneheod. The lost thing you ore for-
bidden from osking is'nVhofs your sign?" These oll sound too much like
lines ond come ocross os boring ond stupid. The good news is thot there
ore countless good, simple questions. Once you get your curiosity cir-
cuitry going, you won'l hove o problem osking them.
m m a$H 0u$t'ng $Bfiilal 0il$$n0n$
You might find yourself wondering, "Gee, ore lhose breost implonts?
How do they stond up so well?" Thofs obviously not o question you're
going to wont to osk. We probobly don'l hove to tell you this, but we
wonled to double- ond quodruple-check.
We're not suggesting thot you ovoid thinking obout sex or ovoid won-
dering obout q womon's breqsts or whot she's like in bed. Those ore
l0[f tFfl sfi lte lv*':tstt" &is&. {}{iri*$sg e}l{l $clr.gx$p*s${*n
things we qll wonder obout when we tolk to women. Don't even tqy to
suppress fiose thoughls. We're iust soying thot none of those questions
will fly. Just remember thot you risk foce slops, explosive forms of vio-
lence, sexless nights ond trouble if you moke overtly sexuol comments.
R$fir[g a[8$[ru]l$ ffi ll0[ all lllmrl|0xffil0ll
It helps trc soy something like 'Wov/' or "Reolly'' or 'Thofs interesting"
before osking o bllow-up question. When you use those phroses, trcke o
breoth between questions ond listen to her response/ so q womqn won't
hel os if you're grilling her. Put owoy the interrogotion-room spotlight ond
moke sure you woid.bombording her with ropid-fire questions. Some
men will keep osking o womon '1/Vhy? Why? Why?" or borroge her with
questions until she flips out. Tho/s onother woy trc hove her feel like she's
locked in on inlerrogoiion room with you. lf you osk one question ot o time
ond go ol o slow, reloxed poce, lhe conversotion will foel nofurol ond eosy
trc susficin.
When some guys ore excited they feel pumped up. While being ener-
gized is o good thing, sometimes guys in this stote tend to osk too mony
questions too quickly ond nol ollow women enough time to respond. Just
remember to slow down, give her time to respond, odd o few oppre-
ciotive comments ond you'll be fine.
RU0n u8$-0Fll0 m0$il01l$
"Do you like ort?" 'Whot sorts of orl do you like?" Con you tell rhe dif-
brence between fiose two questions?
r
I
umu,ltrfu tmmmrdurttMln
ft 
uuulrutil$ulurllumrlntlt
www.ebook3000.com

llllu, t0 Tflllr ls *18llr8fi
Lefs try this on Ron ond Dovid.
DAVID: So Ron, do you like ort?
RON: Yes.
Thot cleorly doesn't build much of o conversoiion. Le/s try it ogoin.
DAVID: Ron, whot kind of ort do you like?
RON: l'm o big Jockson Pollock fon. I like his huge obstroct
pointings.
DAVID: Whot else do you like obout his work?
RON: I love seeing fhe movies of him sploshing huge cons of point
onto convoses. l'm olso interested in how he lived his life.
DAVID: So hove you seen his work in person?
RON: Yes, l've been lo severol exhibits of his work in New York.
So you see where this con go. A yes-or-no question iust doesn't cut it.
For inslonce, "Do you like the bond?" is o problem. A woy to toke thot
question out of the yes-or-no reolm is to osk 'lVhot do you like obout
the bond?" or "How to do you like the bond?" Stort poying otlention fic
the questions you osk women. Moke sure you ovoid putting them in o
form thot will hqve lhem onswer yes or no.
lnts!'r'irirfiirrq Hl8msfl fiisfi . 0uri0sftti afilj $BlFt:tpflstsi0lr
u0ln$ll ff$ 1l0u aruau8 Ft'18il[19
This moy come os o shock lo you, bul our experience shows thot mony
women ore nol the slightest bit receptive lo ony'hing we soy. lfs impor-
tont therefore to remember thot when o womon is meon to you or unre-
sponsive, i/s not o personol ottock on you. We oll hove to deol with
unfriendly women ot one poinl or onother.
Remember, ifs not your foult she wos unfriendly, ond you did nothing
wrong by opprooching her. When o womon is unfriendly, the best thing
to do is lo move on to the next one. lfls pointless to woste your time ond
energy tolking lo women who qre unreceplive. ln foct, it con domoge
your self-esteem to hohg oround women who treot you like crop. Next
time o womon is meon to you, remind yourself thol there ore other
women out there who'd be hoppy to tolk to you ond would oppreciote
your initioting with them-ond then move on.
ril8 plll|RBS$ 0F 0$fir[s ilrB$[l0ll$
H r0 s$ll$l'ffi8 a 80[u01|$aH0ll
Don'l worqy if o womqn stroys from the queslion you've osked her. Some
sfudents get upset when they musler lhe couroge to osk o womon o ques-
tion ond then, rother thon onswering their question, the womon
responds by tolking obout o wholly different topic. Remember, when you
osk o womon o question ond she responds with ony commenl ot oll, it's
good news. Your focus should be on getting o conversotion going.
I
llrullr,lduhrrs!ilUl{rl

ll0ut t0 lallt I0 llll0msn
For exomple. imogine you're osking to o womon in the liquor store
obout wine ond she storts lolking obout o movie she iust sow. Don't soy,
"Hey, I osked you oboul wine-iusl onswer the question, lody!" The
point is thol you wont lo be engoging with her, ond it reolly doesn'l mot-
ter whot you tolk qbout. The foct thot you ore octuolly hoving on inter-
oction with her is good news. Hoving her open her mouth ond tolk to
you is os good os it will get ot first.
lllll|ilHllI u0lltr clll|n$ffiu
For us, curiosity ofien shows up os o smoll flicker in our minds thof we must
poy close ottention trc. lf you don't poy ottention when you feel curious
obout something, your infieresl fodes. At this strrge of the gome you're
retroining yourself ond creoting new hqbits trc let your curiosity out. At first,
occessing your curiosity might bel owhvord ond clumsy, but itwill gel eos-
ier over time.
Asking o queslion of o womon ond listening to your curiosity doesn'l
need to be o big deol. lt doesn't require you to find complicoted or
unusuol topics to explore. ln the following exomples you'll see how
we've loken incredibly mundone situotions ond creoted simple questions
to osk women. After reoding through these exomples ond doing some
experimentolion on your own, this will be o lot eosier for you.
:A
).:
lnt0rpmlinr lfiom8r" ni$r, $l'pi0sibc eill s&lPt{pfss8i0lt
TilflMP$ I
SITUATION: You're ot o concert, listening to the music ond stonding
nexi to on ottroctive womon. Whot do you do? Here's the sequence we
recommend you stort employing when tolking lo women:
First, breothe deep into your body. Mony men breofi shollowly, ond
high in their chests-this reolly doesn't leove you feeling powerful-for
lhot, you need to breothe more deeply. We coll this "breofiing into your
bolls." When we soy this, we meon toke o deep breoth, ond imogine
thot feeling going oll the woy down to the core of your body, oll the woy
down into your bolls. lt moy sound silly, but ifs been our observotion thot
it mokes o big difference.
Second, osk yourself whot you could be curious obout with this womon.
Third, listen lo the response you gel.
Here's o choin of curiosity questions thot you could use ot the concerl:
"So, whot do you think of the bond?" When she onswers, "They're
greol," run through the sequence ogoin:
o Breqthe into your bolls.
o Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout in her response.
o Listen to lhe onswer.
o Ask your follow-up queslion.
::
i1:
.u
q,
.4
:ii
-ll'
i,$r
f
I
1;&,
fJ
.ti
I
uuru [rrltortloorilulilf,l5lt
www.ebook3000.com

/ 
llllfit [o TalHo tl,llmsn
For exomple: 'lVhot ore olher bonds you've seen thot you like?" This
question fien generoles onother response from her. You might osk,
"Hove you seen this bond before?" She might onswer, "No, I hoven't
seen them before." So you then repeot lhe sequence:
o Breothe into your bolls.
o Ask yourself whot you could be curious qbout in her response.
o Listen to the onswer.
r Ask your follow-up question.
For exomple, 'lVhot do you think of lhem?" or 'The boss ploye/s got
reolly wild hoir. Whot do you think obout it?"
See how simple this con be? Once you reolize thot you don't hove to put
yourself on the line ond show off, tolking to women becomes o lot eqs-
ier. Whqfls importonl is for you to osk questions thot moke her impressed
with herself-qnd when you focus on osking questions thot moke her
impressed with herself, your life will be much eosier.
l[r&sr{llFl'ills $ismsNl" Rislf, $tl$Esi&s ail$ $8F-r[l$ns8$i0rN
ffa]npt$ 2
SITUATION: You're in line wqiting trc buy something in o grocery store
ond you're stonding nexl to o womon. You wont to tqlk b her. Whot do
you do?
o Breothe into your bolls.
. 
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout with this womon.
I 
Lislen lo lhe onswer.
. 
Ask your initiol question.
For exomple, you might soy, 'Thot's on interesting pin thd you're weor-
ing. Whofs the story behind it?"
She might soy, "Oh, I got this in Nepol."
So you go through the sequence ogoin:
o Breofie inlo your bolls.
r Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout in response to whot
she soid.
e Toke o second ond listen to the onswer.
. 
Ask your follow-up question.
You might soy, "Nepol, how interesting. Do you like to trovel?" or
"Nepol, thofs reolly on interesling ploce. Whot were you doing there?"
From there you moy find yourself creoting o conversotion with her!
ft 
$ru$$ruuullr$ilru,s*-
- r-
-
f,
Uurlt,trdubor!ooordultHffl

llour t0 lalfi l0 l{8me[
ffimptB $
SITUATION: You're in line woiting to buy something ond you're stond-
ing next lo o womon with o new cell phone honging on o clip from her
purse. So whot do you do? Go through lhe sequence:
o Breothe into your bolls.
o Ask yourself whot you could be curious qbout with lhis womqn.
o Lislen to the onswer.
. 
Ask your initiol question.
"l see you hqve one of those new cell phones, how do you like it?" She
responds, "ll's greol, it gets much better signol thon the other one I hod."
Repeot the sequence:
o Breothe into your bolls.
o Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout in her response.
. 
Toke o second ond listen to lhe onswer.
o Ask your follow-up question.
You might soy, 'lVhot hoppened to your old phone? Did it breok? Or
did you find there were ports of town where it didn't work?"
These ore not very personol queslions, but you con see how these con
leod to deeper conversotions. You con olso see how simple ond nolurol
they ore.
l[tsrrmptin! l{10m8lt. mEN{. $8[i0sits rn6 $slr"lilpr8$$i0n
ffa|nl$ 4
SITUATION: You ore in o bookstore next lo o womon reoding o book.
Go through the sequence:
o Breothe into your bolls.
. 
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout with this womon.
. 
Toke o second ond listen to the onswer.
. 
Ask your initiol question.
You might soy, 'Thol book looks reolly interesting. Whot do you think of
it so for?" She might respond, 'Well, i/s pretty good."
Run through the sequence ogoin:
r 
Breothe into your bolls.
. 
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout in her response.
o Toke o second ond listen to the onswer.
r Ask your follow-up question.
You might respond, "So, whot do you like obout the book?" or "ls thol
outhor good? Hove you reod o$er books by thot outhor?" or 'lVhol
hove you been reoding lotely?" or "ls there onything you con recom-
mend to me?" Those ore the kinds of questions thqt stort o conversotion.
I
fl
fr
uullt,ltuult!iltl0llluril,mrfi[
www.ebook3000.com

ll0{, t0 lal& ls lry0ffe'l
TilMDM $
SITUATION: You ore in o coffee shop ond you ore ordering coffee from
the hot womon behind the counter.
Stort by running through the sequence:
o Breothe into your bolls.
. 
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout with this womon.
. 
Toke o second qnd listen to lhe onswer.
o Ask your initiol question.
For exomple, 'Xou must see oll sorfs of stuff working here. Whot's the
most unusuol thing you've seen while working here?"
She might respond with something like 'A gry come in here once ond
ordered l0 cups of coffee ond dronk them oll within eight minutes." So
whot do you soy next?
You go through the sequence ogoin:
r 
Breothe into your bolls.
. 
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout in her response.
. 
Toke o second ond listen to lhe onswer.
. 
Ask your followrup question.
You might soy something like 'lVhot would hove hoppened if you hod
dronk thot much coffee?" or "lI thot wos your weirdest doy working
ln68rr[ptins t{&u8n, ni$L 0|l$ssits end sslf'$pr,8s$i0[
here, whot wos ihe best doy working here?" or 'lVhofs the coolest thing
you've seen while working here?"
Or you might hove osked, "Do you drink o lot of coffee while working
here? I bet there's o lot of lemptotion."
She might hove onswered, "l con't drink coffee onymore, ond I used to
love it."
Run through the sequence:
r 
Breothe into your bolls.
e Ask yourself whot jiou could be curious obout in her response.
o Tqke o second ond listen trc the onswer.
. 
Ask your follow-up question.
You might soy, 'lVhot do you drink now insteod?" or 'lVhy did you stop
drinking it?"
One thing to notice here is ihol once ogoin fiese ore simple questions.
Also, notice thot when you osk them you're not shoring o lot obout your-
self. You don't need to try to be impressive yourself. She doesn't core
thot you dronk 25 cups of cofhe one doy ond how cool you ore for
being o speed freok. She's interested in herself. Remember to focus on
drowing her out with your questions, not on showing off.
I
uuilrilt'ilttlu0r0ldul!.l{|Hll- I ft,
ouu,leuieruoilulllsmmilhfl

llnut ft8 &lll l$ til8ftc[
ffffi[18$
SITUATION: You're ot the gym. After you finish o workoul, o womon
wolks up ond prepores to use the some mochine you were on. So whql
do you do? Run through the sequence:
. 
Breothe into your bolls.
. 
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout with this womon.
. 
Toke o second ond listen to the onswer.
o Ask your initiol queslion.
Perhops you soy something simple like '!Vhot's your fovorite mochine
here?" She responds, "l love doing bicep curls. Thofs my fovorite."
So you go through the sequence ogoin:
o Breothe into your bolls.
o Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout in her response.
. 
Toke o second ond listen to the onswer.
o Ask your follow-up question.
You might osk, 'Vhot is it qbout the bicep curl thot you like?"
A simple question like thot could stort o conversotion. The more we proc-
tice hoving simple, eosy interoclions with women, the more powerfr.rl we
see thot they con be. Just simple curiosity*not tqying to impress ony-
one-con leod to getting o womon's phone number, o dote, o connec-
lion, ropporl ond more.
l[b8t t'ilsti|ls ttr0m8n, nis[. B[ri8sibc an{ $slr-{ffsr$s$isn
ffalnp$ I
SITUATION: You ore woiling to be seoted ot o coB. A womon is
stonding next lo you who looks like the type of womon you'd like to be
tolking to. You notice thd there is o lot of unusuol ort on the woll. So
you run through the sequence:
o Breothe into your bolls.
. 
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout with this womon.
. 
Toke o second ond listen to the onswer.
. 
Ask your initiol question.
You might sey, "Hi,whot do you think obout oll this ort?" She might
respond, "h/s not my style, but I guess i/s okoy."
Then you go through the process ogoin:
o Breothe into your bolls.
o Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout in her response.
o Tqke o second ond listen to ihe onswer.
o Ask your follow-up question.
You might respond, 'Whot kind of ort do you like?" or 'lVhot kind of
od do you think might look better up there?"
I
lltlltu,houtootcroidulilffru
www.ebook3000.com

a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
llsu m lirllr ?0 wnil8[
TilflMPM O
SITUATION: You ore ot o reslouronl ond on otlroclive wqilress is woiF
ing on you. You see her ond wont io tolk to her. So you slort by running
through the process:
Breothe into your bolls.
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout with this womon.
Toke o second ond listen to the qnswer.
Ask your initiol question.
You soy something like T Vhot's your fovorite food, even if it/s not on the
menu?" She responds, "l love o reolly good steok."
Run through the process ogoin:
o Breothe into your bolls.
o Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout in her response.
. 
Toke o second ond listen to the onswer.
e Ask your follow-up question.
You might respond, "So whot is the best steok you ever hod?" or '!Vho/s
the best reslouront you've ever been Io?" or 'lVhofs your fworile
restouront in lown?" or'lVhofs your fovorite ploce in town for steok?"
lnt$pflllpuing !{l$n*n, lli$x, &uris$ifig il[{ $8ls"ttlp,!$$si0tl
IilAlnUg g
SITUATION: You're ot o liquor store looking for tequilo. An otiroctive
womon working there qsks if she con help you. You run through the
Process:
Breothe into your bolls.
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout with lhis womon.
Toke o second ond listen lo the onswer.
Ask your initiol question.
You might soy, "l'm looking for some good tequilo. Whot kind do you
like?" She might respond by telling you the brond she likes. You con then
run through the process ogoin:
o Breothe into your bolls.
. 
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout in her response.
o Toke o second ond listen to the onswer.
. 
Ask your follow-up question.
So you might come up with the question 'nVhot do you like obout it?,"
which would be o perfect next question. You could olso osk, 'Which
ploce serves the best tequilo or morgoritos in town?" This could build
into o deeper conversolion.
t
uuu,lrubosllorildullfglff
tu

ll0fi sB lkl}l tr0l{llm8n
TfiflM[M ru
SITUATION: You're qt fie video stcre looking for o DVD or o video. You
see o cute womon stocking videos. You decide to trclk to her. Here's whol
you do:
. 
Breothe inlo your bolls.
o Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout with this womon.
. 
Toke o second ond listen lo lhe onswer.
. 
Ask your initiol question.
You might osk her, 'Whot is your fovorite new releose?" or 'lVhofs the
best movie you've seen recently?" She'll probobly onswer the question
ond mention o newly releosed movie, so you run through the process
ogoin:
o Breothe into your bolls.
. 
Ask yourself whot you could be curious obout in her response.
. 
Toke o second ond listen to the onswer.
r Ask your follow-up question.
You respond, 'lVhot did you like obout thol movie?" or "ls thot the kind
of movie you normolly like?" or 'lVhot kind of movies do you tend to
rent?" This will get her telling you obout herself. Then you con osk her
more questions. Over time, these sorts of conversolions con gel much
more intimote ond personol.
i!tlt
{;
lllsemllp&inc tv$l!l&n. nisNr. $ltri0si}$ an6 $slftlltrt S6$i0n
c0llcil$nll
We strongly recommend you proctice being curious wifi both men ond
women. A gome thoi we like to ploy (though we don't tell other people
\ /e ore ploying it!) is seeing how long we con go in o conversotion with-
oul reveoling onything obout ourselves. ln the gome, you're only
ollowed to osk questions of onother person.
We were recently listening to o speech given by morketing guru Joy
Abroms. He wos tolking obout the power of questions ond the power of
listening. Abroms told o slory obout o time he wos troveling cross-coun-
try ond met o guy on on oirplone. Abroms storting osking the guy ques-
tions obout himself. They tolked for hours-neorly the whole trip. At the
end of the conversotion, the mon lurned to Abroms ond soid, 'You ore
the most interesting guy l've ever mel." Abroms commenled fiot the
ironic port wos thot he (Abroms) did not soy onything obout himself; he
iust kept osking questions.
We mention this story lo show how people will bond with you ond feel
comfortoble with you when you give them the gift of osking questions.
When you provide women on opportunity trc tolk ond express themselves,
they will not only feel bonded to you but they will olso feel oppreciotive
lhot someone listrened to them. They moy not consciously reolize thot you
only listened lo them ond only osked questions without shoring much
obout yourself. Still, os in Abroms's story they will be conscious of feel-
ing closer to you.
I
llil,u.lruhrurrfiSilnlff
www.ebook3000.com

ll0l! t0l0ls ts l{lsNll$ll
We osk o lot of women if they've ever been on o dote with o guy who
iust tolked obout himself, never shutting up or osking her onything. They
oll soy yes. They mention thol i/s rore for o mon to be o good listener.
As porf of your curiosity skills, toke the time to listen to how women
onswer your queslions.
Good news: you ore now free of hoving to generote mogicol converso-
tion lo impress o womon. Better news: you ore now free lo osk questions,
lisien to the responses ond osk more queslions. o
clraD[8r 2
I1t8 ilt pt'0graln I uffilt[u
You've leorned obout the importonce of interrupting ond initioting inter-
octions wifi women. Here's o simple woy to stort putting thot knowledge
into oction, storting todoy.
Lel's tolk specificolly obout how you interrupt women ond redirect their
otlention toword you. Mony men think thot whot they reolly need is o
greot opening line. Guys often osk us, 'Whot ore the opening lines thot
women like?"
Here ore some opening lines we know women don't like, jusi for your
omusemenl:
"Hey boby, let's do breokfost tomorrow-sholl I coll you or nudge
you?"
"Hi, my nome is Dovid. Remember il, becouse you'll be screoming
it loter tonight!"
"Hey boby, ore you weoring your spoce underweor tonight?
Becouse your oss is out of this world!"
"Hey se4y, how would you like to ioin me in doing some moth?
Le/s odd you ond me, subhoct our clothes, divide your legs ond
then muhiply!"
"lf I could rewrite the olphobet, I would put U ond I together."
ft 
rrr,*ruu*r,*r,n **,*,* 
. - l
r 
$uu.hu[rulmlfilrul

lltll[ t0 lsll{ ts 1tr0rn8n
'There musl be something wrong with my eyes. I con't toke them
off of you."
"Excuse me, do you hove o quorter thot I con borrow? I told my
mother thot I would coll her when I found the girl of my dreoms."
"Congrotulolionsl You've been voted most beoutiful girl in this
room. The grond prize is o night with me!"
"Hey boby, is your dod o boker? Couse you sure hove greol bunsl"
We ore getting nouseoled.
Lefs be obsolutely crystol cleor: we ore nol suggesting you use these
lines. We include them to drow your ottention to the bosic problem with
opening lines: no motter how cute, sexy or obnoxious your opening line
is, ofter you've used it, you ore still foce to foce with o womon. When
you use some opening line, she either loughs, snorts or throws o drink
in your foce. Then you still hqve to come up with something to soy next.
lf onything, cutresy opening lines moke it horder to connecl with o
womon, becouse so often they ore stupid lines thol piss women off.
The University of Chicogo did o study of opening lines (your tox dollors
ot work!) ond found thot "Hi" is the mosl effective opening line with o
womon. "Hi" is followed in effectiveness by "Do you like the bond?" (But
only if there's o bond ploying-try to keep thot in mind.)
The bottom line is ihere is no opening line thot con keep you from hov-
ing lo generote o conversotion with o womon, so you might os well use
hi-ot leost it won'i piss her off. Of course, you'll still hove the problem
of needing to generote o conversotion with her, but we'll get to thot.
First, lefs tolk obout thot best of oll opening lines, the word "hi."
t
llllhoullflllto[u5|lln -
.
Rs nipr'0sfal|| ts l,italifi$
Ilt0 Hr Pr0gl|flln
Getting into the hqblt of soying hi to women is on importont first step in
hoving longer conversotions with women, conversolions thot leod to
seduction ond sex. Therefore, leorning to soy hi is your first tosk in inter-
rupting ond initioting with women.
This is obvious but importont fo note: soying hi to o womon estoblishes
o precedent of communicotion thot con work to your odvontoge. After
you soy hi to o womon, il's noturolto continue tolking with her-but it'd
be weird to tolk if you hodn't soid hi. Therefore, soying hi is your first
step toword seduction ond sex.
For inslonce, hove you ever been in o sifuotion where, if you'd only soid
hi to o womon right owoy, it would hove been oppropriote to tolk to her
loier on? Perhops it hoppened while you were woiting in line. You got in
line ond you noticed o very pretty girl in front of you, but you didn't soy
hi to her when you first sow her os you got into the line. You were in
your own world or you were trco ofroid to soy hi or you didn't wont to
interrupt her or you used whotever your stondord excuse is for not inler-
rupting ond initioting with women. You stood in line next to this beouti-
ful womon for o little while ond you reolized thot you wonted to tolk to
her-perhops you even thought of something the two of you could con-
verse obout-but by then you couldn't, becouse it would hove seemed
weird to stort iolking to her ofbr ignoring her for so long. lf only you
hod soid hi when you first got into line you would hove hod some prece-
dent of ocknowledging eoch other's existence, ond it would hove been
much eosier to trolk more loler.
r
www.ebook3000.com

*l{l{r, t0 mllr l{r wsllrgll
You've probobly hod thot kind of thing hoppen. We hove, too. Such sod,
lost opportunities ore the result of not setting o precedent of being o guy
who tolks to women. They're the result of not soying hi.
lf you ore going to leorn to tolk to women ond implement whot you leorn
qnd become good ot it, you hove to be oble to toke scory octions ond
boil them down into steps thot ore so smoll thot they ore noi scory ony
more or ore iust scolf enough thot you con still do them. The Hi Progrom
is o greot woy to do thot.
The Hi Progrom is reolly simple: you decide how mony womon you ore
going to soy hi to eoch doy ond you do it. Suppose you decide to soy
hi to I0 women o doy. Loter on, while you're wolking down the streel,
you see I0 women ond you soy hi to them. You go to the moll, you see
10 women, you soy hi to them.
When you follow the Hi Progrom, you become the kind of guy who iust
noturolly finds himself soying hi io women, so when you're in thot line
you hove olreody sqid hi to thot cute girl in front of you ond you con
eosily move on lo some other conversotionol sequence.
IltB HUG RUIB$ 0f [ll0 il Pl|0gl|aln
l. Decide how mony women you ore going to soy hi to
eoch doy ond keep trqck of how you do. Mony of our sludents
soy they will soy hi to I 0 or 20 women o doy for five or six doys o week.
Decide how mony women you will soy hi to for how mony doys o week
I
llrurlll lrllurruurrlllunt!
m8 llipresrslll s wtali8s
ond write it on o piece of poper or on index cord. Corry thot cord with
you ond keep trock of how mony women you octuolly soy hi to os you
go firough your doy.
This moy seem silly, but it's importont. lf you don't hove on ideo of how
mqny women you soid hi to, il,s very eosy to get stopped ond stoy
stopped. lf you keep trock, you con look ot your index cord ond soy,
'Wow, I soid I would soy hi to l0 women o doy ond I soid hi tro zero
women yesterdoy ond two todoy." Then you con look through this section
ogoin, figure out whot your problem is ond correct it. lf you don,t keep
trock, i/ll be eosier to delude yourself, overlook hends ond blow the power
of the entire progrom.
On the olher hond, keeping trock olso helps you feel good obout whot
you've occomplished. Especiolly if you've been o shy guy, looking ot
your cord ond seeing you soid hi to 32 women todoy con feel pretty
good. lt's worfh doing.
2. fn" women you sqy hi to don,t hove to heor you soy
hi. At this point, the importont thing is thot you open your mouth ond
soy hi. Whofs not importont ot this luncture is whether women heor you.
So open your mouth ond soy hi whether you think she con heor you or
not. The women you soy hi to con be wolking in the other direction or
even weoring heodphones. lt doesn't mqfier. Just soy hi.
A lot of guys soy, 'Vell, oll the women I sow this week-oll of them, I00
percent-were weoring heodphones qnd were Rollerbloding the ofier
woy or for some olher reoson wouldn't hove heord me, so I didn,t soy

ilou r0anlol{0ml
hi." Well, thofls gorboge. These guys didn't soy hi becouse they were
scored, ond they used o womon's inobility trc heor them os on excuse for
not following the progrom. Open your mouth ond soy hi. lt doesn't mot-
ter if she heors you or not.
3. Soy hi to ony womqn you see. Tho/s right, ony womon. She
con be old, fot, disobled-it doesn't motter. Remember, this is obout
building your initiotion muscle so you con interrupl women ond redirect
their ottention, no motter how briefly, toword you. At this point, it cqn be
with ony womon ot oll; it doesn'l motier.
{- C"l.btote thqt you did it. Often we tolk with o guy who would
only let himself feel good obout himself if he monoged to convince o
trciclly unottoinoble, uninterested supermodel whom he met on the sfeet
to sleep with him in 15 minutes or less. Then ond only then would he
ollow himself to hel good obout whot he occomplished with women.
We,ve soid it before ond we'll soy it ogoin: thot kind of ottitude is o mis-
tqke. lf you ore leorning to tolk to ond seduce women, you must ollow
yourself to feel good ond to celebrqte eoch step in the process of getting
loid. Beoting yoursell up ond feeling bqd will not help becouse o guy
who is reolly down on himself is inherently unollroclive to women. So
reword yourself; proise yourself for soying hi. h will help stort you on
your woy to becoming o moster ot tolking to women.
lf you try lo proctice the Hi Progrom but put down your effort ond suc-
cess iust becouse you oren't getting loid yet, you will only impede your
own process. Let yourself feel good obout toking oction. Tell yourself
m$ ilipf,s0nffi s l,ibalits
things like 'Vow, I soid hi to l0 women! I om the mon!" Find something
lo celebrote obout the progress you ore moking in interrupting ond ini-
tioting wilh women. You might wonl to keep o iournol obout it, perhops
writing, "l om the mon becouse I soid hi to 25 women todoy. I con see
fhot I reolly om breoking out of my shell, ond tho/s greof." Or you con
get your body involved: moke some little motion, like shoking your fist
powerfully while soying, 'Yes! I soid hil"
We're omozed by the extenl to which the men we work with resist feel-
ing good obout the smoll steps ond smoll octions they toke wilh women,
bul il's importont thot you do so. Most men hove o hord time celebrot-
ing ony occomplishment thot isn't on ordeol. Thot won't work with
women. Women like to be oround men who feel good obout themselves,
so it mokes sense to reword yourself ond feel good obout toking this first
slep in tolking to women: soying hi to them.
You musl do this. So mony of our students will soy things like 'lVell, I
wos wolking down the street ond I soid hi to 20 women in five minutes
ond it wos eos, so therefore it doesn't count." Or they soy, 'Yeoh, I soid
hi to t 0 women, but they were oll old or ugly, so it doesn't count." They
discredit their work before they even see the positive effucts of it.
Mony men who hove o hord time trrlking lo women ore often cought in
this trop: i/s either got trc be troo hord, ond thus they con't do it, or i/s too
eosy, so it doesn't count. h/s os if they hoven't sufbred enough to ollow
themselves to foel good obout whot they did. Don't moke this mistoke.
E. Pructicc out loud. Some men ore stopped by the ideo of soying
hi to women they don't know. They stort to soy hi ond they choke up.
t
uurrlllru[euio{lrllJwww.ebook3000.com

llllr$ ftn lillr T0 llll8ilrs|l
Actuolly, such chokes hoppen to everyone now ond then. You oPen your
mou$ to soy hi ond nothing comes out. lfs emborrossing, but there it is.
lf you hove trouble soying hi to women, proclice soying hi out loud olone
in the comfort ond privocy of your own home or cor. Just soy hi over ond
over in o cleor, powerful voice. This will get your body used to soying hi
ond moke it eosy ond noturol to do. Soon you'll be oble to do it without
thinking obout if, which is whot you need when you get foce lo fqce wifi
o beoutiful womon. You'll be oble to soy hi to women on the street, in
bookstores, of closses or onywhere else you meet them.
H0l[ uil call $cFeu llp [ll0 il Pr0sl|fllll
Our experience hos shown us thot men ore very inventive in screwing
up the Hi Progrom. Here ore fie mosl populor trops guys foll into. Leorn
these ond ovoid them ond you will be fine.
l. Oisquolifyirg oll women. You con screw up the Hi Progrom by
disquolifying every womon os o condidote for o hi. Usuolly it works like
this: o guy refuses to soy hi lo most women becouse they ore not hot
enough. He then refuses to soy hi to lhe resl becouse they ore so hot thot
he's intimidoted. The solution is lo remember this: your iob is to soy hi
to something femole qnd humqn. Thofs oll.
2. Woiting for the "perlecl momenl." The truth is there's never
o perfect moment ic soy hi. You iust hove trc do it. lf you con't iust soy hi,
you're going to hove o reolly hord time generoting conversotions with
$t8 [i pi,sspam tr uittlitc
women. Woiting oround br the perfect moment fic soy hi guorontees thol
you'll never soy hi becouse the perfect momenl never comes. you hqve lo
moke thot moment hoppen by interrupting her flow ond creoting it.
Mosl conloclwith women is not going to hoppen unless you moke it hop-
pen. You need your interruption muscle to be strong so you con creote
thot contoct. This is criticol. Remember, you olone ore responsible for
interrupting women ond initioting contoct wifh them. you hove to do it.
f. O,tty soying hi ro women who mqke eye contocr with
you. This is o very common problem men hove with the Hi progrom.
Guys soy to us, 'You guys told me to soy hi to I O women o doy ond I
thought thot would be reolly eosy, but then no womon mode eye contocr
with me, so I couldn't soy hi to ony of them."
Listen: if you ore going through life woiting for women to moke eye
contoct with you before you soy hi, you ore woiling for women lo initi-
ole with you before you will interoct with them. You ore trying to ovoid
interrupting \ /omen, qnd how well hos thot been working in your life?
Not very well. The terrible truth: you must soy hi to women even if they
oren't looking ot you. Women ore rorely going to moke eye contocl with
you before you soy hi. They ore going to ovoid contoct becouse thot is
whol women ore progrommed to do. Soy hi onywoy.
f. O.ittg upset by women's responses. you,ll get oll sorts of
responses when you soy hi. Some will be worm, some not. One of the ben-
efits of the Hi Progrom is you stort to leqrn thot her response doesn'l mot-
ler. Whot motlers is thot you took oction-you trcok o risk in soying hi.
I
uurur]rrluloqq{ql$I1, 

lleuSli aftn t,romln
DAVID: The other doy lwos leoving my gym ond I sow o very pretty
girl stonding in the gym's foyer looking ot o poster on the woll. As
I went by her I soid, "Hi!"
She storted in shock ond turned toword me, horrified. She looked
completely terrified, which is slronge, os I hoppen to know thot I
om nol thot scory-looking o guy. But this is port of being the kind
of guy who soys hi, who goes for whot he wonts without shome or
opology. Some women ore reolly in their own world of feor ond
upset. lt hos nothing to do with you, ond lhere's obsolutely nothing
you con do obout it. lf I hodn't stortled her, something else would
hove. So I did whot you hove to do in those situotions: I reminded
myself thot doting is o numbers gome, thot this kind of response
hoppens occosionolly ond thot it wos obout her, nol me. Then I
wenl on with my doy ond didnt think obout it ony more.
RON: Here's onolher exomple of the weird kind of response you might
get when you soy hi. The oiher doy, I wos wolking in o neorby
woods ond I soid hi to o womon who wos olso wolking there. Her
response? She turned ond ron owoy from me-ond I om not thot
scoqy-looking either. lt wos this beoutiful noture oreo; I smiled ond
soid hi ond she iust looked incredibly upset.
We ore here lc lell you thot i/s time tn stcp worqying obout women's respons-
es, ven if they ore like the ones dehiled obove. ll's fime lrc get post this ideo
thot you ore going lrc shofier o womon's enlire personolity iust by soying hi.
Some women, becouse of their own problems, lheir own histoqy ond their
ovrn lives, will get o little spooked when you soy hi. lt doesn'l motter. lf you
hodn't spooked her, something else would hove. Tho/s her, not you.
ilt$ lli pr0sn0m f uft$ms
l/s worth risking this kind of response becouse hi con orso work for you.
we hove hod mony more experiences where iust soying hi hos initiored
wonderful, seductive conversotions with women. you iust need to
remember thot everybody who proctices the Hi progrom occosionoily
gets o weird response, ond so willyou.
$. Refusing ro roke ony risks. Men olso kill rhe Hi progrom by
being unwilling to toke risks. Mony men worrr obout whqt other peopre
will think ond oren'r wilting to risk rhqr peopte mighrhink poorly of rhem
becouse they soy hi to women.
For instonce, you moy feel like you ore risking fiot eveqyone wiil see
whot you ore doing, everyone will know you ore trying to be o seducer
ond everyone will point ot you ond rough or throw rocks ot you or whoF
ever' However, if yov ore going to initiote with women ond get them into
bed, you're going to hove to toke these risks-ond more like them.
For now, simply know this: interrupfing women feers risky becouse it is
risky. By following our odvice, you'il leorn how to toke smorr risks wifi
women ond groduolly move into bigger risks over time. The smoll risk of
soying hi is the perfect ploce to stort.
0. Deciding the Hi progrom is so simple thor you don,t
need lo do it. A lot of our students soy, ,lVell, soying hi to women is
reolly eosy so it con't reolly be effective. r meon, r courd do thot right
now." We olwoys respond, ',ekoy, greot. lf ifs so eosy,
hi ro lo
women o doy for the next week.,, lnevitobly lhey come
wvrr."r ..l ctqy rar tne nexf week." Inevitobry rhey come bock the next
week ond tell us, 'Wow, it wos o lot scorier ond more chollenging thon
I thought, ond more voluoble, too.,,
soy
bock
|l
www.ebook3000.com

llou sll nn m l|,0nlsft
iltE R$$UU$ 0F Ell0 il P||0gl|aln
The results of the Hi Progrom con be omozing. One of our studenls, o
guy who hod not hod sex in o couple of yeors ot leost, wos o greol
exomple of this. We gove him the ossignmenl of soying hi to l0 women
o doy ond sent him on his woy.
When we tolked to him the next week, we osked, "How'd it go? Did you
soy hi to l0 women o doy?" He soid, "No, I didn't soy hi to l0 women
o doy. I soid hi lo more thon 300 women in fie lost seven doys. I went
to the beoch ond I soid hi to every womon I sow. lwent to the moll ond
I soid hi to every womon I sow. Wherever I wenl, I soid hi to every
womon I sow. I soid hi to 50, 60, even o hundred women o doy. I soid
hi to hot women, ugly women, old women, young women-qll of them."
He hod done greot work, ond he felt reolly good obout it.
Toking such mossive oction hod positive results. He got his interruption
ond initiotion muscle so slrong thqt he wos empowered to boldly ond
powerfully toke the next steps in tolking to women os we tought them to
him. He become oble to toke opportunities os ihey presented themselves
ond gove himself o bios for oclion with women thot over time got him
sex with o number of women ond eventuolly o girlfriend'
Obviously, soying hi by itself wosn't enough, but he point is this: he
never would hove succeeded without leorning lo soy it. He got himself
to the point where he could initiote eosily, ond thot mode it possible for
I
uuuttuM$cfoH - -
trll8 lli0r{Bram I l'it&li&!
him to meet, converse with ond seduce women. Strengthening your
interruption ond initiotion muscle is the criticol first step in being oble to
tolk to women successfully, ond the best woy to get thot muscle stronger
is by soying hi.
lf you don't feel like you hove the guts b do more, iust stort by soying
hi to o few women o doy or even one o doy. Thot will stqrt to develop
your iniliotion muscle, ond thot will stort you on your woy to powerfully
ond reliobly tolking to women.
umil[u
Men who hove hod bod experiences with women usuolly develop hobits
thot moke it horder to connect wilh women. For inslonce, they never
develop the hobit of expressing their virolity ond their physicol energy.
ln foct, they ore often unoble to proiect ony form of excitemenl or "up
vibe" oboul onything. These men hove repressed the ports of themselves
thot disploy vitolity when interocting wiih others.
We're going tc discuss two types of vitolity: physicolvitolity ond vocol excite-
ment. We'll show you how trr hqve more physicol vitolity ond vocol orcite-
menl in your lifu. Both will help you become more powerfulwith women.
pils$rctr HtH[$il0ll[
lf you don'l hove physicol excitement ond physicol energy, if you don't
proiect o phyricol prosence, il/s hord for women to get excited obout
I

llBtx t0 l{lt l0 tlr0lnsn
you. lf you ore colm ond hove o flot offect, you've gol o problem.
Women ore looking for someone who hos vitolity, possion ond energy.
Put onother woy, do you come ocross os o guy who gets loid or os o guy
who is poinfully shy ond hord to tolk to?
One woy to hove more vitolity is to oct with more urgency oround
women. Mony men treot life like o reheorsol. There's no energy or com-
milmenl behind whol $ey do. They oct like they con woit oround brev-
er before toking oction. As o result, they oppeor to be wishy-woshy ond
they hove o flot offect. These men olso tend to come ocross os boring
ond predictoble. lf you foll into this cotegory don'l worry. We'll teoch
you methods of bringing more vitolity to your life. lt's o skill thot you cqn
moster if you work on developing il over time.
HU8 Utflg$ U0 $rllls Pllu$l8tl rilcl[0lll$]l[
lllm $mr ilr$
Look over your life ond situotions in which you were interocting with
women. Did you hove o sense of urgency when tolking with them or
were you flot ond wishy-woshy? Our hope is thot this book will inspire
you to stort toking more risks with women ond feel more confident lo
toke on life ot o much higher level thot you've ever felt comfortoble
doing before. Here qre five things thot will help you do iust thot.
Use Your Body for Emphosis. When you use your honds ond
body os you speok, you'll come ocross os more possionole ond power-
ful. Don't go loo for, though, by pretending to hove on epileptic fil; we're
rusnimour*mrv/
tolking obout odding hond ond body movements for emphosis onry. you
shouldn't wove your orms oround looking insone.
To get o befier ideo how ro use your body to emphosize whot you're
tolking obout, wqtch lote-nighr-w tolk-show hosts ond comedions. TV
performers ore good speokers becouse they're subtle ond groceful ond
use their body in o very noturolwoy. These people ore skilled or odding
body movements lo emphosize the humor in their monologues. studying
these performers should give you on ideo how to integrote your body
into your own speoking style.
Moke Eye contccr. Port of developing o physicor presence is troin-
ing yourself to moke eye conroct with women. when you enter o room,
do you sweep rhe room moking brief eye confoct wirh women or do you
look ot the floor ond tqy to hide? Most shy men ovoid eye contocr no
motter whot. one of the components of hoving o physicol presence is
moking eye contrrcr with women os well os men. rfs importont thot you
leorn to be seen by people ond feel comforroble being looked or. when
you opprooch o womon, ir's cruciol thot you feel comfortoble looking ot
her ond moking eye con'cct when you speok. Otherwise, you,ll come
ocross os wishy-woshy ond uninterested.
You might find moking eye contoct scory. lf so, you,re not olone. Mony
men find eye contoct intimidoting. We recommend thor you proctice this
skill os often os you con-on the troin, wolking down the srreet, ony-
where there ore women. over fime you'll feel more comfortoble.
rl
www.ebook3000.com

ll0i[ t0 lalh l0 tll0m0n
Donce ond Jump Around. Anoher thing you cqn stort doing right
owoy is to put on o donceoble song ond spend ol leort five minutes eoch
doy doncing ond iumping oround lo the music' Mony men who ore
intimidoted by women don,t give themselves permission to get excited
obout ony'hing or to feel physicolly excited obout onything' They tend to
stoy colm ond flot. Troin yourself to be more spontoneous by doncing to
o song eveqy doy'
let Yourself Screom. lfs importont to let go ond moke some noise
occosionolly. You mighr wont lo go into your cor ond screom loudly' l/s
imporlont thot you leorn to express yourself ond omp up or colm down
depending on fie situotion. One woy to leorn lo be more excited is by
omplifying your voice'
Work Out. Working oul on o regulor bosis is onother woy lo chorge
up your body. When you feel greot ofter o workout or run' you in turn
proiect virolity io the women you inleroct with ond the other people in
your life. Working out is importont, not only becouse it helps with siress
reliel ond keeps you in good shope but olso becouse it increoses your
physicol presence when you're with women' Find o form of oerobic
exercise you enioY ond do il often'
These five suggestions will help you develop physicol presence ond power
with women. All of these exercises will help you be more self-expressed
ond will help you come ocross os more ottrqctive trc women. Remember,
hove fun while you do them ond stop when it sficps being fun'
&s lli pl'8sren & lli${tits
u0cil rilcm|llell[
When you're vocolly excited, you speok with o voriety of vocol lones;
you don't iust tolk in o monotone ond soy the some thing over ond over.
lf there oren't mony speed chonges or volume chonges in your speoking
style, you come ocross os deod. When you opprooch o womon ond ore
boring ond flot, she'll likely wont lo ovoid tolking to you. The reoson
most guys tolk quietly is becouse they're scored of interrupting or upset-
ting women. One woy to feel more confidenl is to leorn to speok from
your bolls.
$mffilll$ rr0ln u0il, Btll$
We first tolked oboui speoking from your bolls in chopter l. lt sounds
slronge, but il's very effective. We've oll hod moments when we felt
strong ond confident ond mode no opologies for whot wos coming out
of our mouths. We've oll hod momenfs when we've soid something ond
it felt like it iust come out of our core ond people iust stopped ond lis-
tened. lf you go bock ond think obout how it felt to speok powerfully,
you'll find thot it come from your guts or oll the woy down from your
bolls. Most likely it wos os if on energy come up from thot port of your
body ond out your mouth. We're going to teoch you how to reproduce
thot experience ot will.
Men who feel intimidoted oround tolking to women cut off their life ener-
gy ond their vitolity. When you speok from your bolls you feel more con-
fident becou3e you hove your life energy supporting you. When you
hove vitolity ond confidence, tolking to women is much eosier.
uulluniulutilfifl,

ll0lll $0&llrn ufim8n
The ideo of speoking from your bolls or your guls is not thot unusuol.
We know thot peok performers in sports ond other fields incorporote this
concept into their success sirotegies. They get reolly grounded in their
guls or their bolls; they feel o conneclion to thot oreo, they breothe into
it ond they get psyched up. Peok performers use this proctice to moke
themselves feel strong, confident ond powerful before they go into o
speech or importont situolion.
This is on owkword thing to discuss; the notion of coming from your bolls
is so foreign thot our only connection to tolking obout it is to ossociote it
with mqsfurbotion. We wont you to stort ossocioting speoking from your
bolls with hoving the power to help you get whot you wont wilh women,
not with something to feel emborrossed oboul or hide from.
Here's how you con use this energy. Stort by closing your eyes ond sens-
ing the energy qround your nwd ond your bolls. We're not tolking
obout ierking off here or onything like thot-sense il internolly. Sense
thot energy, sense your bolls, ond then breothe into it. Next, feel your
breoth circulote down io your guts ond bolls ond then come bock up.
The more comfortoble ond fomilior you become with thot energy, the
more confident you will feel with women. The more fomilior you ore with
thot energy, the eosier it will be to occess thot sense of colm qnd confi-
dence when you ore tolking to women. This simple proctice con be done
onytime, onywhere.
When they first stort working with us, mosl of our students tend to speok
from their heods or their throot. ltt os if they ore cut off below their
necks. They don't feel powerful ond insteod ovoid being grounded ond
n
uuuhou!$llsoli$ulll&- 
--:j
ft8[ipntsrirll 8r*flits
in touch with their power. They ore used to ovoiding their bolls ond gurs
when they feel scqred. You con troin yourself, however, to focus on this
oreo; over time, il will greotly enhonce your self-confidence.
Breothing is on importont ospect of leorning to speok from your bolls. rt
olwoys sounds silly when someone tells you to breothe; if we weren,t
breothing, we'd be deod, obviously. But you con breothe deep down
inside of yourself ond imogine the oir going deeply-or you con breothe
shollowly. when men feet intimidoted, they usuoily breothe shollowly.
Breothing deeply helps you relox. Spend o few minutes eoch doy
breothing deeply into your novel ond below, ond feering the power thot
comes from fiot port of your body.
IHrS$ pl't[[l8B$ $0p cutrffauilg u0ctl
ril8ffi0l1I$nI
Just os you need physicol vitolity, you olso need to proiect vocol excire-
ment. Here ore o few proctices to experiment with thot will enhonce your
vocol copocity.
' 
lmogine thor there's on excirement merer inside of you. When the
meler is of len, you ore bursting with excitemenl; zero equols
being deod. Mosr of the time shy men ore oround one or rwo on
the excitemenr meter. They don't wonilo rock the boot or let things
gel out of control, so they don,l get more excited. One woy for
you to ger more excited is to put yourself in fronr of o mirror ond
www.ebook3000.com

llsilt s0 llllr l0 li,0m0n
see how close to 10 you con get. Try this for 30 seconds b o
minule ond see how it feels to hove the excilemenl circulole
ihrough your body.
. 
Spend time with onother person ond toke ot leost o minute lo gel
more excited obout something thon you normolly would be. You
con go into this one step ot o time; you don't hove lo peg it or 10
right owoy. lf you're normolly ot one or two, let yourself go to four
or five, then groduolly roise the bor. This might seem crozy to you.
ln foct, it is silly, ond when you're excited you risk looking silly.
When you're in the flow of being excited, however, ifs ottroctive to
women. You con get owoy with o lot more when you're excited
oboul something thon you con when you're dull ond boring.
People wont lo be oround excited people. lf you're willing to occept
your own enthusiosm obout things, which might be silly, other peo-
ple will olso be okoy with it. lf you're willing to occept those silly
ports of yourself, o womqn will know thot you will olso occept her
silly ond owkword ports.
Act excited obout mundone things. You con choose to be excited
obout life or you con choose to be deod. You con hide in your
house, be ofroid to tqlk lo onyone ond be ofroid to show your
interest in ony'hing, but this will only keep you further owoy lrom
women. The olternotive: gel engoged in life ond toke the risks to
let yourself engoge wilh women. We're giving you permission to
let yourself show your enlhusiosm.
{lis lli prlt{ri|lt I 8ili8}i&$
c01lcil$run
You now know The Hi Progrom, ond how to implement it in your life. We
invile you to decide to srort using The Hi progrom todoy. chose how
mony women you ore going to soy hi to eoch doy, ond stort doing if.
Keep trock. see whot comes up to block you, get firough those brocks,
ond celebrote your successes. The Hi progrom is the foundotion for rok-
ing the next steps with women we will teoch you in upcoming chopters.
You olso now know obout creoting ond increosing physicol ond vocol
vitolity. Both of these foctors will be importont in you future obilities ro
converse seductively with women. .
x-.
uuuil0lllt0sI00llm

cllap[Bt' il
ril8 lllll$F $a1ll0 0F rtlltlll$ m u0lll0ll
"lf one advances confidentlq in the dir'ection of hir dneams,
and endeauors to live the life urhich he has imagined. he uill
meet ulith a succe$$ unetpected in common houns."
-110il'u IauiI Ill0l'8fl[
There is on inner gome of tolking to women. lt's oll obout groppling with
yourself ond deoling with your feors ot eveqy stoge of opprooching ond
tolking to women.
You might soy fiol there is o wor in your heod. There's o bottleground
inside you. Perhops there is o port of you thot wonts to tolk to women
while onother port is scored to deoth of reiection. One port of you wonts
relotionships with women; onother port only wonls shorl-term sex. One
port of you feels shong ond confident; onother port of you feels scored
ond intimidoted.
Lel's spend some lime looking ot the internol struggles reloted to seduc-
tion ond offering some tips on how to hondle the inevitoble internol
*xfli*.
problems thot come up when opprooching women.
www.ebook3000.com

l|sur ss lblll & t{slrsn
pr'0B10ln$ ln0ll ilauE ull8ll co|n]nllll|caflllg
llil[ll u0ln0ll
Defunding, opologizing ond prctecting yourself. When tolk-
ing to women, mony men feel os if they hove to defend themselves. They
immediotely ossume thot every'hing o womon soys is o personol ottock.
These men oct os if women ore oul to get them, out to humiliole them,
ond the only fhing they con do to reroliote is be prepored for on
inevitoble ottock.
When Bob fhe bod seducer tolks to women he is conslontly on guord
ond wondering when she will ottock him. He stores ot her with on ongry
expression. When o womon osks him o personol queslion he tokes on o
defensive tone ond soys, 'tVhot do you meon by fhot?" or 'lVhy do you
think thofs your business?" Bob is so wropped up in his poronoio $ot
he is unoble to hove o conversqtion with o womon'
Toking o defensive posiiion when you're tolking lo women does not
work. When you toke on o defensive position ond ossume o womon is
ottocking you, being oggressive or trying to horm you, you seem
uncomforioble, meon ond nosty. You need to be open when you're tolk-
ing fo women. When you're focused on defending yourself or opolo-
gizing for your sexuol interesl you connot listen to o womon ond connol
hove fun with her. When you're with o womqn, look for times when
you're defending ond protecting yourself ond times when you oren't'
Whofs the difference? Whot ore the internol triggers?
l[8 lllnsr &am8 [r Telfiins [8 td0ln*n
The other side of being defensive is being protective. Whot ore you pro-
tecting yourself from when you're tolking to women? Usuolly you ore
protecting yourself from reiection or from looking like o moron, or else
you're simply tqying too hord to look good. Unfortunotely there is noth-
ing you con do but toke risks wiih women. You olwoys risk looking stu-
pid, being vulneroble ond being owkword. Approoching women is
inherently risky ond vulneroble. You hove to decide to live with it.
Another common trop is opologizing for your sexuol inleresl. Shy men
feel os though opprooching women is wrong. They think thot if they
show romontic or sexuol intreresl il in some woy hurts o womon. These
men think they ore so powerful thot they con ruin ony womon's doy
merely by commenting thot she is beoutiful or showing ony interest.
Strotegizing. There ore concrete skills you con leorn to help you suc-
ceed with women. ll/s smort to study seduction moferiols; stud this book
ond our other products ond leorn os much obout yourself, women,
romonce ond sexuolity os possible. Studying, however, is oll obout
preporotion. Once you're hoving on ocfuol conversotion with o womon/
oll the rules chonge.
Once you're in on octuol conversotion with o womqn ifs best to try to
forget obout forcing on oulcome; relox ond hove fun. To be in the pres-
ent moment you need lo give up qny strotegy thot you moy hove.
There ore o few reosons why strotegizing does nol work:
o The experience of being with women chonges from moment lo
momont, to ony rtrotegy you employ will not be opplicoble to the
I

l0$ t0 lall trll liilslllcn
ineviioble curvebolls women will throw ol you' How con you hove
o strotegy for q situotion thol hos no predictobility? You con't'
Strotegizing mokes you blind to openings' When you ore tolking
to women lhere ore subtle openings to osk for phone numbers' ini-
tiote different types of conversotions, go lor the first kiss, ond
more. When you're focused solely on your strotegy you will not
see the openings for moving things further' You need to be in on
odd Zenlike stote of being immersed in the situolion yet detoched
enough to see when to osk for her phone number' lf you ore solely
focused on o slrotegy you'll miss the openings'
Strotegizing is not fun' Why do we keep tolking obout fun? Fun
men lurn women on. When you're hoving fun you're in the flow
ond when you're miseroble ond struggling you ore not ottroctive'
When you focus on o strotegy ond work hord to seduce women'
you toke oll the fun out of ir ond moke tolking to women feel like
work. Relox ond find woys to enioy the experience'
Strotegizing mqkes you come ocross os o freok' A mon who is
focused on o sirolegy comes ocross os owkword ond uncomfort-
oble. Telemorketers ore olwoys irying to use cule lines ond stupid
questions lo engoge you ond they olwoys come ocross qs time
wosters. Sqlesmen who hove on ogendo or ore using o soles slrol-
egy come ocross os creepy. When you ore focused on o slrotegy
or using o technique you roo will come ocross os superficiol ond
creepy.
Think obout how o mortiol ortist goes into o fight. He works on his kicks,
his punches, his blocks ond more. He works for yeors developing mus-
cles ond strengih, procticing in the doio with his fellow students. During
n8 hnfr, 88810 0f lalfiins $ lil0men
qn octuol fight he uses evefihing he's ever leorned during his troining.
He uses the blocks, the kicks, the punches ond more.
But to do thot, during the octuol fight he must give up ony strotegy ond
ony skill he's leorned ond be ovvore of the other fighter. He must be open
to responding to onything thot hoppens. lf he's focused on showing off,
strotegizing or expecling the other fighter to fight o porticulor woy he's
in for o rude owokening. The momenl he storts thinking he understonds
how fhe fight will go he'll likely get his oss kicked. The moment he storts
expecting o kick or o punch, the other fighter will do something com-
pletely different ond knock him out. With women you need to let go of
ony strotegy ond skill you've leorned ond be open lo whotever hoppens.
When you con be owore, presenl ond open, tolking to women will be
fluid ond fun.
Monipuloring. Do you wont to leorn o surefire method for feeling like
o ierk? Do you wont to find o woy to feel guilty, crummy obout yourself
ond regretful? Monipuloling women is one woy you con creole o situo-
tion where you feel like o totol ierk.
We've worked with thousonds of men, ond the number one concern lhey
hove in seducing women is thot they wont to dote ond hove sex without
being o lerk. Men tell us thot when they monipulote ond lie lo women
they feel terrible. They feel guilty ond depressed. Men tell us thot even
when monipulotion works the cost is nol worth it. The ultimole cost for
monipuloting women is your self-esteem. Fortunotely, you don'f need to
monipulote. You con build reol connections, using the tools in this book.
www.ebook3000.com

ll0l[ t0 $llt l0l{llnrn
Looking for certsinty. lf you wont to leorn to be o powerful seduc-
er then you need to stop looking for cerlointy. lf you ore seorching for o
seduction method thot is bosed on certointy ond stobility you will foil
every time. Tolking lo women is qll obout uncertointy ond unpredictobil-
ity. Tolking lo women is like iumping off o high diving boord. So whol
do you do? You con either climb bock down or decide not trc iump or
you con muster up the couroge lo go for it. lf you iump there ore o few
seconds in which you ore folling through the oir, which hels scory exhil-
oroting ond intense.
Tolking to women is like iumping off o diving boord. At first there is no
woy of knowing how things will go. You don't know if she's got o
bofriend, if you're her type, if you'll offend her with o comment or if
you'll toke her home thot night ond hove sex with her. To hove o chonce
ot success, however, you need to iump ond go for it ond understond thot
you hove no clue qbout whether you'll succeed or foil. We oll get scored
when we first opprooch o womon. We oll feel nervous ond uncertoin
ond doubt our skills. You con still go for it, though. Your iob is to feel the
feor ond still do it onyrroyl
Resisting the truth. Mony of our students hove o hord time focing
the horsh reolities of doting women. Most men wonl o sonitized version
of doting women; they wont the version without the risk of poin ond
humiliotion. Guess whot? Tho/s not reol. Most women on this plonet ore
not the slightest bit interested in doting you. So whot? You're only look-
ing for the hondful of women who ore.
lls lsnsr fian$ 0f htftin{ 8l} t4t8m0n
Lefs get honest here. Hqrsh truths thot you must foce:
Some of our students meet women who hove boyfriends ond they
will not occept the foct thot the womon is olreody token.
Some of our students keep colling o womon even ofter o few dotes
hove gone bodly. They foil to occept the foct thot the womon is not
interested in them.
Some of our students keep colling women even ofter o few dotes
hove gone bodly. They foil to occept thot they don,t like the
womon!
We oll meet women we find ottroctive who hove no interest in us.
The vost moiority of women you tolk to ore not interested in you.
l/s importont to see the truth ond occept focts. When you hold on to folse
hopes ond lie to yourself i/s hord to succeed with women. poin con be
o greoi motivotor. h/s our belief thot ifls better to be honest ond reol, ifs
befter to feel the poin of foilure ond loneliness, fhon it is to lie to your-
self. The poin con become on olly, not something to resisi. When you,re
oble to be honest it's much eqsier to come up with on qction plon ond
get bock into the gome of doting.
Forcing qn outcome. As men, one woy we succeed in life is by forc-
ing outcomes. lf you're o compufer progrommer, for instonce, through
sheer hord work, discipline qnd drive you con occomplish neorly ony-
thing ond complete ony proiect. lf you're o doctor or on ocodemic you
con push yourself ond struggle through medicol school or struggle
through your Ph.D. fiesis process. You con push yourself ot ony iob to
work overtime, do odditionol studying, toke on odditionol responsibili-
ties ond occomplilh firrks you never thought you could.
a
a
I

ll0lll t0 lhlll l0 lil0ln80
succeeding with women is difhrent from succecs oi work. when it
comes to seducing women hord work is importont, but hord work qlone
will not bring you success. You con conFol o lot of oukomes ot work.
you cqn,l control women. You connol conhol oulcomes with women.
None of us knows whot o porticulor womon wonts, whot furns her on'
whot she,s looking for in o mon. so you connol opprooch the issue of
how to seduce women in the some woy you would your work problems'
With women il's oll on experiment. You show up, run some communico-
tion experiments like Deepening Questions ond Romontic Questions,
ond see whot the response is like. lf she's oPen you do some more' if
she's unreceptive You move on.
This is olso true when going on dotes. You connot force o womon b hove
sex wiih you or be in the mood to mqke out"You con show up ond do
your best to creote o romontic mood. Then ogoin, you con do everything
perfectly ond she still might not be turned on by you. The bottom line is
twofold:
You connoi control ouicomes with women'
You con only show up ond do your best'
You connol force outcomes with women' Do not even lry'
Trying to solve her problems. Trying to solve q womon's problems
is suicide. You might os well iust put o gun to your heod ond blow your
broins out if you think o womon will be romonticolly interested in you i[
you solve her problems.
l?0 Inmr $8rfi$ 0r lalfii|Is [fr $l0tll$ll
Mony men use fie theropist ploy to otlempt trc become lovers with women.
The ploy usuolly works this woy: o guy is o friend with o womon he wonts
to dote. He thinks thot if she opens up irc him emotionolly then it will like-
ly leod ic sex. He thinks thot if he con solve her emotionol problems she
will wont tc dote him. Then, trc his surprise, things pon out difhrently.
lying. Some doting "experts" encouroge men to lie to women os o woy
lo gel sex. We ore wholly ogoinst lying to women ond do not in onywoy
encouroge you to lie. We wont you to cultivote the skills to creote relo-
tionships wilh women you con feel good oboul, nol regret.
Whot does lying soy obout you? Lying soys thot you ore the kind of guy
who connot gel women by being honest. You connot get women unless
you pretend you're someone else. You cqnnol get women if you ore iust
you. Lying leods to o lock of self-respect ond to regret.
Lying might work in the short term, but ultimotely ifs veqy costly. Whot if
you end up reolly liking o womon ond wont to pursue o relotionship with
her? Then she finds you out you lied to her ond she's no longer inlerest-
ed. Whot if you forget obout the lies you told ond o womon cotches you
in one of your lies? How is thot going to go over? Whot if the word gets
oround thol you're o lior?
The bottom line is thoi lying is unnecessory ond tends to couse more
problems thon i/s worth. lnsteod, we recommend you cultivote internol
integrity ond ovoid lying to women.
a
a
rrrrlmlnuuglru,
www.ebook3000.com

o
a
a
a
a
a
a
llslu [s lalh I0 $r0mm
Comporingyourselftoothermen.Rorelyisitmotivotingtocom-
pore yourself to orher men. This book ond this progrom ore obout you
ond you olone. ll's obout whot you con do to get women into your life'
We oll hove different experiences qnd skills. Whol most of our students
do is look qt the bod boys, ond the men who ore with the hofiesl women,
ond feel ieolous ond depressed. Our studenls soy things like:
Other men ore rich ond con therefore eosily get women'
Other men live in o city with more hot women per copito'
Other men hove o iob thot is more conducive to meeting women'
Other men ore younger thon I om ond therefore hove on eosier
time.
Other men qre toller.
Other men ore in betier physicol shope'
Other men ore iust nolurols.
All of these excuses ore trops. There is nothing you con do oboui other
men; oll you con do is chonge yourself'
Rother thon focusing on whot olher men ore doing ond oll the lucky
breoks they hove, whot con you do? Moybe you're veqy inexperienced
with women ond to you i|/s o huge siretch iust to soy hi to women. lf
thofs hord for you then srort by soying hi ond build your skills from
there. Other men feel more comfortoble qnd need to slort experimenl-
ing with the o&onced conversoiionol modes in this book' Some men
moy feel clueless obout doting women ond wonl to buy The Mostery
Progrom oudio course becouse they need o comprehensive progrom for
meeting ond doting women. (Check out our web site' wwwhowtosuc-
ceedwithwomen.com, for more informotion on thoi ond ofier helpful
lh8 lnnfi! &a{ss sr mlsine 80 il,s'|s|t
products.) No motter where you ore in lhe process, comporing yourself
to other men is not useful. Who/s useful is constructing o plon of oction
fhot improves your skills.
Beoting up on yourself. One key difference between successful
seducers ond unsuccessful seducers is thot the most successful seducers
don't beot themselves up. lnsteod, they constontly focus on the woys in
which they ore successful with women.
Doting women is o long-term proiect, qnd os with oll long-term proiects
the gool is smoll incrementol progress over time. somerimes there will be
big sleps forword; sometimes, smoll steps bockword. Along the woy
there will be upset, poin, horsh reolity, scory moments, fun ond ioy. you
need to develop on internol opprooch trc see the positive steps you toke
with women. ln the confusing, long odyssey of doting women, you need
to constontly look ot the movement ond steps you've loken ond con-
stontly compliment ond reword yourself for your own progress.
You con either look ot eoch interoction with women qnd kick yourself for
the woys you blew it or you con celebrote the foct thot you octuolly did
somefiing. Unfortunotely, beoting up on yourself hos become o woy of
life for mony of our students. They moke o proctice out of feeling guilty
for ony opportunities they didnt toke with women, errors they mode
while tolking to women ond opportunities to osk for phone numbers they
didn't toke. lnsteod, we recommend you keep irock of oll the things you
do correctly. When you con see the things you've done correctly ond the
woys you've pushed yourself in new directions, if will enhonce your self-
confidence. lf you only focus on the things you didn't do correctly you,ll
nevar improvc,
urulnrhnnr{fl

I
ll0u! s0 ldlr l0 ll0lll8[
stop beoting up on yourself or Louis & copelond will breok your finger!
lf beoting up on yourself worked we'd tell you'
Not lisfening. To be on effective seducer i/s importonl to develop lis-
iening skills. when you ore oble to lisien corefully lo whot o womon soys
you leorn importonl informotion obout her. You leorn whot she likes ond
dislikes. You leqrn whot she considers romontic ond whot she's possion-
ote obouf. You olso leorn how to move the conversotion inlo more seduc-
tive depths. These detoils ore useful in coming up with dote ideos ond
olso in creoting more ropport between ihe two of you'
All too often men don't listen to women becouse they're thinking obout
the next step in o seduclion or moybe iust the nexl question to osk. Deol
with your internoldiolog when you ore tolking to q womon ond you will
be oble to poy otlention to her.
Being on the couch qnd wishing you wene our flirting wirh
women. h's eosy lo sit on he couch ol home wonting to interoct with
women. We oll get frustroted ond depressed ond iust do not wonl to go
out ond proctice our seduction skills. But there is no olher woy to get
women. They ore not going to porochub into your bockyord' They ore
not going to suddenly knock on your door ond beg for sex' They ore not
going chose you down the sireet ond then toke off their shirt ond beg
you to feel them up then ond there' lt iust oin't gonnq hoppen'
Here's how we recommend you chonge this pottern: get up' leove the
house ond go onyaAere other thon home'
n8 [$ff 8m8 0r Talftins t$ lll0msn
Perhops your eventuol gool is trc go trc bors ond trrlk to women, but ot the
momenl you're terrified of doing so. lnstreod, you con stort tonighl by
going to bookstores ond soying hi to l0 women. lf you're home on the
couch, see if you con get motivoted io toke one smoll sirep toword tolking
lo women by leoving your house. Moybe you'll lust go to the coffee shop
ond smile ot o bw women. Tho/s o much bigger step thon stoying ot
home.
Scomming women. Remember the line from the movie Body Heat
obout the perfect crime? 'A hundred things con go wrong with every
'perfect crime.' lf you're o genius, you con think of 50 of them. And
you're not o genius." Do guys who use tronsporent scoms lo gel women
ocfuolly think women ore dumb enough to foll for them? We know o hot
young bisexuol femqle who spends o lot of time online. She soys ifs not
shocking thot men iry to scom on her online-its iust shocking how
tronsporenl these scoms usuolly ore.
The bottom line is this: most of the time when you think you're getting owoy
with something, you're octuolly being incredibly obvious. This mokes peo-
ple-especiolly women-hob you ond not wont trc give you whot you
wont.
Mony of us leorned eorly on in life rhot the only woy to get oheod is to
scom people. h/s either be o scom ortist or get nothing ot oll-or, even
worse, be screwed by eveqybody else scomming you. The problem with
this is thot while scomming moy get some results occosionolly, ir costs
you your self-respect ond selFesteem os o mon. Scomming is whot o guy
does when he's looking for o quick fix for life's problems, ond quick fixes
runrruhffid5lf
www.ebook3000.com

lltxt sl!talllI0{{llm$n
never work in fhe long term. How does o guy feel obout himself ofter try-
ing some lome pickup line or rouline on o womon ond hoving her throw
her drink in his foce? How does o guy feel obout himself when he spends
$50 on pheromone cologne ond it hos no effed on women?
Often guys with o scom orientqtion think thot ifs olmost o duty to toke
os much os they con from people. lf you give them on inch, they try to
tqke o mile. lf they con get o mile, they go for even more. lf you ore like
this, women you lry to scom on will sense it ond ovoid you. Businesses
yov lry to scom will cotch you. scoms ore hord on your self-respect.
Even when they work, they reinforce the ideo thot you hove to scom to
get by in life, ond thot hos o psychologicol cost'
Men ore fomous for confusing kindness for blindness. Just becouse o
womon is nice doesn'l meon she won't hit bock if you try irr scom on her.
The belief thqt you con or should toke people for oll you con gel ultimotely
does not work with women or for getting the life you wonl. lf you wont
something from someone, you've gol lo moke on effort to build o mutu-
olly beneficiol connection. You must creote positive flirting conversotions
thot give women good feelings ond moke them wonl to see you ogoin'
Whot's reolly needed is to get out of the entire scom orientqtion. A
seducer who isn't o scom ortist underslonds thot poying the price is whot
ifls oll obout. Such o mon iust wonls to know whot the price is. He isn't
trying to pull o fosf one. This shows up with women in leorning how to
moke o reol, humon, romontic connection, even if your gool is o shorl-
term sexuol relotionshiP.
I
ul|tu,hruhillffi
uultltiuttt0uffflure* 
I
trls f'|llsr l}ilmc 0r l0ltti|ls Sn Wl}llxsl|
Beniomin Fronklin once soid, "lf roscols knew the pleosure of virtue, they
would become virtuous out of sheer roscoliry." When you work fie fun-
domentols ond build connecrions with people-whot Fronklin might coll
being virluous-you reolly con get whot you wonl.
Not qsking for the number or stepping up the seduction.
seize opporlunities when they ore in front of you! opporrunities ore
there for one reoson: for you fo toke them. yes ir's true, if you foil to toke
opportunities life will not end, ond you shouldn't beot yourself up. At the
some fime, the world of tolking ro women is oll obout creoting bigger
ond bigger openings to risk toking things to rhe next level. perhops you
wont to tolk to o womon ond you risk tolking to her; the next risk is osk-
ing her out. Push yourself to toke the next risk. push yourself to go for it.
When on opportunity shows up, go for it, rother thon regret not going
for it loter.
Only rrying one opprooch or experimenting with one
technique or niche. lf you use only one technique in this book, you
will foil. successful seduction is built on o foundotion of experimentotion.
You never know with ony degree of certointy whot will eventuolly work.
You need lo experiment wifi online doting, meeting women in bors, try-
ing mony different niches ond constontly being on the lookout for new
ploces to find women. You must try o voriety of different opprooches.
leffing your onger ond frusfrqlion qt women come
lhrough in your communicqrion. lt con be very frustroting to be
out in the world risking ond tolking ro women. h con be stressful, scory
ond downright oggrovoting. lr's very frustroting to wolk down the street

'lsur 
ss lbll* 1l wllllsll
ond see so mony hot women ond feel like you hove no shot with them.
lfs frustroting to see other men hove the success you wont'
The solution is to creote spoces where you con let out your fruslrotion-
spqces where there ore no women oround'
lf you ore o guy who gets frustroted eosily, ond mony of us do' you need
to find outlets for thot frustrotion' lf you come ocross os on ongry mon
to women they will not only be turned off by you, they will most likely
find you intimidoting ond wont to ovoid you. You need to understond
your frustrolion enough to see when it's coming out with women' lf you
ore o nice guy you moy come ocross os orrogont ond meon'
Here's how you come con come ocross os ongry lo women:
Seeming snotty
Seeming iudgmentol
Seeming dismissive
Seeming like you ore lecturing people
Soying things thot seem like roundoboui woys of telling people
to shui up
Joking oround in woys thot seem condescending or potronizing
Being sorcostic in woys ihot seem meon
This does not meon you hove to wolk on eggshells oround women ond
oct like you ore Mr. Hoppy oll the time' lt meons you oct respectfully ond
do not come ocross os o meon guy.
til8 lnfis,, $&ns sr l*Kits t0 lfsuts{!
$0lllfl0ll$
Be quthentic. We've olreody tolking obout being self-expressed ond
hoving chorocter. Women wont o mon who is interesting ond interested.
You need to find your edge, the ports of yourself thot ore unique.
Women wonl o mon with possion ond energy. Look ot how you con
express yourself with women ond show your chorocfer.
Hqve fun. Fun ollrocts more fun. Depression oilrocts more depression;
feor otirocts more feor. women wont to be oround fun men. one req-
son comedions get women, even though mony comedions ore not por-
ticulorly otfroctive, is becouse they ore fun to be oround. women find
men who moke them lough or ore fun to be oround sexy ond exciting-
in o$er words, potentiol lovers. For mony women ployfulness, fun ond
sexiness ore linked. Hove fun ond moke every interoction fr-rn for both of
you.
Give up how it hos to look. When you,re deoling with women
you need to give up your ideos of how o conversotion or interoction
should look. You never know whot will hoppen. Moybe you end up tolk-
ing to o womon ot o concert ond you get her number but don't bring her
home. Moybe o womon seems reolly into you but never colls you bock.
Moybe she's only interested in you os friend ond not o lover. you will not
find this out unless you give up your preconceived notions of how ir
should look, ond find out whot reolly is there. you hove no clue whot the
relotionship will look like. And since you connot control the interoction
or her interest level, oll you con do is show up ond go with the flow.
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
suu,llutuutffi."www.ebook3000.com

llllllt $s i*lli T{r $,o$sll
By going with the flow we don't meon being totolly possive ond not try-
ing to move things into o more seductive reolm; you should toke risks to
moke things os seductive os possible. But if you ore too focused on get-
ting o number/emoil oddress or hoving on inleroclion look o porticulor
woy you will miss the direction she wonts things to go. You will miss the
cues she's giving you ond openings lo toke the interoclion deeper.
h's o porodox. At one pointyou need to give up ony ottochment ond ony
focus on whof things need to look like. At the other you need to try to
push things inlo more romontic spoces. Be cognizont of both of these
opprooches qnd do your best lo stoy in behveen both.
Cut off communicotion qnd ovoid people ond situotions
thot moke you uncomfortoble. Sometimes you need to cut o dote
short ond leove. A mon who hos selFrespect does nol stoy in situotions
where he feels condescended to, obligoted to poy for things thot don't
feel right or offended or otherwise mode uncomfortoble by o womon'
Once ogoin we're not tolking obout being rude or meon, bul sometimes
dotes ore not going well ond even feel reolly bod. We're giving you per-
mission to leove these situolions ond go somewhere else. You do not need
to subiect yourself to women ond situolions thot feel bod. You will likely
end up folking to ond doting women who you're not into being oround.
ln those situolions the best tqctic is to leove when there's on opportunity
trc do so.
Stoy in communicqtion wirh friends qnd buddies. One of the
best woys to increose your skills with women is to hove o buddy you con
I
luurllublruuilriflfr.,
ngrurhlulrrulltrldoEffry8lLi.", 
i
Tlls llltlstr t}sme 8f filllits &0 }vs'|tsg
tolk to obout how your seducfion experimenrs ore going. A buddy is
good becouse you con coll him for support bounce ideos off of him.
Hwing someone you con blk b obout women on o regulor bosis is very help-
ful in stoying motivoted, pushing yourself ond overcoming trouble. you
will olso leorn o lot obout yourself by being o buddy ro onother mon in
helping him dote women.
Focus on your gools ond keep your word to yourself obout opprooching
ond soying hi to women. You need to come up wifi o seduction plon.
This meons you hove gools, both shorr ond long-rerm. This meons you
come up with o strotegy to proctice tolking to women. perhops you com-
mit to soying hi to l0 women per doy, procticing the Romontic Moves o
few limes per week ond hoving qt leost two Deepening conversotions
(oll of which you will leorn loter in this book). Whotever your gools ore
you need to push yourself to keep your word.
unsuccessful seducers don't toke fieir promises seriously ond blow off
occomplishing their gools. successful seducers keep their word no mot-
ter whot. lf they promise to tolk to o cerroin number of women eoch doy
or week, they do it.
Moke ir inro o gqme. Tolking to women is o gome. yes, there ore
emotionol components to deoling with women; yes, ir feels like your ego
is on the line oftentimes, but ir's only o gome. lfs not reor. lt's not o mor-
ter of life ond deoth. There ore no reol consequences.

l|sffr t;{! lall{ T0 ll!,{r|ll0n
So how con you shift the focus from being serious ond heovy to hoving
fun ond enioying the gome? You con stort trocking your progress, doing
things iusr for the hell of it, checking things oul knowing i/s not thot seri-
ous ond creoting your own rules.
Dqnce in the conversolion. Hove you hod the experience where
you were folking fo someone ond time iust seemed to stqnd still ond the
next thing you knew hours hod possed? ln those moments you were in
the flow, you were doncing in the conversotion. You were open ond free
ond iusr reolly synched up with the other person. So how do you repli-
cote thd experience? There is no cleor poth to doing it every doy or ol
will. Just be open to doncing in o conversotion lodoy. The gool is to hove
fluidity in your communicolion.
Hqve self-respect. The problem with domoging your self-respect to
pursue o womon is thot it is selFreinforcing: the more your betroy your
own self-respect ond grovel to o womon, the more likely you ore to
betroy yourself ogoin the next lime. To moke motters worse, when you
violote your self-respect with o womon, it orouses her contempl for you,
ond she will treot you even worse. lf you stoy oround for thot, she'll hurt
you even more. You'll be left wondering why you-such o nice, under-
stonding guy-ore cought up with o womon who treqts you so bodly. lt
will oll be becouse you sold your self-respect for sex, which is o bod deol
ond olmost never octuolly gels you the girl.
This doesn'i meon you should be meon lo o womon, go crozy or do ony-
thing else thot would domoge your self-respect. You iust hove to decide
where the line is ond live with it intelligently.
ulrlrhnlrhlumnfffl
nuulrllnrmmtnrtsr*iifiE&r;l, 
I
I
I
ine lnnsr fiams 0f Isttrins nn d
I
Be experimentol. You never know whot will work for you until you
try it. Port of being experimentol is trying new things. Be open to trying
new things rother fhon dismissing them beforehond. Being experimentol
meons you reolize thot you need to go through o bunch of interqctions
bebre one works so you might os well rry o bunch of stuff in rhe meontime.
Perdops you check out "speed doting" or you onswer o personol od, lusilrc
check it out. Moybe you check out o new ploce where you might meet
women, or q yogo closs-onything our of the norm. The most successful
seducers ore olwoys trying out nav things, coming up wifi nal opprooch-
es, checking out neur sociol opporfunities ond experimenting with nov
opprooches.
Trust your gut. You need to storilrusting yourself when you inieroct with
women. We soy thot when you,re qttrqcted to o womon ond feel some
spork between the two of you, trust fiot. Trust your intuition with women.
Trust your gut when deoling with women in oll phoses of seduction.
when o situqtion doesn't feel right get out of it. tf you meet o womon
ond something obout the interqction feels off, trust thot feeling. Trust
yourself.
Add urgency. one of the differences between successfur ond unsuc-
cessful seducers is thot successful ones hove urgency in their seducrions.
successfr-rl seducers hove o gutsy quolity obout their lives where they ploy
full-out ond reolize thot this could be their one ond only opportunity to
seduce o porticulor womon. Urgency meons you go for il, you move
quickly ond deliberotrely. You oct swiftly ond cut to the chqse. you go for
il. You iump in, You byposs the doubts ond the excuses ond lust do it.
www.ebook3000.com

I[u tr0 tdlh l0 l|l0lllsfi
This is not o proctice life; this is the reol thing' Adding urgency meons
you osk her oul, you opprooch her rother thon worry obout il' you osk
for her number, you moke the cqll rother thon procrostinote, you get oul
ond proctice, you odd o little more do-or-die quolity to your life with
women.
R tEtll Rlll$$ 0f t[olnBll
We've noticed thot mony of our students ore frustroted becouse hey
expect women trc oct the woy men do, ond to be motivoted in the some
woy men ore. To help correct lhis, we've put trcgether this list o[ the rules
ofwomen.
These rules ore generolizotions; you will, of course, find women who ore
exceptions to oll o[ lhem. Don't worry obout it' The boftom line is' your
interoctions with women will go more eosily if you oct os though these
rules ore lrue.
Women qre nol ecrewed'uP men' Women ore not iust screwed-
up or illogicol men. They ore women' lf you relote to women os if they
were iust screwed-up men, you'll olwoys be trying to moke women oct
the woy you wish they would oct-thot is, the woy you would oct'
Women hcrve o different inregrity fiom men' While men ore
more likely to hove integrity to their word, women ore more likely to
hove integrity to their feelings. This meqns thqt i[ o womon's feelings tell
her to do something thot is controry to whot she soid she'd do, such os
showing up for o dole, she's likely to do whot her feelings tell her to
flts f'l,tsr' $0'n& 8f llN*iing lil| trysglsll
rother thon to follow her commitment. Another woy ro soy this is to soy
thql women ore, on the whole, more committed to doing whot their emo-
tions fell them fion they ore to keeping their word. Don'r ler rhis drive
you crozy. h/s not bod, iust different from the woy you qre.
Women wont to be free to chonge lheir minds. Women wont
to be oble to chonge their minds os much os they wont whenever they
wont for whotever reoson ihey wont or for no reoson ot oll. This moy
seem crozy or illogicol toyou, but remember-she's following her feel-
ings, not her verbol commitments.
Women use hints snd innuendoes to tell you whot they
wonl. When you interoct with women, don,l expect them to be direct
with you obout whot they wont. Once ogoin, fiis isn,t being screwed-
up, it's lust o difference in the woys men ond women do things. This
meqns thot when you osk women whot they wont you should provide o
menu of options rother thon expecting them to generote ideos.
Women wonl life fo be on unending dote. Women wont
things fo be romontic. ln some woys they prefer on emotionol roller-
coosler to o smooth ride. Another woy to soy this is to soy thoi women
hove o wide emotionol ronge ond wont lo express ii fully.
Women cqn be surprisingly meon. Mony men who,ve gone
through o divorce hove found out how surprisingly meon women con
be. ln some woys this is becouse women ore more invested in the con-
cept of foirness thon men ore. while you don't expect life to be foir ond
don't think obout it much, the women in your life very well mighr. So if
u*ut'ilumrt1iEiflt.

lltltn s0 ial& x0 l,r0rn8n
you feel shqfted, you might not do much obout it'..but if o womon feels
shofted, often she feels il's only foir lor her lo even lhe score ond toke
revenge.
Women wqnl whot they wont when lhey wonl it becquse
they wont it. Asking o womon why she wonts somelhing-or, even
worse, why she doesn't-is olwoys o mistoke. She wonts it becouse she
wonts il. Which, when you think obout it, is bosicolly true for you too.
Give her the spoce lo wonl whot she wonts when she wonts it becouse
she wqnts it qnd don't let it drive You crazY if it doesn't moke sense to
you.
c0llcil$l0ll
lf you ore reolly going to effectively use ihe tools in this book, you hwe ic
hove o sense of how trc hondle the "inner gome" of tolking lo women, os
well os the skill-bosed "ouler gome" of tolking trc them. You hqve to be oble
to hondle rhe chollenges provided by your own issues with women, ond
your own foors. ln this chopter you hove storted lhol process. ln the next
chopter; you'll leorn how to hondle foor of reiection ond ponic. Once you
hove those hondled, you'll be in o greot ploce for beginning to tolk to
women. .
cltflp[Bt' 4
Hflllnu]l$ md00fl0il fllt[
PAnrc Rr0[nn u01n0[
By this poinf, you moy hove storted The Hi progrom. lf you hove, how is
it going, interrupting women by soying hi ro them? Is it hord or eosy?
Are you toking opportunities or not? Are you storting to see rhot there
ore o lot of women oround you oll the time whom you usuolly tune out
ond ignore? Are you seeing opportunities ond purposefully not toking
them? Or ore you one of those guys who soys, ,lV'ell, soying hi to
women is going to be reolly eosy. rn focr, ir's so eosy thot lll pur it off till
fomorrow."
Not soying hi ond not interrupting women becouse ir's roo eosy is o foir-
ly stondord scom. Just reolize thot soying hi moy be more inrimidoting
thon you thought. Accept thot foct, stop moking excuses ond go ond soy
hi to some women.
lnterrupiing women by soying hi, osking her o queslion or using ony
other method will hove or leosr one cerroin consequence: some percent-
oge of the time you will experience reiection. This probobly doesn,t
come os such o huge shock, does it? you were probobly thinking obout
it before this poinr '!V'oit o minute-if I soy hi ro women ond interrupt
them, thoy'll shoot me down!" rnterrupting women, while ir does leod to
success, will olso inevitobly leod to some reiection. lt could be poinfull
I
ltllll,hui$$!M.
www.ebook3000.com

'le$ 
$ll lal& Is K$tlml!
The problem with ovoiding poin by never inlerocting with women is thot
you end up with o life in which you ore depressed ond lonely ond (por-
odoxicolly) end up feeling reiecied oll the time ony,rroyl So it mokes
sense lo leorn how to hondle reiection so you con minimize or even
obliterote ihe impoct ii hos on you ond thus interocf more freely with
women. This choptrer will give you concrete octions ond steps you con
toke to deol with reiection powerfully. This trcol for hondling reiection is
simple but it hos dromoticolly chonged our lives. Being oble to hondle
reiection is the oil thqt lubricotes our system for tolking lo women. You
must leorn how to use it.
Leorning to tolk to ond seduce women is o process, ond eoch step of thot
process you risk reiection. When you interrupl women ond soy hi, you
risk reiection. When you flirt wilh women, you risk reiection. When you
conduct Romonlic Conversotions, you risk reiection. When you osk for o
womon's phone number qnd emoil oddress, you risk reiection' When
you osk o womon for o Priming Dote, you risk reiection. When you go
on o Priming Dole, you risk reiection. When you go for q first kiss, you
risk reiection. When you go for more, you risk reiection. Every step of
the woy, you ore risking reiection with women.
To moke molers worse/ os you leorn how to lolk to women, you ore like-
ly to be rejected ot every step in lhe process ot one time or qnother.
When you first stort interrupting ond soying hi lo women, you ore like-
ly to feel s1cpped by the women who reiect your interruptions. ln lime, you
will get through hot ond get into conversotions with women. You will try
the Fli*ing Moves; somelimes they'llwork, olher times they'll be reiected.
Get through fhot ond stort showing your romontic interest ond conducting
I
uru,hru!$litu|nll*
I
'lsrMlins 
nsies&i$ff ans l}snil! $t*sgnd t&sllle!!
Romontic conversorions; sometimes you'll experience reiection there rrco.
At every stap-getting her number; osking her out, going for thot first kiss,
oll of it-you will sometimes experience reiection. Knowing how fic hondle
it ond how tc keep moving forword, even in the foce of foor of reiecrion,
is criticol.
Becouse seduction is o numbers gome/ you'll wont to move firough o lot
of women lo get to fhe eventuol yeses fiot you wont. you'll wonilo move
through those nos, those relections, os quickly ond efficienrry os you con
while keeping your spirits high. since we developed this rool, we,ve
been oble to lough in the foce of reiecrion (ot leost some of the time),
deol with it ond move on without ir being o big problem (olmost oll of
the time). You must be oble to do this, too.
we moke o lot of oppeoronces on rodio ond TV coll-in shows qnd we
receive emoil from o loi of men. The number one question we ger is
"How do I hondle reiecfion?" Here,s how you con do it the woy thot top
seducers do.
fl0llt $[cc0$$Fil am llll$llcc0$$Flll
$0DIlcB]|$ ilallilg R0decfl0n
Le/s compore how men who consistently foilwith women hondle reiec-
tion with how relection is hondled by men who succeed wifi women.
There's o fundomentol difference.

ll$ur tr8 tffl& &w8nl8ll
First, let's toke o look ot how guys who foil with women hondle reiection
ond the feor of reiection. When Bob the bod seducer is reiected by o
womon, the first thing he does is moke thot womon into his "one-ond-
only hope" of ever hoving sex ogoin. He does this by ideolizing her:
"She wos so prefi ond I never get to meet women like her. She hod the
whole pockoge-greot body, owesome tils, broins, o successful coreer.
She reolly could hove been 'the one'!"
The second thing Bob does is decide thot her reiection of him is his fqult.
He'll tell himself, "She reiected me becouse l'm so ugly ond l'm stupid.
Whol mokes me think l'd be ottroctive lo o womon like her, onywoy? l'm
nol otlroctive. All I om is o piece of shit. I know thot. Plus, whot I soid to
her wos incredibly stupid. I reolly hondled it wrong. I reolly freqked her
out. I should iust crowl bock into my hole ond die. l'll never succeed with
women. Why do I olwoys hove such bod luck with women? I suck."
But woit-there's morel After evisceroting himself in step two, Bob, ond
unsuccessful seducers like him, tokes onolher key step loword using this
reiection to keep himself from ever toking o risk with o womon ogoin:
he wollows in the poin of it. Thot's right, ofter moking the womon inio
"the perfect womon" ond moking the reiection completely his own foult
ond coming up with on explonotion for the reiection thot is os poinful os
he con devise, brilliont Bob dwells in thol poin.
He reploys the experience of being reiected over ond over, giving him-
self o new dose of emotionol poin every time he relives it. He imogines
the look on her foce when she reiected him ond thinks how upset she
musl hove been. He tells himself thot she no doubt convened o meeting
uruuMbomrdfllllll- -
f
ilnt|dtinc freic$bisr and lrnis rrswd t{ffnsn
of oll of her friends iust ro tqlk obout the houmo thot Bob put her
through. He imogines thot his reputorion, such os it wos, is ruined. He
tells himself fhor now "everyone will knov/' he wos rrying to be o seduc-
er-ond it's oll becouse he bungled things so bodly.
And then Bob wonders why it tokes him four months to get up rhe nerve
to opprooch onother womon, ond why torking ro women is so incredi-
bly hord.
sure, this is on exrreme exomple. But the weird thing is thot ifs not oll
thqt unusuol. We've known mony men who do this-ond worse!-ro
themselves on o regulor bosis. Heck, we even used to be such guys. lf
eifher of us osked o womon our ond she soid no, or if either of us tried
to kiss o womon ond she soid, ,,Oh, I only like you os o friend,,, we,d
go inio the whole "l suck, she wos so prefl;y', routine. We,d moke her our
one-ond-only hope, then soy, "rf only r were more onroctive or luckier or
smorter or riche/' or whorever... Then we'd dwell in the poin for doys
ond use lhot "foilure" ro moke ir even horder to opprooch women ogoin.
Just the other doy we irrlked to o guy who hod this problem. He told us
obout how he went bollroom-doncing o month ogo ond o womon there
reiectred him. This wos o month ogo ond he wos stirr recreoring the poin
of il, over ond over, on o doily bosis. He con,t even opprooch other
women becouse he's too busy reliving the poin of thot one reiection.
You've probobly done this too.
People noturolly think thot they need ro know they con survive whorever
life might throw ot them. so in order to be sofe, when o womon reiects
o mon, poil of him wonts to moke thot relection os bod os possible so
uuu,lrulnumnfiff%. 
i
www.ebook3000.com

l|Etlt &0 tra|l* m !lt0m*n
thot he knows he con survive il no motter how bod it gets. People coto-
strophize reiection ond moke it much worse thon it is to see if they con
moke iilhrough. You ore probobly doing the some thing when you tqy
to moke sure you con survive the worsl possible explonotion obout why
o womon moy hove reiected you.
Cotostrophizing probobly comes noturolly to humon beings. Think obout
it. Which of our oncestors were more likely to survive-the ones who
never worried obout ony'hing or the ones who worried constontly obout
things thot could go wrong ond who mode sure they were reody for ony
bod thing thoi might come olong? Obviously, the oncestors who worried
obout possible future problems hod on edge on those who never wor-
ried.
The some principle does not hold true when it comes to reiection. Those
who put themselves through the poin of reiection over ond over don'l
hove on edge on fie men who don't think obout reiection. li's unneces-
sory ond it doesn't help the slightest bit in getting you whot you wont
wifi women. ht like Mork Twoin soid: "l've suffered mony horrible mis-
fortunes, mosl of which never hoppened'" You don't need lo hove o life
of horrible misfortunes thot never hoppened. Jusl becquse you con moke
something bod emotionolly doesn'f meet lhot you should. You ore not
obligofed to do so iust to prove thot you con survive it. Knowing this will
help o lot in the oreo of reiection.
One of the moin reosons thot tolking to women is so difficult for most
men is thot $ey've creoted so much emolionol poin -thonks to their woy
of hondling reiection-thot when they think obout risking with women
[|{|!l|iill$ na,isssis|| a||s psllis $rslrgd lfi$tn$|N
they con only feel oll thot poin. once you'reoble to reverse thot process
ond hove experiences of being reiected thor oren'r upsetting, it will be
much eosier to iniliote more with women-ond to hove more success.
Now lel's look of reiection firough the eyes of q successful seducer.
When q successful seducer like Bruce encounrers reiection, he olso fol-
lows o three-step process, olbeit o different one from Bob's. when Bruce
encounlers reiection, the first thing he does is remind himself thot doting
is o numbers gome ond thot in no wqy is this womon his one-ond-only
hope. sfotisticolly, whotever you do with o womon is probobry going to
foil onywoy becouse thot's iust life. He soys this to himself: "Greqr. Thofs
one more no I don't hove lo heor on my woy lo on inevitoble yes.,,
second, Bruce comes up with on explonorion of her reiection thot does
not moke it his fouh. specificolly, he creores on explonotion for the reiec-
tion thot is becouse of he4 not becouse of him. He moy soy to himself,
"She must be o lesbion" or "She must be ill,, or ,,Moybe her dog iust
died." lt doesn't motter whor it is os long os ir,s somerhing thot his broin
con lotch on to thot isn't cotostrophic ond thot doesn,t involve him.
Lefs spend q few moments tolking obour this strep becouse it is so impor-
tont ond so hord for o lot of fie men we work with. Just becouse on
explonotion is horribly negotive ond poinful doesn't meon you ore
required by low to believe ir. The truth is you hove no clue why she reiect-
ed you. Moybe she wqs in o hurry. Moybe her cot died. Moybe she does-
n't speok English. You don't know, ond it doesn'f serve you to believe the
worsi possible explonotion. Moke up something positive! lt reolly is iust
os likely to be true or 3ome horrible explonotion tho/s oll obout you.
I

il81r, &0 lilt f0 l|'8m8fl
Guys so often think thot they ore oll-knowing ond omnipotent. But the
truth is you ore not the center of o womon's universe; she is the center of
her universe. The reosons why she does things ore more likely to be
obout her thon obout you. Bul it's incredibly common for o guy ttc think
thot o womon's world is obout him. He'll tell himself, "l know why she
didn't soy hi bock. She could tell thot l'm o bod guy, thot I iust wont to
get in her ponts ond l'm only interesled in sex." Meonwhile, the guy isn't
importont enough to the womon for her to spend her processing cycles
on oll these detoils obout him. She's iust trying to moke it through the
doy, she hos incredible cromps, her feet hurt, she's mod ot her boss or
wholever.
Believe it or not, the womon who reiected you does hove o life outside
of you. And thot life is much more likely to be the reoson thot she reiecF
ed you thon is her obility ond inclinotion to see into your soul ond divine
whot o scummy guy you ore. She's iust not thot interested in you. She
hos problems of her own.
DAVID: l'm thinking obout o time o few yeors ogo when I thought I wos
reiected by o womon. I soid hi to her ond mode some olher remork
ond she iust trotolly blew me off. She ignored me complebly ond
wolked owoy. I wos left thinking thot I must hove done something
wrong. I felt like o trchl wodhless bum. I mentioned fiis incident to o
friend of hers who osked me, 'lVere you on her left?" I soid yes, I
wos. He soid, 'Vell, she's very hord of heoring in generol ond con't
heor in her left eor ot oll. I olwoys moke sure to be on her right
when l'm tolking to her." lt turned out she hqdn't heord me! The
"reiection" hod nothing to do with me ot oll. I thought, '!Vhy didn't I
come up with thot explonotion?"
t
rluu llorll0slllor!{Sf|IllL_,
lrnrur.ilu[ll{f,lllnlL-
r
tlaNlfllins $ci8t!&ills alld 8arfis $r8|ln$ wsill8tl
You musl not moke this mistoke. you must come up with on explonotion
for the reiection fhot is not obout you. Let's soy thor ogoin: you must
come up with on explonotion fhot is not obout you. Moke it her prob-
lem. Moke it o problem with the environment. rt doesn,t motter- just
moke it o problem thot hos nothing to do with you.
lmogine you soid hi to the womon ot the grocery srore. she didn,r soy
hi bock. Whot ore some explonotions thot hove nothing to do with you?
"She iust got stobbed wifh o pencil in her leg.,, ,,She,s suffering from
omnesio." "She iusl got out of the hospitol.,, ,,She,s been here since 5
o.m. ond is exhousted." ,,She,s hoving her period.,, lt doesn,f motier.
come up with some explonotion. one thot works reolly well is "oh, r
guess she's just reolly in her own world." Usuolly i/s true. Usuolly women
ore iust cought up in their own world-ofrer oll, everyone is.
Now b the third ond finol step. Afler Bruce reminds himself thot doting
is o numbers gome ond fiol she wosn'r his one-ond-only hope ond ofter
he comes up with on explonotion for her behovior thot hos nothing to
do with him, he redirects his focus toword something empowering.
once ogoin, you ore not required by low to dweil in your suffering ond
experience the poin of reiection over ond over ogoin iusr becouse you
con. smort seducers think obout something else-onything else. pick up
q newspoper; listen to the rodio, go wotch W, go on o wolk, go flirt with
qnother womon-do something, but do it insrontoneousry, ond ret your-
self get into doing it. The longer you woir, rhe more likely it is you will
dwell in your poin. You've gof to keep moving.
www.ebook3000.com

[Eu, ta &l* |s wrfinn
One greol ottention-redirecting question is 'lVhot do I wont to do right
now?" Often this question will help refocus the energy of the reiection
into some octivity thqt is useful to you. One mon we know wos fli*ing
online with o womon whom he hod previously hod sex with ond whom
he wos hoping to get into bed with ogoin. At one point in their lnstont
Messoge conversotion, she storted telling him obout this new guy she
hod met ond obout how he hod come over for o night of hot sex the
evening before.
Noturolly, he felt reiected. So first he reminded himself thot doting is o
numbers gome ond thot this womon wos not his one-qnd-only hope.
Second, he mode the reiection her problem by exploining to himself thot
she wos o very unsloble olcoholic (which wos true| ond wos probobly
drunk right then. Third, he redirected his ottention by osking himself,
'lVhot do lwont to do right now?"
He reolized thot he wonted lo stop tolking to this womon ond onswer
some personols ods. So tho/s whot he did. He wos oble to use the ener-
gy of the reiection to odvonce his whole seduction system, ond it
worked. He stopped thinking obout the reiection ond got into thinking
obout new opportunities with women.
The importont thing is thot you redirect your ottention to something spe-
cific. l/s not enough to tell yourself, "Don'l think qbout lhe reieclion"
wifiout putting some other octivity into its ploce. You need to think obout
something specific or you'll iust end up thinking obout the reieclion you
oren't supposed to be thinking obout. Find something else to focus on.
n
ulut!,luttruooilluun;f,
llaMlins *sis*tisl! *ll* $affi& 0f,0ms l1$0r0sil
You probobly know o guy who does oil this outomoticoily. He seems
impervious to reiection. When you're ot o bor with him, you notice thot
nothing stops him. After he,s reiected by o womon, he,ll soy trc you, ,,Oh
well, she threw o drink in my foce-r guess [m on to the next one. Ho
hol" You've probobly wondered how he did it. weil, this is how. He
remembers ir's o numbers gome ond thoilhd rejecfion wos iust one more
no he didn't hove trc heor ogoin on his woy to the inevitoble yes. He
mokes the reiection her problem ond then redirects his oilenrion by mov-
ing on to fhe nextwomon (or onything else). Thus he evenruolly succeeds.
Remember thot you hove to do oll three steps; you con't just do the one
you like the best. Lefs go over rhese three sreps one more rime ond then
give you some more exomples:
' 
Remind yourself thor doting is o numbers gome ond thor this
womon wqs not your one-ond-only hope for sex. Remember thot
this is one more no on the woy to the inevitoble yes.
o creote on explonotion for the rejection thot hos nothing to do with
you. Moke it o problem with her or o problem wirh the environ-
menl but not o problem with you.
o Redirect your ottention. Find something else ro think obout or do.
Ask yourself, 'lVhot do I wont to do right now?,, to give yourself
ideos for things you con use the energy from the reiection to do.
TilAMDM$
Now let's look ot some exomples of Ron ond Dovid cooching eoch other
os eoch pretendr trc hove some trouble with rhis process.
ur{uirutomruilffEl.*
:,
r-,, ^l

ll'ls, &|, lals t0 wenlst|
DAVID: So, whot hoppened?
RON: I wos eoting lunch ond I went up to this womon behind the
counter who wos reolly hot. I soid, "Hi, my nome is Ron, how ore
you doing?" And she iust turned owoy ond she didnt tolk to me.
She iust wenl ond did something else.
DAVID: Did you tell yourself thot i/s o numbers gome?
RON: Right, I could hove done thot. I could soy to myself, "Hey, dol-
ing is o numbers gome. lt's not like there oren't 20 women in this
ploce right now. I gol upset becouse this one didn't work out-l
don't need to do thot. Also, thofs iust one more reieclion I don't
hove to experience ogoin on ihe woy lo the inevitoble yes."
DAVID: Whol wos the first thing thd you did? Did you blome yourself
or whot?
RON: I thought, well, ieez, she's so hot, why isn't she tolking to me? I
must hqve blown it in some woy. Did I soy the wrong thing? Am I
o ierk? Whot hoppened?
DAVID: So there's o woy in which you blomed yourself ond mode the
reoson for the reiection obout you' Whol ore some of the reosons
why she might hove totolly blown you off thot hove nothing to do
with you? Just generote some of lhose'
RON: Well, obviously she wqs working, so perhops she hod some
work to do. Thot might hove been one possibility. Or perhops she
wos in o hurry or moybe she's not supposed to tolk to customers.
Or she moy nol hove felt very good-it wqs the oft'ernoon, moybe
she wos tired-or perhops she wos iust in her own world.
I
usu,hutn$ouulllllll-.
uuu,hruhilo$d$re",
l'e0slins n8i88ti$[ Sns $SniS fttr0lln$ wsmcn
DAVID: Greot. How obout fhe fiird step, which is redirecting your
ottention? Did you find yourself iust noturolly going over it ogoin
ond ogoin in your heod?
RON: Yeoh, I did ot first. So I decided to chonge my focus instonto-
neously-to reod the poper, eot o bogel-to do whotever there
wos to put my ottention on. I inierrupted the bod feeling os quickly
os possible.
Do you get whot we're tolking obout here? This reolly is obout leorning
q "menlol move." This is not iust something theoreticol. This is something
octuol thot cqn dromoticolly chonge your life.
Now let's wotch Ron cooch Dovid through the reiection process.
RON: So, tell me whot hoppened.
DAVID: I went on o dote with this girl. She wos reol pretty; I reolly
liked her. We hod onother dote plonned, but she sent me on emoil
soying she's still reolly in love with her ex-bofriend ond she,s
gone bock to him ond they ore living together ogoin ond she
doesn't wont to go out with me ofter oll. She soid she hoped we
could still be friends.
RON: Hmm, nothing cruel obout thot, eh? So first of oll-whot wos
the first thing thot you did?
DAVID: I thought, "God, you know, thot wos such o pretty girl ond we
went on thot dote ond the dote went so well ond she hod so much
cleovoge ond I loved her hoir ond there reolly oren,f thot mony
women who reolly ore thot pretty."
RON: So you storied beoting up on yourself.
www.ebook3000.com

ll{r1r s8 lnll{ l0 lystltsn
DAVID: Yeoh, like she wos lhot "one-ond-only hope."
RON: So, you foiled lo remember thot il's o numbers gome. Whot
obout the next step? Whol hoppened next?
DAVID: I could hove soid, "Of course! Stotisticolly, tho/s gonno hop-
pen o certoin omount of time. Thofs the kind of thing thot hoppens
in seducing. Thot's one more no I don't hove lo heor on the woy to
yes. I gol pretty for with her, lefls see who/s next."
RON: Whot did you moke il meon? Whot wos your inlerpretolion?
Why did she send you this emoil?
DAVID: Well, tho/s becouse she couldn't even beor to see my foce.
l'm so hideous thot I drove her bock to her ex-bofriend! I knew
this would hoppen! This olwoys hoppens to mel Why does this
sort of thing olwoys hoppen to me? Why don't women like me?
l'm iust not lovoble. l'll never hove the girl I wont! All I con hove is
fot women! I suck!
RON: Okoy, okoy-eveqybody is feeling sick now! Now chonge the
interpretotion. Whot would be some olher reqsons why she did
thot?
DAVID: Well, she's reolly mixed up right now. Moybe she is reolly in
love with her ex-bofriend. Thot doesn't hove onything to do with
me. Whot om I going to do, go knock him off or something?
Moybe she is reolly confused. And you know whot? She wosn't
thot hot! h/s not like there oren't hundreds ond thousonds of
women oround who ore thot hol ond hotter! She's not thot hot o
commodity.
RON: Okoy, cool. So the third port of il-did you dwell on it?
il
lllllouboil$tlll[nlL
nuuhuhnurrffi*lr 
I
f|and,i'|$ a8,irs$$l| ell* psllic $r0u|l$ lrys,llsll
DAVID: so, dwelling on it. yeoh-mooning ond rhinking obout it over
ond over ond telling oll my friends obour this horribre rejection...
But whot I could hove done wos soy, ,,Greot, whot do I wont to
focus on right now? How con I toke some of the energy l,ve got
right now ond put if to use?,,
RON: So long os you redirect your energy in some woy.
DAVID: Yeoh, just doing this I feel much befier, more energized.
You need to retroin yourself to hondle reiection properly. we hove done
this to the point where it is outomotic. When we ger reiecred, our broins
immediotely respond bmouse we hove been working on it for yeors.
P8r081l[ru0$ am PruBAililfl0$
DAVID: one rhing fiorwe hove found ro be incredibly helpful in deol-
ing with the inevitobility of o certrrin omounr of reiection is pufting o
percentoge likelihood on onything thot moy hoppen. Soy Ron is get_
ting reody trc go out for o dote ond I soy, ,Whot do you think the
odds ore thot you ore going to hove sex with her tonight?,, ond he
soys, "Oh, 20 or 30 percenf or something like thot. Or soy you,re
going out on o priming Dote ond osk yourself, ,Whot do you think
the odds qre thot she,s going to show up?,, The onswer might be
something like 'Oh, I give it obout Z0 percent.,,
For some reoson/ putting percentoges on things seems ro creote some
kind of "reolily conversqlion,, oround them. you might soy, ,,Greol,
theret o womon ocross the bor. There's o five percenr probobility thot r

llsilt bNl lalx l0 w0'nsNt
could end up hoving sex with her tonight. Thot's one in 20-oll I need is
20 her ond l'm golden!" lt mokes il eosier to opprooch o womon ond
less of o problem if things don't work out. Hey, there wos o five percent
chonce; no big deol thot it didn't work out. And o couse for celebrotion
when it doesl
Percentoges ond probobilities ore onother woy to boil your interoction
with o womon down to something tongible. So insteod of it being this
whole big scory ihing, you soy,'lVell, look*there's o l0 percent
chonce it will go. No big deol."
DAVID: Yep, with thot girl lwos telling you obout, I gove it o 50-50
chonce thot she would go bock to her ex-boyfriend, becouse of the
woy thot she wos tolking obout him. Tho/s whot occurred. Those ore
the numbers. Thofs fie gome. lt mokes the trcsk of reloting trc women
eosier.
Very often guys storl oul overly optimistic obout their chonces, so they're
even more devostoted if the interoction doesn't work out. They think,
"Greot, I hove o 90 percent chonce with thot womon ocross the bor."
Well, you olmosl never hqve o 90 percenl chonce with o womon. You
musl mqke o more reolistic probobility stotement.
We use this tool in every oreq of our lives. Whot ore the odds of us geF
ting fhis new book deol? Soy we think i/s 40 percent. lf so, oll we need
is o little more thon possible deols ond ir'll be likely thotwe'll hove o deol
going. This is something for you to ploy oround with. lt moy be useful
for you to ossign probobilities to things iust to moke different oreos of
your life cleorer ond more like o gome.
I
uruulllrbnuwqfiff
llerdiins *s,isstisn d{ld ssni* $fr$llns $J$m$n
P[tcflctfls [fl8 nBd8cflon P[0c80$
The best woy to become expert ot hondring reiection is to procrice the
reiection process. lf you ore doing the Hi progrom (you ore doing the Hi
Progrom, oren't you?), it will give you o loborotory in which to experi_
ment with the reiecfion process. When women don,t soy hi bock or when
they scowl or give you ony orher response thot you consider o reiection,
proctice the releciion process. Firsf, remind yourself thot ifs o numbers
gome ond thot this is one more no you don't hove to heqr ogoin on your
woy to the eventuol yes. second, come up with on expronotion for the
reiection thot hos to do with her, nor you. And third, redirect your oren-
tion, perhops by osking yourself, ,Whot do I wont to do righr now?,,
Here ore some tips for leorning the process:
wrire il down. rt reolly herps if you write down the reiection process
os you do it. The reoson i/s imporicnilo write it down is thor doing it in
your heod is deceptive, especiolly ot first. lt/s eosy fo do o sloppy ond
incomplete iob if you ore iust thinking your woy through fhe three-srrep
process. You will think you hove done the process, but you octuoily wiil
not hove-you will hove thought obout doing it, which your mind wiil
misinterpret os hoving octuolly gone through the process for reor. Writing
down the reiection process gets it out of the reolm of the obstrod ond inro
the reolm of the reol.
You moy wont to corry oround o pen ond some poper so thot you con
grob o minute or lwo ond write down the process os you go through
your doy. some of our studenrs do rhe process in their heods during the
ttttnuhulnualrrlrEEn
I
www.ebook3000.com

ll81u sll T8llr l0 sjsms|l
doy ond then spend five minutes in the evening writing down ond clor-
ifying whot they did in their heods eorlier. Some men set oside o couple
of minutes twice o doy to write down fieir processes.
After you've written it down o number of times, you won't need to wrile
it down so much onymore, olthough we still write it down on occosions
when reiections seem to get to us more thon they ought to.
Prqctice befiore you moke the opprooch. Of course, you don't
hove to woit to experience reiection lo use this process. You con olso use
it when you ore thinking obout opprooching o womqn ond you feel the
feor of rejection trying to slop you. Tell yourself, "lf this doesn't go the
woy I wont il to, I simply hove lo remember thot doting is o numbers
gome ond thot this will be one more no on the woy to my eventuol yes.
So even if she soys no lo me, this interoction will get me closer lo my
gool. Also, if she reiects me, it will probobly be becouse she is in her
own world or hos o heodoche todoy or something like thot. lf she does-
n'i work out, l'll go tolk to thot other womon over there. Piece of coke,
l'm reody to go!" This will prime your broin qnd put the interoction in
perspective. So whot if it doesn't work? Eventuolly one {ond more) will.
Do ir doily. As with ony skill, it is much eosier to mosler hondling
reieclion if you proclice the three-step process on o doily bosis. lf you
soy hi to o womon ond she ignores you, do the three-step process. lf you
fli* with o \ /omon ond il doesn't go well, do the three-step process. lf
you osk o womon out for coffee ond she soys no, do the three-step
process. lf you go for the first kiss qnd she soys she iust wonls to be
l|englin$ *$*s$i0n e|},1mn* nN'0tll}d yd8r$ll
friends, do the fhree-step process. You need to proctice ond hove it be
so ingroined in your mind thot you iust do it ony rime you need ro. This
will keep you going ond keep you from getting stuck, ond thot is olt thor
motlers.
Do ir unfil you get nesults. oftentimes if you use the reiection
process thoroughly you will feel completely better. sometimes you'll feel
90 percent better or even only 50 percent better. Thor's oll okoy-i/s
moving in the right direciion, ond thots whqfs importont.
Whot is not occeptoble is doing the reiection process ond feeling zero
percent, one percent or lwo percent betier. you oren't done with the
process until you feel substontiolly better ond hove some energy to move
on to something else. lf you find you don't feel better, go through the
process ogoin. Remind yourself thot doting is o numbers gome; reolly
feel how you've iust heord one more no thor you'll never need to heor
ogoin. come up with new, more compelling reosons thot moke the reiec-
tion her problem, not yours. Find something thot you reolly wqnt to do
ond thot engoges your focus. And keep doing this until you feel some
emotionol movement. Until thot hoppens, you reolly oren't finished with
the reiection process.
0e[ RedSc[B[!
The only circumstonce under which you will not need ro moster the reiec-
lion process is if you ore nor getting reiected-ond if you ore nor geiling
reiected you ore not doing enough interruptions ond initiorions wirh
women ond you orc much less likely to succeed with them.
n

8su, S0 lirl{r }s w$r88n
Thot's so imporlont we'll soy it ogoin: getting reiected is o good sign
becouse it meons thot you ore toking oction with women, toking risks
ond doing whot you hove to to creole obundont relotionships with
women in your life. Remember our student who soid hi to more thon 300
women in o week in his ultimotely successful quest to get sex ond o girl-
friend? He soys, "l mode use of the rejection tools on o doily bosis. lt
kept me olive os I went through lots of women till I found whot I wos
looking for." These tools con help you too.
lt0l[ m ilallDm Palllc alll
RllilE[U Rl|0il[D l[01nE[
You need to leorn how to hondle the inevitoble onxiety ond feor thot
comes up when you opprooch ond tolk lo women. Experiencing feor in
these situotions is very common, so we're going to teoch you some bosic
skills to overcome ponic ond onxiety.
Mony of us mistokenly think there ore men out $ere who ore seduclion
mosters who never experience ony feor ond con go up to ony womon
ot ony time ond seduce them. The truth is thot we oll get scored ond feor-
ful when opprooching women. We often get scored when opprooching
women for the first time, qnd so do oll of our studenls. The point is to
leorn how to hondle onxiety ond ponic ond opprooch women even
when you feel nervous.
Mony top othletes experience feor ond nervousness before going into o
big gome, but they've leorned lo use feor to their odvontoge. They've
leorned to use the feor os o molivolor, os somelhing thot helps tham gci
I
Uulll,lrutrul!!!ufru_
$an$i8$ rsiss$isn *lld $enru srolllld y{smsll
in the flow, rother thon something thot rokes them out of the gome.
we've heord rumors thot hockey god Gordie Howe would puke in the
locker room before every gome. He would be overcome with onxiety,
but he leorned how to feel the feor ond go for it onyvoy. our hope is
thot you loo con leorn how ro honsform your feor ond use it to your
odvontoge.
Lefs get reol: if there's one thing thor generotrss ponic, i/s going up to
women ond tolking to fiem. one of fie hordesf things to do is to initi-
ote inleroction with o womon in o ploce like o bor or the street when you
don'l hove ony excuse to tolk to her.
Feor hits eoch mon differently. Feor occurs on o spectrum, from ontici-
potoqy feor like butterflies in your stomoch ond slight nervousness to oll-
out ponic ond totol terror. We've worked with men on oll points of the
spectrum. The tools in this section ore for men who hove mib or smoll
omounts of ponic. lf you suffer from oll-out ponic ottocks with women,
you need to look deeper, perhops fo onti-onxiety medicotion or theropy.
We ore not theropists or doctors, ond hondling ponic is not our oreo of
expertise' We con tell you thot if you hove ponic ottocks there is help.
we've hod mony students overcome extreme onxiety with women by
combining theropy, medicotion ond our moteriols.
Here ore o few tools for you to leorn ond proctice. The more you con
proctice them when you'reolone in q womon-free environment, the eos-
ier it will be to use them when you,re obout to opprooch o womon.
Breothing. Men ore often tense oround women ond forgeilo breofie,
or whon they do breothe they toke shollow breoths. proctice breothing
www.ebook3000.com

llslr ur! lsill te |ry|l|$s{t
deeply. Deep breothing is the fundomentol skill in overcoming ponic
becouse when o person gets tense the first fiing thot chonges is his
breothing. lt becomes shollow ond increoses in speed, ond oll of o sud-
den his body shifts into fight-or-flight mode. When you breothe ropidly
ond shollowly, your broin is olso offected; you think less cleorly ond
enter o spirol thot leods to more ponic. The trick is lo stort deep breoth-
ing before you get neryous oround women ond to continue deep breoth-
ing when you opproqch women.
Here's how you do ih proctice breothing slowly ond fully into your
obdomen. We recommend you breothe in ond count to four ond then
breqthe out while counting to four. After o few minutes of breothing
deeply, you should be much colmer. Proctice this on o doily bosis so thot
you con slow down your breoth ot will.
Visuolizing. Sto* by closing your eyes ond breothe deeply for five or
l0 seconds. Next, imogine o reloxing scene. Moybe you imogine you're
in bed or on the beoch; moybe it/s your boyhood home or your fovorite
nolure spot-it doesn't reolly motter. All thot motters is thot it onchors o
feeling of colm, sofety ond reloxqtion. lt sounds silly, we reolize, but it
octuolly works.
Visuolizing o colm scene iust before you go up ond tolk to o womon is
very usefi,'l in getting yourself into o reloxed, ployful mode. The cool porl
is thot you con use the some reloxing scene over ond over ogoin, which
will help you stoy colm. You con keep recolling lhot scene eoch time you
feel nervous.
,|fitdlins $&l8s&isn and piltric Rr8lilil, l,Jllm8n
Recolling q time you fult powerful ond confidenr. This will
offect your posture ond breothing, ond your overoll sense of confidence
with women. stort by recolling o time when you reolly hod bolls, when
you feorlessly went for something ond produced on extroordinory result.
When you recoll o fime you felt powerful, you don,t hove to drow on o
situotion where you felt powerful with women. lr could be o footboll
gome/ o roce you won/ when you osked for o roise, o greot speech you
gove or ony moment of victory in your life. lt's o woy to boost your con-
fidence. lfs o woy for you lo tell yourself, ,yes, l,ve got bolls, l,ve done
stuff thot is omozing, I con do this-no question obout it, no doubt.,,
We've oll hod momenls where we,ve performed beyond whot we
thought our copobilifies were. And you, yes, you, hove hod rhose
momenls too.
lf you toke o few seconds trc recoll o time you were powerful, you'il bd o
lot more powerful when you opprooch o womon. Remember lhose
moments ond use your post success to fuel your confidence with women
trcdoy.
Strefching. When you feel shessed ond tense, your body in rurn trens-
es up. Affer you hove done some deep breothing ond visuorized success,
ifs olso useful to srretch your body to help it relox. stond up ond toke o
few minutes to stretch your body from heod to toe. Breothe os you do it.
The next time you're stressed ond wonr to opprooch o womon/ go into
o corner or go outside ond stretch for o few minules.
u
rllru lr ullrhr !!l!!urlL
-

ll0u tr0 lilfi n 1|r0m0n
Ghonging your thoughts. lf you ore like most guys, the moment
before you ore going to trclk to o womon your thoughts get ugly-reol
ugly. You ihink obout oll your post foilures, oll the woys in which you
suck, oll the reosons you're o foilure with women. ln the foce of oll thot
self-flogellotion, who con be successful? Troin yourself to think obout
something pleosont, even fun, when you're oround women. Think obout
food, sporls, sex/ your fovorite movie, whotever. When you hel stressed
ond nervous, thinking obout something you enioy will help perk you uP
so you con hove fun.
Nol roking your thoughts so seriously. We oll think crozy stuff
sometimes. But iust becouse you hove o thought one moment doesn'l
meon you ore going lo hove it the next. We heor thot people who med-
itote for yeors ond yeors often comment thot they get io o ploce where
they stop toking their thoughts, feelings ond body sensolions seriously.
They reolize thot ot every moment there ore new thoughts ond senso-
tions possing through their body, ond thot's iust life.
The experience of meditqlors suggests thot we ore olwoys in o stote of
flux. One momenl we might be foeling extreme leor ond the next
moment the feor will turn into something difhrent. You ore olwoys
chonging, so one woy to be reloxed is to think, "l'm nol going to hove
this ponic thought for more thon o minute or lwo; then it will chonge.
Remind yourself thot your thoughts ond body sensotions ore nol reol ond
don't need to dictote your behovior.
uurlou[olllooillnfl;;
ll
i!;ifrtt;fi{ qeis:;irl:}!},,1:* i}ifi it ltt,gfl iig l,*,}gr*,t
visuolizing someone you trust. you moy find it colming fo pic-
fure someone you trust ond imogine them offering you suppod ond
encourogement. Think of Ron Louis ond Dovid copelond. We ore on
your teom. We ore here to encouroge you.
visuolize onybody who hos been o supportive figure in your life. Who
ore the supportive figures in your life now? who ore your best friends?
lmogine they ore there behind you, on your teom, encouroging you to
go up ond tqlk to thot womon you,re scored to tolk to.
You con even imogine thot someone like John Trovolto (in his role in the
movie Gef shortyl, o rock sto4 someone you odmire or o politicol figure
is supporting you. Just imogine they ore there behind you soying,
"Come on, you con do it, you con do it. We hove totol foith in you!,, This
lechnique works very well in building up your confidence.
Toking q wqlk. Leove wherever you ore ond wolk oround the block
for o few minutes. While you're out, do some deep breorhing ond enioy
the fresh oir. And while you're wolking, think obour someone you enioy
being oround or on experience thot is pleosont. you moy wonr ro wolk
veqy briskly to chonge your internol sfote ond get your blood pumping.
Toking o wolk con be reolly useful in chonging your internol store, cleor-
ing your heod ond colming you down enough to opprooch the womon
you reolly wont to opprooch
We olso recommend thor you get oerobic exercise of leost rhree rimes o
week. Men who tend trc hwe ponic ond onxiety con greotly decreose their
shess level by regulorly getting moderote omounrs of oerobic exercise.
www.ebook3000.com

llllur [0 Tillr l0 llJ0msn
Leorning tqi chi or yogq. Leorning some toi chi, chi kung or yogo
postures con help you remoin colm. Mony students hove reported thot
leorning toi chi or yogo is greotly useful in leorning to stoy colm. You
con pick up books on these types of exercise or toke courses. Since toi
chi, chi kung ond yogo tend to be meditotive, students often find they
con use the skills to stoy colm in their doily lives, porticulorly in stressful
siluotions.
Drinking heovily. Just kidding. You con try this mefiod, but it will
usuolly bockfire. Perhops you'll colm down, but you might olso become
o belligerent jerk. You need to gouge how often ond how much you
drink so thot you con feel confident qnd orticulote ond think cleorly
when you're oround women.
There ore o lot of other things thot you con do to relox. These ore iust o
few thot should be helpful. lf there ore proclices you use to decreose
your onxiety, keep doing them. lf you heor of ofier exercises, definitely
try them. The point is lo find proctices you con toke on to remoin colm
ond relqxed when you tolk to women.
Feeling tense ond ofrqid is perfectly normol, but hoving tools to over-
come your feor is whot's most importont. Proclice o few of lhese moves
before opprooching women ond your confidence will greotly improve.
Ponic ond onxiety is something thot con be controlled. lf you suffer from
this problem, no motter where you qre on the ponic speclrum, lhere is
hope. .
T
uuu,llrubruillluxrlL
uml.lllft 
r*.
cltflp[Et' I
nn[lllg, "lllllt['ff trll0 $u0l'u
millllll ffit[?"
As we've soid before, there is o srep-by-srep sequence of events in
seducing o womon. As you reorn ihe skiils for frirting ond torking to
women ond proctice them with women, you'll probobly find it helpful to
remember the phoses of seducing o womon.
The first phose of seducing o womon is getting yourserf reody. you
olwoys need to be getfing your mind creor ond determining if onything
is stopping you. lf there,s o post reiection stopping you, you must get
over it (see the previous two chopters). you musr ger your mind creor;
remember ond celebrote your posr victories ond get yourself into o peok
performonce srqre. You must be reody for possibre reiecrion, ond hove
hondled your ponic' Wherher you're on o coffee dote, obou*o soy hi
lo o womon or going for o first kiss, you ore orwoys going to be botiling
yourself ond your own frome of mind. Thots phose one.
The second phose of seducing o womon is inrerrupting her ond gefiing
her ottention. You must initiorre wirh women, ond it tokes guts to do thot.
It tokes gurs ro initiote the first kiss. lt tokes guts to initiote getting her
phone number ond emoil oddress. rt tokes guts rrc initiote everything. And
thofs your iob. Never foil to remember thot ir's your lob, excrusivery.

ll0trmauill{0ln0n
The third phose is the ropport phose, lhe romonce-building phose. Thot
is when you ore hoving o conneciion with somebody in which she feels
like you underslond her, she feels like she understonds you ond you iust
hove o nice conversotionol flow. The skills in this book will help you
occomplish this.
The fourth phose introduces o physicol connection. She sees you os o
potentiol romonlic portner. This involves light sensuolity.
Finolly, the fifth phose is getting inlo more "heovy''sexuol stuff. You storF
ed by getting yourself reody, interrupting her, developing ropport ond
moking her see you os o romontic possibility. Now you ore initioting thol
nexi foroy inlo sexuol contoct.
Although this book focuses on tolking lo women, for more informotion
on doting you con reod How to Succeed wilh Women ond visit our web
site of www. howtosucceedwithwomen.com'
During o typicol interoction with o womon, you ore going to go through
stoges one through five over ond over ogoin. You ore olwoys going to
come bock to your stote of mind ond getting yourself prepped. You ore
olwoys interrupting her on o deeper ond deeper level.
But these phoses con olso hoppen out of sequence. You ore conslontly
going in os deep os you con go ond then bockpedoling. You go in ond
you ore holding honds ond you stop holding honds then you go bock
into the interruption phose. You might be moking out ond oll of o sud-
den find yourself bock in the ropport-building phose. A dote is unpre-
dictoble. You hove to let thot flow hoppen.
ruu,lr{rbunU[flln,.
lnullrldhru
fiir&ins" 'trrh&? fllr $$!r$ $$lliry'
Before we get into the specific tolking ond flirting skills, there ore o few
generol concepts we should cover: the three time fromes of on interqc-
tion wifh o womon, leoving her wonting more ond other foctors in how
you oppeor to o womon.
iltB rill|B8 illn0 r]Ialn8$ 0F
lllmnaciloll uffiil u0]llE[
lf you ore going to succeed in tolking to o womon, you need to know
iust how urgent the situotion with her is. Every mon hos hod o wonder-
ful womon wolk out of his life forever becouse he wosn't conscious of
how urgenl it wos to toke o risk with her right then. Understrrnding the
three time fromes of on interoction will help keep thot from hoppening.
You only hqve q few minutes. ln this situotion you only hove o
few minules, or moybe iust o few seconds, to moke contocr. you ore on
o troin or in o line ond this is your one-ond-only chonce. you soy hi to
her ond it leods to o conversotion. You hove to get her number or emoil
oddress right then. lf you blow it, she is going to be gone-lirerolly. ln
this situotion you hove to cut to the chose quickly. you hove to risk o lot
to get her phone number or emoil oddress or ilrs oll over.
one of our students told us obout being in one of these situqtions recently
while in line ot the post office. There wos o pretfy girl who wos olso in line
who mode eye contrcct with him severol fimes. He soid hi ond they storted
trc chot, but her furn come up ot the counrer ond she wos drown owoy.
www.ebook3000.com

ll$tlr l,s lhll{ 1{ wsl|r6n
Alter she finished her business ond wos leoving, he got out of line ond
followed her inlo the lobby. "Excuse me," he soid, "but I iust got ihe
strong feeling thot I ought to soy hi lo you. I know il seems slronge, but
I iust hod this feeling obout you. Could I hove your emoil oddress, ond
perhops we could get logefier somelime?" He hod o brief window of
opportunity ond he needed to toke o big risk, so he took it. lf he hodn't,
she would hove been out of his life forever.
You hqve q fuw hours. This is o situotion like on oll-doy seminor,
o porty or o work-reloted octivity where you know the womon you ore
interested in is going to be oround for o little while. You don't hove to
risk it oll right owoy; you con offord to woit, to toke smoll risks with her
over o few hours rother thon toking o reolly big risk oll ot once.
You hove days, weeks or longer. This is the woitress you con go
bock ond see over ond over or lhe womon in your oerobics closs who
olwoys works out ol 5 p.m. on Tuesdoys ond Thursdoys. You con risk
much more sloily with these women ond build o conneclion over lime.
Knowing these three lime fromes helps you know how much you must
risk ond how quickly you must do so. lf you ore putting gosoline into
your cor ond the womon of the nexl cor is otlroctive qnd you wont to
tolk to her then you hod better risk o lot right then, becouse she is obout
to disoppeor from your life. On the other hond, if thot some womon
shows up ot on eight-week closs you ore toking, you don't hove lo risk
big right owoy by going for her phone number or emoil oddress. You
con risk big if you wont, but you cqn olso toke smoller risks ond seduce
her over time.
I
lltuuhrutfffio4{fll}
fliptiltE, "lilrlaf$ ]lts $tors 8$iil,l8a$?"
You con olso look ot this os o risk specrrum. For insronce, you hove ro
loke more risk when you osk for the number of o womon you ore in line
with thon you do to get her number when you see o womon twice o
week in your oerobics closs.
10flu8 ilBl' uflll[lllg ln0n8
l/s best to leove o womon wonting more. Thot meqns ifs beiter if your
conversotions with her ore shod.
Thofs not how mosr guys flirt wirh women. wirh most guys, if on inter-
oction with o womon is going well, they push it ond keep tolking until
something bod hoppens. only when rhere's o problem or bod feeling
with the womon do they sfop. Thot meons they olwoys monoge ro end
their interoctions with women on sour notes. Thofs bod.
These guys think, '!V'ow, this is going greot. Therefore, l,m not going to
try to get her number qnd close the deol, r'm iusr going to keep rorking.,,
Or they think, T V'ow this is going greot. Therefore, l,m not going to
come bock ond tqlk to her more loter; l'm going to stoy here qnd be
omozed thot i/s going well until she inevitobly gets bored. when she
gets bored I will get tense ond then when r get tense I will mess evelr-
thing up ond she will finolly soy, ,Oh, I hove to leove.,,,
okoy, moybe no guy octuolly thinks thqt-but thot's how it works out in
proctice.

fiBilr t0 lellr l0 t{0ln8n
Unfortunotely,you will find o woy to blow it during those first inleroc-
tions if you give it enough time. Therefore you hove tro leove while things
ore going well. ond leqve her wonting more.
Your fli*ing interoctions need to be long enough to give her o pleosur-
oble experience qnd leove her wonting to see you ogoin. lf i/s going
well, don't breok the rules-get out of there on o high note so she's left
wonling more of you, nol tired of you ond wonting less.
Thot is olso o woy to keep yourself empowered. lf you stop your flirting
interoctions wilh women while they qre still fun, you con be hoppy oboul
how well it wenl. lfll chorge you up. And thot will keep your obility to
seduce olive.
l]lFilB]l$Illg il01[ uoll RDDEil' m uolll$[
As you stort using the iechniques in his book, you'll noturolly begin to
find yourself in conversotions with women. Lel's go over o few pointers
obout sounding ond looking good.
Breqthe more deeply. As we mentioned before, mony men breothe
into ond speok from their upper chests ond throots. This gives their voic-
es o nosol sound ond it mokes them sound tense when they tolk io
women.
T
uoCI,Irhiloe[s|ffllk_
uuulffirafl
flirnills, 'T*ksm 
'lls 
$firs $s$n{ rllnw"
Proctice breothing from deeper in your body. Breothe more deeply ond
let your stomoch go in ond out os you do. Then toke o deep breoth so
you con feel your voice originoting from deeper in your body rother
thon exclusively from your throot ond heod. This will give your voice
more resononce ond moke il for more ofiroctive to listen to.
Adiusr your tempo. Over the next doy or so, let yourself become
owore of the speed ot which you tolk. some men tork so quickly thot
they're exhousfing for women to listen to. lf you tend to ,,speed rop,, peo-
ple, you need to proctice slowing down. lf you notice yourself tolking
reolly quickly, pouse ond toke o deep breoth. sometimes blinking slow-
ly helps.
By the some token, we've worked with some men who tolk so sroily ond
ponderously thot it's hypnotic-ond exceptionolly boring-ro listen to
them. lf you're q mon who tolks ve4y slowly, you might consider being
o little more onimoted in your speoking. Breothing more deeply will help
with this, qs will ollowing yourself ro express more of your exciremenr
when you ore tolking to people. proctice sounding more excited when
you tolk with people ond see how it feels.
Mqke eye contocf. lf you ore looking oll over the proce or sroring ot
the floor, you ore going to be unottrocrive to women. while your inter-
oction with o womon should not be o storing conrest, do mointoin some
eye contocl with her.
www.ebook3000.com

a
a
a
a
a
ll0ut uE t0ll{ l0 wsmsl!
ilt$ HUE lul|flllg $fi111$
Now thot you hove some focility with interrupting women ond soying hi
ond we've gone over some other fundomentols/ we con stort teoching
you the specific flirting skills.
There ore two greot things obout these flirting skills. First, they fit togeth-
er reolly well. Once you understond ond stort to use these skills, you'll
see how you con flow from one lo onother ond reolly hove o romontic,
fun, flirtotious, genuine, nonmonipulotive interoction with o womon.
Second, these skills ore eminently leornoble. You con leorn the bosics
quickly, proctice them, review your progress ond get good ot them. They
oren'l mogic; you don'l hove to be superchorismolic mon or o noturolly
gifted hypnotist to use them. These skills, olong with the skills for inter-
rupting ond initioting with women, will help you creote romonlic con-
nections with women.
There ore five fli*ing skills thot you will leorn from this book:
Asking 'lVhot's the story behind thot?"
The Goodbye lntroduction
Siluotidnql Fli*ing
Deepening
Romontic Questions ond Romontic Conversqlions
We'll deol with the first flirting skill right now ond cover the others in
loter chopters.
flirsins. '18ss$? Itrs $trst's *snilld ${t?"
R8H[g "l[Ha['$ fitB $[0l'u BBillllll lilflt?"
'tVhofs the story behind thot?" is obout noticing the detoils of o
womon's oppeoronce ond moking those deroils topics of conversotion.
This is eosy to do if you understond women's reloiionship to detoils. The
world of v/omen is in the detoils. she works hord on the detoils of her
oppeoronce. Noticing fhose detoils ond complimenting her on them is
extremely seductive, ond ifls something you con eosily leorn to do in
your conversotions with her.
Noticing ond ocknowledging detoils obour o womon seporotes you from
other men. Mosl men don't see detoils, or if they do, they don,t comment
on lhem. Noticing detoils sets you oport from the crowd. lt mokes you
more otlroctive.
'Who/s the story behind thot?" is o simple question ro osk ofter you,ve
soid hi ond noticed some detoil of o womon's presentotion. lf you,ve got-
ten qt oll good ot soying hi, using this skill is eosy. ,lVhot,s the story
behind fiot?" is on excellenl question to osk o womon: ilrs open-ended
ond it gives her o chonce to tolk obout something thot might be impor-
tont to her.
lf o womon is weoring on inreresting-looking ring or eorrings or if she
hos on interesting briefcose or pin-bosicolly, if there,s ony'hing obout
her to which she moy hove poid speciol ottention-you con soy, ,,Oh,
thofls o very interesling pin" (or whotever). ,,1 don,f see pins like thqt
every doy. Who/s the story behind thot?,,
lt{u,lllltum||{IHIIIL
ll

il0u a0 l8lfi ls l{0msll
Almost every womon hos o detrcil obout her obout which you could osk
'lVhot's the story behind thot?" You might soy, 'Thot looks like on inter-
esting book you're reoding. Whofls the strcry behind lhot?" or "l see you're
corrying tJne Rader mogozine. Thot looks interesting-who/s the story
behind fhot?" or "l hoven't seen o loptcp compufier like thot before. Who/s
the stcry behind fiot?" lt is o greot woy to open up olmost qny converso-
tion.
We con heor you soying, "But osking lVhot's the story behind thot
mogozine you ore reoding' doesn't moke sensel" You're right-ond thot
lock of "sense" is port of the power of the question. h's very open, so
she's free to interpret il ony woy she wonls, ond thot might leod to some-
thing interesting. At the worst, she'll osk you, 'lVhot do you meon?" ond
you con osk o follow-up queslion such os 'lVhot is it obout thot mogo-
zine thot you like?" or "Are there ony orticles in it thot porticulorly inter-
ested you?"
Of course, ifs better to notice detoils obout physicol oppeoronce lhot ore
more meoningful to her thon her loptop or the mogozine she is corry-
ing, but there moy not olwoys be something like thot ovoiloble. lf so, il's
fine to go for something mundone.
RON: Asking 'lVho/s the story behind thot?" con work reolly well. For
inslonce, I wos tolking trc this womon in line ot o coffee shop. She
wos right in front of me, so I soid hi ond she soid hi bock. I noficed
she hod on this lndion brocelet with oll these morkings on it, so I
soid to her; 'tVow, thot is o reolly interesting brocelet thot you hove
on. I hoven'l seen onything like thot bebre. Who/s the strcqy behind
RirtinE. ""1ffllam m0 $60rs Ssillnd nsu"
thot?" She soid, "Oh, I got this on my hip to lndio.,, I bllowed up:
"Oh wow, o trip trc lndio? Thofs reolly interesting. Are you someone
who likes to lrovel?" She soid, 'Yeoh, it wos on omozing experi-
ence," ond we eosily got intc o conversotion obout trweling ond
her trip to lndio.
We'll show you more detoiled exomples of how to sustoin ond deepen
the conversotions thot'lVhofs the story behlnd fiot?" will stort. For now,
oll you hove to worry obout is soying hi, noticing o detoil ond geiling
one simple question out of your mouth: 'lVhofs the story behind thqt?,,
$linEulng llp "uila['$ Ellg
$Ml'U BBIMD TilAI?
You con screw up ony flirting skill, ond 'Whofs the story behind thot?,,
is no different.
As we mentioned before, 'lVho/s the story behind lhot?., is o very open-
ended question. Thot meons it doesn't limit her onswer. lf you osk,
'lVhot's the story behind thot neckloce?" she ctln onswer by tolking
obout how she got it in lndio or how she mode it herself or how it olwoys
reminds her of her first dog or whotever she wonts. The question does-
nt limit the ronge of her onswer, which is good.
But if you osk the question incorrectly, you
onswers, which is bod. See if you con spot the
lwo exomples.
will limit
errors in
her possible
the following
I
uuu,lllrburmflffIwww.ebook3000.com

ll[llr &0 Tflllr ft $10m8ll
We once hod o cooching client who reported to us ihot he used 'lVhofs
ihe story behind thot?" ond it totolly didn't work. We osked him to tell
us whot hoppened. He soid, "Okoy,l wos in the elevotor ot work with
this womon ond I sow thot she hod on o reolly interesling pin, so I soid
b her, 'Oh, thofs on inleresting pin. Where did you get it?' And she
soid, 'Oh, I got it qt q siore.' Thot wos the end of the conversotion-it
didn't go onywhere ol oll."
Another cooching client sow o womon who wqs weoring o reolly inter-
esting scorf. He soid to her, 'lV'ow, tho/s o reolly interesling scorf you're
weoring. ls thot o fomily heirloom?" She gosped ond soid, "Oh god, I
hope not-l hote my fomily." End of conversotion. He didn't get her
number, or onything else from her.
Did you spot the errors? Both of these men osked the question in woys
thot limited the onswers the women could give. The first guy soid, "Thofs
on interesling pin. Where did you get it?" Well, there's o very simple
onswer to thot question: "l got it ol o store." The question limited the kind
of onswer she con give; she could only tolk obout where she obtoined
it, which wos probobly boring for both her ond the mon.
On the other hond, soying, 'Thofs on interesting pin, whofs the story
behind lhot?" is very open. She con onswer with olmost onything thot
inierests her. She could soy, "l got it in New Zeolond" or "l gol it ot he
moll" or "l got it for myself with my Christmos money." lt leoves her with
on incredibly wide ronge of possible onswers, which mokes it eosier for
you lo osk follow-up questions: "Do you like to trovel?" or 'lVhot obout it
mode you bvy t?"
t
nir*ins, '"t{ttss$ xE* $$ers s8trtil$ rne&?"
ln lhe second exomple, the mon soid, "Thots o reolly inferesling scorf
you're weoring. ls thot o fomily heirloom?,, Once ogoin, he limited her
possible onswers, ond in lhis cose, he forced o conversotionol direction
thot wos upsetting to her. lf he hod osked, ,lVhots the stoqy behind
thoP" she could hove tolked obout whot she wonted to tolk obout ond
things would hove worked out much better.
There's o greot sequence sforfing to build here. Hi con leod very notu-
rolly to 'who/s the stoqy behind fhof?" ond rhor leods into the other flirt-
ing skills.
c0llcilfl0ll
'lVhott the story behind thot?" is on immensely powerful flirting ques-
tion. lt gels most women to open up immediotely ond tell you intimote
detoils obout themselves. After they've told you these detoils, ir's horder
for them to think of you os o ierk; ofter oll, if you were o ierk, why would
they open up so much to you?
when you're tolking ro o womon, be it o solesgirl behind o countrer or
o womon ot o porty, check to see if she's weoring onything thot looks
unusuol or personol. lt might be o pin, o neckloce, o piece of clothing
or o brocelet. When you see it, osk her, 'nVho/s the story behind thot?,,
ll's o powerful conversolion storler. o
uuufrall

cllap[0r 0
R0lnm[|c lll0ug$,000mu9
lllrurucfl0ll
I[0 $BU0ll nOlna]lflc 1n0u8$
We're obout to teoch you seven Romontic Moves (olso colled Flirting
Moves) to memorize ond implement in your life. When you implement
these moves while tolking to women your success rote will increose
greotly. lf you conduct Romontic Conversotions ond don't integrote these
moves, you'll likely stoy sfuck in the dreoded friend zone. So ifs time to
get seductive ond leorn the Romontic Moves.
The moin reoson some men get stuck in the friend zone is becouse they
don't know how to show fteir romontic interesl. Other men get stuck in
the friend zone becouse they're ofroid of being reiected. Men in both
cotegories con leorn the Romontic Moves, use them without risking their
heorts ond souls, ond finolly stop coming ocross os perpetuol friends.
lf you're like o lot of our students, you've looked ot the bod boys who
get women ond decided you weren't going be like them. You probobly
decided thot if getting women meont you'd hove to lie, monipulote
'
women or qct like o ierk, you would iust give up doting.
www.ebook3000.com

It
uuu,[rrfl
T
il0ur t0 l0l[ T[ l/llome[
There is good news, however: you don't need to be o ierk to gel women,
though you con leqrn some things from the bod boys. The bod boys ore
willing to show their romontic inlerest right owoy ond risk rejection. The
bod boys ore willing to be upfront with their sexuol inlerest. You con
leorn lo be up front ond show your romontic interesl to women in woys
thot ollow them to feel opprecioted ond respected. We'll show you how.
When you meet o womon for the first time, i/s cruciol thot she knows
yov're o romqntic possibility. lf she sees you os only o friend, it's hord to
become her lover. We believe thol women decide within three minutes
of meeting o mqn if he's o potentiol lover or not. lf you send cleor sig-
nols fiot you're only intrerested in being friends (by not doing the
Romontic Moves), you'll blow your chonces of something more intimote
developing loter.
Men oflen think thot the Romontic Moves do not opply if o womon is
extremely ottroctive. You follow the some rules when deoling with hot
women os you do with olhers. Show your romonlic interest right owoy
with ollwomen.
h/s importont for you to fomiliorize yourself with oll of the Romontic
Moves. Find the ones thot ore toughest for you ond keep procticing them
until they feel noturol. Hopefully some of them will be eosy for you. lf so,
keep procticing them ond refining your skills. After o while, when you/re
fomilior with oll seven moves , yov'll find yourself effo*lessly integroting
them into your flirting ond your conversotions with women.
*0man$ie !ioss$. 8B8d$us lnbrssmbi0n
R0lnall[lc |n0u8$
You musl leorn oll seven of the moves ond proctice them. When unsuc-
cessfi-rl seducers find thot o few Romontic Moves ore difficult or scory
they give up. Gropple with yourself ond overcome ony resistonce you
hove lo procticing ond integroting the Romontic Moves into your doting
life.
Another pitfoll to which unsuccessful seducers succumb is only using one
or lwo Romontic Moves. lf you only use one or two moves when you flirt
wilh women you will not be successfi.rl. You will nol send enough cleor,
strong signols obout your inlerest. When you meet o womon for the first
time, you need lo do ot leost four of the Romontic Moves so you send o
cleor signol thot you ore romonticolly interested.
look into her eyes "loo long." Looking into o womon's eyes,,too
long" creoles o momenl of intimocy between you ond her. ln holding eye
contoct, you're creoling o little moment in which she recognizes thot
you're romonticolly interested in her. A friend would ovoid eye contoct
ond be more cqulious, but you're no longer iust o friend. You ore step-
ping into the potentiol lover cotegory ond creoting moments of infimocy
by moking eye contoct with her.
Here's how to do il At some point while you're speoking, or during o
conversotionol lull, hold eye contoct for iust o beot too long, iust until ifs
o little uncomfortoble.

ll0m 00 tlllr n ll0men
h's importonl to remember fiot this is not o storing conlesl, iust o little
moment of intimocy. When Bob the bod seducer looks ot o womon, he
slqres too long ond too deeply. He lenses up his body, leons in close to
her foce ond stores ot her long ond hord. The key to looking into o
womon's eyes "loo long" is to ovoid turning it into o big deol. Look into
her eyes for o beot too long-iust long enough to creote o speciol
momenl.
lf you're o guy who tends to ovoid eye conioct ond store ot the floor, you
need to proctice looking into women's eyes when you trrlk. Hoving o dif-
ficult time moking ond holding eye contoct is o very common problem,
but there is help. The cure is to stort looking women directly in ihe eye
for o few seconds ond then wolking owoy.
You con develop new skills wifh women, like tolking ond mointrcining eye
contoct, by hoining your nervous system in smoll doses lo do uncomforF
oble things ond experiment with new behoviors. When you proclice
shetching yourself in new woys, you will eventuolly become desensitized
ond fuel comfortrrble being with women. lf you're willing to stort smoll
ond build your confidence slowly over time, you'll evenluolly overcome
your feors ond be successful. lf you hove o hqrd time looking o womon
in the eyes when you tolk, stort procticing todoy. Over the next few
monlhs you will feel more confident ond comforlrble initioling ond hold-
ing eye conloct.
Lefs go over how to look into o womon's eyes "loo long" once ogoin.
Look into her eyes ond hold eye contoct iust o wee bit too long so you
get into the intimocy zone. Proctice holding eye conloct ond proctice get-
lfl
lurlluttutrmffIn
nsnaffii0 ilsvs$, SslrsbuG tntn0{lcti0n
ting cought looking. Looking info o womon's eyes too long will greotly
enhonce your seductive presence.
Moke decisions quickly ond eosily. Men who ore decisive come
qcross os confident, strong, powerful. lndecisive men come ocross os
scored, intimidoted, ofroid to be themselves. How do you wqnt to come
ocross trc women?
When you're with o womon, moke decisions quickly ond eosily. lf you,re
on o dote ond you con sil in one corner of the coffee shop or the other,
choose quickly. lf you're ordering wine ot o bor, decide quickly. lf you,re
selecting o movie to wofch, do so quickly. lf you,re picking o ploce to
meel for o dote. pick quickly. When you're out with q womon, she needs
to see thotyou're o decisive mon. This doesn't meon you lurn into o deci-
sion Nozi ond never osk for her inpur. lt does meqn, howevel thot when
lhere ore times for quick decisions during o dote you oct decisively.
Wink. Winking is o lost ort. Most men don,t wink ot women. Why ore
we recommending it? Becouse winking ql women is seductive, simple,
fun ond infimote. Friends don't wink ot eoch other; potenriol lovers do.
Here's how to do it:
o Lower one eyelid ond then lift it bock up.
It iust tokes o second ond is very eosy. lt helps to smile ofter you wink to
moke the inleroction feel wormer. You con wink ot ony point in o con-
versolion with o womon. Moybe you're tolking to her ond you,re both
www.ebook3000.com

I
[0ru m afi T0 ull0nsn
loughing obout something ond you give her o little wink. Moybe you're
looking ot o womon ocross o room ond you give her o wink. Winking
creotes o little intimole momenl between you ond her. The key to success
in winking ol o womon is to be subtle ond moke sure the wink is o quick
shored moment between the two of you, not o long uncomfodoble ordeol.
Here's how to blow it:
o lf you contorl your foce ond look like on oxe murderer while blink-
ing both of your eyes ot ropid speed, you will not come ocross os
romontic.
. 
lf you wink ot o womon ond then run toword her, you will look
like o stolker.
. 
lf you wink ot o womon ond then stick out your tongue in on
overtly sexuol monner, you will come ocross os o ierk.
r 
lf you wink ot o womon ond then store deeply into her eyes, you
will look like o scory guy.
r 
lf you wink ot o womon ond look terrified insteod of confident,
you will come ocross os o scored, immofure boy.
We hope you get the point.
Winking is o greot romonlic move becouse ifs not something most men
do; il/s out of the ordinory. When you wink ot q womon it cotches her
ottention ond drows her in.
n
uuulrulrmrfllllllL
$0m*rr$i8 &l0w$" ss{ltths0 l$r0tllssi0fi
Check out her body. Checking out o womon's body does not meon
you slore ot her cleovoge for hours ond hours (even though we oll love
lo see greot cleovoge). This does not meon you drop some chonge on
the ground ond try to look up her skirt while you're picking up the coins
thot fell in front of her. This meons you check our her body in o respect-
fulwoy.
There's o porodox obout mony women. On lhe one hond, they're offend-
ed when you store ond check out their bodies too long. On rhe other
hond, they work out oll the time so they con hove greoi bodies, dress
greot ond weor push-up bros. Women wont you to look ot their bodies
so they fuel opprecioted; they iust wonr you to be somewhot subtle so they
don't feel completrely obiecrified. Yes, ifs o rough line to wolk sometimes,
bul we've got some tips thofll be useful in figuring out this mess.
Here's how to do it:
. 
Stort by looking in her eyes.
. 
ln less thon o second, move your eyes from hers ond then sweep
down her body.
. 
Come bock up to her eyes ond foce, smile ond keep on tclking
like nothing hoppened.
With this method o womon will see you looking ot her body, but becouse
i/s so fost ond strrrts ond ends with her foce it comes ocross os respectfr.rl.

a
a
a
a
ll0llJ ts lalr $ |rsmsll
Checking out o womont body is o good move becouse ifs not something
o friend would do. A friend might woit until she wosn't looking ond then
try to look down her shirt. When yov're oble to check out q womon
quickly, you're letting her know you're romonticolly interested in her ond
not o ierk.
Here's how to blow it:
Get lo$ in storing ot her breosts.
Store qt her crotch ond lick your lips.
Nod your heod emphoticolly up ond down.
Soy "l om sloring ol your bodocious tits" when she osks you whot
you're looking ot.
Tense up your foce ond show her t*re whites of your eyes until you
look like you're going into o grond-mol seizure.
Troin yourself to be oble to check out o womon in less thon o second.
You're checking oul women oll the time onyrvoy, so you might os well
stort procticing this method.
Keep your body powerful. Who ore some of your seduction
heroes in the movies? ls ii Will Smith? John Trovolto? Billy Bob Thornton?
Clint Eostwood? Humphrey Bogort? The nome of your screen hero isn't
importont; the point is thot you'll likely be more seductive if you model
your behovior ond poslure on your hero. Men who ore seductive hold
their body in o powerful woy so when they're stonding, sitting or mov-
ing they come ocross os both foscinoted ond foscinoting. The woy to do
this is to pretend thot you ore foscinoted, foscinoting ond powerful ond
then stond ond move in thot woy.
n
usu,rlpullullllll
ururulfnnrldt
*slnastis *loyss. sllsd&$ In&nr0l:&i0[
Lefs do on experiment. Right now os you reod this book, sit in your
choir like you're bored to teors. Now sir up ond reod this book like
you're gefting o million dollors of volue from Louis & Copelond. Whofs
the difference in your body posture? Whofs the difference in your oilen-
tion? How does your body feel? When you ore in o stote where you ore
otlenlive ond keeping your body powerful it will show in your body lon-
guoge ond in your presentotion.
When you're interocting with o womon ond keeping your body power-
ful, you're not distrocled. You're poying oilention to her, not checking out
other women. You're not looking of your wolch, reoding q newspoper,
messing oround with your polmtop compuler-you,re only focused on
her. We're not suggesting you hove o wild, moniocol look in your eye;
don't store ot her cross-eyed ond never blink while tolking. Just focus on
the womon you're tolking to ond keep your body powerful.
Compliment her. When you compliment o womon the woy o friend
compliments o womon, you soy, 'Wow, thofs o reolly nice briefcose you
hove." When you compliment o womon the woy o potrentiol lover com-
pliments o womon/ you soy/ 'lV'ow, you ore o beoutiful womon. you
hove reolly beoutiful eyes. ll's reolly o pleosure to meel you.,, ln compli-
menling o womon the woy o lover does, you stoy owoy from imperson-
ol complimenls. As o potentiol lover; you wont to let her know thol you,re
noticing romontic detoils obout her ond you're willing to toke risks in
tolking to her.
When you compliment women you con soy things like ,,1 
iust got lost in
how beoutiful you ore for o second" or "You hove on omozing sense of
stylo" or "Your smile brightens up the whole room. ,, l[ yov,re being intro-
www.ebook3000.com

tl
llsrir t0 lilfi lo lvsm8ll
duced to o womon by o mutuol friend, for instonce, you might soy, "Oh,
so this is the beoutiful Jennifer l've heord so much oboul."
When complimenling o womon, be on the lookout for detoils. When you
con see ond ocknowledge the detoils $ol o womon hos put o lot of effort
into, you come ocross os o potentiol lover. As we soid, o friend compli-
ments o womon on her briefcose, cor or something impersonol. A poten-
tiol lover compliments o womon on her eorrings, neckloce, hoir, smile or
something more intimote.
Somelimes friends ond lovers moy notice the some thing obout q womon
but they will bring il up in very different woys. A friend might notice o
neckloce ond soy, 'Thq/s o veD/ nice neckloce." A potentiol lover might
soy, 'lVow, thq/s o reolly lovely necklqce you're weoring, ond it iust
mokes you glow even more." A friend might soy, "l like how your belt
molches your shoes." A potentiol lover would soy, "l noticed your belt
ond shoes motch. They drow out the color in your eyes ond moke you
look even more beoutiful."
You'll moke mistokes olong they woy-we qll do. One of the situotions
mony of our students need to encounler is offending o womqn by push-
ing o compliment too for. Thot con be o good thing to experience.
Flirting with women requires risk, ond when you risk with o womon,
sometimes you will occidentolly offend her. This is port of life. The only
woy to stoy perfectly sofe is lo remoin in the friend zone. lf you're will-
t
urllrirulurutllll$l
UWMIryIfl
p0ma,l&i$ t{$}ss, &sltd0ss ll}$rs{[|ebif,t
ing to toke some risks ond give o womqn some compriments, you,il find
out how fo push the boundory betueen friend ond rover, despire rhe
occosionol mistoke.
As you proctice complimenting women, it's importont to find your own
unigue compliment style. Do you feel comfortoble complimenting o
womqn on her smile? whot feels too overtly sexuol to you? Whot seems
cheesy to you? Get ouf there ond find the style thot's best for you. When
you do, your confidence ond success will increose tremendously.
Whisper to her. When you whisper fo o womon, you creole o
moment of intimocy between the two of you. lt's like the resr of the world
is shut out for o second ond you,re olone together.
lf you hwe the opportunity rrc whisper during o conversorion, i/s o greot
move b mqke. For exomple, you might whisper fic o womon, ,,1 hove ic con_
hss thot you're reolly beoutiful," ot "r reolly om enioying tolking rrc you.,,
Whispering is o good tool to use to emphosize romontic tolk.
Here's how to do it:
o Leon into her ond soy o few quiet words; then leon out ond tolk
normolly.
Whispering's o woy of drowing in your personor spoce ond moking rhe
conversotion more intimote.

tll
a
a
lll|ilr srnfi k $i8msll
Here's how to blow it:
Pretend you're mute or you've hod o trocheotomy.
Whisper like you're speoking some incomprehensible foreign lon-
guoge.
Whisper dozens of times during o dote. Once or twice is quite
enough!
These ore fundomentol moves to moke when you're with women to
insure thot you won'l come ocross os o friend. When you use the
Romontic Moves, you'll furn ony conversotion into o romontic one ond
show o womon you're romonticolly interested. lf you hold eye conloct
"too long," mqke decisions quickly ond eosily, wink ot o womon, check
out her body, compliment her, keep your body powerful ond whisper to
her, you will become o seduciion mochine.
Keep trock of how mony Romontic Moves you do in your doily life.
Which ore eosy ond which ore difficult? Find the moves thol score you
mosl ond try them onywoy. The more you proctice them, the less intimi-
doting they'll be. lf one of the Romontic Moves is eosy for you, refine it
by proclicing it often. We wont you to feel comfortrcble with these moves
while pushing yourself to go outside of your normol comfort zone. These
moves ore going to bring out the romontic you.
tu,u,h9ubllsf,gllll[
n0'nafiic ll0ws, $00dbu8 lfltf0dIcbi0n
rll8 00008U0 l]lm0D[cn0|l
The Goodbye lntroduction is onother woy of initioting with o womon,
showing your romontic interest ond complimenting her on o deep level.
lfs risky in thot you ore going out of your woy ond showing romontic
interest directly. At the some time, ifs low-risk in thot if oddresses her
feors, so is not threotening to her. ll,s olso quick ond it gives you on eosy
exit if the interoction doesn't go the woy you'd hoped.
uil0]l m ll$8 $t$ 00m[!g lllil'[0ll$n01l
When you hoven't hqd o chonce to soy hi. The Goodbye
lntroduction is o greot thing to use with women you hoven't hod o
chonce to soy hi to. She moy be ocross the bor or working out ot your
gym or o woitress who didn't serve your toble or ony womon you see
ond wont lo opprooch, buf the noturol flow of things hosn't thrown the
two of you together.
When you qre leoving qnywqy. The Goodbye lntroduction is o
greot lost thing to do in mony sociol situotions. The Goodbye
lntroduction con be o fun, exciling woy to connect with o hot womon
when you're leoving o bor, reslouronl, store or wherever you moy be.
When you wont to interocf with o womon who intimi-
dotes you. The Goodbye lntroduction is designed to be over quickly;
il doesn't put you in o situotion where you ore foced with o womon with-
out horing ony ideo whot b soy or do. ll/s simple, eosy, trc he point ond fost.
t
www.ebook3000.com

L
|lol|, lis ?al& t$ W$'nsl}
When you wont to build your self-esleem with women.
When you're feeling too intimidoted to try to hove o long conversotion
with o hot womon, the Goodbye lntroduction might be exoctly whot you
need. ll,s not designed to get you her number or emoil oddress, though
you con use it for thot; ifs designed to get you into the gome of seduc-
tion on o much deeper level thon simply soying hi.
[0][ [ll$ $00[[u8 r[[1'0[ll8[n1l u0l|ft$
lmogine you're ot the gym ond you see o womon who's reolly ottroctive.
But she's busy lifting weights, ond it seems like your gym isn't such o
friendly ploce onpvoy.
Here's whot you do: leove the gym when she is between sets or stretch-
ing. Then, on your woy out, introduce yourself like this (smile while you
do it!): "Hi, l'm iust leoving ond I only hove o second here, but before I
go I reolly wonted to inhoduce myself to the womon who hos such won-
derful form. My nome is Ron." She'll soy something bock like "Oh hi,
my nome is Mondy." Then you soy, "l've gotto go, but I hope to see you
here ogoin." Then you leove.
This simple infieroction creotes on opening br you to trclk to her next time
you see her ("Hi Mondy, how ore you?"l.lt olso gives you o woy of inter-
octing with her br the first time without there being much risk for either of
you. Becouse you lrall her right owoy thot you qre leoving, she's less likely
ic be ofroid of you wosting loh of her time. lt olso builds your esleem ond
teoches your nervous system thot you con ocfuolly survive tolking to beou-
tiful women, which mokes il more likely thot you'll do it ogoin in the future,
Uulutrulbfillrlufu
uunSErI[
I
fio$an&i$ !*ey8$. [s$s$ss t[srsN'ljsbisn
ril8 par[$ m ril0 080nng$ l]lil'0mcil0]t
The Goodbye lntroducfion hos four ports, ond they're oll importont:
Tell her yov're leoving. You tell her you ore leoving by soying some-
thing like "l hove to go nov/' or "l'yegorio run, my friends ore woiting for
me outside."
This is o very importont step. Most of the time, women you don,r know
well qre going to osk themselves some combinotion of three things when
you first interrupt them or toke o conversotion into deeper, riskier terri-
tory. These questions ore obout her sofety; they ore 'Whot is he going
to do to me?," "How long will it toke?" ond '!Vhy is he soying this to
me?"
This is why, when you do the Goodbye lntroduction, your first words ore
"l hove to leove." Soying thot you hove to leove mokes it eqsier for her
to listen to you becouse il onswers two of her most pressing questions.
She knows the interoction won't toke long, ond since il won,t toke long,
there's less bod stuff thot you'll hove iime to do to her. Addressing those
sofety questions is importonl, ond soying "l hove to leove" or some vori-
otion thereof hondles thot nicely.
h/s importont to know thol you con'l iust onswer her sofety questions
explicitly through some sort of direct, dignified conversotion, which men
somelimes try to do. Men who try to olloy women's feors directly olmost
olwoys foil; they end up soying something like "l'm not o stolker or ony-
thing, I wonted lo meet you" or "Don't be ofroid, I iusl wonted lo soy hi.,,

ll0uj 00 mn I0 tll0ln0n
These never work, becouse soying these things is so incredibly suspi-
cious thot they steer o womon bock into her sofety questions. She'll
instontly osk herself, 'lVhy is he telling me he's not o stolker? ls it
becouse he is one? Who/s he going to do to me? How long will it toke?"
She ends up terrified, ond the conversotion goes nowhere good.
Soying "l hove lo go," on the other hond, isn't ot oll suspicious ond
onswers her sofety questions well enough for her to relox ol leqst o little.
This ollows her to be more open ond receplive to whot you soy next,
when you...
Tell her you couldn'l leove without complimenting her. You
simply soy, "but I iust couldn'l leove without infoducing myself to the
womon who..."
Compliment her. The compliment itself will depend on the situotion
you ore in. Whot is it obout her thot you're odmiring? Are you odmir-
ing her style? her posture? her rodionce? her smile? Whotever it is, you
compliment il. (This is within reoson, of course-if you're odmiring o
womon's breosts, for inslonce, we shouldn't hove to tell you thot soying
"l couldn'l leove without introducing myself to the womon who's got one
hell of o rock" is not going to sound very seductive.) Find something to
odmire obod her thot she'll see os o compliment ond give it to her-soy
something like 'the womon who is so incredibly rodiont" or "who hos
such o beoutiful smile."
fi0ftan&is il0ys$, li0s{lcs lntl 0{g0tis||
lntroduce yourself. This port is simple-simply stote your nome.
she'll probobly respond by relling you her nome ond being friendly.
After oll, whot does she hove fo lose if you're obout fo leove onyrvoy?
From there you con either moke some chitchot (which we,ll tolk obout
soon) or leove, your self-esteem increosed by hoving token o risk ond
hoving hod o reol, romonric interoction with on qftroctive womon.
The Goodbye lntroduction doesn'f usuolly get you o dote right owoy.
whof it does do is moke you into the kind of guy who opprooches
women directly ond romonticolly, ond o big port of becoming o seduc-
er is becoming thot klnd of guy. Anhis point in the seduction skill build-
ing, the point is not to get her in bed; the poinf is to get you to be the
kind of guy who con do this sort of thing. The Goodbye lntroduction
builds thot oggressive, seductive muscle, which is whot will help you suc-
ceed with women.
Furihermore , iI you use the Goodbye rntroduction ot o gym, bor or ony-
ploce you might see the womon ogoin, you now hove qn opening with
her: you've complimented heri you've introduced yourself to her os o
powerful mon ond you know her nome. Next time you see her, you con
soy hi ond use your other flirting skills with her.
t
uuufilubruo!il{lnl www.ebook3000.com

llorx Uo nfi n Wonin
ll0lllg ffie 800[BUE |ll[l|0Dllc[I0|l [0 B$[
00llmffi lnFo]|lnafl0ll
You con use the Goodbye lntroducfion to get o womon's phone number
or emoil oddress. lf you soy, "l wos iust leoving ond I reolly gotlo go,
but I iust hqd to stop ond soy hello lo fie womon who is so beoutiful. Hi,
my nome is Dovid." She might soy, "Hi, my nome is Soroh." From there
you con soy pretty much onything. lf you're ot the gym, for instonce, you
cqn osk her how she likes the gym or how often she works out. You con
osk 'lVhot's the stoqy behind thot?" or use ony of the other flirting skills.
When you ore reody, you leove-ond we suggest you do this while the
conversotion is still fun. Firsl, soy lo her, 'You know, I reolly hove to go,
but you seem like on inleresling person qnd I would reolly like to know
you o little better. Whot would it be like if we got together sometime?
Con I hove your emoil qddress or phone number?" lf she soys yes, greotl
Toke her info ond be gone. lf she soys no, well, you hove lo leove ony-
woy. Soy, 'lV'ell, it's been nice to meet you!" ond go.
ffifllnDm$
As you con see, the Goodbye lntroduction is reolly very simple. You
opprooch her, tell her you're leoving, tell her you couldn'f leove without
complimeniing her, compliment her, introduce yourself ond either leove
or stoy ond toke the conversotion forther.
T
ullrllr :l u,tor0![!!f lllli'
g0nNa0tis !r0tl8$. Sssdb$s lnsyllsgl!&im
Here ore some exomples:
"Hi! l'm iust leoving now, bd before I went, I hod to come up ond
lell you thot you hove such o beoutiful smile, it lights up the whole
room. I iust hod to let you know fiot before I left. By the woy, my
nome is Ron."
"Hi, I hove to go-my friends ore woiting for me outside-but
before t left t hod to come up ond tell you thot you look incredibly
beoutiful. By the v/oy my nome is Donold."
"Hi, l've gotlo run right now, but before I do I iust hod to toke the
risk of coming up ond telling you thot you hove such o bequtiful
smile. By the woy, my nome is Dovid."
"Hi, l'm lust on my \ /oy out ond only hove o second, but before I
went I iust hod to come up ond tell you thot you hove on omozing
sense of style. I wish I hod to time to stoy ond seduce you, but I
reolly hove to go. By the woy, my nome is Ron."
c0lnln0ll $00[BU0 l[fl'0lucfl0ll lnH[afi8$
Skipping the first port. The most common error men moke with this
is skipping the first port of the Goodbye lntroducrion. They stort tolking
to o womon but they don't tell her "l'm obout to leove, so I only hove o
moment to lolk to you." This leoves her not knowing whot you ore going
to do to her or how long it will toke ond sends her right bock into her
sofety questions. She thinks, "Oh my god, whot is he going tc do ond
how long is this going to toke?" You've got to tell her you only hove o
momenl ond will be leoving, even if lhe contoct slretches out into o much
longcr convcrrolion.

t
ll0ut t0 ftllt l[ ttomon
Not reolly complimenting her. lf you're used to being iust friends
with women, it con be very hord to compliment $em on something
romonlic or sensuol. You might be ofroid to let o women know thot you
think she is beoutiful. You might be emborrossed or worry thot your
compliment might hurt her in some woy. You might worqy thot everyone
will know whot you soid to her ond will lough ot you.
When you let these feors run you, you're likely to give o tepid compli-
ment, like'You hove o reolly nice briefcose" or'Those ore nice shoes."
Such mild complimenls don't show your romontic interest ond don't
show thot you're the kind of guy who's willing to toke some risk with
women. You're likely to come ocross os too mild, ond tho/s not good.
Nol feeling good oboul doing it. Hoving soid thot, if you're veqy
shy, giving o mild compliment ('Thot's o very nice pin you're weoring")
might be oll you con do ot first. lf so, do it ond celebrote thot you did it;
if you're shy, thot moy be o big step. Don'l expect it to blow her owoy,
becouse it won't. But it moy give you the confidence you need to give o
bigger compliment nexl time, ond tho/s oll thot reolly motters.
We hod one studenl who would do the Goodbye lntroduction ond hoted
every minule of it. tf women didn't drop to their knees to give him orol
sex right then, he felt like o complete foilure. This mode him seem grove,
heovy ond even scory lo women, so he never got the result he wos look-
ing for. You hove to lel yourself feel good obout whot you do. Doing o
Goodbye lntroduction is o big step, ond no motter how it turns out you
should feel good obout it.
llilllu,ieutullluurill
Nnd*hl
f;0mMlis iltlu88, $s0*n$8 [t$r$0lll!ti0!N
Not procticing out loud. Proctice possible Goodbye lntroductions
out loud. This is cruciol. There's o huge difference between reoding the
exomples in this book ond octuolly speoking them out loud. We recom-
mend thot you memorize one or two of these ond proctice them l0 or
20 fimes out loud. You hove to get used to hoving these words come out
of your mouth so thot when you're in front of o womon you con iust open
your mouth ond the right words will come out.
Being unwilling to work your wqy up. You don't need to go
for the hottest women in the world ond do fiis seemingly mossive thing
if it's too terrifying. You moy wont to proctice this ot first with o women
whom you oren'l mossively ottrocted lo iust to get the experience.
Woiring for it not to feel risky or scory. lfs worth knowing fiot
the first few times you do the Goodbye lntroduction will be very scory
for you. You'll be ofroid thot something terrible will hoppen or thot she'll
be incredibly upset by it or thot she'll lough ot you or thot everyone will
know whot you did ond you'll be o complete ond uiter fool in eveqyone's
eyes. After you've done it o few times you'll know thqt ifs reolly not thot
big o deol, ond ifll get much eosier to do. The problem is you hove to
go through those first few scory times to get to thot point. lf you woit for
it not to feel risky before you try, you'll never try.
Even ofter you've leorned thot you con do the Goodbye lntroduction
wifhout being inslontly struck down by lightning, there will still be o
scory momenl eveqy time you do it, right before you open your mouth
to tolk. Thofs the moment of commitment, the moment the sky diver
experiences right os he's obout to iump oul of the oirplone. You con't
www.ebook3000.com

llstlj s$ l!1,{ l} w{m8tl
woit for the feor to go owoy before you do it. You just hove to lump.
Open your mouth ond soy the Goodbye lntroduction.
c0llcH$r0ll
Mony men ore ofroid to do the Romontic, Flirting Moves, or the
Goodbye lntroduction. But when we tolk to women, they tell us thot heor-
ing o Goodbye lntroduction or experiencing some Romontic Moves with
o mon often mokes their entire doy. ll/s o nice thing to do. Controry lo
whot you moy believe, you con be o sweet guy ond reolly moke o
women's doy by flirting with her ond showing romonlic inlerest. Don'l
deprive women of this fun, feel-good experience! .
cllflp[0l' t
8lmafl[nil rupnll[
There you ore in front of o hot womon ond you wont to flirt with her.
Moyb" she's the receptionist of your dentis/s office or the woitress ot your
luncheonetle or the womon who ot the moll who's selling you o new tie.
You need o good woy to fli* with women in these ond mony other nor-
mol, doy-to-doy situotions. When you encounter o womon, you need to
be oble to flirt with her in o fun woy thot shows her you're o guy who pro-
vides loughs ond is stimuloting to be oround. Situotionol Flirting is the key.
uila[ H $ffillan0nil rilI'flllg?
You've probobly seen men who were reolly good ot ioking oround ond
kidding with women. Perhops you've even hod moments where you
were thot guy. Men who ore good ol kidding oround with women ond
who con moke thot kidding romontic ore procticing Situotionol Flirting.
Situotionol Flirting involves two key skills: creotive misinterpretotion ond
osking outrogeous queslions. Creolive misinterpretotion hoppens when
you toke some detoil in the environment thot you ond the womon ore in
ond oct os though thot item is dromoticolly different thon it is. You then
osk on oulrogeous question obout thot misinterprelotion. You will leorn
how trr do thig in this chopter.
T
tru.orn..-".il

ll08} s0 Isll I0 tir0ms'l
For instonce, you moy be interocting with o womon who hos o comero.
You moy moke the creotive misinlerprelotion ihot her comero con steol
souls ond then osk the oulrogeous question: "Oh, I see you hove o com-
ero-ifs not going lo steol my soul, is il?"
This ioke is on opening for her to ioke bock with you. Mony women will
respond humorously, soying something like, "No, this isn't my soul-steol-
ing comero-l left thot one ol home." At the very leost, most women will
smile ond lough. As the ployful interoction progresses, you con odd, "l
think your beouty hos stolen my soul olreody." Then you're reolly in the
reolm of effective Situotionol Flirting.
Siluotionol Fli*ing comes down to finding something in lhe environment
thot you con creolively misinterpret ond moke o loke obout or osk on
"Outrogeous Question" obout. lf you con do thot, you con proctice
Situotionol Flirting.
llllru Pracflc$ $r[llflfl0m ]ill|fl]lg?
You need to proclice Situotionol Flirting to solve some of the eorly prob-
lems thot shows up in ony interoclion wi$ o womon you've iust mel:
How ore you going to moke o light, enioyoble connection? How ore you
going to build thot initiol stote of ropport? And how ore you going lo do
ii in o woy thot is fun ond enioyoble for both oI yov?
Look ot it from her point of view: she's worried thoi you're o creep. You
need to creole on enioyoble, memoroble experience together thot shows
her you're o trustworthy, fun guy who she might wont to spend time with.
f
ltuflf iou[$rot{gtrlL
UUl'lltrN
I
$i&ll*bi$mtflifsig
Situqtionol Fli*ing works well on oll these problems. lfs fun, light, pleos-
ont, enioyoble ond energizing for you both. lt creotes o shored reolity
between you, o fontrcsy world thot the two of you cqn revisit on fufure
occosions (more on this loter). And it mokes her look forword b seeing
you ogoin.
ilrB $8u0ll fieu$ 0F $t[mfl0llil ill'fllls
Remember thof dofing is q numbers gome. As you begin to
proctice Situotionol Flirting, it's o good ideo to remember our old odoge:
"Doting is o numbers gome." Situotionol Flirting is not going to work
100 percent of the time; nothing does. Situotionol Flirting is not o quick-
fix kind of thing. Not oll women ore going to be receptive to humor;
some will get scored ond stoy scored. To o certoin exlenl, ifs o crop-
shoot. When you begin Situotionol Flirting with reol-world women, iust
remember thol doting is numbers gome.
Women look ro you for certointy thof fhings qre okoy.
When you're procticing Situotionol Flirting with o womon, you must pro-
vide o sense of certointy for her thot whot you're doing is okoy, thot
there isn't ony problem with you ioking oround with her or with her iok-
ing oround with you.
Some women might be o little bit scored ot first when you stod doing
Situotionol Fli*ing becouse you ore definitely interrupting them on o deep-
er level ond osking them trc ioin you in o humorous, ployful pretend reol-
ity. They ore going to be looking ot you, your behovior ond your level of
confidcncc ond combrt to figure out whether or not there's o problem.
www.ebook3000.com

il0tx t0 I8l[ l0 ul0m0[
lf you seem incredibly neryous, ond come ocross os if you ore thinking,
"Oh my God, is this going to work? l'm doing o horrible thing-l'm
being weird. I sure hope this doesn't wreck her doy. l'm o bod guy," it
will moke it more likely thot she will get upset. lf you seem to be think-
ing, "Greol! l'm moking this ioke ond she is going to look to me ond if
I om okoy wifi it she'll probobly be okoy with it too," she will more like-
ly be fine with it.
Ultimotely, if you moke o Situotionol Fli*ing ioke ond she hos o problem
with it, remember: il's o numbers gome ond her problems ore hers, so
whot else con you do?
Use your body. Using your bo* involves smiling, moking eye contrrct
with ond putting energy ond vitolity intn your voice. lf you're frowning,
scowling, looking ot the foor or mumbling, it's going to be hord br you trc
get Situotionol Fli*ing tc work br you. Smile, breothe, look ot her ond give
it your best shot!
Proctice, proctice, proctice. Situotionol Flirting is complicoted enough
thot you probobly won't moster it overnight. lf you're used to trying to
control conversotions with women, ond most unsuccessful seducers ore,
it moy loke some proctice before you get used to letting go of control-
ling the conversotionol outcomes ond moking creolive misinterpretotions
ond osking outrogeous questions.
To succeed qt Situotionol Flirting, you need to be in the flow of the
moment, not trying to controlwhere the interoction might toke the two of
you. h/s risky ond will toke time to get used to, so give yourself l0 or 20
tries ot this before expecting it to hel noturol.
uruunruuuolrfl
t
milrcf,
t
$i&888i0tli, nirbills
Be reody for o vqriety of responses. When we storted proctic-
ing Situotionol Flirting, sometimes we ended up with women storing ot
us like they were reolly scored. lt olmost never hoppens now becouse the
more we proctice this flirfing skill the more we trust it ond the more we
con proiect thot trust ond reloxotion to the women we're flirting with.
Be prepored to prcvide bofh sides of rhe flirring interoc.
tion. Most women will be oble to ioke bock with you; some won't.
Remember when we ioked obout o womqn's cqmero steoling your soul?
Well, whot if she didn't hove ony comebock ot oll? lf so, you'd provide
the comebock-something like the one you hod hoped she would use.
You might soy, 'Voit, thofs nof your soul-steoling comero-you musl
hove left it ot home." She con lough ot this ond you'll toke her off the
hook for hoving to be clever in order to enloy being with you.
R.emember your Situqtionol Flirring question. When you wonf
lo proctice situqlionol flirting with o womon, look oround the environ-
ment you ore in ond osk yourself, 'Whot is there in this situotion obout
which I con osk some sorl of outrogeous or silly question? Whot con I
creotively misinterpret in this situotion thot might be lvnny?" The onswer
to thot question will guide you in your Situotionol Flirting. You'll see how
we use thot question in the exomples below.
t0al'lll|ls $fi[an0llar ]ul'flllg
We're going to give you exomples of Situotionol fli*ing. Pleose note
this: These exomples ore going to seem silly becouse they ore silly.
You'rc being silly when you look ot something in the environment ond

lle$ ts l0ll{ T0 t'{olncNr
soy something silly obout it or moke on outrogeous ioke oboul it. We've
used oll of the iokes below in reol life ourselves ond they've oll gone
quite well, so don'f worry if these seem weird on the printed poge.
Also remember thd these exomples qre not prescriplions: we ore not sug-
gesting you do these exoct Situotionol Fli*ing convefsotions. These exom-
ples ore to get your mind thinking in this mode, so you con come up with
your own, be flexible, ond hove the flirting interoction reolly work.
DAVID: I wos recently in St. Louis ond I wos buying o ticket to go up
in the St. Louis Arch. There wos o reolly pretty girl selling the tick-
ets. So I wos osking myself the moin question you should osk your-
self for situotionol flirting: 'tVhot is there in this situotion obout
which I con osk some sort of outrogeous or silly question? Whot
con I creotively misinterpret in this situotion thot might be funny?"
So I smiled ond osked her, "Do you ond your friends get to go up
there ond porty ofter hours in the Arch? Does it get to be your
ployground?" She soid, "Oh yeoh, we do hove porties up there
somelimes. You con renl il out, you know." She wos nice but wos-
n't reolly getting into the ioking mood yet, so I smiled ond osked
her, "ls it o ploce where you get to go o lot? Could you ond me go
up there somelime?" And she loughed ond soid, 'Vell, I think you
should try it out with o ticket first." lt wos o successful flirting inter-
oction.
Dovid took something in the environment, the Arch itself, put qn outro-
geous spin or interpretotion on it ("ls this your personol ployground?")
T
Ifllltrlltule ilqllqfnt
um
I
$ibu8timal air$inc
ond got o lough. To thot womon he wos funny ond fun to be oround ond
he gove her o brief, pleosuroble experience. He showed her in some
smoll woy thot she wos speciol, not iust on outomoton dispensing tickets.
DAVID: Here's onother exomple. lwos ot the Czop buying clothes. I
don'l know if you've noticed, but oll the employees ot the Gop
weor rodio heodsets. I don't know if they con tolk on the phone or
poge eoch other or whot, but it struck me os odd, so I osked
myself, 'lVhot is there in this situotion obout which I con osk some
sort of ouirogeous or silly question? Whot con I creoiively misinter-
pret in this siiuotion thot might be funny?" And, of course, the
heodsets stood out. So I osked the heodseFweoring girlwho wos
ringing me out, "Con you lounch the spoce shuttle with thot?" lt
wosn't very fr.rnny, but she thought it wos funny enough to lough
obout il.
I continued, "Oh, I know whot they're doing with fiot heodset*they
ore feeding you pro-Gop propogondo eoch ond every moment,
oren't they?" And she loughed ond soid, "Oh nol I love the Gop!"
And I soid, "Oh, so it's working-they've progrommed you tc love
the Gop!" And she loughed more, ond there we were, hoving o fun
interoclion together.
So the next time I come into the sficre I con do the some thing ogoin.
I con come in ond smile ond soy, "Oh, so they're still feeding you
thot pro-Gop propogondo through your heodset, right? Are you still
pro-Gop?" l/s become o running ioke, ond she ond I hqve thot little
shored reolity together thot is difbrent from our ordinory lives ond is
www.ebook3000.com

ll0t[ u0 Inl[ lD lllm0n
3omothing thot gives her pleosure. lt mokes it pleosuroble for her to
3eo me ond she knows thot I om someone she con ploy with. This is
the kind of thing thot fits in with oll the flirting tools in this book.
RON: I wos grocery-shopping the other doy ond there wos o womon
in the olcohol section who wos pretty hot. I osked myself the ques-
tion, 'lVhot is there in this situotion obout which I con osk some
sod of outrogeous or silly question? Whot con I creotively misinter-
pret in this situotion thot might be funny?" I thought obout o misin-
lerpretotion: whot if she wos on undercover cop looking to orrest
underoge kids for trying to buy olcohol?
So I smiled ond osked he4 "So, whot ore Vou doiryfr Are you scout-
ing for oll the underoge people who ore trying6 buy beer? You're
not going tc bust me, ore you?" She loughed ond loked bock, "l
don't know, you don'l look too young!" I held out my wrists for her
imoginory hondcuffs ond soid, 'You could bust me if you wont "
ond we loughed together. lt moy look stupid when you reod it here
but she wos loving it.
So I took the next step: I soid, "My nome is Ron, whofs your
nome?" h led to something. I could hove gone for her emoil oddress
or phone number. lf I see her ogoin, I olreody hove o connection
with her, so it will be eosy to build upon it. We hove o fun imogi-
nory world between us now. She knows she con be silly with me.
DAVID: You hove probobly noticed thot very pretty girls often work ot
bookstores. lwos ot one such bookstore ond I sow o prefi girl
who worked there iust sort of honging out behind the informotion
$isll0lri8fiat fiirsi{ts
counter. I osked myself the question, 'lVhot is there in this situo-
tion obout which I con osk some sort of outrogeous or silly ques-
tion? Whot con I creotively misinterpret in this situotion thot might
be funny?"
So I went up to her with the book I wqs holding, smiled ot her ond
soid, 'This book looks pretty good. Hove you reod it? Con you
review it br me?" She soid she hodn't reod it, so I soid, smiling ond
prelending to be shocked, 'lVhot, you hoven't reod oll the books in
the bookstore? I thought you knew qll of the booksl You look so
knowledgeoble there behind the informotion countrer!" And she
loughed ond soid, "Nope, not mel Though I do like trc reod, I
hoven't gotien to oll the books yet. l'm still not even done with the lit-
eroture seclion, ond they keep odding to it!"
RON: There's o lot of stuff you con do in o bookstrcre. I hod on experi-
ence once when I wos in o bookstore ond I sow o womon looking ot
books obout UFOs. l osked myself, 'Whot is fiere in this situotion
obout which I con osk some sorl of outrogeous or silly question?
Whot con I creotively misinterpret in this situotion thot might be
Ivnny?"
Here's whot I did: smiling, I held up o book ond osked, 'lV'ere you
obducted by o UFO? I wos obducted once. Whot do you think? Ler,s
shore some qbduction sficries." lt sounds stupid, but she wos lough-
ing. lt put her ot eose.
n
unngl

ll0'ir m nffi t0 ll{8rrsn
ln thot situotion, you mighr olso "misinterpref' o womon to be on olien
ond soy, 'lV'ow, so ore you o beoutiful olien here to obduct people for
tests? l'll bet thotyou ore...ore you going to toke me?" lt mokes o ioke,
compliments her ond shows your romontic interesl. lt/s going to be hord
for her to stuff you inlo the "iust friends" cotegory ofter you confidently
told her she wos bequliful during your first interoction with eoch other.
DAVID: Here's onother exomple. I wenl into the bonk, ond there wos
o girl behind the counter, ond we were doing some bqnking lrons-
oction-o typicol bonking experience. I osked myself the question,
'Whot is fiere in fiis situotion oboul which I con osk some sort of
outrogeous or silly question? Whot con I creotively misinterpret in
this situotion thot might be funny?"
And here's whot I soid: "So, do you get Iokep<Wrcentoge of the
money ihot comes in? You know, like o grotuity?" And she loughed
ond soys, "Oh, thofs so fr.rnny-lwish I could." Then I took our little
shored fonicsy one sfiap further: "Oh, but then you would hove ic
pqy o percentoge of whot goes out, too. Thot would be bod." She
loughed ond soid, "Oh no, I wouldn't like thot port*l'd iust keep
the money when it comes in." I smiled ond soid, 'Thot would be
perfect for you! I con see it now...You get trc keep lhe money
becouse you do such o greot iob!" She soid, 'Yeoh, thot would be
perhct. Here's your money, hove o greot doy!" Next lime she sees
me, she'll be reody to hqve onother fun interoction with me.
Here's onother exomple. I wos ot the bonk oround Chrislmostime,
ond os I went up to the treller I noticed thot right by her window
there wos o gloss ior full of Tootsie Rolls with o bow oround it. I
n
utur!,[ouhil!rlfllmH
$i0$stri08al nit'tins
looked ot thot condy, ond osked myself the question, 'Whot is there
in this sifuotion obout which I con osk some sorl of outrogeous or
silly question? Whot con I creotively misinterpret in this situotion thot
might be funny?"
So I smiled ond soid, 'A ior of Tootsie Rolls! ls this br me?" She
soid, 'tVell, it depends...Hcve you been good this yeor?" And I
thought, "Grerll, she's ploying olong! Thots wonderfr;|." I soid, "l
think l've been pretty good, but in some woys l've been pretly bod,
too." She loughed, ond I soid, "l don't know, I might need some cor-
rection os well os some rewords. Do you think you would be oble trc
do thot?" She loughed, I went on with my tronsoction ond I left hov-
ing hod o successful Situotionol Flirting interoction.
Notice how these flirting intreroctions hoppen with women you see
every doy in ploces you go on o regulor bosis: the bonk, the gro-
cery store, bookstores ond so on. Using this tool, you con use these
ploces lo meet ond connect wilh women.
RON: There is one womon ot my bonk who I om working on. I om
getting closer lo osking her out by flirting with her on o regulor
bosis. So every time I go in there, I continue o running ioke
Situotionol Flirting move I storted with her weeks ogo. She is iust o
bonk treller, but I olwoys kid her obout becoming bonk president. I
soy, "Okoy, Liso, when ore they going to moke you president of
the bonk? l/s obod time! I know you hove been doing this work
only so you con infiltrote the bonk, ond I know thot pretty soon
you ore going to be the president. ln foct, I om going to be your
orrilirnt..." lt is iusl this for-out story thot I keep sustoining ond
www.ebook3000.com

l|rlur $0 lll,r x0 tj$|lme|l
thot we build upon every time I see her. l'll soy things like 'lVhen
you ore the president, I will come ond I will shovel the snow off
your cor ond we'll hong out, you'll do personol loons to me, ond
together we'll moke o killing in interest rotes..."
h/s eosy to keep it going, ond she loves it. ln her doy-to-doy lib, she
probobly feels like the lowest rung on the lodder-which she is-
ond here is o guy who octr.rolly con see her nol only for whot she is
but in o for-oul, flottering woy. So thot hos gone reolly well for me.
DAVID: Restouronts ore onother greot ploce to proctice Situotionol
Flirting. For instonce, nol too long ogo I wos in o bokery where
they hod o giveowoy going: you dropped your business cord in
this fish bowl ond if they picked it out, you won q yeoy's worth of
free breod. There wos o cute giil #hind the counter next to the
fish bowl. I osked myself the question, 'lVhot is there in this situo-
tion obout which I con osk some sort of ouirogeous or silly ques-
tion? Whot con I creotively misinterpret in this situotion thot might
be fi.rnny?"
I soid to her, "So, you're going to give me o yeoy's worth of free
breod, huh?" She soid, "Sure, if you win." I soid, "L,el me piclure
lhis now: you're going to pull up in o gigontic truck ond dump o
yeoy's worth of breod on my lown?" She loughed ot the imoge ond
soid, "No, no, I won't be doing it!" I soid, "Oh, so somebody else
will be dumping the breod on my lown ond you will be like the fig-
ure in the bockground who mokes if hoppen but doesn't reolly come
trc deliver it herself?" She loughed ond soid, "No, no, the breod will
il
r,u!ulru!0llqqll{f,l|lll$
ffi,trEH
8i&llabi8nel llir$ins
come once o week." And so I creoted thot humorous interoction with
o womon by osking myself whot I could creotively misintrerpret into
on oulrogeous, frlnny question.
RON: Here's onother exomple from o coffee shop. I wos sitting in o
coffee shop reoding the book You Just Don't lJndersftrnd. lfs obout
men's ond women's relotionship ond communicolion issues. l'm siF
ting there reoding this book ond it is boring me, so I storted osk-
ing the womon sifting ot the next toble whot she thought obout oll
of these exomples. l'd osk her things like "lt sqys women feel like
men tqy to fix them insteod of listening. Do you think thot/s true?
Hos thot been true hr you?" lt turned out to be on hour-long con-
versolion, ond I got her number ond emoil ond ended up doting
her. Thot oll come out of osking her o silly question from the book,
eliciting her opinion ond tolking. Then, oll of o sudden, we were
connected.
ln this exomple, Ron didn't even "misinterpre/' onything. He wos simply
willing to toke whot wos in the environment ond omplify it o litle. He
wos osking himself if the exomples in the book he wos reoding were
true. Then he took his curiosity ond osked lhe womon ot the next toble.
ln o woy, thofls whot oll of this is obout. When you do Situotionol
Fli*ing, you loke whot is in the environment ond moke it o little bigger,
o little more fonciful, until it becomes o little world in which you ond o
womon con enter together. You con leorn to do this with proctice.
n

l|0!r t0l8llr l0 ws8ell
Your Situotionol Flirting con be truly oulrogeous. Just keep osking your-
self, 'lVhot is there in this situotion obout which I con osk some sort of
outrogeous or silly question? Whot con I creotively misinterpret in this
situotion thot might be funny?" The opportunities reolly ore everywhere.
For instonce, if you're drinking o cup of coffee with o womon, you could
look ot the grounds in the bottom of the cup ond soy something like "l
heord thot some people con tell your fortune by looking ot your coffee
grounds...ifs sort of like ostrology. People do it in Turkey. Would you like
me to reod your fodune? Would you reod mine?" lf you're drinking teo,
you con osk, 'Vould you reod my teo leoves for me? I wont to find out
obout love." She will lough. ond thot is o funny, romontic thing.
This doesn't even hove to be o big deol. When you're leoving o restou-
ront ond your pretty woitress osks you, "Do you wonl your receipt?" You
\
con soy, '{ell, yes, I om going to tqke this os o memento of our time
't
together. l'll'keep it forever." lf you smile while you do it, there's o good
chonce she'll lough, ond you'll hqve hod o Situotionol Fli*ing intreroclion.
Situotionol Flirting is nol necessorily obout getting her phone number {or
emoil oddress) right then ond there, olthough you con certoinly use it to
get her number. lt is more obout being o guy who knows how to flirt,
becquse flirting, combined with soying hi, combined with osking
'!Vho/s ihe story behind lhol?," combined with the Romontic Questions,
combined with giving risks, combined with everything else in this book,
is whot not only gets you o dote but gets you o dote with o womon who
hos been primed ond tested ond who is more thon likely reody to be
romontic or even sexuol with you well before the dote even hoppens.
n
utuu,[!uhil$$lllls
w0lurlEa.
r
$imflni0n*l ftiriting
DAVID: Here's onother exomple of Situotionol Fli*ing. This is ot o den-
tis/s office. I wos getting my teeth cleoned-ond if tho/s someihing
you hwen't done in six monfis or so, you should probobly coll up
your dentist ond moke on oppointment. The receptionist wos o very
pretty girl. As she wos checking me in, I osked her; 'Are you the
guordion of this bod, evil ploce?" She soid, "Oh yeoh, l'm the
guordion oll right." I soid, 'Well, con you put o spell on me, oh
guordion, so the work on my teelh won'i hurt?" She soid, 'lVell, I
don't know." So I soid, 'Okoy, how obout you put o spell on me so
thot the teeth cleoning won't hurt?" She giggled ond soid, "Okoy, l'll
put o spell on you. But I think you will still wont trc try the
Novocoin." So I come bock with, 'lVell, I don't know. I om preily
bewitched by you olreod, but okoy." We hod this wonderful pking
conversofion obout how she hod this mogicol power ond it wos fun
br us both.
RON: I con think of one exomple of Situotionol Flirting thot Dovid ond
I did together every time we sow o cerloin womon ot our locol co-
op groceqf store. She wos kind of punky-looking ond would weor
ormy fotigues most of fie time. So we nicknomed her the Generol,
ond every lime we wenl there we would solule her: "Hello
Generol, how ore you todoy? Whot ore our orders?" She would
iust crock up.
We hod o running ioke obout her being on ormy spy. We'd osk her,
'Are you here spying or ore you here for some covert operotion?"
And she would soy, 'Yep, l'm here spying." We'd soy somefiing
like "So, you're here to see whot is going on in this sficre in cose
www.ebook3000.com

ll0ut &0 lnlfi l0 lr8$ell
you hwe to moke o ficcticol move, right?" And she'd soy something
like "l'd tell you, but l'd hove to kill you." lt wos reolly fi.,n, ond
when we'd come in, her eyes would light up ond she would reolly
look brword to tolking to us.
Here's onolher exomple: We were in New York City on o beoutiful
spring doy once doing some promotion for one of our books ond
we were wolking down the street ond these three beoutiful women
come out of this noil spo. They hod iust hod their noils done ond
lhey were odmiring lhem, ond I sqid to lhem, "Oh, i/s the beoutiful
noil women! You musl be here to show the world your beoutiful
noils. Con we see?" They were thrilled fic show us their new noils.
We told them how beoutiful they looked ond how beoutiful their
noils looked ond they were loughing ond giggling. We ioked obout
how they musi be getting reody to be in on internotionol noil conlest
ond they thought it wos greot. lt wos reolly fun for us trco.
Here ore some ploces where you con try out your Situotionol Flirting
skills todoy:
. The heolth club
. The moll
. The bonk or credil union
. The coffee shop
o The video store
. The subwoy or troin
.Abor
o A reslouronl
o A bookstore
. A shop
. A line
o An)ryvhere else you find yourself
Il
uuullouitll{ilf,I*il
ulflh$re-& 
-
fiifiua&issat rlimil|s
Bosicolly, onywhere you encounrer o womon you should be osking your-
self, 'tvhot is there in this situofion obour which r con osk some sort of
oulrogeous or silly question? Whot con I creotively misinterpret in this
situolion thot might be funny?"
00llcil$ru|l
Situotionol Flirting occomplishes o number of worthy gools:
when you proctice sifuotionol Flirting with o womon, you show thot
you're not iust o friend becouse you're ploying with her in o woy thot o
lowly mole friend never would.
You're interrupting her ot o deeper level ond inlecting yourself into her
consciousness. This shows her thot you're the kind of guy who con go
ofter whot he wonts ond con moke things hoppen.
You provide pleosure for the womon. you creote o little moke-believe
world together, which is o welcome relief from the difficulty ond redium
of her normql life.
situotionql Flirting olso brings out o ployful port of yourself, which is
se4y to women. Remember, silliness ond sexiness hove o close relotion-
ship. When you flirt ond ore silly with o womon ond provide her with
reossuronce thot things ore okoy, you become sexier to her.

ll0lx [0lbllr m til0lnon
Finolly, you provide o fun experience for yourself. When you hove fun
with o womon, you leove the interoction chorged up, with higher selF
esleem ond more energy thon when you stortred.
As you get better ond better ot Situqtionol Flirting, you'll find thot it cre-
otes q self-reinforcing rycle: the more you proctice it with women, the
more energy you hove, ond the more you wont to do it with women.
And thot's good. .
I
uuu,rmruufflln$
wr,lnMrkA-'
clltp[BF I
n88pBfi[g
We're now going to toke fli*ing to the next level with o process colled
Deepening. Deepening is o woy of toking onything o womon soys to
you ond turning it into o bonding conversorion. Deepening is oboui hov-
ing on intimote tolk ond developing ropport.
This is port of o series of steps thot leods to osking o womon out ond
getting the dote. Hi leods to osking '!vhot's the story behind thor?,,
which con leod to Deepening. Deepening then moves into Romonric
conversotions ond osking for the number. When you feel comfortoble
with this progression ond hove some experience trying it our on women,
you'll quickly become o pro.
Whot exoctly is Deepening? Deepening is o conversorionor mode thor
ollows you to get inro o womon's world ond find out whot she's pos-
sionole obout. Deepening is o woy for you to ocknowledge, ond help
her ocknowledge, whot she cores obout. Deepening is powerfur becouse
mosl women oren'r used to being recognized in woys fiot feel romon-
lic. Most women don't see themselves os speciol ond oren't used to other
people seeing them os speciol. When you're oble ro see the possionote
ond speciol ports of o womon ond feed ir bock to her, she,ll feel o bond
with you' with Deepening, you con develop o connection wirh o womon
without bomboozling her.
www.ebook3000.com

a
a
fi8lli tE Talfi lo Won$n
rllB fllo c0lnp0]lEn[$ 0F DEED$nllls
You osk o womon questions obout her possions qnd interests.
Bosed on whot she tells you, you describe her possions ond interests
for her so she feels ocknowledged ond sees the detqils of her life in
o new ond positive woy.
IllO FIUE BA$M N[M$ OF IEEDE||MS
Focus on whqt q womqn is possionote qbout. The purpose
of Deepening is to look for oreos in o womon's life where she feels pos-
sion ond feed it bock to her. You ore volidoting ospecls of her life thot
most people do not see or ocknowledge. When you show o womon thot
she's speciol, she will feel oppreciotive ond bond with you.
Poy oilenrion to deroils. Poy otiention to the detoils of whot the
womon is soying ond look for woys t'c feed bock those detoils trc her in o
romontic woy.
Avoid the Deepening trop. When you ore osking o womon
Deepening Questions, sometimes she'll mention negotive ospects of her
life. l/s importont to ovoid topics thot she is upsel obout. When bod
things come up, redirect lhe conversotion to whot is working in her life
ond whot she's most interested in.
Alwoys include the Romontic Moves. To insure lhot you come
ocross os o romontic possibility, you need to use the Romontic Moves. lf
t
umthtutusuln$l
uru.1rffffifl
ge8ps{|iN|s
you hold eye conloct "foo long," moke decisions quickly ond eosily, wink
ot o womon, check out her body, compliment her, keep your body pow-
erful ond whisper to her, your chonces of hoving o successful Deepening
Conversotion ore greotly increosed.
This is only o lesl... When you conduct o Deepening conversotion,
you qre testing to see if o womon might be someone you wont to go out
with. You ore festing to see if she likes you ond if you like her. Eventuolly,
you'll either tolk obout topics she's possionote obout or you should prob-
obly end lhe conversotion ond move on lo someone else.
Be on the lookout for openings to osk for o dole, phone number, or emoil
oddress. Wotch for chonces to osk for these things. The gool of
Deepening is for women to hove positive experiences with you, hove
lhem expose ports of themselves to you thot they rorely expose to ony-
one else ond then hove them feel enough sofeiy ond ropport to go out
with you.
[eBpBlltns c0nu$l'$afl0ll I
DAVID: Here's o recent exomple of o Deepening Conversotion I hod ot
o porty. I wos tolking to o womon ond osked her o simple queslion.
DAVID: So whot do you do for o living?
CASSIE: l'm o sociqlworker.
DAVID: Wow, thofs reolly interesting. You must see oll sorts of things
in o iob like thot.

llstu &8lal,l le l'J8n8tl
CASSIE: Yes, I do.
DAVID: Where do you work?
CASSIE: lwork down ot the hospitol.
DAVID: Let me osk you o question. ln every iob there ore ospects thot
you dislike ond moments when you feel like you reolly don't like
whot you ore doing, but then lhere ore moments when you feel
like you reolly ore doing whot you were pul on eorth to do. I
would be curious to know, if you would core to shore, whol ore
some of lhose moments for you?
CASSIE: Well, I help the fomilies of children who ore getting orgon
tronsplonts. I do oll the coordinoting ond I olso deolwith oll of
their emotions.
DAVID: Tho/s reolly incredible.
CASSIE: Yes, il's on omozing iob. And lhere ore times when I om
working with fomilies ond I reolly do feel like you soid, like I om
doing whot I wos put on eorth here to do. I get the surgery ond
the orgons coordinqted. I get the kids reody ond I get the fomilies
reody ond it is like I become o member of their fomily for o while.
DAVID: Wow, thot is reolly incredible. You must reolly be o womon
who volues moking o difference in people's lives.
CASSIE: I reolly do, thot is whot I reolly love obout my iob.
DAVID: I don't get to see thot kind of o thing in o womon every doy. I
reolly oppreciotre seeing thot in you, ifs reolly inspiring to me.
uuurrutqqll{lnf,!
lluuMAflnlL
I
assp8ni$
CASSIE: Wow, thoi is reolly greot thot you see thot too...
RON: Le/s tqlk obout this exomple. You got her tolking obout whot
she is most possionole obout ond then you resficfigd it bock trc her,
which is how Deepening works. hrs o good exomple of strcrting wifi
o simple question ond hoving the conversotion become more intimote
ond personol. From there, Dovid could hove built up to osking br
her phone number or osking br the doe.
DAVID: ln this Deepening Conversotion I wos oble to get o lot of
informotion from her. She seemed very interested in tolking to me
ond gove lengthy onswers to eoch of my questions.
De0D$]ltils c0llu0Htfl0[ 2:
a[ a u0sa cH$$
DAVID: Whot do you do?
SOPHIE: l'm on occountonl.
DAVID: I find occounting interesting. ln my business l,ve been studying
some occounfing lotely- lt must reolly feel omozing when you ore
oble line up oll those numbers ond oll those columns. lt must feel
incredible when you hove evefihing bolonced ond everything is
perfectly in order.
SOPH lE: Yes, tho/s exoctly whot ifs like.
DAVID: Lefs tolk obout this exomple. ln this exomple I come up with o
woy to bed bock to her the exciiement of those best moments in
occounling, When I fed thot bock to her I wos oble to see some-
www.ebook3000.com

ll8ut &E lali{ $ lssll!&xr
thing in her life thot most guys do not see. Most guys would hove
soid something like "So, whol kind of softwore do you use os on
occounlont?" Bul I wos oble to see the mogic of hoving oll the
numbers line up. When I reflected her possion bock to her, her
eyes got big ond shiny.
RON: One thing thot lwont to highlight in Dovid's exomple is thot he
took o risk when he described to the occounlonl whot might be
exciting obout her iob. I like thot he soid, "l finolly found on ongle
thot I thought might work." Lel's underline the phrose "mighl
work." When you ore hoving Deepening Conversotions, you're
going to be toking risks ond trying things out ond somelimes
folling flot on your foce. Dovid ond I hove enough experience,
ond hove foiled enough, thot we hove o clue of whot might work
ond whqt might not work, bul the only woy for you to get to o
ploce where you know whot works is through triol ond error.
DAVID: With both of my exomples, I could hove chosen lo osk less
intimote queslions-queslions thot would hove mode me more of o
friend thon o romontic possibility. With the sociol worker, for exom-
ple, I could hove soid, "Oh, where do you work? ls thot o good
iob? Wow, whot ore the hours like?" Those would hove been ques-
tions thot would hove kept me in the friend zone. lnsleod I osked,
'Whd is it obout thot thot mokes you possionote, thot mokes you
feel turned on?" When I met the occountont, I come bock with, "lt
must hel incredible when you hove every'hing bolonced." She
soid,'Yes."
nss$snifi$
h's importonl to remember thqt some women hote their jobs. So if
you osk, 'tVhot do you do for o living?" o womon might soy
something like, "lwork for o dentist. I om his receptionist ond I
reolly hote it." Then if you osk her if there is onything she likes
obout her iob, she's likely to soy, "No." lf thot hoppens, here,s
how to hondle it. We recommend you soy, "Okoy, I would be curi-
ous to know, if you ore willing to shore, whot is it thot you ore
possionote obout? Whqt is it in your life, if it is not your iob, ond
for q lot of us it reolly isn't our iob, thot reolly turns you on os o
womon ond mokes you feel like you ore reolly doing something
you love?"
t
DB0p8llllls c0llu0l'$afl0ll $
Ron tolked to q womon recently who told him she hoted her iob. So he
knew to ovoid osking her obout it. lnsteod, he osked whot she,s most
possionote obout in her life.
KATE: I love qnimols ond I volunteer ot the pet shelter.
RON: Thofs interesling. Whot ore fhe best moments when you're vol-
unteering ot the pet shelter?
KATE: Some of the best moments for me ore when o dog comes in
ond they ore sick ond I om oble to work with them qnd nurse them
bock to heolth. I spend time with them ond then o fomily comes in
ond odopts them. lt mokes me reolly hoppy when everything
works out well. lt mokes me feel like I hove mode o difference in
the world.
Uuruhulltrlllgufrulllt

ll0l[ lr0 ftllr tr ll0m01r
RON: Wow, I con see you qre o womon who reolly volues moking o
difference, ond thofs wonderful.
KATE: Yeoh, I reolly do volue helping people. Thonk you, thofls nice to
heor you soy thot.
RON: Well, I don't meel women every doy who ore so focused on
helping people. I think tho/s reolly speciol ond I cqn see thot you
ore o speciol womon.
RON: The point of this exomple is thot o Deepening Conversotion con
go well when you osk o womon whot she's possionote obout in
her life ond ovoid focusing on her iob. Asking o womon whot
she's possionote obout in her life is o good woy to shift the topic
whenever she mentions thot her iob sucks. lt's o good technique to
use when o womon storts tolking obout ony ospect of her life thot
is difficult, stressful or chollenging. You con eosily move on to
more pleosont topics by osking her whot she's possionote obout.
le0D8llr]ls c0llu8r$afloll 4
DAVID: So Heidi, you seem inleresting to tolk to. l'd be curious to
know whot you do for o living?
HEIDI: l'm o writer ond q cook. I cook for o couple of people who ore
reolly busy. Both of my iobs ore pretty fun.
DAVID: Thot sounds interesting. Whot do you like trc write obout?
H E lD l: I write obout cooking, heolth ond current events. Sometimes I
review restouronts, somelimes I write oboul cooking ond other
0Bspslti[$
times I write obout heolth issues. one of the best ports of my iob is
thot I trovel ond wrire freelonce orticles for trovel mogozines. All
of my interests tie together.
RON: Le/s stop for o second. How is the conversotion going, Dovid?
DAVID: l'm hoppy with it ot this point. As we exomine odditionol
exomples of Deepening, you'll see how we go from osking whot
she does for o living to whot she,s possionote obout. I olreody
osked Heidi whot she likes to wrire obour, which is o woy to storr
exploring whot she's possionole obout. By ry osking personol
queslions, she sees me os o guy who is interested in whot she hos
to soy ond who cores obout her life.
RoN: A big port of Deepening is poying ottention to detoils. Romonce
is in the detoils. lt would hove been eosy for Dovid to soy, ,,Oh,
you're o cook ond you write, whot else do you like to do?',lnsteod
of overlooking $e defoils ond osking mundone, generol quesrions,
Dovid wos oble to dig deeper into specific interests of Heidi's ond
feed them bock to her.
Lel's go bock ond look ot more of Dovid,s conversqfion.
DAVID: I see how it oll kind of fits togetheri the cooking, the troveling
ond writing obour restouronrs ond food. Tho/s inreresting, it is
olmost os if there is this whole lifestyle oround cooking ond writing
for you.
HEIDI: Yes, tho/s very much whoi my life is obout. Those ore my key
interests ond I om glod tho/s olso how I moke my living.
t
ullluiou,bol{lg$ru!!
www.ebook3000.com

ll&m 8s ldllt tr8 ll|J0m8|}
DAVID: I know thot in every kind of iob or coreer there qre ports of it
thot kind of suck. Moybe it sucks to be woshing the dishes or cleon-
ing o kitchen, but I olso know there ore other moments thot ore reol-
ly stellor-momenls where you reolly hel like this is whot you were
pul on this eorth to do. I would be curious to know whot some of
those moments ore for you.
RON: I wonl irc butt in here ogoin. One of the clossic Dovid lines is whot
he iust osked Heidi. l/s o greot phrose.
DAVID: Here's onother question I recommend: 'lVhd might be one of
those moments where you feel the work you ore doing is reolly turn-
ing you on?" When you osk thot question or lhe one I iust put to
Heidi, the womon you're tolking to will hove to slort exploring her
life in o new woy. Let's look ol the conversotion some more.
HEIDI: Like I soid before, I reolly like to trovel, ond i/s greot thot I con
trovel so frequently. I reolly enioy meeting new people ond seeing
new ploces. Somelimes I om flying somewhere ond I think, 'lVow, I
om getting poid to do this."
DAVID: You ore moking o contribufion lo people's lives, loo. ln both the
foods you ore cooking ond in your wriling you're moking o differ-
ence in people's heolth.
HEIDI: Tho/s true. lom reolly interested in heolth ond nutrition. I like
teoching people qbout it becouse I believe the emotionol, physicol
ond spirituol ospects of life ore oll connected.
DAVID: Thofs cool. l've done o lot of cooking myself.
HEIDI: Thofs greot!
gs$psnllxs
DAVID: When I om cooking o meol, it's nice to be in o kitchen where
everything is humming olong. You've got oll these different pots of
food cooking, oll the ingredients qre cut up ond you reolly feel like
you ore on top of it oll.
HEIDI: I love thot feeling. Thofs q good woy ro describe whot i/s like
to be cooking o multi-course meol.
DAVID: Somelimes l've got o zillion things going ond l,m doing one
thing with one hond ond something else with onother. There ore
mony pots of food oll cooking ond eoch pot is cooking ot o differ-
ent temperoture ond everything is going olong iust perfectly. I
sometimes iust get lost in the process.
Yes, thot's o wonderful feeling.
RON: Le/s iump in ond moke some commenb obout where this con-
versotion is going.
DAVID: t told Heidi thot she contribures to people,s lives through her
writing ond her cooking. I decided thot it wos more powerful to
look ot how she contributes to people's lives rother thon osking
whot she likes to cook or some less personol queslion. From there I
wos oble to odmire the foct fiot she mokes o difference in peo-
ple's lives ond then feed it bock to her.
RON: ln these exomples of Deepening you con see how we ore oble
to describe to women the exciting ports of their lives in woys they
do not usuolly see. We ore volidoting something thot they don,t
normolly ossociote with themselves. When we ocknowledge those
things, like Dovid did with Heidi, we bond with the women.
t
uuu,lrubrutqtnFll 

n0ul r0 &$ & lv0mnl}
DAVID: I wont to point out thot I took o risk when I told her thot I om
inleresled in cooking. As o generol rule, you should limit how
much you shore obout yourself, ot first. lt never ceoses to omoze
me how often I rediscover lhot women ore not interested in men
during the initiol conversolions.
I decided thot it wos okoy to mention thot I om into cooking
becquse I thought it would be o bonding detoil. I olso thought I
could use my interest in cooking os o springboord to stort describ-
ing good feelings ossocioted with cooking. So I tolked obout how
good it feels to hove severol things cooking ol once ond how eosy
it is to get lost in the process.
RON: Yes, thot wos o good segue for her to tolk obout her experience
os o cook. Since you ore octuolly into cooking it wos o good
move. There is no reoson to lie or even be misleoding to get
women into your life or into your bed.
DAVID: When I menlioned oll the pots going ol once ond being in the
flow of cooking, I knew she would relole to thot description. When
she responded, I could see her eyes light up, ond she smiled.
When you ore oble conduct o Deepening Conversolion ond include
the Romontic Moves, you will reolly stond oul from other men. Lel's
continue on with the conversotion ond see where it goes.
HEIDI: lfs octuolly like putting on o show or something, becouse you
hove oll these little components coming together ot once. I cooked
in restquronls for yeors ond often hod the experience of people
working together to prepore something wonderful to eot. I know
exoctly thot feeling you're tolking obout.
trssssnin9
DAVID: l've noliced thot there is o flow when I om cooking; ifs olmost
like you're doncing with it. There is olso the moment with the pres-
entotion where you ore octuolly putting the food out. I don't know
if you ever think obout putting the food on the plote ond how
beoutiful it looks on the tqble.
HEIDI: Oh yes, I om reolly picky obout thot. When I used to cook in o
reslouront, I didn't let onyone else do the finishing of the dish. t
think it is reolly importont for me to hove it bolonced visuolly ond
to hove o nice color controst going on with the different foods thot
ore on the plote. lt is definitely on ortistic thing ond I reolly
express myself through the presentotion of food.
DAVID: Those moments ore reolly speciol. There is ollthe setup ond
oll the preporolion, ond then you toke o second ond look ot oll the
food ond feel oll the effort you iust put into creoting somefiing
wonderful. You reolize thot in 20 minutes the food will be gone,
but there is thol perfecl moment iust before you serve the food. Do
you know whot l'm soying?
HEIDI: Yes, I do. l've hod thot experience frequently in my life ond i/s
reolly speciol. lt's reolly exhiloroting.
DAVID: I con see thol ortist in you. I see the ortistry in getting the food
perfect for people ond the qrlistic presenlotion. A wonderful meol
is something so creolive ond reolly gives people on experience.
The right meol is so memoroble. You put together o meol, you put
it in front of your guests ond it is perfect in every woy. You've
mode o reol contribution, which is greot.
n
llrllullouburuflIfulwww.ebook3000.com

||sur &E lslFr fs !{el'|$*
RON: Lefs iump in ogoin. So how ore things going, Dovid?
DAVID: l'm hoppy with how things ore going. I see thot lhe converso-
tion hos gotten more inlense ond we're getting olong well. First
off, there wos tolk obout how greot it feels to be in o kitchen. ln
the bock of my mind I wos soying, 'lVell, I know lwonl her to be
feeling o sense of connection lo me, ond l'm seeing things in her
life thot she doesn't get to shore with mosl people." So I osked
myself whot else in fie oreo of cooking might be o moment where
she would feel those reolly good feelings? When I osked myself
thol question, I decided lo mention thot the moment of presentotion
is o moment where you might feel reolly good. So I osked her
obout the presenlolion. Heidi seemed to get off on thot question. I
told her, "l con see thot ortist in you." She responded positively to
thot.
You con see #ot Deepening is not gimmicky stuff. You con tell from
Heidi's comments thot she volues orl, creotivity ond selFexpression. 
I
om not using cheesy lines with Heidi, l'm trying lrc find woys to moke
o deeper conneclion.
By the woy, my conversotion with Heidi will continue in the next
chopter.
DEBpBllrns c0[uel|$fl[l0ll $
DAVID: Now lel's look ot o shod conversolion betueen me ond
Megon. This conversolion is o greot exomple of Deepening ond
goes through the Deepening structure we've been teoching you. I
stort by osking Megon qbout her iob, ond the conversotion unfolds
nicely from there.
DAVID: Whot do you do in your life thot reolly inspires you?
MEGAN: lt's reolly importont to me to hove iobs thot inspire me. For
yeors I hod o iob thot I iust loved. I wos in chorge of o smoll-town
Chomber of Commerce, ond they thrived on tourism. I hod o boll
working lhere, coming up with new ideos ond promoting the
town.
DAVID: lt sounds like there were o lot of moments in thot iob where
you reolly felt like you were doing whot you were put on eorth to
do.
MEGAN: Yes, I conslontly felt like lwos doing my life's work. When I
hod o new ideo, everyone got behlnd it ond implemented it.
Sometimes the iob wos reolly difficuh. Sometimes the people in ihe
community were hord lo work with or there would be unexpected
problems. ln the end, however, when eoch proiect wos over, every-
one wos olwoys hoppy ond I wos responsible for oll the success.
DAVID: Thofs o greot feeling when you hove finished o big proiect.
h's wonderful to look ot oll the work thot you did behind the
scones, the things fiot no one will even know you did, ond see
whot on occomplishment it is lo complete such o greot proieci.
ll
uuulrutoullJuf,Il[

il08r t0 l*!fi T0 w0lnsfi
MEGAN: Allthose nights lwould be up lote, counting things or putling
pockets trcgether, I olwoys feh like it wos oll worth it in the end.
DAVID: Thot is reolly greot.
RON: Le/s iump in here. Your thoughts, Dovid?
DAVID: When you're iust getting lo know o womon it often mokes
sense lc tqlk qbout sob ond gentle subiects ond then loer build into
heovier, more romontic tolk. We wont to reiterole thot Deepening
conversotions ore oll obout creoling o connection with o womon
thot hos her feel like you see somelhing in her thot most people do
nol see. Being oble tc see things in o womon thot most men don't
see creofies on emolionolconnection. With Megon lwonted to focus
on tolking obout her iob ond on getting b know her os o woy lc
stort the bonding process.
00Epellrlls B0lluE||$afl0ll $
ln this conversolion, look ot how Ron keeps deepening the conversotion
with Terri. Ron gets owoy with being very direct with Terri. Depending
on your personolity, being silly, obnoxious ond sort of pushy with
women might work. Whot mokes this exomple with Ron work is thot he
is ployfulwith Terri but only octs silly in the conlext of ropport building.
He conlinues to osk her questions obout whqfls importont lo her ond
whot she's possionote obout. You con get owoy with being o bod boy
when you combine moking o connection, being respectful, hoving fun
ond pushing the limits oll ot once. When you only ioke oround ond only
oct obnoxiously, o womon will not connect with you.
RON: Whoi ore you possionote obout in your life?
TE RRI: Music is one thing I reolly like. I recently storted singing ond
l'm olso leorning how to ploy the guitor.
RON: Thofs greot. I love the guiior ond l've been ploying for o long
time. I don't meet mony women who ore ospiring guitor pros.
TERRI: I iust love music. A friend of mine is o guitor ployer ond wonF
ed me to slort leorning so we could ploy together. I thought the
guitor might be more fun thon the drums.
RON: I ploy guitor, so I know whot thot is like when you ore ploying
ond you get lost in the music ond you feel like "this is greot' ond
you lose yourself for o few moments in the music.
TERRI: Yes, I know whqt it feels like to lose myself in music. I hove o
question for you, did you sing with other people when you were
ploying?
RON: Yeoh, I ployed in bonds for o long time. lwos olso o touring
musicion for o few yeors.
DAVID: I wonl to iump in here for o moment ond look ot how Ron
went quickly went from tolking obout music to tolking obout the
moment where you ore ploying music ond getting lost in the
process. He is looking for moments where Terri feels possionote.
He is toking whot she's tolking obout, which is music, ond looking
for woys to feed it bock to her in o romontic monner. Let's go bock
ond reod more.
I
urulrurh$eclflIflwww.ebook3000.com

llml| &ll l0llr lll l|'slnslN
RON: The oct of ploying music is o lot of fun. You know the feeling of
getting lost in music ond being oble to sponloneously creote some-
thing reolly bequtiful?
TERRI: Yeoh, I hove wriften some songs ond it's fun.
RON: Thofs greot thol you've been oble lo write music.
DAVID: Let's breok in here ogoin for o second. Ron tolks obout getting
lost in music ond she does not reolly onswer. So he goes bock ond
tries to qsk her o similor queslion. Ron disploys tenocity in thot he
hos to keep guiding lhe conversoiion into romonlic spoces no mot-
ler how Terri replies. When you ore hoving Deepening
Conversotions, ifs importont thot you keep guiding o womon
toword possionote conversofions ond possionote trcpics. Eventuolly,
you'll either successfully iurn lhe conversolion to something she's
possionote obout or you'll probobly wont to stop tolking to her.
Le/s look of some more:
RON: Tho/s greot thot you've been oble to wrile music.
TERRI: I reolly enioy writing music ond l'm focused much more on
music these doys thon on my job. Music iust reolly iuices me up
these doys.
RON: Do you go see live music o lot?
Terri: I don't see mony live bonds right now. l've mostly been focusing
on leorning how to ploy the guitor ond olso on creoting my own
music. l've been reolly unhoppy with my iob these doys, but music
hos been reolly fun.
llsgp$l|inc
RON: All right, set $e mood for me. Lefls soy you invite me over to lis-
ten to you sing ond ploy guitor. Lel's soy you invite me over for o
privolre listening porty, whot would the mood of it be? Whofls the
experience like for you when you ore sitting there listening to
music thot you love?
DAVID: Let's iump in. How is this conversotion going for you ot this
point, Ron?
RON: At this point I om trying to moke the big shift into osking for her
phone number ond/or osking for the dote. We've tolked obout
music ond I feel like our ropport is pretty good. So now I wont to
try to test her ond see how receptive she is to the ideo of me com-
ing over to her ploce. lf she's unreceptive lwill go bock in ond do
more Deepening, ond if she's open I will osk for the number.
Another odvontoge of testing Terri by osking how she'd feel to
hove me over lo her ploce is thot it tokes the conversotion lo o
much deeper oreo.
DAVID: Another thing Ron did in thot segment of the conversotion
wos to ovoid the trop of osking her why her iob sucks. Mony of us
foll into $e trop of trying to be compossionote mon ond coring by
osking her obout work problems. Hoving o womon tolk obout
oreos of her life thot ore not going well is generolly o bod ideq. lt
is o woy to kill o seduction. Luckily, Ron ovoids thot trop ond storts
looking ot whot it would be like for Terri to hove him over to her
house. This is where he storts pushing the limits.
t
ullru,ltutryqlllnll

ll0lj,80 tellr ls wslnsn
RON: I wonbd to osk her o ploful ond silly question so thot if she
didn't wont to go out with me my comments would sound like o
ioke. At the some time, if she is intrerested in me she knows thot I
om inlerested in going out with her. I like testing women in o
humorous monner becouse I leorn o lot obout where I should toke
the conversotion next.
Let's listen lo Terri's onswer:
TERRI: My choice in music reolly chonges o lot. lf I om ploying guitrcr
ond singing then il's probobly folksy, ocoustic music, nothing
foncy. Tho/s the style of music I like ploying the most.
RON: Okoy, lefs set the scene ogoin. You've invitred me to your ploce
ond you ore serenoding me ond I om wotching you closely. Thot
sounds wonderful.
TERRI: Are you going to sing olong?
RON: Not ot this second, but I would if I wos with you ot your ploce.
TERRI: Do you know hormony? Con you sing hormony with me?
RON: Sure, thofd be greotl
TERRI: Gon you help me operote my four-trock recorder? I hoven't fig-
ured oUf how to use it ond l'd like to record myself singing some
of the songs l've writlen. Are you good with recording equipment?
RON: l've done quite o bit of recording ond would hove fun ploying
oround wifi your four-trock mochine. I could come over ond help
you if you wont me to.
ll0&n8llinc
DAVID: As you con see Ron wos working to noil down o dote with
her. He soid, "l could come over ond help you if you wont me to."
It seems like their conversotion is heoding towords o dote ond
Terri seems receptive to going out with him. She's osking Ron if he
con sing hormony ond she's wondering if he knows how to use
recording equipment-oll good signs. You con olso see thot he's
not octing like o friend, lhere's o romontic feel obout lhe converso-
tion.
ln the next chopler, we'll look ot severol more conversotions ond leorn
Advonced Deepening skills. But let's go over whot you've leqrned so for.
The Deepening process seems pretty simple when you reod obout it, but
conducting o Deepening Conversolion con sometimes be confi.rsing.
Here ore some key poinls to remember:
RBUl$llt 0F gil[Eillle$ Fot' [88Delll|lg
c0lluBl'$ffinll$
Focus on whct q womqn is possionofe oboul. The purpose of
Deepening is to look for oreqs in o womon's life where she feels possion
ond feed it bock to her. You ore volidoting ospects of her life thot most
people do not see or qcknowledge. When you show o womon thqt she's
speciol, she will feel oppreciotive ond bond with you.
Poy oltention lo defqils. Poy ottention to fie detoils of whot the
womon is soying ond look for woys to feed bock those deirils trc her in o
romontic woy.
t
UUU.Iottlbom!q{ltlllwww.ebook3000.com

lN0U t0 Talt I0 1|,0m8n
Avoid the Deepening trop. As we mentioned before, when you
ore osking o womon Deepening Questions, somelimes she'll mention
negofive ospects of her life. lfs importont to qvoid topics thot she is upset
obout. When bod things come up, redirect lhe conversolion to whot is
working in her life ond whot she's most interested in.
Alwoys include the R.omqntic Moves. As we olso soid before,
to insure thot you come ocross os o romonlic possibility, you need to use
the Romontic Moves. lf you hold eye conloct loo long, moke decisions
quickly ond eosily, wink ot o womon, check out her body, compliment o
womon, keep your body powerful ond whisper to her, your chonces of
hoving o successful Deepening Conversotion ore greotly increosed.
This is only o test... ln these exomples, you con see how Ron ond
Dovid were testing the womon's ottroction ond receptivity by using the
Deepening conversotionol structure to push things o little. You should do
this, too.
rllB roD rilII8B DEBD0|lr|ls [[8$[nll$
A good woy to slorl o Deepening Conversolion is to osk o womon
whot she does for o living. This is o low-pressure question ond
most women will feel comfortoble onswering it.
Dovidt Deepening Question: "l know thot in every kind of iob or
coieer there ore ports of it thot kind of suck ond other moments ore
reolly stellor where you reolly feel like this is whot you were put on
this eorth to do. You know those moments where you reoch the
!rsPsiriils
peok, where you hel irotrrlly turned on? I would be curious b know, if
you would core tc shore, whol ore some of those momenls tor yov?"
o Another simple question to osk o womon is 'Whot ore you mosl
possionote obout in your life?"
c0Ilcil$nll
Here ore two fiings you con do to slort using
tions with women:
this skill in your interoc-
Look for opportunities lo hove Deepening Conversotions ond slort
osking some of the Deepening Questions.
Stort to qsk T Vhot do you do for o living?" qnd T Vhot is it thot
you find reolly touches your heort? I know some moments qre reol-
ly difficult but $ere ore these moments where you feel like you
were put here on eorlh to do thot thing. Whot ore those moments
tor you?" Experiment, ond stort hoving Deepening Conversotions.o
T
!|ffiouhillolllHtlf!

jiffi,
WUffiT 
I
cltap[Br g
Rnunllr0[ r88pgllllls
ln this chopter we'll continue to provide exomples of Deepening
conversolions. We'll olso include severol Advonced Deepening skills.
By the end of this chopter you'll be crystol cleor on how to initiote ond
monoge Deepening Conversotions. ln the next chopter, we,ll show you
how to move from Deepening conversqtions to Romontic conversolions.
ln this chopter you will get o much cleorer sense of how to move from
Deepening conversotions to osking for phone numbers ond how to toke
the seduction fo the next level.
Here's o preview of the Advonced Deepening Skills you,re going to leorn
in this chopter:
a
a
a
a
a
a
Why Deepening Conversotions with women sometimes foil
How to include yourself when describing scenes to o womon
How ond why you musf ossume ropport
The importonce of hoving fun when tolking to women
How to osk open-ended questions
How to evoke informotion thot o womon would never shore with
o slronger
How lo use Deepening Conversotions to creote q conneclion
How to ure Deepening lo odmire women
a
a
www.ebook3000.com

a
o
'l8il' 
&r! lol& l& w8$s,t
How to qsk women obout greot momenls in their lives
How to use Advonced Deepening Questions like 'lVhot ore you
mosl possionote oboul?" ond 'lVhot ore the postcord moments
fhot you will remember for the rest of your life?"
Why you should ovoid pushing o womon during Deepening
Conversotions
The importonce oI "you" stotremenls
How to toke on o "you" point of view
Why you must shut up ond listen
How Deepening is like fishing
Whot to do if women turn the tobles on you
How Deepening Conversotions con leod to touching or kissing
How osking 'tVho/s the best port of it?" con offen sove the doy
nd$en$sd [8es8[ins
SUE: I hove to go bock to the orts becouse thot is my fovorite thing. I
like to go to orl openings, ort shows ond I om o very progressive
person. I like oll kinds of qrt but especiolly modern ort. I like being
creolive ond I like creotive people. I olso enioy live music ond
hove o wide ronge of musicol interesfs, from clossicol to iozz ond
blues.
RON: l'm o big music fon too. Do you frequenily go see live music?
SUE: I go to os mony concerts os
RON: Would going to o concert be something you'd consider o fr,ln
dqle?
DAVID: Lefls lump in here. Sue gove Ron o lot of informotion ond he
instontly moved in o romontic direction with thot lost question. He
is leorning informotion obout her interests ond plonting the ideo in
her heod thot they might go on o dote.
RON: I om olso ossuming ropport, which is reolly cruciol. I om ossum-
ing thot she's into tolking to me ond into being with me. l/s cruciol
lo ossume the best when you're with o womon. Mony of our slu-
dents ore so used to hoving conversolions wifi women go poorly
thot they olwoys ossume the worsl. When you ossume o womqn
doesn't like you ond is not enioying being with you, you come
ocross os owkwqrd ond uncomfortoble. When you're tolking to
do your besl to ossume ropport ond your confidence will
ln Deepening, we're looking ot whot o womon is possionote obout
ond inbrerlad in. So eorly on I om focused on finding out Sue,s
intororlr ond porsions, lt is obvious thot she is into ort, creotivity,
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
So here we go: lights, comero/ more Deepening!
[8Bp8llrlls collu0l'$fn0ll I
RON: This is q conversotion with Sue. Note how lgo from osking her
whot she's possionote obout to moving lhe conversotion into o
romonlic ond sery direction. This conversotion is o good exomple
of how quickly you con move from simple Deepening Questions to
romontic tolk.
RON: Sue, whot is it thot you ore possionote obout? You mentioned
eorlier thol you ore interested in ort ond olso into being o biker
bgbe, but I om curious obout your other interests. Whot else ore
you possionote obout in your life?
il
llrrluilo0borlllll{re!il

|N0[, t0 lail a ll$sllrstl
music/ so I wonl to connect those topics lo me. Sue seems very open
ond flirtotious ond there is o lot of eye contocl, so I wont to bring up
romonlic topics right owoy. Mony of our sludents woit too long
before pushing conversotions in o romontic direction. Our students
often think they need to woit until the end of o conversolion to bring
up romontic lopics, but ifls often better to bring up romontic topics
eorly on. lf there is o spoce to osk Romqnlic Questions, go for it.
To turn up lhe romonce with Sue, I osked her whot o greot dote
would look like to her. I wonted b osk her questions thot creole
openings for me to osk her out. I olso wonted to osk her questions
thot would quickly show me whether or not she'd be open to going
out with me.
rll0 10[1|-$[00 R[uallcel [$BDBll||lg
0e$cl'D[l0ll pl|080$$
lnsteod of describing o greol concerl or o wonderful piece of ort, in
Advonced Deepening, you describe o sifuotion where you ond she ore
together ot o concerl or on ort museum. lnsteod of describing o fun orl
gollery or museum, you describe o scene where both of you ore ot on
ort gollery or museum looking ot ort. lnsteod of describing o romontic
condlelit dinner, you describe o romonlic dinner where the two of you
ore drinking wine ond hoving o greot time.
When you describe romonlic scenes with the two of you, il's lust one
more woy for her to stort imogining you os o potentiol lover. The process
goes like this:
t
ururullorllbrutgflnFFil
UWre*. 
I
ndwnSss s88?8ilin0
Pick o situotion you wonl to describe, such os o fun dote, o greoi
trip, o vocotion or o conceri.
lmogine thot you ore describing her in thot situotion ond odd
detoils lo lhe scene to moke il more intimote. lf you leorn thol she's
inlo ort, you could osk yourself whot obout being in on orl gollery
would moke it more intimote. Perhops you imogine drinking wine
ol on ort opening ond getting lost in o conversoiion. Moybe you
imogine looking ot the ort ond opprecioting its beouty. Moybe you
imogine ifs on elegonl ort opening ond everyone looks so beouti-
ful ond you iust look ot eoch other ond smile ond feel so hoppy.
Whotrever lhe scene, you odd intimote detoils.
o Put yourself in the scene. The imoginory scene would feoture the
two of you ot on elegont ort opening, borh looking greot ond reol-
ly hoving o fun time. Or moybe both of you ore drinking wine ot
on ort opening ond hoving o fun time loughing ond smiling ot
eoch other ond loughing ot oll the pretentious people. Or moybe
both of you ore storing ol the beoutiful ort on the wolls ond get-
ting lost in it together.
r 
Now describe this scene to the womon. Yes, you eventuolly hove
to toke the risk to tolk. You need lo open your mouth ond creole
some of these situotions when tolking to lhe womon you ore with.
Afier you hove some clues obout the things o womon is interesled in, we
recommend you follow this four-step sequence o few times during eoch
Deepening Conversotion.
www.ebook3000.com

ll0r8 !* lall{ l0 wsmsn
[EepBlltllg co]luEl|$tfl0ll t c0llul]ll!00
When we left off with this chot, Ron hod iust osked if Sue thought going
lo o concert would be o fun dote.
SUE: l'd enioy going to o concerl. l'd even enjoy iust going to o bor
ond listening lo some live blues. Nothing is more fun thon hoving
fun, drinking ond doncing your feet off.
RON: Well, whot qbout going on rides on the bock of o Horley?
SUE: I think thot would be greot too. l'm on odventurous person ond I
love bikes. So my ideo of o good time would be lo just get in the
cor, or get on o bike if it is o nice night, ond iust heod out some-
where ond moybe iusl go oll night ond foll osleep where we end
up-moybe iust sleep outside under the stors. I think thot would be
so much fun.
DAVID: Le/s iump in. How is this going?
RON: I om getting o lot of useful informotion from Sue. I om osking
questions ond getting informolion on where to possibly toke her
on o dote. I om qlso osking her questions thot will hove her think
of going out with me. Lostly, I om hoving fun tolking to her.
Hoving fun when tolking to o womon is reolly importont. lf o con-
versotion is not fun i/s often o sign thot the womon is not inlerest-
ed in you. Whenever you're not hoving fun il's importont to osk
yourself who/s nol working. Are you nervous? Are you trying too
hord to get into her ponts? ls she boring you so bodly you wqnt to
ff{r*n88$ llsspsniw
leove? Whofs going on in your mind ond whot con you do thot
second to slorl hoving fun? Hoving fun, being sexy, being interesF
ed ond being interesting oll work together.
Let's listen in some more:
RON: You've convinced me. I om reody to toke you oul, ond we leove
tonight. l/s our secret operotion.
SUE: [Loughs] I wont to explore the whole world, which is my possion.
I hove o gool to trovel oround the world before I die.
RON: Where hove you troveled? I don't meet o lot of women who
reolly go for whol they wont. I meet o lot of women who wont lo
go for it, but most don'f hove the guts lo go out ond reolly do it.
SUE: I hove been to Europe ond Mexico, but I reollywont to go to
Asio ond Austrolio. The next trip I om plonning is to visit Asio.
DAVID: Lel's iump in ogoin. ls fiere ony'hing you wont to soy, Ron?
RON: lwos feeling closer ond closer to osking her out. lwos hoppy
with the poce ond depth of the conversotion. Sue seemed to be
hoving o good time tolking to me ond we were bonding.
I used humor to connecl with her. Turning o dote inlo o secret
operotion mode it more fun ond exciting. I took the conversotion
into o different direction ond in the process we both hod fun.
Women like to go on odventures ond they like it when you con be
ployful. When you con creote dotes fiot ore odventures, you'll
como ocro3s os seductive, romonlic ond fun.
r
ulrut[urrquHnBul

'lr,lll 
s$ tatl{ ft tryslltsll
[B$DB]lrllg c0|lu8|'$afl0n I
ln this conversotion Dovid uses the Deepening Questions you've been
leorning.
We wont to worn you oheod of time thot Louro is on odd womon, bul
very ottroctive. She tolks obout wonting to simplify her life ond ot times
comes ocross like o survivolist. Are there o lot of weird women out there?
Yes! Are there women who ore inlerested in topics you find siupid, bor-
ing ond insone? Yes! Are there women who will soy things ond give
opinions you strongly disogree with? Yes! So it's importont thot we
include some women in this book who ore o bit odd ond off-kilter since
you're likely to encounter them in your own doting life.
ln tolking lo rondom women you will encounler women who seem odd
to you. We oll encounter women who soy unusuol things. Our tosk is to
decide if they're worth pursuing. lf so, we need to stop focusing on the
unusuol ospects of their personolities. Once you're pursuing o womon/
horboring negotive iudgments obout her tend to get in the woy of o suc-
cessful seduction. Once you're in o relotionship, you need to ignore the
ospects of o womon's personolity thot bother you. lt's colled coping with
the horsh reolity.
DAVID: Hi Louro, nice to see you. l'm curious-whot is your iob?
LAURA: I own o smoll hotel, but I om getting out of the hotel business
to simplify my life. I olso own o computer consulting compony.
*&lJan8s{ $*fp8lli,ts
DAVID: Simplifying your life is such on importont thing. lwould guess
thot you ore someone who volues trying to simplify things when
everything seems complex. ls thot true?
LAURA: Absolutely, I keep working ot it ond olwoys try to simplify
things for myself.
DAVID: Whot does your vision of o simple life look like?
LAURA: Just o simple house in fie country ond not hoving to work
much.
DAVID: Thot sounds nice ond much more loid bock.
Lel's iump in. Hor/s this conversotion going for you, Dovid?
DAVID: At the beginning I osked her whot else she would like to do in
business. I wonted to throw o wide o net so she wouldn't feel cor-
nered by my queslions. You wonl lo osk women open-ended ques-
tions ond give them the room to respond how they wont.
Since Louro mentioned thot she wos simplifying her life, I osked
her obout ii. ln the bock of my mind, lwos looking for something
she's possiorrote obout, ond I kept osking questions until she gove
me somefiing to work with.
LAURA: I reolly om turned on by the ideo of living in the country
being pretty self-sufficient ond iust being oble to do whotever I
wont to do.
DAVID: So you reolly volue selFsufficiency, doing whot you wont to
do ond toking it eosy?
n
lllrllrrtrutu${{Hnnilfiwww.ebook3000.com

llt 1! s0 Tal[ 18 {&m8l|
LAURA: Yes I do. I wont to toke o breok from the rol roce.
DAVID: Thot would be o reoson to stort your own business loo, to cre-
ote something you would be oble to sell ond to do exoctly whot
you wonl lo do. Tho/s cool. I don't get to meet women every doy
lhot ore so direct in their lives. lt sounds greot to live somewhere
beoutiful ond be oble to sit in the sun ond hove o good time.
DAVID: Le/s iump in ogoin. ln ihe lost seclion I spent o lot of time voli-
doting her desire trc live in q secluded oreo ond simplify her life. I
wont her to bel odmired. ln feeding bock to her the quolities she
volues l'm seeing ports of her thot most people overlook. I om trrking
notice of whot is speciol to her ond whot is speciol obout her. I om
olso listening intently tc whot she's soying. I om lislening for useful
informotion ond concenlroting on how I con turn whot she's telling
me intrc more Deepening Questions.
DE0DE]lrlls c01lu0||$4fl0ll { c0llElll[E[
ln the previous chopter Dovid tolked to Heidi. Here's the conclusion of
their conversolion. ln this exomple, Dovid uses Deepening to get Heidi's
phone number.
DAVID: How long hove you been writing?
HEIDI: l've olwoys enioyed writing. ln foct my Mom hos these funny
little books thot I wrote when I wos o kid which she held on to. lt is
reolly hilorious looking ol them.
gsmml8$ n*rpnlli8{r
DAVID: Whot wos one of your books obout?
One of them wos obout my cot Snowboll.
DAVID: Your cot Snowboll?
H E I D I : Yes, it wos o book full of little illustrotions. lfs pretty fi,rnny to
look ot.
DAVID: l'd like lo heor obout it.
H E I D I : lt's mode out of construction poper ond eoch poge hos onother
little foct obout my cot. I wos probobly 5 when I mode it. Loter,
when I wos Z or so, I come oul with o bigger book obout uni-
corns.
DAVID: Wow, fho/s so cool. Thofs o reolly sweef childhood imoge.
Do you feel thot now you're oble to top into thot little-kid energy
when you ore creoling stuff ond writing?
HEIDI: ltop into itsometimes. lcon feel itwhen lom writing for
myself but nol usuolly when I om wriling for work. I find myself
being oble to be free when I om not writing under the pressure of
o deodline.
DAVID: Would you sqy thot you get those moments where you feel
like o little girl ogoin? You know, iust letting it oll go ond feeling
hoppy ond corefree?
HEIDI : Yes, definitely.
RON: Let's breok in here ogoin qnd dissect whot Dovid's done so for.
Tell us whot you're thinking ot this point in the conversotion.
n
tlrsu,fioutruou{lEluf

ll0u lI0 l0llr ls l{lla8n
DAVID: Well, I knew from my previous conversotion with Heidi thot
she works os o wriler. So I osked her obout the writing. Then she
told me obout the books she wrole os o kid. I odmired Heidi for
writing those little books. When she tolks obout her current writing
I osk her obout topping into thot little-kid energy.
I om trying to focus the conversotion on feelings lhol ore open,
receptive ond sweet. l'm bringing up imoges of feeling free ond
hoppy like o little kid. You should focus on osking women obout
the best moments in their lives, both post ond presenl.
When Heidi told me obout the books she wrole os o kid, I soid,
'Wow, thqt's so cool." She wos shoring something from her heort
lhere, somelhing kind of intimote. Heidi wos shoring something
with me thot she would not necessorily shore with o sfonger, so I
wonted to volidote her for shoring those things wiih me.
HEIDI: lwish I could incorporote those feelings of freedom ond won-
der more into my professionolwork. Sometimes I con, but il's reol-
ly fun to let thot side out.
DAVID: You seem like o reolly interesting womon. lt's reolly greot fiot
you're doing things in life thot you're turned on by. l'm curious to
know whot you're mosl possionote obout in your writing. Do you
hove those momenls like 'tVow this is whot I wos put here to do"
ond you feel like the writing is coming through you?
HEIDI: Yes, lgo through periods like thot. I feelthotwoywhen l'm not
thinking obout the finol product, not thinking obout whot I need to
do. I feel reolly hoppy when l'm qble to iust enioy the process-
n6mr80s [re]s|lin$
when I con let go ond enioy writing. Those ore olso moments
where I think, 'Wow, I om getting poid to do this, it's such o fun
thing for me." Then there ore limes when I hove writer's block ond
I lust con't write ot oll ond I hove o complete lock of foith in my
writing. Sometimes there ore weeks when I iust dreod writing.
As you con see, Dovid is using stondord Deepening Questions with
Heidi. He is olso digging into whot she's possionote obout ot o deeper
level. Since he knows she's o writer he is osking himself whot could be
momenls in her life where writing feels the best. He then osks her whot
it's like when writing seems to flow, ond he osks her to describe those
feelings to him.
Asking o womon 'lVhot ore you most possionole obout?" is o clossic
Deepening Question. h/s one of those phroses you con use over ond over
in Deepening. Whenever you con find o woy to use thot question, you'll
bring the conversolion to o deeper level ond built more intimocy.
One lesson to leqrn from this exomple is to ovoid going into negotive
spoces with o womon, os we sow in the previous chopter. Heidi begon
tolking obout writer's block, which is reolly o bod feeling. lnsteod of tolk-
ing more obout writey's block ond trying to console her, Dovid simply
redirected her ottenlion. h's utter suicide lo try to fix o womon's prob-
lems. Our suggestion is to redirect her ottention.
When Bob the bod seducer is with o womon ond she mentions o prob-
lem he immediotely osks her to describe the problem in greot detoil:
"Oh, writcr's block sounds terrible. Tell me more obout it. Wow, thot
n
ullu[o$o!Wun!,[lfi
www.ebook3000.com

|'0r,J u8 |rl,{ !s |'ds}l|8ll
sounds like obsolute torture. How often does it hoppen to you? I heord
oboul o writer who hod writer's block ond she hod to be put into o psych
word - do you think thqt would ever hoppen to you?" Bob stupidly thinks
thot if he octs sympotheticolly enough ond ollows o v/omon lo shore her
deepest poin with him then she will like him. Bob in foct olienotes women
by osking so mony serious ond intense questions $ot he comes ocross
os o complele downer. By osking women to describe their poin in
greoter detoil Bob shoots himself in the foot ond digs himself deeper inio
o hole thot he con'l gef out of.
Rother thon hove Heidi tolk obout whofs not working in her life or how
often she hos wriler's block, Dovid chonges the subiect ond osks her whot
else she likes to wrile obout ond if she writes poetry. When he osks her
questions obout whot she likes in her life he shows thot he's interested in
her, but he's not giving energy to the depressing things she's tolking
oboul. He is responding by guiding lhe conversotion into o positive direc-
tion. Your iob is to guide conversolions inlo romonlic ond intimotre spoces
ond qvoid topics where o womon is likely to get depressed or feel poin.
DAVID: Whol gives you the most ioy in writing?
Heidi: I like to go to coffee shops ond observe people. I love to eoves-
drop on people. lt's fun for me to iust stort writing obout the person l'm
observing ond imogine fiol I know them. I stort writing diolog ond
imogining thot I know whot they're thinking. Sometimes my coffee-shop
writing turns into short slories. lt's reolly fun for me to do thqt kind of
writing, i/s iust something silly I enjoy.
$$us[l8s* $EEsEnin*
DAVID: Tho/s interesting, Heidi. I don't get to meet o lot of women
who ore thot creotive. lfls fun lo heor obout your writing.
HEIDI: Thonks, I love thot kind of writing. I reolly enioy observing
people ond leorn o lot from wotching people.
DAVID: Are you observing me right now?
No, not ot oll.
DAVID: Now l'm scored. Uokinglyl
HEIDI: lwrite some poetry but l've never hod ony published. I don't
usuolly shore my poetry with people; i/s iust o privote thing.
DAVID: Moybe if we get to know eoch other better o time will come
when you will wont to shore some poetqy with me. I understond
moybe now is not the right time to shore it.
Do you write poetry?
DAVID: No I don't. I om more of o nonfiction writer, but I know whot
ifs like to be in the flow like you were tolking obout eorlier. Where
you foel like the words ore iust flowing through you ond it bels like
you're in the donce of writing. Those ore moments when you fuel like
you reoch beyond whot you're normolly oble to reoch ond you come
up wit*r moteriol thot is better thon who you know yourself to be.
Yes, I know thot feeling very well.
DAVID: An importonl port of my life is hoving work situotions ond
friends in my life thot bring out the better me ond help me see
myself in o new, better light. Hoving those people oround mokes
lifu moro fun ond exciting.
n
uqu hqrh itlryllfllf tw!4!fi

ll0llr l,s tr*llr Tr! wsmsll
HEIDI: I reolly like writing ond you iust mode me think obout how cool
it is to be oble to write somelhing ond ollow someone else to see
something briefly through your eyes ond iust know whot it is like
to be you just for o second.
RON: Let's interrupt for o second ond exomine Dovid's conversotion
with Heidi. The conversotion storted off plolul ond eosy ond now
it's getting much more intimote ond intense. Dovid's doing o good
iob hoving o heorl-to-heort tolk with Heidi.
DAVID: I storted out thot section offirming her. I told her I don't get to
meel o lot of women who qre os creotive os she is.
RON: But you ore olso ioking oround, moking some funny comments.
You're teosing her, ond thot seems to be o good woy to go with
Heidi. She seems receplive to you ond wouldn'l be reveoling so
much obout herself unless she felt comfortoble with you.
DAVID: Humor is port of the bonding process. When Heidi tells me
thot she likes to observe people, I soy, 'Are you observing me?" I
olso soid, "Moybe if we get to know eoch other beiler o time will
come when you will wont to shore some poetry with me." I didn't
push her reol hord lo show me her poetry; I iust wonted to bring
up the lopic of going out with me in o fun, holFioking woy.
One thing to notice is thot Ron ond I use o lot of "you" stoiements.
ln the most evocotive visuqlizotions, lhe person tolking does his
best to include the listener in the sifuotion he is describing. For
exomple, 'You see yourself wolking down the sloirs"; 'You see lhe
things oround you";'You feel this." All of these exomples use
8$sallss$ Ss8ssni|}s
"you" Io creote cleorer imoges. h's very useful to describe things
from o "you" point of view. Tolking to women is oll obout getting
them to feel things, visuolize things ond imogine things.
Thofs why utilizing the you perspective in your speoking is so
importonl. lf you ore describing how greot it feels to be in the flow
of writing you might soy, "l feel so good when I om there ond the
energy is lust flowing through me ond the words ore iust flowing
through me." h's o lot more powerful to soy, "li feels so good
when you ore there ond you ore writing ond the words ore iust
flowing through you ond you feel so connected to something lorg-
er thon yourself, do you know whot I meon?" I wos iust describing
thot feeling os if she is hoving it. My hope is fiot when I use you
stotemenls she'll soy to herself, "lt's omozing thot I om with this
guy who understonds thoi."
RON: lwont to point out thot in fie previous conversotion Heidi is
tolking more then Dovid. Dovid is shufting up long enough to listen
to whot she's soying. He's lhen toking his time to conslruct o
response thot is either o bonding visuolizolion or o question thol
pulls the conversolion into o more intimote spoce.
Eorlier in this book we tolked obout the power of describing
romonlic scenes ond situotions to women. We told you thot whot
you describe lo o womon is whot she will feel. When you describe
romontic scenes o womon hos to go inside herself ond experience
those feelings. A new woy to opply the principle of describing
feelings is io osk o womon Romontic Questions. When o womon
onswers Romontic Questions ond describes o romontic situqtion to
It
ll,ulutiloulllulltllHxn!ili
www.ebook3000.com

il8l|' &t! l&ltt & wsmsn
you, she'll experience it while describing il to you. For exomple, if
you osk o womon obout her dreom vocolion ond she describes ii
lo you, she will hove lo go into her imoginotion ond experience il.
Whether you describe romonlic scenes to o womon or you osk
Romontic Questions thot invoke o romontic response from o
womon the result is the some: she experiences romontic feelings.
Let's go bock ore reod more of the conversotion.
DAVID: I would like to know more oboul you. Moybe I could reod
some of your writing somelime. Whot would it be like if we got
together for o cup of coffee sometime ond lust tolked more obout
writing ond got lo know eoch other o little better?
H E I D I : Thot would be greot. l'd reolly enioy thot.
DAVID: I tellyou whot, give me your emoiloddress or phone number
ond we con set thot up.
HEIDI: Sure, thot sounds greot.
[$0pE|lrlls G0nuBl|$an0ll $
RON: Hi Kotie, greot to see you.
KATIE: You loo, how ore you?
RON: l'm doing greot todoy. Your ring coughl my otlention. lt looks
reolly interesting, whofs the story behind it?
$$van$e* $$s$$l|irls
KATIE: Well, octuolly, I gol it when lwos troveling. I wos bockpocking
through Bonglodesh ond there wos someone selling iewelry ond
this ring is octuolly q Celtic symbol. lt looked reolly cool so I
bought it.
RON: Bonglodesh, whot were you doing in Bonglodesh?
DAVID: I wont to point od thot Ron effectively used the question
'lVho/s the story behind fiot?" to open up lhe conversotion with
Kotie ond then proceeded into Deepening Questions. This shows
how'lVhot's the story behlnd thot?" con noturolly leod into
Deepening Conversolions ond fien Romontic Conversotions. We
wonl you to keep on eye on how oll the conversolionol modes
you're leorning in this book oll fit together.
RON: Whqt mode you decide to go to Bonglodesh? Whot did you do
there?
KATIE: I iust wonted to visit o ploce for owoy in o totolly different cul-
ture. I wonted to go on o chollenging iourney thot wos different
from my normol life.
RON: Wow, thot is reolly brove, Kolie.
KATIE: lt wos reolly fr.rn ond exciting. lt wos one of the most intense
trips of my life.
RON: I don't get lo meet women ve4y often who hove token on life ot
thot kind of level. l/s reolly cool thot you went there. How long
were you in Bonglodesh?
KATIE: I woc lhere for obout three months.
u
ll,lltu llruhluiltfltllKrull

llsllt &s lsl& *r $,smell
RON: Wow, three months in Bonglodesh? Thot's o long lime. You olso
soid thot you hove o Celtic ring?
KATIE: lt's o Celtic symbol of on eternol knot.
RON: An eternol knot? Let me see thot for o second. [He reoches over
ond touches the ring] This is o cool ring. Where else do you like to
trovel?
DAVID: Let/s iump in for o second. When you're tolking to o womon
it's helpful to be on the lookout for openings lo louch her hond or
her iewelry. Touching o womon in non-inlrusive woys is greot in
building up to osking for o dqte. Ron seizes the opportunity to
moke things more physicol with Kotie by touching her ring.
RON: I mentioned thot I thought Kolie wos brove for going to
Bonglodesh. This compliment wos q woy to volidote her life.
Another exomple of volidoting her is when I soid I don't get to
meet mony women who hove lived like thot. An importont ospect
of Deepening is osking questions to find out whot o womon vol-
ues. From there, fie nexl slep is odmiring whot she volues qnd
feeding it bock to her.
KATIE: Do you like to trovel?
RON: Yes ldo, olthough lrorelygo plocesos unusuolos Bonglodesh.
l/s omozing when you trovel, you get to see new things ond expe-
rience q new culture. When you lrovel you get to let different ports
of yourself come out. Do you know whot I meqn?
KATIE: Yes, tho/s one of the moin reosons I love to see new ploces.
a8val|l}s$ gssssnills
RON: I would be interested lo know whot port of your trip touched
your heort the most.
KATIE: The woy people were welcoming to me ond let me into their
homes. lt is not something thot you see every doy. My fovorite port
of the trip wos meeting new people. I mode o lot of speciol con-
nections.
RON: Did you hove ony experiences thot kind of iust sticks in your
heort? Do you recoll experiences thqt ore postcord moments thot
you'll remember for the rest of your life? l'd be curious lo know if
you hod experiences ond moments like thot.
DAVID: Lefls iump in. Whot's interesting lo me in this conversotion is
thot Ron is toking this seemingly mundone conversotion thot hos
nothing romontic in it ond progressively toking it to deeper levels
of ropport building. Ron ond Kotie hqve o connection building.
She is storting lo lrust him, ond he is listening ond feeding bock
the positive things she is soying. By listening ond feeding bock
whot he heors, Ron is showing his interest in Kotie.
RON: Kotie storted osking me questions. But opening conversotions
with women ore more obout how you moke them feel, not obout
your showing off, so I tried to ovoid tolking obout myself ond
insteod focused on feeding bock to Kotie $e positive feelings of
troveling.
Next, I osked odditionol Deepening Questions to get her tolking
more obout troveling. I osked Kotie, 'lVhen you ore troveling,
whot touches your heort the most?" Then I osked her, 'lVhot ore
the port cord moments thot you will remember the most of your
al
lllllu I o uto$uo$n_mnill&llwww.ebook3000.com

|lel|, ll{! t8'l{ t8 {{emsl}
life?" These ore Deepening Queslions you might wonl to use when
you tolk to women.
KATIE: Well, it's not something I core to think obout often, but there
wos o reolly bod slorm ond there wos o mudslide thot we some-
how escoped. Thot port of the trip sticks out in my mind.
RON: Wos ihere o good port to thot crisis? Like feeling thot you hove
o deeper oppreciotion for life? Whot wos the most positive thing
you wolked owoy from thot experience feeling?
DAVID: Lel's iump in ogoin. We've seen conversotions move into neg-
otive directions before. We told you thot il's imporlont to redirect
conversolions inlo more positive topics. When Kotie mentioned she
wos stuck in o mudslide lhe conversotion could hove become
depressing ond unpleosont. Ron wos oble to gently move the con-
versolion to o different topic ond keep focused on building his
ropport with Kotie.
RON: I noticed thot Kotie wos running the horrible scene of borely
escoping o mudslide in through mind. I didn't wont her to feel the
bod feelings ossocioted with thot experience, so I took the conver-
sotion in q different direction. I wosn'l sure whol to soy to her, but
I come bock with, '!Vos lhere o good porl to thot crisis?" I knew I
hod to move quickly ond come up with something to guide the
conversotion onto o different topic.
DAVID: lf you hod let Kotie keep tolking obout the mudslide it could
hove become o depressing. She might hove soid, "Kids died in
thot mudslide..." So il's greot thot Ron interrupted her. Women
sttsill|fi$* &8sp*'|i[Ns
don't olwoys tolk obout upbeot subiects so you need to leorn how
to furn negotive lopics into positive ones.
You con hondle negolive lopics by osking ony of the following questions:
'aVhot wos the best port of it?"
'lVos there o positive port in oll of it?"
"Whot did you leorn from lhol experience?"
"How hos thol experience chonged you?"
KATIE: Surviving the mudrlide mode me oppreciote life o lot more. At
$e some time I felt proud of myself for surviving such o scory
experience ond chollenging myself. I reolly like pushing myself
ond putling myself out $ere. l'm glod I hod such on intense expe-
rience in Bonglodesh.
RON: I con see in tolking with you thotyou reolly push yourself ond
live life on fie edge. lt seems like you're someone who is strong in
the foce of uncertointy. I reolly odmire how you live life fully.
RON: One thing I noticed in tolking to Kotie is thot she pushes herself
lo try new things ond is reolly courogeous qnd odventurous. ln
Deepening I om looking for whot she is possionote obout ond
whot she volues, so I wonted lo let her know thot I see her os o
gutsy womon. I olso complimented in o woy thot wos deeply per-
sonol ond intimote. Let's look ol some more.
!t
lltruulltul0$00lllfl5illl

l|st!' s8 &lt} ls l{tonlsll
RON: I know exoctly how it feels to reolly push yourself ond reolly go
ofbr whot you wont. Like when you meet someone you con con-
nect with or you feel like they open their heort to you in o certoin
woy. There is something reolly speciol obout being open like thot. I
donl think we get enough of those moments in our lives.
KATIE: Being in Bonglodesh ond hoving people be so kind to me
mode me wont to be more open to people in my everydoy life. I
try to be friendly when I om out oi the grocery store doing little
tosks ond erronds thot seem mundone.
RON: lt's been greot to meet you, but I need to run in o second.
Moybe we could get together for o cup of coffee sometime ond
tolk some more.
Kolie: Sure, thot would be greot. Moybe you could tell me obout your
trovel experiences.
RON: Whd is your phone number ond emoil oddress? lt would be
greot to go out sometime this week.
KATIE: Here, l'll write down my number ond emoil.
RON: When Kotie mentioned thot she tries to be friendly when she's
out shopping ond running erronds, I thought thot wos o good
segue trc osking her out. I wonted lo end the conversqtion on o
high point. I thought thot if she wosn't willing lo go out with me
ofter tolking for so long it wos unlikely thot she'd give me her
number if we tolked ony longer.
s$l'&ll|}8t [88p&rlillS
Here's o good phrose to use when osking o womqn for her num-
ber: "h/s been nice tolking to you, perhops we con get together
sometime ond tolk obout this some more." You don't need ony-
thing foncy or speciol. You don't need o perfect line, you iust need
to open your mouth ond qsk her out. After you hove her phone
number or emoil oddress you con set up the coffee dote.
|n0l|0 01l [8Ep8llr|ls
Le/s recop whol we've leorned in this chopter:
Conversqlions with women somelimes foil. Deepening
Conversqtions don't olwoys go well. There is no mogicol formulo to hove
successful conversotions wilh women 100 percent of the time. Sometimes
the conversotion goes well ond sometimes you flot on your foce.
When bod-luck seducer Bob hos Deepening Conversotions thot go
poorly, he's shocked. "l did whot Louis & Copelond soid in thot domn
book ond the one womon I tolked to didnt wont to moke out with me.
Those guys ore ierks. I wonl my money bockl" Bob foils to reolize thot
mosl conversotions with women will not leod to getting o phone number,
let olone sex. Bob's so focused on finding o mogicol solution to getting
women trc dote him thot he forgets thot tolking to women is o numbers
gome, ond work. lnsteod of tclking to severol women until one is interest-
ed in tolking lo him, Bob would rother blome everyone else ond comploin.
!t
UUUloulotrF$5n!illtllwww.ebook3000.com

!|sl,r &n t8l* l$ Wltms|N
The trick in rolking lo women is to be persistent. When one
conversotion goes poorly, move on ond tolk to onother womon. When
o conversotion goes poorly, iust cholk it up to experience. lf you ore per-
sistent ond tqlk to dozens of women, you'll eventuolly hove successful
Deepening Conversotions. Afiter o few successful Deepening
Conversotions you'll get o phone number ond things will keep pro-
gressing from there. lf you ore willing to do the work ond be potient,
success is inevitoble.
lnclude yourself when describing scenes. ln Deepening you
ore creoting romontic imoges through descriptions of romontic scenes.
ln Advonced Deepening you ore describing scenes where you ond your
conversolionol portner ore together in the scene.
For inslonce, insteod of describing o greot concerl, describe o sifuotion
where you ond she ore ot o concert together hoving o wonderful time.
When you describe romontic scenes with the two of you, o womon will
hqve to go inside ond imogine thot picture of the two of you together. By
describing scenes to o womon you increose your chonces of getling her
number. You'll olso improve your chonces of hoving her see you os o
romontic possibility.
We reolize thot including yourself when describing scenes to women con
be confusing. l/s o new skill thot you need lo procfice. Try writing out
polentiol conversolions ond proctice osking questions out loud ot home.
The more proctice you hove the eosier it will be to include yourself in
scenes when you hove o womon in front of you.
nfiran88d 88sp*llinc
Assume ropporl. By this we meon thqt when you're tolking to o
womon you should ossume she is enioying tolking to you ond being with
you. When o solesmon ossumes ropport. he ossumes thot his prospec-
tive customer likes him, is interested in whot he's selling, hos similor vol-
ues ond trusts him. h's cruciol to ossume the best when you're with o
womon.
Bob ossumes thol every womon he tolks to will hote him ond thot every
interoction will go poorly. When he tolks to women ond osks Deepening
Questions his certointy thot the interoclion will go poorly comes ocross
in his fone of voice ond his presence. Becouse Bob is so cerloin his con-
versotions will go poorly, he comes qcross os ongry ond meqn.
You con teoch yourself to ossume ropport by reminding yourself thot
women ore interested in tolking lo you ond find you otlroclive. You con
tell yourself thot the interoclion is going well. When you ossume women
like you, you will not only feel more confident ond more reloxed, you
will olso be more romontic, eosygoing ond likeoble. Assuming ropport
is cruciol in tolking to women.
Ask open-ended questions. We've menlioned the importonce of
osking open-ended questions before. You need to cosl the widest net
possible when tolking io women. The gool is to creole o spoce for
women to feel comfortoble ond reloxed tolking to you. Bob is o moster
of osking questions so thot women feel tropped. Here's on exomple of
Bob's ottempl ot Deepening:
BOB: Hi, did you see the new John Trovolto movie?
I
llilIu[rubllqlglrrltultti

ll$$ &e trat'i ls s,smsl}
WOMAN: No, I hoven't. Did you?
BOB: So you didn't see thot movie? Why not? ls it becouse you don'l
like movies or is it becouse you don't like John Trovoltq?
WOMAN: Oh, I iust hoven't seen o movie in few months. l've been
working o lot. Did you see the movie?
BOB: Oh, so you must reolly hote your iob since you hove to work so
much. I hote iobs where they force you to work overlime ond don't
poy you.
WOMAN: Oh, I must go now. Bye.
Bob osks closed ("yes-or-no") questions thot hove on occusotory feel to
them rother thon open-ended questions lhot encouroge o womon to tolk.
Bob not only osks yes-or-no queslions, he orgues with the womon's
response rother thon encouroging her to tqlk. Don't box women into
onswering yes-or-no questions or questions thot limit their options. Ask
open-ended questions so thot lorger conversotions con develop.
Fun, fun, fun. Whot's more romonlic to o womon/ o mon who is
stressed, neryous ond uptight or someone who is reloxed, ployful ond
hoving fun? The onswer is cleor: men who ore oble to enioy themselves
ore much more otlroctive thon guys who ore uptight ond worried.
Women's bullshit detectors ore much more ottuned lhon ore men's.
Women know when you're nol interested in tolking to them, when you're
neryous ond when you're not hoving fun. So we strongly recommend
you find fun woys lo moke conversotions with women fun. Bring up top-
ics thot ore enioyoble for you. Mention things you find funny. Ask ques-
n8{nn88* sEspnl|ills
lions you're curious obout. Hove o good time.
Tolking lo women should not be on ordeql. When Bob tolks to
women he's constonlly preoccupied with osking the perfect queslion. He
is so cought up with his own thoughts ond concerns thot tolking to o
womon is o stressful, horrible offoir. Bob is too ofroid trc toke ony risks
ond so he folls deeper into o feor spirol. He is too ofroid to shore ony-
thing obout himself, mention onything he considers funny or osk ony
quesiions thot ore romontic. His feor creoles o situotion thot is unpleos-
ont for both himself qnd the womon.
Here ore some surefire woys to nof hove fun when you're wilh o womon:
Trying to be perfect
Asking questions thot you don'l core onything obout
Never shoring onything obout yourself
Not toking ony romontic risks
Worqying lhot you're doing evefihing wrong
Never smiling
Solely focusing on getting into her ponts
Never crocking iokes
Worrying thot evefihing you soy will offend her
Solely focusing on hoving her not think you're lrying to get
into har ponts
il
uillul lrutqils!!1llm{ry1il1 www.ebook3000.com

|Nsrs xs $lt{ }8 wo|Nls,!
lf you ore oble to let go, hove fun ond loke some risks with women, you'll
be more reloxed ond more fun to be oround. Fun ottrocts more fun; feor
tends to creole more feqr.
Don'l be o strqngea When tolking to women be on the lookout for
detoils she's shoring with you she wouldn't normolly shore with o
stronger. These ore detoils you wonl to ocknowledge.
Deepening Conversotions ore oll oboul creoting o connection with o
womon thot mokes her feel thot you see some$ing in her to which most
people ore not privy. When you ore oble to see things in her thot most
men don't see, intimocy is creoted. When you stort creoting emotionol
connections, she'll wont to connect more deeply with you.
Admire her. You wont to be the kind of guy who ocknowledges
women. Everyone feels good when they're ocknowledged. When you
odmire o womon for her strengths or loke notice of whot is speciol io her
ond whot is speciol oboul her, she'll feel closer to you.
Ask obout greot momenls in her life. ln Deepening you ore
focusing on o womon's life ond looking for speciol moments to ocknowl-
edge. You ore looking for times in her life when she felt best, moments
she's mosl proud of, her occomplishments ond her possions. Ask women
obout greot moments in their post ond greol momenls in their current
life. Two greot questions to use ore 'lVhot ore you mosl possionole
oboul?" ond 'Whot ore the postcord moments thot you will remember
for the rest of yovr li[e?"
tt
uuoroullqlqq[m$ll[ll
uuu[{illrn
I
,|lfllaltses $**psr3i{g'
Don't push too hqrd. You do not need to push women inlo sexuol
or romontic tolk. The purpose of Deepening is often iust to bond.
Without the foundotion of bonding there is no hope of turning things
sexuol. lf you skip this eorly work you'll foil miserobly loter on. The gool
of Deepening is trc creole o bond, develop ropport ond loy the ground-
work for osking for o number. Sometimes the conversotion turns romon-
tic; other times ifs much lighter. ln either cose $e gool is to move from
being o stronger to creoting enough of o connection to toke the next step.
Some women qre weird, wocky ond sftqnge. We oll
encounter women who soy unusuol things. lf she's worth pursuing, slop
focusing on the unusuol ospecls of her personolity. Once you ore in o
relotionship, you need lo ignore the ospects of o womon's personolity
thot bother you. lfs colled coping with the horsh reolity.
The importonce of "yott" stqlemenls. The most evocotive writ-
ing ond visuqlizotions strive to put fte lislener in lhe scene by using the
word "you." lfs very useful to describe things from e "you" point of view,
ie, 'Yeo, I think i/s so greqt when you ore hoving o perfect doy, ond you
con iust breothe in ond reolly feel good obout whot you've occom-
plished."
Tolking to women is oll obout getting them to feel things, visuolize things
ond imogine things. Thot's why using fie "you" perspeclive in your
speoking is so importont. Toking on o "you" perspective might toke some
proclice, but il's worth it. Do you understond?

1|0t[ li8 tffl$ ls 1'*{ll!l8ll
Women mighr turn the tobles on you. Eventuolly o womon will
turn he tobles on you ond stort osking queslions oboul your life ond
possions. We recommend you reply with romontic ond open-ended
responses. You need to reveol detrcils oboul yourself, but you con do so in
q wqy fiot is not brogging or time-consuming or boring for the womon.
When o womon osks Bob whot he's possionote obout in his life he
begins tolking b her obout his new flot-ponel compuler screen, the greot
screen resolution it hos, ond how the competitoy's version sucks. Bob goes
off on o IO-minute longent on o topic lhe womon could core less obout.
Bod move. Jusl give o short response oboul yourself ond then osk oddi-
tionol Deepening Questions ond refocus the conversotion on her.
Shul up qnd listen. When you're conducting Deepening
Conversolions it's cruciol thot she tolks more thon you do. When you're
hoving o Deepening Conversotion, shut your pie hole while she onswers
your question. Don't interrupl o womon when she's tolking. lnsteod, lis-
ten ond trrke time to construct o response thot is either o visuolizotion
bosed on whot she's iust told you or o question thoi evokes more infor-
motion from her.
When Bob conducts Deepening Conversotions, he never shuts up. He
inlerrupts lhe womon when she's tolking obout her fovorite vocolion ond
brogs obout his Aloskon cruise. Bob constontly interrupls women when
fiey're telling him key informotion. Rother thon listen, Bob enioys offer-
ing his opinions on whot o womon is telling him. When Jennifer told him
obout the besl ports of her iob, he lectured her on why she should quit
her iob ond find o higher-poying profession.
$dsaN|88{ $ess8llin$
Bob con't contoin his thoughts enough to creole o bond with women.
You need to shut up long enough for them to respond. A good rule of
thumb is they should tolk Z0 percent of the time, you should tolk 30 per-
cenl of the time.
Tolking to women is like fishing. lf the first question you osk o womon
doesn't elicit o iuicy response, move on lo onother question. ln
Deepening you ore fishing by osking queslions ond finding out whot
she's possionote obout. Once you gei o strong response from he4 osk
more queslions ond feed bock more situotions to her. Just like with fish-
ing, you're potiently woiting for o bite. Once you gel one, you quickly
go for it ond get her tolking obod whot she's possionote oboul.
Deepening Conversqlions ccrn leqd to fouching ond more.
When you con touch o womon os port of o Deepening Conversotion you
ore helping escolote the seduction. Mosl men woit until the end of o dote
before doing onything physicol. During Deepening Conversolions, how-
ever, lhere ore often openings for touch. When osking o womon obout
her ring, for exomple, you could touch her hond. When sitting next to o
womon, you could "occidentolly'' brush ogoinst her orm.
When you touch o womon, do so gently ond os unobtrusively os possi-
ble. lf o womon reocls negotively, thot is o sign to slow the seduction
down. lf o womon seems open to fouching, ifls o sign to go for fie next
level of touching or kissing.
When the conversotion goes downhill. Severol times during
this chopter we mentioned how importont it is to ovoid tolking obout
depresing topics. When o womon slorls tolking obout bod experiences
t
ururu:[rirt!lqlq[n!!!!]trwww.ebook3000.com

ll0u te Tal'l ?$ t{snl|}
or depressing lopics, your iob is to redirect the conversotion to o differ-
ent topic. Here qre o few phroses you con use:
'lVhot wos the best port of it?"
'lVos there o good port to lhol crisis?"
"Did you hove o deeper oppreciotion for life?"
'lVhot wos fie mosf positive thing you wolked owoy from thot expe-
rience feeling?"
cllaD[Bl' il
R0lnnllllc 0llg$n01l$, pilt I
We've tolked obout the importonce of interrupting ond initioling, ihe Hi
Progrom, the Goodbye lntroduction, 'lVhot's the siory behind lhol?",
Situotionol Flirting, ond Deepening. Procticing eoch of these converso-
tionol tools will give you the power you need to initiote with women, lo
interrupt $em on deeper ond deeper levels, ond to redirect their
thoughts-ond possibly their romonlic ottention-to you.
Now you're reody to odd onother skill to the mix: osking Romontic
Questions. Romontic Questions build on the tools you olreody hove to
toke your conversotions wilh women to on even deeper ond more seduc-
tive level.
Before we cqn get into osking Romontic Questions, though, it's impor-
tont for you to review the power of description, becouse description is
the key thot mokes Romontic Questions work.
ulla[ u0lr [B$cl|ne H ulla[ $lle ]801$
There is o fundomentol concept thot underlies everylhing romonlic thol
you soy lo o womon. lt is on ideo qbout the woy people's broins work,
ond it ir vory simple: when you describe something to somebody, she
c0ncu$l01l
Hopefully, you ore slorling to get o feel for how oll of this con fit togeth-
er. You initiote with women by soying hi, using the goodbye introduc-
lion, or though ony olher sociol meons thot gets you tolking to onother
humon being. From there you toke some deeper risks, doing the flirting
moves lo get yourself out of the "friends" zone, osking 'Whofs the story
behind thoi?", using situotionol flirting, ond, now, odding in Deepening
conversolions.
Now we'll move on to the next step in tolking to women: Asking
Romqntic Questions. o
t
uluulruh$mllmirhfi

ll0$ t0 l0lll l0 l{Srien
must go inside ond imogine it or experience it so she con underslond
whot you ore tolking obout.
The clossic exomple of this phenomenon involves describing on ele-
phont. lt is huge, it hos big white tusks, groy skin, o long trunk ond big
floppy eors. ln order to understond this description, you hod to imogine
whot we were describing, ot leost to some extent. Even if you wonted to
resist us ond decided thot, no motler whot, you were nol going lo imog-
ine on elephont, you'd still hove lo imogine one to know whot you
shouldn't imogine. This is o bosic principle of how the mind works: if you
describe something to someone, ihey outomoticolly imogine it.
This little quirk in the humon mind reolly works in your fovor when you
tolk to women becouse it doesn't only work if you describe things like
elephonts. lt olso works if you describe experiences like love, romonce,
seduction ond orousol. lf we were to describe on experience lo you,
you'd hove to imogine hoving thot experience, ot leosl to some smoll
extenl, simply to understond whot we were tolking obout. (The extent to
which you hod thot experience would depend on how well we described
it.) lt/s on involuntory reoction, ond eveqyone hos it.
This is your occess into the emotionol being of o \ /omon. lf you ore tolk-
ing to o womon ond describing romontic experiences, erotic experi-
ences or emotionol experiences, she is going to hove to go into her mind
ond experience those experiences iust to trock with the conversotion.
When o womon hos those feelings while she is looking ol you then you
ore hoving o romontic interoclion.
n8fl$nlii6 &{g$si$l}s. $&l'& !
lf you don't believe thot describing on experience con influence feelings,
look ot it from the other side: no one would disogree thot describing dis-
gusting things hos on effect on someone's inlernol emolionol slote. You
don't wont your dinner componion to describe creepy, slimy worms
while you're eoting spoghetti becouse you'd noturolly imogine worms
qnd feel revolted by the plote of spoghetti in front of you. This mirrors
the bosic principle of seductive conversolion.
DAVID: Just lost night I wos doing some lnternet flirting. lwos osking
o womon oboul romonlic experiences she hqd hod ond out of the
blue she storted into this tirode obout obortion ond how bod
obortion is ond how she is totolly ogoinst it. Now one thing I
could hove done wos fight with her qbout it, bul olreody she wos
imoging oll this horrible stuff obout obortion in her heod ond feel-
ing her feelings obout it. Fighting would only hove mode il worse.
I could olso hove osked her not to think obout it, but she still
would hove hod to imogine whot she shouldn't be thinking obout,
so it might hove mode those horrible pictures she wos imogining
even more vivid.
So I let her soy whot she hod to soy ond then I come bock with
"L,el's tqlk more obout doting. Le/s ilrlk more obout romonlic experi-
ences. Le/s tolk obout how the heort opens up with someone who
you reolly bel connected fic." Those were the kind of experiences I
wonfed us to be trclking obout so she would be hoving lhose romon-
tic experiences inside ond connect them to me, rother thon hwing
her think obout obortion ond connecting thot to me. And it worked;
she got off her obortion tirode ond we hod o greot romontic tolk.
H
uilllt! [tublluuflnf,ililllrwww.ebook3000.com

l|0$ &e l*llt n $r8m0n
You hove probobly been in on experience with o womon when it seemed
like everything iust went sour. You were getting olong greot, then sud-
denly there wos o problem ond you couldn't seem to fix it no motter whot
you did. lf you were to look ot o lronscript of thot conversotion, you'd
probobly find thot the conversotion took o turn into something like rope,
child obuse, obortion or something else thot she found reolly unpleosont.
Her mind become filled with unpleosont pictures while she wos interoct-
ing with you ond before you knew it, the romontic vibe wos gone.
You might even hove coused the problem. Perhops you tolked obout
things you didn't even reolize you were tolking obouf perhops you
tolked obout porn or wor or something else thot, when she imogined it,
reolly turned her off. Sometimes it con be o lot subtler thon you reolize.
With women, you reolly don't know whot is going to hoppen; you hove
to sloy owoke, be presenl ond poy ottention to the conversotionol topics
thot turn her on ond the things thot turn her off.
We will get into the specifics of using romonlic descriptions with women,
but here's the bottom line obout how we use them: through tolking, ques-
iioning ond listening, we look for things thol women ore possionote
obod ond volue. We then either get women to describe the feelings of
those possions ond volues lo us or we describe them to the women. They
qre then oble to experience ond dwell on those feelings while being with
us. This creotes o very reol ond romonlic connection.
Success with women isn't totolly obout whot you look like, whot you do
or how much money you moke, even though those things ore obviously
foctors. Success with women is qbout how you moke women feel*thot's
*r!'lr*r!&is *u8$&i(ln$. pSfQ I
whofls most importont. lf you moke o womon feel excited, turned on ond
opprecioted, she's going to be o lot more likely to go for you.
ln the next few chopters you will leorn the specific flirting skills necessory
to turn onything thol o womon soys into o Romonlic Conversotion. We
meon it*if she tells you she's on occounfont, you'll be oble to turn lhot
into o Romontic Conversotion. The first step is understonding the struc-
ture of Romontic Questions.
ile $m[cE[||E 0F R0lnflll[rc 0ll0$fl0ll$
A properly osked Romonlic Question hos three components:
o The excuse
The description
The question
Let's look ot eoch port.
THE EXCUSE. When you osk o womon q Romontic Question, you need
to slorl with on excuse. The excuse onswers the question the womon will
be osking herself obout your question, which is '!Vhy is he osking me
this?" lf you con onswer thot question right owoy with your excuse, il will
be much eosier for her lo open up to you.
tl
uul0l fi uuttil$tmtlilt,!1lr

ll{ll0 t0lalNl }0 wll$sl:
Most of the fime, women you don't know well ore going to osk them-
selves some combinotion of their sofety questions when you first interrupt
them or when you toke the conversotion inlo deeper, riskier territory.
Remember, these questions ore 'tVhot is he going to do to me?," "How
long will it toke?" ond 'lVhy is he soying this to me?"
When you osk o Romontic Question, the excuse onswers the question
'Why is he soying this trc me?" lt gives her o context for whot you're osk-
ing, which helps o womqn relox into the interoction.
A Romontic Question stonding on its own con seem invosive ond scory
but when you odd on excuse ond description, olmost ony question con
become polotoble.
Lefls try this out on one of the tockiest questions you cqn osk o womon:
"Do you believe in love ot first sight?" You'll probobly ogree with us thot
most women would think of this os o hockneyed line, which il is. But let's
see whol hoppens when we odd on excuse to il. Which question do you
think would moke it eosier for o womon lo relox ond onswer: "Hey, do
you believe in love ot first sight?" or "l've been tolking to my friends
obout this ond sort of toking on informol survey. Do you think people
con foll in love ot first sight?"
We qren't recommending such on overused line, but the second version
of this question would be eosier for o womon to onswer. Thol's becouse
it hos on excuse ottoched to it. The womon con soy to herself, "Oh, he's
osking me this becouse he's been tolking oboui it to his friends. Okoy."
$s{l!as$is $1l$sliis|l$. Sar$ I
THE DESCRIPTION. This port of o Romontic Question helps guide the
womon to the kind of onswer you ore looking for. lt olso describes the
kind of feelings you wont her to imogine hoving while she is onswering
the question.
Lefs odd o descriplion lo our test question: "l'ye been lolking to my
friends obout this ond sort of toking on informol survey. lt seems like
sometimes you meet someone ond lhere's iust on immediote click, do
you know whot I meon? Like, 'Oh, i/s you,' even though you've never
met before. So l've been wondering, do you think people con foll in love
ot first sight?"
The description we odded to this Romontic Question suggests the feeling
you wont your conversotionol portner to feel ond olso guides her toword
the kind of onswer you ore looking for. Agoin, i/s worth noting thot even
o tocky question con slort seeming downright interesting when you odd
on excuse ond description to it.
THE QUESTION. The question is simply $e Romontic Question itself-
in our exomple, "Do you think people con foll in love ot first sight?"
Once ogoin, lefs look ot the Romontic Question in its entirety. Notice
how much more normol-sounding ond less tocky the question is when
the excuse ond description ore in ploce. Then think obout how well this
would work with o question thot hosn't olreody been beoten to deoth in
every bor in weslern civilizotion:
il
uuru.hutil$ml5xl,!dhwww.ebook3000.com

llsll, $0 tralfi ls s,smsll
"l've been tolking to my friends obour this ond sort of roking on informol
survey. h seems like sometimes you meel someone ond lhere's iusl on
immediote click, do you know whot I meon? Like, 'Oh, ifs you,' even
though you've never mel before. So l've been wondering, do you think
people con foll in love ot first sight?"
Romonlic Questions push the conversotion inlo o romontic direction.
When you osk o Romontic Question, you ore toking things to o more
intimote level. You need to be respectful of thot foct, by setting up your
queslions in the most non-invosive woy thot you con. The woy you do
thot is by hoving on excuse ond o description before you osk your
Romontic Question.
Le/s look ol some exomples.
rilalllpl$ r
THE ROMANTIC OUESTION: 'lVhot mqkes your heort flufier?"
You don't iust osk thot question outright becouse it would sound owk-
word ond weird. You'd dump her right into her sofety queslions: 'tVhy
is he soying this to me? Who/s he going to do to me?" You need lo set
up your question with our three-step process.
Here's lhe full woy of osking il: "l wos thinking the other doy obout how
omozing it is to be moved to the point where your heort flutters. Moybe
you've seen o piece of ortwork or heord some music ond itt like the pos-
$sm*nsill $lls8$iells" $a,,& tr
sion lust builds in you ond you feel it so intensely in your heort. l'd be
curious to know, whot mokes your heort flutter? Whot's on exomple in
your life of thot?"
Lefs breok fiot exomple down into the excuse, the description ond the
question itself:
TH E EXC U S E. "l wos thinking the other doy obout how omozing it is to
be moved to the point where your heort flutters." Thol onswers the ques-
tion 'lVhy is he osking me this?" You were thinking obout it the other
doy, tho/s why you're osking obout it.
THE DESCRIPTION. "lt's like the possion iust builds in you ond you feel
it so intensely in your heorl." You describe whot you wont her to experi-
ence so she hos to go inside ond experience thot description, ot leost o
little bit. This olso guides her into the kind of onswer you're looking for.
THE aUESTION. "l'd be curious to know, whot mokes your heorl fluF
ter? Whofs on exomple in your life of thot?" Now she knows why you
osked, she's felt the feeling o little bit ond she's more likely to give you
the kind of emotionol, romoniic onswer you're looking for.
rilalllpl$ 2
THE ROMANTIC QUESTION: "Hove you ever met someone ond felt
like you were meeling them ogoin for the first lime?"
n
uuu[0ut0]fimilnmill

l|{}trj t8 ?0,ll I$ W{,tilsn
Once ogoin, you wouldn't iusl dump this question on someone withoul
preporolion.
You might soy: "l wos tolking to some friends the other night over din-
ner ond we were tolking obout the feeling of when you meet someone
ond feel like you've known them before. One person wos reolly into the
post-life thing, ond I wosn'f sure whot to think obout thot. l've certoinly
hod those experiences where you meel someone ond you look ot them
ond you feel like you've known them before. lt's like you're meeting them
ogoin, rother thon for the first time. Do you know whot I meon? So, l'd
be curious to know, if you'd be willing to shore obout it, hove you ever
mel someone ond felt like you've met them before?"
Le/s breok it oport:
THE EXCUSE. "lwqs tolking to some friends the o$er night over din-
ner ond we were tolking obout the feeling of when you meel someone
ond feel like you've known them before." You were tolking obout it with
friends the other night, so lhere's o reoson it's on your mind.
THE DESCRIPTION. "One person wos reolly into the post-life thing,
ond I wosn't sure whot to think obout thol. l've certoinly hod those expe-
riences where you meet someone ond you look ot them ond you feel like
you've known them before. l/s like you're meeling $em ogoin, rother
thon for the first lime." This description is greot becouse it runs o little
visuolizotion on her ond reolly points o word picture of the kind of feel-
ing you wont her to experience os she looks ot you. lt will olso guide her
in selecting the kind of onswer you're looking for.
$t!,ltslt&i* {|j8$&is'l$. $eps I
T H E OU ESTIO N. "Hove you ever met someone ond felt like you've met
them before?" When you put it this woy it doesn't sound like o corny
pickup line, which it would if you osked it stroight out. Asking in this woy
gives her the opportunity to shore obout herself ond her experiences of
feeling o reol conneclion when first meeting someone-ond to look ot
you while she describes, ond feels, those feelings.
ffifln[r$ fl
THE ROMANTIC QUESTION: 'lVhotwos it like the first time you hod
o crush on someone?"
This question osked by itself sounds ridiculous.
But let's odd on excuse ond description ond see how it sounds: "l wos
tolking to o buddy from high school who I hodn't seen in o long time.
We were looking bock on high school ond tolking obout first loves ond
crushes ond how fun ond exciting it wos. lt wos this new, tender ond
exciting feeling of being so excited ond turned on ond reolly into some-
one, you know? I wonder if you con recoll the first time you reolized you
hod o crush on someone. Whot wos thot like for you?"
Let's breok it down to fie three ports:
THE EXCUSE. "lwos tolking to o buddy from high schoolwho I hodn't
seen in o long time. We were looking bock on high school ond tolking
obout first loves ond crushes ond how fun ond exciting it wos."
n
uuu roub!ryllusllffi,llrldillwww.ebook3000.com

l{r}$ $e }E x fe r{8N||stl
THE DESCRIPTION. "lt wos this new tender ond exciting heling of
being so excited ond turned on ond reolly into someone, you know?"
THE QUESTION. "l wonder if you con recoll the first time you reolized
you hod o crush on someone. Whot wos thot like for you?"
ffialnpl$ 4
THE ROMANTIC OUESTION: 'tVhot's o speciol ploce you enioy
going to for vocolion thot mqkes you feel reolly good ond reolly olive?"
Obviously, you would not wonl to iust throw thot ot o womqn.
You might soy: "l wos wqlching W the other night ond I sow on od for
troveling to Jomqico. And I thought, 'Gosh, thot sounds like o reolly greot
lime.' l've never been there. lt looked so greot. The cleor woter, being
oble to see the fish under the woler in o gloss-bottom boot or going snor-
keling ond hoving on incredible vocotion. lt got me thinking ond osking
people obout their ideol vocotion. So l'd be curious to know, if you'd be
willing to shore, whot's your ideol vocqtion? lt con be one you've been
on or moybe one you'd like to go on. l'd iust be curious to know."
Let's breok it down:
THE EXCUSE. "lwos wotching TV the other night ond I sow on od for
troveling lo Jomoico. And I thought, 'Gosh, thqt sounds like o reolly
greot lime."'
lomaffiis 0uf$tim$, $arl, I
THE DESCRIPTION. "l've never been there. lr looked so greot. The
cleor woter, being oble lo see fie fish under the woter in o gloss-bottom
boot or going snorkeling ond hoving on incredible vocolion. lt got me
thinking ond osking people obout iheir ideol vocolion."
THE QUESTION. "So l'd be curious to know, if you'd be willing to
shore, who/s your ideol vocotion? lt con be one you've been on or
moybe one you'd like to go on. l'd iust be curious to know."
ffialllpl0 5
THE ROMANTIC OUESTION: 'Who/s your fovorite moment in o
kiss?"
osked o womon whot her fqvorite moment is in o kiss flot out
you'd come ocross os o reol freok-boy.
Try this insteod: "lwos tolking to my friend Tonyo the other doy ond we
were tolking obout kissing. We were tolking obout the mogic of kissing
ond the mogicol moments thot occur during o kiss. There is o moment
when you close your eyes. There's the moment when your lips first touch.
There is o moment when your longues first entwine. lt's oll so omozing.
l'd be curious lo know, whol's your fovorite moment in o kiss?"
This is obviously o more intense question thon the o$ers. You ore bring-
ing up something very inlimote ond describing something thot con leod
directly to sex.
r
lI!u,hou!uuryqi!,!ln/blll

llsrll $8 nll* k W0m8'l
But this is o good thing. lf you've been doing the other flirting moves,
she's olreody thinking of you os o possible romontic portner, ond it's
oppropriote to heot things up o bit. This is o greot woy lo do thot. At the
right moment, this question could reolly work for you. You might odd in
o whisper or get closer to her eor. lt might turn inlo o very sensuol
momenl. This might even turn into o kiss.
Here ore the three ports:
THE EXCUSE. "lwos tolking to my friend Tonyo the other doy ond we
were tolking obout kissing. We were tolking obout the mogic of kissing
qnd the mogicol moments thot occur during o kiss."
THE DESCRIPTION. 'There is o moment when you close your eyes.
There's lhe moment when your lips first touch. There is o momenl when
your tongues first entwine. lt's oll so omozing."
TH E OU ESTION. "l'd be curious to know, whot's your fovorite moment
in o kiss?"
HIflMPM $
THE ROMANTIC QUESTION: 'lVhot ore
romontic movies?"
some of your fovorite
I
ultur ltllIlt0tuuiltdltllluuti,!0m/0tll
uuuhulumfll[m$lAtl
t
*0msl,si8 {{lsesim$. }Ert I
Mosl guys ore nol porticulorly into romontic movies, but i/s good to osk
o womon obout them becouse her onswer to fiis question con tell you o
lot obout how she likes to be seduced. lt'll provide informotion you will
find useful on doles with her. lt'll olso get her describing ond feeling
some of her fqvorite romonlic feelings, while looking ot you.
So here's whot you might osk: "l om usuolly into oction films myself, but
lotely l've been looking ol some more romontic films. Somelimes I see
movies thot hove such o romontic feel to them. They hove such sweet,
strong romontic moments in them-o couple is being swept off their feet,
folling deeply in love, like o Cory GronFAudrey Hepburn sort of
moment. l'd be curious lo know, if you'd be willing to shore, if you were
going to recommend o romonlic film to me, whot would il be?"
The three ports:
THE EXCUSE. "l om usuolly into oction films myself, but lotely l've been
looking ot some more romontic films."
THE DESCRIPTION. "somelimes lsee movies thot hove such o romon-
tic feel to them. They hove such sweet, strong romonlic moments in
them-o couple is being swept off their feet, folling deeply in love, like
o Cory Gront-Audrey Hepburn sort of moment."
THE QUESTION. "l'd be curious to know, if you'd bewilling to shore,
if you were going to recommend o romontic film to me, whot would it be?"
www.ebook3000.com

llsi|I ${N l*,ll l! ws[lrst}
tilmDmt
THE ROMANTIC OUESTION: 'lVhot wos your first kiss like?"
Put it this woy: "l've been osking my friends this question lotely ond it
reolly seems lo generole some pretty interesting conversolions.
Everybody hos o first-kiss story-thot feeling of doing something so
romontic for the first time con reolly be so incredibly moving. So l'm
wondering, if you would core io shore, whot v/os your first kiss like?"
The three ports of this question:
THE EXCUSE. "l've been osking my friends this question lotely ond it
reolly seems lo generole some pretty inleresting conversotions."
THE DESCRIPTION. "Everybody hos o first-kiss story-thot feeling of
doing something so romontic for the firsl time con reolly be so incredi-
bly moving."
THE OUESTION. "So l'm wondering, if you would core lo shore, whot
wos your first kiss like?"
ls this whole Romontic Question sequence storting to moke sense to you?
There's some subtlety to it, but it's not rockel science or broin surgery (or,
os one of our students colled it, "rocket surgery''f . You ore not iust hiF
ting on someone. You ore developing o connection with her. You ore cre-
oting o connection bosed on things she cores obout, things she hos pos-
sion obout.
l0mnbic quBsbi0n$, paru I
collllnon rue$iloll$ [80[[
R0lnan[rc 0ll8$[run$
Here ore some of $e most common questions men hove obod using
Romontic Questions.
QUESTION: How intimote should the questions be?
ANSWER: As you've no doubt noticed, the questions vory in intensity
from relotively low-risk questions like 'lVho/s o speciol ploce you
enjoy going to for vocotion?" lo relotively high-risk questions like
'lVho/s your fovorite moment in o kiss?" As you leorn to impro-
vise these questions, you'll come up with ones thot ore even milder
ond others thot ore even riskier. You decide how intimote o ques-
lion to osk by ossessing two things: how things ore going with the
womon ond the level of risk you wont to toke.
Mosl of the time, you'll wont to stort with the lower-risk questions,
ond, os thot goes well, move up to the higher-risk questions. lf
you're feeling especiolly bollsy, you con move up to the higher-risk
queslions foster. lf you osk them with o sense of certointy thot
evefihing is okoy then things will probobly go fine.
You con tell thot you qre risking too much if you find yourself leov-
ing out the excuse ond description ports of the Romoniic Question.
When guys get tense, lhey tend to leove out the excuse ond the
description ond iust go to the question. lf thot hoppens lo you, you
need to slow down, loke some deep breoths ond osk o lower-risk
querlion.
tt
uutr! i0rub0tllsjglulHfQgn/tsllr

|lNl{, $l} lalll trs Wsmcfl
Q: Whot should I do if she osks me the Romontic Question bock?
A: This hoppens oll the time, ond you should be reody for it. For
instonce, if you osk o womon, 'Whol is your ideo of o reolly
romqnlic dote?" ond she onswers you ond osks you the some
question bock, you need to onswer her. Simply describe o dote
thot sounds reolly romontic lo you. There's no big trick to it; iust
tolk obout o situotion thot sounds romontic to you. lf you con use
your words to point o picture for the two of you trcgether, fiot's
good. lf your description is similor to her ideo of o romonilc dole,
even better.
Obviously, you will wont lo speok from the romoncer porl of your-
self when you onswer this question. lf she describes her ideol
romonlic dote os on evening by the seoshore, iust her ond her
lover eoting lobster ond drinking fine wine, you won't wont to
respond by telling her thot your ideol romontic dote is on evening
drinking beer ot the demolition derby followed by o night of hot
sex with your fovorile Penthouse centerfold. Get into the spirit of $e
thing ond describe something romontic thot she would olso enioy.
Won't showing my romonlic interesl be emborrossing for us both?
It's true thot if you use Romonlic Questions properly she'll know
you're interested in her romonticolly. However, becouse yov're
opprooching the seduction in such o romontic, nonslimy woy, she
is very likely to think thot your desire for her is o veqy good thing
rofier thon o creepy thing she needs to get owoy from.
Asking Romontic Queslions is olso greot becouse you con slort
with the less risky, less obvious ones ond work your woy up to the
Q:
n$milnsie 0u8stil,0s, pa$ I
more intense ones. lf she bolks on the less risky ones ond seems
uncomfortoble, you know not lo go on to the more intense ques-
tions until you get better resuhs with those less risky questions. ln
this woy you con find out her level of interest strep by step without
risking moking things reolly weird for you both by osking some-
thing too inlense out of the blue.
Q: How often should I osk Romontic Questions during on
with o womqn?
You'll see exomples of how we use Romonlic Questions in the
diologs lhot ore coming up in this book, but the short onswer is
this: pepper them in. Romontic Queslions ore not the sole focus of
your discussion. You tolk oboul the weother, lhe news, you do
some of the Flirting Moves, osk her obout her iob ond throw in
Romontic Queslions. lf you pepper them in, it will feel noturol.
Asking loo mony Romontic Quesfions is not the problem most of
our students hove. The first problem most of our students hove is
not osking Romqntic Questions ot oll. The second problem most of
our students hove is dropping out the excuse ond the description
ond iust osking $e question port of the Romontic Question. The
lost ond certoinly the leost problem our students hove is osking too
mony Romontic Questions.
Hoving soid thot, it will probobly feel owkword the first few fimes
you osk one of these questions. As you proctice, you moy leove
some intreroctions with women feeling os if you osked too mony
Romontic Questions or worrying thot you overwhelmed her with
t
utltu.irult$t!il*lnlm/ltllwww.ebook3000.com

'lt!$J 
&il Tal|{ ls l{ems}}
them. Thofls okoy; ifs port of the leorning process. Overdoing it
once or twice is involuoble to your leorning how to use Romonlic
Queslions. And don't worry*if won't hurt her if you osk "too
mony'' Romontic Questions. She's mode of tougher stuff thon thot.
How should I get storted with Romontic Questions?
Firsl, choose one or two Romontic Questions ond leqrn them by
heort. Remember, thol meons you hove to leorn oll three ports of
lhe queslion: the excuse, the description ond the question itself.
Second, proclice speoking the entire Romontic Question out loud.
When you're olone ol home or in your cor or getting reody to go
to work in the morning, speok your Romontic Questions. This gets
your body used to soying the questions-which is of course whot
you ore going to end up doing. When you ore in front of o
womon, it does you no good to be greot ot soying the Romontic
Question silently in your own mind. You need to be qble to speok
lhe question, ond thot is why you proctice it out loud.
Third, try it out with o womon. Perhops you meet o womon ot o
coffee shop ond you've soid hi, done some of the Flirting Moves
like smiling, holding eye contoct ond winking ot her, oll perhops in
the contexl of doing some Situolionol Flirting. Perhops you've
osked her 'lVhot's the story behind thot?" obout her neckloce ond
thot's generoted some shoring conversotions. Things ore going
well. Then osk your Romontic Question. Moke your excuse, give
your description ond osk owoy. Voild!
Q:
ssnlel|tis $[*$6in!lli. $a,$ I
Should I leorn these questions by heo* or improvise them on the
spot?
At firsl you will wonl to leorn one or two Romontic Questions by
heort ond try them oui with women to see whot kind of converso-
tions ond romontic feelings thoi they spork.
As you get more experience, you'll find thot i/s noturol to improvise
the queslions or ports of the questions. At first you will probobly find
it is most nofurol ic improvise new excuses ond descriptions lo go
with the Romontic Queslions you intend to osk. ln time, you'll be
oble trc improvise the questions lco. As you relox more with o
womon, you'll be oble trc get more curious obout her ond obout her
life. Your curiosity obout her will guide you in spontrrneously creot-
ing new Romqntic Questions fiot ore well-suited for her.
Q:
c0llcil$nll
As we'll see in the next chopter, osking Romontic Questions leods notu-
rolly lo osking her for her phone number ond emoil oddress. Asking
Romontic Questions noturolly segues into both of you wonting to hove o
dote. Asking Romqnlic Questions noturolly segues into hoving o womon
think of you in romontic lerms. On your dotes, you con osk Romontic
Questions to deepen into the feelings of romonce. Romontic Questions
often leod to greot opportunities for the first kiss.
You con osk Romonlic Questions before fie dote, on the dote ond when-
over you con get them in. You con osk Romontic Questions online, in o
firrt mccting-on;nrhcre, Romontic Questions ore on imporlont port of
il
llllt! [rub0ruooqslfl[fl/till

ff0u rl} Ilur l0 ll,l0m8n
your seduclion loolbox. The more fomilior you ore with this skill ond the
more comforloble you ore with it, the more often you'll be oble to use it
lo your odvontrrge.
The cool port obout osking Romontic Questions is thot, once ogoin, ifs
not qbout bomboozling, hypnotizing, tricking, or scomming on women.
Romontic Queslions ore o woy for you lo outhenticolly leorn obout o
womon, to get inlo her world ond to moke o reol connection. When you
osk o Romontic Question, you give o womon o gift ond in the process
find out whot kind of connection con exisl between the two of you. .
cllil[8l| il
R0lnflil[ffi 0ll8$ilm$, pfll|r 2
Le/s look ot some reol exomples of Romontic Conversotions with women.
For eoch one of these exomples we'll give you the diolog ond breok in
occosionolly with some ploy by ploy so you con know whot wos going
on in our minds os we were conducting these conversotions.
As you reod these diologs, remember: you ore only getting the text of
the conversotions. You oren't getling the unspoken sociql cues thot go
olong with lhem, so let's bring you up to speed: during oll of these con-
versotions we ore smiling ond our voices ore friendly. Sometimes in
these diologs we moy soy things thot would seem confrontotionol if they
were soid in on ongry or horsh monner. But they're fine here becouse
our monner is light ond ployful. For instonce, ot one point Ron soys lc o
womon, "So you con relote lo lhe women who wos morried, yet she wos
sleeping with somebody else?" As you'll see in the diolog below, the
womon Ron wos tolking to didnt toke whot he sqid the wrong woy. Thot
wos becouse he wos smiling, they were hoving o good time together
ond it wqs cleqr to her thot he wos joking with her, not insulting her.
uilaE H l[ ilff0 m r0B1 $p0cn1?
ln thir axompla Ron is going lo ixlk to Grri ond osk her the Romonlic
Quorlion lilhot ir it like when you hd very speiol on o dote?" Here it is:
t
uruu.Iurtoil!oillsnlll,lillwww.ebook3000.com

l|Eur &8 T*[r lo $,,sm*n
RON: lwos tolking lo some friends of mine lost night obout this ond
we were wondering. Somelimes it seems like o dote is reolly going
greol, there's greot flow ond things seem to reolly be cooking ond
you feel incredibly speciol. So I wqs wondering: whot is it like
when you feelvery speciol on o dote?
TERRI: When I om fie focus, when I om included in the conversolion.
I wos iust on o dote lost week ond it wos wonderful becouse the
gentlemon leoned forwqrd on the loble when he wos tolking to me
ond I knew there wos inlerest. lt wos very cleor.
RON: Okoy, cool. So you ore the kind of women who likes it when o
guy tokes chorge of the conversotion yet includes you?
TERRI: Oh yes, obsolutely.
RON: So you wont him to soy things like'You look beoutiful" or "You
know I con'l woil Io," you know, or "l would love to kiss you"?
Thot sort of thing?
TERRI: Yes, the otlention ond the openness. lwonl men who don't iust
queslion me but who ore willing to shore obout themselves too.
Lefs breok in here ond toke o look ol our story so [or. Ron is reolly doing
well wiih Terri. He got the question out ond she is reolly giving him some
informotion. As you reod this you should be osking yourself: whot is
Terri reveoling obout herself thot might help in the seduclion? Ron hos
leorned thot she is reolly turned on by o guy leoning forword on the
toble, so he puts thot doto point into his mind ond he'll use thot loter.
He'll leon forword ond show interest os soon os he con.
&0x$n&ie $l|c$lri8n$. $8rli 2
Let's look ol some more of the conversotion.
Do you hove ony questions for me?
TERRI: Yes, why ore you here?
TERRI:
Why om I here on eorth?
I meon ot this ploce ot this time.
To be with you. Why else would I be here?
TERRI: Bul we iust metl
RON: Well, I believe thot things hoppen for o reqson. Don't you think
thol's true?
TERRI: Yes.
RON: So I think this wos o good thing thotwe ore meeling ond tolk-
ing, ond I think moybe it wos meont to be. So from where I om siF
ting, moybe we could tolk ogoin. I would love to coll you ond go
out for coffee ond iust hove the fun continue becouse I would hote
for this lo be o one-time thing.
TERRI: All right, do you wonl my number?
RON: Yes, would you like to write it on my hond or write il on my
stomoch?
TERRI: Well, I think you con memorize if you ore reolly poying otten-
tion. ILoughs]
I
rruu,ilruUoilerilmrftilt
I om, bul perhops I should write it down too, iust to be sure.

llllllt h0 Tallt Ta l1l|rn8|r
Lefls teor oport the second holf of this interoction. She soys she wonls
guys who will shore obout themselves, so he osks her "Do you hove ony
questions for me?" to show her thot he is open to shoring obout himself.
She come bock with o silly question, 'lVhol ore you doing here?" Very
often, when o womon does something like this, i/s qn invitqtion to be
silly, on invitotion to ploy together in some woy. Ron picked up on thot
ond wos oble to ploy with whot she soid. He mode o ioke ond it went
over well. He wos willing to iust open up his mouth ond soy whqtever
come oul ond hove it be oll right. Remember whot we've soid before:
women ore looking to you lo see how well the inleroclion is going. lf you
seem confident obout it, if you seem ploful ond if you don't seem wor-
ried, then most of the time she is going to be okoy too.
RON: ln lhe end, it seemed reolly noturol to osk for the phone number. I
meon, il wos true-we were hwing o good time ond I did wont to
get trc know her better so I osked her if she would like to go out. lt
wosn't forced. lt felt noturol.
So often our students worry loo much during flirting interoctions. They
seem lo think, '1vell, I wqnt to do it perfectly, so every word needs to
line up with every other word ond it hos to be exoctly right."
Thot simply isn't lrue. As you reod fiese flirting inlerocfions, we hope
you're storting to understond thot flirting is nol o motler of "doing it per-
fectly." ll's o motter of showing up, risking, being curious, committing
yourself to being o source of certointy thot it's going to be okoy ond hov-
ing some fun with it. You'll see ogoin ond ogoin thot we hoven'l rewrit-
tr0mfiil$is $uGsti0ns" parr ?
ten these flirting diologs to moke them letter-perfect becouse thofs not
how life is, ond you shouldn't get the ideo fiqt it ever goes perfectly.
You'll see thot ifs not necessory for Romontic Conversotions to be per-
fect for flirting ond seduclion lo work. As you proctice you'll hove more
fun ond you will be o lot more seductive.
lltllflu filll[ 0F R[uE|lr[[8 tlt0llrD B0 ][ll?
ln this exomple, Ron is going to tolk to Terri ogoin. ln this conversotion,
he's going to osk the Romonlic Question 'tVhot kind of odventure would
be fun?" Notice how this question opens her up. lt is not necessorily
something thot is going to moke her melt with romontic feelings, like o
question obout her mosi romontic dote might, but it is olso low-risk ond
effective. Here it is:
It sounds like you olso volue fun.
TERRI: Yes.
RON: l've been thinking obout the ploces thot I like to go for odven-
tures. You know-the kind of ploces where you con go ond it's
reolly speciol, fun, exciting ond owoy from your normol doily life.
So if I wos toking you oul whot kind of on odventure would be
reolly fun for you? Would it be o doy trip together?
TERRI: Yes, o doy trip outside or o drive somewhere in the country or
o hike in some woods, somewhere there is o nice view, you know?
And we could sit on the hillside in the sun ond listen to the wind
through thc firll gross or leoves...
f
ul|ruioutboruouilSnllsnlwww.ebook3000.com

ll8tt, s0 xltr 1! wsrllsl}
RON: Wow thot sounds greot. Hove you done ony hiking in the
mountoins or hos it been more oround here?
TERRI: l've hiked in Howoii ond Alqsko but most of my hiking hos
been in Wisconsin. There ore no mounloins here.
RON: So troveling is o greol possion of yours, is it? Like seeing new
ploces ond going to new exciting outdoor ploces, like in Alosko?
TERRI: Yes, I spenl three weeks in Alosko.
RON: Wow whotwos thqt like?
TERRI: lt wos greot, iust driving oround comping in the different ports
of the stote. I took q troin from Anchoroge to Foirbonks ond thot
wos o wonderful experience, iusl seeing the middle of the wilder-
ness from the window of o troin.
RON: I don't get to meet o lot of women who ore such serious go-geF
lers or hqve thot much guls, so I reolly odmire thot obout you, thot
you ore oble to go on these fun odventures, you know?
TERRI: lt is fun, I do like thot.
Le/s iump in here ogoin ond tolk obout how Ron is doing, flirting with
Terri. Ron is reolly curious, ond his curiosity reolly helps guide him in the
conversolion ond helps the conversotion unfold eosily. For instonce,
when Terri tolks obout her trip to Alosko, Ron gets curious ond osks,
'lVhot wos thot like?" Thqt gives her more opportunity to shore obout
something she cores obout. Ron then compliments her by telling her thot
he doesn'l get to meet women like her very often ond telling her fiot he
*{}ll$'|&is $ir8$$i8'r$. $sst 2
odmires her odventuresome spirit. Tho/s o greot move-we ore olwoys
looking for something we con odmire obout the women we ore flirting
with, ond Ron did o greot iob odmiring Terqy.
RON: The other thing thot I keep osking myself is'lVhot trcpic hos the
iuice?" lt doesn't motter if I om not interested in Alosko or if I om not
interested in troveling; i/s whot lights her up, il's whot gets her going
on something she is possionob oboul. Therefore i/s importont trc
me. And if it reolly does light her up, it will ultimotely get me inter-
ested, even if l'm not interested d the stort.
Let's look ot the rest of this conversotion. Notice how Ron hos fun with
Terri ond iokes oround with her.
TERRI: Howoiiwos onoiher fovorite spot of mine. Hiking olong the
coost, you come ocross o sign thot soys, 'Tidol wove level, stoy
obove this sign." And you hope thot lhere's no tidol wove coming.
RON: Thot sounds pretty odventuresome. Are you telling me thot
behind thot pretty foce of yours is this hellcot, doredevil womon?
TERRI: [Loughs]Well, I om nol o doredevil. I do worry obout life ond
limb, but I enioy odvenlures. But not bungee iumping.
RON: But you ore somebody who pushes the envelope. Admit it-you
con odmit it to me right now. [She loughs] I meon, it is the tru$,
you ore loughing but it is true, you ore the one who goes to the
tidol wove. You like to come to the edge where it is iust olmost
sob enough ond then get pulled bock in, right?
il
ultuu fi lrlhtu0l|ffflruil,t|il1

llsu Ss klx Io Wolnsll
TERRI: Right.
RON: Well, thonk you
onswer out of youl
Ron's interoctions with
plolul with o womon
Conversotions.
for being honesl-we finolly get on honest
IBoth lough]
Terri ore greot exomples
ond to hove fun while
of being willing to be
conducting Romontic
l0lna0tio 0u8sti0ns. pnrt I
URSULA: Someone who enloys it.
I enjoy it, Ron Louis enioys it.
URSULA: Someone who fully enioys it with me ond who is reolly with
me. Becouse some people hove sex ond they ore not reolly with
you, but there is this other thing where you're reolly tuned into
eoch other ond you ore tololly communicoling with your entire
body, including your eyes, ond speoking ond everything, ond you
ore using evelf one of your physicol senses with the other per-
son-it is iust like nirvono to me, I iust think it is nirvono. Hove
you experienced thqt?
RON:
URSULA: I hove too. I meon, thot is the one time I reolly feel reolly
corefree-when I om with o mon I love.
This is o good exomple of being plolulwith o womon, being sexy ond
hoving fun. You con tell Ron is noi going to end up iust o friend with this
womon.
RON: lwqs shocked with the onswer she gove me to the question-l
hod no ideo thot she wos going to respond with something so sex-
uol. I remember soying to myself, "l con't believe she is soying
this." So I wos shocked obout thot. And thot odded to the fun of it.
Of course, you're going to get o wide voriety of responses from women.
Some women will be this responsive, some will be totolly unresponsive.
Thil il thc grcot thing obout hoving o high level of "throughpuf'with
womn ond hoving o lot of women in your system. When your numbers
uilaE'$ a il[ailu cal'BFl'0E lltpBl|lellcB?
This time the Romontic Question is 'lVhofs o totolly corefree experience
tor you?"
RON: I wos ot o dinner porty o couple doys ogo ond there were o lot
of people ond we storted tolking obout moments when people felt
corefree wifi someone of the opposite sex, ond this womon wos
tolking obout whot it is like when she is on o dote ond how she
feels free lo iust be herself, to moybe kiss o guy out of the blue or
to soy whotever it is she wonls lo soy. l'd be curious to know, if
you core lo shore-whot's o totolly corefree experience for you?
URSULA: Moking love.
RON: Wow, greot! Thot's whot I like to heor!
URSULA: Well reolly, it is iust o very free experience with somebody,
with someone who enjoys it.
RON: Someone like me?
I
Ituul0utm$tflmm,illwww.ebook3000.com

,l01$ *s lols ls ${sfn8ll
ore god ond you know how to tqlk to women, you'll be oble to find ond
focus on the ones who ore the most responsive, which mokes everything
in the seduction o lot eosier. When you find the ones thot ore thqt respon-
sive, you go for them ond you let go of the ones who ore resistnnt.
uHfl[ Rr8 lll[B]l$Elu Pt$$mAm
ln0ln0ll[$ r0l| u0ll?
ln this exomple notice how Dovid geis curious obout whot the womon is
soying, how he gets ploful ond how he osks questions to toke the inter-
oction further.
DAVID: l've been sod of conducting on informol survey obout this ond
i/s led to some pretty inleresting conversotions. For whotever reo-
son, lhere ore limes when you feel reolly connected to someone
else-it moy not be sexuol, it could be onyrvhere, but you iust for
whqlever reoson feel reolly connecled ond reolly possionote. So
l'd like to osk you: whol ore some moments in your life where you
feel intensely possionote ond reolly connected to somebody else?
CAROL: I iust love it when you ore hoving o reolly deep conversotion
with somebody ond everything else tunes out. I meon, it con hop-
pen ot o porty, for instonce. There con be oll kinds of people
oround you, ond noise, or ii could be iust the two of you qlone.
The importont thing is the two of you ore hoving this conversolion
ond suddently everything else tunes out.
DAVID: Does thol hoppen often for you?
a0$e*fii8 $lj8$tifit*" 0fl1'0 ?
CAROL: Not reolly.
DAVID: lfls hoppening right now, isnt it?
CAROL: [Loughs] I iust love fiot, when you ore reolly communicoting
with somebody ond you ore getting into the conversolion ond it
just goes deeper ond deeper ond you ore reolly tolking heort to
heort ond you feel completely with the other person, inside the
olher person, ond ogoin, it is iust thot greot thing where oll of o
sudden everybody else ot the porty iust disoppeors ond iust the
two of you ore suddenly there by yourself even though there is this
big bunch of noise going on oround you. h's like oll of o sudden
il's very quiel.
DAVID: Very cool.
CAROL: Yes, ond thot is iust on ideol kind of thing to hove in o relo-
tionship.
This went reolly greot. This womon is very responsive. Corol described
the kind of moment where she wos oble to feel possionotely connected,
ond it wos fun ond it creoted o greol, romonlic feeling between the two
of them. She olso gove Dovid some greot informolion: she kept empho-
sizing the imporlonce of o mon being with her. Dovid will be oble to use
this informotion in building o connection with her, ond use thot phrose
when he describes fiot experience to her. He con tell her how importont
it is for him to feel like he is with her ond more importontly con prove
thot by creoting o connection where she reolly feels like he is with her.
n
utCIut ll0utc$0llflllnrofifi

ll8Kl t8 mlt tS {{smsll
ulla[ R|'E s0[I' fau0||m
R0lllallrrc lll0u0$?
Now Ron is going ic osk Sue oboul romontic movies. Notice how he struc-
tures the question with the excuse ond the description. At this point they
hove been hoving o Romonlic Conversotion for o while ond she is pretty
lit up. She is veqy responsive ond obviously likes him. There is definitely o
sexuol vibe; he hos done oll of the things lo tqke himself out of the friend
cotegory.
RON: I wotch o lot of movies. I om kind of o movie buff.
SUE: Me too.
RON: l'm curious oboulwhotwomen feel ore romonlic movies,
romonlic choroclers or situotions they feel ore romontic, becouse
ollwomen seem lo hove o different definition of romonce.
SUE: Reolly?
RON: Some women like it when o guy is o greot doncer, some like it
when o guy is o greot fotheri you never know whqt q womon will
find romontic in o movie. So I would be curious to know, whot ore
some of your fovorite romonlic movies?
SUE: One thot comes to mind is lhe Eng/ish Potient.
RON: Oh yes.
SUE: Thot wos very romontic.
*slnaltis $tlssisns. !0t b tr
RON: Wos thot becouse of the scene, the romonce of the filming or
the sensuolity of it or wos ii somelhing else?
Sue soys thot IAe English Polient is her ideo of o reolly romontic film.
Rother lhon orgue with her obout it-to us, IAe English Pofi'enfwos most-
ly gloomy, octuolly-Ron got curious. Whot obout this gloomy film did
she find romontic? And how will knowing thot help him build o connec-
tion wifi her thot is both romontic ond seductive?
SUE: There were o couple of reolly romontic relotionships in the
movie, ond one wos between the morried women ond Rolph.
RON: So you con relole lo the women who wos morried, yet she wos
sleeping with somebody else?
SUE: Yes. Forgetting the morrioge port of it, they hqd on overwhelm-
ing physicol possion for eoch olher, ond thot wos iust very, veqy
exciting in the movie. And then fhere wos this other relotionship.
They iust hod to be together, tho/s oll.
RON: And I thought $ot wos very romontic thot they go through oll
this stuff to try to be together. And then there wos thol romonce
between the nurse ond this lndion soldier.
SUE: Did you think thot wos romontic? Oh, like there wos this one
scene, it wos so greot-he puts condles out oll the woy from the
house she wos living in oll the woy trc the born where he is stoy-
ing. lt wos iust reolly greot. She comes out ond it wos o poth for
her to follow right to him. And I think thot wos the first night they
moda love, they hod condles oll over ond it wos reolly romontic.
n
|ltutu.[0ut!$$ulmflillillwww.ebook3000.com

'le{lr 
$0 lal|{ lb wsnc[
RON: So you ore on old-foshioned romonlic, the clossic romontic. I
om iust using these tips for myself so when we get together loter I
will know to light condles oll over the bedroom ond to hove o troil
of condles for you.
SUE: Yeoh, ond dress yourself up, you know? Weor something reolly
sexy, something speciol. Put the oftershove on.
RON: Hove the wine reody for you.
SUE: Yes, exoctly.
RON: lfs going to be o good night, i/s going to be o good night.
SUE: Chocolotes, chocolobs.
RON: So you love chocolotes?
SUE: Yes, chocolote is supposed to be on ophrodisioc, you know.
RON: Yes, it is supposed to be, we con find out.
SUE: Thot must be why I like it.
As you con see, things ore reolly cooking between the iwo of fiem so
Ron is oble to push it further by moking references to the greot time they
ore going to hove together qnd to octuolly being in bed together. They
ore strongly sexuol references, but becouse of the connection they hove
built through the Flirting Moves ond Romontic Questions she wos
obsolutely fine with them.
RON: Yes, lwos thinking, "How om I going to moke this reol? How
con I toke everything she soid obout whot she finds romontic in
*8l|lall&i* &l}e$&ie'l$" pil!,fr I
lhese movies, how con I bring those imoges together with imoges
of her ond me together?" So I checked it out-l described us
logether in o bedroom together with o hoil of condles-ond she
liked itl
Notice how Ron risked reiection, but in o context in which o reiection
would most likely not hove been personol or horsh. lf the womon wos-
n'i inlerested in him romonticolly, she could very eosily hove simply
given o tepid onswer to Ron's remorks obout being in the bedroom with
her. She could hove soid, 'lVell, thot wouldn't work with me" or "l'd
hove lo know someone o long time before thot would ever hoppen" ond
it wouldn't hove even been o blonket reiection of him. lt iust would hove
been onother piece of informotion obout her; onother port of lhe conver-
sotion. lnsteod, she went right olong with it, tolking obout chocolote ond
ophrodisiocs. lt reolly pushed everything to the next level. Ron con be
foirly ossured ot this point thot she will respond positively when he goes
for the first kiss ond more.
ulla[ ua$ u0ll[ In0ffi Pa$$l0llaru cl|ll$[?
uila[ H u0llt' ]au0l'E0 |n0lnB[[ lll a H$$?
Ron is going trc strrt by osking Terri o Romontic Question obout her mosl
possionote crushes. When thot does not go exoctly where he expects it trc
go, nolice how he moves intrc the first-kiss questions. The point is, you con
tie Romontic Questions together. There is no low soying you con only do
one ond you hwe ic brce on onswer. lf it looks like something else would
work bcticr onca you hove sturted on one, go trc onother. lfs not o big deol.
n
ullu hout!11!!s!f lIf, {l{!!!

ll0l, tll lalli t0 u,$N[srl
Let/s check it out.
RON: I wos thinking the other doy. I wos remembering when I wos
younger, in high school, ond I wos thinking obout some of the
women I hod crushes on ond how nerve-wrocking il wos, feeling
exciting ond vulnerqble. Whot ore some momenls lhot you con
remember in your life, like when you hod o crush on somebody
bock then ond whot hoppened?
TERRI: Oh, wow.
RON: Like the first guy you hod o crush on, whot wos it like?
TERRI: ln kindergorten?
RON: lwos thinking obout in high school, but kindergorten is fine.
Kindergorten, you storted eorly!
TERRI: I hod two bofriends in kindergorten, bul they hod the some
nome so it wosn't reol confusing. High school, I hod crushes on
boys, but usuolly nothing come of it.
RON: Come on, lefs get some nqmes.
TERRI: So there would be Tom. Yes, I hqd o crush on him.
RON: Whot become of it?
TERRI: Something did hoppen there. We went steody for six months
when I wos l3 yeors old.
RON: Whot wos o crush where you looked ot the guy like you ore
looking ot me ond you iust felt like your heort pitter potter, ond
rhor kind of thing.
*sl|la|l&i& $usrsisns" pefl& 3
TERRI: Oh, let's see, ihere wos o Tom, thot's for sure. There were o loi
of Bobs, too.
RON: lwos thinking obout this too: the moments you ore kissing ond
you ore possionotely lost ond you ore soying to yourself 'This is
greol" ond it is so fulfilling to be with them ond you ore with them
ond your eyes ore closed ond you ore iust lost, iust getting into the
experience of it. Whot ore times for you, if you ore willing to
shore how you feel, wos it recently when you hove hod thot feel-
ing of enioying like your fovorite port of the kiss?
TERRI: Whot is my fovorite port of o kiss? Well, my fovorite port of o
kiss is someone thot knows how to kiss, thot helps. And-
RON: You ore blushing o little bit!
TE RRI:
lSmilesl
RON: The chemislry is there.
TERRI: So yes, someone who knows how to kiss. I love to kiss.
RON: Tell me some of the moments, if you ore willing to. Let/s soy we
ore kissing ond your eyes ore closed. Would this be o moment in
the kiss thot wos greot? Would it be ot the beginning, the middle
or...?
TERRI: lt would be ofter o little omount of time, but not o lot. You find
out reolly quickly if the kiss is greot.
RON: All right, greol, I understond thot. You con show me this loter.
n
uuU,[out$lot{glmruHiltwww.ebook3000.com

ll0lu ss l0llr ls w0{ll8rl
Ron stqrfi-.d with o Romonlic Question obout crushes but it didn't reolly
get to the kind of intensity thot he wos looking for. He wos looking for o
response like 'Wow, with my first crush in high school, Bob, I couldn't stop
thinking obout him ond we couldn'l keep our honds off eoch other."
lnsteod, he kept getting somewhol vogue ond innocent childhood crushes.
This is fine, ond it's exoctly the sort of thing thot will hoppen with women
on o regulor bosis. The \ /omon you ore flirting with probobly hos not
reod this book, so she moy nol know the responses she's "supposed" lo
give. Put onolher woy, fiese techniques work in brood srokes-$e
womon you ore with moy well be unresponsive to certoin questions or
moy wonder off topic or whotever. ln this cose, Ron decided to shift to
onother question, obout the best moment of o kiss, becouse there wos-
n'i much iuice wilh the first-crush question. And it worked-olmost
immediotely things storted going deeper ond he wos oble to moke o
flirting remork obout how she could show him the best moment of o kiss
loler on. Hod she been o little more responsive he could hove even gone
for giving her the first kiss ot thot point.
ulla['$ u0lll| rflu0l'fiB uaGa[l0ll $00[?
Dovid's Romontic Question, oboul Heothe/s fovorite vocotion spot,
leods into o lot of different iopics ond into o lot of different opportuni-
ties to flirt. Also notice how eosily the question drows her into tolking
obout things she cores obout ond oboui memories thot ore pleosont lo
her. All these good feelings ore getling connecled lo Dovid, leoving her
liking him more ond woniing to be with him.
&sll|sll$iti {ll$ti&is't$. pars I
DAVID: So I wos wotching this trovel show the other night ond I wos
wondering obout vocotions ond obout how I hoven't been on o
vocotion in o while. I wos wondering if you hove o fovorite voco-
tion spot or vocotion dreom? You know, perhops o ploce you hove
been thot blew you crwoy or o ploce where you reolly sort of iust
let go. Or moybe o ploce where you would reolly like to go. I wos
iust kind of curious obout your thoughts obout your ideql vocotion.
HEATHER: I reolly like to trovel. lwent to lrelond obout o yeor ogo,
ond thot wos pretty much the ideol vocotion. I went with o couple
of friends ond il wos o reolly greot trip. We didn't plon things
out-insteod of hoving this huge itinerory we just did whot we
wonted when we wonted to. Thott whot I like to do when I om
troveling. I don't like to hove lo be somewhere ot o certoin lime,
thol's how things ore in my life ot home. So it is reolly nice to be
oble to lust stoy somewhere if you like il or leove if you don't.
DAVID: I bet you get to hove experiences thot woy thot you would not
otherwise hove. You get lo see things thot normol tourists would
not gel to see.
HEATHER: Yes. lthink my ideolvocolion is obout hoving some time to
rest qnd meeting new people ond getting o feel for the culture wher-
ever I om. lfls obout seeing the countryside, hiking, wolking.
Lel's iump in o second. Dovid is doing some cool stuff with this womon
ond it's working. First, he found out where her ideol vocoiion wos. Once
he hod thot he storted osking her obout the best moment on thot voco-
tion, the one momenl when she felt most speciol ond omozed qnd when
n
uU0l,Iut0illlHfflnHn,tll

llsn tslilllrlslfilms'l
she felt like her life wos obsolutely ot its best. He let himself get curious
ond osk follow-up questions. You con see how thot is helping the whole
conversotion unfold in on interesting monner.
We should mention here $ot "fovorite vocotion" is not o very risky
Romontic Question in thol it does not oulomoticolly let her know you ore
romonticolly inlerested in her in the woy thot o question like 'tVhot is
your ideo of o perfect romontic dole?" would. Thot's okoy, becouse this
Romontic Question does nol exist in o void. Along wi$ the Romontic
Queslion, Dwid is doing the Flirting Moves. Also, he will osk her other
Romontic Questions ihot build in intensity ond riskiness qs his interoc-
tions with her unfold.
Dovid is olso getting lots of informotion obout her. He's leorning how she
likes to relox she doesn't like regimented reloxotion; she likes to be oble
to hong oul ond be spontoneous. This informotion will be helpful to him
when he storts designing their Seduction Dote: he'll be sure lo set up o
dote where she hos oplions ond where they con "follow lheir noses"
rqther thon one thot is more tightly regimented or slructured. (You con
reod more obout seduction dotes in our book How lo Succeed wilh
Women, ond in our other products.)
Le/s get bock to their conversotion.
DAVID: Wos there one ploce thot you wenl to where you thought
something like 'Vow this is so speciol, this is so omozing"? Or
wos there one experience you hod, moybe sitting on the beoch,
where you felt like 'Vow, I om herel This is my life, this is omoz-
ing." Moybe it wos someone you met, I don'l know.
*0tllan&il! tll8$ui0ns. pa$! ?
HEATHER: I think itwos when we were hiking oround in o notionol
forest. lt wos reolly beoutiful. lt wos hord to believe I wos reolly
there. I kept telling myself thot I wos in lrelond. lt wos reolly mogi-
col ond beoutiful. There were woterfolls ond rolling hills ond o
loke ond it wos reolly beoutiful.
And onother time wos when we were neor o little town ond we
were driving olong the coostline on this norrow little di* rood, it is
iusl o reolly bizorre driving experience. We reoched o ploce
where the whole rood wos token up by o lorge herd of cottle.
DAVID: Wow.
HEATHER: I guess fiey regulorly do thot, move lhem from one port of
the field to onother.
DAVID: So they were iusl honging out in the rood?
HEATHER: I guess thot wos the only woy. There wos this little boy with
o stick trying to get them in line ond trying to get them lo turn the
corner lo go on this other rood ond it wos iust veqy memoroble.
Thot would never hoppen oround here, ond it wos iust o reolly
funny experience.
DAVID: Yes, wow. Thot sounds greot, like one of those simple, perfect
momenis you'll remember forever ond olwoys feel good obout. I
often think obout those moments when you feel like you reolly
hove lived life. You know, those moments thot loter in your life you
look bock on ond you qre reolly hoppy thot you took the opportu-
nity thot come your woy. lt sounds like you ore pretty hoppy you
ftcok thot opportunity to go on thot trip ond to find out whot there
t
llltru.Ifilb0itl$rilt[f,lnon hllwww.ebook3000.com

'|l,$ 
*ll n8{ ?s is|lfrlsn
wos in it for you. So whot obout your future? Are there ploces thot
you fontosize oboul going to thot reolly turn you on to think obout?
Let's breok in ogoin. Dovid found out obout her post fovorite vocolion,
which led to her shoring o simple, wonderful momenl thot she will
olwoys remember. Now Dovid's curiosity hqs token him in the direction
of the future.
HEATHER: I hove olwoys wonted to go to Novo Scotio. I reolly don't
know o lot obout it but l'm interested in the music l've heord from
thol region, ond I understond thot o lot of people who live there
hove Scottish oncestors.
DAVID: Oh, wow.
HEATHER: And I hove heord thot the counlryside is reolly beoutiful
ond thot the music is greol. Like I soid before, one of the best
things obout troveling is meeting people who ore there.
DAVID: I con tellyou ore someone who reolly cores obout connecting
with people, moking reql connections. I find thot reolly ottroclive,
so thot is reolly o cool thing.
Dovid ended by odmiring something obout her-thot she reolly cores
obout moking reol connections, which hoppens to be true, ond by telling
her thot he found thot ottroctive, which olso hoppens to be true. ln this
woy he mode the Romontic Question even more romontic by finding her
interest, odmiring it ond telling her $d becouse of it she's the kind of
womon lo whom he's ottrocted. These lost moves took the whole inter-
oction to o more personol level.
l0mafltio 0il8$ti0n$" pilrt 2
uHa[ ua$ I[ ilff8 t[ll$ll uOil
ft]lBu UOU UB]|$ Iil IOUB?
Now we're going to heor Ron tolk to Terri ond osk her some more
Romontic Questions. You'll notice thot ot the beginning he gives the
excuse ond the queslion, but not the description. The reoson for thot is
thot he is in the flow with her ond the conversotion, so there is some flex-
ibility. Until you get good ot it, you reolly should do oll three ports of the
Romonlic Question.
Also, notice thot Ron uses the queslion "Do you believe in love ot first
sight?" Wqtch corefully how he does thot, becouse, os you probobly
know, if you go up to o womqn in o bor ond soy, "Hey boby, do you
believe in love ot first sight?" you will probobly get nothing more from
her thon o drink thrown in your foce. But if you structure it properly, the
woy he does it here, you con reolly gel o conversolion going. He does-
n't leod with thot question but builds up to it, so it seems quite noturol.
RON: You know, I wos tolking to o friend of mine ond we were tolking
obout different times she hos been in love ond whot it wos like,
ond so I would be curious to know whot ore times in your life
when you suddenly felt like you knew you were in love?
TERRI: Oh wow, how mony do you wont to know obout?
RON: I iust wont to know oboul one or two. I con recoll whot it wos
like when you soy trc yourself, 'This person is greo/' ond you love
being with hem ond it is olmost like the world becomes o rosy picture.
r
lrlllu luutlriutlr0lllrMls,mlll/hll

lltit ! t{t l8lx l0 lf{0r!$n
TERRI: Right, 'This person is perfed." The chemisiry is there, the com-
mon interests ore there, the wit ond wormth ond ployfulness ore
there. The ployfulness is importont, so lhose things come together,
ond so you soy, "This is it, this is greol."
RON: So it is greot.
TERRI: You iust go oround ond gush.
RON: Do you believe in love ot first sight? ls thot possible?
TERRI: Oh yes.
RON: ls it hoppening right now, os we speok?
TERRI: [Loughs] l'm nol going to tell you thot!
RON: Whqt ore the secrets? Does it hoppen to you, love ol first sight
or lust ot first sight?
TERRI: Lust ol first sight, yes, love ot first sight, no. lt might loke o cou-
ple of sights, though.
RON: A couple of moments?
TERRI: Yes, pretty quickly, usuolly in o few doys.
l[llt[ Rl|B U0ll[ ]au0Fl[0 R0lnallnG Da[B$?
This time, Ron is tolking to Terri ond he is going tc osk her obout romon-
tic evenings trcgether. One thing to notice is how he brings the things she
soys bock to his relotionship with her ond iS inevitoble success by soying
things like 'You ore giving me lors of good tips on where I con loke you'"
&smafiti8 &uGsais|l$" p8f$ tr
RON: lwould be curious, whot ore some of the best first dotes you've
ever been on? When you meel someone ond it is going greot ond
you might meet for coffee-like we might be doing soon-ond
fiings ore good ond then you go out on o more romontic dole.
Whot qre some romqntic dotes you con recoll thot went greot?
TERRI: Storting out with dinner ond iust wolking oround, moybe
downtown, ond seeing the night sky from vorious ploces, sorf of
checking out whofs here, whofs there, whot new clubs ore there.
Just kind of exploring together. Then wolking bock to the cor ond
thinking, "l don't wont lo go home" ond he soys lo me, "Do you
wont lo go home yet?" ond I soy, "No, not me." Jusl continuing,
finding o quiet ploce... Going to eoch club, opening the door, soy-
ing, "No, too loud," closing the door ond moving on to the next
one. Jusl not wonling the evening to end, iust being together, iust
tolking ond wolking.
RON: So whot is it qbout thot thot is so omozing to you? You were
together wolking oround, ond whot is it obout thot thot is so
romqntic or sensuol to you?
TERRI: Just the wonting to stoy together, wonting to know more obout
the other person to sort of groduolly getting closer, iust sort of
bumping into eoch other iust sod of holding honds, iust step by
step, physicolly getting o llt bit closer, leorning more ond more
ond being ouldoors too, iust enioying the night sky ond enjoying
the sights ond sounds together. lf you were in some exotic ploce,
you would probobly lose your focus, I think, on the other person.
tl
llilltu h0ull0lmlllunuil !m,hll
www.ebook3000.com

llllrNr bs Ia$ a w8m8ll
RON: So you ore giving me o lot of good tips on where I con toke
you, is thot whot you ore telling me?
TERRI: Right.
This womon gove Ron q lot of informotion when he osked obout her
ideol romontic dote, ond he got curious ond wonted to boil it down to
the bottom line. So he osked her, "So whot is it obout thot thot is so
omozing Ioyov?" And thot deepened her even more into the beling she
liked so much.
h's worth noting thot you con use the question 'nVhot is it obout thot?"
ony time o womon is describing on experience thot she enioyed' She
enioys going from club to club, iust wolking oround with o guy? Asking
'tVhot is it obout thot thol wos so greot?" will help her focus even more
on those feelings you wont her to be hoving with you.
lf you listen lo o womon's onswers to your Romontic Queslions, she will
often outline whot her ideol dote is. You will then use thot informolion
when you construcl o seduction dote with her. ln this cose, Terry is telling
Ron thot one thing thot might moke her hoppy is wolking oround down-
town, holding honds ond exploring. He's creoled o connection with her,
creoted some romontic feelings ond discovered o potentiol plon for
seducing her. Greot!
lOmailli0 0u8sti0[s, lam 2
uilffi t$ u0m rau0l||[B |n0lnBIlE rll a fir$$?
DAVID: I wos tolking to o friend of mine recently obout kissing. We
were wolching on old movie on W where there wos o lot of kiss-
ing going on ond we gol inlo o conversotion obout the whole lost
ort of kissing. You know, people dont think obout thot enough.
Oh, logree.
DAVID: I like everything thot your normol guy likes, but sometimes I
ihink I like kissing more thon your overoge guy does.
SUE: Oh, thofs greot.
DAVID: I wqs thinking obout
whot is your fovorite
moment in o kiss? There ore so mony different stoges to o kiss,
you know? Like you ore oboul to kiss, then you stqrt to kiss, then
you ore reolly inio the kiss, then there's the first momenl your
tongues touch... And you could be kissing someone ond the world
iust seems to stop, you know? So whot is your fovorite moment in
o kiss?
SU E: I just love thot very first instont when your lips come together.
There is nothing like it. lt gels good ofbr thot too. But you know,
you ore seporole, you ore seporole, you ore seporote, then you
get closer, closer, closer, you know you ore going to kiss ond then
you know the lips touch. Oh, to me thofs iust sensotionol.
DAVID: Hove you ever hod one of those times where you ore obout to
kiss somebody ond i/s winler ond there's stotic electicity ond there
il o littlc rpork from your lips to theirs, right before your kiss?
t
utur! i0ut0r{000film|m/tdlr

lloul tr8 TeNl{ }h $i,$mFn
SUE: [Loughs] I think thot hos hoppened. But I think it wos his broces.
DAVID: Thot moment iust before it hoppens is my fovorite momenl
too, I think.
SUE: Yes, iust the very inslonl when your lips first touch.
DAVID: Especiolly for the first time with someone ond you reolly like
them ond you reolly trust them.
S U E: Especiolly if they know how to kiss. I meon, I hove been out with
men thd hove been morried ond do not know how to kiss.
Things ore going greot. She's responsive to the question, so thofs reolly
greol news, ond she's getting used to shoring on this level obout such
intimote topics ond hoving if be o good time.
We'll tolk more loter obout the first kiss, but for now, notice how this
Romontic Question could leod to o first-kiss situotion. As they shore
more deeply obout kissing, ond os the vibe becomes more intimote, it
would be o simple motter for Dovid to leon over ond soy something like
'lVhot o greot ideq, I think l'll kiss you right nov/' ond do it.
DAVID: So how do you kiss? Whot would your odvice be for me?
Le/s soy you ond I ore kissing, hypotheticolly, ond if we got to
know eoch other thot woy, whot would be o good kiss?
SUE: Well, I don't like o first kiss where your mouth is honging com-
pletely open. Thot is iust too much bo soon. Thot is iust gross.
Your lips should be iust slightly ported, ond your lips need to be
very reloxed ond flexible. When you touch eoch other's lips, you
*0m8fi&i8 $llaslii$ll$, $ilf$ I
should try to moke the whole lip touch their whole lip. And then
you con just slightly move your lips, like o gentle mossoging kind
of movement, so you ore reolly using your lips like fingers. You
know, you ore reolly filling up the person's lips with your lips, if
you con imogine.
DAVID: I con imoginetyou ore moking me wont to try thot out, proc-
lice my kissing.
This is o spot where octuolly toking thot first kiss would be o fine thing
lo do. Dovid could leon ocross ond soy, 'You meon, something like
this?" ond kiss her exoctly os she described.
uilffi Rt'E u0lll| tau0l|ffi0
R0|Ilall[lc |n0uE$? lt
DAVID: I hove been wotching o lot of different movies lotely. l've been
in sort of o film-festivol mode oround my house. I meqn, I like
oction films but olso hove been getting into more romontic kind of
films, like When Horry Met Sally.
SUE: llikethotone.
DAVID: I iust love lhose scenes where o womon is being swept off her
feet ond iust reolly oble to iusl totolly let go intrc some sort of
whirlwind romonce. And I wos iust wondering, whd qre some of
your fovorite romontic scenes or romontic movies?
n
l|ll,ut [0utl0tllllillu0ilffit hllt www.ebook3000.com

ll$l{rbs lalll I0 }{0msll
SUE: Well, you know, I om glod you mentioned When Horry Met
So//y, couse it is one of my fovorite movies. And I hove o fovorite
scene too-it is when Horqy ond Solly ore ol o New Yeor's Eve
porty but they ore not in o relotonship with eoch other, but they
hove both tried relotionships with other people, ond there is o
momenl when Horry oll of o sudden he looks ot her ond he reol-
izes thot she is the one ond thot he loves her. He gets q look on
his foce, you con reod his mind, he is iust like looking ot her with
love in his eyes.
DAVID: Wow, thot's reolly cool. I hove olso been looking ot some of
the Cory Gronl movies. Like him ond Audrey Hepburn in
Chorade.
SUE: Oh, CharadelThot is one of my fovorite movies, I hove thot
movie.
DAVID: lwould love to see thot film ogoin: the woy they ploy together
ond how Cory Gront is olwoys chonging identies ond they hove
such fost ropport ond ore so witty.
SUE: Thot is such o greot movie, ond romontic. lt is so clever ond
romontic. I reolly love oll the movies Cory Gronl mode, I reolly
love Io Cotch A lhief There is o greot moment when Groce Kelly
iust kisses the heck out of him.
DAVID: Yep, I remember thot.
SUE: She iust like tokes him. Thot is o greol scene.
DAVID: Whot is thot greot movie he mode wifi lngrid Bergmon?
$mansil} &l|es&i$1t6. $Er& t
SUE: He wos pretending to be o morried mon so he would not get
committed in his relotionships. I con't think of the nome but thot is
o reolly good movie.
DAVID: Well, it's good to get connected lo o women who knows some
of those films. You know whot I think would be fun one night is to
get together, cuddle up together, get some popcorn ond wotch
Chorade or somelhing like thot.
SUE: Yes, thotwould be fun.
c0|lcil$r0[
You now know obout osking Romontic Questions. You hove seen the
spectrum of risk thot those questions con cover ond how ihey creote con-
versotion, intimocy ond openings for going deeper into your connec-
tions with o womon. You've seen how using Romontic Questions does o
lot to keep you out of the friends zone ond creotes conversotions thot o
friend would never hove with o womon.
The next step: loking tolking further. .
U
ullllu Illul!uutl00lldubilltlil!tll

cltfp[El'n
mffillg mHllls rllrru0r
There ore other importonl steps to seducing o womon beyond simply
being oble to tolk to her. You need to get her number or emoil oddress
ond sei up the dote. You need to be oble to tolk to her on the dote-
okoy, we've covered fiot in exhoustive detqill-ond you need to be oble
to go for the first kiss.
ln our doting cooching proctice, we get lots of questions qbout these
issues, so the first porl of this chopter will be in question ond onswer
formot. Then we'll tolk obout going for the first kiss.
For further informotion obout everything covered in $is chopter ond to
leorn obout where to meet women/ Priming Dotes, Seduction Dotes ond
much, much more, check out our book How fo Succeed wilh Women,
ond, of course/ our website, howtosucceedwilhwomen.com.
ll0l[ [0 R$ff FOl' [ilB Pil0n8 ll[lnBGl'
Men often osk us how to get o womon's number or osk her oul. There's
\
no trick trc it, os you'll see from this O & A.
www.ebook3000.com

l|$rf, &{} lul& fi, u,8nl$ll
QUESTION: Hey guys-l iusl wonled to osk how lo close the deol
with o girl. After tolking trc them br o while I still hove trouble get-
ting their numbers or osking them out on dotes. I would oppreciote
your odvice.
ANSWER: This is simpler thon you might think. After chotting with o
womon for o while ond doing some of the flirting moves so she
knows yov're interested, you simply sey, "Hey, you seem cool.
Whot would it be like if we went out for o cup of coffee sometime?
Could I hove your emoil oddress or phone number?" lf she soys
yes, try lo set up the dote right then.
l/s reolly jusl o motter of opening your mouth (oL os Ron colls il,
your "pie trop") ond risking reiection by osking her.
ll$I|lx il0 Pil0llB u0 R$[ Offi l[0lnBll
Mony o successful dote lives or dies on how you use the phone. You'll
see in these questions thot we consislently give one piece of odvice: get
her emoil oddress!
I reolly like this girl in school (we ore both in college). I think she is
responsive whenever I tolk with her ond I don't think she hos o
boyfriend. I got her number ond she soid I could coll her, bul l've
cqlled severol times ond she hosn't colled bock. Whot should I do?
Should I leove her olone?
When o womon doesn't coll you bock, it does nol meon thol she
isn't inlerested in you. Never expecl o womon to coll you bock,
Q:
la$ins &lllills f*tfiIer
especiolly ol the beginning of your seduction of her. Shocking os it
moy seem, o womon who is interested in you willvery likely not
coll bock. Of course, neither will o womon who is not interested,
so you jusl con't use collbock frequency os o meosure of how
much she likes you.
So when should you coll her? When you wont to. But don't keep
lewing messoges-simply coll. lf she onswers, greol, but only leove
o messoge once in o while. lf ofter the third messoge she hosn't
colled you bock, she's not interested, ond tho/s too bod. Time trc
move on.
Sodly, the phone con become o reol stumbling block. Don't worry
fiot she might think you ore weird for colling-remembe6 she's
looking lo you to see whether or not she should bel weird obout
things. lf you don't think ifs weird to coll her, odds ore she won't,
either.
This problem points tro the imporlcnce of getting her emoil oddress.
Set up the dote vio emoil or o combinotion of emoil ond telephone
ond you'll be woy oheod of the gome.
How do I deolwifi onswering mochines when trying to set up o
time ond dote for the Priming Dote? I hote to keep colling, trying
to cotch her in person, especiolly becouse Cqller lD ond *69 con
moke it sooo eosy to find oui who iust colled you.
This is o reol problem ond con kill o romonce before it even gets
ltqrlcd. Howover, there is q woy to block coller lD. lt vories from
Q:
A:
tt
llruu irull[rllouud[fiillt*llll,tlll

l|slll t$ lsltl lb w0mss
qreo to oreo, but it's often occomplished by dioling *62, ihen the
number-coller lD shows you os "Privote Number." Diol *62, then
the number. lf you get the mochine, hong up. Check your phone
book before trying this; *67 moy nol work in oll oreos.
Of course, fiis doesn't meon you shouldn't ever leove o messoge.
Just don't leove more thon three of them. And how you do this
depends o lot on how hot o leod the womon is. lf you hove greot
ropport with her qnd hove flirted wirh her mony times ond ifs pretty
cleor she's iust being scotterbroined, you con soy something like "l
hove trc tellyou, I hove o policy. I don't meon irc be meon, but I cqn't
leqve more thon three messoges wifiout getting o coll bock. lf you
don't get bock to me, I won'l be oble to coll you for o long time. I
like you ond you seem like o greol womon, but thofs iust whofs up.
Anylvoy, my number is..." This isn't heovy; you're not yelling ot
her...iust telling her the woy it is. You oren't upset, iust strrting the
focts.
lf she doesn't return your colls ofter three messoges, we think she's
probobly not intere$ed. lf you see her, don't mention the colls-do
not confront her obout itl Flirt with her more ond try to set up o dote
right thenl
Q: Since I begon studying How to Succeed with Women obout o yeor
ond o holf ogo/ over ond over ogoin, l've become exlremely suc-
cessful. l've reoched the point where I con get olmost ony single
womon's phone number ond I now hove o high success role o[
hoving sex on doles.
nftinrfiilltins ftrmsr
However, the big snog l'm hitting lotely is ofter getling the girl's
number. l've hod obout l0 girls over the post monfh who seem
veqy ollrocted to me give up the phone number, ihen either never
coll bock or moke up stupid excuses to not go out. l'm used to
hoving ot leost three dotes per week ond l've hod none for severol
weeks now so it's frustroting.
You certoinly ore hoving some solid success, ond thot is greol.
Whot you ore bumping up ogoinst is o very common pottern
we've noliced with our sfudents: success ond foilure seem to come
in woves. Thot's port of the seduction life. By woves, we meon thot
there seem to be trends in doting thqt ore outside of your control,
bosed in some sort of rqndomness or luck. And it's weird: some-
times every womon colls bock-somelimes none do. Somelimes
every womon you dote wqnts lo sleep with you. Sometimes there
ore periods of no sex. Somelimes every womon you interoct with
is q blonde. Sometimes they oll seem to be schoolteochers.
Stronge though these trends moy seem, they ore normol. And in
time, the trends olwoys furn.
ln the meontime, here ore some other pointers we invite you to refed on:
How long do you woit to coll the womon ofter you get the num-
ber? Perhops you ore woiting too long to coll ond set up the dote.
Moybe you should try to tie down the dote ot the some time you
get the phone number.
Are you octively doing the three-step reiection process when things
don't work oul or ore you getting demorolized?
lltlllu.[nllh$ruild$llls,nwb$lwww.ebook3000.com

fifi$ s$ lfflll f0 $jslNl$ft
ln cose you've forgoften, the three-siep reiection process is:
l. Remember thot doting is o numbers gome. You will probobly hove to
heor o certoin number of nos before you get o yes, so this is one more
no you won'l hove to heor ogoin on your woy to the inevitqble yes from
someone else.
2. Chonge your interpretotion of why she reiected you from something
thot hqs to do with you lo something thot hos to do with her or with life.
"l guess she didn't heor me." "Looks like she's wropped up in her own
world." "Perhops her dog iust died." Remembe4 iusl becouse on explo-
notion is poinful doesn'l meon you hove to believe it. Find on explono-
tion thot is not poinful for you ond proctice believing thot.
3. Redirect your ottention fo something else. Don't dwell in the reiec-
tion-find something else-onyhing else*ond letyourself get obsorbed
in it.
lf they don't coll you bock, do you then ossume they ore not intrer-
ested ond not coll them ogoin? We recommend thot you expecl
them not to coll you bock qnd thot you coll o number of times-
soy, three times-before you give up on them. With eoch coll, oct
os though the previous coll never hoppened. Never confront o
womqn obout nol colling you bock.
Do you ever gel their emoil oddresses? This mighr be o more efbc-
live woy to seduce them. lf they ore busy moybe emoil is more effi-
cient-ond you con use Romonlic Questions, Deepening ond other
seduction moves lo "pre-seduce" lhem vio emoil before the dotre.
A:
xafiills trsllri'}{ ntrtrmp
nillllg illng$ tlllult0t' ffi []na[
When is o good time to stort sending romontic letters viq emoil? I
hove known this girl for qbout two weeks. Extremely hot. I hove to
shoke guys' honds everywhere I go just becouse they hove seen
me with her. I don't wont to push it too fost with the romontic tolk,
but I olso wont her to think romonticolly obout me. I olso hove her
home oddress if you would like to odd onything there...
Good work on the first steps-going out with o womon you find
ottroctive. Now for $e nexl step-turning mindless honging out
into somelhing romontic ond sexuol.
You don't soy much obout your relotionship now. Whofs it like?
Are you kissing? Moking out? Hoving sex? Heck, ore you even
holding honds? Does she know you ore not iust o friend? This stuff
is importont.
Since you ore relucicnl to mqke romontic trrlk with her, we con
deduce thot you ore probobly not hwing sex with her. You must
stort showing your romontic interesl in her. You must be compliment-
ing her, for one thing. lf you ore noi complimenting her os o womon
or showing your romontic interest ihen you ore reolly in trouble-
she moy be thinking of you os q friend olreod.
Emoil is greot becouse it gives you the opportunity to soy things,
especiolly romontic things, thot you might not normolly hove the
nerve trc soy lo o womon. lt gives you on opporfunity lo run "visuol-
izolionr' on her. Rememberi when you describe something trc some-
T
utCIt!,i0uhtm0fi ulbium,oilull

llBlll t0 lrllr n llr0n8ll
one, she hos to go inside ond imogine whot you ore describing iust
to be oble to trock with whot you ore tolking obout. lf I describe o
cow you hqve lo imogine it. By the some bken, if you describe on
experience trc someone, she hos to go inside ond imogine hwing
rhot experience in order to understond whot you ore tolking obout.
So you wqnt to writre emoils thot describe wonderful feelings of love
ond romonce tc the womon of your dreoms. This will gei her in the
right stote of mind for your nexl move.
We suggest love poems. Seorch online or go to o bookstrore or
librory ond look under love poetry. Write her emoils thot soy things
like "l sow this poem ond it mode me think of you. I thought l'd
shore it." Then enclose the poem. Feel free lo use the some Poem on
o number of women, iust so long os they don't know eoch other.
ln your siluotion, romontic emoils should be port of your
opprooch. You should be showing your romontic interest ond tok-
ing her on o Seduction Dote. You should hove on outcome in mind
for eoch dote-kissing her? hoving sex? Be sure to pursue other
women-don't let her be your one-ond-only hope-ond be willing
to risk finding out whot she thinks of you. lf you hoven't kissed her
yet, you should soon. Whotever you do, don't let this thing remoin
"moybe friends, moybe potentiol lovers." Be the mon, push the siF
uotion ond find out.
Q:
lallills lrllliw Srr$llsr
Iafilllg rllrllg$ talttll0l|
How con I go from hond-holding to something more intense? I find
I con get to the point where l'm sitting on the couch with o
womon, wotching o movie ond holding honds. But whot nexf?
You've heord the soying "God is in the detoils"? Well, so is sex, os
it turns out. lf you con bring exquisite, detoiled ottention to even o
tiny port of her body, she'll go nuts for more. The mistoke most
men moke is they wont to move on to something big*ond fost. To
odvonce from hond-holding to something more, you hqve to focus
on being smollond slow
This meons slowly coressing the polm of her hond or ftcuching your
fingertips fic hers ond reolly bringing your ottenlion trr the beling of
the sensolion. Or you might iust lightly stroke the inside of her wrist.
You do this to drow her ottention ic the subtleties of the ficuch you
ore shoring. Also, toke your time with it. Most of our students ore
ofroid thot if they don't rush sexuol inbroctions, sex will never hop-
pen. But it turns out the opposite is lrue. lf you show thot you ore
reolly willing fic give her detqiled, ottrentive touching ond thot you
oren't pushing things, it will very often drow her towords you. Also,
if you ore willing trc show thot you hove some foith thqt sex will hop-
pen-you show this by not pushing things too hord, or too fost-
you will be very oltroclive b her. You won't be like oll the bone-
heoded guys who either ore friends becquse they show no intrerest
ot oll or ore ierks becouse they try trc push her into sex.
t
!ilIu,hil!b$mmdutthuomm unrhlhwww.ebook3000.com

l|0ls &0 trel|| 18 $J0msE
You moy olso wont to hold eye conficct while you ore doing this
touching. Don't force il if she turns to look ot you, hold her goze'
Be willing to look intrc her eyes ond tc have her look inb yours'
Show her you ore willing to hold thot intimote contrrct. She'll probo-
bly be looking ic you for whether i/s okoy or not to connect so
strongly, so let yourself believe hot i/s okoy-don'f woit for her to
believe i/s fine before you do.
This is o good time to comment on the energy between you'
Commenling on the energy drqws her otlenlion to it without it seem-
ing like you ore lorcing onything. Soying, '!Vow this energy
beween us is reolly omozing" con do o lot to intensify her owore-
ness ond occeptonce of thot energy. lf she soys, 'Yes, it reolly feels
greol," tho/s when you might wqnt lo kiss her. You con either slowly
leon in ond kiss her without soying onything or use the onnounce-
ment method ond soy something like "Dont ponic, l'm going to kiss
you now."
Commenting on ihe energy is olso o greot lesl ic see whether she is
reody for rhe first kiss or not. lf she soys, "Eh, I don't feel much ener-
gy," then you know to not bother trying to kiss her' lf she soys, 'Yes,
I feel it ond it reolly scores me, I think we should slow things down,"
then you know to bock off for o while until she is comfortoble. Often
women will pose some sort of problem ot fiis point ic see how you
will hondle il 'tVill he be potient wih me or will he orgue, poul or
be o ierk?" Be potient, don't resist her resislonce ond go bock to
hond-holding. Move closer ogoin lobr.
Q:
A:
lellitls T8lfii{ls lm$fisp
These steps will help build the reol energy ond intimocy between
you ond open the golewoy for more conlocl.
illllll|ls R tl|rc]l0 l]lm R 10uB1t
Sometimes men wont to toke tolking further when they hoven'l even
done the oppropriote tolking first. lf o womqn thinks of you os o friend
ond you ore interested in her romonlicolly then you must loke oction to
toke things forfher. Here's o question obout thot.
ls it possible to turn o womon from o friend into o lover even if
you've known her os o friend for o few months?
Yes, it is possible to turn o womon from o friend to o lover if you
know whot to do-but even then it won't work every time. Some
women keep you os o friend becouse you've been too scored to
moke your romonlic inlerest known or becouse you've mode o
bunch of boneheod mistokes ond olienoted her (ot leost temporori-
ly) from being romontic. Perhops you've mqde fort iokes, soid col-
lous things or treoted her like o buddy-nothing too serious. These
ore women you've got o shoi of chonging into lovers.
Other women hqve you squorely in the iust friends cotegory ond
you oin't goin' onyrvhere, pol. These women moy be morried or in
relotionships, they moy be difficuh, high-mointenonce women or*
the sod foct-they simply moy not like you very much ond iust keep
you oround br when they hove nothing better to do. You ore unlike-
ly ic furn lhase women intrc lovers, but by trying, ot leost you'll get
I
u$u.hlllbm00$ilultIu0lllil t0n,bill

ll0l[ t0 lslfi lff l{01{N8ll
them out of your life ond cleor some psychic spoce for women who
do wont to be sexuol with You.
So whot con you do trc get "iusl o friend" ic become your lover?
L,e/s look ot the bosic primer on friends-to-lovers, Louis & Copelond
style.
pursue other women. lf you wont ic furn o friend inb o lover,
it is cruciol beyond words thot she not be your one-ond-only-hope
for sex. You must be pursuing olher women, flirting with other
women, romoncing other women ond being sexuol with other
women. Pursuing ond being successfi;l with other women is the only
woy to hove reol freedom oround the friend you ore trying to
seduce. lt will give you o sense of potience with her, remove ony
sense of desperotion you moy be feeling oround her ond moke you
less woiloble-qnd thus more oliroclive-trc her'
Acr like o lover, nor like q femqle friend' Pop quiz, hot-
shot whot does o mon who becomes o womon's friend do difbrent-
ly with her thon onother womon would? Answer: nothing. Morol: if
you wonr o womon trr see you os o sexuol mon, rolher thon bosicol-
ly os on ugly womon, then you musl ocl differently lhon onother
womqn would. This is true for women you ore iust meeting os well
os for women who hwe known you for o while ond olreody think of
you os o friend. Bottrom line: you must flirt with her, weird os it moy
feel to you the first time you do it. You must flirt'
so often q mon who ends up o womon's friend fulls into the trop of
wonting lhe womon to bel combrtoble obove oll else'
l0liins lfllfii[c tumnsn
Consequently, he is indecisive ond oppeors weok trc her, olwoys
neryous, olwoys woiting for her ic relox before he reloxes. He does-
n'l ever flirt or soy onything romontic becouse he doesn'l wonl trc
risk moking her uncombrtoble. Only if he hos o cleor signol thot
flirting is okoy will he do it. This will never work.
lf you ore going trr be seductive with o womon, you musl be willing
to provide the certointy thot everything in the interoction is okoy-
even if i/s romonlic. Thot meons thot you believe il's okoy ond let
her know it. You don't oct like lhere's o problem-you oct like every-
rhing is greot! Since she's probobly been looking irc you ond your
behovior ic know how to feel obout things, most of the time this will
octuolly help her relox.
You musl srort doing oll rhe flirling moves. You olso must
strrrt using the flirting skills. You must osk 'Whot's the stoqy behind
lhot?" You must proctice Situotionol Fli*ing ond the Goodbye
lntroduction. You must condud Romontic Conversolions ond
Deepening Conversotions. When you stort incorporoting lhese
behoviors intc your lib, women will nof wonder whether you ore o
wimpy friend or o potentiol lover. You'll be o potentiol lover every
time-or she'll get rid of you. (More on thot below.)
Be upbeor qnd be b.rsy. The chonces ore you ore kind of
depressed when you're with the femole friend you wont lo hove sex
with, comploining obout your life ond generolly being o whiner. You
must strcp doing ihot right owoy. She should find herself thinking,
'tV'or, he seems pretty hoppy, even wilhout me. l'd better get o
sulrutmrmnlulbhumil tm,lill
www.ebook3000.com

llslu $s Tsllr l0 y{0mell
piece of thot!" rother thon 'Wow, this guy is o downer." You must
ocl more upbeot, like you hove something going on in your life' The
best woy to do this is to pursue olher women {see obove).
One mon we know did thls with o womon he wos interested in. She
hod doted him o few times, then decided they should be iust friends.
("1'm very excited," she trcld him. "l'm excited you ore going trc be
my new best friend." Arrrgl) He storted following the doting fundo-
menlols oggressively ond soon found himself being sexuolwith
onolher womon. ln thot ploce of sexuol obundonce, he wos oble to
be hoppier ond less woiloble oround lhe womon who wonted tc be
iust friends.
He told us, "She colled to lell me she'd be trco busy trc see me for o
while ond I wos oble trc honestly soy it wos iust fine-thot I wos reol-
ly looking forword irc seeing her ond thot we'd get 1cgether whenev-
er we both found the time. Her response? 'But I reolly wont lo see
you!' By being hoppy ond busy, l've been oble t'c keep her pursuing
me, ond l'm confident l'll end up in bed with her." He's free irc be
polient with her, to work the seduction slowly, ond not be ottoched
to the outcome. Be upbeot ond busy if you wont to turn o friend into
o lover.
R.efuse to snoy iust friends. lf you do whot we soy, things will
slrrl seeming more romontic with the women you befriended. She'll
either get with the progrom (ond probobly soy, 'You've chonged!")
or she'll tell you in no uncerloin lerms thot you ore now ond will for-
ever be iust friends. lf thot hoppens, you hove trc stop honging
oround with her. Without hedging, tell her, "l'm sorry but i/s trco
lillins tilhiss rllmilft
poinful for me to be iust friends with someone I bel this woy obout.
l'm ottrocted fo you." Then sficp honging oround with her*ot leost
you'll be doing something positive for your self-esteem os o mon.
Don'l bockslide. lf she goes for it ond gets romontic with you,
you moy be trempled to foll into the trop of octing like o friend
ogoin. Don't do it! Follow seducfion protrccol.
rllE fl||$[ fit$$
The first kiss con come ot ony time in on interoction with o womon. This
is o criticolly importont point. So mony men mess up their seductions of
women by thinking the first kiss hos lo come ot the end of the dote. They
therefore don't hove their eyes open for opportunities to go for the kiss
eorlier ond put so much pressure on themselves ot the end of the dote
thot they mess up the kiss onywoy.
As you proctice flirting, you'll find thot there ore more opportunilies lo
build up to ond go for the first kiss thon you used to think. For exomple,
we olwoys suggest thot you behove like o gentlemon wi$ women. lf o
womon interests you, lry to olwoys open doors for her. ln o nice restou-
ront, pull out the choir for her. lf she is o possenger in your cor, open the
door for her ond close it for her ofter she gets in. These little gentlemon-
ly moves ore like the Flirting Moves; they keep reminding her thot you
ore nol iust o friend. You ore o mon, treoting her like o womon. This will
go o long woy loword conlinuing the seduction. ln o woy, being o gen-
demon is o form of Situolionol Flirting, becouse you qre using the ele-
I
uw hrshrmilldulilumm mtntbtll

ll8[' bll talfi l[ t{8lllsn
ments of the situotion you ore in os o woy of continuolly showing her
your romontic intentions. This con leod to o first kiss.
Here's on exomple: Dovid wos once on o dqte thot hod been set up by
some friends of his. His two friends (o couple) hod decided to ploy
motchmoker ond hod set up o dinner for the four of them. Now, we
olwoys odvise our students not lo count on their friends lo set lhem up,
but ot the some lime being set up is on occeptoble port of your doting
strolegy. lt iust should never be your one-ond-only hope. We olso usu-
olly tell men to hove Priming Dotes before hoving dinner dotes. (A
Priming Dote is o cofhe dote you hove with o womon. You don't move
on to Seduction Dotes-bosicolly evening dotes-until you've estob-
lished some mutuol sexuol inbrest. See our book How lo Succeed wilh
Women for much more on Priming Dotes ond Seduction Dotes.)
But few rules ore corved in stone, so Dovid went olong on this dinner-
ond-doncing dote. lt turned out the womon, Betsy, wos very prefi ond
intelligent. They hod o good time ot dinner; Dovid wos flirting with her,
smiling, holding eye conloct, winking ond checking out her body. He
osked her'Whofls the story behind thot?" ond did some Deepening. He
osked the Romontic Question 'lVhot is your ideo of o mosl romontic
dqte?" ond oll four of them discussed it. Dovid noticed thot ofter this,
Betsy's eyes sporkled os she looked ot him.
After dinner the four of them went doncing. Dovid's friends lei Dovid ond
Betsy off in front of the donce club while they went to pork lhe cor. lt wos
cold, so Dovid took off his iockei ond put it oround B"tty't shoulders os
they wolked trc the club. This wos Situotionol Flirting in thot it wos using
&lrirK lfflllins futlGr
the elements of the situotion fic show romonlic interest (though it wosn't
comic, os most Situotionol Flirting is). As they woited outside the club for
their friends, Betsy osked Dovid, 'Aren't you cold?" He onswered, 'Yes,
but o kiss would worm me up!" She soid, oOkoy,'ond they leoned fitg"th-
er ond kissed.
At thd point, they hod known eoch other obout two hours. He hod firted
ond shown romontic interest ond she hod responded. Once this kiss hod
hoppened, Dovid's queslion wos no longer'lVill she get sexuolwith me?"
The question become one of 'lVhen?" By poying otlention to the environ-
ment ond using the situotion to his odvonlrege, Dwid wos oble to get $e
first kiss well before the end of the dote-ond much more lqter in the
evening.
Here's onolher exomple. Ron wos on o Priming Dote with o womon in o
coffee shop. He hod done the Flirting Moves qnd osked his dote the
Romonlic Question 'lVhot is your ideol romontic dole?" She responded
enthusiosticolly, telling him, 'There ore octuolly three ideol scenorios"
ond describing them in detoil. She then osked him obout his ideol romon-
tic dote, ond they looked into eqch othey's eyes os he tolked obout it.
She excused herself to go to the bqthroom. When she come out of the
bolhroom, she poused in front of the fire burning in the coffee shop's
fireploce. Ron come up behind her ond gently put his honds on her
shoulders. She turned ond smiled, looking into his eyes, ond they kissed
severol times. This wos ofter knowing her for oboul on hour.
urur lilltullild[l[huemllm/illl
[ut,lHlil$illil||unil,0til/itll
www.ebook3000.com

llr,ur &s lltx l0 il$eKsll
One of our students mel o womon ol o compus grocery co-op. They hit
it off ond he osked her if she'd like to go to o coffee shop with him. She
soid yes, so they went lo one ond tolked for over on hour. He did the
Flirting Moves ond Deepening ond osked some Romonlic Questions.
During o Deepening Conversotion he osked her, 'lVhot would you most
like to be doing with your life?" She onswered, ond there wos o very
close, intimote feeling in the oir. She osked him the question bock. He
onswered, "l don't knowwhot lwont to be doing with my life, but I know
thot right now I wont to be kissing you." She blushed ond soid, "Okayi'
ond he leoned ocross ond kissed her. From thot point on, there wos no
question thot their relotionship wos romqntic, not iust friends. Totol time
from meeling her to getting thot first kiss? One hour ond 20 minutes.
Does this hoppen every time? Of course not. But it con hoppen o lot more
thon most men reolize-but you hove lrc toke the opportunity to go for the
kiss when it presents itself. Simply hwing on eye open br opportunity will
dromoticolly increose your chonces of getting the first kiss well bebre the
end of the dob.
00lllg F0l| [ile Hl|$[ fit$$
There ore two bosic conditions fiot must be creoled for the first kiss to
work (for o lol more on this, see How lo Succeed with Womenl. First, she
must not be surprised by the kiss. She must be thinking of it or seeing it
os somewhot inevitoble. This will hoppen if you've shown your romontic
interest, if you've done whot we've outlined in this book, ond - here's the
X-foctor-if she likes you. lf you do fiese things, shet likely to like you,
lo*i'|s &l&ins tunlll8r
but of course, you never know. The bottom line: if you've shown romon-
tic interest, she shouldn't be surprised when you go to kiss her.
Second, she must like the ideo of being kissed. You test this through the
flirting ond Romqntic Conversotions thof you do. lf she resists your flirt-
ing - if she won't hold eye contoct, glores ot you when you check out her
body or turns owoy when you wink-she probobly is not interested in
the first kiss. lf she onswers oll your Romontic Questions with one-word
or evosive replies, she's probobly not interested. Don't bother going for
the kiss; she's nol interesbd.
lf she's been receptive trc oll the other romontic things you've done then you
con go br the first kiss wifi o good chonce of success. There ore o couple
of woys trr do it. You con osk her if you con kiss her, but mony women ftnd
this offonsVe, believe it or nol. You con "iusl do it " but when you do, you
run the risk of doing it ogoinst her will-which is third-degree sexuol ossoult
if it pisses her off enough. (Don't soy we didnt worn youl) We like simply
onnouncing the kiss by leoning trrword her ond sqying something like
'Wow, l'm going tc kiss you" or "Don't ponic, l'm going tc kiss you." This
works well ond doesn't leqve her thinking thot you ore o beggor or o ierk.
c0llcil$n1l
Tolking to women is not the only component of succeeding with women,
though it is o criticol porl. You still must be oble to get her number or
emoil oddress, set up the dote ond go for thot oll-importont first kiss. lf
you odd the skills in this chopter b whot you now know obout tolking to
women, you'll go o long woy toword hoving the sex life you desire. .
tr
uuu ll0ub0il00ildulthu0nil 00lll/lrll

C]lilIBl' H
$0[cl[f,l0ll
Congrotulotions! From this moment forword, you never hove lo feel like
you ore "stuck" in your tolking to women ogoin. You now know the
Flirting Moves, 'lVho/s the story behind lhol?," Situotionol Flirting,
Deepening, the Goodbye lntroduction, Romontic Questions ond more.
With these skills ovoiloble to you, you olwoys hove someploce to go in
o conversqtion. You con use your curiosity ond osk o question. You con
do some Deepening. You con osk o Romontic Question. You con toke o
risk. You con moke sure you ore smiling, winking or conveying vitolity
with your body. As you proctice with this moleriol, you will find thot
lhere's olwoys o direction you con go in o conversolion with o womon,
ond thot is very reloxing knowledge, indeed.
You've olso leorned thot tolking to (ond seducing)women is o sequence,
ond the ports of $e sequence oll fit together. lf you don't know whot to
do ond ore seeing o womon for the first time, you con soy hi or use the
Goodbye lntroduction. Those moves often leod to opportunities lo use
your curiosity, either by osking o curiosity queslion ond follow-up ques-
tions or by osking 'Whofs the stoqy behind thot?"
Other limes, you'll find you con go from hi to o Situotionol Flirting move,
moking some sort of loke or creqlive misinterpretotion obout the envi-
ronmenl, ond you con bond by being silly ond loughing together. Doing
lM! [uub0$r00rrdllrllllru0lll0ll cml/hrllr
www.ebook3000.com

ll[ur &l} lallt ls !il,8nal
thot will often leod lo good, plolul feelings, from which you con olso
osk o curiosity question or 'lVhot/s the story behind thot?"
Once o womon storls reloxing with you, i/s eosy lo strcrt osking
Deepening Questions. You might sey, "l know thot everyone's iob hos
moments they don't like, but very often there ore momenls where you
feel like, 1Mow, this is whot I wos put on eor$ to do.' l'd be curious to
know, if you'd core to shore, whot ore some of lhose moments for you?"
From there il's eosy lo odmire whot she is into ond reflect il bock lo her,
which mokes you more speciol in her eyes ond connects you even more.
While this is going on, of course, you've been procticing your Flirting
Moves. You've been moking ond holding eye conloci, you've been mok-
ing decisions quickly ond eosily, you've been winking ol her, you've
been complimenting her ond so forth. These moves odd to the certointy,
both on your porl ond hers, thot you ore tolking io her qs o mon tolks
lo o womon he is inlerested in romonticolly. lt will be hord for her to
think of you os iust o friend; the fli*ing conversotions you've been hov-
ing olso help. At this point you might osk her out for o coffee dote. On
thot dote you con do more flirting, more "regulor" conversqtion ond
Deepening ond stort osking Romontic Questions.
You con probobly sense how oll this fits together ond how il creotes o
romontic vibe in your interoctions with women. These ore the vibes thot
you con copitolize on to creole o sexuol relotionship. You need never
feel stuck in o conversotion with o womon ogoin.
$sn$lIsi0n
R|l[ Hllallu._.
Ultimotely, the conclusion of this book is writien by you. h/s written by you
in how you live your life ond how you use this moteriol. lf you look ot this
os on interesting book thot you got o fow tips out of, tho/s fine. But this
book will be oll the more powerful if you review the progrom ond set it trc
work. You write the conclusion...in howyou use this book in your lib.
Even though we don't know you personolly, we reolly do core whot hop-
pens trc you ond your success wilh women. We reolly do wont this book
to speok directly trc you, ond we hope it mokes o reol ond positive differ-
ence in your life. We hope ic meet you somedoy ol o seminor, through our
cooching progrom or oDnvhere in the world vn{rere we moy hove the
good b*une to conneci. We olso wont lo sincerely thonk you for reoding
this book, suspending your doubts ond trying things out. We ocknowledge
you for getting hrough the sections you might hwe disogreed with or
bund difficult. ln oll sincerity, we commend you for toking the sieps you
need to toke to develop the kind of success with women you desire.
Feel free to contoct us ond let us know how it goes.
You con reoch us:
. vio the web of www.howtrcsucceedwithwomen.com
o viq emoil ot Authors@howtosucceedwilhwomen.com
r vio regulor moil qt:
Mostery Technologies, lnc.
P.O. Box 55094
Modison, Wl 53705
Ir
uuu llttll!nl$iliulilu0nil r0lll/hli

?I
)hy r"n hove o unique ond speciol set of problems. For the
lost yeor we hove focused our doting cooching proctice on
working with shy men. Now you con benefit from whot we
AS A GIFT TO YOU, WE HAVE AN AUDIO SAMPLE OF
RON LOUIS AND DAVID COPELAND USING THIS MATERIAL
ON WOMEN. YOU CAN DOWNLOAD THIS SAMPLE AT:
ulrtlttl h0ultnsucceeduithuomsil s0ln/tallt
leorned in our new oudio course, avercoming the Nice Guy
Syndrome: How to Stop Being Shy Wilhout Becoming o Jerk
(on four oudiocossettes or four CDs).
lf you ore o shy guy, oll the "fechniques,"
"pickup lines," or "motivotionol visuolizo-
tions" in the world won't help you. The
problem deeper thon thot, ond hos to be
oddressed, or you will stoy shy. This course
oddresses those deeper reosons, ond gives
you concrete, tested woys to become less
shy with women.
lmogine going from feeling guilty, ofroid, or oshomed with women to feeling good
oboui showing romontic interest, ond hoving it work for both you ond the womon!
Tho/s whot Overcoming the Nice Guy Syndrome is obout.
These tapes are for you if:
o You oflen seem lo end up o womsn's "Jriend" when you would
rother be lovers.
r You hqve on especiolly difficult time showing sexuol inleresl in o
womon.
r De,ep down, you feel like showing romontic or sexuql interest in
q womqn is "using" her in some woy, unless you get into o relotion-
ship with her.
o Women feel scfe with you, buf fhen go with "bod boys," whom
you don't wont to be like, no motler whot the cost.
. You qre especiolly shy with women ond feel guilty when you try to tolk
with them.
Imaoine...
o
Being oble hc both respect women, ond let them know obout your sexuol interest in
them...knowing thotyour intentions with women ore good, even if you ore only inter-
ested in shorl-term sex...being oble to provide both sofety ond risks for women...not
hoving to control outcomes with women...not being stopped by feor or
reiection...being curious obout women ond life, ond letting thot guide you.
lmogine being o nice guy who is interesting ond exciting to women, ond who is oble
to get sex ond relotionships with them.
The How to Talk ]o Women Companion CD
You moy be interesied in the How to Talk lo Women Componion CD.
Tc moke this CD, we brought women into the studio ond flirted with them,
creoting Romonlic Conversotions using the techniques from this book.
We then odded our commentory ond "ploy by ploy'' so you con heor whot
we ore thinking, ond how we ore deciding our nexl sleps os we do itl Check
out www.howicsucceedwithwomen.com/tolk to find out mor obout this
useful productl
Ordering
www.ebook3000.com

THE MASTERY PROGRAM
Your Slep-by-Strep Course in Meeting, Flirting Wth,
Doting ond Seducing lhe Women of Your Dreoms
The Mostery Progrom Tope Series is 32 professionolly-recorded doily lessons on
l6 CDs or oudiocossettes, including obout three hours of tope of us flirting with
live women in the studio, olong with o ZO-poge workbook, including speciol
trocking forms. lt is designed to teoch you every ospect of developing o doting
life, from finding "niches" thot moke it eosy to meet women, to knowing whot to
soy when you first opprooch o womon, to toking q seduction oll the woy trc the
bedroom.
lmogine hoving Ron Louis ond Dovid Copelond with you, evety doy, for over o
month, teoching you step-by-step everything you need ic know to moster the 8
doting "fundomentols" ond to hove the success with women thot you wont.
You'll leorn:
o How to generote interoctions with women ihot con become romontic
o How to ironsform your feor of reiection into o friend thot powers you toword
5UCCe55
o How to hel reolly good obout your interoctions with women, every step of
the woy
o How ond where to meet women, outomoticolly
r How to show your romontic interest in women in woys they will enioy
r How to overcome your inner "blocks" thot stop you with women
o How to flirt with women, osk them out, go for the first kiss, ond morel
This course is perfect for ony mon who feels "stuck" in his doting life wi$
women, ond who reolly wonts to iump-stort profound improvemenls in his relo-
tionships with women.
Find out more or order online ot www.howtosucceedwithwomen.com
j$mq,
or use the order form on poge 321.
Tr*" ore now more women online thon men...ond
now more thon ever, mony of these women ore ottroctive
ond intelligentl Bui if you don't know where to find these I
women, or whot to soy to them vio emoil or using instont l
messoge progroms/ thon you'll never hove the success l
you ore looking for! This booklet tokes you step by step l
through finding these women, ond shows you specificolly
how to tolk with them when you do. 
l
lf you ore o shy guy, or if you feel nervous oround
women, the internet is one of the best ploces for you the flirt with ond seduce
women-from the comfort of your own home! Leorning online flirting skills cqn
be one woy for you to increose your confidence with women, ond use your shy-
ness os on odvontoge.
The Internet Seductlon Toolklt coyerss
e How to use Americo Online qnd other Chot clients
r Using "profiles" powerfully
r Secrets of internet personol qds, such os the ones you'll use on populor
internet doting sites
r Not moking the boneheod mistokes thot doting sites seem to try to get you
io moke
. Touching her heort in the first sentence of your od
o How to find women online to flirt with, onytime of doy or night
. How io creote personol "emoil responders" for hondling lorge numbers of
women
o Eosy woys ic get lots of women into your online flirting "system"
. The five fundomentol rules of flirting vio emoil, ond how to never breok
them ogoin
. Reol world exomples of emoil interchonges with women thot worked, ond
discussion of the reosons why they worked
o How to furn ony lnstont Messqge conversotion into o seductive conversotion,
wiih numerous reol world exomples, so you con see exoctly how Louis ond
Copelond ore thinking obout internet seduction, every step of the woy
The lntemet Seduclion Toolkit costs $l I .95 plus $5.95 Postoge ond Hondling in
the USA. lt is not ovoiloble to be shipped outside of the USA, except olong with
orders for our oudio courses. lf you wont to order it from outside the USA, pleose
purchose the eleckonic, downloodoble version ot
www. howtosucceedwithwomen.com/tool 
kit/i ndex. htm l.
Find out more ond order online ot:
http: //www. howtosucceedwithwomen.com/toolkit/index. html
or ur lhr order brm on poge 321.
9EXG
didt

PTEASE VISIT
hornrb$lKSSd
wi$,tW[mgll.eo]n
How lo Succeed wilh Women
comes out three times o month, directly to your emoil oddress.
Our privocy policy: we will never rent, trode or sell your emoil
oddress
to get lots of useful, free
seduction informotion,
ond to get o free six-
monih subscription to the
emoil newsletter. This newsletter
SHIPPING ADDRESS (IF DIFFERENT THAN ABOVE)
CREDI] CARD NUMBER
NAME AS IT APPEARS ON THE CARD
EXPIRATION DATE
OVERCOMING THE NICE GUY SYNDROME:
HOW TO SIOP BEING SHY W]THOUI BECOMING A JERK
l-l a cPt or I 
a Cossettes for $59.95
THE MASTERY PROGRAM
YOUR SIEP.BY-STEP CPOURSE IN MEETING, FURNNG WIIH,
DANNG AND SEDI'CING IHE WOMEN OF YOI'R DREAMS
rHE INTER.NET SEDUCTIoN ToOIKIT $1 I.95
sHrpprNc AND HANDUNG $10.00 ($40.00 outside USI
TOTAI
MAKE CHECKS PAYABLE TO: MASTERY TECHNOIOGIES, lNC.
MAI[: MASTERY TECHNOIOGIES, lNC.
P.O. BOX 55094, MAD|SON, Wt53Z05
oR rAx TH|S FORit (608) 663.1550
All prleo rublrcl to chongr wilhoui nolicc.
www.ebook3000.com

rsBN B-1?150?t-0-l
llililililffilllillll

