How‐to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming

How‐to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices
Procedures and Programming
Edited by
Amin Al‐Ahmad
Texas Cardiac Arrhythmia Institute
Austin, TX, USA
Andrea Natale
Texas Cardiac Arrhythmia Institute
Austin, TX, USA
Paul J. Wang
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, CA, USA
James P. Daubert
Duke University Medical Center
Durham, NC, USA
Luigi Padeletti
IRCCS MultiMedica
Milan, Italy

This edition first published 2018
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material 
from this title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of Amin Al‐Ahmad, Andrea Natale, Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert and Luigi Padeletti to be identified as the authors of the editorial 
material in this work has been asserted in accordance with law.
Registered Offices
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Editorial Office
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print‐on‐demand. Some content that appears in standard print versions of 
this book may not be available in other formats.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion only and are not intended and should 
not be relied upon as recommending or promoting scientific method, diagnosis, or treatment by physicians for any particular patient. In view 
of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of 
medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for 
each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and 
precautions. While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no representations or warranties with 
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any 
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives, written 
sales materials or promotional statements for this work. The fact that an organization, website, or product is referred to in this work as a citation 
and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the publisher and authors endorse the information or services the organization, 
website, or product may provide or recommendations it may make. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged 
in rendering professional services. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a 
specialist where appropriate. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when 
this work was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, 
including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication Data
Names: Al-Ahmad, Amin, editor. | Natale, Andrea, editor. | Wang, Paul J., editor. | Daubert, James P., editor. |  
  Padeletti, Luigi, editor.
Title: How-to manual for pacemaker and ICD devices : procedures and programming / edited by Amin Al-Ahmad,  
  Andrea Natale, Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, Luigi Padeletti.
Description: Hoboken, NJ : John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2018. | Includes bibliographical references and index. | 
Identifiers: LCCN 2017049884 (print) | LCCN 2017050275 (ebook) | ISBN 9781118820865 (pdf) |  
  ISBN 9781118820742 (epub) | ISBN 9781118820599 (pbk.)
Subjects: | MESH: Pacemaker, Artificial | Defibrillators, Implantable | Equipment Safety–methods |  
  Cardiovascular Surgical Procedures–methods
Classification: LCC RC684.P3 (ebook) | LCC RC684.P3 (print) | NLM WG 26 | DDC 617.4/120645–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017049884
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Images: (X-ray) © Science Photo Library - ZEPHYR./Gettyimages;
(Circles: From top to bottom) © RandyJayBraun/Gettyimages;
Courtesy of Brett Atwater; © Jan-Otto/Gettyimages
Set in 10/12pt Warnock by SPi Global, Pondicherry, India
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

v
List of Contributors  vii
About the Companion Website  xi
Part One 
1
1	 How to Access the Cephalic Vein Using a Cut‐down Approach  3
Carola Gianni, Pasquale Santangeli, Andrea Natale, and Amin Al‐Ahmad
2	 Extrathoracic Subclavian Vein Access  9
Paul C. Zei and Javid Nasir
3	 Subcutaneous Implantable Cardioverter‐Defibrillator  17
Anil Rajendra and Michael R. Gold
4	 Internal Jugular Venous Access and Lead Implantation for Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices  23
Michael G. Katz and David T. Huang
5	 Implantation of the Left Ventricular Lead  27
Shrinivas Hebsur and Edward Platia
6	 How to Place a Lead in the Azygos Vein  37
Jason S. Bradfield, Daniel H. Cooper, Noel G. Boyle, and Kalyanam Shivkumar
7	 Alternative Site Pacing: A Guide to Implantation Techniques  45
Michael C. Giudici
8	 How to Maximize CRT Response at Implant  55
Attila Roka, Gaurav Upadhyay, Jagmeet Singh, and E. Kevin Heist
9	 How to Perform Sub‐pectoral Device Implants  63
Gurjit Singh and Claudio Schuger
10	 Device Extractions  69
Sean D. Pokorney, Donald D. Hegland, and Patrick M. Hranitzky
11	 How to Extract Pacemaker and Defibrillator Leads from the Femoral Approach  79
Leenhapong Navaravong and Roger A. Freedman
12	 How to Extract Leads from the Jugular Approach  89
Maria Grazia Bongiorni, Andrea Di Cori, Luca Segreti, Giulio Zucchelli, Ezio Soldati, Stefano Viani,  
and Luca Paperini
Contents

Contents
vi
13	 How to Perform Venoplasty for Access  97
Seth J. Worley
14	 How to Perform Defibrillation Threshold Testing  111
Chad Brodt and Marco V. Perez
15	 Use of Chest X-ray, Computed Tomography and 3-D Imaging to Evaluate Lead Location  119
Brett D. Atwater
16	 How to Evaluate Postoperative Device Complications  133
Dan Sorajja and Win‐Kuang Shen
Part Two 
145
17	 How to Program Pacemakers for Patients With Sinus Node Disease  147
Carsten W. Israel and Lucy Ekosso‐Ejangue
18	 How to Interpret Pacemaker Electrocardiograms  159
Giuseppe Bagliani, Stefania Sacchi, and Luigi Padeletti
19	 How to Perform Pacemaker Troubleshooting  173
Brian Olshansky and Nora Goldschlager
20	 How to Program an ICD to Program ATP, and Program for VT/VF Storm  187
P. Pieragnoli, G. Ricciardi, Margherita Padeletti, Stefania Sacchi, Alessio Gargaro, and Luigi Padeletti
21	 How to Troubleshoot An ICD  195
Advay G. Bhatt, Santosh C. Varkey, and Kevin M. Monahan
22	 Management of ICD Device and Lead Failures and Recalls  207
Yousef Bader and N.A. Mark Estes III
23	 How to Program an ICD to Minimize Inappropriate Shocks  213
Paul J. Wang and Winston B. Joe
24	 How to Perform CRT Optimization  221
Kevin P. Jackson and James P. Daubert
25	 How to Manage Device Infections and When to Reimplant After Device Extraction  233
Giosuè Mascioli
26	 How to Implement a Remote Follow‐up Program for Patients with Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices  241
George H. Crossley, April Bain, and Rachel Tidwell
27	 How to Set Up an HF Monitoring Service  255
Edoardo Gronda, Emilio Vanoli, Margherita Padeletti, and Alessio Gargaro
28	 How to Deactivate Cardiac Implantable Electric Devices in Patients Nearing the End of Life and/or Requesting 
Withdrawal of Therapies  263
Rachel Lampert
Index  269

vii
Amin Al‐Ahmad, MD, FACC, FHRS, CCDS
Texas Cardiac Arrhythmia Institute
St. David’s Medical Center
Austin, TX, USA
Brett D. Atwater, MD
Duke University Health System
Durham, NC, USA
Yousef Bader, MD
Tufts University School of Medicine
Tufts Medical Center
Boston, MA, USA
Giuseppe Bagliani, MD
Department of Cardiology and Arrhythmology
Foligno General Hospital
Perugia, Italy
April Bain, RN
Medtronic Inc.
Nashville, TN, USA
Advay G. Bhatt, MD
Boston Medical Center
Boston University School of Medicine
Boston, MA, USA
Maria Grazia Bongiorni, MD
Second Division of Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiac‐Thoracic and Vascular Department
Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana
Pisa, Italy
Noel G. Boyle, MD, PhD
UCLA Cardiac Arrhythmia Center
Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Jason S. Bradfield, MD
UCLA Cardiac Arrhythmia Center
Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Chad Brodt, MD
Cardiac Electrophysiology & Arrhythmia  
Service 
Stanford University Medical Center
Stanford, CA, USA
Daniel H. Cooper, MD
Cardiovascular Division
Department of Medicine
Barnes‐Jewish Hospital
Washington University School  
of Medicine
St. Louis, MO, USA
George H. Crossley, MD, FHRS, FACC
Vanderbilt Heart and Vascular Institute
Nashville, TN, USA
James P. Daubert, MD
Division of Clinical Cardiac  
Electrophysiology
Duke University Medical Center
Durham, NC, USA
Andrea Di Cori, MD
Second Division of Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiac‐Thoracic and Vascular  
Department
Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana
Pisa, Italy
Lucy Ekosso‐Ejangue, MD
J.W. Goethe University
Frankfurt, Germany;
Department of Medicine – Cardiology
Evangelical Hospital Bielefeld
Bielefeld, Germany
N.A. Mark Estes III, MD
Tufts University School of Medicine
Tufts Medical Center
Boston, MA, USA
List of Contributors

List of Contributors
viii
Roger A. Freedman, MD
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine
University of Utah Health Sciences Center
Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Alessio Gargaro, MS
Biotronik, Clinical Research Department
Vimodrone (MI), Italy
Carola Gianni, MD
Texas Cardiac Arrhythmia Institute
St. David’s Medical Center
Austin, TX, USA
Michael R. Gold, MD, PhD
Division of Cardiology
Medical University of South Carolina
Charleston, SC, USA
Nora Goldschlager, MD
Professor of Medicine
San Francisco General Hospital
San Francisco, CA, USA;
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA
Edoardo Gronda, MD
Cardiovascular Department
IRCCS MultiMedica
Sesto San Giovanni
Milan, Italy
Michael C. Giudici, MD, FACC, FACP, FHRS
Professor of Medicine
Director of Arrhythmia Services
University of Iowa Hospitals
Iowa City, IA, USA
Shrinivas Hebsur, MD
Michigan Heart and Vascular Institute
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Donald D. Hegland, MD
Duke University Medical Center
Durham, NC, USA
E. Kevin Heist, MD, PhD
Cardiac Arrhythmia Service
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, MA, USA
Patrick M. Hranitzky, MD
Texas Cardiac Arrhythmia
Austin, TX, USA;
WakeMed Heart and Vascular Center
Raleigh, NC, USA
David T. Huang, MD
Division of Cardiology, Department of  
Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY, USA
Carsten W. Israel, MD
J.W. Goethe University
Frankfurt, Germany;
Department of Medicine – Cardiology
Evangelical Hospital Bielefeld
Bielefeld, Germany
Kevin P. Jackson, MD
Division of Clinical Cardiac  
Electrophysiology
Duke University Medical Center
Durham, NC, USA
Winston B. Joe, BA, MD
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, CA, USA
Michael G. Katz, MD
Division of Cardiology, Department of  
Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY, USA
Rachel Lampert, MD
Yale University School of Medicine
New Haven, CT, USA
Giosuè Mascioli, MD, FESC
Unit of Arrhythmology and  
Cardiac Pacing
Cliniche Humanitas Gavazzeni
Bergamo, Italy
Kevin M. Monahan, MD
Boston Medical Center
Boston University School  
of Medicine
Boston, MA, USA
Javid Nasir, MD
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, CA, USA
Andrea Natale, MD, FACC, FHRS, CCDS
Texas Cardiac Arrhythmia Institute
St. David’s Medical Center
Austin, TX, USA

List of Contributors
ix
Leenhapong Navaravong, MD
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine
University of Utah Health Sciences Center
Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Brian Olshansky, MD
Professor Emeritus
University of Iowa
Iowa, USA;
Cardiac Electrophysiologist 
Mercy Hospital-North Iowa
Mason City, Iowa, USA
Luigi Padeletti, MD
IRCCS, MultiMedica
Sesto San Giovanni
Milan, Italy
Margherita Padeletti, MD
Cardiology Unit
Borgo San Lorenzo Hospital
Florence, Italy
Luca Paperini, MD
Second Division of Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiac‐Thoracic and Vascular Department
Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana
Pisa, Italy
Marco V. Perez, MD
Cardiac Electrophysiology & Arrhythmia  
Service
Stanford University Medical Center
Stanford, CA, USA
P. Pieragnoli, MD
Heart and Vessels Department
University of Florence
Florence, Italy
Edward Platia, MD
Medstar Washington Hospital 
Center/Georgetown University
Washington, DC, USA
Sean D. Pokorney, MD, MBA
Duke University Medical Center
Durham, NC, USA
Anil Rajendra, MD
Division of Cardiology
Medical University of South Carolina
Charleston, SC, USA
G. Ricciardi, MD
Heart and Vessels Department
University of Florence
Florence, Italy
Attila Roka, MD, PhD
Cardiovascular Institute of the South
Meridian, MS, USA
Stefania Sacchi, MD
Institute of Internal Medicine and Cardiology
University of Florence
Florence, Italy;
International Centre for Circulatory Health
National Heart and Lung Institute
Imperial College
London, UK
Pasquale Santangeli, MD, PhD
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Claudio Schuger, MD, FACC, FHRS
Cardiac Electrophysiology
Henry Ford Hospital
Detroit, MI, USA
Luca Segreti, MD
Second Division of Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiac‐Thoracic and Vascular Department
Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana
Pisa, Italy
Win‐Kuang Shen, MD
Division of Cardiovascular Diseases
Mayo Clinic Arizona
Phoenix, AZ, USA
Kalyanam Shivkumar, MD, PhD
UCLA Cardiac Arrhythmia Center
Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Gurjit Singh, MD
Cardiac Electrophysiology
Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA
Jagmeet Singh, MD, PhD
Cardiac Arrhythmia Service
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, MA, USA

List of Contributors
x
Ezio Soldati, MD
Second Division of Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiac‐Thoracic and Vascular Department
Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana
Pisa, Italy
Dan Sorajja, MD
Division of Cardiovascular Diseases
Mayo Clinic Arizona
Phoenix, AZ, USA
Rachel Tidwell, RN, MSN, CCDS
Medtronic Inc.
Nashville, TN, USA
Gaurav Upadhyay, MD
Heart Rhythm Center
University of Chicago Hospital
Chicago, IL, USA
Emilio Vanoli, MD, PhD
Cardiovascular Department
IRCCS MultiMedica
Sesto San Giovanni
Milan, Italy;
Department of Molecular Medicine
University of Pavia Margherita
Pavia, Italy
Santosh C. Varkey, MD
Boston Medical Center
Boston University School of Medicine
Boston, MA, USA
Stefano Viani, MD
Second Division of Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiac‐Thoracic and Vascular Department
Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana
Pisa, Italy
Paul J. Wang, MD
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, CA, USA
Seth J. Worley, MD, FHRS, FACC
Medstar Heart & Vascular Institute
Washington Hospital Center
Washington, DC, USA
Paul C. Zei, MD, PhD
Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Harvard Medical School
Boston, MA, USA
Giulio Zucchelli, MD, PhD
Second Division of Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiac‐Thoracic and Vascular Department
Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana
Pisa, Italy

xi
This book is accompanied by a Companion Website:
The URL to the Website is www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
The Website includes:
●
●Videos
About the Companion Website

Part One
1

How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
3
The cephalic vein has been used for access and 
lead  ­placement ever since transvenous leads were 
developed. The cephalic vein offers relatively easy 
access into the central venous system with a very low 
risk of complications [1]. There is essentially no risk of 
pneumothorax with the cephalic vein cut‐down com-
pared with axillary or subclavian puncture. In addition, 
lead longevity with cephalic access is superior to that 
of other common techniques such as access via axillary 
or subclavian veins [2]. This is because of a more gentle 
angle of entry with cephalic access and a lower risk of 
subclavian crush to the lead when compared with 
­subclavian access [3,4].
Some physicians use cephalic access for all device 
implants, while others use it only for selected patients. 
All physicians should become proficient with implants 
via cephalic access as it can be useful in patients with 
access challenges, such as those who have a high risk of 
complications such as pneumothorax, as well as patients 
where the longevity of the lead is of prime importance 
such as young patients.
In this chapter we describe the techniques to gain 
access into the cephalic vein as well as some of the 
­potential challenges and pitfalls.
­Procedure Description
An important aspect of the cephalic vein cut‐down 
­procedure is an understanding of the anatomy of the 
pectoralis and deltoid muscle areas as they relate to the 
location of the vein. The cephalic vein runs in the delto-
pectoral groove. On the skin, this is the groove where the 
shoulder meets the chest and is visible and palpable in 
most people (Figure 1.1). The incision can be made either 
parallel to the deltopectoral groove, or perpendicular. 
Care should be taken to ensure that the incision is close 
enough to the groove that access to the vein is unencum-
bered. An incision too medial will lead to a difficult 
­dissection of the cephalic vein. An incision directly on 
the groove can also be uncomfortable for the patient. 
A  typical incision is approximately 1 cm (or 1 finger’s 
breadth) medial to the groove, approximately 1–2 cm (or 
1–2 finger’s breadths) below the clavicle. An incision that 
is too low can make for a challenging dissection and can 
be too close to the axilla in some individuals.
Once the incision has been made, dissection is carried 
through to the pectoral fascia using blunt dissection and 
electrocautery. A fat‐pad located in the deltopectoral 
groove can now be easily identified in most people. The 
vein is located within the fat‐pad (Figure  1.2). Using 
only blunt dissection with a small clamp (such as a 
“mosquito” clamp) or a pair of Metzenbaum dissecting 
scissors allows for removal of the fat and identification 
of the vein. In the fat‐pad area, the use of electrocautery 
should generally be avoided as it can destroy the vein 
and render it useless for access. The vein will be thin, 
white, or have a blue hue in some cases. The vein may 
also be flat or should become flat when lifted gently. 
Care should be made to avoid the artery that in some 
cases runs adjacent to the vein. The artery can be identi-
fied as it is thicker, more rounded, and white in color. 
When the artery is manipulated it may constrict and 
pulsations can be seen during systole. Occasionally, the 
artery is positioned such that access into the vein is 
challenging; in these cases, using the clamp or pick‐ups 
(Debakey forceps), the artery can be moved away from 
the vein and a small application of electrocautery in the 
“cautery” mode applied to the metal of the clamp will 
destroy the artery.
1
How to Access the Cephalic Vein Using a Cut‐down Approach
Carola Gianni1, Pasquale Santangeli2, Andrea Natale1, and Amin Al‐Ahmad1
1 Texas Cardiac Arrhythmia Institute, St. David’s Medical Center, Austin, TX, USA
2 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

1  How to Access the Cephalic Vein Using a Cut‐down Approach
4
A right‐angle clamp can be used to dissect around 
the vein to ensure that the vein can be lifted free from 
any tissue in the groove. At this point the vein is inspected 
to ensure that any adherent tissue is removed so that 
only  the vein is manipulated (Figure  1.3). Using the 
right‐angle clamp, two pieces (approximately 10 cm) of 
non‐­absorbable suture (0 silk or 0 Ethibond) are brought 
around the vein to maintain control of the distal and 
proximal aspects of the vein (Figure 1.4). The vein can 
then be manipulated and accessed.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.1  (a) Deltopectoral groove. (b) Venogram demonstrating the relationship between the bony landmarks and the cephalic vein. 
Also, the relationship to the axillary and subclavian veins can be appreciated.
Figure 1.2  The fat‐pad is located in the deltopectoral groove. The 
cephalic vein is within the fat‐pad.
Figure 1.3  Cephalic vein isolation using a small clamp.

­Procedur e Descriptio ﻿
5
More than one technique can be used to access the 
vein. A commonly used technique utilizes a scalpel to 
make a small venotomy. This is best done while lifting 
the more distal suture gently as this reduces the amount 
of bleeding from the vein (Figure 1.5). The scalpel should 
have a straight blade (typically, number 11 blade) and 
should cut the vein initially placed in a horizontal posi-
tion and lifted vertically once the vein has been pierced 
(Figure  1.6). Care should be taken not to make the 
­venotomy too large so that the integrity of the vein is 
compromised. In addition, it is important to ensure that 
the venotomy cuts into the vein rather than only the 
adventitia surrounding it. Typically, a small amount of 
blood escapes and the lumen of the vein should be visi-
ble. Once the vein has been cut, a vein pick is placed at 
the lip of the incision and used to lift the lip of the inci-
sion to expose the lumen of the vein. Now, under direct 
visualization, a small (4 French, Fr) sheath can be 
advanced a small amount into the vein and a hydrophilic 
glide wire advanced via the sheath into the venous 
­system under fluoroscopic guidance (Figure 1.7).
An alternative approach to using a scalpel and vein 
pick is direct puncture into the vein with an Angiocath 
or a micropuncture needle. The Angiocath needle is 
commonly used to obtain peripheral percutaneous vas-
cular access, while the micropuncture needle is used for 
central percutaneous vascular access. Once vascular 
access is obtained with the Angiocath needle, the cathe-
ter is advanced gently into the vascular space. With the 
micropuncture technique, after obtaining vascular 
access with the needle, a micropuncture wire is advanced 
into the vein and the micropuncture dilator (5 Fr) is 
advanced over the wire. Then, through the Angiocath 
catheter or the micropuncture dilator, a hydrophilic glide 
wire may be advanced into the central venous system.
Once the wire has been advanced, the small 4 French 
sheath or the Angiocath catheter is removed and the 
wire can be used to place a larger peel‐away sheath for 
the lead delivery. This wire needs to support placement 
of a larger sheath, so a stiff angled tipped glide wire is 
often the best choice for this job (e.g., Glidewire). The 
same wire can be used for both sheath placements in the 
case of a dual chamber system. In this situation, the first 
sheath is oversized to retain the wire while placing the 
lead (Figure 1.8). After removal of the sheath, a second 
sheath can be placed over the wire and advanced. 
Figure 1.4  Sutures loops are placed around the vein 
to maintain control of the proximal and distal 
aspects of the vein.
Figure 1.5  Lifting the distal suture to show the cephalic vein. 
This allows access either by direct venotomy or with a small 
Angiocath needle.

(a)
(b)
Figure 1.6  (a) Venotomy using an 11 blade with the sharp aspect of the blade pointing upwards. (b) A vein pick (yellow) is placed in the 
vein to maintain the opening so that a wire can be inserted.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.7  (a) Introduction of the 4 Fr sheath. (b) The hydrophilic guide wire is placed via the 4 Fr sheath and advanced into the vein. It 
can be advanced into the heart under fluoroscopy.
(a)
(b)
Pectoralis
Proximal suture
Figure 1.8  (a) The proximal suture is tied to limit “forward” bleeding. Also, a second wire can be inserted by the side of the sheath. This 
wire can be inserted within the first sheath and then the sheath can be removed retaining two wires in the vasculature. This wire can be 
retained for placement of the second sheath. (b) Two leads can be easily placed and sutured to the fascia in this location.

References ﻿
7
The choice to retain the wire with the second sheath is 
often based on physician preference, with the advantage 
of keeping the wire being that access is maintained until 
both leads are placed. Alternatively, once the first sheath 
is placed, another wire can be advanced in the case of a 
dual chamber system and the sheath then removed, 
­leaving two wires in place that can each be individually 
accessed with a sheath. In this case, there is no need to 
use an oversized sheath.
­Potential Pitfalls and Complications
A common challenge is seen in patients who are over-
weight. In these patients, the deltopectoral groove is not 
always easy to see, so this may result in an incision that is 
too lateral or medial. This makes the dissection much 
more difficult, especially given the large amount of fat and 
the depth of the dissection needed. In these patients, tak-
ing the time to perform deep palpation and finding the 
area where the deltopectoral groove lies is of utmost 
importance. Typically, the operator begins palpation at the 
shoulder and “walks” his or her fingers over the deltoid 
muscle towards the chest until finding the “deepest” area. 
This is the deltopectoral groove.
In very thin individuals the surface landmarks are typi-
cally easy to find; however, the fat‐pad area may be devoid 
of any fat. In these patients, examining the muscle fiber 
orientation of the pectoralis and the deltoid muscles leads 
to identification of where the cephalic vein should run.
Occasionally, the cephalic vein is very small which 
makes it a challenge to access. Presence of a small vein 
should not necessarily result in abandoning the approach, 
as often one can still place two leads via a small cephalic. 
The use of a small amount of local anesthetic (lidocaine) 
may help increase the girth of the vein, as sometimes 
manipulation of the vein can result in some spasm. 
Typically, a few drops of local anesthetic directly on the 
vein helps. Once a wire is placed through the cephalic 
and advanced into the right atrium, or preferably the 
inferior vena cava, a sheath can be advanced through the 
vein. In these cases, the vein will be destroyed with 
advancement of the sheath, but this rarely causes any 
long‐term problems. In some cases, the vein cuff is tight 
around the sheath causing difficulty with sheath advance-
ment and lead–lead interactions. The use of electrocau-
tery to cut the vein cuff will allow the sheath to be 
advanced. In some cases, the vein needs to be dilated 
with progressively larger dilators until the sheath can be 
placed. The use of a stiff wire such as a “super‐stiff” 
Glidewire can be useful to help advance the sheath. 
Occasionally, even after the vein is dilated and the sheath 
advanced, there can be significant interaction between 
the leads placed together in the cephalic. In these 
patients, care not to dislodge a lead when removing a 
sheath and manipulating the other lead is critical. 
Sometimes, the interaction is too severe and can impact 
implant success. In these cases, a separate subclavian or 
axillary puncture for the second lead can simplify the 
procedure significantly. In devices with three leads, while 
they can all be placed via the cephalic vein, it is generally 
preferred to place the smaller of the leads in the axillary 
or subclavian vein. This is commonly the left ventricular 
pacing lead.
When the vein is very large, the main problem is bleed-
ing around the leads. This back bleeding can become an 
issue in patients with a large cephalic vein and high 
venous pressures, such as those with congestive heart 
failure. Often, simple manual pressure at the entry site of 
the cephalic vein is adequate to quell the bleeding after 
the leads have been placed. In some cases, a purse string 
suture may be needed. This should be placed carefully 
with an absorbable suture to ensure that the lead is not 
compressed within the suture or otherwise damaged by 
the suture needle. A reasonable approach is to place the 
purse string suture prior to placement of the leads when 
significant back bleeding is anticipated.
­Conclusions
The cephalic vein cut‐down procedure is a simple tech-
nique to gain access for lead placement, with very low 
risks and a high success rate. Once the operator becomes 
proficient, it can be performed as quickly as an axillary 
or subclavian puncture. Understanding the potential dif-
ficulties, the operator can usually succeed in obtaining 
access using this technique.
References
	1	 Chang HM, Hsieh CB, Hsieh HF, Chen TW, Chen CJ, 
Chan DC, et al. An alternative technique for totally 
implantable central venous access devices: a 
retrospective study of 1311 cases. Eur J Surg Oncol 
2006;32:90–93. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2005.09.004
	2	 Gallik DM, Ben‐Zur UM, Gross JN, Furman S. 
Lead fracture in cephalic versus subclavian approach 
with transvenous implantable cardioverter defibrillator 
systems. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
1996;19:1089–1094.

1  How to Access the Cephalic Vein Using a Cut‐down Approach
8
	3	 Roelke M, O’Nunain SS, Osswald S, Garan H, Harthorne 
JW, Ruskin JN. Subclavian crush syndrome complicating 
transvenous cardioverter defibrillator systems. Pacing 
Clin Electrophysiol 1995;18:973–979.
	4	 Parsonnet V, Roelke M. The cephalic vein cutdown 
versus subclavian puncture for pacemaker/ICD lead 
implantation. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
1999;22:695–697.

9
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Placement of traditional transvenous cardiac rhythm 
management (CRM) devices requires access to the venous 
system for endocardial lead positioning in the right‐sided 
cardiac chambers. Given the typical placement of mod-
ern CRM devices in the pectoral region, vascular access 
to the upper extremity venous system is required. Several 
techniques can be used to access the venous system for 
CRM devices. Prior to the development of peel‐away 
sheaths almost all devices were implanted using a cephalic 
cut‐down; subsequently, subclavian access became much 
more prevalent. Most recently, with the development 
of  percutaneous, extrathoracic techniques to access 
the  venous system (e.g., extrathoracic subclavian and 
extrathoracic axillary access), these presumably safer 
techniques have become the standard approach. Cephalic 
cut‐down and the traditional intrathoracic subclavian 
access are discussed elsewhere; here we focus on access of 
the extrathoracic subclavian vein and briefly discuss 
accessing the extrathoracic axillary vein.
There are several advantages particular to extratho-
racic subclavian vein access. Given the typical placement 
of the pulse generator, these veins can often provide the 
most direct and, as a result, least stressing course for lead 
travel into the venous system. Unlike the cephalic vein, 
the subclavian vein is generally large enough to accom-
modate multiple leads and, when performed correctly, 
does not carry the risk of pneumothorax or subclavian 
crush inherent with traditional subclavian access tech-
niques. Therefore, in most operators’ assessment, the 
extrathoracic subclavian vein is considered the preferred 
approach to obtaining venous access.
­Venous Anatomy
The axillary vein is the segment of the venous drainage 
system from the upper extremity beginning as a continu-
ation of the basilic vein in the axilla (when it crosses the 
teres major). It continues to course just inferiorly to the 
clavicle until it reaches the lateral margin of the first rib 
and becomes the subclavian vein. While, technically 
speaking, the portion of the vein that overlies the first rib 
is the extrathoracic portion of the subclavian vein, in 
clinical practice, many refer to this as the medial axillary 
vein to differentiate this type of access from traditional 
subclavian access [1]. The rationale for this distinction is 
that if performed correctly, access of the extrathoracic 
subclavian vein does not carry the same risk of pneumo-
thorax or subclavian crush as true subclavian vein access.
A typical venogram demonstrating left upper 
­extremity venous anatomy is illustrated in Figure 2.1. 
The axillary vein typically is projected over the lateral 
edge of the ribcage between the second and third ribs 
and then crosses over the first rib just inferior to the 
clavicle. The vein tends to be more cranial in location in 
men and patients with higher body mass index (BMI), 
and tends to lie more caudally in Caucasians. A more 
caudal ­axillary vein course (lateral to medial) has also 
been reported in those with a history of congestive 
heart ­failure [2]. As a “bookkeeping” note, all subse-
quent anatomic and technical descriptions will by 
default refer to the left upper extremity venous system. 
For right‐sided implants, specific considerations will be 
addressed additionally.
2
Extrathoracic Subclavian Vein Access
Paul C. Zei1 and Javid Nasir 2
1 Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
2 Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA

2  Extrathoracic Subclavian Vein Access
10
­Accessing the Extrathoracic 
Subclavian Vein
Access to the central venous system via the extrathoracic 
subclavian vein was first described by Byrd as an ­alternative 
approach to failed intrathoracic subclavian access [3]. 
He  subsequently described his experience accessing the 
extrathoracic subclavian vein preferentially in 213 consec-
utive patients with a 98% success rate with no complica-
tions [4]. This approach was later prospectively evaluated 
in 2001 in 200 patients randomized to either a cephalic 
cut‐down or a contrast‐guided extrathoracic subclavian 
approach [5]. In this study, when compared with a cephalic 
cut‐down, extrathoracic subclavian access resulted in a 
higher success rate (99% vs. 64%; p <0.001), shorter proce-
dure time (86 ± 22 vs. 98 ± 35 min; p <0.01), less blood loss 
(55 ± 13 vs. 115 ± 107 mL; p <0.01), and no difference in the 
rates of complications (6% vs. 11%; p = 0.2).
With this approach, the vein is accessed superficially to 
the first rib and lateral to the clavicle. This allows access 
to the vein with a shallow angle, providing a less strained 
lead course and should eliminate the risk of subclavian 
crush associated with more medial access and risk of 
­second rib fatigue fractures with more lateral access. 
Additionally, if performed correctly, the risk of pneumo-
thorax is no greater than with cephalic cut‐down [5], as 
the first rib will be encountered if the vein is missed, 
­providing the underpinning for one descriptor of this 
technique as a protected first rib approach.
Consent
Informed consent should include a comprehensive 
assessment of the patient’s risks and benefits, which 
should be tailored to the planned access method. Access‐
related complications discussed with the patient should 
include pneumothorax, bleeding, venous thrombosis, 
arterial puncture (including risk of AV fistula formation, 
and lead fracture. Other complications, not related to 
access, are discussed elsewhere.
The assessed risk of pneumothorax should be tailored 
to the planned access technique. With cephalic, extratho-
racic subclavian, or extrathoracic axillary access, the 
published rates of pneumothorax are approximately 1% 
compared to 2% for traditional subclavian access [6]. 
Risk of significant pneumothorax requiring a chest tube 
in cephalic and traditional ­subclavian access has been 
reported as 0.2% and 1.2%, respectively [7].
Figure 2.1  (a) Venogram demonstrating the typical course the cephalic, axillary, and subclavian veins. (b) The venous anatomy has been 
marked with the extrathoracic axillary vein colored black, the cephalic vein with horizontal stripes, the thoracic axillary vein with vertical 
stripes, the extrathoracic subclavian with gray and the subclavian with diagonal stripes.

­Accessin g the Extrathoraci c Subclavi an Vei ﻿
11
The risk of pocket hematoma is likely similar with the 
various available access techniques and is related pri-
marily to both surgical technique and patient medication 
use (e.g., antiplatelet or anticoagulants); however, this 
risk may be slightly increased with use of the retained 
wire approach. Hemothorax is a rare complication 
­usually related to injury to great vessels. By avoiding 
medial, non‐compressible needle sticks the risk of this 
complication can be mitigated.
The risk of lead failure is related to access technique. 
Accessing the intrathoracic subclavian vein can cause 
subclavian crush or fracture of the lead in an anatomi-
cally restricted space between the first rib and clavicle. 
This is likely related to soft tissue entrapment by the 
­subclavius muscle and can be avoided by accessing the 
venous system more laterally [8]. The stress on leads is 
also likely increased with extrathoracic axillary tech-
niques because of the extreme angulation required for 
extrathoracic access of the axillary vein and can lead to 
second‐rib related fatigue fractures. While data are 
wanting, this was most evident when the Canadian Heart 
Rhythm Society retrospectively examined the data for 
3169 Sprint Fidelis leads and found that axillary access 
was one of the strongest risk factors for lead fracture [9].
Pre‐procedure
Prior to implantation of the CRM device, a careful 
­history and physical examination should be performed. 
The presence of hemodialysis shunts or catheters may 
preclude venous access to the ipsilateral axillary vein. 
Similarly, prior lymph node dissection and excision, 
­typically seen in mastectomy, will increase the risk of 
impaired venous return if leads are placed in the 
­ipsilateral vein. Additional contraindications (relative 
and/or absolute) to performing access for lead 
­implantation include known venous thrombosis in the 
upper ­extremities, ongoing infection, coagulopathy, 
and known ­contralateral pneumothorax.
If the patient is undergoing an upgrade, with addition 
of one or more leads to an existing pacing system, 
­generally the first choice approach is to utilize the venous 
system ipsilateral to the existing system. However, there 
is always the possibility that the existing lead system has 
already resulted in chronic venous occlusion, so a careful 
examination of the ipsilateral chest surface for the pres-
ence of superficial venous collateral vessels should be 
performed. Additionally, consideration should be made 
to perform ipsilateral venography prior to incision, in 
order to plan for this scenario and still allow for a suc-
cessful outcome. This may involve abandonment of the 
existing system and placement of an entire new system 
on the contralateral pectoral region, accessing the venous 
system on the contralateral side and tunneling the 
­proximal portion of the lead across the chest superficial 
to the sternum and ribs to the existing system, ipsilateral 
venoplasty, or lead extraction to allow venous access on 
the ipsilateral system.
Prior echocardiography should also be reviewed to 
ensure no congenital abnormalities are present and there 
is no evidence to suggest persistent left‐sided superior 
vena cava (SVC; e.g. dilated coronary sinus). An assess-
ment of renal function, coagulation status, and electro-
lytes should be performed. In patients with renal 
insufficiency, pre‐hydration and/or premedication with 
N‐acetylcysteine can be considered [10]. With significant 
renal dysfunction, contrast can usually be avoided for 
pacemaker or implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator 
(ICD) implantation with extrathoracic subclavian or 
cephalic access, but usually a small amount of contrast is 
needed for implantation of leads in the coronary sinus. 
If  difficulty accessing the extrathoracic subclavian is 
encountered and one wishes to avoid the use of contrast, 
a coronary wire can be placed through a peripheral IV in 
the upper extremity to illustrate the path of the venous 
anatomy.
Regarding medications, oral diabetic medications and 
short‐acting insulin should be held. We also tend to hold 
diuretics while the patient is NPO. We generally will 
­continue aspirin in the perioperative period but will hold 
clopidogrel for 5 days if the patient has not undergone 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in the last 12 
months. Management of warfarin in the perioperative 
period is more complex. If there is no compelling indica-
tion for continuous anticoagulation (e.g., mechanical 
heart valve, pulmonary embolism, atrial fibrillation with 
high risk of thromboembolism, left ventricular throm-
bus) we usually stop warfarin 3 days prior to the proce-
dure and resume upon discharge or within 48 hours. If 
there is a compelling reason for anticoagulation, most 
operators are comfortable performing device implanta-
tion in patients on warfarin with an international nor-
malized ratio (INR) ≤3.0 at the time of implantation; 
however, patients on heparin or enoxaparin are transi-
tioned to warfarin, if possible, to minimize the risk of 
pocket hematoma. Birnie et  al. [11] demonstrated 
patients on therapeutic warfarin instead of heparin or 
enoxaparin bridge had significantly lower rates of clini-
cally significant pocket hematoma (3.5% vs. 16.0%; p 
<0.001). Some operators will perform implantation while 
patients are continuing with novel oral anticoagulants 
(NOACs); however, the data on this practice are cur-
rently sparse and there may be increased rates of serious 
complications [12], so most operators will hold NOACs 
in the perioperative period [13]. We generally discon-
tinue NOACs 2–3 days prior to implant and restart 
­typically within 1–2 days post implant if excessive 
­bleeding is not seen.

2  Extrathoracic Subclavian Vein Access
12
Preparation
Access is typically performed with a pectoral region 
pulse generator placement in mind. Therefore, the pec-
toral region should be prepped in a typical surgical ster-
ile fashion. Consideration should be made whether to 
prep the unilateral or bilateral pectoral region, in case 
one side must be abandoned and implant will proceed on 
the contralateral side. In our practice, bilateral pectoral 
regions are prepped. In that regard, at least medium bore 
(20 G or less) IVs are placed in the bilateral distal upper 
extremities to allow for venograms on either side if 
needed.
Relative hypovolemia can result in venous under filling 
and a resultant smaller target vein. This may increase the 
risk of missing the vein entirely or going through‐and‐
through the vein. We typically administer a small IV 
saline bolus (the volume depends on the patient’s condi-
tion and how long they have been NPO) just before 
access is attempted.
Incision and Creation of the Pocket
Most operators create an incision that both runs medial 
to and parallel to the deltopectoral groove, or inferior 
and parallel to the clavicle. The advantage of the former 
incision is that is allows better exposure of the deltopec-
toral groove if a cephalic vein cut‐down is being consid-
ered and tends to produce a more cosmetically appealing 
scar. Disadvantages of creating the incision parallel to 
the deltopectoral groove result from having to dissect 
medially to make the pocket to prevent the generator 
from lying too close to the axilla, while still allowing 
access to the extrathoracic subclavian vein. That being 
said, to allow for the option to access the cephalic vein 
and for improved cosmetics, we typically create an 
angled incision approximately 1 cm inferior and medial 
to the deltopectoral groove.
In patients presenting for a lead revision or upgrade 
with an existing system, the location of the new incision 
may be placed directly overlying the pre‐existing scar 
from prior incision(s), or a new incision can be made 
entirely. While efforts are made to use an existing inci-
sion, if there are concerns regarding the location of the 
existing scar, we will make a new incision. Potential con-
cerns include the prior incision not being in a location 
suitable for access to the venous system, device migra-
tion (typically, inferiorly and laterally) which may lead to 
difficulty accessing the prior device and/or leads, or 
inadequate soft tissue at the incision site to allow for a 
well‐healed scar. Otherwise, we tend to create an inci-
sion at the prior incision if feasible. Excision of the prior 
scar and other cosmetic techniques are available, but 
these are not discussed here.
After we have decided on the location of the incision, the 
patient prepared, and the venogram performed, we admin-
ister light conscious sedation with fentanyl and midazolam 
(if general anesthesia is not being used) and inject copious 
local anesthetic along the intended incisional line both 
superficial and deep. An incision is then created with a 
No.10 blade taking care to cut through the entire skin 
thickness with one smooth incision. Using Weitlaner 
retractors and electrocautery, the incision is continued 
through the adipose and connective tissues until the mus-
cular fascia is seen, with care being take to avoid disrupting 
the fascia. We will then inject another 10–20 mL of local 
anesthetic just superficial to the fascia and along the floor 
of the pocket where access and suturing is anticipated, and 
we will create a pocket for placement of the pulse generator 
at this time. While some will defer creation of the pocket 
until after access has been obtained or the leads have been 
secured, we advocate for creation of the pulse generator 
pocket at this time, as this will allow adequate time to 
assess for persistent bleeding that should be addressed.
Venography
Although in general the vein takes a relatively well‐
defined and predictable course, there is enough patient‐
to‐patient variation such that we almost universally 
perform venography to visualize the venous anatomy 
prior to access. However, access to the extrathoracic sub-
clavian can be obtained using only fluoroscopy. Only 4 of 
213 of the patients in Byrd’s series required venography 
and access without venography was successful in 245 of 
250 of the patients in Gardini and Benedini’s series [4,14]. 
Hence, many operators will “walk” the access needle 
along the first rib blindly until the extrathoracic subcla-
vian vein is accessed and only use venography if the vein 
is not easily found. However, venography should always 
be performed if old leads are present, if there is suspicion 
for vascular abnormality (e.g., persistent left SVC or 
large coronary sinus on echocardiography), or if access is 
not easily obtained.
Prior to performing venography, the fluoroscopy cam-
era should be positioned so that that image encompasses 
the vertebral bodies medially, clavicle superiorly, and 
deltopectoral groove laterally (Figure 2.2a,b). In addition 
to visualizing the extrathoracic subclavian vein, this 
positioning will allow examination for the presence of a 
persistent left SVC and show the position of the extratho-
racic axillary vein and cephalic vein in case alternate 
approaches are chosen (e.g., extreme anterior displace-
ment of clavicle). Oftentimes, operators will place the 
access needle at or near the anticipated access path at the 
surface of the pectoral muscle prior to venography so 
access can be performed after cineography but prior to 
the contrast leaving the vein.

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 2.2  (a) Venogram of left upper extremity. (b) The anatomy relevant for accessing the extrathoracic subclavian has been marked 
with the inferior margin of the clavicle identified with a solid double line, the lateral margin of the first rib with a dotted line, and the 
medial margin of the first rib with a thick solid single line. The target for accessing the extrathoracic subclavian has been marked with 
an asterisk. (c) The lateral margin of the first rib has been marked with a dashed line and the extrathoracic subclavian with an asterisk. 
(d) The access needle is above the first rib and approaching the medial margin of the first rib which has been identified with a thick black 
line. The medial margin of the first rib should not be violated with the access needle unless you are intentionally accessing the intrathoracic 
subclavian vein. (e) Access has been obtained and a J wire advanced into the intrathoracic subclavian vein. (f) The J wire has been advanced 
into inferior vena cava (beneath the diaphragm and on the left side of the vertebral body in AP view) ensuring you have not inadvertently 
accessed the arterial system.

2  Extrathoracic Subclavian Vein Access
14
After correct positioning of the camera, 20 mL of a 1 : 1 
contrast : saline mixture should be injected through in 
the ipsilateral upper extremity followed immediately by 
at least 10–20 mL saline. A larger bore (≥20 G) IV in the 
distal ipsilateral upper extremity is used for injection. If 
the proximal upper extremity is used, care should be 
taken to avoid the cephalic vein as the axillary vein may 
not be opacified well. Short pulses of fluoroscopy are 
then used until contrast is seen entering the extratho-
racic axillary artery and then cineography is performed. 
During cineography, if existing leads are present we 
will pan the table towards the SVC–right atrium (RA) 
junction to ensure no occlusion or stenosis is present. 
The resultant venogram can then be displayed as a 
“­roadmap” for “offline” access to the vein.
Vascular Access
After the creation of the pocket and venography, we 
­proceed to access the extrathoracic subclavian and/or 
axillary vein(s). The access needle (typically either 18 
gauge or a micropuncture needle) should be attached to 
a 10 mL Luer Lock syringe and filled with 1–2 mL saline. 
We choose an access point on the floor of the pocket at 
least 2 cm from the lateral edge and advance the needle 
bevel up superficially while applying gentle negative 
pressure until the lateral margin of the first rib is reached 
(Figure 2,2c). The rationale for a relatively medial entry 
point is to ensure an adequate area to secure the leads to 
the pectoral muscle. Typically, our angle of entry is 
approximately 30 degrees, adjusted according to body 
habitus and anatomy. We will decrease the angle in thin 
patients or if we anticipate there will significant distance 
to travel. A more acute angle may be used if significant 
soft tissue in this region suggests a deeper vein location. 
Once the lateral margin of the first rib is reached (as seen 
on fluoroscopy), we change our angle to approximately 
60 degrees and advance until we make contact with the 
first rib, reach the medial border of the first rib, or the 
vein is entered (Figure  2.2c,d). If the vein was not 
accessed, the needle should be slowly drawn back with 
continued gentle negative pressure. If the vein was punc-
tured through‐and‐through, most often a flash will be 
seen during needle withdrawal as the needle once again 
enters the lumen of the vein. If the vein is not accessed 
with withdrawal of the needle, the needle should be 
repositioned to either follow a steeper angle (if the first 
rib was not encountered prior to reaching the medial 
margin of the first rib) or either more cephalad or caudal 
(if the first rib was encountered) until access is obtained, 
using a saved frozen image of the venogram as an 
­anatomic guide. We recommend attempting to access 
the vein directly through the “front wall” of the vein, 
rather than a “through and through” Seldinger technique. 
The  latter increases the likelihood of continuing to 
advance the needle well past the vein, risking pneumo-
thorax or other complications if it is not suspected that 
the vein has already been entered and passed.
At this point, the syringe is removed, and a wire is 
advanced through the needle into the vein. If no signifi-
cant resistance to advancement is perceived, the wire can 
be safely advanced several centimeters without fluoros-
copy (Figure 2.2d). Once the wire is reasonably secure 
within the vein, fluoroscopy is used to guide advance-
ment of the wire past the subclavian vein, the SVC, and 
into the RA. At this point, we recommend further 
advancement of the wire into the inferior vena cava (IVC; 
rightward of the spine and beneath the diaphragm in AP: 
Figure 2.2e). Advancing the wire past the diaphragm will 
ensure that the arterial system has not been inadvert-
ently entered, potentially leading to erroneous lead 
placement within the left ventricle. Additionally, by plac-
ing the wire within the IVC it will not interfere with lead 
implantation in a more secure position. The access nee-
dle is removed, and the wire is then secured externally 
using a clamp to avoid dislodgement and/or migration of 
the entire wire into the venous system, a potentially sig-
nificant complication. Typically, we use a 60 cm 0.035” J 
wire given its soft atraumatic tip but will occasionally use 
a St. Jude Medical 0.035” Tigerwire or Covidien 0.025” 
Whorley wire if a steerable wire is needed to cross an 
area of stenosis or tortuosity. In general, hydrophilic 
wires should not be used for initial access, as pulling the 
wire back to any degree within the needle may result in 
shearing of the hydrophilic coating at the needle edge.
Subsequent Venous Access
If two or more leads are planned, either separate access 
points are obtained for each lead, a retained wire 
approach is used to maintain access as each lead is 
sequentially placed, or a hybrid approach is used. We 
generally favor a hybrid approach for CS lead placement, 
in which a retained wire technique is used for the RA and 
RV leads, while a separate access is used for the CS lead, 
if needed. This will minimize lead–lead interaction for 
the CS lead, while somewhat reducing the number of 
separate punctures required.
If more than one access point to the vein is desired, we 
recommend keeping additional access sites remote from 
the initial access site to minimize interaction between 
leads and crowding during suturing of the leads. In gen-
eral, additional contrast is not needed, as the wire just 
placed can be used as a fluoroscopic landmark. The 
advantages of separate access points for each lead are the 
minimization of lead–lead interactions during lead 

­Accessin g the Extrathoraci c Subclavi an Vei ﻿
15
manipulation, and possibly reduction of bleeding from 
axillary vein back bleeding. The downside of an approach 
utilizing separate access points for each lead is that with 
each pass of the access needle comes an additional risk of 
pneumothorax if the medial margin of the first rib is 
inadvertently violated.
Alternatively, a retained wire technique can be used. 
Once the access wire is placed, that same site can be 
used for subsequent lead placement by placing a sheath 
that is large enough bore to accommodate both the lead 
and a wire. The lead is then advanced through the 
sheath with the wire still within the sheath. Once the 
lead enters into the RA, the sheath is peeled before 
positioning the lead to minimize interactions between 
the lead and wire, and wire retained for subsequent 
access. This retained wire approach can be then 
repeated as needed for subsequent leads. While the 
retained wire technique may decrease the risk of pneu-
mothorax by limiting the number of needle passes, this 
approach may also increase the risk of axillary venous 
back bleeding and result in significant lead–lead 
­interaction during manipulation of the leads.
Another option to minimize needle passes and avoid 
oversized sheaths is to advance a small (e.g., 5 Fr) sheath 
over the initial access wire. Once the dilator is removed, 
additional wire(s) are advanced through the sheath back 
into the venous system (all the way to the IVC again). 
The sheath can then be withdrawn, and the sheath 
intended for the first lead to be placed is advanced over 
one of the two‐plus in situ wires. The advantages of this 
approach are that it allows for the smallest necessary 
sheath sizes to be used for each lead and minimizes 
­needle passes. The disadvantages are that multiple 
­additional steps are needed, there may be a higher rate of 
bleeding because of multiple leads passing through a 
­single vein puncture, and an increased risk of lead–lead 
interactions.
Whether using separate sticks or a retained wire 
­technique, we recommend advancement of at least the 
first sheath, if not all sheaths, under fluoroscopic 
­visualization. This will confirm the sheath tracks along 
the access wire; otherwise, the sheath may easily tear the 
vein. This is particularly important in right‐sided 
implants, as the course of the right subclavian vein into 
the SVC is more acute, rending it more difficult for the 
sheath to track along the acutely angled wire.
Hemostasis
One of the more significant causes of pocket hematoma 
is access vein back bleeding, especially in patients with 
elevated venous filling pressures, as often is the case in 
patients undergoing cardiac resynchronization therapy 
(CRT) placement. Once all the desired wires are placed 
into the venous system, we favor placement of a suture 
that encompasses the puncture site(s) at the pectoral 
muscle, at least 1 cm proximal to the wire exit point 
from the muscle. This suture is clamped and not tied off 
until the leads have been secured and tested. At that 
point, this “back bleed control” suture is tightened 
around the pectoral exit site such that any back bleeding 
from the axillary vein will be minimized, if not 
­eliminated. We always use an absorbable suture, ­typically 
2‐0 Vicryl, which allows for good hemostasis initially 
but avoids permanent tension on either the pectoral 
muscle or the leads.
Figure 2.3  Venogram demonstrating dimpling of the extrathoracic axillary vein with access.

2  Extrathoracic Subclavian Vein Access
16
­Extrathoracic Axillary Access
Many operators utilize a lateral axillary vein access site. 
With this technique the vein is accessed at the lateral 
margin of the rib cage just cephalad to the intersection of 
the inferior border of the second rib and superior border 
of the third rib (Figure 2.3). A needle approach angle of 
45 to nearly 90 degrees is typically used. Using fluoro-
scopic landmarks alone, Burri et al. [15]reported a 61% 
success rate without venography and 95–99% success 
rate with venography.
The primary advantage of this technique is minimi-
zation of pneumothorax risk, as the needle should 
never pass over the projection of the ribs and hence 
the lung fields; however, there are significant draw-
backs to this approach. The placement of leads near 
the axilla may result in patient discomfort, as the leads 
and potentially pulse generator may sit within the 
axilla, subject to movement and irritation from arm 
movement. Additionally, the acute angulation of the 
access needle may result in increased risk of lead 
­fracture [11].
­References
	1	 Belott P. How to access the axillary vein. Heart Rhythm 
2006;3(3):366–369.
	2	 Hsu JC, Friday J, Lee BK, Azadani PN, Lee RJ, Badhwar N, 
et al. Predictors of axillary vein location for vascular access 
during pacemaker and defibrillator lead implantation. 
Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2011; 34(12):1585–92.
	3	 Byrd CL. Safe introducer technique for pacemaker lead 
implantation. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
1992;15(3):262–267.
	4	 Byrd CL. Clinical experience with the extrathoracic 
introducer insertion technique. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 1993;16(9):1781–1784.
	5	 Calkins H, Ramza BM, Brinker J, Atiga W, Donahue K, 
Nsah E, et al. Prospective randomized comparison of the 
safety and effectiveness of placement of endocardial 
pacemaker and defibrillator leads using the extrathoracic 
subclavian vein guided by contrast venography versus 
the cephalic approach. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2001;24(4 Pt 1):456–464.
	6	 Aggarwal RK, Connelly DT, Ray SG, Ball J, Charles RG. 
Early complications of permanent pacemaker 
implantation: no difference between dual and single 
chamber systems. Br Heart J 1995;73(6):571–575.
	7	 Kirkfeldt RE, Johansen JB, Nohr EA, Moller M, Arnsbo 
P, Nielsen JC. Pneumothorax in cardiac pacing: a 
population‐based cohort study of 28,860 Danish 
patients. Europace 2012;14(8):1132–1138.
	8	 Magney JE, Flynn DM, Parsons JA, Staplin DH,  
Chin‐Purcell MV, Milstein S, et al. Anatomical 
mechanisms explaining damage to pacemaker leads, 
defibrillator leads, and failure of central venous catheters 
adjacent to the sternoclavicular joint. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 1993;16(3 Pt 1):445–457.
	 9	 Birnie DH, Parkash R, Exner DV, Essebag V, Healey JS, 
Verma A, et al. Clinical predictors of Fidelis lead failure: 
report from the Canadian Heart Rhythm Society 
Device Committee. Circulation 
2012;125(10):1217–1225.
	10	 Zagler A, Azadpour M, Mercado C, Hennekens CH. 
N‐acetylcysteine and contrast‐induced 
nephropathy: a meta‐analysis of 13 randomized  
trials. Am Heart J 2006;151(1):140–145.
	11	 Birnie DH, Healey JS, Wells, GA, Verma A, Tang AS, 
Krahn AD, et al. Pacemaker or defibrillator surgery 
without interruption of anticoagulation. N Engl J Med 
2013;368:2084–2093.
	12	 Kosiuk J, Koutalas E, Doering M, Sommer P, Rolf S, 
Breithardt OA, et al. Treatment with novel oral 
anticoagulants in a real‐world cohort of patients 
undergoing cardiac rhythm device implantations. 
Europace 2014;16(7):1028–1032.
	13	 Nascimento T, Birnie DH, Healey JS, Verma A, Joza J, 
Bernier ML, et al. Managing novel oral anticoagulants 
in patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing device 
surgery: Canadian survey. Can J Cardiol 
2014;30(2):231–236.
	14	 Gardini A, Benedini G. Blind extrathoracic subclavian 
venipuncture for pacemaker implant: a 3‐year 
experience in 250 patients. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
1998;21(11 Pt 2):2304–2308.
	15	 Burri H, Sunthorn H, Dorsaz PA, Shah D. 
Prospective study of axillary vein puncture with 
or without contrast venography for 
pacemaker and defibrillator lead implantation.  
Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2005; 
28(Suppl 1):S280–283.

17
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Since its advent in 1980 and widespread commercial 
use in 1985, implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators 
(ICDs) have been a very effective therapy in aborting 
sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) as well as improving sur-
vival in high‐risk patients. Conventional ICDs utilize a 
­transvenous approach to lead implantation in the endo-
cardium for arrhythmia detection and defibrillation. 
Although this approach was a major advance compared 
with the early systems which required patches placed 
on the heart via a thoracotomy, there are numerous 
­potential complications associated with transvenous 
lead implantation. Procedural complications include 
pneumothorax, ­hemothorax, cardiac perforation, and 
tamponade, whereas, more chronically, lead failure 
and  malfunction can lead to inappropriate therapies 
and require lead revisions. Device infections are associ-
ated with serious morbidity and mortality and require 
extraction of the leads, a procedure that is associated 
with ­substantial morbidity and mortality.
Recently, an entirely subcutaneous ICD (S‐ICD) was 
developed with the goal of avoiding the complications 
associated with transvenous ICDs. In early human trials, 
the optimal electrode and generator placement was 
determined, with the generator placed in the left lateral 
axilla and the coil in the left parasternal position [1]. In 
this configuration, the proximal sensing electrode is 
adjacent to the xiphoid process, and the distal sensing 
electrode is at the manubriosternal junction. Three sens-
ing vectors can be derived with this lead placement: 
­primary (proximal electrode to can), secondary (distal 
electrode to can), and alternative (distal electrode to 
proximal electrode). In studies of induced arrhythmias, 
S‐ICD has been shown to be highly sensitive (100%) and 
specific (98%) for arrhythmia discrimination, with better 
discrimination of supraventricular arrhythmias than 
with transvenous devices [2]. In addition, the S‐ICD 
achieved high success in defibrillation during ventricular 
fibrillation (VF) testing at implant [3]. In this chapter, we 
seek to describe optimal patient selection and implant 
techniques.
­Patient Selection
The S‐ICD has been approved broadly for patients 
­meeting previously established guidelines for primary or 
secondary prevention of SCA who do not have a pacing 
indication. This device should be avoided in patients 
who require pacing for bradycardia, ventricular tachy-
cardia, or cardiac resynchronization therapy. This device 
is most commonly used for patients who are poor candi-
dates for a transvenous system for a variety of reasons. 
Such groups include patients with congenital heart 
­disease with no or limited venous access, hemodialysis 
patients, and those with previous bacteremia including 
endocarditis. Patients with previous transvenous device 
infections, whether systemic or localized, are frequently 
treated with an S‐ICD.
Transvenous ICD leads have a high long‐term failure 
rate [4]. This often results in the need for further trans-
venous leads, increasing the risk for venous occlusion, 
or to lead extraction, which carries substantial risks. 
Therefore, young patients with a long life expectancy 
may benefit from a subcutaneous approach to avoid 
these potential complications. Similarly, patients with 
inherited disorders associated with sudden death, 
including ­channelopathies, are often young with no 
pacing indications. They are another excellent group to 
consider for an S‐ICD. Such conditions include 
­hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Brugada syndrome, and 
long QT syndrome.
3
Subcutaneous Implantable Cardioverter‐Defibrillator
Anil Rajendra and Michael R. Gold
Division of Cardiology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA

3  Subcutaneous Implantable Cardioverter‐Defibrillator
18
Despite ideal as well as poor candidates for S‐ICD, 
the majority of ICD candidates do not fit into one of 
these categories. Thus, patient selection for this device 
continues to evolve and other factors influence the 
choice of device, such as the need for remote monitor-
ing, battery longevity, costs, and, importantly, patient 
preference.
Patients need to be screened to ensure appropriate 
identification and discrimination of arrhythmias. The 
lead is placed subcutaneously; the sensing vector 
resembles the signal of a standard surface ECG, thus 
leaving it susceptible to oversensing of cardiac signals 
(i.e., T waves) and noise. To prevent this issue, the 
sensing algorithm has a threshold that adapts to the 
amplitude of the QRS complex and decays over time. 
To ensure that the sensing algorithm can be effective, 
cutaneous ECG screening is performed prior to 
implant to ensure an adequate R to T wave ratio. The 
three electrodes are placed where the subcutaneous 
pulse generator and lead electrodes would be posi-
tioned rather than at traditional ECG locations. If the 
R to T wave ratio is inadequate, then implantation is 
discouraged, as the patient is at increased risk of 
­inappropriate shocks.
­Anatomic Landmarks 
for Implantation and Prepping
The implantation of an entirely subcutaneous ICD can 
be performed completely by anatomic landmarks with-
out the use of fluoroscopy. The major landmarks are 
the left lateral mid axillary line, the xiphoid process, 
and the manubriosternal junction. The pulse generator 
(i.e., can) sits in the left mid axillary line, with small 
incisions at the xiphoid process and manubriosternal 
junction. Prior to prepping the skin, fluoroscopy can be 
used to identify the apex of the heart or this can be iden-
tified by palpation, because the ICD can should be 
placed at that level. The site for the can may be indi-
cated with a marking pen prior to the skin being 
prepped to ensure the appropriate location for the inci-
sion (Figure 3.1).
Care should be made to prep an adequate area for the 
implant, as it is a larger area than conventional trans-
venous implants. The skin should be clipped from just 
right of the sternum to the posterior axilla, and from the 
chin to the epigastrium. The same area should be prepped 
with a typical skin cleansing solution. It is important to 
prep far enough posterior to decrease the risk of infec-
tion. To improve visualization and access to the axilla, a 
roll or wedge can be placed under the patient’s left side so 
that it is slightly elevated or a rotating surgical table can 
be used. The left arm will need to be extended out to the 
side on an arm board so that it does not obscure the axilla 
and is not in the operative field.
As with skin preparation, placement of the sterile 
drapes should be wide enough to provide an adequate 
operative field (Figure  3.2). The entire axilla to the 
­sternum and the xiphoid process to the sternal notch 
should be included in the sterile operative field. With 
the left arm extended out to the side, an additional 
drape will need to be placed over the arm to maintain 
good sterility.
Figure 3.1  Photograph of a patient from the left side. The sites 
for the incision (left axilla, xiphoid process, and manubriosternal 
junction) are marked with a blue pen prior to the skin prep 
and draping.
Figure 3.2  A superior view of the sterile field from the head of 
the bed. Note that a wide surgical field is draped to allow access to 
the incision sites.

­Implantation  Procedur ﻿
19
­Implantation Procedure
After the patient has been adequately prepped and 
draped using a sterile technique, the pocket should be 
made in the left lateral axilla. The can should reside at 
the apex of the heart, above the level of the diaphragm in 
the left axilla. A good landmark for the diaphragm is the 
xiphoid process (i.e., the can should not sit lower than 
the xiphoid process). Placement of the can in an anterior 
location can lead to inadequate defibrillation so erring 
toward the posterior axilla is preferable. Typically, the 
incision for the pocket is made in the lateral axilla and 
dissected posteriorly until an adequate pocket size is 
achieved. Numerous cutaneous vessels reside in the area, 
and care must be taken to ensure adequate hemostasis. 
As with transvenous systems, dissection should be per-
formed to the fascia, in this situation of the latissimus 
dorsi muscle, and care should be taken to avoid interrup-
tion of that fascia to prevent excessive bleeding.
Once the pocket for the can has been made, attention 
should be turned to the smaller incisions along the ster-
num. An incision about 2 cm in length should be made 
just left of the xiphoid process. There is no clear consen-
sus whether a vertical or horizontal incision is preferred. 
The lead should lie along the left parasternal border, so 
the incision should be made about 1 cm left of the xiphoid 
process. The fascia should be sufficiently uncovered with 
dissection. Using 2‐0 silk, a suture is tied to the fascia; 
another 2‐0 silk suture is tied to the fascia 1 cm lateral 
from the initial suture. The strands of these two sutures 
should be left in place, as they will be used to tie the 
suture sleeve in place later. Another incision is made 
1 cm left of the manubriosternal junction. This landmark 
can be found by palpating the sternal notch. Similar to 
the previous incision at the xiphoid process, the subcuta-
neous tissue should be dissected and the fascia revealed. 
Using a 2‐0 silk, a suture is tied to the fascia.
Next, the tunneling trochar is placed in the incision at 
the xiphoid process at the level of the fascia. The trochar 
is then tunneled along the fascia laterally toward the infe-
rior border of the lateral pocket until it breaks through 
the tissue and penetrates the pocket (Figure 3.3). The tro-
char has a small hole at the end, through which a 2‐0 silk 
suture is tied. A long strand should be preserved and is 
then tied to the end of the lead so that the lead is attached 
to the trochar. This set‐up allows the lead to be pulled 
with the tunneling device. The trochar is then pulled 
from the handle through the incision at the xiphoid pro-
cess until the lead is pulled through that incision as well 
(Figure 3.4). There is a sensing electrode 1 cm proximal to 
the coil on the lead. A suture sleeve with two grooves is 
attached to the lead 1 cm proximal to the sensing 
­electrode. The sutures that were tied to the fascia 
­previously are used to secure the lead to the fascia with 
the suture sleeve. The trochar, with the lead still attached 
via the silk suture, is then inserted into the incision at the 
xiphoid process again, but this time directed cranially 
toward the superior parasternal incision. When the tro-
char breaks through the tissue at the manubrium, the lead 
is then pulled into the incision with the silk tie that was 
attached to the tip. The silk tie is then cut so that the lead 
is freed from the trochar. The 2‐0 silk that was sutured to 
the ­fascia previously is then placed through the hole in 
the end of the lead, and the lead is secured to the fascia.
Figure 3.3  The trochar has been tunneled from the xiphoid 
incision to the lateral pocket.
Figure 3.4  The lead is pulled from the lateral pocket through the 
xiphoid incision via the silk tied to the trochar.

3  Subcutaneous Implantable Cardioverter‐Defibrillator
20
The lead is now in place, running along the left par-
asternal border and across to the lateral pocket 
(Figure 3.5). A suture is then placed in the floor of the 
pocket at the cranial end and tied to the fascia. The lead 
is placed in the header of the can, and the set screw is 
tightened. The suture that was tied to the fascia of the 
pocket is attached to the can through a hole in the header. 
The pocket is then closed in the usual fashion. The 
smaller incisions along the sternum are also closed in the 
usual fashion.
­Two‐Incision Technique 
for Implantation
The above technique was developed for good lead stabil-
ity as the lead is secured in three locations, leaving little 
room for lead dislodgement. However, the superior par-
asternal incision is conspicuous, thus having cosmetic 
disadvantages. In addition, more incisions increase the 
risk of infection and prolong the implantation proce-
dure. Consequently, a technique that eliminates the inci-
sion at the manubriosternal junction was developed [5]. 
This technique was evaluated in 39 patients, with a mean 
follow‐up of 18 months. There were no lead dislodge-
ments and no patients required lead revisions, demon-
strating the technique to be safe and viable.
The two‐incision technique eliminates the superior par-
asternal incision. The pocket and incision at the xiphoid 
process are fashioned in the same manner as described 
above. Once the lead has been tunneled to the inferior 
parasternal incision and tied to the fascia, the silk tie con-
necting the lead to the trochar is cut. The tunneling device 
is then placed through an 11 French peel‐away sheath 
(Figure 3.6). The trochar is then tunneled cranially toward 
the manubriosternal junction along the left sternal border. 
Once the trochar has reached the superior landmark, the 
sheath is advanced over the trochar to that landmark. The 
sheath is held in place as the tunneling device is then 
removed. The sheath is now in place along the left sternal 
border up to the manubriosternal junction. The lead is 
placed through the sheath until it has been advanced com-
pletely into the sheath. The end of the lead typically can be 
felt in its superior location. The sheath is then peeled away 
while the lead is held in place by applying external pres-
sure to the tip of the lead to keep it steady. The lead is now 
in its final position again along the left parasternal border. 
The lead is attached to the can and the incisions closed as 
described above.
­Defibrillation Testing and Device 
Programming
Once the S‐ICD has been implanted, the device auto-
matically selects the optimal sensing vector to prevent 
double counting and T‐wave over‐sensing. This can be 
changed manually if necessary. At the end of the initial 
implant procedure, arrhythmia detection and termina-
tion can be tested using a 65 joule shock to ensure 
an  adequate (15 J) safety margin. For spontaneous 
­arrhythmias, the device delivers 80 J shocks only, with 
Figure 3.5  A chest X‐ray of the subcutaneous implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator (S‐ICD) after implantation, showing the 
proper lead and can position.
Figure 3.6  The 11 Fr sheath on the tunneling trochar.

­Reference ﻿
21
the ­polarity automatically switching for failed shocks. A 
shock zone is programmed in all devices that is analo-
gous to the VF zone in transvenous systems. An optional 
“conditional” zone can also be programmed from 170 to 
240 bpm that will apply rhythm discrimination algo-
rithms to differentiate VT from SVT. This arrhythmia 
discrimination algorithm applies morphology template 
matching that is similar to transvenous systems but eval-
uates up to 41 points on the QRS complex to increase 
resolution. Several studies have shown that that two‐
zone programming markedly reduces the incidence of 
inappropriate shocks [6].
Final device programming options are minimal. Shock 
therapy, a conditional zone, rate cutoffs for the zones, 
and post‐shock pacing are the only programming capa-
bilities with shock output and polarity being automated.
­Conclusions
The S‐ICD is a new defibrillator for the prevention of 
sudden death. It has been shown to be a safe and effective 
alternative approach to the traditional transvenous 
implant. Although the implant technique is quite differ-
ent from the transvenous approach, it can be easily 
learned and carried out relatively quickly and safely. For 
certain patient populations, the S‐ICD is a viable and 
often preferable option.
­Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Peter Belott for sharing some of the photo-
graphs in this article.
­References
	1	 Bardy GH, Smith WN, Hood MA, Crozier AG, Melton IC, 
Jordaens L, et al. An entirely subcutaneous implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator. N Engl J Med 2010;363:36–44.
	2	 Gold MR, Theuns DA, Knight BP, Sturdivant JL, 
Sanghera R, Ellenbogen KA, et al. Head‐to‐head 
comparison of arrhythmia discrimination performance 
of subcutaneous and transvenous ICD arrhythmia 
detection algorithms: the START study. J Cardiovasc 
Electrophysiol 2012;23:359–366.
	3	 Weiss R, Knight BL, Gold MR, Leon AR, Herre JM, 
Hood M, et al. Safety and efficacy of a totally 
subcutaneous implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator. 
Circulation 2013;128:944–953.
	4	 Borleffs CJ, van Erven L, van Bommel RJ, van der 
Velde ET, van derWall EE, Bax JJ, et al. Risk of 
failure of transvenous implantable cardioverter‐ 
defibrillator leads. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 
2009;2:411–416.
	5	 Knops RE, Olde Nordkamp LRA, de Groot JR, Wilde 
AAM. Two‐incision technique for implantation of the 
subcutaneous implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator. 
Heart Rhythm 2013;10:1240–1243.
	6	 Gold MR, Weiss R, Theuns DAMJ, Smith W, Leon A, 
Knight BP, et al. The use of discrimination algorithm to 
reduce inappropriate shocks with a subcutaneous ICD. 
Heart Rhythm 2014;11:1352–1358.

23
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Patients with cardiac implantable electronic devices 
(CIEDs) frequently require upgrading procedures. 
Greater awareness of pacemaker syndrome and the 
­benefits of cardiac resynchronization therapy have 
resulted in more frequent and earlier implantation of 
additional functional leads. At the same time, implanting 
physicians encounter subclavian vein obstruction more 
­frequently because of prolonged patient survival and the 
presence of multiple pre‐existing leads [1]. Implantation 
of a separate pacemaker or defibrillator system is a strat-
egy that can be reasonably employed. However, this 
results in significantly more endovascular leads and 
abandoned leads that crowd the venous return, including 
the critical superior vena cava (SVC). Accessing an 
occluded or severely stenosed subclavian venous system 
can be associated with increased risks of vascular injury, 
dissection, inadvertent arterial access, and collateral 
injury including pneumothorax.
The stenosis or occlusion involved with transvenous 
implantable cardiac devices typically occurs at the level 
of subclavian–axillary juncture or at the venous access 
sites. When occlusions are present, obtaining access at 
sites distinctly separated from the same venous system 
will allow implantation with vascular entry on the ipsilat-
eral side as the remaining functional leads and device. 
The internal jugular (IJ) vein drains a separate venous 
return plexus and often remains patent even in patients 
with multiple leads in the subclavian system. Access via 
the IJ permits a direct path to the right cardiac chambers 
for implant of cardiac device leads.
­Patient Selection and Preparation
Implanting a lead via the IJ approach requires percutane-
ous access to the vasculature at the neck, opening the 
pectoral device pocket, tunneling from the pocket across 
the clavicle, and ultimately pulling the lead across the 
clavicle into the pocket via the tunnel. An adequate 
amount of subcutaneous tissue is vital to prevent erosion 
as the lead crosses the clavicle under the subcutaneous 
tissue. It is also important to recognize the anteriorly 
­displaced clavicle, which is frequently associated with 
kyphosis in elderly women. The risk of serious vascular 
or brachial plexus injury is high if the lead is accidentally 
tunneled under rather than over the clavicle.
Contrast venography should be considered in any 
patient with pre‐existing leads, when venous patency is 
in doubt, or if abnormal anatomy is suspected. When a 
peripheral, left‐sided, occlusion is noted in patients with 
devices already implanted via the left subclavian, it may 
be helpful to perform right‐sided venography to evaluate 
for the presence of central occlusion at the SVC or 
innominate veins, potentially precluding the IJ approach. 
Bilateral venography may also reveal other potential 
­targets for contralateral central venous access. We gen-
erally perform the venography immediately prior to the 
planned procedure, after the patient is positioned on 
the table, but prior to the antiseptic preparation, so that 
the anatomy is representative of the patient’s anticipated 
positioning during the procedure and draped so as to 
offer a wider operative window as necessary.
4
Internal Jugular Venous Access and Lead Implantation for Cardiac 
Implantable Electronic Devices
Michael G. Katz and David T. Huang
Division of Cardiology, Department of Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA

4  Internal Jugular Venous Access and Lead Implantation for Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
24
The use of contrast dye for venography requires ­careful 
attention to pre‐procedural renal function to avoid con-
trast‐induced nephropathy (CIN). Although it is beyond 
the scope of this chapter to discuss the pathophysiology 
of CIN and the evidence base for prophylactic proce-
dures, it is important to consider that even modest 
amounts of dye (<20 mL) can result in renal dysfunction 
in an unprepared patient. Patients are risk stratified 
for  potential CIN, taking into account factors such as 
advanced age, chronic kidney disease, diabetes, and 
severe reduction in left ventricular ejection fraction 
(LVEF) (<0.40) [2]. If patients have multiple risk factors 
for CIN, they are instructed to hold diuretics and angio-
tensin converting enzyme inhibitors on the day of the 
procedure. While randomized control trials have not 
provided clear evidence on the best type of periproce-
dural hydration, normal saline or sodium bicarbonate is 
administered as a bolus 1 hour prior to the procedure 
and several hours afterwards.
When the decision to proceed with IJ implantation of 
the lead has been made, the surgical site should be widely 
prepared and draped. In addition to scrubbing the pecto-
ral area of the chest with chlorhexidine and alcohol solu-
tion, we also prepare up to the hairline, behind the ear, 
and to the mandible on the side ipsilateral to the device. 
Once the area has been scrubbed, the area of interest is 
surrounded by surgical towels and covered with a sterile 
see‐through plastic adhesive drape, which is impreg-
nated with iodoform solution. We modify a standard 
device drape by extending the window with suture scis-
sors. We secure the superior edges of the newly extended 
window with several occlusive transparent dressings 
(Tegaderm) (Figure 4.1). It is important to insulate the 
superior edges securely to both maintain sterility and 
prevent fire in the surgical suite. Electrocautery may 
ignite the supplemental oxygen in use and the 70% 
­alcohol‐based scrubs may serve as fuel if the skin surface 
is not completely dry.
The technique described can be accomplished with 
the components of a standard pacemaker instrument 
tray and two lead introducer kits. It is useful to have a 
long‐stemmed instrument, such as a Bozeman uterine 
dressing forceps, for tunneling purposes. Additionally, 
we utilize vascular ultrasound to establish venous access 
as described next.
­Procedure
Once the device area and ipsilateral neck are prepared 
and draped, a site for IJ venous access is selected 
­approximately two finger breadths above the cranial 
edge of the clavicle along the lateral edge of the sternal 
head of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. This approach 
helps to avoid pneumothorax and allows for adequate 
distal separation of the IJ from the internal carotid artery 
and at the same time minimizes the tunneling distance. 
Numerous studies of central venous access demonstrate 
that ultrasound guidance has been shown to increase the 
success of first‐time wire placement and to decrease the 
risk of complications. We utilize vascular ultrasound 
with a sterile sleeve to directly visualize the compressible 
IJ, immediately lateral to the pulsatile carotid artery. 
This area is then infiltrated with 1% lidocaine solution. 
Using the components from a standard peel‐away sheath 
kit, a 5 cm 18‐gauge needle is inserted at an angle of 
about 20 degrees to the skin, in the direction of the 
­ipsilateral nipple. After venous access is obtained, the 
J‐shaped end of the wire is introduced into the needle 
and advanced into the IJ vein. The free end of the wire is 
temporarily secured with a mosquito or mini Kelly 
clamp. Delaying sheath placement, as the conclusion of 
the Seldinger technique prior to the tunneling, avoids 
distortion of the anatomy of the neck.
Attention is turned to opening the device pocket. 
Typically, our pectoral incision is positioned around two 
finger breadths below the caudal border of the clavicle. 
Efforts are made to coordinate the incision over the 
­cranial aspect of the device, with care not to make 
the incision too caudal. This site of incision will allow 
for  minimized tunneling of the lead to be inserted 
(Figure 4.2; Video 4.1, 0:04).
The tunneling process starts at the inner, medial, and 
cranial edges of the pocket lip. To avoid skin erosion 
and bleeding complications, it is essential to tunnel just 
on top of the fascial layer and clavicle, with as much 
Figure 4.1  The pectoral and neck region is prepared widely, with 
adequate room (at least two finger breadths) above the clavicle. 
A standard drape can be modified by cutting out a portion of the 
drape to allow access to the neck. Care must be taken to secure 
the modified drape to ensure sterility and to avoid ignition of 
supplemental oxygen by electrocautery.

­Procedur ﻿
25
­overlaying subcutaneous tissue as possible. For control 
and visualization of the tunnel entrance, electrocautery 
can be used to make a small nick at the desired entrance 
site (Figure 4.3; Video 4.1, 0:22). With the curved angle 
facing anteriorly (i.e., towards the ceiling), the Bozeman 
forceps are introduced to the entrance of the tunnel and 
bluntly dissect along the subcutaneous tissue to create a 
tunnel over the clavicle, towards the skin entrance of the 
secured guidewire. The upward curve of the forceps 
­prevents inadvertent tunneling into the muscle or under 
the clavicle (Figure 4.4). Once the instrument reaches the 
clavicle, the angle of the forceps is turned downward (i.e., 
towards the floor) to conform to the anatomic curve of 
the clavicle. As the tunneling passes over the clavicle, 
the forceps are once again turned upward or anteriorly 
directing towards at the site of the J wire retained in the IJ.
The Seldinger technique is then completed and the 
peel‐away sheath along with the dilatator are inserted 
into the IJ over the J wire. Once in place, the wire and 
dilator are removed en bloc, leaving the sheath within 
the IJ. The lead is then inserted into the sheath and 
implanted in a fashion similar to traditional percutane-
ous implantation via a subclavian–axillary venous access 
in the pectoral pocket. The silicone elastomer collar of 
the lead is temporally removed. Iris scissors can be used 
to make longitudinal cut along the collar to remove it. 
Care must be applied so as not to injure the lead insula-
tion (Video 4.1, 0:29).
At this point, the sheath remains “unbroken,” and acts 
to protect the newly implanted lead from trauma as the 
Bozeman forceps is inserted from the pocket into the 
newly formed tunnel, again with the curve facing 
upwards. The tips of the forceps should exit the skin 
­surface where the sheath enters the skin (Video 4.1, 0:51). 
A skin nick with a scalpel can be helpful if the tips do not 
easily exit the subcutaneous tissue and the skin surface. 
One end of sheath guidewire is then grasped by the for-
ceps and pulled back to the pocket through the tunnel 
(Video 4.1, 1:20). The end result is wire that enters at the 
IJ sheath site and exists into the pocket. The sheath is 
then broken and peeled away (Video 4.1, 1:58).
A Seldinger maneuver is utilized again as a sheath and 
dilator, enough to accommodate the terminal pin end of 
the lead (e.g. a 9 Fr sheath for 7 Fr pacemaker leads or an 
11 Fr sheath for 9 Fr IS‐4 ICD leads), are passed into the 
tunnel, over the wire, entering through the cranial edge 
of the pocket and exiting at the newly fashioned IJ lead 
insertion site (Figure 4.5). The wire and dilator are, again, 
removed en bloc. The free terminal end of the implanted 
Figure 4.2  The incision to open the pocket is made cranial to 
the device to reduce the tunneling distance from the internal 
jugular (IJ) entrance site.
Figure 4.3  Electrocautery can be used to nick the upper lip of the 
pocket so that tunneling can be initiated directly anterior to the 
prepectoral fascia.
Figure 4.4  Bozeman uterine forceps are used to tunnel from the 
pocket, over the clavicle, and towards the guidewire exiting the IJ.

4  Internal Jugular Venous Access and Lead Implantation for Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
26
lead should fit snugly into the nearby tip of the sheath. 
Once the terminal is fitted securely within the sheath, 
the lead can be pulled back to the pocket by the sheath, via 
the tunnel. Gentle traction on the lead will result in 
reduction of the proximal loop formed at the skin surface 
and this will smoothly tuck underneath the skin surface 
(Video 4.1, 2:17). The end result is a lead that enters the 
IJ vein, tunnels subcutaneously across the clavicle, and 
enters the pocket. The silicon collar that was initially 
removed from the lead may be carefully re‐applied to the 
free end of the lead, as it exits the pocket. The lead may 
then be secured to the pectoral fascia, via the silicon 
­collar, allowing enough slack for the lead to be secured to 
the header. The pocket can then be closed in the usual 
fashion. A small amount of surgical skin adhesive can be 
applied to the IJ puncture site following hemostasis.
­Long‐Term Outcome
In the presence of peripheral occlusion of the axillary or 
subclavian veins, our institution has found lead implan-
tation via the IJ vein to be safe, straightforward, and 
durable with regard to lead performance. Of 14 leads 
implanted via the IJ at the University of Rochester from 
2000 to 2011, 7 remain in use and are followed at our 
institution, with excellent thresholds, sensing, and surgi-
cal results. There has been no report of erosion at the IJ 
site or over the clavicle. No patient discomfort has been 
noted. Five patients were subsequently followed at other 
institutions, but no problems were reported. Two leads 
were removed. One lead was removed as a result of 
device infection 2 weeks after implant. An implanted left 
ventricular lead was extracted without complications in 
the context of high capture thresholds and the presence 
of a separate shock lead fracture. Both of these leads 
were removed relatively early after implant, using simple 
traction. The course and curvature of the lead as it trav-
els over the clavicle and enters the IJ would generally 
prohibit the co‐axial use of telescoping or laser‐utilizing 
extraction sheaths.
Given the morbidity burden of most patients undergo-
ing device upgrade, the ability to add another lead via a 
patent IJ affords an alternate opportunity to implant a 
revised system on the side ipsilateral to the existing 
­system. Importantly, this technique avoids extensive 
­vascular dilation and/or ballooning and has been dem-
onstrated to be safe and associated with longer term 
­survival of the system.
­References
	1	 Lickfett L, Bitzen A, Arepally A, Nasir K, Wolpert C, 
Jeong KM, et al. Incidence of venous obstruction 
following insertion of an implantable cardioverter‐
defibrillator: a study of systematic contrast venography 
on patients presenting for their first elective ICD 
generator replacement. Europace 2004;6(1):25–31.
	2	 Mehran R, Aymong ED, Nikolsky E, Lasic Z,  
Iakovou I, Fahy M, et al. A simple risk score for 
prediction of contrast‐induced nephropathy after 
percutaneous coronary intervention: development 
and initial validation. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2004;44(7):1393–399.
Figure 4.5  Once a standard J‐guidewire has been pulled back 
through the tunnel by the Bozeman forceps, a sheath can be 
advanced over the wire, through the tunnel. Once the dilator and 
wire are removed, the lead terminal can be secured in the free end 
of the sheath.
  To watch the videos, please log in to the Companion Website: 
www.wiley.com/go/al‐ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds

27
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
­Venous Access
Whether implanting a fresh biventricular pacing system 
or upgrading a pre‐existing dual chamber system, 
­obtaining venous access must be carried out with fore-
thought. It is highly advisable to have separate access 
points for each lead. This will help increase maneuvering 
and positioning of leads. At the very least, the access 
point for the left ventricular (LV) lead should be separate. 
In cases where coronary sinus (CS) access is straightfor-
ward and lead placement goes smoothly, the need for a 
separate access point may seem conservative. There are 
considerably more potential challenges of successful CS 
lead implantation, and to ensure the maximum freedom 
of catheters, it is best to have a separate venous access 
point to allow easier manipulation of the sheath, guiding 
catheters, and lead. If venous access is obtained via the 
subclavian approach, LV lead guiding catheters must 
negotiate between the subclavius muscle, the costoc-
oracoid ligament, and the costoclavicular ligament. 
The access of axillary or cephalic vein will allow easier 
manipulation of the LV lead system, and therefore it is 
our recommended access site for LV lead implantation.
If venous access to the target vessel is difficult to obtain, 
simple solutions include giving intravenous ­fluids, raising 
the patient’s legs, or applying traction on the patient’s 
arm. Another option is using the internal jugular vein. 
This technique is best suited if the device is on the right‐
hand side as the left internal jugular vein poses difficulty 
for the LV lead to traverse the various bends. It is recom-
mended to use ultrasound guidance for proper visualiza-
tion of the vessel. Once the lead is placed into the CS at 
the desired location, it may be ­tunneled in a subcutaneous 
fashion using standard blunt instrumentation to the pulse 
generator located in the infraclavicular fossa (Table 5.1).
Especially for patients in whom there has been pre‐exist-
ing access or intervention of the venous system, it is imper-
ative to perform a venogram to determine vessel patency. 
For patients for whom there is moderate to severe stenosis 
of the venous system, venoplasty may be considered.
Each implanting physician has his or her preference, 
but it is often helpful to have at least the right ventricular 
(RV) lead in place first. This offers several advantages, 
including pacing back‐up and to provide a landmark to 
aid in locating the CS os.
­Coronary Sinus Catheter
The basic platform assembly for LV lead implantation 
involves an outer guide catheter and an inner telescop-
ing catheter for target vein access. If a short 9 Fr vascu-
lar access sheath is used, the guide catheter is usually a 
9 Fr sheath with a 7–8 Fr inner catheter, which can 
deliver a 5–6 Fr lead. Table 5.2 shows a variety of guide 
catheters based on operator preference and patient 
anatomy. Most guide catheters are preformed to allow 
the greater curvature to rest against the free wall of the 
right atrium and act as a fulcrum to allow easy manipu-
lation of the catheter toward the CS. Larger or extended 
curve guide catheters are available from each company 
to help with access in patients with severely dilated 
atria (Figure  5.1). Some guides now come with two 
curves. The primary curve is large, which allows the 
guide to rest on the right atrium. The secondary curve 
bends in a posterior plane, which allows for easier 
access to posterior structures, such as the CS. Many 
operators choose not to use an inner telescoping 
­catheter, relying on the outer guide or using a 0.035 inch 
soft wire to probe for the CS.
5
Implantation of the Left Ventricular Lead
Shrinivas Hebsur1 and Edward Platia 2
1 Michigan Heart and Vascular Institute, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
2 Medstar Washington Hospital Center/Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA

5  Implantation of the Left Ventricular Lead
28
Some operators use a deflectable tip electrophysiology 
catheter as the telescoping catheter. This technique can 
be particularly useful in difficult cases. Inner catheters 
are also manufacturer specific, and there are many 
­different varieties. Some are steerable or deflectable. 
The inner catheter can also be a standard coronary angi-
ographic catheter, such as an Amplatz or multipurpose 
catheter.
­Coronary Venous Anatomy
Implantation of the LV lead requires good knowledge of 
cardiac anatomy, in particular the opening of the CS, 
structures surrounding or obstructing the CS, and the 
general course of the CS and its various tributaries. The 
CS arises in the posteroinferior aspect of the right intera-
trial septum. The orifice tends to be roughly 5–10 mm in 
size. The valve of the CS is the Thebesian valve, which 
varies in extent of coverage of the CS os. The Eustachian 
ridge is the thick muscular structure contiguous with the 
crista terminalis, which starts at the os of the inferior 
vena cava (IVC) and terminates on the interatrial septum 
just posterior to the CS os. A prominent Eustachian 
ridge can obstruct or misdirect the guide catheter 
from  the CS. Often times in patients with dilated 
­cardiomyopathy, the ostium and the proximal portion of 
the CS will point in a more cephalad fashion, creating a 
more acute angle for cannulation and also tortuosity of 
the mid and distal coronary venous segments.
Fluoroscopy can help in the location of the CS os. The 
CS lies in the atrioventricular fat‐pad. Using right ante-
rior oblique (RAO) cine, the fat‐pad can be located, which 
may help locate the level of the CS. In standard AP fluor-
oscopy, the os is located along the left border of the spine, 
1 cm above the contour of the diaphragm. One of the 
advantages of placing the high‐voltage RV lead in first is 
that the proximal edge of the shocking coil is ­usually 
immediately inferior to the CS os in standard AP view.
Although there is a great deal of variation in the ­anatomy 
of coronary venous drainage, a knowledge of normal anat-
omy in several views will help the implanting physician 
find the best site for LV pacing (Figure 5.2).The optimal site 
for pacing should be a posterolateral and basal location on 
the LV. The left anterior interventricular vein (AIV) runs 
alongside the left anterior descending artery. It drains the 
anterolateral left ventricle, and where there are small sec-
ondary and tertiary tributaries going more lateral, this may 
Table 5.1  Order of lead placement.
Right ventricular (RV) lead first
Left ventricular (LV) lead first
Advantages:
●
●Allows back‐up pacing
●
●Fluoroscopic landmark of 
tricuspid annulus and 
interventricular septum
Advantages:
●
●Easier sheath, guide 
catheter manipulation
●
●Coronary sinus will not be 
obstructed by the RV lead
Table 5.2  Outer guide catheters.
Brand: Product line
Types of catheters offered
Biotronik: Selectra
Straight, Standard, Extended, Right, 
Amplatz, MP
Boston Scientific: 
Acuity Break‐Away
Straight, Standard, Extended hook, 
Right, Amplatz, MP
Pressure Products: 
SafeSheath CSG
Standard, Jumbo, 90°. Note this is a 
peel‐away sheath. Dilators come 
preformed in 45°, 90°, 180° angles
Medtronic: Attain 
Command
Straight, Standard, XL, Multipurpose, 
Amplaz, Right Sided, Deflectable. 
Attain Prevail® is steerable
St. Jude: CPS Direct
Straight, Wide, X Wide, 135°, 115°, 
Right. CPS Luminary ™ is deflectable
Figure 5.1  From left to right: St. Jude CPS Direct SL II X‐Wide; 
Boston Scientific Acuity™ Break‐Away Extended; Boston Scientific 
Acuity™ Break‐Away Right; Medtronic ™ Attain 3D catheter; 
Medtronic™ Attain Amplatz; Medtronic™ Attain 50 Strait.

­Cannulatio n of the Corona ry Sinu ﻿
29
be an excellent site for pacing. In the RAO projection, the 
AIV is the most anterior vein seen. The middle cardiac vein 
often abruptly takes off at a 90 degree angle near the CS os 
or may even have a separate os. This vein courses posteri-
orly alongside the posterior descending artery and travels 
toward the apex. On occasion, tributaries of the middle 
cardiac vein can drain the posterolateral LV.
Oftentimes, the target of LV lead placement will be the 
posterolateral or left marginal cardiac veins. In AP or 
RAO, the lateral veins will be seen taking off in between 
the middle cardiac vein and the AIVs. Usually, the left 
posterolateral veins take off within 1–2 cm of the CS os. 
In left anterior oblique (LAO) view, where the lateral 
border of the heart is seen best, one can see the course of 
this vein. In the course of implantation of hundreds of LV 
leads, depending on anatomy, any of these three main 
coronary veins may be suitable for lead placement. It is 
important to be flexible and thoughtful in one’s approach.
­Cannulation of the Coronary Sinus
The CS is most reliably approached by pullback method 
from the tricuspid valve. The tricuspid valve is located ante-
rior to the CS. Posterior approach from the right atrium 
(RA) is not advisable because of the Eustachian ridge. Also, 
if one comes too inferior, then the Thebesian valve often 
obstructs the os. Care should be taken in advancing a guide 
catheter without using a wire as the catheter can cause 
trauma to tissue and even inadvertently dissect the CS. It is 
recommended to always advance the guide over a wire.
Often, the most reliable method is to advance the 
delivery system under fluoroscopic guidance across the 
tricuspid valve and then slowly pull back, giving 20–30 
degrees counterclockwise torque. This maneuver will 
naturally migrate the catheter posterior and cephalad. It 
is best to have an assistant to gently advance and retract 
the wire while doing this until the wire enters into the 
CS. Confirmation that the wire is indeed in the CS and 
not in the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) can be 
made by the LAO view, which should show the wire 
crossing the spine and traveling left. Small puffs of 
­contrast can be used while performing this procedure to 
confirm when in the CS os. It is recommended that the 
main operator keep both hands on the catheter for opti-
mal control while an assistant injects 2–4 mL of contrast. 
Also, the presence of ventricular ectopy when advancing 
the wire gives the operator clues that the wire is not in 
the CS; rather, it is in the RVOT. Once the catheter is 
positioned within the os of the CS, the angiography wire 
can be advanced slowly inside the CS. Never advance the 
catheter unless over a wire as the CS can dissect.
CS
CS
MCV
MCV
PCV
PCV
PLCV
ALCV
LCV
ALCV
GCV
GCV
LCV
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2  (a) Coronary venous tree in right anterior oblique (RAO) projection. ALCV, anterolateral cardiac vein; CS, coronary sinus; 
LCV, lateral cardiac vein; MCV, middle cardiac vein; PCV, posterior cardiac vein. (b) Left anterior oblique (LAO). GCV, great cardiac vein; 
PLCV, posterolateral. In LAO, it is often easier to separate different lateral vein branches. The RAO projection is most useful for selecting 
posterior branches. Note, however, that secondary braches from MCV, PCV, LCV, and the ALCV can give rise to suitable pacing sites.

5  Implantation of the Left Ventricular Lead
30
Difficulties in Coronary Sinus Access
The CS os can become distorted, especially in patients 
with right heart failure and dilated right atriums. 
Usually, the os will become displaced more superiorly, 
and the likelihood of formation of acute bends of the 
venous system is higher. Techniques using deflectable 
catheters, injecting contrast into the vein selector, or 
coronary angiograms with late venous phase cine 
imaging can be useful. Creativity and flexibility are 
often needed, and exchanging for multiple sheaths, 
guides, and inner catheters will be required. Sheaths 
with a primary large curve and a smaller secondary 
curve like the Medtronic 3D allow for negotiation of a 
prominent Eustachian ridge, as the large curve and the 
smaller secondary curve naturally bend posteriorly to 
access the CS. If the CS still cannot be accessed, stiff 
decapolar catheters can be placed from the femoral 
vein into the CS, which can help open obstructive 
Thebesian valves.
In some cases, the guide wire will easily advance 
into the CS, but the guide catheter, which is consider-
ably stiffer, will not and will push the guide wire out. 
In these instances, an inner soft‐tipped catheter can 
be placed over the wire, and this acts as a rail from 
which the guide catheter can easily be advanced. 
An Amplatz catheter is a very simple inner catheter 
that can often be used which will easily accommodate 
the shape of the CS.
­Coronary Sinus Venogram
Once guide catheter is into the CS, the inner catheter can 
be taken out, and preparation for the venogram can 
begin. A 6 Fr Swan‐Ganz catheter is placed through the 
guide catheter into the proximal CS. Be aware that the 
Swan‐Ganz catheter is much stiffer than traditional 
guide catheters. Advancing the Swan catheter can dis-
sect the sinus if not carried out with care. One trick is to 
advance the Swan just up to the leading edge of the guide 
catheter and then withdraw the catheter, thus freeing the 
Swan tip. The balloon is inflated to 1.5 mL air to form 
proximal occlusion of the CS. It is again recommended 
to have an assistant for the venogram. The main operator 
should maintain catheter stability, while the assistant 
injects contrast under cine fluoroscopy. For adequate 
opacification and visualization of the venous tree, it is 
recommended to use at least 10 mL of half‐strength con-
trast. It is useful to perform venography with at least two 
fluoroscopic views (Figure 5.3).
As is the case with coronary anatomy, potential steno-
sis cannot be appreciated with one simple injection. 
Also, finding the proper course of the target vessel may 
be apparent only after careful inspection of multiple 
views. The cine should run until there is no more 
­contrast visualized. If cine angiography is cut short, 
­collateral vessels may not become apparent, which can 
lead to suboptimal site selection for LV lead placement. 
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3  (a) RAO venogram. Note the diminutive lateral marginal veins, which is quite common in patients with extensive scarring. 
There is a prominent posterolateral vein that fills in late, which was chosen as the target site. Also, note the relationship of the coronary 
sinus (CS) os with the proximal edge of the RV high voltage coil. (b) LAO venogram. There are diminutive lateral veins and the 
posterolateral vein fills in late because it is proximal to the balloon.

­Lea d Placemen ﻿
31
Close to the end of the cine loop, the balloon should be 
deflated. This will allow proximal vessels to be seen. 
In patients without an optimal lateral or anterior cardiac 
target, distal tributaries from the middle cardiac vein can 
be visualized. Finally, if the balloon is against the ostium 
of a lateral branch, this will not become apparent until 
balloon deflation.
In patients with large proximal CS, the standard 1.5 mL 
of air insufflation into the Swan will be inadequate to 
occlude the vessel. This can lead to inadequate opacifica-
tion of the distal venous tree. Double ballooning of the 
Swan can be performed, but must be carried out very 
carefully as the risk of vascular trauma increases.
In some patients, target vessels may not be apparent 
even with multiple occlusive cine angiograms. This can 
be because of severe stenosis, diminution, or lack of good 
lateral veins, or the course of the vessel cannot be deline-
ated soon after take off. In all cases, distal venograms may 
be required. Distal vessels are often too small to perform 
occlusive venograms safely. When good lateral veins are 
not seen, one must look to secondary and tertiary tribu-
taries of the middle and the great cardiac vein because 
these often will form collaterals to drain the lateral myo-
cardium. In this case, a 5 Fr soft‐tipped vein selector can 
be used. With the vein selector in the guide sheath, the 
inner catheter is advanced over a wire. The type of wire 
used will depend upon the situation and, as is the case 
with this entire procedure, having a varied toolkit will 
help. Hydrophilic‐coated wires, such as Whisper, Cougar, 
or PT‐Graphic, can maneuver through mildly stenotic or 
tortuous segments. Stiffer wires, such as the Mailman, 
can be used to straighten out bends in the vein. The main 
drawback to using stiffer wires is that they are difficult to 
manipulate, thus necessitating the use of a torqueing 
device similar to those used in interventional coronary 
procedures. Stiffer wires, such as Amplatz 0.035 cm, can 
also be used, but with more tortuosity these wires will 
have the same problems as the catheters.
­Lead Placement
The ultimate goal of implantation of an LV lead system is 
to have the following:
1)	 The lead advanced into the target vein of choice, no 
matter how small, tortuous, or distal.
2)	 The lowest pacing threshold possible without evi-
dence of phrenic nerve capture but having excellently 
timed biventricular pacing.
3)	 The smallest possible risk for lead dislodgment.
As no two patients are alike, it is impossible to develop 
one lead that will fit all three of these stipulations. Thus, 
there are many types of leads available on the market, 
and with the advent of international standard lead 
designs, almost any LV lead can be placed into any pulse 
generator (Figure 5.4).
As the venogram is completed, the operator will have 
a sense of how large the target vessel is, what curves the 
lead system will have to navigate, and how distal the lead 
will need to go. At the advent of coronary resynchroni-
zation therapy (CRT), most LV leads were stylet driven. 
For the electrophysiologist, stylet‐driven LV pacing was 
familiar to implantation of RV and RA leads. Advantages 
of using a stylet‐driven lead is that in vessels that are 
very tortuous, the stiffness of the stylet can help 
straighten the vein, thus allowing for easier passage of 
the lead. Stylet‐driven leads are also larger and may be 
better in patients who have larger, more proximal target 
vessels. As with RV and RA leads, stylets can be pre-
formed to assist in navigating angles. Compared with 
over‐the‐wire leads, more acute angles are much more 
difficult for ­stylet‐driven leads to advance. Also, as the 
stylet is advanced all the way into the lead, the lead tip 
becomes very stiff, so great care must be taken to ensure 
the lead tip is always free under fluoroscopy and never 
advanced when meeting resistance. In using stylets, 
never bend the stylet once inserted into the LV lead 
because this can cause damage to the lead and insula-
tion. Over‐the‐wire techniques have been adopted 
from the field of interventional cardiology. Nowadays, 
many leads offer this method of deployment. A standard 
Figure 5.4  Left ventricular lead types. From left to right: Boston 
Scientific Acuity Spiral Lead. This is one of the smaller leads on the 
market. The lead tip tapes down to 2.6 Fr. This lead can be useful 
for very small target veins. Due to its small size, it is only a unipolar 
lead. Boston Scientific Acuity Steerable Lead. For target veins that 
have acute take offs, this lead can be deflectable via a stiff inner 
stylet. With the stylet out, the lead naturally forms a “J” shape, 
which will help oppose the vein, allowing stability. Medtronic 
StarFix lead. This is a unique active fixation lead that is excellent 
for very large target veins. The lobes expand the lead to 24 F size. 
Biotronik Corox Lead. This lead is either stylet or over the wire 
driven. There are two acute curves at the distal end of the lead, 
which allow good contact and stability. St. Jude Quartet 
Quadripolar Lead. Allows for 10 pacing configurations, allowing 
much more flexibility on target vessel placement.

5  Implantation of the Left Ventricular Lead
32
0.014 inch ­hydrophilic angiography wire (Whisper, PT 
Graphic) can be used with a torque device to navigate 
acute angles. These wires can often be front or back 
loaded, depending on the LV lead being used.
Often, based on the take off of the target vessel, an 
inner vein selector catheter may need to be used to 
deploy the lead. When target vessels come off the main 
venous trunk at acute angles, vein selectors can telescope 
through the outer guide for easier lead delivery. 
Figure 5.5 shows a venogram where the target vein comes 
off at a 90 degree bend. There are many brands and 
­varieties of inner catheters that can accommodate 
­different angles. In this instance, a catheter with a distal 
90 degree bend was used.
In the beginning days of CRT, only unipolar LV leads 
were available. Unipolar leads paced from the LV lead 
tip to the RV ring. With better lead design, most LV 
leads nowadays offer bipolar LV leads. There may be 
instances when a very distal or small vein will be selected 
in which case a unipolar LV lead will be chosen because 
these tend to be smaller. If using a bipolar LV lead, it is 
important to know the distance between the two poles. 
There are advantages of having pacing poles widely 
spaced. In cases of large veins that will not properly 
secure a lead, the lead may need to be placed into small 
distal apical branches, but if the proximal lead is spaced 
further apart, basal pacing is still possible. Having 
smaller spaced leads can also be useful in cases where 
the target site for the distal end of the lead is also 
the  optimal pacing site. The final LV lead position 
should be in a basal posterolateral location for optimal 
­resynchronization therapy (Figure 5.6).
Once the LV lead is in its desired location, the stylet or 
wire is withdrawn from the lead. It is hooked up with 
alligator clips to the pacing system to assess threshold. 
Even during low output pacing, it is important to be 
mindful of detecting phrenic nerve capture and dia-
phragmatic stimulation. Phrenic nerve capture is evident 
in 3–26% of patients undergoing CRT and often is the 
cause for revisional procedures or even turning off 
CRT  [1]. Different pacing configurations should be 
attempted if there is evidence of phrenic nerve capture 
or a high pacing threshold. If a St. Jude Quartet lead is 
used, up to 10 pacing configurations can be tested. If 
there are still unsatisfactory results, the pacing site must 
be revised.
LV leads have a high rate of dislodgment. There are 
numerous novel strategies that companies have devel-
oped to fix the lead against the vessel wall. The lead is 
directly against a blood vessel and not muscle, so it can-
not be screwed in. Many leads have unique preformed 
curves, such as a J, corkscrew, or helical shape. With 
large proximal veins, added stability can be achieved 
with proximal curves. When a wire or stylet is inserted 
into the lead, the curve will straighten out and then will 
form once the stylet is taken out. Therefore it is ­important 
to check pacing thresholds once the stylet is withdrawn 
because pacing characteristics can change with changes 
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5  (a) LAO occlusive venogram, showing a posterolateral vein branch at a 90 degree angle from CS. A Medtronic™ Select II 
Extended 90 degree catheter was used to subselect the vein to allow easy passage of lead into target vein. Courtesy of Medtronic. (b) 
From left to right: Medtronic ™ Select II 90 degree extended; Select II 90 degree standard; Select II 90 degree short; Select II 130 degree 
Extended; Select II 130 degree Standard catheters. Courtesy of Medtronic.

­Remova l of Delive ry Platfor ﻿
33
in the lead shape. Some leads have tines that will pro-
trude near the distal end of the lead, which help to oppose 
the lead to the vein. The Medtronic Starfix lead has 
­multiple protruding radio opaque segments that flare 
out at a 90 degree angle from the lead. These oppose to 
the vessel wall and often will have tissue growth over 
them, allowing for excellent stability. However, this 
comes at a cost in the event that the lead needs to be 
extracted or revised (Table 5.3).
­Removal of Delivery Platform
After all the hard work of locating the CS and placing 
the lead in a good position, the last step may be the 
most critical of all  –  removal of the delivery system. 
Especially in the early days of CRT before better tech-
niques and tools were developed, lead dislodgement 
during the final step happened often. Most outer guide 
catheters are removed with a slicing tool, with the 
exception of the Pressure Products Worley Catheters. 
For an example of a cutting tool loaded on to a lead and 
delivery system see Figure 5.7. To ensure that the pac-
ing lead does not move, the lead is loaded on to the 
guide cutter. With one hand (usually the right) firmly 
locked in place over the cutter, the other hand pulls 
back on the guide ­catheter with constant pressure. It is 
important to make sure the direction of force is coaxial 
with the natural direction of the catheter as it enters the 
body. If this is not the case, there can be untoward 
torque that builds up in the catheter which may cause 
lead dislodgment. As the catheter is pulled back, it will 
be cut. It is recommended that a second operator 
watches as the guide exits the pocket, and the LV lead is 
immediately grabbed to ensure it does not move.
There are two major problems to be cognizant about 
with removal of the guide. The first is to have an 
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6  (a) RAO cine of final LV lead placement. The LV lead is more posterior than the RV lead tip, which is best appreciated in RAO. 
(b) LAO cine of final LV lead placement. Notice the very lateral location of LV lead.
Table 5.3  Left ventricular leads for coronary sinus anatomy.
Target vessel
LV lead
Small
Boston Sci: Acuity Spiral™ 2.6 Fr lead tip, 
unipolar
St. Jude QuickFlex μ.™ 4 Fr lead tip, steerable
Medtronic: Attain Ability 4396™; bipolar with 
tined fixation
Biotronic: Corox OTW‐S BP; silicone thread 
facilitates fixation
Tortuous
Medtronic: Attain Ability 4196™/4296; vein  
sub‐selector catheter compatible
Boston Scientific: Acuity™ Steerable LV lead
St. Jude: QuickFlex™ u LV Lead: 4.0 Fr lead tip,  
S‐shaped end
Biotronic: Corox OTW‐S BP. Steerable
Large
St. Jude: Quartet™ LV Lead; 10 different 
pacing configurations
Medtronic: Attain StarFix™; large side lobes, 
expands to 24 Fr size
Boston Scientific: Acuity™ Steerable LV lead
Biotronic: Corox OTW‐L BP; additional curve 
allows for more contact

5  Implantation of the Left Ventricular Lead
34
­appreciation of the potential stored torque on the 
­catheter. If the guide catheter is deeply seeded into the 
CS or there was tortuosity, which the catheter needed to 
navigate, then as the guide is pulled out of the CS, this 
can cause the lead to move or even dislodge completely. 
Catheters are being developed to combat this issue, 
such as the Biotronik Selectra. As the catheter is cut, the 
torque immediately dissipates as a result of the enmeshed 
inner braided core. The other, more common problem is 
when there is not constant pressure on the catheter as it 
is pulled back into the slicer. This is because the proximal 
portion of the guide near the hemostatic valve has higher 
resistance than the distal portion. When there is chang-
ing of resistance to cutting, this can often cause the 
­catheter to slip from the cutting mechanism, which can 
cause leads to dislodge or, worse, the lead may acciden-
tally be cut by the slicing tool. Companies are working to 
develop valve portions with the lowest resistance possi-
ble and to develop a guide with the least coefficient of 
resistance possible.
­Complications of CRT
It is important to be aware of the many complications 
that LV leads can pose to manage the expectations of 
patients. Understanding the complications and their 
respective occurrence rates will also help in finding ways 
to best mitigate the risk.
Device infection between pacemaker and implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD) remains around 1%, 
even despite prophylactic antibiotic usage. For CRT, the 
risk is slightly higher at 2%. There are several reasons, 
but the most important factor is often time. The longer a 
pocket stays open, the more likely is the risk of infection. 
In cases of difficult‐to‐access target vessels in CRT, 
­pockets can be exposed for several hours. Continuing to 
improve on efficiency even for the most seasoned 
implanting physicians will help to decrease infection 
rates. Similar to ICDs, pocket hematomas are more 
­common in CRT, occurring in around 2.2%. Hematomas, 
even if they do not require surgical evacuation, can 
increase the overall risk of infection so obtaining 
­excellent hemostasis prior to pocket closure should 
always be practiced.
As with any device implantation, there is a risk of 
pneumothorax. There is very little added risk of pneu-
mothorax in adding a CS lead when compared with a 
dual chamber device. Several large registries and meta‐
analyses have shown the risk is 0.51–1.2% [2]. The risk of 
pneumothorax is increased in patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), very thin and 
very obese patients, and also in the elderly. Strategies to 
decrease the risk would be to avoid blind vascular access, 
using a venogram prior, retaining wires, and using 
cephalic cut‐downs.
LV lead dislodgement, similar to other types of devices, 
has a much higher incidence in the immediate post‐
implant period than in the long term. The incidence 
­varies among studies but is in the range of 2.9–10.6%, 
compared with less than 1% for single and dual chamber 
Figure 5.7  The LV lead is loaded on to the cutting tool and with 
the right hand firmly locked in position, the left hand drags the 
guide catheter across the blade, cutting the sheath. Courtesy of 
Boston Scientific.
Figure 5.8  Localized rupture of coronary sinus. During implant of 
LV lead, coronary balloon was not advanced over a wire, resulting 
in a localized rupture of CS. During contrast injection, there is 
staining of pericardium just distal to site of rupture. The patient 
remained hemodynamically stable and following several minutes, 
successful lead implantation was carried through without any 
other significant clinical sequelae.

­Reference ﻿
35
devices. Given that the CS lead is not screwed in and is 
also subject to increased torque from navigating several 
bends, these higher rates are not surprising. Therefore, it 
is very important that the final CS lead is in a stable posi-
tion during initial implant. The lead should be in a small 
enough venous branch to lie opposed to the vessel wall.
Finally, coronary veins are thin‐walled epicardial 
structures that can be subject to trauma from catheter, 
wire, balloon, or lead manipulation. The incidence of 
causing perforation or dissection is 2%. Although there 
is a risk of causing significant pericardial tamponade, it 
is much less than during coronary artery interventions. 
Blood tends to flow from areas of high to low pressure, 
and in coronary veins there is usually very low pres-
sure, meaning that if a perforation were to occur, fluid 
would flow from the pericardium back into the coro-
nary vein. In instances of large perforation, or severely 
elevated venous pressure, tamponade or significantly 
large pericardial effusions are more likely to occur. The 
published incidence of requiring pericardial evacua-
tion is around 1% (Figure 5.8) [2]. Always use fluoros-
copy when inflating balloons, and always advance 
catheters over a wire. Especially when using a stylet‐
driven LV lead, careful and deliberate advancement is 
required because these have a much higher propensity 
to cause vascular trauma.
­References
	1	 Huizar JF, Kaszala K, Koneru JN, Thacker LR, 
Ellenbogen KA. Comparison of different 
pacing strategies to minimize phrenic nerve 
stimulation in cardiac resynchronization  
therapy. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 
2013;24(9):1008–1014.
	2	 van Rees JB, de Bie MK, Thijssen J, Borleffs CJW, 
Schalij MJ, van Erven L. Implantation‐related 
complications of implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators 
and cardiac resynchronization therapy devices: 
a systematic review of randomized clinical trials.  
J Am Coll Cardiol 2011;58(10):995–1000.

37
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Failed defibrillation during defibrillation threshold (DFT) 
testing of an implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD) 
occurs rarely with modern defibrillator systems. Indeed, 
failure has become so uncommon that DFT testing, which 
was once a standard component of ICD implantation, is 
no longer routinely undertaken for primary prevention 
implantations in many centers. The low defibrillation fail-
ure rate is largely thanks to advances in transvenous ICD 
technology over the past three decades.
Over this time period, there has been a progression 
from comprehensive DFT testing with multiple ventric-
ular fibrillation (VF) inductions, to “safety‐margin” 
­testing with limited VF inductions, and ultimately to the 
current state where many physicians defer DFT testing 
altogether because of concerns that the risks of recurrent 
VF induction may outweigh the benefits. Further, the 
correlation between acute intra‐procedural DFT test-
ing  results and real‐world defibrillation success is not 
known. Intra‐procedural DFT testing results can be 
influenced by a number of factors including prolonged 
operative times, use of general anesthesia, and recurrent 
VF inductions.
Regardless of this clinical trend, clinicians are still faced 
with occasional patients, either at the time of implant or 
after appropriate therapy for ventricular tachycardia 
(VT)/VF, who have documented unsuccessful defibrilla-
tion. Failed defibrillation is more common in young, 
overweight patients with a non‐ischemic etiology for 
their cardiomyopathy. When failed defibrillation occurs 
(Figure 6.1), knowledge of techniques to increase the like-
lihood of defibrillation success is essential. Implanting 
physicians must have the tools and skills necessary to 
intervene in these now rare situations to provide optimal 
protection for their patients from life‐threatening 
arrhythmias.
Initial options for failed defibrillation include pro-
gramming optimization such as changing the shocking 
vector (programming out the proximal coil, reversing 
polarity, “cold‐can”) and programming the tilt of the 
biphasic waveform. If initial programming changes are 
not successful, the original ICD lead position can be 
reassessed and consideration can be given to right ven-
tricular (RV) lead revision. Moving the lead to a more 
apical position may improve the shocking vector. 
Additionally, the ICD generator can be placed in a sub-
muscular position to modify the shocking impedance.
Early data suggested a benefit of dual coil ICD leads 
over single coil leads, with regards to DFTs. However, 
with advances in ICD technology this benefit is no longer 
clear and in patients with severely enlarged hearts the 
proximal coil is often positioned within the atrial cham-
ber, which potentially could increase DFTs as a result of 
shunting of energy to the atrial blood pool. Further, in 
the age of laser lead extraction there has been a move-
ment away from dual coil leads in many centers. This is 
especially true in younger patients, as dual coil leads 
pose a significantly increased risk at the time of 
­extraction, because of the risk of superior vena cava–
right atrial junction laceration.
Additional available options include subcutaneous 
array or epicardial patch implantation. However, these 
techniques either involve a cardiac surgical approach 
(epicardial patches) or additional incisions and blunt dis-
section (subcutaneous array implant) which may require 
a second procedure for surgical access to the required 
region. An additional tool, a single coil lead without 
­fixation mechanism, was initially designed for use in the 
superior vena cava (SVC; in patients with single coil RV 
leads) or the coronary sinus (CS) to alter the shocking 
vector. However, placement in the CS raises concerns 
6
How to Place a Lead in the Azygos Vein
Jason S. Bradfield1, Daniel H. Cooper2, Noel G. Boyle1, and Kalyanam Shivkumar1
1 UCLA Cardiac Arrhythmia Center, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA
2 Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Barnes‐Jewish Hospital, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA

6  How to Place a Lead in the Azygos Vein
38
regarding stability and dislodgement, while limiting 
the implanting physician’s ability to place a CS lead for 
­cardiac resynchronization therapy.
Azygos vein coil implantation has recently been 
described as an alternative technique to optimize DFTs. 
The original description of an azygos vein lead implanta-
tion with a single coil lead was reported by our group 
in 2004 [1], and in subsequent case reports and series 
[2–4]. Placement of a lead in the azygos vein (posterior to 
the left ventricle) allows for an improved shocking vector 
that includes more of the left ventricular myocardium.
­Azygos Vein Anatomy
The azygos vein arises at the level of the first lumbar or 
12th thoracic vertebral body and receives venous drain-
age from the renal and lumbar veins. It runs rightward of 
the spine and inserts into the SVC after arching over the 
right main‐stem bronchus. Azygos means “unpaired” 
based on its Greek roots, as it is on the right side of the 
body and does not have a counterpart on the left side. 
However, the hemizygos vein is a tributary of the azygos 
on the left side and depending on anatomic variations 
and relative branch size can be utilized for this tech-
nique. A pre‐procedure chest computed tomography 
scan can be considered to assess venous size and relative 
location to the left ventricle (LV); however, this has not 
been necessary in our experience.
­Implant Technique
Venous access is obtained as per institutional physician 
preference to either the axillary or subclavian vein via a 
modified Seldinger technique. A 9 Fr long (25–40 cm) 
peel‐away sheath is advanced to the junction of the SVC 
and the right atrium over a 0.035 inch 150 cm Terumo glide 
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.1  Failed defibrillation. (a) Precordial ECG leads of induction of VF and (b) subsequent failed defibrillation at 41 J in a 26‐year‐old 
morbidly obese patient with non‐ischemic cardiomyopathy.

­Implant  Techniqu ﻿
39
wire (Terumo Medical Corporation, Somerset, NJ, USA) 
or a Wholey guide wire (Covidien, Mansfield, MA, USA) 
(Figure  6.2). The sheath is pulled back and an initial 
pass is made with the wire to engage the azygos vein. 
The 30 degree right anterior oblique (RAO) angiographic 
view is useful for ensuring the posterior direction of the 
wire. If unsuccessful, a 5 or 6 Fr JR4 coronary diagnostic 
catheter is advanced through the outer sheath over the 
wire. The JR4 angiographic catheter is directed posteri-
orly and the wire is advanced into the azygos vein. If the 
wire is not easily passed, contrast can be injected 
through the JR4 to locate the ostium of the azygos and 
illustrate the tortuosity of the initial portion of the vein. 
The anteroposterior (AP) and left anterior oblique (LAO) 
views will demonstrate that the wire is leftward relative 
to the ICD lead (Figure 6.3).
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.2  Long sheath at superior vena cava–right atrium (SVC–RA) junction. (a) Contrast injected posteriorly into the azygos 
(orange arrow). (b) Wire advanced into the azygos with previous contrast injection as a guide.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.3  Image of wire engagement of azygos. The anteroposterior (AP) (a) and left anterior oblique (LAO) projections (b) are the most 
helpful views. The LAO view in particular is useful to demonstrate the wire is leftward and not in the right heart.

6  How to Place a Lead in the Azygos Vein
40
The wire should be advanced distally below the dia-
phragm for support and the JR4 catheter can then be 
advanced over the wire into the azygos vein and the outer 
sheath advanced over the JR4 (used as a rail). If an inner 
catheter was not used, a second wire can be advanced 
through the outer sheath to provide additional support 
to advance the sheath. However, if an inner sheath is not 
used, care must be taken to only advance the sheath to 
the ostium of the azygos as aggressive advancement of 
the sheath around the tortuous entrance to the azygos 
could cause venous dissection or perforation. We advise 
the use of an inner sheath to allow distal advancement of 
the outer sheath into the azygos. This is important, as if 
the outer sheath is only at the ostium of the azygos, the 
ability to manipulate the lead within the vein can be lim-
ited. Once access is achieved, a venogram can then be 
obtained to assess azygos anatomy (Figure  6.4), which 
can be somewhat variable.
A passive fixation defibrillation lead or specially 
designed lead without fixation can then be advanced to 
the inferior heart border through the outer sheath after 
the JR4 catheter and wire are removed (Figure 6.5). The 
lead most commonly used is a Medtronic 6937A lead 
(58 or 65 cm length) which was initially marketed for SVC 
or CS placement, but has been adapted for azygos vein 
implantation. However, the use of standard passive fixa-
tion single coil ICD leads has also been described. It is 
best to advance the lead as distally as possible, as when 
the peelaway sheath is removed the lead may retract 
slightly as it is not actively fixated. If implanted distally, 
the lead can be easily withdrawn if located too distally to 
provide an optimal shocking vector, but if placed too 
proximally it may be difficult to advance the lead after the 
sheath support is removed. Major movement of the lead 
after implant is rare, though alternative fixation tech-
niques have been described for those rare cases [5].
The azygos lead can then be attached to the ICD 
­generator at the SVC port in a standard DF1 device. 
If a  dual coil RV lead was used the SVC coil should be 
capped. Repeat DFT testing can then be performed. 
Depending on the device company either a RV coil to azy-
gos and can, reverse polarity with the same ­configuration, 
can to azygos with RV coil programmed out of the circuit, 
or a “cold can” configuration can be used (Figure 6.6).
­Variation For Right‐Sided Implants
The risk of elevated DFTs is higher for right‐sided ICD 
implants as a result of a less optimal shocking vector 
involving the ICD generator, with less LV mass included 
in the shocking vector. Therefore, this technique has 
even more theoretical benefit for right‐sided systems. 
When azygos lead implantation is considered from the 
right side, a shorter version (25 cm) of the long 9 Fr 
sheath in combination with a JR4 coronary diagnostic 
catheter can be used to minimize the amount of catheter 
outside of the body.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.4  Venography of the azygos vein prior to lead implantation in two patients. (a) A relatively large vein; (b) a more diminutive vessel.

­Case  Exampl ﻿
41
­Case Example
A 55‐year‐old woman with a history of non‐ischemic 
cardiomyopathy, ejection fraction 10%, status‐post 
biventricular ICD implantation was admitted for 
recurrent ICD therapies secondary to monomorphic 
VT, with evidence of intermittent failed defibrillation 
at maximum device output (36 J). She underwent DFT 
testing, but despite testing in multiple configurations 
including reversal of polarity, cold can technique and 
waveform tuning, the DFT remained elevated requir-
ing multiple external shocks. The patient underwent 
RV lead revision to a more apical position, which did 
not positively affect the DFT. Therefore, an azygos coil 
was implanted, resulting in a decrease in her DFT 
from >35 to 15 J.
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 6.5  (a) Right anterior oblique (RAO), (b) AP,and (c) LAO views of azygos lead final placement. The LAO view demonstrates that an 
azygos lead is leftward of the left ventricle (LV), but the RAO and AP views demonstrate the lead remains more posterior then would be 
desired for an ideal shocking vector.

(a)
(b)
Figure 6.6  Improvement in shocking vector after implantation of an azygos coil. (a) A standard vector incorporating the right ventricle 
(RV) and SVC coils and implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD) generator. In this configuration minimal left ventricular myocardium is 
incorporated into the shocking vector. (b) The improved shocking vector with substantial left ventricular myocardium incorporated into 
the shocking vector (blue triangles).
Obtain access to axillary or subclavian vein
Advance long sheath to junction of SVC/RA over wire
Pull sheath back and probe for azygos vein
If necessary, advance JR4 to aid in posteriorly directing
the wire into the azygos vein
Advance JR4 into azygos over wire and then follow
with outer sheath using JR4 for support
Equipment Required:
0.035-in, 145 cm long wire
         Wholey guide wire or
         Terumo glide wire
9-Fr long, hemostatic peel-
         away sheath
5 or 6 Fr Judkins-Right 4 (JR4)
Medtronic 6937A lead
         58–65 cm length
If necessary:
Medtronic 5019 HV splitter
IV Contrast
Remove JR4, wire and introduce lead, advancing lead
as far as possible with goal of tip being at level of
diaphragm
Peel away sheath and retract lead if necessary to
optimize position. Secure suture sleeve.
Plug into SVC port of generator. Cap SVC connector of
RV lead and place in pocket.
* Sheath will straighten out azygos. Anticipate
some retraction after sheath removal
* if no JR4 needed, use 2nd wire for support
* Contrast can be used to illustrate entrance
and tortuosity of proximal segment
* Target: Azygos empnes into SVC just superior
to the right mainstem bronchus
Figure 6.7  Schematic diagram of steps to azygos lead implantation.

­Reference ﻿
43
­Limitations
The published case experience with azygos lead implanta-
tion for elevated DFTs is limited. Clinical experience at 
our center and others has been positive, but not all patients 
will have a decrease in DFT. The azygos vein, while a pos-
terior structure, remains rightward of the bulk of LV mass 
and therefore this technique may not be successful in all 
cases. While DFTs were lower in the case series noted 
[1–3], larger studies are needed to verify these findings.
In the event of endocarditis or a systemic infection 
requiring ICD lead extraction, the addition of an azygos 
lead adds an additional lead and coil that must be removed 
and potentially increases the risks associated with 
­extraction. The risk of vascular damage and ­bleeding is 
presumably similar to a lead or coil in the innominate vein. 
However, limited data exist on ­extraction of these leads.
The option of implanting an azygos coil or lead and 
attaching the lead to the SVC port of an ICD generator is 
not feasible with newer ICD lead technology which has 
the RV with or without SVC coils integrated into a single 
proximal component with the pace/sense lead using an “in 
line” configuration (DF4). With this new lead ­technology, 
the option of adding an azygos lead is not possible as there 
is no SVC port to be used. Until recently, if a DF4 lead was 
used, RV lead revision to a DF1 lead would be required 
prior to adding the azygos lead. However, a new adaptor 
that will facilitate azygos addition to a DF4 lead has been 
released [5]. The adaptor (Medtronic 5019 HV adaptor) 
has a Y‐configuration with a DF4 connector on the single 
end that excludes the SVC coil and two separate connec-
tions on the other end for the DF4 lead and the azygos 
(via a conventional DF1 connector).
­Conclusions
The addition of an azygos lead to an already existing ICD 
system or to a new system at the time of implant is a 
­valuable tool for implanting physicians when DFTs are 
found to be elevated. Unlike subcutaneous arrays or 
­epicardial patches, azygos lead implantation provides 
the ability to consistently reduce DFT without the need 
for additional tools or prep for subcutaneous array 
­placement or surgical access to the pericardium. 
In  ­addition, there is a risk of additional postoperative 
­discomfort and perioperative infection associated with 
the alternative procedures, whereas the additional risks 
are minimal with azygos coil implantation.
Azygos lead addition is a safe, effective, and relatively 
easy means to lower DFTs in patients with documented 
high thresholds (Figure 6.7; Video 6.1).
­References
	1	 Cesario D, Bhargava M, Valderrabano M, Fonarow GC, 
Wilkoff B, Shivkumar K. Azygos vein lead implantation: 
a novel adjunctive technique for implantable 
cardioverter defibrillator placement. J Cardiovasc 
Electrophysiol 2004;15:780–783.
	2	 Cooper JA, Latacha MP, Soto GE, Garmany RG, Gleva 
MJ, Chen J, et al. The azygos defibrillator lead for 
elevated defibrillation thresholds: implant technique, 
lead stability, and patient series. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 2008;31:1405–1410.
	3	 Seow SC, Tolentino CS, Zhao J, Lim TW. Azygous vein 
coil lowers defibrillation threshold in patients with high 
defibrillation threshold. Europace 2011;13:825–828.
	4	 Bar‐Cohen Y, Takao CM, Wells WJ, Saxon LA, Cesario 
DA, Silka MJ. Novel use of a vascular plug to anchor an 
azygous vein icd lead. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 
2010;21:99–102.
	5	 Lim HS. Overcoming the limitations of the DF‐4 
defibrillator connector. Innovations Cardiac Rhythm 
Manage 2013;4:1205–1207.
Video 6.1  How to place a lead in the azygos vein.

  To watch the videos, please log in to the Companion Website:  
www.wiley.com/go/al‐ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds

45
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
The first transvenous pacing leads had no active fixation 
mechanism. The leads were placed at the right ventricu-
lar apex (RVA) out of necessity. Patients were restricted 
in their activity until it was felt sufficient time had passed 
such that scar tissue would have formed around the lead 
to hold it in place. Dislodgements were common even 
with the subsequent addition of tines to the lead tips.
The first atrial leads had a preformed J and small tines. 
These leads, again by necessity and design, were usually 
put in the right atrial appendage (RAA). Dislodgements 
were even more common in the atrium than the 
ventricle.
With the development of positive fixation leads in the 
late 1980s, not only did the rate of lead dislodgement 
markedly decrease, but implanters were no longer 
restricted to only the RVA and RAA as implant sites.
Electrophysiology in the 1980s and 1990s was an era of 
programmed stimulation for ventricular tachyarrhyth-
mias. Temporary pacing catheters were placed in the 
RVA and right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) and 
stimulation was performed to try to induce ventricular 
tachycardia.
In 1991, Dr. Carel DeCock, from the Netherlands, 
decided to bring an echocardiography unit into the 
­electrophysiology lab and evaluate hemodynamics while 
pacing the RVA and RVOT. He found a 17% improve-
ment in cardiac index with RVOT pacing compared with 
the RVA [1]. This led to further studies with permanent 
leads by numerous investigators which continue to the 
present time.
In addition to RVOT pacing, the 1990s saw trials 
with biatrial pacing [2], Bachmann’s bundle pacing, His 
bundle pacing [3], and coronary sinus ostial pacing [4]. 
Biventricular pacing, or cardiac resynchronization 
­therapy (CRT), appeared in the late 1990s and its impact 
dwarfed that of other alternative site pacing for a time.
As research has continued, more benefits of pacing the 
RVOT, now referred to as right ventricular septal (RVS) 
pacing have been discovered. This chapter looks at 
­techniques for implantation of permanent leads in 
Bachmann’s bundle, His bundle, and the right ventricular 
septum and discuss the potential advantages to the 
patient for each site.
­Bachmann’s Bundle Pacing
Bachmann’s bundle (BB) is the anterior of the three 
connecting fibers between the sinoatrial (SA) and atrio-
ventricular nodes [5]. It courses across the anterior 
aspect of the roof of the intra‐atrial septum before it 
turns posteriorly and decends towards the AV node 
(Figures 7.1 and 7.2). The SA node is the only major 
part of the conduction system that is not near the sep-
tum. This leads to asymmetric activation of the atria 
(right before left) which becomes more of an issue with 
aging and atrial fibrosis and may contribute to the 
propagation of atrial fibrillation.
Pacing at BB results in a faster, more symmetric atrial 
activation resulting in a shorter P‐wave duration. A mul-
ticenter trial showed a significant decrease in atrial fibril-
lation burden in patients paced from BB compared with 
those paced from the RAA [6]. In addition, BB pacing 
has been shown to improve the contractile coupling 
between the left atrium and left ventricle during CRT [7].
Technique
Pacing BB is accomplished by using either a fixed‐helix 
or extendable‐retractable lead. The lead is advanced to 
the atrium where the straight stylet is exchanged for a “J” 
stylet. Depending on the size of the atrium, a shorter 
7
Alternative Site Pacing: A Guide to Implantation Techniques
Michael C. Giudici
University of Iowa Hospitals, Iowa City, IA, USA

7  Alternative Site Pacing: A Guide to Implantation Techniques
46
curve may be preferred to a longer curve. Putting a small 
curvature on the tip of the stylet to direct the lead medi-
ally into the septum is also helpful (Figure  7.3). If the 
atrium is cavernous, simply rotate the lead and stylet 
counterclockwise and bring it up the intra‐atrial septum 
and fixate the lead with the tip in the anterior aspect of 
the roof of the septum (Figure  7.4). If the atrium is 
smaller, it may be helpful to advance the lead across the 
tricuspid valve and withdraw it back into the atrium 
while keeping counterclockwise torque as the lead tracks 
up the septum to the anterior roof or the atrium. I usually 
perform these implants in the anterioposterior (AP) view 
on fluoroscopy and then move the fluoroscopy to a 45 
degree left anterior oblique (LAO) view which should 
show the lead pointing rightward into the high atrial 
septum.
Some implanting physicians may find that the extend-
able‐retractable leads are difficult to keep directed along 
the septum for fixation as they have a tendency to slide 
over into the RAA. If this is the case, the options include: 
extending one or two turns of the helix to make the lead 
grip the tissue, extending the entire helix and using it as 
a fixed‐helix lead, changing out to a fixed‐helix lead, or 
using a guide catheter directed lead.
A caveat to keep in mind is that many patients have a 
probe‐patent foramen ovale and the pacing lead can 
cross into the left atrium as it is dragged up the septum 
(Figure 7.5). If this is not caught on fluoroscopy, the lead 
will prop open the foramen and create an ongoing shunt.
Figure 7.1  Pathologic specimen of the superior aspect of the 
heart. Ao, aorta; BB, Bachmann’s bundle; LAA, left atrial 
appendage; LSPV, left superior pulmonary vein; PA, pulmonary 
artery; RAA, right atrial appendage; RSPV, right superior 
pulmonary vein; SVC, superior vena cava.
Bachmann’s bundle
Aorta
Atrioventricular
Interventricular
Membranous septum
Pulmonary valve
Atrioventricular (A–V) node
Common A–V bundle (His)
Right bundle branch
Purkinje fibers
Moderator
band
Anterior
papillary
muscle
Superior
vena cava
Nodal artery
S–A node
Anterior
internodal
tract
Middle
internodal
tract
Posterior
internodal
tract
“Bypass” fibers
Accessory
bundle of kent
Inferior vena cava
Annulus of tricuspid valve
Right
side
Crista
terminalis
Figure 7.2  Cutaway illustration of the cardiac conduction system.

­His  Bundl e Pacin ﻿
47
­His Bundle Pacing
His bundle pacing results in normal synchronous 
left ventricular activation with a narrow QRS complex 
in  patients with intact conduction. Compared with 
other  ventricular pacing sites such as the apex or 
­septum, His pacing is a much more exact, and therefore 
time‐­consuming procedure. In the original studies of 
Deshmukh et al. [3], mean procedure duration for a 
­single‐chamber pacemaker (including AV nodal ­ablation 
in 10 of 12 patients) was 3.7 ± 1.6 hours.
Technique
The procedure consists of placing a His bundle catheter 
from a femoral or subclavian approach and finely map-
ping that region to identify the largest His potential. The 
permanent ­pacing lead is usually positioned by shaping 
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 7.3  Stylets used for accessing Bachmann’s bundle in the atrium: various views. Note the curve at the distal tip directing the lead 
towards the intra-atrial septum.

7  Alternative Site Pacing: A Guide to Implantation Techniques
48
the stylet with a secondary curve orthogonal to the first 
and ­aiming medially. The pacing lead is then directed 
into the ­membranous interventricular septum just above 
the ­tricuspid valve at the site of the largest His spike 
(Figures 7.6 and 7.7). As with BB pacing, a fixed helix 
lead may be advantageous as it will be less likely to slide 
out of place prior to fixation. This is a procedure where a 
millimeter or two makes a difference in whether a nar-
row QRS will be achieved – or not. The success rate in 
achieving true His pacing and a normal, narrow QRS is 
improved with either adding more turns during lead 
­fixation to penetrate farther into the tissue, or using a 
lead with a longer helix.
There have been issues with high pacing thresholds 
and lead dislodgement with His bundle pacing. Some 
implanting physicians will implant a second ventricular 
lead in either the septum or apex for safety and use a dual 
chamber device with the His lead in the atrial port and 
the RV lead in the ventricular port. The device is then 
programmed DDIR and the RV lead only stimulates if 
needed.
­Right Ventricular Outflow Tract 
(Septal) Pacing
Since the early studies of de Cock, there has been a 
great deal of interest in RVS pacing. There have been 
numerous small studies showing increased cardiac 
output [1, 8–10], a narrower QRS complex [9, 11], less 
mitral and tricuspid valular insufficiency [11, 12], less 
­progression to atrial fibrillation [13], and better long‐
term preservation of LV function [14]. One study [15] 
even suggested that pacing the RVS improves the 
­performance of a pacemaker ventricular rate regula-
tion algorithm in patients with rapid conduction of 
atrial fibrillation.
As a result of these and many similar studies, many 
implanting physicians have adopted RVS pacing as 
their  standard approach. There are currently larger, 
­randomized trials in progress that will shed further light 
on the optimal RV pacing site [16].
Technique
The most common technique for RVS pacing is to 
advance an active‐fixation pacing lead through the 
­tricuspid valve, either by pulling the stylet back and pro-
lapsing the lead across the valve or putting sufficient 
curve on the lead stylet to direct the lead into the right 
ventricle. Once across the tricuspid valve, the lead is 
advanced into the RVOT and out into the pulmonary 
artery (PA) (Figure 7.8). Once in the PA, a specifically 
shaped stylet (Figure 7.9) is advanced to the lead tip and 
the lead is brought down the septum with small back and 
forth, withdrawl and advance, movements until the lead 
drops just below the Moderator Band where it is 
advanced and fixated (Figure 7.10). The stylet is shaped 
with a large curve to keep the lead from dropping down 
to the apex and a secondary curve at the tip to direct the 
Figure 7.4  Pacing leads in Bachmann’s bundle and the  
mid‐septum.
Figure 7.5  Pacing lead across a patent foramen ovale. Note that it 
is perpendicular to the screen in the LAO view.

­Right  Ventricular  Outflo w Tract  (Septal)  Pacin ﻿
49
lead tip towards the septum. I prefer to monitor the 
­positioning of the lead in a shallow (20–30 degrees) right 
anterior oblique (RAO) position. This lays out the right 
ventricle well and one can easily see the lead dropping 
over the Moderator Band (Figure 7.11). To confirm sep-
tal placement rather than the RV free wall, move fluoros-
copy to the 45 degree LAO position and the lead should 
be coming towards the screen and turning right into the 
septum (Figure 7.4).
As with BB and His pacing, some implanters will prefer 
a fixed‐helix lead as it will more easily drop down the 
septum in small increments rather than dropping lower 
than desired which may require several attempts at opti-
mal positioning and reshaping lead stylets.
These techniques are also appropriate for implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD) leads. Studies have shown 
RVS placemant of ICD leads to be safe [17, 18] and have 
acceptable sensing and defibrillation thresholds [19, 20].
Figure 7.6  Right anterior oblique fluoroscopic projection demonstrating final position of His bundle pacing electrode. AbL‐cath, ablation 
catheter; Hx‐map, His bundle mapping catheter; PPM‐L, permanent pacemaker lead. (Image courtesy of P. Deshmukh, MD.)

7  Alternative Site Pacing: A Guide to Implantation Techniques
50
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.7  (a) Right anterior oblique, and (b) left anterior oblique views of permanent His bundle lead placement. (Images courtesy  
of R. Hoyt, MD.)
Figure 7.8  Right anterior oblique view of pacing lead 
in the pulmonary artery.

­Right  Ventricular  Outflo w Tract  (Septal)  Pacin ﻿
51
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.9  Stylets used for mid‐septal lead placement: various views. Note the curve at the distal tip directing the lead towards the right 
ventricular septum.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.10  Right anterior oblique view of lead being brought down the septum to just above (a) the Moderator Band and then just 
below (b) where it is fixed to the septum.

7  Alternative Site Pacing: A Guide to Implantation Techniques
52
­Conclusions
Alternative site pacing, like most things we do, has a 
small learning curve. By taking the initial time to 
learn these techniques in the atrium, you will very 
quickly be achieving shorter P wave durations and 
less intra‐atrial conduction delay, helping suppress 
atrial fibrillation, and seeing better LA–LV synchrony 
with CRT. In the ventricle, you will normalize the 
QRS axis, narrow the QRS, preserve the LV ejection 
fraction, and decrease the incidence of perfusion 
defects on nuclear scans.
­References
	1	 de Cock CC, Meyer A, Kamp O, Visser CA. 
Hemodynamic benefits of right ventricular outflow tract 
pacing: comparison with right ventricular apex pacing. 
Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 1998;21(3):536–541.
	2	 Saksena S, Prakash A, Ziegler P, Hummel JD, 
Friedman P, Plumb VJ, et al. Improved suppression 
of recurrent atrial fibrillation with dual‐site right 
atrial pacing and antiarrhythmic drug therapy. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2002;40(6):1140–1150; 
discussion 1151–1152.
	3	 Deshmukh P, Casavant DA, Romanyshyn M, Anderson 
K. Permanent, direct His‐bundle pacing: a novel 
approach to cardiac pacing in patients with normal 
His‐Purkinje activation. Circulation 
2000;101(8):869–877.
	4	 Delfaut P, Saksena S, Prakash A, Krol RB. Long‐term 
outcome of patients with drug‐refractory atrial flutter 
and fibrillation after single‐ and dual‐site right atrial 
pacing for arrhythmia prevention. J Am Coll Cardiol 
1998;32(7):1900–1908.
	5	 de Micheli Serra A, Iturralde Torres P, Aranda Fraustro 
A. About the specialized myocardial conducting tissue. 
Arch Cardiol Mex 2013;83(4):278–281.
	6	 Bailin SJ, Adler S, Giudici M. Prevention of chronic atrial 
fibrillation by pacing in the region of Bachmann’s 
bundle: results of a multicenter randomized trial. 
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2001;12(8):912–917.
	7	 Suzuki T, Osaka T, Kuroda Y, Hasebe H, Yokoyama E, 
Kamiya K, et al. Potential benefit of Bachmann’s bundle 
pacing on left ventricular performance in patients with 
cardiac resynchronized therapy. Circ J 
2012;76(12):2799–2806.
	8	 Giudici MC, Thornburg GA, Buck DL, Coyne EP, 
Walton MC, Paul DL, et al. Comparison of right 
ventricular outflow tract and apical lead permanent 
pacing on cardiac output. Am J Cardiol 
1997;79(2):209–212.
	9	 Mera F, DeLurgio DB, Patterson RE, Merlino JD, 
Wade ME, León AR. A comparison of ventricular 
function during high right ventricular septal and apical 
pacing after His‐bundle ablation for refractory atrial 
fibrillation. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
1999;22(8):1234–1239.
	10	 Victor F, Mabo P, Mansour H, Pavin D, Kabalu G, de 
Place C, et al. A randomized comparison of permanent 
septal versus apical right ventricular pacing: short‐term 
results. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 
2006;17(3):238–242.
	11	 Lewicka‐Nowak E, Dabrowska‐Kugacka A, Tybura S, 
Krzymińska‐Stasiuk E, Wilczek R, Staniewicz J, et al. 
Right ventricular apex versus right ventricular outflow 
tract pacing: prospective, randomised, long‐term 
clinical and echocardiographic evaluation. Kardiol Pol 
2006;64(10):1082–1091; discussion 1092–1093.
Figure 7.11  Pathologic specimen showing right 
ventricular septal pacing lead just below the 
Moderator Band.

­Reference ﻿
53
	12	 Hemayat S, Shafiee A, Oraii S, Roshanali F, Alaedini F, 
Aldoboni AS. Development of mitral and tricuspid 
regurgitation in right ventricular apex versus right 
ventricular outflow tract pacing. J Interv Card 
Electrophysiol 2014;40(1):81–86.
	13	 Parekh S, Stein KM. Selective site pacing: rationale and 
practical application. Curr Cardiol Rep 
2008;10(5):351–359.
	14	 Tse HF, Yu C, Wong KK, Tsang V, Leung YL, Ho WY, 
et al. Functional abnormalities in patients with 
permanent right ventricular pacing: the effect of sites of 
electrical stimulation. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2002;40(8):1451–1458.
	15	 Tse HF, Siu CW, Lau CP. Impact of right ventricular 
pacing sites on exercise capacity during ventricular rate 
regularization in patients with permanent atrial 
fibrillation. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2009;32(12):1536–1542.
	16	 Da Costa A, Gabriel L, Romeyer‐Bouchard C, 
Géraldine B, Gate‐Martinet A, Laurence B, et al. 
Focus on right ventricular outflow tract septal pacing. 
Arch Cardiovasc Dis 2013;106(6‐7):394–403.
	17	 Giudici MC, Barold SS, Paul DL, Schrumpf PE, Van 
Why KJ, Orias DW. Right ventricular outflow tract 
placement of defibrillation leads: five year experience. 
Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2004;27(4):443–446.
	18	 Lubinski A, Lewicka‐Nowak E, Królak T, Kempa M, 
Bielawska B, Wilczek R, et al. Implantation and 
follow‐up of ICD leads implanted in the right 
ventricular outflow tract. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2000;23(11 Pt 2):1996–1998.
	19	 Mollerus M, Lipinski M, Munger T. A randomized 
comparison of defibrillation thresholds in the right 
ventricular outflow tract versus right ventricular apex. 
J Interv Card Electrophysiol 2008;22(3):221–225.
	20	 Crossley GH, Boyce K, Roelke M, Evans J, Yousuf D, 
Syed Z, et al. A prospective randomized trial of 
defibrillation thresholds from the right ventricular 
outflow tract and the right ventricular apex. Pacing 
Clin Electrophysiol 2009;32(2):166–171.

55
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
­Pre‐implantation Evaluation
Assessment of heart failure severity, left ventricular 
­ejection fraction (LVEF), and 12‐lead ECG is required 
to establish the indication for cardiac resynchroni-
zation therapy (CRT) implantation [1]. To optimize 
patient 
selection, 
potentially 
reversible 
factors 
­contributing to heart failure and cardiomyopathy 
should be addressed (e.g., uncontrolled hypertension, 
ischemia, suboptimal medical management) prior to 
the procedure.
Although most patients who undergo CRT implanta-
tion have at least moderately severe heart failure, care 
must be taken to avoid performing the procedure when 
the patient is unstable. Volume overload and pulmonary 
congestion may limit the time the patient is able to spend 
in a flat, supine position, and increases the risk associ-
ated with procedure. Most implanting physicians prefer 
conscious sedation for the procedure, as it has the lowest 
risk of periprocedural complications. In patients with 
severe heart failure or comorbidities, however, anesthe-
sia consultation may be required to consider general 
anesthesia.
Multiple imaging modalities have the capability to 
evaluate left ventricular dyssynchrony, although the role 
of mechanical dyssynchrony assessment in the predic-
tion of CRT response is controversial. Echocardiography 
is the most common modality used to assess LVEF, 
but it may also be used to assess right ventricular (RV) 
­dysfunction, contribution of valvular pathology, and 
intra‐ or interventricular delay. Although these may be 
helpful to identify a higher risk of non‐response, there 
are insufficient data to withhold therapy from patients 
who would otherwise be candidates for CRT based on 
their QRS morphology and LV dysfunction. Cardiac 
MRI may also be used to assess dyssynchrony and scar 
­burden, which may affect outcome.
­Assessment of Coronary Vein 
Anatomy
Transvenous left ventricular lead positioning is often 
limited by the anatomy of the coronary veins. Imaging 
studies of the anatomy of the coronary sinus (CS) may 
help to determine whether the patient is suitable for 
transvenous implantation and to plan CS access, 
although these are not routinely performed.
In particular, delayed images after contrast injection 
during conventional coronary arteriography can be used 
to outline the anatomy of the CS and its main branches. 
Although this technique cannot assess the terminal 
branches of the CS, the images may be used to identify 
fluoroscopic markers for CS ostium to guide cannulation 
and to assess whether larger side branches are present.
Cardiac CT venography provides a detailed view of 
coronary venous anatomy. Pre‐implantation evaluation 
of the coronary venous anatomy was shown to decrease 
the procedural time of CRT implantation. Additional 
uses include identification of the area of latest mechani-
cal activation for targeted LV lead placement and visuali-
zation of phrenic nerve course. The CT images can be 
fused with fluoroscopic images and electroanatomic 
mapping during the procedure, providing excellent 
­guidance. Contrast allergy or severe renal dysfunction 
may preclude the use of CT imaging. Fusion of CT and 
electroanatomic mapping requires special hardware 
and software capability.
8
How to Maximize CRT Response at Implant
Attila Roka1, Gaurav Upadhyay2, Jagmeet Singh3, and E. Kevin Heist3
1 Cardiovascular Institute of the South, Meridian, MS, USA
2 Heart Rhythm Center, University of Chicago Hospital, Chicago, IL, USA
3 Cardiac Arrhythmia Service, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

8  How to Maximize CRT Response at Implant
56
Cardiac MRI can also be utilized to assess the coronary 
veins. In addition, this technique can describe the area of 
latest activation, scarred regions, and general scar 
­burden. In ischemic cardiomyopathy, less than 15% of 
total myocardium infarcted and absence of significant 
posterolateral scar is associated with better response. 
Contraindications include severe renal dysfunction, 
­previously implanted non‐MRI compatible hardware, 
long scanning time, and need for patient cooperation.
Although these advanced imaging modalities improved 
implantation success rate and responder rate in smaller 
studies, routine utilization may not be cost‐effective. 
Advanced modalities could be reserved for cases where 
difficult anatomy is anticipated or if the patient had an 
unsuccessful implantation attempt.
­Transvenous LV Lead Implantation
The standard approach to CRT is to implant three endo-
vascular leads for cardiac stimulation: RV, RA, and an 
epicardial LV lead into a coronary vein through the CS 
(Figures  8.1 and 8.2). Although this is the most com-
monly used approach, it is dependent on highly variable 
venous anatomy. The most common reasons for failed 
LV lead implants are the inability to cannulate the CS or 
unsuitable venous anatomy. In almost all cases of CRT 
implants, a venogram is obtained after the CS is cannu-
lated, with the use of an occluder balloon and hand‐
injected contrast agent. Care must be taken to avoid 
underfilling of the CS, as side branches otherwise 
­suitable for lead placement can be missed.
Even with a suitable CS, an unstable LV lead position, 
high pacing threshold, or phrenic nerve stimulation may 
hinder LV pacing. Implantation success rate is currently 
above 90% in experienced centers, although some of 
these implants may involve suboptimal LV lead locations 
because of the issues described earlier.
Techniques of LV lead implantation are elaborated in 
Chapter  7. The European Heart Rhythm Association 
(EHRA) and Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) have pub-
lished guidelines for the recommended approach for 
transvenous CRT implantation [1]. The RV lead should 
typically be placed first as it is less likely to dislodge 
Figure 8.1  Coronary sinus (CS) 
venography with an occluder balloon and 
manual contrast injection. The CS body is 
completely occluded by the balloon and 
the veins, even the smaller branches, are 
well visualized. The posterior vein, which is 
proximal to the site of the occlusion, is 
filling via collaterals.
Figure 8.2  Same patient as in Figure 8.1. 
The posterolateral vein was selected as the 
site of the left ventricular (LV) lead 
implant. A quadripolar lead is placed into 
a stable wedge position. Stimulation if the 
basal–mid posterolateral LV segment is 
achieved via pacing between the proximal 
electrode pair.

­Targetin g LV  Lead  Placemen ﻿
57
­during manipulation of other leads, provides informa-
tion about the position of the tricuspid valve and right 
atrial size, and can be utilized for back‐up pacing if the 
right bundle develops mechanical trauma during CS 
cannulation, which can lead to transient complete AV 
block in patients with pre‐existing left bundle branch 
block (LBBB).
Most current LV leads are bipolar or quadripolar with 
a low profile (5 Fr or less) and the lead delivery to the 
target vein is performed over a guide wire. Alternatively, 
a stylet can be used to directly advance the lead into the 
vein. The lead is usually thin and flexible enough to be 
advanced at least into the basal to mid portion of a coro-
nary vein. Quadripolar CS leads allow multiple pacing 
configurations, providing options to avoid phrenic nerve 
stimulation or sites with high threshold. It also enables a 
more stable distal lead position, while still allowing pac-
ing on the proximal electrodes if desired. Acute echo‐
guided CRT optimization with these leads in a study of 
22 patients showed improvement in New York Heart 
Association (NYHA) and LVEF at 6 month, compared 
with bipolar controls [2]. Quadripolar leads are also 
safe  –  the MORE‐CRT study included 1068 heart 
­failure  patients scheduled for CRT from 63 centers in 
13 countries. Patients were randomized in a 1: 2 ratio to 
undergo CRT with either a bipolar or a quadripolar lead. 
At 6 months, compared with bipolar controls, patients 
with quadripolar leads were significantly more likely to 
be free from a composite endpoint of both intra‐ and 
postoperative LV lead‐related complications (85.97% vs. 
76.86%). The driver of this benefit was mainly the 
­intraoperative complication rate (5.98% vs. 13.73%).
Quadripolar leads may also enable multipolar LV pac-
ing with a compatible pulse generator. Forty‐four patients 
receiving a CRT implant were randomized to receive 
biventricular or multipolar pacing. For each patient, an 
optimal pacing configuration for the assigned pacing 
mode was programmed based on intraoperative pres-
sure–volume loop measurements. After 3 months, 50% 
of biventricular paced and 76% of multipolar paced 
patient were responders (reduction in end‐systolic vol-
ume (ESV) ≥15%). ESV reduction, ejection fraction 
increase and NYHA class reduction relative to the base-
line was significantly greater in the multipolar group 
than in the conventional biventricular group.
In patients in whom the target vein is stenotic, balloon 
angioplasty may be attempted. Angioplasty may also be 
used as a rescue when dissection of the CS is observed 
during implantation, which would otherwise preclude 
further attempts at lead placement. The risk of perfora-
tion and tamponade is low. In patients with unfavorable 
coronary vein anatomy in the target area, dilatation and 
use of collateral veins may be considered. With access to 
these interventional techniques, implantation success 
rate may be as high as 99%. A retrospective single center 
analysis showed that 3.5% of patients required veno-
plasty for LV implantation; of these, 77% coronary vein, 
13% subclavian vein, 10% valvular structures within the 
CS or a Marshall vein. The required inflation pressures 
for ring‐like structures were high (16 ± 3 atm), but com-
plications were rare. Mostly, short balloons with 3 mm 
diameter were used.
High pacing threshold or phrenic nerve stimulation 
may require achieving an electrode position where tra-
ditional fixation mechanisms are not be effective. 
Stabilizing the lead position with retained stylets is not 
recommended because of the high risk of late lead fail-
ure. Instead, a coronary stent implanted near the distal 
end of the lead may stabilize the new position. A large 
single center study of 312 patients with stent fixation 
of the CS lead showed that the method was safe and 
­effective in the long term to prevent lead dislocation. 
Ninety‐five percent of patients had stenting because of 
intraoperative lead instability or phrenic nerve stimu-
lation, while 5% required it as a result of previous lead 
­dislocation. Bare metal stents were implanted 5–35 mm 
proximal to the most proximal electrode. There was no 
mechanical damage to the lead and no CS perforation 
was observed. During an average follow‐up of 
28.4 months, a significant increase in the left ventricu-
lar pacing threshold was found in four cases and reop-
eration was necessary in two patients (0.6%). Phrenic 
nerve stimulation was observed in 18 patients, endo-
vascular repositioning with an ablation catheter was 
performed in seven patients. In three patients the leads 
were removed without complications 3–49 months 
after the initial implant (because of infection or heart 
transplant).
­Targeting LV Lead Placement
The goal of CRT is to decrease the hemodynamic conse-
quences of intra‐ and interventricular dyssynchrony. The 
optimal position for the LV lead is thought to be where 
biventricular pacing leads to the greatest decrease in 
ventricular activation time  –  in absence of significant 
electromechanical uncoupling/delay, this should lead to 
decreased mechanical dyssynchrony.
There is a large variability in the ventricular activation 
pattern and distribution of mechanical dyssynchrony 
even in patients with LBBB. In clinical practice, detailed 
mapping during transvenous implantation is not feasi-
ble. Lead placement via endocardial and surgical epicar-
dial approach may have more potential for individualized 
targeted pacing. Targeting methods include electrical, 
mechanical, and anatomic parameters.
Anatomic positioning is still the most commonly used 
method to achieve “optimal” lead positions. Targeting 
“segments” of the LV is a commonly utilized LV lead 

8  How to Maximize CRT Response at Implant
58
­placement strategy, aiming for the basal–mid posterolat-
eral–lateral area. Apical lead placement was shown to be 
inferior in 115 patients undergoing CRT who were 
­followed prospectively for 15.1 ± 9.0 months (combined 
endpoint of heart failure hospitalization, cardiac trans-
plantation, or all‐cause mortality). Event‐free survival was 
significantly lower in the apical group: 52% vs. 79%. The 
apical group also experienced less improvement in NYHA 
functional class and less LV reverse remodeling. Apically 
positioned LV leads were associated with worse clinical 
outcome also in the REVERSE and MADIT‐CRT trials. 
The COMPANION and MADIT‐CRT studies showed a 
comparable response between lateral, anterior, and poste-
rior LV lead locations, while patients in the REVERSE trial 
benefited from a lateral lead location. The importance of 
the interlead distance was demonstrated in 51 patients, 
who underwent CRT; the separation of the LV and RV 
lead tips was determined on postprocedural anteroposte-
rior and lateral radiographs. The corrected direct LV–RV 
interlead distance on the lateral radiograph correlated sig-
nificantly with the delta dP/dt. The corrected horizontal 
interlead distance on the lateral film was greater in acute 
hemodynamic responders; other parameters did not 
­correlate with the hemodynamic change.
Aiming for maximum electrical delay is another option 
to enhance CRT efficacy [3]. Several algorithms based 
on intracardiac electrograms have been investigated to 
guide LV lead positioning. Measurement of the LV lead 
electrical delay (LVLED, Q‐LV) may identify areas of late 
activation in different locations, by moving the LV lead 
within the coronary veins. In a study of 52 patients, the 
LVLED was predictive of response to CRT (reduction in 
LVESV >15% at 6 months; Figure 8.3).
As clinical improvement is expected to be the conse-
quence of improving mechanical function, targeting areas 
with maximum mechanical delay can also be used to 
guide CRT. Echo tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) and 
tagged MRI can be utilized for this purpose. A study eval-
uating the role of this technique to identify the latest acti-
vated LV areas included 244 heart failure patients treated 
with CRT. On the basis of radial strain–time curves 
obtained at the mid ventricular short‐axis images of the 
left ventricle, the most frequent latest activated areas 
were the posterior (36%) and the lateral (33%) regions. 
Pacing at the site of latest mechanical activation resulted 
in superior echocardiographic response after 6 months of 
CRT and better prognosis during long‐term follow‐up.
Imaging studies may help to select specific sites for left 
ventricular pacing based on anticipated optimization of 
electromechanical effects. Echocardiography (TDI or 
tissue synchronization imaging) may identify LV sites 
with marked mechanical delay. Pacing these sites may 
result in greater ventricular remodeling and improved 
clinical outcomes. Currently, there are not enough data 
supporting the role of acute hemodynamic measure-
ments during implantation to target lead implantation.
The randomized TARGET study assessed the impact 
of targeted LV lead placement on outcomes of CRT [4]. 
Two hundred and twenty patients had baseline echocar-
diographic speckle‐tracking two‐dimensional radial 
strain imaging and were then randomized 1: 1 into two 
groups. In the TARGET group, the LV lead was posi-
tioned at the latest site of peak contraction with an 
amplitude of ≥10% to signify freedom from scar. In the 
control group, patients underwent standard unguided 
CRT. Patients were classified by the relationship of the 
LV lead to the optimal site as concordant (at optimal 
site), adjacent (within 1 segment), or remote (≥2 ­segments 
away). The primary endpoint was a ≥15% reduction in 
LVESV at 6 months. Secondary endpoints were clinical 
response (≥1 improvement in NYHA ­functional class), 
all‐cause mortality, and combined all‐cause mortality 
and heart failure‐related hospitalization. In the TARGET 
group, there were a greater proportion of responders at 
6  months (70% vs. 55%). Compared with controls, 
TARGET patients had a higher clinical response (83% vs. 
65%) and lower rates of the combined endpoint.
Multisite or multipolar ventricular stimulation (more 
than one LV lead) may provide even greater benefits with 
Figure 8.3  Optimizing LV lead placement using electrical delay. 
The delay between the initiation of the QRS and the sensed LV 
signal (Q‐LV) and the Q‐LV: QRS duration ratio (LVLED) can be 
measured while positioning the lead. The LVLED was shown to 
correlate with clinical outcome during cardiac resynchronization 
therapy (CRT).

­Positio n of the R V Lea ﻿
59
more homogenous ventricular activation. More clinical 
data will be needed to evaluate whether this is superior 
to biventricular stimulation.
The randomized TRIP‐HF study compared the effects 
of triple‐site versus dual‐site biventricular stimulation. 
It was a multicenter, single‐blind, crossover study which 
enrolled 40 patients with moderate to severe heart fail-
ure, a mean LV ejection fraction of 26%, and permanent 
atrial fibrillation (AF) with slow ventricular rate. A CRT 
device, connected to one RV and two LV leads, inserted 
in two separate coronary sinus tributaries, was success-
fully implanted in 34 patients. After 3 months of biven-
tricular stimulation, the patients were randomly assigned 
to stimulation for 3 months with either one RV and two 
LV leads (3‐V) or to conventional stimulation with one 
RV and one LV lead (2‐V), then crossed over for 3 months 
to the alternate configuration. The primary study 
­endpoint was quality of ventricular resynchronization 
(Z  ratio). Secondary endpoints included reverse LV 
remodeling, quality of life, distance covered during 
6‐min hall walk, and procedure‐related morbidity and 
mortality. No significant difference in Z ratio, quality of 
life, and 6‐min hall walk was observed between 2‐V and 
3‐V. However, a significantly higher LVEF (27% vs. 35%) 
and smaller LVESV (157 vs. 134) and diameter (57 vs. 
54 mm) were observed with 3‐V. The results will need to 
be verified in a larger CRT population.
­Alternative LV Lead Placement 
Techniques
In the first cases of CRT, the LV lead was surgically placed 
via thoracotomy. This approach was associated with con-
siderable morbidity, requiring general anesthesia and 
longer recovery time. Long‐term electrical stability of 
surgically placed electrodes was inferior when compared 
with transvenous leads. However, this method does not 
require fluoroscopy, is not constrained by the venous 
anatomy, allows the visual identification of the segment 
with latest contraction, and can prevent phrenic nerve 
stimulation. Most surgical implants can be performed via 
limited thoracotomy. The surgery is performed using 
­single‐lung ventilation on a beating heart. A 2–3 inch 
incision is made over the 4th or 5th intercostal space 
anterior to the mid axillary line. The lung is pushed back 
and the pericardium is opened anterior to the phrenic 
nerve. The left ventricle is mapped for optimal pacing site 
and an epicardial lead placement device is used to attach 
the electrode. The leads are tunneled to the generator 
site, usually in the left infraclavicular region. This tech-
nique is a safe and acceptable option, with benefits com-
parable to transvenous CRT. In 33 patients, functional 
and echocardiographic parameters showed similar 
improvement, however, with a delayed onset of peak VO2 
improvement. Instead of minimal thoracotomy, video‐
assisted thoracoscopy may also be used for lead 
placement.
Biventricular pacing with endocardial stimulation may 
provide more homogenous intraventricular resynchroni-
zation than with epicardial stimulation. Trans‐septal 
approach can be utilized to implant a conventional endo-
cardial lead into the LV cavity for endocardial stimulation. 
The endocardial surface of the LV may be mapped with an 
EP catheter or the lead itself to localize the site most suit-
able for lead implantation–electroanatomic mapping may 
be used to precisely identify the area of latest activation in 
the LV. The main disadvantage of this technique is the 
unknown long‐term thromboembolic risk, which requires 
long‐term anticoagulation. Over an average 85 month fol-
low‐up of six patients in a case series, one patient had LV 
lead dislodgment at 3 months requiring re‐intervention. 
One patient had a transient ischemic attack, when antico-
agulation was accidentally interrupted. These patients 
require full anticoagulation immediately after the implan-
tation, increasing the risk of periprocedural bleeding com-
plications. Mitral valve damage and endocarditis are rare 
but serious complications.
Transapical endocardial LV lead placement was also 
investigated in a case series.This technique combines the 
minimally invasive surgical approach with the presumed 
advantages of endocardial pacing in patients in whom 
extensive epicardial adhesions prohibit access to the per-
icardial space. After induction of general anesthesia and 
selective bronchial intubation, the LV apex is localized 
with transthoracic echocardiography, then a small left 
thoracotomy is performed. The apex of the left ventricle 
is punctured and an active fixation lead is inserted into 
the cavity, using the Seldinger technique. The bleeding is 
controlled with purse‐string sutures. The lead is guided 
into its final position with a guide, using fluoroscopy. As 
transapical endocardial lead implantation does not 
involve the mitral valve, the risk of mitral valve endocar-
ditis is likely less. The lead is subcutaneously tunneled to 
the pocket to be connected to the generator. Long‐term 
anticoagulation is required. Advantages of this technique 
are the accessibility of the endocardial segments without 
limitations of the CS anatomy and absence of phrenic 
nerve stimulation.
­Position of the RV Lead
The optimal position for the right ventricular pacing or 
pacing/defibrillation lead is not clear. In the 346 patients 
enrolled in the active (CRT on) arm of the REVERSE 
study, there were no significant differences between 

8  How to Maximize CRT Response at Implant
60
RV apical and non‐apical lead positions in the analyzed 
endpoints (death and first heart failure hospitalization). 
Khan et al. [4] also analyzed the effect or RV lead posi-
tioning on CRT outcomes. In 131 CRT patients, the LV 
lead was positioned preferentially in a lateral or postero-
lateral position. The RV leads were implanted on the 
septum or RV apex. There were no significant differ-
ences in mean reduction of LVESV at 6‐month follow‐up 
(RVS vs. RVA: –23.3 ± 16% vs. 22.1 ± 18%; p = 0.70) or rate 
of responders (58.2% vs. 57.9%; p = 0.97). This study also 
found that LV lead position correlated with the outcome: 
if it was placed to pace the segment that contracted the 
latest (as determined by 2D speckle tracking radial strain 
imaging), the response rate was higher (76.1% vs. 36.7%; 
p <0.001). This difference was not affected by RV 
lead position.
Increased defibrillation threshold is a common con-
cern when placing implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator 
(ICD) leads into non‐apical positions. A prospective, 
randomized study performed on 33 patients by Reynolds 
et al. [5] found no significant differences in RVOT or 
RV apical positions (RVA, 9.8 ± 7.3 J; RVOT, 10.8 ± 7.2 J; 
p = 0.53).
­Device Optimization at Implant
There has been extensive research on AV and VV 
­echocardiographic optimization after CRT, with variable 
overall success. The practice of echocardiographic CRT 
optimization is still highly variable between implanting 
centers as the optimal method and timing is unknown 
and the technique is time‐consuming. More recently, 
ECG optimization at the time of implant has been advo-
cated. Methodologies focus on altering LV offset timing 
in order to minimize paced QRS duration while main-
taining evidence of LV pre‐excitation (usually confirmed 
with presence of an R‐wave in V1). Early evidence sug-
gests that ECG optimization of VV intervals may be a 
simple, cost‐effective means of improving CRT response. 
Novel methods, such as automatic CRT optimization, 
are being investigated as alternatives (RESPOND 
CRT, FREEDOM).
­Atrial Fibrillation
Ablation of the AV node is generally recommended in 
CRT patients with persistent and/or permanent atrial 
fibrillation and elevated ventricular rates leading to 
reduced biventricular pacing [6]. The SPARE II observa-
tional, prospective, multicenter study grouped patients 
by intrinsic rhythm (sinus rhythm vs. AF). For the first 
2 months, negative chronotropic drugs were optimized 
in the AF group. If ventricular pacing was ≤85%, AVJ 
ablation was recommended. Responders were defined as 
patients who survived without requiring heart transplant 
and had a ≥10% reduction in LVESV at 12 months after 
implantation. Of 202 patients included, 156 (77%) were 
in sinus rhythm and 46 (23%) had AF. After drug 
­optimization, only 28% of the AF patients required AVJ 
ablation. 53% were responders in the sinus rhythm group, 
vs. 48% in the AF group (p = NS). Among AF patients, the 
response was 48% for AF with non‐AVJ ablation vs. 46% 
with AVJ ablation (p = NS). The LVESV decreased in all 
three groups. Mortality was higher in patients with 
AF compared with sinus rhythm: 21% vs. 5.7% (p <0.05).
­Device Upgrades
New guidelines emphasize the role of CRT in certain 
groups of patients who already have conventional 
pacemakers, to avoid pacing‐induced dyssynchrony 
and remodeling [1]. Upgrade of an existing device may 
pose difficulties because of scarring or venous occlu-
sion (Figures 8.4 and 8.5). The perioperative risks in 
these patients are higher: the 6‐month major compli-
cation rate was 18.7% in the REPLACE registry in 
patients undergoing upgrade to a CRT device with 
addition of a new endocardial LV lead to the existing 
leads. The risk of subclavian vein thrombosis is related 
to the number of leads implanted; in CRT patients it 
can be up to 30%. Subclavian venography with injec-
tion through the upper extremity veins is a simple and 
effective technique to evaluate venous anatomy prior 
to an upgrade or lead revision. Venoplasty may be per-
formed if ipsilateral implantation is favored, otherwise 
the lead can be tunneled to the device pocket from the 
contralateral site.
­Peri‐ and Postoperative Period
The implanting physician should be prepared to address 
most common complications of CRT implants: failure to 
implant the LV lead (requiring to pursue an alternative 
implantation method), pocket hematoma, hemothorax 
or pneumothorax, CS dissection, cardiac perforation or 
tamponade, extracardiac stimulation, complete heart 
block, LV lead dislodgement, congestive heart failure 
exacerbation, acute renal failure. Overall perioperative 
complication rates are around 4%, declining from 28% 
noted in early CRT trials.

­Conclusion ﻿
61
The optimal duration of postprocedural hospitaliza-
tion is unknown; most centers observe the patient over-
night following the implant. Although proarrhythmia 
from biventricular pacing is extremely rare, it can be a 
very serious complication leading to ICD shocks or sud-
den death. Less than optimal biventricular pacing may be 
recognized (fusion beats, frequent premature beats, 
atrial tachyarrhythmia with rapid ventricular rate) and 
corrected before the patient is discharged.
Medications may be adjusted shortly after the implant. 
Bradycardia should not be a limiting factor during titra-
tion of the beta blockers and patients may be able to tol-
erate angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor 
with less hypotension. With improvement in heart fail-
ure symptoms and congestion, the dosage of diuretics 
may be decreased, although this may occur over the 
ensuing months after implant.
­Conclusions
Efficacy of CRT is dependent on proper patient selection, 
optimal lead placement, device programming, and mini-
mizing the risk of peri‐ and postprocedural complica-
tions. Although large randomized trials continue to 
identify patient groups who may benefit from CRT, there 
are still a substantial minority of patients who do not 
respond appropriately. Evidence‐based perioperative 
care and access to alternative implant techniques may 
improve efficacy of CRT and decrease complication rates.
Figure 8.4  Revision of a CRT system. 
The patient with ischemic cardiomyopathy 
had an earlier system revision, where a CS 
lead was removed from the lateral vein 
and a new one was placed into the 
anterolateral vein. As response was poor, 
adding a new lead into the lateral vein was 
planned but hindered by severe stenosis 
in the proximal segment. Balloon 
angioplasty was attempted but, despite 
inflations up to 18 atm, the stenosis did 
not resolve.
Figure 8.5  Same patient as in Figure 8.4. 
A right ventricular (RV) lead has been 
added into the right ventricular outflow 
tract (RVOT) position to enable 
“triventricular” pacing with two RV and an 
LV lead.

8  How to Maximize CRT Response at Implant
62
­References
	1	 European Heart Rhythm Association; European Society 
of Cardiology; Heart Rhythm Society; Heart Failure 
Society of America; American Society of 
Echocardiography; American Heart Association; 
European Association of Echocardiography; Heart 
Failure Association, Daubert JC, Saxon L, Adamson PB, 
Auricchio A, Berger RD, Beshai JF, et al. 2012 
EHRA/HRS expert consensus statement on cardiac 
resynchronization therapy in heart failure: implant and 
follow‐up recommendations and management. 
Heart Rhythm 2012;9(9):1524–1576.
	2	 Calò L, Martino A, de Ruvo E, Minati M, Fratini S, 
Rebecchi M, et al. Acute echocardiographic 
optimization of multiple stimulation configurations of 
cardiac resynchronization therapy through quadripolar 
left ventricular pacing: a tailored approach. Am Heart J 
2014;167(4):546–554.
	3	 Gold MR, Birgersdotter‐Green U, Singh JP, Ellenbogen 
KA, Yu Y, Meyer TE, et al. The relationship between 
ventricular electrical delay and left ventricular 
remodelling with cardiac resynchronization therapy. 
Eur Heart J 2011;32(20):2516–2524.
	4	 Khan FZ, Virdee MS, Palmer CR, Pugh PJ, O’Halloran D, 
Elsik M, et al. Targeted left ventricular lead placement to 
guide cardiac resynchronization therapy: the TARGET 
study – a randomized, controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2012;59(17):1509–1518.
	5	 Reynolds CR, Nikolski V, Sturdivant JL, Leman RB, 
Cuoco FA, Wharton JM, et al. Randomized comparison 
of defibrillation thresholds from the right ventricular 
apex and outflow tract. Heart Rhythm 
2010;7(11):1561–1566.
	6	 Yin J, Hu H, Wang Y, Xue M, Li X, Cheng W, et al. 
Effects of atrioventricular nodal ablation on 
permanent atrial fibrillation patients with 
cardiac resynchronization therapy: a systematic 
review and meta‐analysis. Clin Cardiol 
2014;37(11):707–715.

63
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Cardiac device generators have slowly scaled up from 
the abdominal wall to the left pectoral position since the 
inception of the technology. Pacemakers have tradition-
ally been implanted in the pre‐pectoral area because of 
their smaller sizes and, with the evolution of bipolar 
pacing and smaller pacemaker generators, interest in 
submuscular implant diminished further except for 
pediatric patients. Earlier abdominal internal cardio-
verter‐defibrillator (ICD) implants were frequently 
positioned in submuscular locations, mainly for aes-
thetic reasons. With the advent of active ICD cans 
requiring pectoral implantation, submuscular place-
ment of generators became the mainstream approach 
given the bulky size of earlier ICD systems. Since then, 
major advances in defibrillator technology, such as 
biphasic waveforms, smaller and more efficient battery 
systems, and marked reduction in capacitor sizes, have 
made possible much smaller generators, and so the need 
for submuscular implantation has reduced dramatically. 
Still, there exists a niche for this surgical technique for 
patients in whom even the current sized generator poses 
risks for erosion and skin necrosis, and sometimes for a 
better aesthetic result.
Various surgical techniques have been advanced in the 
last century mainly by cardiac surgeons in relation to this 
field. Use of general anesthesia was necessary in the early 
days because of the need for extensive dissection and 
the  resultant pain. Implantation of pacemakers and 
­defibrillators can now be safely performed in the electro-
physiology laboratory under sedation or under general 
anesthesia with minimal additional tools. In a study of 
submuscular implants by Lipscomb et al. [1], 12 patients 
under general anesthesia were compared with 33 patients 
under local anesthesia which showed no major differ-
ences in patient perception or reported pain (Table 9.1).
­Venous Access for Lead Placement
Venous access for sub‐pectoral implantation is similar to 
the subcutaneous route. Some implanting physicians 
recommend obtaining venous access in the same plane 
as the pocket as there is a concern for increased lead 
stress while traversing the plane from superficial to 
deeper submuscular tissue. Typically, a submuscular 
pocket is created first after making the skin incision 
­followed by venous access in the subcutaneous plane. 
Access via the subclavian, axillary, or cephalic vein is 
generally equally successful when using the sub‐pectoral 
approach as with the subcutaneous approach.
­Technique
Familiarity with the regional anatomy of the pectoral, 
clavicular, and axillary regions is essential prior to a 
device implantation. The implantation can be performed 
on the left or the right side, although the left‐sided 
approach is preferable because of issues related to 
­defibrillation efficacy. The key superficial areas to be 
identified at the outset are the clavicle, coracoid process, 
deltopectoral groove, deltoid muscle, and the pectoralis 
major muscle.
The pectoral region mainly consists of the pectoralis 
major and minor muscles in front of the rib cage sur-
rounded inferiorly with the serratus anterior muscle and 
laterally by the latissimus dorsi muscle (Figure 9.1). The 
pectoralis major muscle is a fan‐shaped muscle collec-
tion, which originates from three main regions: the 
­clavicle, sternum, and the aponeurosis of the oblique 
abdominal muscle. The clavicular head arises from 
the medial half of the clavicle and fans out laterally into 
9
How to Perform Sub‐pectoral Device Implants
Gurjit Singh and Claudio Schuger
Cardiac Electrophysiology, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA

9  How to Perform Sub‐pectoral Device Implants
64
the lamina of a two‐layered tendon. The sternocostal 
­bundle arises from sternum and upper six costal cartilages 
which runs laterally to form the rounded anterior axillary 
fold. All these muscle bundles eventually conglomerate 
toward the axilla to insert into the bicipital groove of the 
humerus. There is a clear plane between the sternal head 
and clavicular head which can be separated to create a 
pocket. The clavipectoral fascia is a layer of fascial tissue 
lying under the pectoralis major muscle. In its superior 
margin, it splits to enclose the subclavius muscle and lat-
erally it forms a thick bundle to join the coracoid process 
of the scapula. When traced inferiorly, it splits to enclose 
the pectoralis minor ­muscle. The axillary artery and 
­brachial plexus run deep in the axilla underneath the clavi-
pectoral fascia. The anterior wall of the axilla is formed 
by  the clavipectoral fascia and the pectoralis muscle. 
Underneath the pectoralis major muscle lies the smaller 
pectoralis minor muscle, originating from the third, fourth, 
and fifth rib surface and inserting into the coracoid process 
of the scapula. The cephalic vein, throacoacromial artery, 
and the lateral pectoral nerve emerge from the clavipecto-
ral fascia between the clavicle and upper border of pec-
toralis minor muscle. Pectoral muscles obtain their nerve 
supply from medial and lateral pectoral nerves which arise 
from the medal and lateral chords of the brachial plexus. 
The medial pectoral nerve travels inferiorly under the clav-
icle and under the pectoralis minor muscle. A distal branch 
of this nerve pierces through the pectoralis minor muscle 
and supplies the lower portion of the pectoralis major 
muscle. The lateral pectoral nerve arising from the lateral 
chord of brachial plexus runs under the pectoral major 
muscle inferiorly and innervates the majority of the 
pectoralis major muscle. Damage to the lateral pectoral 
or medial pectoral nerve can result in complete atrophy 
of the pectoralis muscle group.
The plane between the pectoralis major and minor 
muscle provides an excellent entry point to create the 
submuscular pocket using various incision techniques, 
including anterior sub‐pectoral, lateral, anterior axillary, 
and infra‐mammary approaches.
Anterior Sub‐pectoral Approach
This is the most widely accepted and straightforward 
technique. The patient is draped and prepped as for the 
subcutaneous approach. The arm on the side of implant 
is kept by the side without any abduction. A straight 
­incision is made 3 cm below the clavicle starting in the 
mid clavicular line and extended laterally to end in the 
deltopectoral groove. Dissection is carried out using 
electrocautery and blunt methods with the subcutane-
ous tissue being held taut by a Weitlaner retractor. 
The subcutaneous tissue and fat is dissected until the 
pre‐pectoral fascia is visualized. Then the fascia is 
­dissected to expose the pectoralis major muscle where 
Table 9.1  Benefits and risks of sub‐pectoral device implants.
Indications for sub‐pectoral implant
1)  Scarce subcutaneous tissue
2)  History of prior erosion
3)  Cosmetic reasons
4)  Pediatric implants
5)  Prior infection and significant subcutaneous tissue 
debridement and contraindication for implant on 
contralateral site
6)  Twiddler’s syndrome
Benefits of submuscular implant
1)  Enhanced cosmesis
2)  Lesser lead dislodgement rate
3)  Lesser Twiddler’s syndrome
4)  Lower erosion rate
Complications or disadvantages of sub‐pectoral 
implant approach
1)  Increased bleeding risk and hematoma formation
2)  Possible disruption of pectoral muscle function
3)  Increased risk of lead fracture
4)  Difficulty during generator replacement
5)  Issue with lateral migration into the axilla
6)  Greater postoperative pain
Figure 9.1  Initial incision showing pectoralis major muscle heads 
and relationship to clavicle, deltopectoral groove, and sternum in 
a left side implant.

­Techniqu ﻿
65
a fibrofatty band is visualized demarcating the sternal 
and clavicular portions of the muscle (Figure 9.2). The 
two portions of the pectoralis major muscle can then 
be  separated using blunt dissection with the aid of 
Metzenbaum scissors or curved artery forceps. At this 
point, gentle separation of the two heads can be contin-
ued by inserting a finger and running from side to side 
in an arc fashion. Extreme caution should be exercised 
while handling the muscle tissue as the bleeders are 
sometimes hard to control despite using cautery with 
resultant risk of hematoma formation. Creating a 
pocket between the two heads is usually straightfor-
ward as there is no major resistance, unlike creating a 
pocket in a subcutaneous fashion. The clavicular head 
usually overlaps the sternal head for few centimeters 
and initial dissection requires an upward sweep under 
the clavicular head to create a plane. Thereafter, the 
plane can be extended under the sternal portion of the 
muscle by flexing the fingers in the inferior direction. 
Again, extreme care must be taken not to damage the 
thoracoacromial neurovascular bundle which lies in 
front of the pectoralis minor muscle. The leads are con-
nected to the pulse generator and the generator is 
housed in the pocket after performing an antibiotic 
wash. It is recommended that the pulse generator is 
secured to underlying tissues with a non‐absorbable 
No. 0 suture. Once the generator is placed in the pocket, 
the two muscle heads are apposed to each other using 
interrupted vicryl sutures (Figure  9.3). The wound is 
then closed using the standard three‐layer technique.
Lateral Sub‐pectoral Approach
This technique is similar to the anterior sub‐pectoral 
approach except for the initial skin incision and retrac-
tion of the clavicular head of the pectoralis major mus-
cle. The initial skin incision is made in the deltopectoral 
groove a few centimeters below the clavicle. With a 
Weitlaner retractor and electrocautery, the incision is 
deepened until the pectoralis major muscle is visualized. 
The pectoral fascia is then incised and the pectoralis 
major and deltoid relationship is explored. At this point, 
the lateral border of the clavicular portion of the pecto-
ralis major muscle is retracted in an inferomedial 
­direction and a submuscular plane is created by blunt 
dissection using the fingers (Figure 9.4). The pocket is 
created in the inferomedial direction and usually requires 
more dissection medially to avoid lateral migration and 
interference of the pulse generator in the axilla.
Clavicular head of pectoralis
major muscle retracted
laterally
Pectoralis minor
muscle underneath
pectoralis major
muscle
Clavicle
Sternum
Sternocostal head of
pectoralis major muscle
Figure 9.2  Anterior sub‐pectoral approach. The clavicular head of 
pectoralis major is retracted up and laterally to expose the 
pectoralis minor muscle and a pocket is created medially 
underneath the pectoralis major.
Figure 9.3  Pacemaker implant in sub‐pectoral pocket using 
anterior approach underneath the two muscle heads of pectoralis 
major muscle.

9  How to Perform Sub‐pectoral Device Implants
66
Lateral Anterior Axillary Approach
This technique can be further divided into single and 
double incision techniques.
Single Incision Technique
The patient is prepped and draped in a supine position 
with the arm abducted away. Careful and meticulous 
sterile preparation of the axilla is required for the axillary 
approach. After infiltrating the skin with local anesthetic, 
an incision is made more or less vertically in the anterior 
axillary line along the lateral border of pectoralis major 
muscle. The incision is deepened until the muscle is vis-
ualized and dissection is carried out behind the pectora-
lis major muscle in the axilla. The lateral border of 
pectoralis major muscle is retracted medially to visualize 
the structures underneath (Figure 9.5). A plane is created 
between the pectoralis major and minor muscle and 
blunt dissection is carried out medially to create a pocket. 
Careful attention should be paid to control muscle 
­bleeders as perforating arteries typically run under the 
pectoralis major belly. Contrast venography is typically 
recommended for this technique as venous access is in 
the same plane under the pectoralis major muscle. 
The axillary or subclavian vein access is obtained using 
an extra‐long needle. After the pulse generator is placed 
Clavicular head of pectoralis
major muscle retracted
Pectoralis minor
Deltoid
Clavicle
Sternum
Sternal head of
pectoralis
major muscle
Figure 9.4  Lateral sub‐pectoral approach. The 
clavicular head of pectoralis major muscle is 
retracted medially and downwards to expose 
the pectoralis minor muscle and dissection is 
carried out under the pectoralis major.
Clavicle
Lateral border of pectoralis
major muscle retracted
medially
Deltoid
Figure 9.5  Anterior axillary approach. The lateral border of 
pectoralis major muscle is retracted medially and a dissection 
plane is created in the anterior axillary fold.

­Compariso n of Subcutaneo us and Sub‐pecto ral Implant ﻿
67
in the pocket, the lateral ends of the anterior axillary soft 
tissue are approximated to the pectoralis major muscle 
using interrupted sutures. Care should be taken to 
­prevent suturing of the pectoralis major and minor mus-
cle together, which will otherwise limit upper extremity 
movements.
Another single incision sub‐pectoral technique has 
been described by Hammel et al. [2], where the initial 
skin incision is made parallel and medial to the deltopec-
tral groove. Venous access is obtained as per usual in the 
pre‐pectoral plane then the submuscular pocket is cre-
ated by dividing the pectoralis major muscle fibers along 
the fiber direction 2–3 cm below the deltopectoral sul-
cus. Using blunt dissection, a plane is created between 
the pectoralis major muscle and the chest wall to create 
the submuscular pocket.
Double Incision Technique
This technique, as first described by Foster [3], requires 
two separate incisions for venous access and the sub‐
pectoral pocket. The patient is positioned supine in the 
usual fashion with arm abducted. A small 2–3 cm inci-
sion is first made parallel and inferior to the clavicle at 
the junction of the medial and lateral third of the clavi-
cle. The incision is deepened by dissection until pre‐
pectoral fascia is visualized. Access to the subclavian or 
axillary vein is then obtained by the usual technique 
and leads are advanced into the respective chambers 
under ­fluoroscopy. The leads are anchored to the 
underlying fascia and muscle using non‐absorbable 
sutures. A vertical 5–7 cm incision is made along the 
anterior axillary line behind the lateral end of the pec-
toralis major muscle. Dissection is carried deep until 
the pectoralis major muscle is visualized. Then an 
attempt to locate the plane between the pectoralis 
major and minor muscle is made and a pocket created 
by blunt dissection.
Another method of dividing the posterior attachments 
of the serratus anterior muscle to the ribs (lateral to the 
pectoralis major muscle border) has been proposed as 
this allows excellent approximation of the fascial layer of 
the serratus to the pectoralis major to avoid generator 
migration into the axilla. After division of the serratus 
muscle, the anterior surface of the intercostal fascia is 
followed into the subpectoral space. After the pocket is 
created, the leads are tunneled into this pocket using 
various tunneling methods. The wounds are then closed 
in the usual fashion. Again, it is recommended to anchor 
the pulse generator to the underlying tissue to prevent 
migration and leads should not be coiled under the gen-
erator to avoid can abrasions against the bony rib cage. 
The benefit of axillary incision is the possibility it affords 
of placing a subcutaneous patch or coil in case of ­elevated 
defibrillation thresholds should the need arise.
Infra‐mammary Implantation
The infra‐mammary approach usually requires two 
incisions, one for the venous access for lead placement 
and other one for the generator. A 5–7 cm skin inci-
sion is made 5 cm inferior to the areolar complex in 
males and in the breast fold crease in females. The inci-
sion is extended down to the pre‐pectoral fascia. The 
inferolateral margin of the pectoralis major muscle is 
identified and retracted medially to define the plane 
between the major and minor muscle. Sometimes, 
muscle dissection using electrocautery is required to 
dissect the lateral attachments of pectoralis major and 
serratus anterior muscle. A pocket is then formed 
to  accommodate the device can. The leads are tun-
neled into the pocket using a 24 Fr chest tube as a 
tunneling device.
Another technique using a 20 cm pericardiocentesis 
needle has been proposed by Roelke et al. where the 
­needle is directed towards the superior subclavicular 
incision. A J guide wire is passed and the needle 
is removed. Using the retained guide wire technique, 
two 10 Fr introducer dilators are positioned through 
which the leads are brought into the submuscular 
pocket.
­Comparison of Subcutaneous 
and Sub‐pectoral Implants
The largest study to date assessing the complication rates 
between subcutaneous and sub‐pectoral implants came 
from the Worldwide Jewel Investigators in which 604 
subcutaneous implants were compared with 396 sub‐
pectoral implants. The investigators found shorter pro-
cedure times and more lead dislodgements for the 
subcutaneous approach but, interestingly, more pocket 
erosions with the submusclar approach. Erosions in the 
submuscular group was a surprising finding and the 
authors explained it as a likely selection bias with patients 
weighing less and having smaller body surface area. 
Overall, there were no major differences in the cumula-
tive freedom from complications between the two groups 
(4.1% vs. 2.5%; p = 0.1836) [4].
There is a theoretical concern about increased lead 
stress using the submuscular approach as the lead usu-
ally bends around the muscle and then courses deep 
across the muscles which can cause issues by repeated 
stress imposed by muscle contraction. In a study by 
Bernstein et al. [5] analyzing the predictors of failure for 
Medtronic Sprint Fidelis leads, submuscular implanta-
tion was a significant predictor on both univariate 
and multivariate analysis, raising the risk of lead fracture 
by 14‐fold.

9  How to Perform Sub‐pectoral Device Implants
68
­Defibrillation Threshold and Efficacy
The impact of submuscular versus subcutaneous posi-
tion of pulse generator using “active” can configuration 
has been studied by Iskos et al. [6] when they compared 
20 patients who underwent sub‐pectoral implant with 46 
patients with subcutaneous implants. They found a small 
3–4 ohm impedance difference in the high voltage 
­defibrillation pathway among the two groups (higher 
impedance in the subcutaneous group). No major differ-
ences in the energy required for successful defibrillation 
were noted based on the anatomic location of the active 
can (9.9 ± 3.8 vs. 7.4 ± 3.3 J; p = 0.057) [6].
­Generator Replacement
Because of the submuscular nature of the generator, 
­generator replacement can pose significant impediment 
requiring extensive dissection and electrocautery to 
relieve the generator. Moreover, there is always a ­concern 
for significant muscle bleeding during dissection if proper 
attention to detail is not practiced. Similar attention 
should be paid during dissection to avoid damage to the 
lateral pectoral nerve and arterial structures. No major 
study has compared the outcomes after generator replace-
ment in the submuscular position with the subcutaneous 
location. Experience with sub‐pectoral implants has been 
published by Kistler et al. [7] in which no major issues 
were encountered during generator replacements for 
pacemakers in the sub‐pectoral position.
­Conclusions
Implantation of cardiac devices has become a routine 
procedure in cardiac electrophysiology laboratories 
predominantly utilizing a subcutaneous pre‐pectoral 
approach. Miniaturization of generator cans has led to 
a decline in the use of the sub‐pectoral approach, but 
occasionally one will encounter a situation where lack 
of significant subcutaneous tissue or need for better 
cosmesis will require sub‐pectoral implantation. 
Device implantation in the submuscular position can 
be accomplished in several ways, with the anterior 
approach being the easiest and most straightforward. 
Overall, no significant long‐term issues have been 
reported with submuscular techniques except for a 
requirement for significant dissection during genera-
tor replacement.
­References
	1	 Lipscomb KJ, Linker NJ, Fitzpatrick AP. Subpectoral 
implantation of a cardioverter defibrillator under local 
anaesthesia. Heart 1998;79(3):253–255.
	2	 Hammel D, Block M, Geiger A, Bocker D, Stadlbauer T, 
Breithardt G, et al. Single‐incision implantation of 
cardioverter defibrillators using nonthoracotomy lead 
systems. Ann Thorac Surg 1994;58(6):1614–1616.
	3	 Foster AH. Technique for implantation of cardioverter 
defibrillators in the subpectoral position. Ann Thorac 
Surg 1995;59(3):764–767.
	4	 Gold MR, Peters RW, Johnson JW, Shorofsky SR. 
Complications associated with pectoral cardioverter‐
defibrillator implantation: comparison of subcutaneous 
and submuscular approaches. Worldwide Jewel 
Investigators. J Am Coll Cardiol 1996;28(5):1278–1282.
	5	 Bernstein NE, Karam ET, Aizer A, Wong BC, Holmes 
DS, Bernstein SA, et al. Right‐sided implantation and 
subpectoral position are predisposing factors for 
fracture of a 6.6 French ICD lead. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 2012;35(6):659–664.
	6	 Iskos D, Lock K, Lurie KG, Fahy GJ, Petersen‐Stejskal S, 
Benditt DG. Submuscular versus subcutaneous 
pectoral implantation of cardioverter‐defibrillators: 
effect on high voltage pathway impedance and 
defibrillation efficacy. J Interv Card Electrophysiol 
1998;2(1):47–52.
	7	 Kistler PM, Fynn SP, Mond HG, Eizenberg N. 
The subpectoral pacemaker implant: it isn’t 
what it seems! Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2004;27(3):361–364.

69
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
­Background
Implantation rates of pacemakers and implantable 
­cardioverter‐defibrillators (ICDs) have increased over 
time [1]. Unfortunately, the infection rate with cardiovas-
cular implantable electronic devices (CIEDs) has also 
increased over time because of device implantation in 
older patients with more comorbidities. The incidence of 
device related infections is approximately 2–3% [1,2]. The 
combination of more devices implanted with higher infec-
tion rates has driven an increased need for lead removal.
Scar tissue can develop around the lead over time based 
on a patient’s fibrotic response to the lead. Leads that are 
removed with simple traction and without advanced 
techniques are known as lead explants, and these are 
most typically leads with a dwell time of less than 1 year 
[3]. Leads with dwell times of greater than 1 year or leads 
with more extensive scar tissue even within 1 year of 
implantation may require advanced extraction techniques 
with the use of locking stylets, femoral snares, cutting 
tools, telescoping sheaths, and laser sheaths for extrac-
tion; these techniques constitute lead extraction [3]. 
Locking stylet and laser extraction sheath assisted proce-
dures result in high complete procedural success rates of 
90–97%; the intra-procedural mortality is as low as 0.3%, 
although risk of in‐hospital mortality may be as high as 
2.2% with an approximately 2% risk of major complica-
tions [4–7]. At high volume centers, lead extraction safety 
has improved over time, and the procedure has even been 
shown to be safe in patients over the age of 80 [6,8,9].
The decision to pursue lead removal must be 
­individualized. The Telectronics Accufix fixed atrial 
J  lead was associated with a risk of lead fracture that 
could cause atrial laceration, but periprocedural mortality 
with extraction was 0.4%, so widespread extraction of the 
lead likely increased mortality relative to a strategy of no 
extraction [10]. In the case of lead failure, the alternative 
to lead extraction is taking a “cap and abandon” strategy 
by placing a lead end‐cap cover over the end of the lead, 
securing the lead end‐cap with non‐absorbable suture, and 
implanting a new lead to be connected to the generator 
to take over the function of the capped and abandoned 
lead. The quantitative risk of capping a lead is difficult to 
determine, but extraction has been shown to result in 
lower rates of long-term device infections, relative to 
capping and abandoning [11]. Patient-specific factors 
and individual patient wishes are important for lead 
mangement decision-making. The REPLACE registry 
evaluated the procedural ­complication rates associated 
with pacemaker or ICD replacement procedures with 
the addition of a new lead, and reported an 11% major 
complication rate among patients who underwent a revi-
sion of a non‐cardiac resynchronization system [12].
The numbers of major adverse events in published 
analyses of lead extraction are relatively small. In the 
Lead Extraction in the Contemporary Setting (LExICon) 
Study, there were only 20 major adverse events, and body 
mass index of less than 25 kg/m2 was the only patient 
characteristic that was associated with higher major 
adverse event rates [6]. A separate study with 32 major 
adverse events identified female sex as the only patient 
characteristic associated with higher major adverse 
event rates [5]. One study of 2176 extracted ICD leads 
(82% dual coil) showed that extractions of dual coil ICD 
leads were associated with a higher risk of major compli-
cations than single coil leads [13]. Another extraction 
study of 1385 ICD leads (67% dual coil) found that dual 
coil, relative to single coil, ICD leads were associated 
10
Device Extractions
Sean D. Pokorney1, Donald D. Hegland1, and Patrick M. Hranitzky2,3
1 Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA
2 Texas Cardiac Arrhythmia, Austin, TX, USA
3 WakeMed Heart and Vascular Center, Raleigh, NC, USA

10  Device Extractions
70
with higher 30‐day all‐cause ­mortality (approximately 
4% vs. 2%, adjusted odds ratio [OR] 2.7; 95% confidence 
interval [CI] 1.6–4.5; p < 0.001) [7]. This retrospective 
analysis had 54 major adverse events and a multivariable 
model identified the following characteristics as being 
associated with major adverse events: history of cerebro-
vascular disease (adjusted OR 2.2; 95% CI 1.1–4.4), ejec-
tion fraction of 15% or less (adjusted OR 2.0; 95% CI 
1.1–5.0), lower platelet count with a mean in patients 
with an event versus no event of 178 000 versus 197 000 
(adjusted OR 1.7; 95% CI 1.0–2.5), international normal-
ized ratio (INR) ≥1.2 (adjusted OR 2.7; 95% CI 1.2–5.7), 
and the use of mechanical (dilator or telescoping sheaths: 
adjusted OR 3.4; 95% CI 1.9–6.2) or powered sheaths 
(Excimer Laser Sheath, Spectranetics, Colorado Springs, 
CO; Evolution Mechanical Dilator Sheath, Cook Medical, 
Bloomington, 
IN;, 
and 
Perfecta 
Electrosurgical 
Dissection Sheath: adjusted OR 2.3; 95% CI 1.1–4.9) [7]. 
However, the sample size is too low to develop a predic-
tive model of major adverse events with all of the rele-
vant variables in the setting of these low event rates. For 
example, older age is associated with higher adverse 
event rates, and a history of prior sternotomy is associ-
ated with lower risk of extraction‐related major adverse 
events.
­Indications
Pocket infection, infective endocarditis, and occult 
gram‐positive bacteremia are all class I indications for 
complete device and lead removal (Table  10.1) [3]. 
Patients with bacteremia or infective endocarditis should 
have imaging performed to assess for the presence and 
size of a lead‐related vegetation. Given that vegetations 
can embolize during percutaneous lead removal causing 
septic emboli, there has been some consideration for 
open lead removal in patients with lead‐related vegeta-
tions >2 cm [14]. That said, both an AHA Scientific 
Statement and a HRS Consensus Statement report that 
decisions to percutaneously remove leads with vegeta-
tions >2 cm should be individualized, as there is no spe-
cific size cutoff rule mandating open surgical removal, 
and in many circumstances the risks associated with 
thoracotomy or sternotomy may be greater than the risks 
associated with septic emboli during percutaneous 
extraction in a patient with active endocarditis [2,3].
Device infections are the most common reason for lead 
removal, while the second most common reason is lead 
failure. Non‐functioning leads are a class IIa indication for 
removal (Table 10.1). Reports of ICD lead failure rates vary, 
but have been reported to be as high as 10% at 2 years, 15% 
at 5 years, and 40% at 8 years, although these failure rates 
have declined substantially in most currently utilized ICD 
Table 10.1  Indications for lead extraction.
Indication for extraction
Class
Level of 
evidence
Infection
Infective endocarditis
I
B
Pocket infection
I
B
Occult gram‐positive bacteremia
I
B
Persistent occult gram‐negative 
bacteremia
IIa
B
Superficial or incision infection
III
C
Non‐CIED source bacteremia and 
plan for suppressive antibiotics
III
C
Refractory chronic pain
IIa
C
Thrombus/venous stasis
Lead thrombus and clinically 
significant thromboembolic  
events
I
C
Planned stent procedure that 
would entrap a lead
I
C
SVC stenosis with symptoms
I
C
Need for additional lead, venous 
occlusion, and contraindication to 
contralateral vein access
I
C
Bilateral subclavian or SVC 
occlusion
I
C
Need for additional lead, venous 
occlusion, and no contraindication 
to contralateral vein access
IIa
C
Lead‐related indications
Life‐threatening arrhythmia or 
immediate threat from a lead
I
B
Lead interferes with the function 
of the CIED
I
B
Leads that interfere with 
malignancy treatment
IIa
C
Abandoned functional lead may 
interfere with CIED
II*
C
Leads not being used or that are 
potential future threats
II*
C
Non‐functioning lead with >4 
leads on 1 side or >5 through  
SVC
IIa
IIa
To facilitate access to MRI
IIb
C
Non‐functioning leads at time of 
other CIED procedure
IIb
C
Anomalous placement of leads
III
C
Functional, redundant leads with 
<1 year life expectancy
III
C
CIED, cardiac implantable electronic device; SVC, superior vena cava.
* IIa for non‐functional leads and IIb for functional leads.

­Preparation  for Devic e Extractio ﻿
71
lead designs [15]. Historically, 56% of lead failures have 
been caused by insulation defects, but lead failure as a 
result of the conductor component of the ICD lead has also 
been problematic, as was the case with the Medtronic 
Sprint Fidelis 6949 lead [15]. Classically, insulation failure 
presents as a drop in lead impedance. Exposed conductor 
elements that result from insulation failure are at increased 
risk of electrical failure, which can manifest as over‐sens-
ing, under‐sensing, elevated pacing thresholds, increased 
pacing impedance, or creation of an electrical short circuit 
that prevents the delivery of high voltage tachytherapy. 
Leads with higher than expected rates of lead failure may 
be placed under a lead advisory, and advisory leads are a 
cause of concern for patients and have a negative impact 
on patients’ quality of life even if they are not among those 
experiencing direct morbidity or mortality from the advi-
sory lead’s performance. Extraction of an electrically nor-
mal ICD or pacemaker lead that is under advisory has a 
class IIb indication for removing these functioning leads 
that are at risk for causing future harm.
­Qualifications
To be qualified to extract ICD or pacemaker leads, the 
HRS Consensus Statement from 2009 recommends that 
the extracting physician be the primary extraction opera-
tor for at least 40 leads under the supervision of a ­physician 
who has performed at least 75 extractions [3]. After the 
initial 40 leads, extracting physicians should perform at 
least 20 extractions per year in order to maintain their 
skillset. Transesophageal echocardiography needs to be 
available during the extraction procedure. The extraction 
procedures can be performed in an ­operating room or in 
the electrophysiology laboratory, as long as high quality 
fluoroscopy is available and a cardiothoracic surgeon, per-
fusionist, and a cardiopulmonary bypass machine are 
available to allow a patient to rapidly undergo emergent 
sternotomy with cardiopulmonary bypass in the event of a 
complication such as a tear of the superior vena cava, car-
diac avulsion, or cardiac perforation. The cardiothoracic 
surgeon should be familiar with the patient and the type of 
complication injuries that are seen in lead extraction, as 
well as the necessary repair for these injuries.
­Preparation for Device Extraction
As with any procedure, history, physical exam, and 
informed consent are all important. Given that there is 
variation in adverse events by center and device extrac-
tion volume, it is important to quote your hospital’s 
procedural outcomes, including sternotomy risk, proce-
dure‐related mortality and 30‐day mortality rates, risk of 
cardiac or vascular injury requiring surgical repair, and 
alternatives to lead extraction (capping and abandon 
with lead failure, suppressive antibiotics for infection, 
and open surgical extraction). The cardiothoracic 
­surgeon and the anesthesia team should also perform a 
history and physical exam, including exploration of vas-
cular access options (exclude the presence of vascular 
access ports, dialysis grafts, dialysis fistulas, or dialysis 
access catheters), so that the entire procedural team 
knows that patient’s characteristics in the event of a 
complication. A pre‐procedure device interrogation 
is  also critical to understand whether the patient is 
­pacemaker dependent and will require a temporary 
pacemaker at the time of the procedure.
Likewise, a pre‐procedure chest X‐ray is important to 
exclude the presence of abandoned hardware that may 
otherwise have been unknown to the extracting physician 
and to rapidly identify lead characteristics to confirm that 
they match with the reported model numbers in the 
patient medical record (e.g., active fixation versus passive 
fixation mechanisms and single coil versus dual coil ICD 
leads). The pre‐procedure postero‐anterior and lateral 
chest X‐rays will also be useful in: (i) clarifying lead posi-
tion (including exclusion of an inadvertent arterial lead 
placement, providing insight on vascular access angles 
and approaches used at implant, and following the course 
of the leads to exclude anomalous vasculature such as a 
persistent left superior vena cava); (ii) evaluating for con-
ductor fracture; (iii) assessing for conductor cable exter-
nalization; and (iv) evaluating for evidence of previous 
failed extraction attempts that might increase the diffi-
culty of the currently planned procedure (e.g., identifying 
an abandoned lead that appears pulled or stretched out of 
position, identifying high voltage coils that have sepa-
rated because of a previous attempt at pulling on the lead 
that was unsuccessful in removing the lead).
An important part of the history and device interroga-
tion is identification of the number of leads, characteris-
tics of leads, and dwell time of all leads in situ, including 
abandoned leads. These characteristics need to be known 
for all leads, not just leads being targeted for extraction, 
as sometimes a non‐targeted lead may be inadvertently 
disrupted during the extraction procedure and may need 
to be removed and replaced, or a non‐targeted lead may 
need to be removed to allow for removal of the targeted 
lead. Once the lead vendor and model numbers have been 
identified, there are several resources to help describe the 
lead fixation mechanism, the lead diameter, the number 
of coils, the coating or backfilling around the coils, and 
the ­recommended laser sheath size [16].
Pre‐procedure laboratory tests should include a 
­complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, pro-
thrombin time (PT)/INR, and partial thromboplastin 
time (PTT). Patients should have an active type and cross 

10  Device Extractions
72
in place, and consideration should be given to having 
packed red blood cells in the procedure room, available 
for immediate transfusion. Oral anticoagulants and anti-
platelet agents such as P2Y12 inhibitors should be held 
prior to the procedure for a period of time sufficient to 
allow the effect of that medication to dissipate (e.g., 
­holding clopidogrel for 5 days, holding factor Xa 
­inhibitors for at least 2 days, and holding warfarin until 
the INR is <1.5).
An electrocardiogram is needed prior the procedure. 
If the patient has an underlying left bundle branch block, 
there is a chance that right bundle branch conduction 
may be interrupted by mechanical contact force during 
the extraction of a right ventricular lead, so the operator 
may consider placing a temporary pacing wire at the start 
of the procedure or have a temporary wire accessible in 
the event of complete heart block during extraction.
An echocardiogram is needed before the procedure to 
determine the presence of valvular lesions, tricuspid 
regurgitation, a baseline pericardial effusion, right heart 
function and pulmonary pressures, exclusion of a high 
burden of thrombus on the lead, exclusion of a patent 
foramen ovale or atrial septal defect that could result in 
paradoxical embolism during lead extraction, and 
­ejection fraction. Transthoracic and transesophageal 
echocardiograms may be useful to identify and charac-
terize vegetations in bacteremia or endocarditis. The use 
of pre‐extraction chest computed tomography (CT) may 
help to identify patients with lead perforations and lead 
adherence to venous or cardiac structures (Figure 10.1), 
as there are data to indicate that these patients have 
longer procedure times and are at higher risk for compli-
cations [17]. In patients at risk for underlying coronary 
artery disease, it is reasonable to consider pre‐procedure 
coronary angiography by either cardiac catheterization 
or coronary CT angiography, so that the cardiothoracic 
surgeon knows the coronary anatomy and/or previous 
coronary artery bypass anatomy (such as the status of 
vein grafts and the left internal mammary artery) in case 
the patient has to undergo sternotomy. These modalities 
of pre‐procedural imaging assist with anticipating diffi-
culties, procedural planning, and assessing risks of the 
procedure, risks of sedation, and risks and challenges of 
possible sternotomy rescue if needed.
­Lead Extraction Procedure
Before starting the procedure, desired brady pacing 
parameters can be chosen (e.g., VVI 40 for a patient 
with no pacing indication or DOO 70 for a patient who 
is pacemaker dependent) and tachytherapies ­disabled to 
prevent inappropriate shocks resulting from noise from 
electroacautery. Confirm that all of the necessary supplies 
are in place and readily available for the procedure itself, 
as well as for sternotomy in the event of a complication. 
Patients will need to be clipped and prepped from bilat-
eral femoral regions to the bilateral clavicles to allow 
femoral vascular access, device pocket access, and allow 
sternotomy if needed for rescue. Although the cardio-
thoracic anesthesiologist may elect to place an internal 
jugular triple lumen vascular access catheter in addition 
to a radial arterial line and Foley catheter, there should 
also be consideration of placing femoral venous access 
for the purpose of delivering blood in the event of a supe-
rior vena cava (SVC) laceration, or for placement of a 
temporary pacing wire, snare, or SVC occlusion balloon 
as a bridge to SVC repair if needed, as well as femoral 
arterial access for the purpose of peripheral bypass in the 
event of any difficulty with median sternotomy. For 
example, this may be of particular importance for 
patients with a history of prior ­sternotomy. Femoral vas-
cular access can be minimized (e.g., utilizing 4 Fr “micro‐
puncture” sheaths for the femoral vein and femoral 
artery) in hopes of minimizing the risks of vascular 
access and decreasing sheath pull times, but these small 
sheaths still facilitate rapid upsizing for peripheral bypass 
cannulas. Femoral cut‐down with direct visualization for 
placement of peripheral bypass cannulas can also be 
Figure 10.1  Extracted lead with adherent tissue.

­Lea d Extracti on Procedur ﻿
73
used. The approach to femoral vascular access should be 
individualized for the patient’s and cardiothoracic sur-
geon’s needs. An arterial line is needed for accurate 
hemodynamic monitoring during the procedure. Packed 
red blood cells (4 units) should be rapidly available if not 
in the room in case of a complication and cell saver tech-
nology should be immediately available. It may be useful 
to cine the heart borders and costophrenic angles prior 
to starting the case, and these images can serve as a refer-
ence during the case to evaluate for pericardial effusion 
and hemothorax, respectively.
When accessing the pacemaker or ICD pocket, it is 
important to make the incision long enough (remember-
ing scar tissue contracts and therefore the extraction 
incision will usually need to be longer than the scar from 
the device implant) and high enough to provide an angle 
of approach parallel to (or slightly above) the access of 
the axillary/subclavian vein but still close enough to the 
device generator to allow its retrieval, as well as access to 
the sewing rings. Extracting from below the venotomy 
site makes it difficult to remain coaxial with the extrac-
tion tools. When approaching the device and leads with 
electrocautery, consideration may be given to dissection 
along the plane of the capsule to removed the entire gen-
erator and leads as a unit and to facilitate ­performance of 
a full capsulectomy. The degree of scar tissue and calcifi-
cation in the pocket can be instructive, as to the burden 
and composition of scar and adhesions around the leads.
At the point where the leads enter the pectoralis mus-
cle, it is often helpful to place slight traction on the lead 
to be extracted and advance the electrocautery in 
“­coagulation” mode along the lead to free it through the 
pectoralis muscle. A prevascular fat‐pad can be seen 
once the dissection plane is through the pectoralis 
­muscle, prior to approaching the central venous 
­vasculature. With creation of this dissection plane using 
electrocautery, the index finger can also be advanced 
over the lead to bluntly dissect in this region. The idea is 
to create open space to prevent the need for the extrac-
tion sheath to follow any unnecessary contours when 
these points can be opened with pectoral dissection.
In preparing the leads, it is important to carry out the 
procedure in the same way in every case, so that all steps 
are performed in the proper order and without skipping 
steps. First, leads need to be dissected and freed down to 
their sewing rings. Caution should be used to minimize 
lead traction that might disrupt the integrity of the leads 
targeted for extraction, as well as minimizing electrocau-
tery and traction over leads that are to be retained. This 
is especially the case for left ventricular leads, which are 
often the most fragile and most difficult to replace. It is 
important to remember that electrocautery can melt the 
silicone, polyurethane‐like compounds can split, and 
simple traction can dislodge leads.
After cutting and removing the sutures over the ­sewing 
rings on leads to be extracted, the sewing rings should be 
withdrawn to the maximal extent outside the pocket, so 
that the sewing rings removed when the leads are cut and 
not at risk for being forgotten and pushed into the cen-
tral venous vasculature by the extraction sheath (remem-
ber there may be more than one sewing ring on some 
leads). Next, insert the clearing stylet in an attempt to 
clear any debris in the lumen of the lead. If the clearing 
stylet will not advance, attempt to place the lead under 
gentle traction, while withdrawing and advancing the 
clearing stylet in an attempt to bypass the obstruction. If 
the lead lumen cannot be cleared as a result of blood or 
infectious material in the lumen, wipe the clearing stylet 
with a wet saline gauze, reattempt inserting the clearing 
stylet as close to the tip of the lead as possible. 
If the lead is an active fixation lead, use the fixation 
screw clip or hemostat to attempt to retract the screw. 
Leave the clearing stylet in place when attempting to 
retract the fixation screw, as this improves the delivery 
of torque to the fixation screw and helps to maintain the 
luminal integrity. Fluoroscopy may be helpful in 
­determining whether the fixation screw retracts. It is 
important not to over‐retract the fixation mechanism to 
the point that the mechanism breaks, as this may 
­compromise lead integrity. Most modern ICD and 
pacemaker leads can have their rotation mechanism 
turned counterclockwise approximately 15–20 rota-
tions ­without breaking. If there is spin‐back on the pin 
with removal of the rotation tool, then the fixation 
mechanism is likely still intact, but if there is no spin‐
back, then the fixation mechanism is likely fractured.
After the clearing stylet is removed, the lead can then 
be cut with heavy scissors below the region of the con-
nection portion of the lead, making sure to leave at least 
5 cm of lead beyond the point where the lead enters the 
pectoral muscle. Approximately 2–3 cm of outer insula-
tion should be removed from the cut end of the lead by 
cutting circumferentially with a No. 15 blade and 
­applying manual traction on the outer insulation. For 
pacing leads, conductor cables beyond those wrapping 
the central lumen can be unwound and cut off with heavy 
scissors. For ICD leads, the high voltage cables can be 
knotted together. Next, the locking stylet can be placed 
in position. Confirm with fluoroscopy that the locking 
stylet is advanced all the way to the lead tip. If the locking 
stylet does not advance to the lead tip, apply gentle 
­traction to the lead with alternating advancement and 
retraction to get the locking stylet as close to the lead tip 
as possible. The locking stylet should at least be able 
advance to the furthest point achieved by the clearing 
stylet. If the locking stylet cannot be advanced to the tip 
of the lead, consideration can be given to using a differ-
ent, usually smaller, locking stylet to try to get to the lead 

10  Device Extractions
74
tip. In general, it is better to have a less robust locking 
stylet get all the way to the tip than a more “heavy duty” 
locking stylet that cannot reach the lead tip. When the 
locking stylet is in the best achievable position, the lock-
ing stylet fixation mechanism should be deployed. For 
locking stylets with the ability to be retracted, assure 
familiarity with the retraction process so that the locking 
stylet is not inadvertently retracted during the extraction 
procedure.
If the lead is active fixation and the screw did not 
retract initially, a hemostat can be placed over the central 
conducting cables with a locking stylet in place and about 
5–7 counterclockwise turns can be attempted under 
fluoroscopy in order to determine whether the fixation 
screw retracts. Rotating beyond 5–7 turns could result in 
compromising lead integrity and/or introducing kinks 
and twists into the lead.
After deploying the locking stylet fixation mechanism, 
a high tensile strength suture, such as Ticron, can be tied 
over the outer insulation about 1–2 cm from where the 
outer insulation was cut. The knot should be tight 
enough to see indentation into the outer insulation, but 
excess bulk to the knot should be minimized to avoid dif-
ficulty in passing the extraction sheath over the knot. 
Next, place three half hitches over the outer insulation 
between the knot and the location of the cut insulation. 
If the lead is a high voltage lead, an additional high ten-
sile strength suture can be placed between the knotted 
high voltage cables; the suture can be tied approximately 
1 cm from the knot of voltage cables with three half 
hitches placed between the suture knot and the knot in 
the high voltage cables.
Alternative lead preparations include using: (i) a fixa-
tion device called a BulldogTM or (ii) a locking stylet only 
with no fixation over the outer insulation. Although 
many leads can be extracted without the time and effort 
it takes to secure the outer insulation and/or the high 
voltage cables, the operator must decide, based on their 
approach and patient characteristics, what lead prepara-
tion measures are needed. In the event of an externalized 
conductor, such as with a Riata lead (Figure 10.2), the 
high voltage cables can be tested with traction individu-
ally under fluoroscopy to identify which cable is exter-
nalized. High voltage cables that are externalized can be 
knotted together and secured with a high tensile strength 
tie that is separate from the other secured components of 
the lead.
There are several tools that can be used to facilitate 
safe extraction (Table 10.2). When using a laser sheath or 
a mechanical sheath, the operator’s body position and 
weight balance are important in order to avoid unwanted 
forward movement of the extraction sheaths. Fluoroscopy 
angles should be varied as needed to ensure that the 
extraction sheaths are remaining coaxial. There needs to 
be adequate traction (pull) on the leads along with the 
countertraction (push) forward of the sheaths in order to 
allow the extraction sheath to follow the “rail” that is 
­created by the traction on the lead. If an appropriate 
amount of traction on the lead and push on the extrac-
tion device repeatedly does not result in advancement of 
the sheath over the locking stylet, then consider the 
­possible reasons:
●
●Not coaxial
●
●“Snowplowing”
●
●Ineffective deliver of force because of binding or 
­friction under the clavicle
●
●Calcification.
Use fluoroscopy to watch for movement of surround-
ing structures when operating the laser extraction 
sheath. If there is insulation snowplow or lead on lead 
binding, the outer sheath may be advanced over the laser 
sheath to break up these binding sites or create space for 
the laser to advance. If this is unsuccessful, the laser 
sheath may need to be upsized or if entering a region of 
high risk, such as the SVC, then a switch to the more 
flexible TightRail may be helpful. If there is calcification, 
a mechanical cutting sheath or TightRail may be needed. 
It is important to avoid getting the extraction sheath 
stuck on the lead or creating a situation in which exces-
sive forward force begins to create a channel through the 
visceral structure rather than staying along the course of 
the lead. In either case, it is important to retract the 
extraction sheath frequently and confirm that the extrac-
tion sheath is not stuck on the lead when pulling back 
and tracking the lead well when pushing forward.
Femoral snares may be helpful to maintain traction 
during laser use or to retract a severed lead. In the event 
that there are lead fragments (Figure 10.3), the femoral 
Figure 10.2  Riata lead with conductor externalization.

­Lea d Extracti on Procedur ﻿
75
Table 10.2  Extraction tools.
Tool
Description
Standard, non‐locking stylet
Used for support with simple traction
Fixation screw retraction clip
Counterclockwise rotation may retract the active fixation mechanism
Locking stylet
Allows the extractor to pull from the distal tip of the lead instead of the proximal lead
Snare (gooseneck snare,  
needle’s eye snare, ensnare, 
and bioptome)
Can be used through a femoral workstation, with or without a deflectable sheath to direct 
the snare to the targeted lead or lead fragment
Mechanical sheath
Frequently composed of metal, Teflon, or polypropylene, providing stiffness and stability
Rotational cutting sheath
Beneficial in patients with calcified scar tissue, such as end stage renal disease or older leads 
in younger patients
Laser sheaths
Excimer laser that cuts through endothelialization and fibrotic scar tissue but does not cut 
through calcium
Electrosurgical sheaths
Radiofrequency energy emitted between two electrodes at the sheath tip
Telescoping sheaths
Any extraction sheath that can be paired with a second sheath, allowing the flexibility of the 
inner sheath but the support of the outer sheath, as needed to facilitate lead extraction
Angiovac
22 Fr cannula for the removal of thrombus or vegetation adherent to leads or tricuspid 
valvular tissue
TightRail/TightRail Mini
Flexible extraction tools particularly useful for extraction around points of curvature, 
rotational cutting mechanism useful for regions of adherent calcification with alternating 
directionality of rotational cutting to avoid building up unwanted torque on in situ leads 
during extraction
Bridge Balloon
Low pressure compliant balloon (80mm × 20mm; 60cc) designed to conform to the SVC to 
occlude bleeding while obtaining access for surgical repair
Figure 10.3  Fluoroscopy image of a broken lead.
Figure 10.4  Needle’s eye snare holding an extracted lead.

10  Device Extractions
76
snares can also be used to retrieve those fragments 
(Figure  10.4). Snares can be put through deflectable 
sheaths or guide catheters for better maneuverability. 
Extraction through the right internal jugular vein is 
another, although infrequently used, alternative [18]. 
The femoral workstation is a 16 Fr venous access (alter-
natively, there are 18 Fr and 20 Fr femoral workstations); 
although this may present hemostasis challenges, the 
large access allows for multiple techniques, including:
●
●Needles eye snare to entrap an in tact of lead or portion 
of lead
●
●Goose neck snare or ensnare passed over the end of an 
exposed lead tip or lead fragment
●
●Use of a deflectable sheath to direct the snare to the 
targeted lead
●
●Large enough inner lumen to allow passage of a dou-
bled over ICD lead without binding in the sheath.
In the case of device infections, a complete capsulec-
tomy for pocket debridement may be performed. The 
pocket must be fully debrided with pocket tissue sent for 
gram stain, culture, and sensitivity. If there is not sub-
stantial infectious tissue, the pocket can be debrided and 
closed primarily with a high tensile strength absorbable 
suture (such as Vicryl 2‐0, Vicryl 3‐0) and staples with 
placement of a JP or Blake drain. If there is substantial 
infectious tissue, a wound vacuum can be applied 
­primarily; however, great care must be taken to assure 
adequate hemostasis prior to its application. If there is 
any question about hemostasis, it is best to pack the 
wound with Kerlex or NuGauze soaked in saline or 
­bacitracin and re‐consider wound vacuum placement 
on the ­following day.
­Complications
As mentioned in the preparation section of the chapter, 
patients with left bundle branch blocks are at risk for com-
plete heart block during the extraction procedure, in the 
event that the right bundle branch block secondary to 
catheter manipulation is encountered. Patients who are 
pacemaker dependent and have a temporary pacing wire in 
place may have their temporary wire dislodged during the 
extraction procedure, resulting in asystole. In both of these 
cases, a temporary pacing wire from the femoral vein 
should be placed prophylactically or be easily accessible for 
use in the case of complete heart block and asystole.
During the procedure, it is important to use constant 
and steady traction (sustained traction) on the leads 
whenever the extraction sheath is being advanced. Scar 
may form within venous structures, in the atria, on tricus-
pid valve leaflets, or in the right ventricle, and the sus-
tained traction will allow time for tissue release, while 
sudden pulling carries a greater risk of tearing apart larger 
amounts of adherent tissue during lead removal. This 
is particularly important when an extraction sheath 
approaches the tip of the lead in the right atrium or right 
ventricle, because use of the laser or mechanical ­extraction 
sheaths at the lead–myocardium interface could result in 
damage to that myocardial chamber. As  the lead tip is 
approached, it is important to be patient with the use of 
traction and countertraction to provide the ­necessary sup-
port for the laser sheath around the lead, allowing the tis-
sue to release with minimal removal of the surrounding 
myocardium. In some instances of active fixation leads 
with screws that do not retract, counterclockwise torque 
of the lead and laser sheath as a unit may help the fixation 
screw disengage from the myocardium.
One of the reasons that active fixation leads are prefer-
able to passive fixation leads for purposes of extractability 
is that fixation screws that do not retract usually straighten 
with traction forces used routinely in lead extraction 
cases. Although straightening of the fixation screw may 
help the lead release from the myocardium, additional 
care must be taken to retract the lead into the extraction 
sheath before removal of the lead from the central 
­circulation in order to avoid potential risk of vascular lac-
eration with the sharp tip of the exposed fixation screw.
Also during the procedure, the right ventricular lead 
may be adherent to the tricuspid valve. If the lead is 
adherent to the tricuspid valve, less damage may be 
done to the tricuspid valve by using a laser to separate 
the lead from the tricuspid valve leaflet instead of 
­ripping the lead off the tricuspid valve. Worsening tri-
cuspid regurgitation after lead extraction is relatively 
common and has been reported in as many as 4–9% of 
cases [3,19]. However, flail tricuspid leaflet after extrac-
tion requiring surgical repair or replacement was rare 
at less than 0.5% [7].
Transesophageal echocardiography to evaluate the 
status of the tricuspid valve and evaluate for pericardial 
effusion at any point during the case where there is sus-
picion of cardiac or vascular compromise and at the end 
of the case is useful. Also, fluoroscopy images can be 
compared with the baseline cine image of the heart to 
monitor for pericardial effusion, as well as to detect 
blood in the ­costophrenic angle, which may indicate 
hemothorax resulting from compromise of the SVC. 
Intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) is another tool that 
can be used to assess lead adherence characteristics and 
to evaluate procedural complications during lead extrac-
tion, but this tool adds meaningful cost to the extraction 
procedure. The ICE can help differentiate true tampon-
ade from pseudo‐tamponade, which can be seen when 
there is right ventricular eversion [20].

­Reference ﻿
77
Larger extraction sheaths have a greater chance of 
leading to bleeding complications, so it may be helpful to 
consider purse string sutures at the entrance site of the 
extraction sheath to assist with hemostasis. Purse string 
sutures to assist with hemostasis may be particularly 
important in patients with coagulopathy, dialysis patients 
with an ipsilateral AV graft or shunt, patients with high 
right‐sided pressures, or patients being considered for 
placement of a wound vacuum immediately after device 
extraction. In the event that a patient becomes acutely 
hypoxic during the procedure, consider a pulmonary 
embolism, air embolism, or septic embolism from a lead‐
related thrombus or vegetation. If patients develop upper 
extremity swelling after the procedure, consider an upper 
extremity ultrasound or other imaging to evaluate for 
vein thrombosis.
In conclusion, there are many infectious and non‐
infectious indications for lead removal. Given that a 
greater number of devices with an increased number of 
leads are being implanted in younger patients who have 
more years to live with and experience complications 
from in situ pacing and defibrillator leads, lead extrac-
tion is an important procedure to be available for patients 
beyond indications of removal for infection. Lead extrac-
tion can be carried out safely and effectively, but it is 
important for the procedure to be performed by opera-
tors with sufficient experience and at centers with the 
necessary facilities and cardiothoracic surgery back‐up, 
as serious complications and death can occur.
­Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Ruth Ann Greenfield, 
Jonathan Piccini, Roger Carrillo, and Scott Beaver.
­References
	1	 Greenspon AJ, Patel JD, Lau E, Ochoa JA, Frisch DR, 
Ho RT, et al. Trends in permanent pacemaker 
implantation in the United States from 1993 to 2009: 
increasing complexity of patients and procedures.  
J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;60:1540–1545.
	2	 Baddour LM, Epstein AE, Erickson CC, Knight BP, 
Levison ME, Lockhart PB, et al. American Heart 
Association. Update on cardiovascular implantable 
electronic device infections and their management: a 
scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation 2010;121:458–477.
	3	 Heart Rhythm 2017 Sep 15. pii: S1547–5271(17)31080–
9. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2017.09.001. [Epub ahead of 
print] 2017 HRS expert consensus statement on 
cardiovascular implantable electronic device lead 
management and extraction.
	4	 Wilkoff BL, Byrd CL, Love CJ, Hayes DL, Sellers TD, 
Schaerf R, et al. Pacemaker lead extraction with the laser 
sheath: results of the pacing lead extraction with the 
excimer sheath (PLEXES) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 
1999;33:1671–1676.
	5	 Byrd CL, Wilkoff BL, Love CJ, Sellers TD, Reiser C. 
Clinical study of the laser sheath for lead extraction: the 
total experience in the United States. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 2002;25:804–808.
	6	 Wazni O, Epstein LM, Carrillo RG, Love C, Adler SW, 
Riggio DW, et al. Lead extraction in the contemporary 
setting: the LExICon study – an observational 
retrospective study of consecutive laser lead extractions. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2010;55:579–586.
	7	 Brunner MP, Cronin EM, Duarte VE, Yu C, Tarakji KG, 
Martin DO, et al. Clinical predictors of adverse patient 
outcomes in an experience of more than 5000 chronic 
endovascular pacemaker and defibrillator lead 
extractions. Heart Rhythm 2014;11:799–805.
	8	 Rodriguez Y, Garisto JD, Carrillo RG. Laser lead 
extraction in the octogenarian patient. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol 2011;4:719–723.
	9	 Brunner MP, Cronin EM, Jacob J, Duarte VE, Tarakji 
KG, Martin DO, et al. Transvenous extraction of 
implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator leads under 
advisory: a comparison of Riata, Sprint Fidelis, and 
non‐recalled implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator 
leads. Heart Rhythm 2013;10:1444–1450.
	10	 Kay GN, Brinker JA, Kawanishi DT, Love CJ, Lloyd 
MA, Reeves RC, et al. Risks of spontaneous injury 
and extraction of an active fixation pacemaker 
lead: report of the Accufix Multicenter Clinical Study 
and Worldwide Registry. Circulation 1999;100: 
2344–2352.
	11	 Pokorney SD, Mi X, Lewis RK, Greiner M, Epstein LM, 
Carillo RG, et al. Outcomes Associated with Extraction 
Versus Capping and Abandoning Pacing and 
Defibrillator Leads. Circulation 2017;136:1387–1395.
	12	 Poole JE, Gleva MJ, Mela T, Chung MK, Uslan DZ, 
Borge R, et al. Complication rates associated with 
pacemaker or implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator 
generator replacements and upgrade procedures: 
results from the REPLACE registry. Circulation 
2010;122:1553–1561.

10  Device Extractions
78
	13	 Epstein LM, Love CJ, Wilkoff BL, Chung MK, 
Hackler JW, Bongiorni MG, et al. Superior vena cava 
defibrillator coils make transvenous lead extraction more 
challenging and riskier. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;61:987–989.
	14	 Smith MC, Love CJ. Extraction of transvenous pacing and 
ICD leads. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2008;31:736–752.
	15	 Kleemann T, Becker T, Doenges K, Vater M, Senges J, 
Schneider S, et al. Annual rate of transvenous 
defibrillation lead defects in implantable  
cardioverter‐defibrillators over a period of >10 years. 
Circulation 2007;115:2474–2480.
	16	 Spectranetics Website. http://www.spectranetics.com/ 
resources/lead‐lookup/. Accessed August 14, 2017.
	17	 Lewis RK, Pokorney SD, Greenfield RA, Hranitzky PM, 
Hegland DD, Schroder JN, et al. Preprocedural  
ECG‐gated computed tomography for prevention of 
complications during lead extraction. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 2014;37:1297–1305.
	18	 Bongiorni MG, Soldati E, Zucchelli G, Di Cori A, 
Segreti L, De Lucia R, et al. Transvenous removal of 
pacing and implantable cardiac defibrillating leads 
using single sheath mechanical dilatation and 
multiple venous approaches: high success rate and 
safety in more than 2000 leads. Eur Heart J 
2008;29:2886–2893.
	19	 Glover BM, Watkins S, Mariani JA, Yap S, Asta J, 
Cusimano RJ, et al. Prevalence of tricuspid 
regurgitation and pericardial effusions following 
pacemaker and defibrillator lead extraction.  
Int J Cardiol 2010;145:593–594.
	20	 Sadek MM, Epstein AE, Cheung AT, Schaller RD. 
Pseudo‐tamponade during transvenous lead extraction. 
Heart Rhythm 2015;12:849–850.

79
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
It is estimated that 10 000–15 000 pacemaker and 
­defibrillator leads are extracted worldwide per year, and 
the numbers of extracted leads and lead extraction 
­procedures are growing. This growth is fueled by the 
growing base of patients with implanted pacemakers and 
defibrillators, the increasing complexity of the implanted 
systems, increasing rates of infection, and recently mar-
keted lead models with high rates of mechanical failure. 
Whereas 20 years ago lead extraction was an infrequently 
performed procedure, lead extraction programs have 
emerged as integral components of comprehensive 
­cardiac arrhythmia centers. Fellows in clinical cardiac 
electrophysiology training programs increasingly value 
training in lead extraction as a high priority.
As the frequency of lead extraction procedures has 
increased, so have the numbers of approaches and tools 
available to perform the technique. Most of the available 
tools are focused on manipulating the leads as they enter 
the venous system from the subclavian, cephalic, or axil-
lary veins. Approaching leads from their entry point into 
the venous system has obvious appeal in that the proxi-
mal portion of the lead is in hand and, but for loosening 
adhesions of the lead to endovascular and endocardial 
structures, the lead can be removed with direct traction. 
Conversely, any approach to the lead not via the 
implanted vein  –  such as the femoral or jugular 
approach – necessitates securely snaring the lead from a 
distance within a vein or the heart and, at some point in 
the procedure, abandoning control of the lead from the 
implanted vein. Nevertheless, these alternate approaches 
have been durable components of the lead extraction 
armamentarium for decades and even today represent 
arguably equally safe and effective alternatives to more 
commonly utilized extraction techniques. Indeed, it is 
not uncommon to encounter leads that have been par-
tially extracted or severed at the vein entry site, or leads 
where the central lumen will no longer accept a stylet, 
and in these cases there is no option for extraction but to 
snare the leads within a vein or the heart.
­Femoral Lead Extraction Approach 
Within the Larger Context 
of the Lead Extraction Procedure
With the exception of rare cases, the femoral approach 
to lead extraction is performed within the context of a 
superior surgical approach (i.e., from within the gener-
ator pocket and via the implanted vein). At a minimum, 
the necessary steps performed from within the 
­pacemaker or defibrillator pocket include mobilizing 
the ­generator, disconnecting leads from the generator, 
freeing the leads of their subcutaneous adhesions, 
­cutting the sutures on the suture sleeve, mobilizing the 
suture sleeves, and attempting to retract extendable–
retractable distal fixation helices.
Beyond these basic steps performed within the genera-
tor pocket, it is discretionary how much additional work 
will be carried out from the surgical approach before 
“converting” to the femoral approach. Here are several 
examples that highlight the range of options:
●
●A single 2‐year‐old active‐fixation pacemaker lead is 
to be extracted. It is likely that the lead can be extracted 
from a superior approach with relatively few tools and 
minimal risk. The extracting physician may plan on 
an  expeditious superior extraction and resort to the 
­femoral approach only if unexpected difficulty is 
encountered.
●
●A 16‐year‐old non‐backfilled dual coil defibrillator 
lead, with the proximal coil located in the brachioce-
phalic vein, is to be extracted. A reasonable strategy 
11
How to Extract Pacemaker and Defibrillator Leads from the Femoral Approach
Leenhapong Navaravong and Roger A. Freedman
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

11  How to Extract Pacemaker and Defibrillator Leads from the Femoral Approach
80
would be to advance a powered or mechanical sheath 
from above until the distal end of the proximal coil 
has been reached but no further, and then convert to 
femoral approach. This would serve to mobilize the 
proximal coil from above but avoid the risk of superior 
vena cava tear.
●
●Several leads all implanted for longer than 15 years are 
to be extracted. Some of these leads have relatively lit-
tle slack in the right atrium where they would typically 
be snared from below. In this case, a reasonable 
approach would be to avoid locking stylets and any 
traction or sheaths from above, and convert to femoral 
approach immediately after the basic pocket steps are 
completed. The advantages of this strategy are: (i) sav-
ing time, avoiding additional fluoroscopy, and con-
serving supplies if there is a very high likelihood of 
resorting to femoral approach; and (ii) avoiding losing 
available lead slack in the right atrium to make snaring 
from below easier.
Choosing the balance between superior and femoral 
approaches depends on the experience, skill, and availa-
ble tools of the extracting physician. Some relatively high 
volume extraction centers have little or no experience 
with femoral extraction, do not have femoral tools in 
stock, and rely almost exclusively on their expertise in 
superior extraction. Obviously, such a center would 
rarely resort to the femoral approach. Other centers have 
more balanced expertise and can select the best strategy 
on a case‐by‐case basis.
­Tools for Femoral Extraction
Femoral extraction requires two basic categories of tools.
1)	 Outer femoral sheath. This is the introducer that is 
placed in the femoral vein through which the snare is 
placed and leads removed. The outer sheath can usually 
be left in place as multiple leads are snared and removed. 
The most commonly used outer sheath is a 16 Fr hemo-
static introducer that extends from the femoral area to 
the right atrium (Femoral Introducer Sheath, Cook 
Medical). It is available in both straight and curved 
shapes (Figure 11.1) and comes with a dilator.
2)	 Snares. There are several snares that can be used 
through the outer femoral sheath:
●
●Dotter basket (Cook Medical) and deflectable tip 
wire (Figure 11.2). The deflectable tip wire can be 
looped over a lead segment and then snared in the 
Dotter basket. This technique does not require a 
free end of lead for snaring.
●
●Amplatz gooseneck snare (Covidien). An Amplatz 
snare can be used to “lasso” an accessible free end 
of the lead. Alternatively, it can be used to snare a 
tip deflecting wire which is looped over a lead 
­segment and then snared with the Amplatz snare 
(Figure 11.3).
●
●Needle’s Eye Snare (Cook Medical; Figure  11.4). 
The Needle’s Eye Snare is the most commonly used 
snare for lead extraction and forms the focus of this 
chapter. The Needle’s Eye Snare can be used to 
snare a segment of lead or a free end of lead. The 
snare consists of a loop or “cobra head” which is 
draped over the lead segment and the Needle’s Eye 
or “tongue” which is extended through the “cobra 
Figure 11.1  Outer sheaths utilized for femoral approach to lead 
extraction. The sheath is placed percutaneously in the femoral 
vein and the distal end advanced to the right atrium. Top: 
Proximal end of 16 Fr sheath with hemostatic valve and side arm. 
Middle: Distal end of curved outer sheath. Bottom: Distal end of 
straight outer sheath. Source: Reproduced with permission of 
Cook Medical Incorporated.
Figure 11.2  Dotter basket with 
deflectable tip wire, used together to 
snare pacemaker defibrillator leads in the 
right atrium or great veins. Source: 
Reproduced with permission of Cook 
Medical Incorporated.

­Usin g the Tool ﻿
81
head,” thus encircling the lead segment. An inner 
femoral sheath (12 Fr) is used to cinch the snare 
(Figure 11.4). Snares are available with 13 or 20 mm 
“cobra head” diameters. The inner sheath is ­supplied 
in both straight and curved shapes.
­Using the Tools
Practical Tips for Inserting Outer 
Femoral Sheath
The 16 Fr outer sheath has an outer diameter of 5.3 mm, 
which is larger than typical catheters familiar to 
­cardiologists. There is a tendency to undersize the length 
of the skin nick in the femoral area – doing so will impede 
entry of the catheter. When the sheath reaches the femo-
ral vein, there is another area of resistance which requires 
additional force. A palpable “pop” signals entry of the 
catheter into the vein. The outer sheath should be 
advanced over the supplied guidewire to the inferior 
right atrium.
Deploying the Needle’s Eye Snare
The snare and the inner sheath containing it are advanced 
into the right atrium. Pacemaker and defibrillator leads, 
be they right ventricular, right atrial, or coronary sinus, 
are usually snared in the right atrium. Less commonly, 
leads can be snared in the superior vena cava, brachioce-
phalic vein, or inferior vena cava. The Needle’s Eye Snare 
should not be advanced to or beyond the tricuspid valve, 
as deployment of the snare near the tricuspid valve is 
likely to cause severe damage to the valve and/or its 
­supporting structures.
Once in the right atrium, the snare, inner sheath, and 
femoral outer sheath should be rotated to see if one or 
more of leads targeted for extraction are “bumped.” 
Bumping a lead signifies that it can be snared with the 
snare and sheaths being used. Failure to bump a lead, 
even as the snare is moved from the superior vena cava 
down to the inferior vena cava, suggests that a different 
snare size or sheath curve may be needed.
The next step is to drape the “cobra head” over the 
lead segment (Figure 11.5). The goal is position the lead 
­segment as far back in the lobes of the “cobra head.” It is 
important not to torque the “cobra head” against resist-
ance so much as to distort its geometry. Angulated fluor-
oscopic views can be useful to confirm positioning of the 
(a)
(b)
Deflecting
wire
Amplatz
snare
Sheath
Byrd
femoral
sheath
Figure 11.3  Deflectable tip wire used 
with Amplatz gooseneck snare to snare 
pacemaker lead. (a) Wire and snare 
deployed in the right atrium around the 
lead. (b) Demonstrating snaring end of 
deflectable wire and pulling the lead 
within the femoral sheath. Source: Belott 
(1998) [2]. Reproduced with permission of 
Futura Publishing.
Figure 11.4  Needle’s Eye Snare with “cobra head” and “tongue” 
surrounding the lead. The 16 Fr outer femoral sheath and 12 Fr 
inner femoral sheath are also visible. Source: Reproduced with 
permission of Cook Medical Incorporated.

11  How to Extract Pacemaker and Defibrillator Leads from the Femoral Approach
82
snare over the lead, although commonly sticking to a 
­single fixed fluoroscopic view is most expeditious.
Once the “cobra head” is draped over the lead segment, 
the tongue is extended by advancing a plunger on the 
proximal end of the snare apparatus (Figure  11.6). 
Importantly, for effective snaring the targeted lead 
­segment must be bracketed between the lobes of the 
“cobra head” and the tongue. In a single fluoroscopic 
view it is not always possible to determine if that is the 
case. Very commonly, the extended tongue will end up 
behind the lead and the lead will not be effectively snared. 
In addition to taking angulated fluoroscopic views, ways 
to test for effective snaring are to check to see if the lead 
segment rotates when the snare is rotated and to advance 
the inner sheath.
After extending the tongue, the inner sheath is then 
advanced over the snare towards the lead. If the lead is 
effectively snared, the inner sheath will abut the lead 
(Figure 11.7), cinching it between the tongue and “cobra 
head.” If the lead is not effectively snared, however, the 
inner sheath will be advanced past the lead, and this is 
the sign to the operator that it is time to redeploy the 
snare and try again.
As mentioned above, one of the steps of lead extrac-
tion performed from the pocket area is to attempt to 
unscrew the distal helices of active fixation leads by 
manipulating leads from their proximal end. For extend-
able–retractable helices, this involves counterclockwise 
rotation of the proximal electrode pin. For fixed helices, 
this involves counterclockwise rotation of the entire lead. 
However, it is not uncommon for these maneuvers to be 
unsuccessful. Most likely the reason is failure to transmit 
Figure 11.5  “Cobra head” of Needle’s Eye Snare draped over atrial 
lead in the right atrium.
Figure 11.6  “Tongue” portion of Needle’s Eye Snare extended 
through the “cobra head,” thus surrounding the atrial lead.
Figure 11.7  Inner sheath advanced up to atrial lead, cinching it 
between the “cobra head” and “tongue” portions of the Needle’s 
Eye Snare.

­Specia l Situation ﻿
83
sufficient counterclockwise torque to the distal end of 
the lead from rotation at the proximal end. Snaring leads 
from below, much closer to the endocardial attachment 
site, allows for torqueing of the leads much closer to the 
location of the helix. When unscrewing leads from their 
proximal end fails, it is almost always possible to unscrew 
them from below by counterclockwise torqueing of the 
snare after the lead is well cinched into the snare 
(Video 11.1). Once the helix is unscrewed from the endo-
cardium, any residual coiling of the lead near the snare 
should be relieved by rotating the snare clockwise; this 
will permit easier advancement of the outer sheath over 
the doubled over lead.
Delivering the Lead
After the lead has been firmly cinched by the snare and 
inner sheath, and if active fixation it has been unscrewed 
from the endocardium, the snared lead is doubled over 
inside the outer femoral sheath. This is accomplished in 
one of two ways. If the lead is free of the endocardium, it 
can be simply pulled down into the outer sheath 
(Video 11.2). If the lead is still attached to the endocar-
dium, the outer sheath is advanced forward over the 
doubled over lead while tension is held on the lead from 
the snare below. Ideally, the outer sheath is advanced all 
the way to the endocardium to stabilize the heart as the 
distal end of the lead is detached. Frequently, however, 
the distal end of the lead will pull free of its attachment 
during the process of advancing the outer sheath, espe-
cially when a ventricular lead is being extracted. Failure 
to advance the femoral outer sheath all the way to the 
endocardium is particularly common in the case of larger 
diameter defibrillator leads which cannot be readily 
­doubled over within the outer sheath.
As the lead is pulled into the femoral outer sheath, the 
proximal portion of the lead should be cut at the vein 
entry site in the pectoral area. Often, a locking stylet will 
have been inserted into the lumen of the lead and 
­frequently it is not possible to remove the locking stylet 
at this point in time, so it too is cut along with lead. 
Fortunately, although the locking stylet certainly adds 
rigidity to the lead, its presence does not appear to impair 
removal of the lead via the outer femoral sheath.
Once the lead is delivered the lead via the outer 
­femoral sheath, fluoroscopy of the chest and abdomen is 
performed to confirm no retained lead fragments. It is 
prudent to image the outer sheath (still in the femoral 
vein) as well to make sure no fragments are retained in its 
lumen. The outer sheath should be aspirated forcefully 
and flushed as thrombi can be retained in the sheath.
The inner sheath and snare can be re‐advanced into 
the femoral outer sheath to snare additional leads. Once 
all leads are extracted, the outer sheath is pulled from the 
vein and hemostasis is obtained. A 20‐minute manual 
groin hold and 6 hours bedrest is recommended.
­Special Situations
Need for Temporary Pacemaker
When temporary pacing is needed during lead extrac-
tion, our practice in most patients has been to place the 
temporary pacemaker via the left femoral vein, reserving 
the right femoral vein for the extraction tools. To the 
degree possible the right atrial “heel” of the temporary 
pacemaker should be positioned away from the target 
segments of the leads to be extracted.
Retaining or Creating Subclavian 
and Brachiocephalic Access During Femoral 
Extraction
Occasionally, leads are extracted from patients whose 
ipsilateral subclavian or brachiocephalic veins are sten-
osed or occluded, and it is desirable to reimplant new 
leads via those veins after the extraction. The method of 
accomplishing this using the femoral extraction approach 
is to make a 2 mm nick in the insulation of one (or more) 
of the leads to be extracted and then to insert the straight 
end of a 0.035 inch guidewire between the insulation and 
the outer conductor for a distance of 3–4 mm, far enough 
so it will withstand gentle traction. (A standard vein lifter 
can facilitate inserting the guide wire under the insula-
tion.) After the lead is snared from below and is being 
pulled through the femoral outer sheath, the guide wire 
is gently fed along into the vasculature. Once the leading 
end of the guide wire is beyond the area of vascular 
occlusion or stenosis, a quick tug is exerted on its proxi-
mal end to free it from the lead. If a tug is not sufficient, 
then a dilator can be advanced over the guide wire to free 
it from the lead.
Retaining Femoral Access When Extracting 
Larger Defibrillator Leads
Most leads can be delivered by doubling them over 
within the femoral outer sheath and without removing 
the femoral outer sheath from the femoral vein, as 
described in the previous section. Notable exceptions are 
larger diameter defibrillator leads (those requiring 9 Fr 
introducers or larger for insertion), which are too thick 
to readily double over within the femoral outer sheath. 
For these leads, the snared portion is brought back to the 
distal and of the outer sheath and pulled within it for as 

11  How to Extract Pacemaker and Defibrillator Leads from the Femoral Approach
84
far as possible, which may be up to several centimeters. 
Once the lead cannot be pulled any further into the outer 
sheath, the outer sheath along with lead are removed 
together from the femoral vein.
When a larger defibrillator lead is one of multiple leads 
to extract, one strategy is to remove that lead last so that 
losing groin access is not a concern. However, when that 
strategy does not work (i.e., if there are multiple larger 
defibrillator leads to extract or if it is not possible to 
snare the larger defibrillator lead first), it will be neces-
sary to regain femoral vein access. Generally, this can be 
done on the original femoral vein used, although a groin 
hold will first be necessary to achieve hemostasis. When 
it is anticipated that access to the femoral vein will be 
lost, it is advisable to place in advance a “spare” guide 
wire from the access site adjacent to the femoral outer 
sheath up to the inferior vena cava. This is accomplished 
by inserting two long guide wires through an introducer 
in the femoral vein earlier in the case, and then advanc-
ing the femoral outer sheath over one of them, saving the 
other as the “spare.”
Calcified or Heavily Fibrosed Leads
Whereas calcified or heavily fibrosed leads present a 
major challenge for extraction using superior techniques, 
they are readily removed using the femoral approach. 
Figure 11.8 shows the non‐backfilled, non‐coated proxi-
mal shocking coil of a defibrillator lead extracted 17 
years after implantation. After extraction, the proximal 
shocking coil was found to have a rigid sheath of calcium 
about 1.5 mm in thickness surrounding it, which was 
cracked in two for illustrative purposes after extraction 
(Figure  11.8). Despite the calcific sheath, the lead was 
extracted femorally with little force and no difficulty.
Previous Extraction Using Femoral Approach
Patients who have a prior extraction from a femoral 
venous approach may have excessive scar tissue in the 
area of that vein resulting from the prior extraction. The 
scar tissue may impede placement of the femoral outer 
sheath or of pulling leads through the femoral area, espe-
cially in cases when leads cannot be pulled out through 
the outer sheath, such as larger defibrillator leads. In 
such cases, the leads can be wedged into the scar tissue 
and if excessive force is used can break with potential 
embolization back to the heart or pulmonary artery. 
Therefore it is recommended to consider utilizing the 
left femoral vein in patients who have had prior extrac-
tion from the right femoral vein. A similar recommenda-
tion would apply to patients known to have excessive 
scar tissue in the right femoral area from repeated vascu-
lar instrumentation of any nature.
­Precautionary Measures
The same precautionary measures that are typically 
taken with lead extractions using the superior approach 
are advised for the femoral approach. The precautionary 
measures that we employ are as follows:
●
●General 
anesthesia, 
ideally 
with 
a 
cardiac 
anesthesiologist.
●
●Entire chest, abdomen, and groin areas prepped and 
draped as a single field.
●
●Defibrillation pads placed, typically in right scapular 
area and left mid axillary line.
●
●Arterial catheter for continuous blood pressure moni-
toring. Generally, the arterial line will be placed in a 
radial artery. When it is placed in a femoral artery, it is 
advised to place it contralateral to the femoral vein 
used for extraction.
Figure 11.8  Proximal shocking coil of a defibrillator lead 
extracted using femoral approach 17 years after implantation. 
The lead was a Guidant model 0125 which has no backfill or 
coating to prevent tissue ingrowth into shocking coils. After 
extraction, the proximal shocking coil was found to have an intact 
rigid sheath of calcium about 1.5 mm in thickness surrounding it, 
which is shown cracked in half after extraction for illustrative 
purposes. Despite the calcific sheath, the lead was extracted 
femorally with little force and no difficulty.

­Complication ﻿
85
●
●Transesophageal echocardiography with continuous 
monitoring for complications.
●
●Cardiac surgery standby back‐up with appropriate 
surgical supplies and equipment available.
●
●Withholding of warfarin (goal INR ≤1.2) and other oral 
anticoagulants, heparin, and thienopyridines (e.g., 
clopidogrel, prasugrel). Aspirin can be continued if 
there is a firm medical indication for its use.
●
●4 units paced red blood cells in the procedure room. If 
there is any question of INR not being at goal of ≤1.2, 
then plasma should also be available.
An additional precaution not generally utilized with the 
superior approach is sequential compression devices on 
the lower extremities to lower the risk of deep venous 
thrombosis following extraction.
­Complications
The complication profile of femoral extraction differs 
somewhat from that of superior extraction. Table 11.1 
lists the complications of the femoral approach.
The most common life‐threatening complication of 
lead extraction from the femoral approach is myocar-
dial perforation resulting from avulsion or tear with 
resulting hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade. 
A  published series comparing femoral with superior 
extraction 
approaches 
reported 
two 
myocardial 
­perforations among 189 femoral extractions (1.1%) and 
two among 268 superior extractions (0.7%) [1]. It is 
extremely helpful to have continuous transesophageal 
echocardiography monitoring in place for early detec-
tion of pericardial effusion. In the event of pericardial 
effusion, transthoracic echocardiography is helpful to 
direct pericardiocentesis. A pericardiocentesis tray 
and  a physician with expertise in the technique of 
­pericardiocentesis should be immediately available. 
Occasionally, percutaneous pericardiocentesis is not 
adequate to control bleeding and a limited thoracotomy 
is required for repair of the myocardial defect.
Vascular complications occur occasionally, generally 
involving the femoral venous access site and include 
hematoma, femoral artery pseudoaneurysm, arterio-
venous fistula, deep venous thrombosis, and pulmonary 
embolism. Rarely, pacemaker or defibrillator leads will 
get wedged into a scarred femoral area and require cut‐
down and venotomy for removal.
As with the superior approach, leads can fragment 
during a femoral extraction procedure and potentially 
embolize. If lead fragments remain in the right atrium or 
the great veins, then it is usually possible to snare them 
and extract them. A deflectable catheter, such as an abla-
tion catheter, is occasionally useful to insert in the inner 
femoral extraction sheath to advance it into less easily 
accessible veins such as the brachiocephalic veins; once 
the inner sheath is positioned the deflectable catheter is 
replaced with the Needle’s Eye Snare. Under no circum-
stances should the Needle’s Eye Snare be advanced 
through the tricuspid valve. Attempting to snare a lead 
within the right ventricle carries a high risk of severe 
damage to the tricuspid valve. Lead fragments that have 
embolized to the proximal pulmonary artery can often 
be snared with Amplatz goose neck snare or other snares 
familiar to vascular surgeons and interventional radiolo-
gists. The Needle’s Eye Snare is too rigid to allow for safe 
deployment within a pulmonary artery.
Damage to companion leads (i.e., implanted leads that 
are not specifically targeted for extraction) can occur 
during a femoral lead extraction procedure, but this 
complication is probably less common using the femoral 
approach than with the superior approach. The reason is 
that with the superior approach, leads are often adhered 
together in the subclavian vein, brachiocephalic vein, 
and/or the superior vena cava, and the process of advanc-
ing powered sheaths over the lead being extracted is at 
significant risk for damaging companion leads. It is much 
less common for leads to be adhered in the right atrium 
and when they are the adhesions tend to be focal and 
relatively easy to lyse with simple traction. Therefore, 
when target leads are snared in the right atrium using the 
femoral approach, they can almost always be freed from 
adhesions to companion leads in the right atrium with 
moderate traction. Furthermore, when snared from 
below, target leads can generally be freed with minimal 
traction from adjacent leads in the superior vena cava, 
brachiocephalic vein, and subclavian vein.
When damage to companion leads does occur during 
the femoral approach, it is usually because the companion 
Table 11.1  Complications of pacemaker and defibrillator lead 
extraction utilizing the femoral approach.
Myocardial perforation with hemopericardium and cardiac 
tamponade
Superior vena cava tear rarely seen
Tricuspid valve damage
Damage or dislodgement of companion leads
Fragmentation of leads, possibly with embolization
Vascular complications
●
●Hematoma
●
●Femoral artery pseudo‐aneurysm
●
●A‐V fistula
●
●Deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
●
●Inability to pull leads out of femoral vein – require cut‐down 
and venotomy
Dislodgement of temporary pacemaker
Radiation exposure

11  How to Extract Pacemaker and Defibrillator Leads from the Femoral Approach
86
lead interferes with successful snaring of the target lead 
and therefore the companion lead is intentionally extracted 
to allow for snaring of the target lead. Dislodgement of 
companion leads may occur when they are repeatedly 
contacted by the snare; this complication is generally 
limited to newly implanted companion leads or leads 
placed within the coronary sinus tree.
Tear of the superior vena cava as a complication of the 
femoral approach to lead extraction is extremely rare. 
We are aware of only one report of superior vena cava 
tear resulting from a femoral lead extraction [1]. We have 
never experienced a superior vena cava tear using the 
femoral approach to lead extraction, and a search of the 
FDA Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience 
(MAUDE) database for fatal tears of the superior vena 
cava with the Needle’s Eye Snare yielded no reports.
In a comparison of femoral with laser superior 
approaches to lead extraction, total fluoroscopy time was 
found to be higher (21 min) for the femoral approach 
than the laser superior approach (7 min) [1]. In that study, 
patients undergoing extraction by the femoral approach 
had locking stylets inserted from above and also attempts 
were made to detach the distal end of the lead from the 
endocardium by pulling from above. It is arguable that 
these maneuvers are not necessary for a femoral approach 
lead extraction, and that the fluoroscopy time for these 
patients would have been shorter had they not been 
­performed. Furthermore, pulling on leads from above 
generally eliminates any slack the leads would have had in 
the right atrium and therefore makes snaring from below 
more challenging and time consuming.
­Why is Less Force Required 
to Extract Leads from Femoral 
Approach than Superior Approach?
Physicians who have experience extracting leads from 
both the femoral and superior approaches are struck by 
the significant difference in required force to extricate 
and remove leads between the two techniques, with less 
force required for the femoral than the superior approach. 
The explanation for this discrepancy is unclear. One pos-
sibility is that with pulling from above, especially using 
locking stylets that exert upward traction from the distal 
end of the lead, the leads may shorten and “bunch up,” 
leading to slight increase in their effective diameter and 
impeding their passage through tight adhesions. 
Conversely, when leads are pulled from below, they 
Figure 11.9  Wall stress in superior vena cava when shear force is exerted on an adhered lead from superior approach (left) compared with 
force exerted from femoral approach (right). Wall stress is sixfold higher from the superior approach than from the femoral approach.

­Reference ﻿
87
stretch slightly and their diameter decreases or “neck,” 
and this eases their passage through tight adhesions 
(Mark T. Marshall, personal communication). Another 
possibility for the discrepancy in required force is that 
adhesions have a “barb” effect such that they impair 
­passage of leads in one direction more than the other.
A related question is why tear of the superior vena 
cava is so much less common when leads are extracted 
from the femoral approach than the superior approach. 
A recent study of a computer model of the effect of shear 
forces exerted by traction on a lead adhered to the supe-
rior vena cava showed sixfold higher stress in the wall of 
the superior vena cava when shear force is exerted by 
traction from the superior direction than equal shear 
force exerted from the inferior direction (Figure 11.9).
­Conclusions
The femoral approach to pacemaker and defibrillator lead 
extraction is an alternative and complementary approach 
to the more commonly practiced superior approach. Tools 
and methodology for the femoral approach have been 
developed after years of refinement. Reported head‐to‐
head comparisons of the femoral and superior approaches 
are sparse, but available evidence suggests similar rates of 
procedural success and complications between the two 
approaches. The incidence of various procedural compli-
cations differs between the two methods, and in particular 
tear of the superior vena cava with resulting hemothorax 
appears to be much less common with the femoral than 
with the superior approach.
­References
	1	 Bordachar P, Defaye P, Peyrouse E, Boveda S, Mokrani B, 
Marquié C, et al. Extraction of old pacemaker or 
cardioverter‐defibrillator leads by laser sheath versus 
femoral approach. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 
2010;2:319–323.
	2	 Belott PH. Endocardial Lead Extraction: A Videotape 
and Manual. Futura Publishing; Armonk, NY, 1998.
Video 11.1  Unscrewing atrial lead with counterclockwise rotation of femoral snare. Snared active fixation atrial lead is unscrewed from 
endocardium with counterclockwise rotation of Needle’s Eye Snare inserted via femoral approach.
Video 11.2  Pulling snared atrial lead down the outer femoral sheath. After being unscrewed from atrial endocardium, the snared atrial 
lead is pulled down the outer femoral sheath. The outer femoral sheath will stay in place if needed to extract other leads.
  To watch the videos, please log in to the Companion Website: 
www.wiley.com/go/al‐ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds

89
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
The advent of implantable devices has produced the sub-
sequent need for removal of these devices. Malfunction, 
erosion, pocket infection, endocarditis, and other unique 
device‐related issues are common reasons for removal. 
Removal of the subcutaneous or sub‐muscular pulse 
generator alone is a fairly uncomplicated procedure. 
However, removal of the chronically implanted 
­transvenous lead system can be a significantly complex 
procedure [1–5].
Over the years of lead development, the early, large 
diameter, solidly built wires have been replaced by 
smaller, more delicate, and structurally complex leads. 
The major barrier to removal of these leads is fibrosis 
that progressively grows around the lead body and 
­electrode tip, securing leads to the venous endothelium 
and to the myocardium. The goal is to free the lead from 
these binding sites safely.
Standard surgical techniques through a midline ster-
notomy, lateral thoracotomy, or limited atriotomy were 
developed as solutions for lead removal. However, they 
remain an option of last resort given their invasiveness, 
morbidity, and longer recovery time, with a reported 
mortality rate of 0–12.5% [6,7]. The desire for safe extrac-
tion techniques, performed via the implant vein and 
compatible with the pectoral pocket transvenous implant 
method, led to the development of transvenous 
­techniques [5,6]. By using telescoping sheaths made of 
polymer and/or steel material which slide over the lead 
body, a countering force is applied to the intravascular 
fibrotic overgrowth that resists the traction force applied 
to the lead. This technique of intravascular counterpres-
sure localizes shear stress on the fibrotic tissue and 
aids  in blunt dissection or dilation of the tissue away 
from the  lead circumference. Many tools, techniques, 
and approaches may be used and combined in order to 
remove cardiac leads. This chapter focuses on the 
­incremental role of a transjugular approach in the field 
of percutaneous lead extraction.
­Background
Definition of Terms
According to the North American Society of Pacing and 
Electrophysiology (NASPE) Policy Statement [8] and 
Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) Expert consensus [9] on 
transvenous lead extraction, “lead removal” is defined as 
the removal of pacing and defibrillating lead using any 
technique. Within the general category of lead removal, 
distinctions must be made between:
1)	 Lead explant: simple procedures that can be per-
formed via the implant vein without specialized 
tools; and
2)	 Lead extraction: removal of leads involving more 
complex procedures and specialized tools.
Extraction Tools
Extraction tools are all the potential items used to accom-
plish lead removal. The following tools can be used for 
lead removal:
●
●Implant tools: tools typically supplied for lead implant, 
allowing manipulation of the lead so that the lead exits 
the vasculature via the implant vein. These tools 
include such items as standard stylets (non‐locking) 
and fixation screw retraction clips.
12
How to Extract Leads from the Jugular Approach
Maria Grazia Bongiorni, Andrea Di Cori, Luca Segreti, Giulio Zucchelli, Ezio Soldati,  
Stefano Viani, and Luca Paperini
Second Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Cardiac‐Thoracic and Vascular Department, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Pisana, Pisa, Italy

12  How to Extract Leads from the Jugular Approach
90
●
●Traction devices: specialized locking stylets, snares, 
sutures, grasping, or other devices used to engage or 
entrap and remove the lead or lead fragments.
●
●Sheaths: dilatators used to disrupt fibrotic adher-
ences across the leads. These may be “mechanical” 
(composed of metal, Teflon, or polypropylene and 
requiring manual advancement over the lead and rely 
on the mechanical properties of the sheath to disrupt 
fibrotic attachments) or “powered” (using laser, 
­radiofrequency, or rotational technology to dissect 
binding sites).
Extraction Techniques
Techniques for lead removal include all practical 
­methods or arts applied to extract leads from the body. 
The major obstacle to lead removal is the body’s 
response to an intravascular foreign body. A few months 
after the implant, the leads are fixed at binding sites 
along their course and at the tip, mainly by the growth of 
fibrous tissue including the lead itself [10]. Usually, leads 
implanted for 1 year or more are not likely to be removed 
by simple traction, particularly in the presence of 
implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD) leads, 
where the defibrillating coils are usually responsible for 
significant growth of fibrous adherences. The  sites 
where binding sites are most likely to be present are the 
site of insertion into the subclavian vein, the junction 
between innominate vein and superior vena cava (SVC) 
and right atrium, the tip of the lead and, in the case of 
ventricular leads, the tricuspid valve [11–13]. The key 
point in order to remove a lead is to free the lead by 
these binding sites, from the venous entry to the tip. 
Most of the currently available techniques combine 
traction with the dissection of the binding sites, and the 
most important difference between them is the energy 
used to dissect the binding sites.
Any technique used for extraction should have good 
lead control. The aim of lead control is to allow traction 
force application uniformly over the entire length of the 
lead. Lead control is important for improving success 
rates and reducing complications. First, lead control is 
obtained by securing the inner coil with a stylet. Secondly, 
a suture is used as an additional traction device. 
Finally, once the lead is prepared, lead control is obtained 
by assessing constantly the tensile properties of the lead 
during traction application. Changes in the tensile 
response may be a result of detachment of the stylet from 
the lead, freeing of the lead from binding sites, unravel-
ling of the inner conductor, or rupture of the outer 
insulation.
Lead traction, counterpressure and countertraction, 
progressive dissection and mechanical dislodgement 
represent the techniques for lead extraction [14–18].
Lead Traction
Simple traction is the most primitive method of lead 
removal. It was the only method of extracting leads during 
the early years of pacing, when leads to be removed had 
large and strong bodies, no effective fixation mechanisms, 
and short implant duration [18]. Traction was performed 
for minutes to days manually using various weights or 
elastic bands [19]. Later, fibrous encapsulation along the 
lead–vascular wall–myocardium interface developed, 
making simple traction ineffective and potentially risky. 
Although standard or locking stylets have considerably 
improved the effectiveness of direct traction, the success 
rate remains pretty low, requiring the use of additional 
tools like dilating sheaths with the related techniques (i.e., 
counterpressure and countertraction).
Counterpressure and Countertraction
Counterpressure is performed by applying simultaneously 
a forward pressure on the sheath and traction to the lead. 
Pressure describes the pushing force applied to the sheaths 
that is directed towards the heart, and its objective is to 
overcome binding sites between the lead and vascular sys-
tem. The goal of counterpressure is to counterbalance the 
advancement force (pressure) with the retraction force 
(traction). An imbalance between these two forces can 
cause the procedure to fail or lead to complications.
Countertraction is performed when the sheath has 
been progressed to the lead tip–myocardial surface. The 
traction applied on the lead is counterbalanced by the 
pressure obtained by pushing the outer sheath to sup-
port the myocardium; in other words, the force is applied 
perpendicular and in opposition to the heart wall. This 
allows centering and limiting the traction force to the 
binding sites surrounding the lead tip, minimizing the 
risk of myocardial invagination or tear.
No single technique for transvenous lead removal 
should be considered “standard” and applicable in all 
cases. The different tools and approaches must be tai-
lored to each individual case [20].
Extraction Approaches
Cardiac leads are usually removed via the implant vein. 
The implant vein is the venous access by which the lead 
was inserted.Sometimes, however, alternative venous 
access is required from a non‐implant vein. Examples of 
alternative approaches to subclavian vein include femo-
ral and jugular veins. There are three approaches for 
transvenous lead extraction (Figure 12.1) [21]:
1)	 Venous entry approach (VEA), also known as the 
superior approach;
2)	 Transfemoral approach, also known as the inferior 
approach; and
3)	 Internal transjugular approach.

­Interna l Transjugula r Approac ﻿
91
Most operators begin with a VEA using the implant 
vein and switch to a transfemoral approach if necessary. 
Moreover, when leads are broken or flee‐floating, the 
transfemoral approach is historically performed [22].
Different venous approaches using the mechanical 
dilatation technique represent the personal contribution 
to transvenous removal, using the internal jugular vein 
(IJV) in patients with free‐floating leads or difficult 
exposed leads [20].
­Internal Transjugular Approach
Rationale
We introduced the internal transjugular approach (ITA) 
to approach two complex clinical scenarios: difficult lead 
extraction from VEA and free‐floating leads. Although 
the described success rate is 90% for standard approaches, 
extraction may be risky or impossible in some cases. 
The introduction of ITA allows us to shorten the road 
from the skin to lead tip and to change the dilatation 
angle, overcoming difficulties and increasing the success 
rate from 91.1% to 98.5% [22,23].
Difficult conditions for the removal of leads exposed at 
the implant site are damage of the lead (fracture, loss of 
insulation), hard turns in the course of the lead (the 
energy of dilatation may be applied to venous wall, 
increasing the risk of venous tears), very thin costo‐­
calvicular space (avoiding the use of large dilation 
sheaths), and the presence of very tight binding sites 
(sometimes calcified) where dilatation is not effective.
Gross Anatomy
The IJV is the major venous return from the brain, upper 
face, and neck. It is formed by the union of inferior pet-
rosal and sigmoid dural venous sinuses in or just distal to 
the jugular foramen (forming the jugular bulb). It 
descends in the carotid sheath with the internal carotid 
artery. The vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) lies between 
the two. After receiving tributaries from the face and 
neck, it continues to descend into the thorax, usually 
between the heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, 
before uniting with the subclavian vein to form the bra-
chiocephalic vein [24,25]. The IJV is surrounded by 
accompanying lymph nodes. Main relations are with the 
following structures (Figure 12.2):
1)	 Relation to internal carotid artery:
●
●C2 – posteriorly
●
●C3 – posterolaterally
●
●C4 – laterally.
2)	 Vagus nerve (CN X) always situated between the ICA 
and IJV.
3)	 Anteriorly (i.e., is crossed by these structures):
●
●Upper third – spinal root of accessory nerve (CN XI)
●
●Middle third – lower root of ansa cervicalis
●
●Lower third – sternocleidomastoid muscle, tendon 
of omohyoid muscle.
4)	 Posteriorly (from superior to inferior as the IJV 
descends in the neck):
●
●Lateral mass of C1 (atlas)
●
●Middle scalene muscle
●
●Anterior scalene muscle
●
●Pleura of lung apices.
The jugular veins are relatively superficial and not 
­protected by tissues such as bone or cartilage. As the IJV 
is large, central, and relatively superficial, it is often used 
to place venous lines. Because the IJV rarely varies in its 
location, it is easier to find than other veins. This proce-
dure has no absolute contraindications. Relative 
­contraindications include the following:
●
●Severe coagulopathy
●
●Physical status unfit for anesthesia
●
●Unavailability of a suitable access site
●
●Thrombosed veins
●
●Overlying skin infection.
Equipment
The following material is necessary for cannulation:
●
●Sterile gloves
●
●Antiseptic solution with skin swab
●
●Sterile drapes or towels
●
●Sterile gown
1. Venous entry approach (VEA)
2. Transfemoral approach (TFA)
3. Internal transjugular approach (ITA)
Figure 12.1  Summary of transvenous extraction approaches.

12  How to Extract Leads from the Jugular Approach
92
●
●Sterile saline flush, approximately 30 mL
●
●Lidocaine 1%
●
●Gauze
●
●Dressing
●
●Scalpel, No. 11
●
●Needle driver
●
●Prolene suture 4/0
●
●Introducer 11 Fr.
Skin cleansing with 2% chlorhexidine in alcohol is rec-
ommended for skin antisepsis, as this has been shown to 
be superior to povidone‐iodine or 70% alcohol. Expose 
the neck from the angle of the jaw superiorly, to the 
­nipples inferiorly, to the midaxillary line laterally, and to 
the sternum medially. Surround the exposed area with 
sterile drape or towels.
Catheterization Technique
The patient is placed in the Trendelenburg position with 
his or her head turned to the contralateral side. The phy-
sician stands above the patient on the contralateral side, 
and a large skin wheal is raised with local anesthetic over 
the junction of the sternal and clavicular divisions of the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle. The IJV is located between 
the clavicular heads of sternomastoid muscle. It is 
accessed best at the apex of the triangle the muscle heads 
make with the clavicle (Figure 12.3).
While the medially located carotid artery (which 
courses under the sternal division) is palpated, a 2 cm, 
22‐gauge needle and syringe are used to locate the IJV 
which lies lateral to the carotid artery, immediately 
beneath the medial border of the clavicular division. The 
needle should enter the skin at a 30–450 angle directed 
laterally toward the mid‐clavicle, thereby avoiding pos-
sible puncture of the carotid artery. On entering the vein, 
the syringe is disengaged but the needle is not removed; 
it remains in the vein to serve as a direct visual guide to 
the underlying vein. After ensuring that the needle is 
within the lumen of the vein, the J guide wire is passed 
through the needle and the tip is positioned in the upper-
most inferior vena cava (IVC). Fluoroscopy is used to 
confirm the position of the guide wire tip. After confirm-
ing that the guide wire is positioned correctly, withdraw 
the needle and introduce a 11 Fr dilator sheath with the 
aid of an image intensifier to monitor correct travel of 
the sheath into the vein. Remove the dilator sheath and, 
using a screwing motion, pass a peel‐off sheath, ideally 
into the uppermost IVC or into the right atrium. Remove 
the guide wire and trocar of the dilator sheath, and aspi-
rate blood from the side arm to confirm positioning 
within the vein. Flush the sheath with saline.
ITA for Lead Extraction
Free‐Floating Leads
Free‐floating leads are defined as leads previously cut 
and abandoned intravascularly. A VEA approach is 
impossible. The femoral approach is technically possible 
but challenging, considering the required tools (trans-
femoral station, snares) and the suboptimal angle to 
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.2  Frontal (a) and right oblique (b) anterior view of the right internal jugular vein.

­Comple x V EA Extractio ﻿
93
achieve the lead tip in the right ventricle. Exposure of the 
lead through an SVC tributary, such as the right IJV, can 
enhance the effectiveness of dilatation, by using the same 
technique and tools as in the presence of exposed leads. 
Once exposed through the IJV, free‐floating leads can be 
managed in the same way as exposed leads.
The right IJV is percutaneously cannulated using an 11 
Fr introducer. A Lasso is advanced via the jugular vein, 
the proximal end of the lead is grasped and then exposed. 
The lead exposure from the right IJV allows the insertion 
of a stylet and sheaths as described for a standard 
approach through the venous entry site. When the length 
of the lead does not allow the lead to be exposed, the 
Lasso (Osypka GmbH) is used as an extension of the lead 
and dilation is performed by a dilating sheath, previously 
inserted over the lasso. In our experience, this approach 
results in the removal of all the leads submitted to the 
procedure without complications.
­Complex VEA Extraction
Fibrosis propagation occurs along the lead which 
becomes increasingly dense with time (Figure  12.1). 
Patient and lead‐related factors account for the quantity 
and quality of adherences [26–31]. Usually, the venous 
entry site, the curve into the SVC, and the region from 
the anode ring to the lead tip are sites most likely to 
develop severe fibrosis [31]. A comprehensive knowl-
edge of adherence location is key to a safe and effective 
transvenous procedure. The aim is dissection of all lead‐
related adherences from the venous entry site to the tip. 
Complications are commonly observed as the result of 
vascular or cardiac damage during dilatation. In the past, 
adherence rate and location have been described for 
standard pacing leads, and some predictors have been 
identified [11,31].
The SVC is a critical region for the shot angle between 
this vein and the right or left innominate vein. Particularly 
in case of presence of tenacious adherences in this region, 
the advancement of dilating sheaths, specially if ­powered, 
must expose the patient to risk of vein tearing. According 
to the “Pisa approach” [32], we use the IJV in order to 
reduce the shot angle between the sheath and the SVC 
during the dilating maneuver. In the presence of a diffi-
cult lead, it can be turned into a free‐floating one, thus 
slipping it through some binding sites from the femoral 
vein, and then exposed through the IJV. At this point 
there is a “straight line” course all the way to the tip of the 
lead. Conventional dilatation of distal binding sites and 
30°
45°
to
Figure 12.3  Catheterization of the right jugular vein.

12  How to Extract Leads from the Jugular Approach
94
the tip can be carried out. Regardless of the energy used, 
the straight course of the lead from the jugular vein 
to the heart facilitates dilatation and allows the use of 
large sheaths.
The VEA can be troublesome and risky in presence of:
1)	 Tight space between clavicle and first rib (as in medial 
access to intrathoracic subclavian vein).
2)	 Tenacious adherences in some critical points like 
innominate vein–SVC junction, SVC–right atrium 
spring, right atrium, tricuspid valve, right ventricle. 
When, despite the use of a larger sheath, advance-
ment of the sheath was stopped at any site of 
­adherence for 5 minutes, or when dilatation was 
judged too risky, a cross over to ITA is considered. 
The approach through the IJV presents some advan-
tages in these conditions. The straight course of the 
lead from the jugular vein to the SVC, right atrium, 
right ventricle allows the dilatation of adherences 
along the longitudinal axis of the lead. Using this 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 12.4  Fluoroscopic session of intra‐procedural steps for internal transjugular approach (ITA) removal. (a) Dual chamber implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD) with ineffective venous entry approach (VEA). (b) Using a transfemoral approach (TFA), the lead is grasped 
and pulled back in the venous system. (c) Using an ITA, the lead is grasped again and exteriorized. (d) A new mechanical dilatation is now 
performed from the right jugular vein.

­Reference ﻿
95
technique, narrow bends (in leads inserted through 
the right site) and tight binding sites at the SVC are 
bypassed or safely dilated. In tight binding sites in the 
right chambers and tricuspid valve, the internal jugu-
lar approach allows better dilatation of adherences 
than through the vein of insertion because of the 
avoidance of long turns from venous entry access. 
The lead has to be made free from VEA up to the 
SVC. Then, through the right femoral vein, using a 
deflectable wire (Osypka) the lead is grasped and 
made intravascular. The next steps are exactly the 
same as described for intravascular leads (Figure 12.4).
­Conclusions
Nowadays, transvenous approaches are the gold stand-
ard for cardiac lead extraction. In experienced hands, the 
overall success rate is about 90%, even if 10% of proce-
dures continue to be challenging. The most common dif-
ficulties are related to the necessity of removal abandoned 
free floating leads or leads difficult to remove from the 
VEA. In all these cases, the ITA resulted in safe and 
effective complete lead removal. The incremental value 
of ITA is observed for both pacing and ICD leads, inde-
pendently from procedural indication.
­References
	1	 Bilgutay AM, Jensen NK, Schmidt WR, Garamella JJ, 
Lynch MF. Incarceration of transvenous pacemaker 
electrode: removal by traction. Am Heart J 
1969;77:377–379.
	2	 Byrd CL, Schwartz SJ, Hedin N. Lead extraction: 
indications and techniques. Cardiol Clin 
1992;10:735–748.
	3	 Imparato AM, Kim GE. Electrode complications in 
patients with permanent cardiac pacemakers: ten years’ 
experience. Arch Surg 1972;105:705–710.
	4	 Myers MR, Parsonnet V, Bernstein AD. Extraction of 
implanted transvenous pacing leads: a review of a 
persistent clinical problem. Am Heart J 
1991;121:881–888.
	5	 Wallace HW, Sherafat M, Blakemore WS. The stubborn 
pacemaker catheter. Surgery 1970;68:914–915.
	6	 del Rio A, Anguera I, Miro JM, Mont L, Fowler VG Jr, 
Azqueta M, et al. Surgical treatment of pacemaker and 
defibrillator lead endocarditis: the impact of electrode 
lead extraction on outcome. Chest 2003;124:1451–1459.
	7	 Frame R, Brodman RF, Furman S, Andrews CA, Gross 
JN. Surgical removal of infected transvenous pacemaker 
leads. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 1993;16:2343–2348.
	8	 Love CJ, Wilkoff BL, Byrd CL, Belott PH, Brinker JA, 
Fearnot NE, et al. Recommendations for extraction of 
chronically implanted transvenous pacing and 
defibrillator leads: indications, facilities, training. North 
American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology Lead 
Extraction Conference Faculty. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 2000;23(4 Pt 1):544–551.
	9	 Wilkoff BL, Love CJ, Byrd CL, Bongiorni MG, Carrillo 
RG, Crossley GH 3rd, et al. Transvenous lead extraction: 
Heart Rhythm Society Expert consensus on facilities, 
training, indications, and patient management: this 
document was endorsed by the American Heart 
Association (AHA). Heart Rhythm 
2009;6(7):1085–1104.
	10	 Robboy SJ, Harthorne JW, Leinbach RC, Sanders CA, 
Austen WG. Autopsy findings with permanent 
pervenous pacemakers. Circulation 
1969;39(4):495–501.
	11	 Smith HJ, Fearnot NE, Byrd CL, Wilkoff BL, Love CJ, 
Sellers TD. Five years’ experience with intravascular 
lead extraction: US lead extraction database. Pacing 
Clin Electrophysiol 1994;17(11 Pt 2):2016–2020.
	12	 Bongiorni MG, Zucchelli G, Soldati E, Arena G, 
Giannola G, Di Cori A, et al. Usefulness of mechanical 
transvenous dilation and location of areas of adherence 
in patients undergoing coronary sinus lead extraction. 
Europace 2007;9(1):69–73.
	13	 Segreti L, Di Cori A, Soldati E, Zucchelli G, Viani S, 
Paperini L, et al. Major predictors of fibrous 
adherences in transvenous implantable cardioverter‐
defibrillator lead extraction. Heart Rhythm 
2014;11(12):2196–2201.
	14	 Verma A, Wilkoff BL. Intravascular pacemaker and 
defibrillator lead extraction: a state‐of‐the‐art review. 
Heart Rhythm 2004;1(6):739–745.
	15	 Fearnot NE, Smith HJ, Goode LB, Byrd CL, Wilkoff BL, 
Sellers TD. Intravascular lead extraction using locking 
stylets, sheaths, and other techniques. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 1990;13(12 Pt 2):1864–1870.
	16	 Yue A. System and lead extrations. In Timperley J, 
Leeson P, Mitchell ARJ, Betts T. (eds) Pacemaker and 
ICDs. O.M. Publications, 2008: 313–331.
	17	 Belott PH. Endocardial Lead Extraction. Futura, 
1998: 142.
	18	 Byrd CL, Schwartz SJ, Hedin NB. Lead extraction: 
indications and techniques. Cardiol Clin 
1992;10:735–748.
	19	 Bilgutay AM, Jensen NK, Schmidt WR, Garamella JJ, 
Lynch MF. Incarceration of transvenous pacemaker 
electrode: removal by traction. Am Heart J 
1969;77(3):377–379.

12  How to Extract Leads from the Jugular Approach
96
	20	 Bongiorni, MG. Transvenous Lead Extraction: From 
Simple Traction to Internal Transjugular Approach. 
Springer Verlag, 2011.
	21	 Smith MC, Love CJ. Extraction of transvenous pacing 
and ICD leads. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2008;31(6):736–752.
	22	 Bongiorni MG, Soldati E, Zucchelli G, Di Cori A, 
Segreti L, De Lucia R, et al. Transvenous removal of 
pacing and implantable cardiac defibrillating leads 
using single sheath mechanical dilatation and multiple 
venous approaches: high success rate and safety in 
more than 2000 leads. Eur Heart J 
2008;29(23):2886–2893.
	23	 Bongiorni MG, Giannola G, Arena G, Soldati E, 
Bartoli C, Lapira F, et al. Pacing and implantable  
cardioverter‐defibrillator transvenous lead extraction. 
Ital Heart J 2005;6(3):261–266.
	24	 Sandring S. The anatomical basis of clinical practice. 
Gray’s Anatomy, 40th edition. Churchill 
Livingstone, 2008.
	25	 Bongiorni MG. Techniques for transvenous leads 
extraction. Minerva Cardioangiol 2007;55(6): 
771–781.
	26	 Bongiorni MG, Di Cori A, Segreti L, Zucchelli G, Viani 
S, Paperini L, et al. Transvenous extraction profile of 
Riata leads: procedural outcomes and technical 
complexity of mechanical removal. Heart Rhythm 
2015;12(3):580–587.
	27	 Bongiorni MG, Segreti L, Di Cori A, Zucchelli G, Viani 
S, Paperini L, et al. Safety and efficacy of internal 
transjugular approach for transvenous extraction of 
implantable cardioverter defibrillator leads. Europace 
2014;16(9):1356–1362.
	28	 Di Cori A, Bongiorni MG, Zucchelli G, Lilli A, Coluccia 
G, Fabiani I, et al. Short‐term extraction profile of 
cardiac pacing leads with hybrid silicone‐polyurethane 
insulator: a pilot study. Int J Cardiol 
2013;9;168(4):4432–4433.
	29	 Maytin M, Carrillo RG, Baltodano P, Schaerf RH, 
Bongiorni MG, Di Cori A, et al. Multicenter experience 
with transvenous lead extraction of active fixation 
coronary sinus leads. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2012;35(6):641–647.
	30	 Di Cori A, Bongiorni MG, Zucchelli G, Segreti L, Viani 
S, de Lucia R, et al. Large, single‐center experience in 
transvenous coronary sinus lead extraction: procedural 
outcomes and predictors for mechanical dilatation. 
Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2012;35(2):215–222.
	31	 Di Cori A, Bongiorni MG, Zucchelli G, Segreti L, Viani 
S, Paperini L, et al. Transvenous extraction 
performance of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene 
covered ICD leads in comparison to traditional ICD 
leads in humans. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2010;33(11):1376–1381.
	32	 Kennergren C. European perspective on lead 
extraction: part II. Heart Rhythm 2008;5(2):320–323.

97
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
­Background
Fibrous occlusions develop in the subclavian/distal 
innominate vein and/or innominate/superior vena cava 
(SVC) in 13–35% of patients with existing leads. As indi-
cations for cardiovascular implantable electronic 
devices (CIEDs) expand and patients with existing CIED 
leads require additional or replacement leads, implant-
ing physicians increasingly need to navigate these 
venous occlusions [1–8]. Subclavian obstruction is also 
a factor that prevents successful addition of an LV lead 
for cardiac resynchronization [9,10]. If crossing the 
occlusion ­followed by subclavian venoplasty is safe and 
does not damage the leads [11–18], it may be preferable 
to contralateral access, the supraclavicular approach 
[19,20], or powered sheath extraction, which pose 
­additional risks [21–26].
­Safety of Subclavian Venoplasty
We began performing subclavian venoplasty (SV) in 
1999 and reported our results in 373 cases as of 
November 2010. Successful access was achieved in 
371/373, with no adverse clinical outcome, no distal 
embolization (chronic occlusion no thrombus), no 
venous disruption (the veins are heavily encased in scar 
tissue), and no acute damage to the leads. To extend our 
safety data from 2010 [12], we identified 488 SV proce-
dures performed by nine physicians at Lancaster General 
Hospital from January 27, 2004 to November 20, 2014 
via an Electronic Health Record query. There were no 
acute clinical events in the cohort. It is unknown whether 
the pressure and mechanical stress to which existing 
leads are subjected during venoplasty affect long‐term 
lead performance, so we looked for damage to existing 
leads becoming manifest over 12 months following 
­venoplasty. Of the initial 488 patients, 20 were lost to 
­follow‐up. In the remaining 468 patients there were two 
atrial lead dislodgements and one insulation defect found 
in a pre‐existing atrial lead. The atrial lead dislodgements 
were detected at 3 and 5 months post SV, respectively, 
while the insulation defect was detected at 9 months. 
When compared with a cohort who had lead replacement 
without venoplasty, there was no signal to suggest that 
venoplasty caused delayed lead damage.
In an attempt to acquire additional safety data, an 
email survey of 23 centers performing SV was conducted 
in 2015. All centers contacted responded. There was a 
mean of 19.4 ± 12.7 cases per center with no center 
reporting an adverse event. Based on the above it appears 
that SV is not only safe, but does not damage existing 
leads. Discussions of lead management should include 
venoplasty as a means to preserves venous access and 
assists in optimal lead placement. Because of the exten-
sive fibrous tissue surrounding the leads (Figure 13.1), 
venoplasty is an intrinsically safe procedure: it is really 
fibroplasty not venoplasty. The safety experience 
described applies to patients with chronic leads (>2 years) 
where venoplasty was performed to add a lead(s). When 
SV is compared with progressively larger dilators, veno-
plasty is faster and there are problems with dilators; 
catheters remain difficult to manipulate throughout the 
procedure, central stenosis (SVC–right atrium junction) 
is not opened and dilators create a false sense of safety.
There are some situations where venoplasty may not 
be advisable such as along the SVC (Figure 13.2) and for 
a swollen arm developing within the first several months 
of implant. In the latter situation, fibrous tissue has 
not  yet developed and larger balloons are required, 
increasing the likelihood of venous disruption: in this 
13
How to Perform Venoplasty for Access
Seth J. Worley
Medstar Heart & Vascular Institute Washington Hospital Center, Washington, DC, USA

13  How to Perform Venoplasty for Access
98
case venoplasty not fibroplasty. In addition, there is little 
evidence that venoplasty for a swollen arm produces 
lasting patency with clinical improvement resulting from 
collateral development.
­Utility of Subclavian Venoplasty
Ji et al. [27] were able to evaluate the utility of SV at 
Montefiore Medical Center/Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine where some implanting physicians decided to 
adopt/learn venoplasty and others chose not to adopt/
learn venoplasty. In 41 patients with subclavian vein 
occlusion who were sent for the addition of lead(s), 18 
were performed by physicians who learned to perform 
SV, 23 by physicians who did not learn to perform SV. 
When the implanting physician was venoplasty compe-
tent, procedure times were shorter (2:31 hours venoplasty 
competent, 3:28 hours not venoplasty competent). When 
the implanting physician was venoplasty competent, 
implants were more successful: five implant failures in the 
23 cases (21.5%) resulting from inability to gain venous 
access when the implanter was not venoplasty competent. 
There were no implant failures in the 18 cases when the 
implanter was venoplasty competent [27].
­Step‐by‐Step Approach 
to Subclavian Venoplasty
1)	 In patients with previous leads, because of the pos-
sibility of subclavian obstruction, we now start 
venous access with a 15 cm stiffened dilator micro 
puncture kit (for details see Box  13.1) rather than 
using the 18 gauge needle and wire that comes with 
the sheath.
2)	 Perform an axillary vein venogram. While the con-
trast is flowing, enter the vein with the needle as far 
peripheral to the occlusion as possible (Figure 13.3; 
Videos 13.1, 13.3, and 13.4) without regard to the 
location of the rib. Unlike traditional axillary vein 
access, the needle should enter the body at a shallow 
angle (approximately 30 degrees).
3)	 To enter the vein peripheral to the occlusion it is often 
necessary to enter the vein through the skin rather 
than through the pocket. If the needle enters the vein 
at the site of occlusion, it will be difficult to advance 
the wire and any opening through which to advance 
the wire will be lost. Do not be concerned if it 
seems  like there is a total occlusion, the peripheral 
venogram usually overestimates the severity of the 
obstruction.
4)	 Carefully advance the wire into the vein up to the site 
of obstruction. It is important not to disrupt the site 
of obstruction with the needle or the wire.
5)	 Carefully advance the 5 Fr dilator or stiffened dila-
tor/5 Fr catheter over the wire (Videos 13.1, 13.3, and 
13.5). The tip of the dilator should not be pushed 
beyond the tip of the wire. The goal is the get the tip 
of the dilator/catheter a few millimeters peripheral to 
the obstruction.
6)	 Attach a contrast injection system with hemostatic Y 
adapter to the hub of the dilator/catheter (Figure 13.4). 
An injection system similar to that shown in 
Figure  13.4(a) can be assembled from “spare parts” 
available in most labs or purchased more cost 
­effectively as a kit (Box 13.1).
Figure 13.1  Example of the dense fibrous tissue that develops 
around the pacing lead.
Figure 13.2  Right‐sided venous obstruction that may not be safe 
to dilate. The predominant area off obstruction is along the lateral 
wall of superior vena cava (SVC) rather than within the subclavian 
innominate vein. Although a wire was easily advanced into the 
right atrium venoplasty was not performed because of the lack 
tissue surrounding the obstruction and the catastrophic nature of 
an SVC tear.

­Step‐by‐Ste p Approac h to Subclavia n Venoplast ﻿
99
Box 13.1  Annotated list of equipment for crossing and dilating a subclavian obstruction/occlusion
Contrast injection system
Attached to the hub of the dilator from a 5 Fr sheath or the 
5 Fr catheter of the micro‐puncture system. Contrast 
­injection through the system with the tip of the dilator/
catheter at the site of occlusion will identify an opening 
through which to advance a wire. The Y adapter with rotat-
ing hemostatic valve allows the wire to be advanced 
through the dilator/catheter to cross the occlusion:
1)  Contrast Injection System Worley Advanced Kit 1 CAK 
1(comes w/contrast bowl and labels) (Order # K12‐
WORLEY1 Merit Medical); or
2)  Worley Advanced Kit CAK 2 (without bowl and labels) 
(Order # K12‐WORLEY2 Merit Medical).
Dilator from 5 Fr sheath
Prior to our recent conversion to a stiffened dilator micro‐
puncture kit, the dilator from a standard 5 Fr sheath would 
be advanced over the 0.035 inch J wire from a standard 
peel‐away sheath. Conversion to stiffened micro‐puncture 
kit was precipitated by:
1)  Difficulty advancing a 0.035 inch wire into vein for 
­initial venous access (easier using a 0.018 inch wire);
2)  Difficulty advancing the dilator over the wire (not stiff 
enough);
3)  Difficulty visualizing the tip of the dilator to be certain 
it was in the vein (not radiopaque).
5 Fr micro‐puncture kit with radiopaque tip 
and stiffened dilator for initial venous access
The 21 gauge needle and angled tip 0.018 inch Nitinol wire 
can make initial venous access easier. The stiffened dilator 
(indicated by the S in the order number) provides support 
to advance over the wire through scar tissue and/or difficult 
anatomy when compared with a standard micro‐puncture 
kit without a stiffened dilator. The stiffened dilator is also 
more radiopaque so you can be certain the tip is in the vein. 
Finally, the length of the catheter is 15 cm (usually 10 cm) to 
increase the likelihood that the tip of the 5 Fr catheter 
reaches beyond the stenosis (Order # S‐MAK501N15BT) 
(Catheter = 5 Fr  –  15 cm, wire = 0.018 inch × 60 cm Nitinol 
with platinum tip, needle = 21 G × 7 cm.
Wires for crossing subclavian obstructions
Angled polymer tip (PT) Nitinol wires with a hydrophilic 
coating (AKA glide wire or Terumo) are best for crossing 
subclavian obstructions These wires are available 
from multiple vendors with slightly different names. The 
polymer tip Nitinol construction, hydrophilic coating, 
length, diameter, and tip configuration are all key issue. 
In  general, 0.014 inch angioplasty wires have not been 
helpful in crossing subclavian occlusions. The majority of 
0.014 inch angioplasty wires are made of stainless steel 
(not Nitinol). The tips of stainless steal wires are easily 
deformed by ­contact with the fibrous tissue where the 
Nitinol wire retail their shape.
1)  0.035 inch × 180 cm angled tip (not straight) wires 
are  available from multiple vendors including 
Merit  Medical Laureate wire (Order # LWSTDA35180 
Merit Medical);
2)  0.018 inch × 180 cm angled tip (not straight) wire avail-
able from multiple vendors including Merit Medical 
Laureate wire (Order # LWSTDA18180 Merit Medical).
Torque device (AKA steering handle) for directing 
the angled tip wire
Because of the hydrophilic coating the wires are very 
­slippery and the torque device is essential for the operator 
to direct the tip (caution: one size does not work for all size 
wires multiple vendors including Merit Medical).
1)  Torque device for 0.014–0.018 inch wire;
2)  Torque Device for 0.025–0.038 inch wires.
Catheters used to exchange from a polymer tip wire 
to an extra support wire and to cross a difficult 
subclavian obstruction/total occlusion
Catheters for wire exchange
The polymer tip wire used to cross the occlusion ­frequently 
does not provide sufficient support to advance the bal-
loon across the occlusion. To provide adequate support 
the polymer tip wire needs to be exchanged for an extra 
support wire (Amplatz Extra Support). To exchange wires, 
a 4–5 Fr braided hydrophilic catheter works best. The 
metal braid and hydrophilic coating are essential. Similar 
catheters without metal braid (e.g., Terumo Glide Cath) do 
not have adequate stability to be advanced over the wire 
into the central circulation. On occasion a tight stenosis 
may require downsizing to a 4 Fr catheter. One of the 
angled tip catheters is used for both crossing a difficult 
occlusion and wire exchange. As an alternative to an 
angled tip catheter, the straight catheter can be used 
when the polymer tip wire advances to the central circula-
tion without the need for an angled tip catheter.
Catheters for crossing difficult occlusions
To cross totally occluded subclavian, a properly shaped, 
angled tip, braided catheter with a hydrophilic coating is 
essential. To my surprise I also found that the length and 
(Continued)

13  How to Perform Venoplasty for Access
100
7)	 Inject contrast to identify an opening in the occlusion 
(Figure 13.5). Do not be concerned if it seems as if 
there is a total occlusion. The majority of the time a 
wire can be passed, either alone with a torque device 
(Videos  13.1 and 13.5) or with the assistance of a 
braided angled tip catheter (Videos  13.3 and 13.4) 
even when no opening is immediately apparent 
(Figure 13.6).
8)	 Insert a 0.035–0.018 inch angled polymer tip Nitinol 
wire into the hemostatic valve. Nitinol angled poly-
mer tip wires are available from several vendors 
(Box 13.1). In some cases, the 0.035 inch wire is too 
large to cross the obstruction. I find the 0.018 inch 
Nitinol polymer tip wire superior to a 0.014 inch 
­angioplasty wire because the angioplasty wire is 
stainless steel which is easily bent whereas the 
Nitinol of the 0.018 inch wire retains its shape.
9)	 Attach a torque device to the proximal end of the 
wire 5–10 cm from where it enters the hemostatic 
valve.
10)	 Close the hemostatic valve.
11)	 Use puffs of contrast and the torque device to direct 
the wire across the occlusion (Videos 13.1 and 13.5).
12)	 If the wire alone cannot be advanced across the 
obstruction, replace the 5 Fr dilator/5 Fr micro 
puncture catheter with and angled 4–5 Fr braided, 
hydrophilic catheter (Box  13.1). As detailed in 
Box 13.1, the angle and length of the tip as well as 
angle of the tip are critical, slight variations in tip tangle 
and length are surprisingly important. The angled tip is 
used to direct the wire to more decisively, the braided 
catheter provides support to push the wire into the occlu-
sion. Once the wire advances the catheter is worked up to 
the tip of the wire. I have the most experience with the 5 Fr 
version of the catheters listed. Similar catheters without 
metal braid (Terumo) do not have adequate torque ­control 
or support:
1)  5 Fr Impress KA 2 Hydrophilic Angiographic Catheter 5 
Fr 65 cm (Order # 56538KA2‐H Merit Medical);
2)  4 Fr Impress KA 2 Hydrophilic Angiographic Catheter 4 
Fr 65 cm (Order # 46538KA2‐H Merit Medical);
3)  4 Fr Impress STS Hydrophilic Straight Angiographic 
Catheter 4 Fr 65 cm (Order # 46538STS‐H Merit  
Medical).
If both the 4 and 5 Fr KA 2 catheters (1 and 2 above) are 
available, the straight 4 Fr is optional (3 above).
J Tip Extra Stiff Support Wire to replace the polymer tip 
wire used to cross the obstruction
Note: Not all Amplatz Extra Stiff wires are created equal! 
For example, both the Boston Scientific and Cook are 
labeled “Amplatz Extra Stiff”; however, the support pro-
vided is very different. With “Extra Support” wires the total 
length, the coating, the tip (J tip not straight), the length of 
the floppy section after the J tip, and stiffness are the key 
issues. In my experience, the Cook Amplatz Extra Stiff Wire 
Guide provides the best option for providing stability in 
the coronary sinus (CS). The floppy section beyond the J 
tip of the Boston Scientific is too long to be useful in the 
CS. Cook wire details: 0.035 inch diameter, 180 cm total 
length, PTFE‐Coated Stainless Steel, 3 mm curve J tip, 3 cm 
floppy tip length, and 7 cm taper length (THSCF‐35‐180‐3‐
AES, Order # G03565). For providing support to advance a 
balloon either wire is satisfactory; however, for providing 
support in the CS the correct wire (Cook) will make the 
­difference between success and failure. Order the Cook for 
simplicity of inventory.
Balloons for subclavian venoplasty –  
Ultra‐noncompliant and over the wire
Because a 0.035 inch polymer tip hydrophilic wire is usu-
ally used to cross the subclavian obstruction, you need a 
balloon with a 0.035 inch lumen to go over the wire.
1)  To add one lead use a 6 mm diameter × 4 cm 
length × 75 cm. Example CONQUEST (Kevlar) Order # 
CQ‐7564 Bard Peripheral Vascular Ultra‐noncompliant: 
wire lumen 0.035 inch, over the wire, rated burst 
­pressure 30 atm.
2)  To add two leads or if there is elastic recoil use a 
9 mm × 4 cm × 75 cm balloon Bard Peripheral Vascular 
Ultra‐noncompliant: wire lumen 0.035 inch, over the 
wire, rated burst pressure 26 atm. Order # CQ‐7594 Bard 
Peripheral Vascular.
3)  When the 6–9 mm diameter balloon will not advance 
across the obstruction, use one of the 4 Fr braided 
hydrophilic catheter (above) to exchange the 0.035 
inch wire for a 0.014 inch extra support wire and pre‐
dilate with a noncompliant rapid exchange coronary 
balloon (below). Once pre‐dilated, replace the 0.014 
inch wire for the 0.035 inch extra support wire and fin-
ish dilating with the 6–9 mm balloon.
Balloons for pre‐dilation in the event the stenosis is too 
tight to allow the larger balloons to cross 
the obstruction (these are coronary balloons)
Noncompliant (RBP 18–20 atm) and rapid exchange 
­available from multiple vendors (e.g., 3.0 × 15 mm, NC 
Sprinter from Medtronic).
Box 13.1  (Continued)

­Step‐by‐Ste p Approac h to Subclavia n Venoplast ﻿
101
metal braid in the walls of the catheter are critical, 
substitution is not advised. The angled tip catheter is 
used to inject contrast and aim the wire toward an 
opening (Video 13.3). In addition, the catheter is stiff 
enough to be pushed into the occlusion followed by 
the wire (Video 13.4). I cannot say whether the 4 or 
5  Fr angled catheter is superior. I have the most 
experience with the 5 Fr angled catheter and like the 
support provided.
13)	 Confirm that the wire has entered the heart.
●
●Advance the wire until the tip enters either the 
pulmonary artery (PA) or the inferior vena cava 
(IVC). If the wire does not advance into the PA or 
IVC do not proceed.
●
●Confirm in the right anterior oblique (RAO) and 
left anterior oblique (LAO) projections, that the 
wire follows the lead(s) to the SVC.
14)	 Replace the polymer tip wire with an Amplatz Extra 
Stiff wire using a braided 4–5 Fr catheter.
●
●If the wire alone advanced, use either the 4 Fr 
straight or 4 Fr angled catheter.
●
●If an angled tip catheter was required to advance 
the wire, use it for wire exchange.
15)	Advance a 6–9 mm diameter by 4 cm ultra‐­
noncompliant balloon over the Amplatz Extra 
Stiff wire (Box  13.1) to just beyond the SVC–
innominate junction. Use a 9 mm balloon if the 
plan is to add two leads or there is elastic recoil 
after 6 mm balloon inflation.
16)	 If the balloon will not track to the SVC–innominate 
junction, use the braided catheter to replace the 
0.035 inch wire with two 180 cm 0.014 inch extra 
stiff angioplasty wires (any manufacturer will do). 
Pre‐dilate the obstruction with a 4 × 15 mm non‐
compliant rapid exchange coronary balloon. Once 
dilated, use the braided catheter to replace the angi-
oplasty wires with the Amplatz Extra Stiff wire and 
finish dilating with the 6–9 mm balloon.
17)	 Always perform the first inflation at or central to the 
SVC–innominate junction. Initially, we did not 
dilate at the SVC–innominate junction but when we 
tried to advance the sheath we found a stenosis 
requiring additional venoplasty in approximately 
20% of cases. Because the profile of the balloon 
increases after the first inflation–deflation cycle 
(called “winging”), the balloon used for the more 
apparent proximal stenosis would not would advance 
through the central stenosis.
18)	 Inflate the balloon to the rated burst pressure (RBP) 
indicated on the balloon package (26–30 atm for the 
peripheral balloons listed in Box 13.1 and 18–20 atm 
for the coronary balloon).
19)	 Keep the balloon inflated until the pressure is stable 
at RBP and there is no residual waist. If the waist is 
not eliminated use “focused force venoplasty” 
(Figure 13.7).
20)	 Deflate the balloon by applying negative pressure to 
the inflation device.
21)	 Once the contrast is evacuated from the balloon, 
withdraw the balloon until the tip reaches the ­former 
tail position (head to tail overlap). Do not withdraw 
the balloon until the contrast is evacuated from the 
balloon (Figure 13.8).
22)	 Continue the head to tail overlap inflation until the 
tail of the balloon is visible in the pocket. The rec-
ommendation to continue until the tail visible in the 
pocket frequently produces concern but is essential 
and does no seem to cause excessive bleeding. If 
bleeding is a problem it is easily addressed with a 
hemostatic suture.
23)	 Advance a long (25 cm) sheath over the wire. Always 
use a long sheath after venoplasty. By definition, 
there is excessive elastic recoil if it is not very easy to 
advance the sheaths (similar to a virgin implant). 
If elastic recoil is present it is worth taking the time to 
upsize to a 9 mm diameter balloon. The other expla-
nation for difficulty advancing the sheath is a residual 
peripheral stenosis from failure to inflate the balloon 
with the tail visible in the pocket as recommended.
24)	 If two leads are needed, advance two Amplatz Extra 
Stiff wires into the long sheath, and withdraw the 
sheath retaining the two wires.
Figure 13.3  Venous access as contrast is injected into a peripheral 
vein. The occlusion with collaterals is apparent. The vein is entered 
peripheral to the occlusion. When the needle is inserted into the 
vein as contrast is flowing the vein can be seen to indent 
confirming where the needle enters the vein. When crossing an 
occlusion it is important to enter the vein as far peripheral to the 
occlusion as possible.

13  How to Perform Venoplasty for Access
102
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Y adapter
8–10 mm tip
at 30 degrees
Torque device
Angled tip 0.035 inch
polymer tip
hydrophilic wire
Figure 13.4  Equipment used to cross and dilate a subclavian obstruction. (a) The contrast injection system Contrast Injection System 
(Worley Advanced Kit 1 CAK 1 [includes contrast bowl and labels] order # K12‐WORLEY1 Merit Medical or Worley Advanced Kit CAK 2 
[without bowl and labels] Order # K12‐WORLEY2 Merit Medical). (b) The 0.035 inch/150 cm angled polymer tip hydrophilic (Laureate wire 
Order # LWSTDA35150 Merit Medical) is advanced through the hemostatic valve of the Y adapter. A torque device is essential for 
directing the wire through the opening observed with local contrast injection. (c) The 5 Fr braided angled tip hydrophilic catheter (5 Fr 
65 cm Impress KA‐2 Hydrophilic Angiographic Catheter Order # 56538KA2‐H Merit Medical) used to direct a wire through an occlusion 
(crossing catheter). The wire braid in the catheter provides torque control and “push‐ability” that are important for crossing difficult 
obstructions. The length (6–8 mm) and angle (30 degrees) of the tip are also important. In my experience similar catheters with a longer 
tip or more acute angle are less effective. (d) The 4 Fr braided straight catheter (65 cm Impress Straight Hydrophilic Angiographic 
Catheter Order # 46538STS‐H Merit Medical) used to exchange an existing wire for a more supportive wire over which to advance the 
balloon. I find that a braided hydrophilic catheter will advance through an obstruction when a non‐braided catheter of the same French 
size will not advance.

­Step‐by‐Ste p Approac h to Subclavia n Venoplast ﻿
103
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 13.5  Crossing a subclavian occlusion and performing venoplasty. (a) The peripheral venogram reveals extensive collaterals 
suggesting total occlusion. (b) Injection at the site of occlusion through the dilator from a 5 Fr sheath (local venogram) reveals a stenosis 
not a total occlusion through which the wire is easily advanced. (c) A 6 mm × 4 cm non‐compliant balloon is inflated at the site of occlusion 
seen on the venogram. (d) The balloon is inflated more peripherally, revealing a stenosis not appreciated on either the peripheral or 
local venogram.

13  How to Perform Venoplasty for Access
104
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 13.6  Subclavian occlusion despite injection at the site of occlusion (local venogram). (a) Injection with the angled tip hydrophilic 
braided crossing catheter (Figure 13.4c) at the site of obstruction reveals that the subclavian is flush occluded. Despite this the obstruction 
was crossed using the KA2 catheter and polymer tip hydrophilic wire. The KA2 was advanced into the right atrium, the hydrophilic wire 
exchanged for an extra support wire and venoplasty performed. (b) Injection at the site of occlusion reveals near total occlusion; however, 
contrast is seen to taper to a “beak.” Directing the wire into the “beak” with the KA2 is associated with a good chance of successful crossing 
of the occlusion. Retrograde filling of contrast is also observed and is associated with successful crossing. The KA2 and glide wire were 
used to successfully cross the occlusion. (c) There is total occlusion at the site of injection though the dilator from a 5 Fr sheath. There is 
retrograde filling via collateral to the azygous vein. A beak at the site of occlusion suggests that crossing the occlusion is possible. 
Surprisingly, a 0.035 inch, angled polymer tip hydrophilic wire was easily passed through the occlusion without the need for the KA2. The 
glide wire was exchanged for a 0.035 inch super stiff wire using the 4 Fr braided hydrophilic exchange catheter (Figure 13.4d) but the 
6 mm diameter balloon would not advance through the occlusion. The 0.035 inch wire was exchanged for a 0.018 inch wire and a 
6 mm × 4 cm low profile balloon was advanced through the occlusion and venoplasty performed. (d) Total occlusion without a beak is 
seen with contrast injection at the site of occlusion. There is no retrograde filling of the innominate. Femoral access and injection at the 
site where the lead enters the SVC revealed flush occlusion. The obstruction could not be crossed.

­Combining  Femoral  Extractio n and Venoplast ﻿
105
­Balloon Options
Coronary balloons are too small (both length and diam-
eter) for SV to add a lead. With a 0.035 inch wire across 
the obstruction it makes sense to start with a balloon 
designed to go over the wire (Box 13.1). When the steno-
sis is tight enough to require a 0.018 inch wire, the 
obstruction usually requires pre‐dilation with a 4 mm 
coronary balloon before the 6–9 mm balloon will pass. 
As indicated in Box  13.1, the recommended balloon 
diameter is 6–9 mm and length 4–6 cm. The 9 mm bal-
loon is useful if there is excess elastic recoil or if the 
intent is to add two leads. Alternatively, elastic recoil may 
be addressed with focused force venoplasty. If a 9 mm 
diameter balloon is not available for adding two leads, 
the stenosis can be re‐dilated with the 6 mm balloon 
when the first long sheath (with dilator) is in place. The 
6–9 mm balloons are 40–75 cm in length and can be over 
the wire without the need for exchange length wires. By 
comparison, coronary balloons are 120 cm in length, 
thus to avoid the need for 300 cm wires, rapid exchange 
models (not over the wire) are required.
­Wire Exchange
The Nitinol angled polymer tip hydrophilic wire used to 
cross the occlusion often does not provide sufficient sup-
port to advance the balloon through the obstruction 
(Video 13.2). Accordingly, a 4–5 Fr braided hydrophilic 
catheter (Box 13.1) is advanced over the existing wire to 
exchange for an Amplatz Extra Stiff wire. A variety of 
hydrophilic exchange catheters are available. We find 
that a braided catheter (wire braid incorporated into the 
wall) provides greater ability to advance through the 
obstruction.
­Focused Force Venoplasty
Approximately 3% of cases require focused force veno-
plasty for a stenosis (Figure 13.8) refractory to an ultra‐
noncompliant balloon (RBP 30 atm). Focused force can 
also be attempted when there is excessive elastic recoil 
(i.e., when it remains difficult to manipulate the catheter 
after initial balloon dilation despite no visible waist). 
To apply focused force, remove the balloon, advance a 
long 5 Fr sheath over the wire (or a 6 Fr multipurpose 
guide not diagnostic catheter), advance two 0.035 inch J 
tip Amplatz Extra Stiff wires through the sheath/guide, 
remove the sheath/guide and advance the balloon over 
one of the wires. The balloon is then inflated to RBP 
against the wire beside the balloon. The stiff wire beside 
the balloon pressed against the fibrous tissue is more 
aggressive then the balloon alone. The procedure is also 
referred to as the poor man’s cutting balloon.
­How to Cross a Difficult Subclavian 
Occlusion
The key to success is to enter the vein peripheral to the 
occlusion at a shallow angle (30 degrees). To this end it is 
best to enter the vein while contrast is flowing to confirm 
where the needle enters the vein (Videos 13.1, 13.3, and 
13.4). To achieve the proper angle (30 degrees off the 
skin), it is usually necessary to stick through the skin 
peripheral to the pocket then pull the wire into the 
pocket. In many cases the angled polymer tip Nitinol 
wire crosses the occlusion. If not, the 5 Fr dilator/5 Fr 
micro puncture catheter is replaced with a braided 
angled hydrophilic catheter (Box  13.1) to provide 
­direction and support for the wire.
­Combining Femoral Extraction 
and Venoplasty
In some cases, it may be impossible to cross a total sub-
clavian obstruction which brings up the use of extraction 
for venous access. Pre‐pectoral extraction with powered 
or mechanical sheaths requires termination of the proce-
dure to arrange for OR back‐up because of the risk of 
SVC laceration and perforation. However, in many cases, 
Figure 13.7  Focused force venoplasty (see text for details).

13  How to Perform Venoplasty for Access
106
combining femoral extraction of an existing lead with 
venoplasty can avoid the need for OR back‐up particu-
larly in patients with prior sternotomy. For example, if 
there is an existing active fixation atrial lead in a patient 
with prior OHS the lead can be used for access as 
­illustrated in Figure 13.9. Conversely, retained wire fem-
oral extraction of an “old” passive fixation atrial lead in a 
patient without previous OHS could result in perforation 
at the site of attachment of the tip of the lead to the 
myocardium.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 13.8  Difficult subclavian obstruction with extensive elastic recoil. (a) The balloon is inflated with a residual waist. The distal (D) and 
proximal (P) markers on the balloon catheter are separated by 4 cm. (b) The balloon is withdraw before the contrast is fully removed. The 
proximal (P) and distal (D) markers on the balloon are closer together indicating that the tip of the balloon is folded back on itself making 
it larger and more difficult to remove. (c) After the balloon is re‐advanced, a wire is advanced beside the balloon and the balloon inflated 
against the wire (focused force venoplasty). (d) A second balloon is advanced beside the first and both balloons inflated simultaneously. 
D1, P1 are the distal and proximal markers on the first balloon. D2, P2 are the distal and proximal markers on the second balloon.

­Combining  Femoral  Extractio n and Venoplast ﻿
107
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 13.9  Retained wire femoral extraction followed by venoplasty in a case of total occlusion not able to be crossed. (a) Femoral access 
and contrast injection confirms that the right innominate is flush occluded at the SVC. It was not possible to advance a wire from either 
direction despite using the KA2. (b) The suture sleeve of the active fixation atrial lead was released and the screw retracted in an 
unsuccessful attempt to use the wire under the insulation technique to advance a wire into the circulation. Subsequently, the IS‐1 
connector was removed and a 300 cm 0.014 inch angioplasty wire advanced to the tip of the lead. A 25 mm loop snare (6 Fr × 100 cm snare 
catheter + a loop 25 mm diameter 120 cm in length “One Snare” order # ONE2500 Merit Medical) was advanced through a long sheath over 
the tip and closed on the body of the atrial lead containing the angioplasty wire. (c) The atrial lead is extracted via the femoral vein pulling 
the angioplasty wire into the circulation. The 0.014 inch angioplasty wire is exchanged for a 0.035 inch super stiff wire using the 4 Fr 
braided hydrophilic exchange catheter (Figure 13.4d). (d) A 6 mm × 4 cm noncompliant balloon was advanced over the Amplatz wire and 
inflated to it’s rated burst pressure. The first inflation was at the subclavian SVC junction with subsequent overlapping inflations until the 
tail of the balloon was seen in the pocket.

13  How to Perform Venoplasty for Access
108
­How to Make a Subclavian 
Obstruction Difficult to Cross
An attempt at venous access in a patient with existing 
lead(s) before a venogram is often successful. However, if 
there is an obstruction the initial blind attempt(s) can dis-
rupt the venous anatomy making it impossible to cross 
the occlusion. If the artery is entered inadvertently the 
subsequent hematoma will compress the vein making 
access even more difficult. If you start with a frozen veno-
gram or ultrasound it will not be clear where the needle 
enters the vein relative to the obstruction. If the needle 
enters the vein at the site of occlusion the wire will not 
advance and/or an existing opening will be obscured.
­References
	1	 Bracke F, Meijer A, Gelder B. Venous occlusion of the 
access vein in patients referred for lead extraction: 
influence of patient and lead characteristics. PacingClin 
Electrophysiol 2003;26:1649–1652.
	2	 Lickfett L, Bitzen A, Arepally A, Nasir K, Wolpert C, 
Jeong KM, et al. Incidence of venous obstruction 
following insertion of an implantable cardioverter 
defibrillator: a study of systematic contrast venography 
on patients presenting for their first elective ICD 
generator replacement. Europace 2004;6:25–31.
	3	 Spittell P, Vleietstra R, Hayes D, Higano S. Venous 
obstruction due to permanent transvenous pacemaker 
electrodes: treatment with percutaneous transluminal 
balloon venoplasty. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
1990;13:271–274.
	4	 Spittell PC, Hayes DL. Venous complications after 
insertion of a transvenous pacemaker. Mayo Clin Proc 
1992;67:258–265.
	5	 Oginosawa Y, Abe H, Nakashima Y. The incidence and 
risk factors for venous obstruction after implantation of 
transvenous pacing leads. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2002;25:1605–1611.
	6	 Haghjoo M, Nikoo MH, Fazelifar AF, Alizadeh A, 
Emkanjoo Z, Sadr‐Ameli MA. Predictors of venous 
obstruction following pacemaker or implantable 
cardioverter defibrillator implantation: a contrast 
venographic study on 100 patients admitted for 
generator change, lead revision, or device upgrade. 
Europace 2007;9:328–332.
	7	 Bulur S, Vural A, Yazıcı M, Ertaş G, Özhan H, Ural D. 
Incidence and predictors of subclavian vein obstruction 
following biventricular device implantation. J Interv 
Card Electrophysiol 2010;29:199–202.
	8	 Sticherling C, Chough SP, Baker RL, Wasmer K, Oral 
H, Tada H, et al. Prevalence of central venous occlusion 
in patients with chronic defibrillator leads. Am Heart J 
2001;141:813–816.
	9	 Poole JE, Gleva MJ, Mela T, Chung MK, Uslan DZ, 
Borge R, et al. REPLACE registry investigators. 
Circulation 2010;122:1553–1561.
	10	 Duray GZ, Israel CW, Pajitnev D, Hohnloser SH. 
Upgrading to biventricular pacing/defibrillation 
systems in right ventricular paced congestive heart 
failure patients: prospective assessment of 
procedural parameters and response rate. Europace 
2008;10:48–52.
	11	 McCotter CJ, Angle JF, Prudente LA, Mounsey 
JP,Ferguson JD, et al. Placement of transvenous 
pacemaker and ICD leads across total chronic 
occlusions. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2005;28:921–925.
	12	 Worley S, Gohn DC, Pulliam RW, Raifsnider MA, 
Ebersole BI, Tuzi J. Subclavian venoplasty by the 
implanting physicians in 373 patients over 11 years. 
Heart Rhythm 2011;8:526–533.
	13	 Worley SJ. Implant venoplasty: dilatation of 
subclavian and coronary veins to facilitate device 
implantation: indications, frequency, methods, and 
complications. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 
2008;19:1004–1007.
	14	 Worley SJ, Gohn DC, Pulliam RW. Over the wire 
lead extraction and focused force venoplasty to 
regain venous access in a totally occluded 
subclavian vein. J Interv Card Electrophysiol 
2008;23:135–137.
	15	 Worley SJ, Gohn DC, Smith TL. Micro‐dissection to 
open totally occluded subclavian veins. EP Lab Digest 
EP, September 2003.
	16	 Worley SJ, Gohn DC, Pulliam RW. Needle directed 
re‐entry to cross a subclavian occlusion following failed 
microdissection. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2007;30:1562–1565.
	17	 Baerlocher MO, Asch MR, Myers A. Successful 
recanalization of a longstanding complete left 
subclavian vein occlusion by radiofrequency 
perforation with use of a radiofrequency guide wire. 
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2006;17:1703–1706.
	18	 Worley SJ, Gohn DC, Pulliam RW. Excimer laser to 
open refractory subclavian occlusion in 12 consecutive 
patients. Heart Rhythm 2010;7:634–638.
	19	 Antonelli D, Freedberg NA, Rosenfeld T. Lead 
insertion by supraclavicular approach of subclavian 
vein puncture. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2001;24:379–380.

­Reference ﻿
109
	20	 Fox DJ, Petkar S, Davidson NC, Fitzpatrick AP. 
Upgrading patients with chronic defibrillator leads to a 
biventricular system and reducing patient risk: 
contralateral LV lead placement. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 2006;29:1025–1027.
	21	 Jones S, Eckart R, Albert C, Epstein L. Large, single‐
center, single‐operator experience with transvenous 
lead extraction: outcomes and changing indications. 
Heart Rhythm 2008;5:520–525.
	22	 Byrd CL, Wilkoff BL, Love CJ, Sellers TD, Reiser C. 
Clinical study of the laser sheath for lead extraction: the 
total experience in the United States. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 2002;25:804–808.
	23	 Wilkoff BL, Byrd C, Love CJ, Hayes DL, Sellers TD, 
Schaerf R, et al. Pacemaker lead extraction with the 
laser sheath: results of the pacing lead extraction with 
the excimer sheath (PLEXES) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 
1999;33:1671–1676.
	24	 Bongiomi MG, Giannola G, Arena G, Zucchelli G, 
Paperini L, Viani S, et al. Pacing and implantable 
cardioverterdefibrillator transvenous lead 
extraction. Ital Heart J 2005;6:261–266.
	25	 Hauser RG, Katsiyiannis WT, Gornick CC, 
Almquist AK, Kallinen LM. Deaths and 
cardiovascular injuries due to device assisted 
implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator and 
pacemaker lead extraction. Europace 
2010;12:395–401.
	26	 Venkataraman G, Hayes D, Strickberger SA. Does 
the risk‐benefit analysis favor the extraction of 
failed sterile pacemaker and defibrillator leads? 
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2009;20:1413–1415.
	27	 Ji SY, Gunderwar S, Palma EC. Subclavian venoplasty 
may reduce implant times and implant failures in the 
era of increasing device upgrades. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 2012;35:444–448.
Video 13.1  Use of a 5 Fr 15 cm stiffened dilator micro‐puncture kit for venous access. See video annotation for details.
Video 13.2  Exchanging the polymer tip wire used to cross the obstruction for an extra support wire using a 4 Fr hydrophilic catheter. The 
exchange was necessary because the polymer tip wire did not provide sufficient support to advance the balloon through the occlusion. 
See video annotation for details.
Video 13.3  Use of an angled tip hydrophilic catheter to provide wire direction for crossing a total subclavian obstruction. The despite the 
use of a torque device, the polymer tip wire could not be directed through the dilator of a 5 Fr sheath toward the center of the occlusion. 
The dilator was replaced with an angled tip hydrophilic braided angiographic catheter (for details see Box 13.1). The angle on the tip of 
the catheter made it possible to direct the wire across the occlusion.
Video 13.4  Use of an angled tip hydrophilic catheter to provide support to push through a total subclavian occlusion. The wire alone did 
not have sufficient support to advance into the total occlusion. The 5 Fr angled tip catheter was stiff enough to enter the occlusion. The 
wire was then advanced beyond the tip of the catheter and the catheter advanced over the wire to successfully cross the occlusion.
Video 13.5  Crossing an apparent total using the contrast injection system, the dilator from a 5 Fr sheath and a polymer tip wire. See video 
annotation for details.
  To watch the videos, please log in to the Companion Website: 
www.wiley.com/go/al‐ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds

111
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
The implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD) was 
developed as a life‐saving device, initially for secondary 
prevention of ventricular arrhythmias and later for pri-
mary prevention. Clinical trials in multiple high‐risk 
patient groups over the past several decades have shown, 
overwhelmingly, the ability of these devices to rescue 
individuals from sudden cardiac death (SCD). However, 
their success is dependent on the principle that these 
devices are capable of detecting a ventricular arrhythmia 
and delivering an effective intervention with a high prob-
ability of success. Notably, the clinical trials that have 
demonstrated efficacy of the ICD included defibrillation 
threshold (DFT) testing as part of the implantation 
protocol.
The DFT50, often referred to as simply the DFT, is the 
shock energy required to successfully defibrillate 50% of 
the time. The term DFT, however, is often used, albeit 
somewhat inaccurately, to refer simply to the lowest 
amount of energy necessary to defibrillate successfully, 
or convert the myocardium from ventricular fibrillation 
(VF) to sinus rhythm, during testing. DFT testing has 
traditionally been performed during implantation to 
assure high probability of success.
A better understanding of shock delivery and improved 
technology has led to the development of high‐output 
devices, pectoral devices that actively participate in 
energy delivery and biphasic waveforms that improve the 
probability of successful shock. Early devices utilized the 
truncated exponential monophasic waveform to depo-
larize the myocardium. The effect on the transmem-
brane potential peaks with a pulse width of approximately 
5 ms. Modern devices use a biphasic waveform because 
the residual charge at the end of a monophasic impulse 
would leave the myocardium in a proarrhythmic state. 
The second phase of the shock functions to eliminate the 
transmembrane potential that would leave the tissue 
primed for propagation.
In light of these advances, the risks of failure to rescue 
a patient from ventricular fibrillation during DFT testing 
and the possible detrimental effects of shocks themselves 
have led to a debate about the need for routine DFT test-
ing. Although there is a trend away from performing 
DFTs routinely, a 2010 review found the majority (71%) 
of ICD implants are still performed with DFT testing, 
based on the National Cardiovascular Data Registry [1]. 
The decision to perform DFTs must consider the balance 
of risks of mortality from a failure to identify a high DFT 
that would result in patient SCD versus the risk of failure 
to defibrillate a patient during DFT testing. Even among 
implanting physicians who have opted not to perform 
DFTs routinely, there are still important clinical scenar-
ios when DFTs may be predictably high or when addi-
tional information is required for optimal device 
programming, thus maintaining an important role for 
DFT testing in all electrophysiology practices. There are 
many available protocols reviewed in this chapter to 
determine DFTs, including step‐up and step‐down 
­protocols and the calculation of the upper limit of 
­vulnerability (ULV), which correlates well with DFTs.
­Reasons for DFT Testing
Although a test that guarantees successful defibrillation 
in all clinical scenarios is not possible, the goal of DFT 
testing is to estimate the energy at which the likelihood 
of defibrillation is high. Additional goals in DFT testing 
are to confirm adequate sensing of VF, to verify the elec-
trical integrity of the device and lead system and to verify 
that all connections are intact. Much of this can be 
14
How to Perform Defibrillation Threshold Testing
Chad Brodt and Marco V. Perez
Cardiac Electrophysiology & Arrhythmia Service, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA, USA

14  How to Perform Defibrillation Threshold Testing
112
­estimated by checking pacing thresholds and imped-
ances, as well as checking sensing thresholds during 
sinus rhythm. Rarely, however, an insulation failure can 
only be detected with high‐voltage testing, or VF signal 
amplitude does not correlate with amplitudes during 
sinus rhythm [2]. In addition, testing during implanta-
tion can help identify patients with high DFTs who need 
system revision or modification that can be carried out 
immediately, at the time of implant.
Possibly one of the most important arguments in favor 
of DFT testing is that the major clinical trials that have 
demonstrated the efficacy of ICD therapy were carried 
out with DFT testing as part of the implantation proto-
col. The goal in the Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator 
Implantation Trial II was to achieve a safety margin of 
10 J. However, the recently published SIMPLE trial 
looked at 2500 patients undergoing initial ICD implanta-
tion and were randomized to undergo DFT testing vs. no 
testing [3]. The patients were followed for a mean of 
3.1 years and results show that there is no significant dif-
ference in shock efficacy or reduction of arrhythmic 
death between groups.
In theory, only patients who have predictably high 
DFTs could be selected for DFT testing. Factors that 
have been shown to be associated with high DFTs 
(Table  14.1) include obesity, enlarged left ventricular 
size or mass, a low ejection fraction, right‐sided implan-
tation, advanced heart failure, very wide QRS, and non‐
ischemic ­cardiomyopathy. However, these factors are 
not reliable and some studies have suggested that none 
of these clinical variables were sufficiently good 
­predictors [4]. There are also many medications that are 
known to impact DFTs. Antiarrhythmic drugs from the 
Vaughan Williams Classifications Ib (mexiletine, lido-
caine) and IV (verapamil, diltiazem) can increase DFTs, 
while the class II (beta blockers) and class III (sotalol, 
dofetilide, ibutilide) decrease DFTs. The exception is 
amiodarone, a class III agent, whose long‐term use 
is associated with increased DFTs.
The primary challenge in estimating the true DFT is 
the probabilistic nature of defibrillation. In pacing, the 
strength–duration curve to elicit myocardial capture is 
thought of as nearly an all‐or‐nothing phenomenon. 
This is attributed to the relatively stable conditions at 
which pacing occurs. The defibrillation strength–­
duration curve is more probabilistic (Figure  14.1), in 
part  because the energy delivery affects the tissue in 
­varying states of depolarization and repolarization. 
Other ­factors, such as electrolyte levels, medications, 
and left ventricular function, can also affect the likeli-
hood of defibrillation at any given energy. Every patient 
has a ­different curve, which can change over time. 
Table 14.1  Factors that may influence decision to perform defibrillation threshold (DFT) testing.
Factors that may predict high DFTs
Contraindications to DFT testing
Factors that may increase risk of death from 
failure to defibrillate during DFT testing
Advanced heart failure
Atrial or ventricular thrombi
Advanced heart failure
Low ejection fraction
Atrial fibrillation without adequate 
anticoagulation
Severe COPD
Enlarged left ventricular size or 
mass
Hemodynamic instability or ongoing 
inotropic support
Obesity
Higher body surface area
Severe aortic stenosis
Three vessel or left main coronary artery disease
Right‐sided implantation
Active coronary ischemia
Wide QRS (>200 ms)
Recent stroke or TIA
Non‐ischemic cardiomyopathy
Recent percutaneous coronary intervention
Use of medications that raise DFTs
COPD, chronic obstrucive pulmonary disease; TIA, transient ischemic attack.
100
80
60
40
20
0
5
0
10
Shock energy (J)
Probability of success (%)
15
20
25
Figure 14.1  Theoretical defibrillation curve depicting the 
probability of successful defibrillation with increasing doses of 
energy.

­Decisio n to Perfo rm DF T Tes ﻿
113
This  uncertainty in predicting the effective energy to 
successfully defibrillate is one of the impetuses behind 
DFT testing.
An important argument that was originally made in 
favor of DFT testing was that a precise measurement of 
the DFT then allowed the clinician to program energy 
delivery at a relatively lower energy output. With mod-
ern devices, patients will typically have DFTs in the 
­single digits. Even accounting for a 10 J window, the final 
energy programmed could remain relatively low, which 
would in turn result in quicker charge time and energy 
delivery to the patient during an episode of ventricular 
tachyarrhythmia. A quicker delivery time could mean 
the difference between syncope and no syncope. 
However, charge times in modern devices have become 
short enough that this concern has, for the most part, 
been mitigated. The use of lower shock energy, however, 
could lengthen the longevity of the device battery and, 
theoretically, result in less myocardial damage.
­Arguments Against Routine  
DFT Testing
As previously noted, while 71% of implantations were 
performed with DFT testing in a recent registry 
­survey [1], the remaining implantations did not include 
DFT testing which reflects the measurable trend away 
from routine DFT testing. This trend is likely a result of 
a combination of factors that include improvement in 
technologies, as described earlier, resulting in lower 
­likelihood of unsuccessful DFTs. The likelihood of 
­identifying high DFTs is approximately 2–12%. However, 
with high energy devices, the estimated percentage of 
ICDs that would need revision because of high DFTs is 
approximately 3% [5]. There are additional factors 
that are likely influencing the trend away from routine 
DFT testing.
One of the major concerns during DFT testing is the 
risk of death because of inability to rescue a patient from 
VF. The risk of prolonged resuscitation after multiple 
failed internal and external shocks in one study was 
0.14% [6]. Beyond the mortality risk, there may also be 
other morbidities associated with induction of VF. 
Induction of VF and the subsequent shock to follow 
results in a period of myocardial depression that may not 
be well tolerated, particularly by those with left ventricu-
lar dysfunction and decompensated heart failure. 
Concerns have been raised that transient hypotension 
resulting from induction of VF could result in impaired 
cognitive function, myocardial ischemia, and strokes. 
The presence of underlying atrial fibrillation at the time 
of DFT could result in a thromboembolic event if the 
patient is not properly anticoagulated. It has been 
­difficult to determine which of these complications are 
caused by the DFT testing itself, versus the implant pro-
cedure or the underlying heart disease. Nevertheless, 
there are several contraindications to DFT testing which 
are meant to minimize the risk of major morbidities 
from VF induction (Table 14.1).
There have been prospective studies that have 
attempted to characterize the safety of foregoing DFT 
testing in the clinical setting. In one Italian study of 1284 
patients who underwent ICD implant without DFT 
­testing and followed for 2 years [7], there were a total of 
144 patients who required shock therapy. Of these, six 
patients (0.5% of total implant population) had ineffec-
tive ventricular shocks during follow‐up. This was not 
significantly different from the 836 patients who under-
went DFT testing at the time of implant (0.8%). Although 
the patients in this study that did not undergo DFT test-
ing may have been selected as low‐risk patients, this 
study does support the growing sentiment that it may be 
safe to forego DFT testing in some groups of patients 
undergoing ICD implant. The SIMPLE trial was a rand-
omized trial published in 2015 that found that foregoing 
DFT testing was non‐inferior to routine DFT testing 
for  arrhythmic death or failed appropriate shock [3]. 
Of note, this trial excluded patients with expected right‐
sided implants.
In addition to these arguments, there are other factors 
that may explain the trend away from routine DFT test-
ing. The increase in the use of aggressive antitachycardia 
pacing (ATP) therapy, in combination with the imple-
mentation programming changes that delay ICD thera-
pies, are resulting in a decrease in the number of ICD 
shocks needed. In the scenario where an ICD shock is 
needed and the first ICD shock fails, modern devices are 
typically programmed to deliver up to six additional 
shocks which increase the likelihood of successful defi-
brillation. Finally, there are costs associated with DFT 
testing, which include greater utilization of staff and 
other resources such as anesthesia. Some of these factors 
may even raise barriers that limit the appropriate use of 
ICD implantation.
­Decision to Perform DFT Test
As with all clinical decisions, the decision to test depends 
on the risks and benefits involved. Ultimately, the risks of 
DFT testing, including the small increase in risk of death 
or morbidity, have to be balanced with the risks of not 
testing, which includes death from failure to deliver 
appropriate 
ICD 
shock 
therapy 
in 
the 
field. 
Contraindications, as well as other clinical factors that 
predict high DFTs or mortality from testing (Table 14.1), 
should be taken into account.

14  How to Perform Defibrillation Threshold Testing
114
An additional factor that should be considered is the 
likelihood that a patient will have a clinical, life‐­
threatening ventricular arrhythmia. In those with the 
highest likelihood of ventricular tachyarrhythmias, such 
as those being implanted for secondary prevention, a 
stronger argument for DFT testing could be made.
Despite all of the arguments against DFT testing, it is 
important to note that DFT testing has traditionally been 
considered standard of care. While these standards may 
be evolving with the publication of new trials and expert 
consensus statements [3,8], this argument may have 
medicolegal implications in cases where DFT testing is 
not performed in a patient without clear contraindica-
tions to testing.
­DFT Testing Strategies
When planning an ICD implantation, it is important to 
know ahead of time whether DFT testing will be per-
formed. The intention of DFT testing will require a team 
that can provide adequate anesthesia for this part of the 
procedure. The staff should be trained in the various 
protocols and aware of their responsibilities regarding 
stand‐by external defibrillation if needed. Those in atrial 
fibrillation or atrial flutter who require DFT testing will 
also need to have a documented strategy for the minimi-
zation of stroke risk because DFT testing can result in 
conversion to sinus rhythm. For DFT testing that is per-
formed at the time of initial ICD implant or generator 
change, an appropriate time for testing is after the leads 
have been tested, the generator connected and inserted 
into the pocket, and the incision is prepared for closure.
The first step of DFT testing is induction of VF, which 
may be carried out using one of three different strategies: 
delivery of alternating current (AC) voltage; using very 
high rate stimulation; or, most commonly, by delivering a 
shock on the T‐wave. Classically, VF was induced by 
applying direct current (DC) voltage using an external 
battery connected to epicardial leads. This method has a 
very high success rate of VF induction, but internal 
­delivery of DC voltage remains an option only in a small 
number of ICD systems. The T‐wave shock method is 
currently the most popular and relies on the principle 
that the myocardium is vulnerable to VF when sufficient 
energy delivery is timed within a window surrounding 
the peak of the T‐wave. This can be performed during 
sinus rhythm or, more commonly, after a pacing drive 
train of 8 beats at 400 ms. A 1 J shock on the peak of the 
T‐wave, which is typically about 300 ms after the last 
paced impulse, will usually induce VF. If unsuccessful, 
analysis of the electrograms will allow optimization of 
T‐wave shock timing, or a scan at 20 ms intervals, usually 
before the peak of the T‐wave, can be performed. The 
final strategy, very high frequency stimulation, is gener-
ally not as efficacious as the shock on T‐wave approach. 
However, it can be helpful when the peak of the T‐wave 
is difficult to measure, or shock on T‐wave is unsuccess-
ful despite scanning. Very high frequency stimulation is 
performed by pacing between 10 and 50 Hz for several 
seconds until VF is induced.
The next step of DFT testing is evaluation for under-
sensing of VF. R‐waves amplitudes during sinus rhythm 
generally correlate well with those during VF. 
Undersensing is rare if the R‐wave amplitude during 
sinus rhythm is >5 mV. The VF amplitude varies, so it is 
typical that some beats during VF will be undersensed 
(Figure 14.2). These dropouts are acceptable as long as 
they are not long enough to prevent the device from 
delivering adequate therapy. A “worst‐case” sensing 
threshold, ranging from 1.0 to 1.2 mV, depending on 
manufacturer, is usually adequate to assess proper detec-
tion during DFT testing. Testing can also be important 
in scenarios where interference occurs with other leads 
or devices. If the defibrillator lead does not demonstrate 
adequate sensing, either the existing lead must be repo-
sitioned to a location with larger R‐wave amplitude, or a 
secondary bipolar pacing lead can be placed in the right 
ventricle for detection. The presence of existing 
­hardware, such as abandoned leads or pulse generators, 
Figure 14.2  Sensing of ventricular 
fibrillation (VF) during defibrillation 
threshold (DFT) testing. Red arrows point 
to VF signals that were undersensed.

­DF T Testi ng Strategie ﻿
115
can lead to interaction only during VF induction 
(Figure 14.3) and may therefore prompt testing with a 
focus on adequate sensing.
Finally, there are many approaches that can be used to 
measure the DFT itself. These approaches vary in the 
total number of shocks delivered, precise estimate of the 
DFT, and amount of time the patient may remain in VF. 
The goal of testing is to determine the lowest energy 
required for successful defibrillation. A traditional 
method is the step‐down (SD) approach, where defibril-
lation is attempted starting at an arbitrary value, typi-
cally 15 or 20 J. If successful, the testing is reattempted 
sequentially at steps of 5 J lower energy each time until 
failure to defibrillate. This approach has the advantage of 
measuring the DFT with relatively good precision 
­without leaving the patient in VF for prolonged periods 
of time. Using this method, the lowest successful shock is 
termed the “DFT”, and closely approximates the DFT70, 
which is the energy able to successfully defibrillate 70% of 
the time. Programming the device to double the DFT70 
would result in high confidence of successful defibrilla-
tion. However, if the DFT calculated is greater than half 
the maximum device output, then repeating the DFT 
test and demonstrating that the energy output is success-
ful a second and third time increases the confidence and 
allows one to program smaller safety windows of 15–10 J, 
respectively.
The step‐up (SU) approach begins with the first defi-
brillation attempt at 5 J with sequential increase in the 
energy dose by 5 J until successful defibrillation is 
achieved. This approach minimizes the total number of 
induction attempts, but may result in a prolonged 
­episode of VF and if needed results in multiple shocks.
Another popular protocol for DFT testing, which is 
used at our institution, is the verification method, also 
called an efficacy protocol. This method does not meas-
ure the precise DFT, but ensures a high likelihood of 
defibrillation success at the maximum output of the 
defibrillator. After induction, energy is delivered at a 
desired safety margin below the maximum programma-
ble output. For single shock testing, a 20 J safety margin 
results in a >90% probability of successful defibrillation 
at the first maximal output shock. We typically perform 
two tests at 25 J providing a safety margin of 10 J in 
devices with a maximal output of 35 J. This similarly 
results in a high probability of successful defibrillation 
at the device maximum programmable output. This 
method helps to minimize the total number of ICD 
shocks during testing.
An alternative strategy to predict successful defibrilla-
tion that also minimizes number of shocks delivered is to 
assess the upper limit of vulnerability (ULV). The vulner-
able period is a time interval, within about 40 ms, near 
the peak of the T‐wave during which a shock using an 
Figure 14.3  Interaction between new 
high‐voltage lead and old lead noted only 
during VF induction. Red arrows point to 
examples of clipped signals that represent 
electrical noise caused by a new lead 
contacting the abandoned lead.

14  How to Perform Defibrillation Threshold Testing
116
amount of energy within a certain range results in VF 
induction. The upper limit of this range is defined as the 
upper limit of vulnerability, and correlates strongly with 
the DFT. To identify the ULV, one can begin with a shock 
on the T‐wave peak at approximately 20 J, then repeat 
the same shock energy delivery at 20 and 40 ms before 
the T‐wave peak. Next, one can begin decreasing the 
amount of energy used by small increments, such as 5 J, 
and similarly scan at 0, 20, and 40 ms before the T‐wave 
peak. The energy at which VF is first induced is then 
defined as the ULV. Using this method, VF is only 
induced (and converted) once. The final device program-
ming should be made using at least a 10 J safety margin 
above the ULV.
When performing DFT tests, it is advisable to wait 
5–10 minutes between VF inductions in order to allow 
for hemodynamic recovery. In the event that an initial 
shock fails to defibrillate, a back‐up internal defibrilla-
tion at the maximum output of the device should follow 
promptly. While waiting for the device to charge for the 
rescue shock, an external defibrillator should be charged 
to provide back‐up defibrillation if the maximum output 
internal shock does not work. The defibrillation pads are 
often placed in non‐standard locations during ICD 
implantation, which can result in a failure to defibrillate, 
so the implanting physician should be prepared to deliver 
an external shock with paddles at maximum output in 
a  more standard location. Because of the potential 
for  worsening electromechanical dissociation with 
­prolonged VF, the physician and staff should be prepared 
to perform adequate resuscitation efforts if necessary.
­How to Manage High DFTs
In the event that the device does not allow the operator 
to program an adequate safety margin above the meas-
ured DFT, the implanting practitioner will need to either 
change the mode of energy delivery or change the hard-
ware used for energy delivery. The first step is to review 
the device set up and patient to ensure that all the 
­connections are adequate and that a pneumothorax has 
not developed. One should also ensure that the distal RV 
coil is programmed as the anode because this will typi-
cally result in the lowest DFT. With biphasic devices, 
switching polarity so that the RV coil is programmed as 
the cathode will improve the DFT in only 18% of patients. 
Another programmable option, found in only a few 
devices, is to change the biphasic waveform of the device, 
for example, from a fixed tilt waveform to a shorter tuned 
waveform.
Next, one should check that the RV coil position is as 
apical and septal as possible for best results; however, in 
some patients, a high septal position may prove more 
successful. One delivery strategy is to screw the tip of the 
RV lead into the high basal septum, near the outflow, and 
then prolapse the remaining lead so that the proximal 
end of the RV coil is situated near the apex of the RV. 
If  still unsuccessful, and a single coil lead was used 
­initially, the RV lead could be swapped out for a dual coil 
lead containing an SVC coil. On the contrary, if a dual 
coil system was used, and the impedances are less than 
40, then one may try to remove the SVC coil from the 
shock vector.
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.4  Anteroposterior (a) and lateral (b) chest X‐rays in a patient with a subcutaneous electrode implanted. White arrow points to 
the subcutaneous lead.

­Reference ﻿
117
If these basic changes fail, then most patients will need to 
move towards placement of additional hardware. For those 
in whom an endovascular device has failed, switching to a 
subcutaneous ICD system may be a good option. In patients 
who require pacing for other indications, one may consider 
concomitant use of an endovascular pacemaker and a 
­subcutaneous ICD. If the patient is not a candidate for a 
subcutaneous ICD, or if adequate DFT are not found 
with the subcutaneous device, then placement of additional 
leads to an existing endovascular system can decrease 
impedance, improve the shock vector, and decrease the 
DFTs. A common next step is to add a long subcutaneous 
posterior ­electrode. This electrode can be inserted laterally 
and tracked subcutaneously along the back, towards the 
spine (Figure 14.4). The insertion can be at the lateral edge 
of the pocket, or at a separate, lower, and more lateral inci-
sion site. The tip of the lead is ideally placed near the base 
of the left ventricle as seen on an anteroposterior view.
Alternatively, additional coils could be placed in the 
azygos vein or the coronary sinus. The azygos vain can 
be found by exploring immediately superior to the right 
atrium–superior vena cava junction using a curved sty-
let. However, extraction of a lead placed in the azygos or 
coronary sinus is challenging in the case of an infection 
or malfunction. Other locations that can be explored 
with independent coiled leads include brachiocephalic 
and left subclavian veins.
If none of these additional coil locations result in ade-
quate DFTs, then a trial of sotalol may be enough to 
lower the DFTs to an acceptable level. It is necessary to 
remember not to give with concomitant amiodarone, 
and that a period of amiodarone washout will be required 
prior to re‐testing DFTs. A failure of all of these tech-
niques may then result in surgical consultation for place-
ment of an additional coil in the epicardial space. It also 
important to recognize that clinical judgment is crucial 
to safely addressing high DFTs. If a patient has failed 
multiple DFT tests, it may be advisable to reschedule for 
further testing at a later date to allow appropriate 
recovery.
­References
	1	 Russo AM, Wang Y, Al‐Khatib SM, Curtis JP, Lampert R. 
Patient, physician, and procedural factors influencing 
the use of defibrillation testing during initial implantable 
cardioverter defibrillator insertion: findings from the 
NCDR(R). Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2013;36:1522–1531.
	2	 Ruetz LL, Koehler JL, Brown ML, Jackson TE, Belk P, 
Swerdlow CD. Sinus rhythm R‐wave amplitude as a 
predictor of ventricular fibrillation undersensing in 
patients with implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator. 
Heart Rhythm 2015;12(12):2411–2418.
	3	 Healy JS, Hohnloser SH, Glikson M, Neuzner J, Mabo P, 
Vinolas X, et al. Cardioverter defibrillator implantation 
without induction of ventricular fibrillation: a single‐
blind, non‐inferiority, randomized controlled trial 
(SIMPLE). Lancet 2015;385:785–791.
	4	 Hohnloser SH, Dorian P, Roberts R, Gent M, Israel CW, 
Champagne J, et al. Effect of amiodarone and sotalol on 
ventricular defibrillation threshold: the optimal 
pharmacological therapy in cardioverter defibrillator 
patients (OPTIC) trial. Circulation 2006;114:104–109.
	5	 Russo AM, Sauer W, Gerstenfeld EP, Hsia HH, Lin D, 
Cooper JM, et al. Defibrillation threshold testing:  
is it really necessary at the time of implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator insertion? Heart Rhythm 
2005;2:456–461.
	6	 Birnie D, Tung S, Simpson C, Crystal E, Exner D, 
Ayala Paredes FA, et al. Complications associated 
with defibrillation threshold testing: the Canadian 
experience. Heart Rhythm 2008;5:387–390.
	7	 Brignole M, Occhetta E, Bongiorni MG, Proclemer A, 
Favale S, Iacopino S, et al. Clinical evaluation of 
defibrillation testing in an unselected population of 
2,120 consecutive patients undergoing first implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator implant. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2012;60:981–987.
	8	 Wilkoff BL, Fauchier L, Stiles MK, Morillo CA, Al‐
Khatib SM, Almendral J, et al. 2015 HRS/EHRA/
APHRS/SOLAECE expert consensus statement on 
optimal implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator 
programming and testing. Heart Rhythm 
2016;13(2):e50–86.

119
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Implantable cardiac leads provide effective treatment for 
bradyarrhythmia and heart failure and prevention of 
sudden cardiac death. Leads may be placed through the 
vasculature via an endocardial approach, or surgically via 
an epicardial approach. Chest radiography is useful for 
pre‐operative planning, intraoperative assessment of 
anatomy for proper device positioning, and postopera-
tive assessment of lead position and surgical complica-
tion including pneumothorax, pleural effusion, and 
pericardial effusion. This chapter describes methods for 
evaluating lead position using standard X‐ray imaging, 
and indications for the incorporation of computed 
tomography and other three‐dimensional (3‐D) imaging 
for lead localization.
­Chest X‐ray Identification of Lead 
Insertion Site
Endovascular leads may be inserted in any central venous 
location, including cephalic, axillary, subclavian, innom-
inate, internal jugular, femoral, iliac, or hepatic; however, 
in most labs, the preferred implantation sites include the 
cephalic, axillary, or subclavian veins. Identification of 
lead insertion sites prior to device generator change or 
insertion of additional leads is helpful for procedural 
planning. Clues as to the insertion site may be obtained 
on radiography; a more lateral insertion position sug-
gests a cephalic site (Figure 15.1), while a more medial 
insertion site suggests a subclavian or axillary site 
(Figure 15.2). An extreme medial technique may be used 
for placement of leads in cases of occlusion of the axillary 
or subclavian vein. This may be identified on X‐ray by an 
insertion point at or near the sterno‐clavicular junction 
(Figure  15.3). Tunneled leads may also me identified 
on X‐ray as a lead that does not follow the course of any 
vascular bed (Figure 15.4).
­X‐Ray Right Ventricular Lead Tip 
Localization
The right ventricle (RV) is usually divided into three dis-
tinct anatomic regions when describing the position of 
the tip of a pacing or defibrillation lead: free wall, sep-
tum, and apex (Figure 15.5). Historically, the RV apex has 
been the preferred location for RV lead position, owing 
to the high degree of lead stability with tined or passive 
fixation leads, low pacing capture thresholds, and low 
defibrillation threshold values during high voltage thera-
pies. More recent studies have suggested that pacing 
from the RV septum may provide more physiologic acti-
vation of the left and right ventricle, minimizing the neg-
ative hemodynamic effects of RV pacing. Enthusiasm for 
septal positioning of RV leads increased after data 
showed only a small increase in defibrillation threshold 
in this position relative to the apex. Unfortunately, inad-
vertent RV lead tip position on the free wall is associated 
with a higher risk of procedure‐related complications 
including RV perforation, left anterior descending artery 
perforation, chest wall stimulation, and worsening RV 
and left ventricular (LV) dyssynchrony and function than 
placement on the interventricular septum or apex. 
In  studies using 3‐D echocardiography or 3‐D CT 
­imaging, the incidence of inadvertent RV free wall lead 
placement is as high as 50% when a RV septal location is 
targeted. Steep left anterior oblique (LAO) projections 
are used to assess septal versus free wall positions with 
15
Use of Chest X-ray, Computed Tomography and 3-D Imaging to Evaluate 
Lead Location
Brett D. Atwater
Duke University Health System, Durham, NC, USA

15  Use of Chest X-ray, Computed Tomography and 3-D Imaging to Evaluate Lead Location
120
anterior facing lead tips indicating free wall positions 
and posterior facing lead tips indicating septal positions. 
Prior work has compared the use of right anterior oblique 
(RAO) 30 degree and LAO 40 degree fluoroscopy to 
evaluate RV lead tip position using cardiac CT as the 
gold standard [1]. Implanting physicians attempted to 
place all RV lead tips in the mid‐RV septum using LAO 
40 degree and posterior‐anterior (PA) fluoroscopy. 
Cardiac CT verified that 59% of the RV lead tips were 
inadvertently placed in the RV anterior‐free wall while 
Figure 15.1  Cephalic vein insertion.
Figure 15.2  Axillary vein insertion.

­X‐Ra y Right  Ventricula r Le ad Tip Localizatio ﻿
121
Figure 15.3  Extreme medial technique 
posterior‐anterior (PA) view.
Figure 15.4  PA and lateral X‐ray of tunneled high voltage lead.

15  Use of Chest X-ray, Computed Tomography and 3-D Imaging to Evaluate Lead Location
122
41% were correctly placed in the mid‐septum. RAO 30 
degree fluoroscopy provided better discrimination of 
septal lead tip position than LAO 40 degree (positive 
predictive value for septal placement 94.7% and nega-
tive predictive value of 90.6%). Numerous studies have 
evaluated the reproducibility and accuracy of X‐ray 
imaging compared with CT imaging for RV lead 
tip localization. We recently showed limited ability to 
distinguish RV free wall locations from RV septal 
locations using X‐ray.
Figure 15.5  The right ventricule (RV) is usually divided into three anatomically distinct regions for identification of lead tip position. 
(a) An RV apical position is typically identified by a lead tip extending towards the leftward side of the cardiac silhouette in either an right 
anterior oblique (RAO) or PA angulation, usually associated with a downward direction to the lead tip. (b) An RV free wall location is 
identified by an anteriorly directed lead tip terminating near the sternum on a steep left anterior oblique (LAO) angulation and a position 
away from the cardiac border on an RAO or PA projection. 

­X‐ra y Identificati on of Alternat iv e LV  Lead Implan tation Technique ﻿
123
­X‐ray Left Ventricular Lead Tip 
Localization
Pacing leads are usually placed in a LV location along 
with a RV lead to deliver cardiac resynchronization ther-
apy (CRT). Pacing is then provided from either both ven-
tricular leads simultaneously or with a predefined offset, 
or from the LV lead alone with an attempt to provide 
fusion with conduction down the remaining ventricular 
conduction system. Numerous studies have shown that 
CRT provides improved ventricular hemodynamics, 
reverse remodeling of LV dilation, improvements in 
heart failure symptom severity, fewer heart failure related 
hospitalizations, and mortality reduction than placebo, 
especially among patients with a left bundle branch 
block on surface ECG. Unfortunately, not all patients 
respond to CRT and LV lead tip location is a key deter-
minate of the likelihood of response.
The RAO, LAO, PA, and lateral X‐ray views are used 
to identify LV lead tip position. Optimal RAO and LAO 
angulation are dependent on the degree of heart rota-
tion within the thorax. The RAO view should maxi-
mally foreshorten the AV groove while the LAO view 
should minimally foreshorten the AV groove. One easy 
way to achieve this in a patient with prior LV lead place-
ment is to angle the X‐ray view to maximally and mini-
mally foreshorten the portion of the LV lead body that 
rests within the coronary sinus and great cardiac vein. 
Various LV segmentation strategies have been advo-
cated to describe LV lead position. The 15‐segment 
method divides the longitudinal LV axis into three 
­segments (base, middle, and apex) using the RAO or PA 
X‐ray projection. The short LV axis is divided into five 
segments (anterior, anterior‐lateral, lateral, posterior‐
lateral, and posterior) using the LAO X‐ray projection 
(Figure 15.6). Recent work has demonstrated that the 
15‐segment method lacks accuracy and reproducibility 
compared to simpler methods combining the base and 
middle LV segments (to create a “non‐apical” segment) 
and the anterior‐­lateral, lateral, and posterior‐lateral 
segments (to create a “lateral” segment) to produce a 
6‐segment method.
­X‐ray Identification of Alternative LV 
Lead Implantation Techniques
Left ventricular leads are usually implanted using an 
endovascular strategy, coursing through the coronary 
sinus into one of the ventricular branches to provide an 
LV epicardial position or by a surgical approach using a 
mini‐thoracotomy approach to provide direct access to 
the epicardial heart surface. Recently, an endovascular 
endocardial approach has been described where the LV 
lead is advanced to the LV cavity through either a trans‐
aortic or trans‐septal route. The trans‐septal route can 
Figure 15.5 (Cont’d)  (c) An RV septal lead position is identified by a posteriorly directed lead tip terminating away from the sternum on a 
steep LAO angulation and a position away from the cardiac border on an RAO or PA projection. (All lead tip locations in these figures were 
confirmed by 3‐D reconstructed CT imaging.)

15  Use of Chest X-ray, Computed Tomography and 3-D Imaging to Evaluate Lead Location
124
be achieved by puncture through either the inter‐atrial 
septum followed by a course through the mitral valve to 
the LV cavity (Figure 15.7), or through a puncture through 
the inter‐ventricular septum to the LV cavity (Figure 15.8). 
These approaches are used rarely, usually in cases of pre-
vious failed attempts at LV lead placement by the coro-
nary sinus. An endovascular endocardial approach can be 
identified on X‐ray by a posterior lead tip location within 
the cardiac silhouette without a course through the coro-
nary sinus. An epicardial approach can be identified by a 
screw‐in type active ­fixation and a lead tip that termi-
nates outside of the ­cardiac silhouette (Figure 15.9).
­X‐Ray Identification of Alternative 
Defibrillator Lead Implantation 
Techniques
Defibrillator shocks are usually successful in restoring 
normal rhythm when delivered between a coil positioned 
within the RV, superior vena cava (SVC), and/or the 
­defibrillator housing. Occasionally, the defibrillation 
threshold is higher than the maximum amount of energy 
deliverable from the defibrillator device and alternative 
defibrillator vectors are needed. Historically, these were 
(a)
(b)
RAO
LAO
Figure 15.6  Classification of left ventricular lead location using standardized X‐ray views. (a) Right anterior oblique (RAO) view is 
representative of the long axis of the heart. This view allows segmentation of the left ventricle into basal, mid‐ventricular, and apical 
segments. (b) Left anterior oblique (LAO) view is representative of the short axis of the heart. This view allows segmentation of the left 
ventricle into anterior, anteriolateral, lateral, posteriolateral, and posterior segments.
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.7  PA and lateral images an LV endocardial lead implanted by a trans‐intra‐atrial septal puncture. (a) is an RAO projection and 
(b) is an LAO projection. Source: van Gelder 2007 [3]. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.

­X‐Ra y Identificati on of Alternat ive Defibrillato r Le ad Implantat ion Technique ﻿
125
achieved through surgical positioning of epicardial 
­defibrillator patches or subcutaneous coils (Figure 15.9). 
Newer methods involving alternative endovascular 
­locations and subcutaneous tunneling to place shock 
coils have largely replaced the need for open surgical 
procedures. These positions can be identified easily on 
chest X‐ray. The azygous coil location can be identified 
by a lead that transverses down the right side of the spine 
Figure 15.8  Anterior‐posterior, and LAO views of an endocardial LV lead positioned by the trans‐inter‐ventricular septum technique. 
The left ventricular lead tip is marked by the arrowheads. The asterisk marks a left ventricular aneurysm. Source: Gamble 2013 [4]. 
Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
Figure 15.9  Epicardial array, epicardial LV 
leads, epicardial RA lead, and endocardial 
RV lead.

15  Use of Chest X-ray, Computed Tomography and 3-D Imaging to Evaluate Lead Location
126
on the PA radiograph and that has an extremely poste-
rior course near the spine on the lateral radiograph 
(Figure 15.10). A coronary sinus shock coil configuration 
can be identified by a lead coursing along the valve annu-
lus in the PA view and coursing posteriorly in the lateral 
radiograph (Figure  15.11). Subcutaneously tunneled 
leads can be identified by their superficial course that 
does not follow a vascular pattern (Figure 15.4). Anatomic 
variations may also be identified easily after device implan-
tation by following the course of leads placed through the 
Figure 15.10  PA and lateral image of shock coil in azygous vein. The coil courses along the right side of the spine in the RAO projection 
and is very posterior in the lateral projection.
Figure 15.11  Coronary sinus shock coil location after defibrillation threshold (DFT) was found to be elevated with a shock coil in an 
azygous position. PA and lateral images. The coronary sinus position can be identified in X‐ray by a lead coursing along the valve annulus 
in the PA view and coursing posteriorly in the lateral view.

­X‐ra y Identificati on of Lead  Failur ﻿
127
anatomy. A common example is device implantation 
through a left‐sided SVC approach (Figure 15.12).
­X‐ray Identification of Device 
Implant Complications
Complications occur in 1–3% of pacemaker implanta-
tion procedures and 3–6% of defibrillator implantation 
procedures. Some complications including pneumotho-
rax, hemothorax, lead dislodgement, and cardiac perfo-
ration can be identified by X‐ray, even in the absence of 
patient symptoms. While the utility of routine post‐
device implantation X‐ray imaging has been debated in 
the literature, it is currently performed at most hospitals. 
Pneumothorax can be identified on X‐ray by a linear 
opacity, usually located at the apex in an upright patient, 
but occasionally located in the sulcus or lateral lung field 
in dependent patients (Figure  15.13). The size of the 
pneumothorax is usually determined by measurement of 
the distance between the chest wall and the lung. An air 
rim of 2 cm at the level of the hilum or 3 cm at the apex 
differentiates a “small” and “large” pneumothorax. Small 
pneumothoraxes can usually be managed medically 
with  high flow oxygen supplementation while large 
pneumothoraxes usually require placement of a chest 
tube. Less  commonly, tension pneumothorax may be 
identified by absence of parenchymal findings in one 
lung field accompanied by mediastinal shift away from 
the collapsed lung although this diagnosis is made 
­clinically when hypotension and hypoxia accompany a 
radiographic diagnosis of  pneumothorax. Tension 
­pneumothorax should be treated urgently or emergently 
with either needle decompression or prompt chest tube 
insertion. Hemothorax may be identified by radiopaque 
density in the pleural space with accompanied collapse 
of the lung.
Lead dislodgement can be identified when a lead is 
not in its intended position. Typically, RV septal leads 
dislodge to either the RV apex or right atrium while RV 
apical leads dislodge to the right atrium or the inferior 
vena cava (IVC). RA leads usually dislogdge to either 
the IVC or the SVC. More rarely, leads dislodge and 
advance forward, and can cause cardiac perforation. 
This may occur if excess slack is applied to the lead 
body at implantation. This can be identified when the 
lead tip exits the cardiac silhouette, and is occasionally 
accompanied by enlargement of the cardiac silhouette, 
indicative of hemoparicardium.
­X‐ray Identification of Lead Failure
Pacing and defibrillation leads undergo tremendous 
stress in the human body, with dramatic bending and 
twisting forces applied by the normal motion of the 
heart, chest, and arms and by the forces applied by 
sutures used to tie the leads in position. These forces 
Figure 15.12  PA and lateral X‐ray views obtained after a bi‐ventricular ICD upgrade from prior pacemaker implantation. The pre‐
procedure X‐ray demonstrated that the prior pacemaker was implanted through the left‐sided superior vena cava, alerting implanting 
operators to expect a more difficult upgrade procedure.

15  Use of Chest X-ray, Computed Tomography and 3-D Imaging to Evaluate Lead Location
128
may cause lead insulation breach and lead fracture. 
Insulation breach can be identified as an interruption of 
the normal lead diameter on X‐ray (Figure  15.14). 
Conductor fracture can be identified by interruption of 
the conductor cable. Image magnification may be helpful 
in some cases.
X‐ray imaging is recommended for evaluation of all St. 
Jude Medical Riata defibrillation leads to evaluate for 
externalized electrical conductors. X‐ray examination 
should be performed in two steps:
●
●Step 1: Examine the entire visible length of the lead 
focusing on areas where conductors appear to be 
­separated from the rest of the lead. An externalized 
conductor exists if all of the lead conductors do not fit 
within the shock electrode shadow width.
Figure 15.14  PA chest radiograph shows fracture (arrowhead) of ventricle lead and insulation breach (arrow) of atrial lead in subclavian 
vein adjacent to clavicle [5].
Figure 15.13  A large left‐sided pneumothorax 
after device implantation. This was managed 
by chest tube placement.

­X‐ra y Identificati on of Lead  Failur ﻿
129
●
●Step 2: Examine the radius of curvature of each 
conductor. In most cases, externalized conductors 
have a different radius of curvature than the rest of 
the lead body. If the suspected externalized con-
ductor occurs on the inside of a bend, the center of 
the conductor length has a radius of curvature that 
is larger than the rest of the lead body. If the exter-
nalized conductors occur on the outside of a bend, 
the externalized conductor will have a smaller 
radius of curvature than the rest of the lead body 
(Figure 15.15).
If a lead fulfills criteria in either step 1 or 2, conductor 
externalization is confirmed. At this point, little guid-
ance has been put forward on the correct clinical course 
to take after identification of externalized conductor 
cables. Some advocate routine lead extraction followed 
by re‐implantation of another lead. Others recommend 
capping the recalled Riata lead followed by placement of 
another lead. Still others recommend continuing to use 
leads with externalized conductors with intensified 
remote monitoring practices.
Figure 15.15  X‐ray image of confirmed electrode cable 
externalization in St. Jude Medical Riata defibrillation lead. Source: 
Chan 2012 [6]. Reproduced with permission of John Wiley & Sons.
(a)
Post
Post
Post
Ant
Ant
Ant
(c)
(b)
Figure 15.16  Three‐dimensional reconstruction of two‐dimensional CT images in a patient with device infection, prior left ventricular 
assist device prior to lead extraction. (a,b) Sagittal and coronal images demonstrate a high, anterior right ventricular lead position. 
(c) 3‐D reconstruction demonstrates an anterior/free wall RV lead position with possible micro‐perforation.

15  Use of Chest X-ray, Computed Tomography and 3-D Imaging to Evaluate Lead Location
130
­CT and 3‐D Imaging for Identifying 
Lead Location
X‐ray imaging using multiple views is usually adequate 
for routine gross identification of pacing lead location. 
However, X‐ray imaging is frequently inadequate when 
more detailed information about lead location is desired. 
These limitations result from an inability to control for 
cardiac rotation within the thorax and the inability to 
image cardiac soft tissues. When more detail is required, 
cardiac CT and 3‐D imaging can be extremely helpful.
In our center, we employ cardiac CT with 3‐D recon-
struction routinely before lead extraction procedures 
(Figure 15.16). Using this technique, our operators have 
identified previously unknown cases of lead tip RV per-
foration, SVC lead perforation, and inadvertent lead 
placement in the splenic vein prior to extraction proce-
dures. In these cases, elective open sternotomy extrac-
tion procedures were performed rather laser lead 
extraction and all leads were removed safely [2].
Three‐dimensional imaging is also used commonly in 
many centers prior to and during cardiac resynchroniza-
tion therapy implantation procedures to identify areas of 
LV scar, and branches of the coronary sinus venous 
­system suitable for placement of LV leads. These images 
may then be imported into some fluoroscopy systems to 
be displayed in real time on the fluoroscopy screen to 
help ensure LV lead placement in a favored location. 
Alternatively, 3‐D imaging may be acquired during the 
implantation procedure using either rotational angiogra-
phy (Figure 15.17a,b) or electroanatomic mapping of the 
LV venous system (Figure 15.17c). The mapping proce-
dures offer not only anatomic information about the 
venous system, but also the ability to identify the latest 
point of electrical activation. A building base of evidence 
suggests that placement of LV leads in areas of late 
­electrical activation leads to superior outcomes in CRT.
­Conlusions
X‐ray imaging is extremely useful before, during, and 
after device implantation for identification of pacing and 
defibrillator lead location. More detailed information 
can be obtained using CT and other 3‐D imaging 
­techniques when needed.
­References
	1	 Osmancik P, Stros P, Herman D, Curila K, Petr R. The 
insufficiency of left anterior oblique and the usefulness 
of right anterior oblique projection for correct 
localization of a computed tomography‐verified right 
ventricular lead into the midseptum. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol 2013;6(4):719–725.
	2	 Lewis RK, Pokorney SD, Greenfield RA, Hranitzky PM, 
Hegland DD, Schroder JN, et al. Preprocedural  
ECG‐gated computed tomography for  
prevention of complications during lead  
extraction. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2014;37(10):1297–1305.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 15.17  (a) 3‐D reconstruction and segmentation of coronary sinus anatomy acquired by high‐speed rotational angiography during 
CRT implantation (Dyna‐CT, Seimens AG). (b) Integration of 3‐D coronary sinus anatomy into real‐time fluoroscopy to improve implanter 
understanding of 3‐D left ventricular anatomy (Dyna‐CT, Seimens AG). (c) 3‐D reconstruction of coronary sinus anatomy acquired by 
high‐speed rotational angiography during CRT implantation also incorporating LV activation timing to facilitate implantation of LV lead 
using both anatomical and electrical conduction information (Cardioguide, Medtronic Inc.)

­Reference ﻿
131
	3	 van Gelder BM, Scheffer MG, Meijer A, Bracke FA. 
Transseptal endocardial left ventricular pacing: an 
alternative technique for coronary sinus lead placement 
in cardiac resynchronization therapy. Heart Rhythm 
2007;4(4):454–460.
	4	 Gamble JH, Bashir Y, Rajappan K, Betts TR. Left 
ventricular endocardial pacing via the interventricular 
septum for cardiac resynchronization therapy: first 
report. Heart Rhythm 2013;10(12):1812–1814.
	5	 Lanzman RS, Winter J, Blondin D, Fürst G, Scherer A, 
Miese FR, et al. Where does it lead? Imaging features 
of cardiovascular implantable electronic devices on 
chest radiograph and CT. Korean J Radiol 
2011;12(5):611–619.
	6	 Chan CW, Chiang CS. An ICD lead with failure of 
outer insulation goes undetected by regular 
measurements. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2012;35(9):e261–262.

133
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Annually, hundreds of thousands of pacemakers and 
internal cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD) implantations 
occur worldwide, usually without adverse events. 
However, the procedure is not without risk, as there are 
many potential complications related to the procedure 
itself that can occur immediately or in a delayed setting 
(Table 16.1). Of note, the incidence of these complica-
tions is inversely related to the procedural volume of the 
implanting physician and center [1,2]. This chapter 
­discusses postoperative device complications including 
their risk factors, presentation, and management.
­Lead Dislodgement
As fixation mechanisms have improved, lead dislodge-
ment has become less frequent. However, this complica-
tion still occurs, being least common with generator 
changes (<1%), more common in new lead implanta-
tions (1.1–4.4%), with higher rates seen in pediatric 
populations as well as coronary sinus leads, which may 
dislodge in up to 3–10% of patients [1,3]. Coronary sinus 
lead ­dislodgement occurs at a higher rate, likely because 
of anatomic limitations for lead placement that must 
balance lead position stability with adequate thresholds 
while avoiding diaphragmatic stimulation. For non‐­
epicardial leads, the ventricular lead dislodges at a lower 
rate than the atrial lead, which typically has to curve 
anteriorly and superiorly to gain adequate contact with 
myocardium [1]. Some lead dislodgments are attributa-
ble to Twiddler’s syndrome (Figure 16.1), which may be 
conscious or unconscious patient manipulation of the 
pulse generator. To hinder repeat twiddling, an option is 
to place the device in a subpectoral position. Another 
option is to place the device inside an antibiotic sleeve, 
and then use sutures in multiple locations to anchor 
the  sleeve (containing the pulse generator) to the 
pocket floor.
Dislodgement can be microdislodgement, in which 
the lead tip has moved but is unapparent visually, but 
enough to impair its function. In contrast, lead macro-
dislodgement is evident visually, such as on fluoroscopy 
or radiography.
With microdislodgement, usually the impedance 
remains normal while the threshold worsens. With 
­macrodislodgement, common findings include loss of 
sensing, increased capture threshold, or inability to 
­capture. This loss of capture can result in pacemaker 
syndrome, such as with atrial lead dislodgement leading 
to loss of AV synchrony. The lead may also dislodge to a 
position with inadvertent stimulation, such as the 
phrenic nerve or pocket stimulation of the brachial 
plexus. These leads require revision.
While lead revision is the likely course of action for a 
lead dislodgement, prevention should also be addressed. 
Signs that the lead is in adequate contact with myocar-
dium include adequate sensing and a current of injury, 
as well as direct visualization of movement of the lead in 
coordination with the heart. Securing the lead to the 
suture sleeve, with proper anchoring to the pocket floor, 
should be standard procedure. Postoperative activity 
restrictions should be discussed with the patient and 
given as written instructions. A sling should be worn for 
24 hours to remind the patient of the arm movement 
restriction, but afterward the sling should not be worn 
during daytime activities to avoid orthopedic complica-
tions such as frozen shoulder. For patients who sleep 
with their arm above their head, use of the sling only 
while sleeping is encouraged. Otherwise, patients should 
restrict their driving for at least 7 days post‐procedure.
16
How to Evaluate Postoperative Device Complications
Dan Sorajja and Win‐Kuang Shen
Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, AZ, USA

16  How to Evaluate Postoperative Device Complications
134
­Pneumothorax
Typical venous approaches to placement of new pace-
maker and defibrillator leads include the axillary 
approach, subclavian approach, and cephalic vein 
cut‐down. Pneumothorax is avoided with a cephalic 
cut‐down approach, while an axillary (extrathoracic 
subclavian) approach has a lower risk than a subclavian 
approach. Other factors increasing the risk of pneumo-
thorax include older patients, female gender, and a 
lower body mass index [2,3]. A micropuncture access 
kit may decrease the risk of pneumothorax, as will use 
of contrast injection because of the improved ability to 
target the venous system. Overall, the risk of pneumo-
thorax is 1–2% [1–3].
Pneumothorax should be suspected when there is 
aspiration of air with the introducer needle, or there 
are  systemic symptoms such as respiratory distress, 
hypotension, or chest discomfort. These findings 
­manifest within 48 hours after new lead placement.
After a new lead implantation, post‐procedure care 
should include an immediate chest X‐ray to inspect for 
possible pneumothorax. This X‐ray should be performed 
during inspiration with the patient upright. A small 
asymptomatic pneumothorax (Figure 16.2), comprising 
less than 15% of the lung field, can be managed with 
observation and supplement oxygenation, which can 
increase the reabsorption of the pneumothorax up to 
fourfold faster. The rate of reabsorption is estimated to 
be 1–2% daily with conservative measures, and may take 
several weeks to resolve. In the interim, these patients 
should be instructed to avoid air travel and deep sea div-
ing until the pneumothorax is full resolved. However, 
larger pneumothoraces (those greater than 15% of the 
lung field) and those associated with hemodynamic 
compromise or significant bleeding into the thoracic 
cavity (hemopneumothorax) should be considered for 
chest tube placement. Management of pneumothorax 
should be primarily guided by the symptoms rather than 
the size of the pneumothorax. Small pneumothoraces 
can cause significant hemodynamic compromise, and 
chest tube placement may be warranted.
For hemopneumothorax, prevention is key. When 
access to the vein is obtained, the guide wire should be 
advance to below the diaphragm confirming placement 
in the inferior vena cava (IVC), not the arterial side, prior 
to dilatation with an introducer sheath. Use of an axillary 
approach is preferred as it allows for manual compres-
sion in this situation.
­Bleeding, Swelling, and Hematoma
In patients on antiplatelets and/or anticoagulants, 
­bleeding is more common throughout the procedure 
such as exposing the pectoral fascia and with creating 
the pacemaker pocket. Bleeding more commonly occurs 
during new device and lead implantations than during 
generator changes, when fibrosis typically limits the 
bleeding (Figure 16.3) [2,4].
Typical bleeding sites include subcutaneous vessels 
and exposed muscle fascia. Bleeding from the skin inci-
sion can be minimized with use of pulsed plasma radiof-
requency energy (PEAK plasmablade) instead of a 
traditional scalpel, but this bleeding is likely inconse-
quential for most procedures. When bleeding occurs 
from multiple diffuse spots within the pocket (an 
“oozer”), electrocautery can be helpful in addition to 
gentle compression. Other options include using topical 
thrombin, thrombin‐coated mesh, and Gelfoam. If the 
bleeding is limited to superficial bleeding, consider an 
ice pack or a pressure dressing. When the muscle fascia 
is split or torn, reapproximating the edges will reduce 
bleeding. For patients with high venous pressure or if a 
venous access site was double‐wired to place multiple 
leads, bleeding around the lead suture sleeve can occur 
even if properly placed. Manual pressure or a purse 
string suture placed around the leads at their access site 
will facilitate hemostasis (Figure 16.3).
Table 16.1  Device complications, incidence, and timing [1–5].
Complications
Incidence (%)
Early complications (within 6 months  
post‐implantation)
Lead dislodgement, loss of capture
0.2–10
Lead or insulation damage
2.7–3.6
Bleeding, swelling, hematoma
0.1–2.3
Infection
0.7–1.9
Pneumothorax
0.5–1.6
Pain
0.2–1.4
Cardiac perforation, tamponade, pericarditis
0.09–1.4
Perioperative death
0.4–1.3
Erosion
NA
Inadvertent left ventricular lead placement
NA
Lead block connection problem
NA
Extracardiac stimulation
NA
Late complications (after 6 months  
post‐implantation)
Lead fracture
2.7–3.6
Thrombosis
0.03–3.5
Infection
0.7–1.9

­Bleeding , Swelling , and Hematom ﻿
135
Prevention has a role in reducing the occurrence of 
postoperative bleeding. For patients on warfarin, bleed-
ing complication is low when the international nor-
maized ratio (INR) is less than 2.5 without disruption of 
warfarin therapy. Novel anticoagulants (dabigatran, 
rivaroxaban, apixaban) and clopidogrel should be held 
for at least 3 half‐lives if possible. Heparin and low 
molecular weight heparin are especially associated with 
increased bleeding and hematoma formation. These 
drugs should be discontinued prior to the procedure, 
and held at least 24–48 hours post device implantation.
At device follow‐up, if ecchymosis is present, no fur-
ther treatment than reassurance is required. Hematoma 
formation should be assessed for the rapidity of its 
­formation, ability to control pain, and possible pocket 
erosion. Aspiration should not be attempted as it is 
unlikely to completely evacuate the hematoma while also 
increasing the risk of device infection. If the hematoma 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 16.1  (a) Device at 1 day post implantation. (b) 1 month post implantation, and the coil is retracted to the innominate vein, while 
coiling of the lead is now apparent just superior to the pulse generator. (c) A lead from a Twiddler. (d) The same Twiddler lead as in panel 
(c) out of the pocket.

16  How to Evaluate Postoperative Device Complications
136
continues to enlarge or the pain cannot be controlled, 
then the evacuation of the hematoma should be 
­performed under sterile operating room conditions. 
Anticoagulation should be held if possible until bleeding 
has been controlled.
­Pain
When patients present with pain immediately after 
a  device implantation, the pain usually is caused by 
­swelling, and typically responds to analgesics such as 
acetaminophen. Occasionally, this pain requires a ­narcotic 
in combination with the acetaminophen. Further from the 
time of device implantation, other possible contributors to 
pain should be considered, such as the device location 
being too superficial or lateral, nerve entrapment, or an 
allergy to a device component. However, the most worri-
some complication that must be considered is infection.
If the device is placed too laterally or the device is not 
anchored properly, it can cause significant discomfort 
from irritation of the axillary nerve (or space). If the pain 
cannot be controlled, consideration should be given to 
affixing the device more medially. When the irritation is 
caused by the device swinging freely, non‐absorbable 
suture or an encapsulating sleeve (e.g., AigisRx) can be 
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
Figure 16.2  (a) Chest X‐ray with minimal pneumothorax. (b) Panel (a) X‐ray enlarged with arrows demarcating the margin of the 
pneumothorax, which was managed conservatively. (c) Large left‐sided pneumothorax. (d) A pigtail catheter placed for the 
pneumothorax in panel (c).

­Pai ﻿
137
used to anchor the device to the pocket floor. When the 
device is implanted too superficially within subcutane-
ous tissue rather than deep to the adipose tissue, the 
result can be very painful and difficult to control with 
medication. Usually, the pain is at the margin of the 
device, where pressure points exist. This complication 
frequently requires revision of the device to a deeper 
level, including submuscular implantation. For possible 
nerve entrapment, the device pocket can be “unroofed” 
but sometimes the device has to be relocated to the 
­contralateral side to alleviate pressure on the nerve.
Several components that make up a pacing and 
­defibrillating system have been shown to generate 
­allergic reactions including: titanium, nickel, polychlo-
roparaxylene, polyurethane, epoxy, mercury, cadmium, 
chromate, silicone, and cobalt. On a similar note, combi-
nations of these components make up several alloys used 
in devices, making an offending allergen not as apparent. 
Stainless steel (which contains nickel and chromium) 
can be found in many parts including the screws in a 
pacemaker or defibrillator, and the fixation portion of 
the pin and ring of the electrode lead. Many of these 
components are housed internally inside the pulse 
­generator or inside the lead body, and therefore are not 
in direct contact with the patient. To determine if the 
patient has an allergy to a specific component, each of 
the manufacturers provides an allergy test kit to perform 
an epidermal skin test, but certain components such as 
titanium may elicit an allergic reaction despite negative 
testing. The risk of an allergic reaction should be weighed 
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 16.3  (a) A hematoma 1 week post implantation is most apparent from a lateral view with prominent swelling over the device 
pocket. (b) The same patient as in panel (a) with ecchymosis tracking down the chest and arm. He was on warfarin and clopidogrel during 
device implantation. (c) A device pocket floor is shown with two leads anchored to the floor with their suture sleeves. A pursestring suture 
encircling both leads can reduce bleeding, particularly in patients with high central venous pressure or when “double wiring” is required 
to access the vein.

16  How to Evaluate Postoperative Device Complications
138
and considered fully with the patient, because the dif-
ferential diagnosis includes infection, which requires 
removal of pulse generator and leads. Treatment for an 
allergic reaction includes topical steroids which is a tem-
porizing measure. Other options include implantation of 
a gold‐plated generator or a whole system coated with 
0.2 mm PTFE surgical membrane.
­Erosion
The development of erosion of the pulse generator is 
usually an indolent process occurring months to years 
after implantation. Superficial implantation of the pulse 
generator increases the risk or erosion. Another factor is 
the size of the device pocket being too small for the pulse 
generator, including new implantations but more so with 
device upgrades such as upgrading from a pacemaker to 
an ICD, or a biventricular device upgrade. Lateral place-
ment of the pulse generator into the deltopectoral 
groove, where arm movement may create pressure on 
the device, also can lead to erosion. However, the most 
common cause of erosion is infection (Figure 16.4).
When erosion occurs, a revision of the pulse generator 
must be undertaken. The determination of whether 
there is infection should be made prior to performing a 
revision, as lack of visual purulent material during a 
­revision is not satisfactory enough evidence to rule out 
infection. If the erosion occurs because of infection, then 
the leads must also be removed, and the new system 
should be implanted at a clean site (usually the contralat-
eral side) after the infection has been cleared.
­Infection
Superficial infection, which does not involve the device, 
is frequently caused by stitch abscess. This can typically 
be treated with oral antibiotics, usually for 7–10 days. 
Longer treatment up to 48 hours after resolution of 
­erythema or signs of infection may be necessary.
The incidence of device infection after implantation is 
approximately 1% with slightly increased rates (up to 
1.9%) seen with generator changes or device upgrade 
[1–5]. Other risk factors for infection include immuno-
suppression, diabetes, renal failure, pocket hematoma, 
longer case times, and additional operators [5]. 
Completed infusion of antibiotic within 60 minutes 
prior to implant can reduce the risk of infection by 80%, 
and good sterile technique should be employed. 
Counseling patients on postoperative care is also impor-
tant, particularly avoidance of getting the implantation 
site wet for at least 48 hours post procedure.
Fever with systemic symptoms is more typical for early 
presentation (within 4 weeks post‐procedure), infections 
with the causal agent predominantly being Staphylococcus 
aureus, which comprises almost 50% of all device infec-
tions [5]. These patients are more likely to be female and 
on anticoagulation. Of note, approximately 90% of 
­cardiac device infection presents as a pocket infection. 
Frank erosion or purulent discharge is an obvious infec-
tion. However, device infection should be strongly 
­considered when local erythema, serous drainage, skin 
adherence to the pulse generator, painful device pocket, 
or bacteremia are found. Of note, late presentations 
(after 4 weeks post procedure) of device infection 
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.4  (a) Pus covering inapparent erosion with surrounding erythema. (b) Erosion is now apparent after the patient cleaned the 
wound himself.

­Lea d Block  Connectio n Problem ﻿
139
­typically lack fever, and the most frequent culprit is 
Staphylococcus epidermidis.
For possible device infection, the approach is to collect a 
suitable amount of evidence to determine if an infection is 
present, and whether there are sequelae from the infection 
such as cardiac valve vegetation or lead vegetation. Needle 
aspiration of a potentially infected pocket is not recom-
mended; this test may potentially seed an uninfected 
pocket with infection. Blood cultures should be obtained 
prior to antibiotic administration. If blood cultures are 
obtained after antibiotics were given, and the cultures 
remain negative, the next step is a transesophageal 
echocardiogram. Positive blood cultures should result in a 
transesophageal echocardiogram to evaluate for possible 
vegetation involving the valve and lead. While transtho-
racic echocardiogram may have higher specificity, the 
sensitivity of the exam is insufficient for guiding therapy. 
Consultation with an expert in infectious diseases is 
­recommended for all suspected device infections [5].
When there are sufficient data for a cardiac device infec-
tion, the whole system including the pulse generator and 
leads (including abandoned leads) should be removed, as 
approximately 50% of pocket infections have concomitant 
endovascular vegetations by transesophageal echocardio-
gram. Swab cultures from the pacemaker pocket and cul-
tures of the lead tips should be obtained. After antibiotic 
treatment is started, serial blood cultures should be 
obtained, with the frequency depending on the suspected 
virulence of the causal organism and if definitive therapy 
(device system removal) has been performed [5].
Antibiotic duration will depend on the pathogen and its 
susceptibility. In general, pocket‐site infection requires 
14 days of antibiotics after device removal. If there are 
sequelae of infection (endocarditis, persistent bacteremia 
despite device removal), then antimicrobial therapy may 
be required for up to 6 weeks. Reimplantation of the 
device can occur after blood cultures (drawn after device 
removal) have been negative for at least 72 hours. If val-
vular infection is present, reimplantation of leads should 
occur at least 14 days after device removal. Reimplantation 
of the device should be not performed ipsilateral to the 
prior extraction site, and options include the contralateral 
side, epicardial, and iliac vein implantation [5].
­Inadvertent Left Ventricular Lead 
Placement
Passing of the transvenous lead into the coronary sinus 
or middle cardiac vein and their branches sometimes 
occurs. The pacing configuration from the middle car-
diac vein has a similar appearance to an apically paced 
right ventricular lead on the endocardium. In patients 
after tricuspid valve surgery, this placement may be 
desirable, with adequate sensing typically seen but often 
with elevated capture threshold. Pericardial effusion or 
tamponade physiology may occur in the acute setting 
associated with vein perforation from the lead screw 
helix. As the lead matures over time if acute complica-
tions are not noted, worsening lead parameters are likely 
to be seen, thereby requiring revision.
Placement of a transvenous lead in the left ventricular 
cavity most commonly occurs when the lead passes 
­inadvertently through a septal defect in the atrium or 
ventricle. The passage of a ventricular lead through an 
atrial septal defect can be recognized by the inability to 
lower the “takeoff” of the lead as it passes leftward 
because the takeoff will be limited by the inferior border 
of the atrial septal defect. In the left anterior oblique 
(LAO) view, the lead tip will be seen passing into the 
­septum from the left. In the right anterior oblique (RAO) 
view, it should be possible to determine whether the lead 
crosses to the left side through the coronary sinus (infe-
rior and posterior to tricuspid annulus fat stripe), atrial 
septal defect (closer to the vertebral column), or a 
­ventricular septal defect (distal to tricuspid fat stripe and 
closer to sternum) (Figure 16.5).
Leads placed endocardially in the left ventricle require 
revision mainly because of the risk of thromboembo-
lism, which also occurs with right‐sided lead placement 
but is usually inconsequential. Anticoagulation should 
be initiated if the lead is to be left in the left ventricle, 
or  there is a delay in therapy to revise the lead. Lead 
reposition or extraction should be considered when the 
left ventricular lead placement is detected.
­Lead Block Connection Problems
If the lead pin is not adequately past the set screw or 
loosely connected, noise can be seen on monitoring but, 
more importantly, there can be failure of output, which 
may be intermittent or persistent. The noise is reproduc-
ible with manual manipulation of the device and lead. 
Other considerations for connection problems include 
air trapped in the header prior to lead insertion into the 
header, resulting in oversensing. Other causes include 
adaptors, such as with older leads to fit IS‐1 headers, 
additional subcutaneous coils, or yokes for defibrillation.
Reconnection of the lead with the tip past the set screw 
is required. Visual inspection may show the lead pin not 
adequately passing through the connector block. With 
inadequately secured leads, gentle pulling of the lead at 
the header may completely disconnect the lead from the 
connector block without use of the wrench. Simple steps 
to ensure a connection without noise include “burping” 
of lead housing by placing the wrench in the connector 
block prior to connecting the lead, and wiping the lead 

16  How to Evaluate Postoperative Device Complications
140
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 16.5  (a) A right anterior oblique (RAO) view is shown with the right atrial (RA), right ventricular (RV), and coronary sinus (CS) leads 
shown. Leads placed through an atrial septal defect (ASD, white circle) would be expected to have an inferior border or curve not lower 
than the ASD. Leads placed through a ventricular septal defect (VSD, double‐dashed oval) would curve through this area. The profile of 
the tricuspid and mitral valves are seen and correspond to the visible fat‐pad surrounding an annulus. (b) A left anterior oblique (LAO) 
view is shown of the same patients. (c) An RV lead is seen with a takeoff that is higher than the slack in the RA lead. The lead was 
inadvertently placed in the CS os, more specifically the middle cardiac vein. The lead has an unnatural curvature upward for an RV apical 
placement. (d) In the lateral film, the RV lead can be seen approaching the “septum” from the left side confirming the middle cardiac 
vein location.

­Rising  Threshol d and Ex it Bloc ﻿
141
tip and ring dry prior to connection. There are rare cases 
where the amount of lead insulation makes the lead 
diameter great enough to hinder advancement of the 
lead into the connector block. In these cases, placement 
of silicone oil on the lead body proximal to the lead elec-
trode connectors should be considered. Use of forceps to 
advance the lead is discouraged, but non‐teethed forceps 
(e.g., Debakey) are an option.
­Lead or Insulation Damage
The median time to lead failure is 7 years, with the most 
common issue being insulation failure. More commonly, 
damage occurs with use of scalpels, scissors, or electro-
cautery such as during a generator change. Crush under 
the subclavian space (between the clavicle and first rib) is 
more likely to result in conductor problems rather than 
insulation failure.
While sensing abnormalities are more common, fail-
ure of the insulation can also result in abnormal pacing 
and, as a result, inappropriate shocks or no shock ther-
apy may occur. Insulation damage is often unrecognized, 
but when significant enough can result in low impedance 
(less than 200 Ω). Chest X‐rays typically do not reveal 
insulation issues. However, in some cases, fluoroscopy 
may detect insulation failure if there is externalization of 
the electrical conductors (e.g., St. Jude Riata leads).
Insulation damage, when apparent through other 
parameters of lead function, requires lead revision in 
most cases. The main aspect of managing insulation 
damage is prevention. For patients who are device‐
dependent or with occluded veins, consideration should 
be given to use of pulsed plasma radiofrequency energy 
(e.g., PEAK PlasmaBlade) which has a reduced thermal 
injury depth compared to standard electrocautery. 
In addition, avoidance of more lateral venous access can 
prevent subclavian crush and fatigue fractures from sec-
ond or third rib stress from additional acute bends of the 
lead required to access the vein. For anchoring of leads to 
the pacemaker pocket, suture sleeves should be used to 
prevent damage to the lead or insulation, but overly tight 
suturing still can damage the insulation and conductor 
coils. Care should also be taken to avoid piercing the lead 
or insulation with the suturing needle.
­Lead Fracture
Lead fracture is a complication that typically occurs late 
post procedure, at least 6 months after lead implantation 
in 2.7–3.6% of patients [1]. Sites of fractures are at stress 
points of the lead, such as coming out of the header 
block, at the costoclavicular space, and at suture sleeves. 
Risk factors of lead fracture include younger age 
(<50  years old) and higher left ventricular ejection 
­fraction (>45%), likely from increased activity and 
­physical stress on the lead [1].
Without overt failure of sensing, impedance, or 
threshold of a device lead, impending lead fracture can 
­sometimes be seen on a device check as non‐physiologic 
noise, with a cycle length of less than 140 ms. The mani-
festations can vary, with sensing abnormalities or failure 
to capture or failure to output. If the fracture is com-
plete, then the abnormalities are persistent and typically 
include failure to output. Occasionally, there may 
be intermittent capture with a complete fracture if the 
­fracture intermittently has enough connection between 
the disjointed ends. In incomplete fractures, some of the 
device output is transmitted to the tissue but with fail-
ure to capture. For defibrillators, the noise that is sensed 
may result in inappropriate tachyarrhythmia therapy. 
Device programming algorithms have been designed to 
detect this non‐physiologic noise, and with certain 
devices may be able to detect a fracture days before an 
inappropriate shock is delivered.
For management of lead fracture, the lead should be 
configured to sense and pace in a unipolar configuration, 
which may be able to “work around” the fracture. This 
situation is not ideal, and lead revision should be planned 
with timing based on the clinical scenario.
­Rising Threshold and Exit Block
After achieving satisfactory pacing thresholds at the time 
of lead implantation, rising threshold and exit block 
manifests with progressively increasing threshold with-
out any evident macrodislodgement or perforation. 
While microdislodgement is in the differential diagnosis 
initially, it typically does not have a continuing increase 
in the threshold. With steroid‐eluting leads nowadays, 
exit block is less common, but rising threshold and exit 
block are still frequent with coronary sinus leads and 
­epicardial leads. Although the etiology is unclear, one 
possible explanation is an increased reaction such as 
fibrosis at the lead–cardiac tissue interface.
Prevention may have a role in reducing the frequency 
of exit block; placement of the lead tip in a stable position 
that has limited movement (e.g., not acting as a hinge 
point) may help. Once exit block is present, the output of 
the lead will have to increase to maintain capture, and 
changing the pacing configuration or vector of the lead 
(e.g., unipolar, tip‐to‐coil) may facilitate this. Another 
option is a trial of steroids (dexamethasone 2  mg PO 
twice daily for 1 week), which may be able to lower the 
threshold sufficiently. However, the improvement may 
be  temporary and limited to the time around steroid 

16  How to Evaluate Postoperative Device Complications
142
administration, so lead revision may ultimately be 
required. For patients undergoing lead revision for exit 
block, particularly with coronary sinus leads and epicar-
dial leads without steroid elution, supplement steroid 
use for 1 month should be considered, as the steroid use 
will prevent chronic elevation in the lead threshold.
­Extracardiac Stimulation
When leads dislodge, the extracardiac stimulation 
­usually involves adjacent structures to the dislodge-
ment, most commonly seen involving leads placed in 
the ­coronary sinus. A microdislodgement or macrodis-
lodgement can have the same result.
The left phrenic nerve, which travels over the left lat-
eral cardiac border, is not infrequently near the target site 
for a coronary sinus lead. To prevent this complication, 
the coronary sinus lead should be tested at high output 
(10 V) to assess for diaphragmatic stimulation, which if 
present should result in lead repositioning. When there 
are no other satisfactory coronary sinus lead positions 
(such as because of inappropriately high threshold or 
concern for lead position stability), the testing output 
should be titrated down to assess if there is an adequate 
safety margin between stimulating the phrenic nerve and 
left ventricular capture threshold. Different pacing vector 
configurations may be able to avoid phrenic nerve 
­capture, which is facilitated by current coronary leads 
(particularly quadripolar leads) and pulse generators.
Less commonly, right phrenic nerve capture is seen 
with the right atrial lead. Repositioning of the lead is 
required if this phenomenon is observed. Although not 
extracardiac, the right atrial lead when placed in the 
appendage may be able to capture the right ventricular 
outflow tract. This finding also requires lead reposition-
ing, usually to a position more lateral in the appendage 
or elsewhere in the right atrium.
The right ventricular lead, when placed away more 
inferiorly, may capture the diaphragm resulting in com-
plaints of twitching or hiccups that may be positional. 
The right ventricular lead when placed anteriorly may 
result in intercostal muscle stimulation. Both of these 
situations frequently require lead revision if the pulse 
generator output cannot be reduced to capture cardiac 
myocardium without the extracardiac stimulation.
­Cardiac Perforation, Tamponade, 
and Pericarditis
Lead perforation is a potential serious complication, 
with risk factors including elderly patients, low body 
mass index, and systemic steroid use [1]. Certain areas 
of the heart that are more prone to dissection include 
the right atrial free wall, right ventricular free wall, and 
distal coronary sinus. Lead perforation likely has an 
underrepresented frequency in studies as they are often 
asymptomatic and unrecognized. Symptomatic perfora-
tions are more common with ICD leads at a rate between 
0.6–5% [1], while coronary sinus lead placement (1.3%) 
and pacemaker lead perforation (0.8–3%) are less com-
mon. In asymptomatic patients, diagnosis of perforation 
is detected by CT scan with rates of perforation being 
15% with atrial leads and 6% with ventricular leads 
­overall. While active fixation leads have lower rates of 
perforation in the right atrium (12% vs. 25% for passive 
fixation), passive fixation has lower rates of perforation 
with right ventricular pacemaker leads (5% vs. 7% for 
active fixation).
Diagnosis is frequently by CT scan for asymptomatic 
patients (Figure 16.6). Echocardiography may be helpful 
but usually the diagnosis is not apparent as a result of 
artifact on imaging from the lead. Impedance change is 
also typically not helpful. Of note, pericardial irritation 
may occur without any overt perforation. More typically, 
for leads placed in the right ventricle, perforation should 
be suspected when the paced rhythm is a right bundle 
pattern (suggesting pacing from the left ventricle), 
although apical right ventricular leads may also result in 
a right bundle pattern. Other signs of potential perfora-
tion include diaphragmatic stimulation, pericardial pain, 
and pericardial effusion with and without cardiac 
­tamponade. These signs are apparent during lead 
implantation, but perforation may also result in slow 
hemodynamic worsening over 48 hours and reportedly 
even over 1 month from the time of implantation.
Figure 16.6  Coronal cuts through a computed tomography scan 
show the right ventricular lead perforating the myocardium 
anteriorly and inferiorly.

­Thrombosi ﻿
143
For management of patients with mild symptoms of 
pericardial irritation with and without perforation, 
observation with anti‐inflammatory medications is rea-
sonable and should resolve the symptoms during the 
course of treatment. High dose aspirin, colchicine, or 
even prednisone may be used depending on the severity 
of symptoms. For small pericardial effusions without 
tamponade, serial echocardiograms should be obtained 
to monitor for enlarging effusion size or tamponade 
physiology.
If there is a large effusion or one resulting in hemody-
namic compromise, emergency treatment is required. 
For tamponade, pericardiocentesis should be performed 
using fluoroscopic or echocardiographic guidance, and a 
pigtail catheter should be left in the pericardial space. 
When the reaccumulation rate is less than 25 mL over 24 
hours, then the pigtail catheter can be removed. Serial 
echocardiography should be performed to confirm a lack 
of reaccumulation, at which point lead revision is not 
required.
If there continues to be recurrent effusion, a pericar-
dial window is not recommended, as it will not fix the 
underlying issue. A lead revision is required and this 
should be performed with either equipment ready for 
repeat pericardiocentesis if necessary or in an operating 
room with a cardiothoracic surgeon on standby.
­Thrombosis
Post device implantation, thrombus attached to the 
right atrial and right ventricular leads can be detected 
with echocardiography in 9% of cases after 6 months 
of ­follow‐up. Usually, patients are asymptomatic for 
these thrombi, with symptomatic thromboemboli 
seen in only 0.03–3.5% of cases [3]. When thrombus 
forms more proximally such as at the superior vena 
cava, there is concern for a higher likelihood of 
­pulmonary embolism and development of superior 
vena cava syndrome (0.03–0.15%). With thrombosis 
involving the more proximal course of a transvenous 
lead, such as in the innominate or subclavian vein, the 
risk of pulmonary embolism decreases. The risk of 
vein stenosis or thrombosis increases with the num-
bers of leads, or increased diameter of leads, such as 
ICD leads.
These more proximal stenoses or occlusion can result 
in upper extremity swelling and pain if significant col-
lateralization has not developed, with 1–3% of patients 
being symptomatic for this condition. In some cases, 
dilation of the superficial venous system is visible on 
physical examination (Figure 16.7).
Most thrombosis is asymptomatic, so no further 
­management is usually required. If there are symptoms 
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.7  (a) Thrombosis apparent on physical examination resulting from extensive collateralization seen in superficial veins. (b) Same 
patient as in panel (a) with fluoroscopy and contrast injection confirming occlusion (arrow) of the subclavian vein with collateralization 
(arrowheads).

16  How to Evaluate Postoperative Device Complications
144
attributable to the thrombosis, or the potential for 
thromboembolism is great enough, then anticoagulation 
is recommended. Conservative measures such as arm 
elevation also help with symptom alleviation, which typi-
cally improve over weeks. Often, the venous stenosis or 
thrombosis is discovered during a lead revision or device 
upgrade. In these cases, venoplasty should be considered 
if there is expertise in opening the vein. With complete 
occlusions, this usually requires the use of alternative 
venous access.
­Conclusions
With increasing indications for implantation of pace-
makers and ICDs with an aging population, the number 
of devices will continue to grow every year. While most 
procedures occur smoothly, the risk of an adverse event 
is small but present. For physicians who perform device 
implantations or manage these patients, knowledge of 
the potential postoperative complications and their cor-
responding management is essential.
­References
	1	 Armaganijan LV, Toff WD, Nielsen JC, Andersen HR, 
Connolly SJ, Ellenbogen KA, et al. Are elderly  
patients at increased risk of complications  
following pacemaker implantation?  
A meta‐analysis of randomized trials. PACE. 
2012;35:131–134.
	2	 Kirkfeldt RE, Johansen JB, Nohr EA, Jørgensen OD, 
Nielsen JC. Complications after cardiac implantable 
electronic device implantations: an analysis of a 
complete, nationwide cohort in Denmark. Euro Heart J 
2014;35:1186–1194.
	3	 Peterson PN, Daugherty SL, Wang Y, Vidaillet HJ, 
Heidenreich PA, Curtis JP, et al. Gender differences in 
procedure‐related adverse events in patients receiving 
implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator therapy. 
Circulation 2009;119:1078–1084.
	4	 Poole JE, Gleva MJ, Mela T, Chung MK, Gottipaty V, 
Borge R, et al. Complication rates associated with 
pacemaker or implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator 
generator replacements and upgrade procedures: 
results from the REPLACE registry. Circulation 
2010;122:1553–1561.
	5	 Baddour LM, Epstein AE, Erickson CC, Knight BP, 
Levison ME, Lockhart PB, et al. Update on 
cardiovascular implantable electronic device infections 
and their management: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation 
2010;121:458–477.

Part Two
145

147
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Pacemaker therapy in sinus node disease (SND) allevi-
ates symptoms rather than modifying prognosis. Causing 
symptoms by suboptimal programming therefore has a 
particularly important role.
Forms of SND are: permanent sinus bradycardia, inter-
mittent sinoatrial (SA) block/arrest, sinus bradycardia 
alternating with atrial fibrillation (AF) and tachyarrhyth-
mic ventricular response (brady‐tachy syndrome), and 
chronotropic sinus node incompetence. SND associated 
with an AV block represents binodal disease.
Pacemaker programming in SND aims to maintain 
intrinsic conduction if the atrioventricular (AV) node 
function is normal. Single‐chamber ventricular pacing in 
SND should be avoided because it can lead to pacemaker 
syndrome, cause AF, reduce exercise capacity and quality 
of life, and increase the risk of stroke [1].
Several decisions have to be made when programming 
a pacemaker in patients with SND: pacing mode, lower 
and upper pacing rate, sensor programming, AV delay 
programming, activation of specific algorithms, and 
memory functions.
­Pacing Mode Programming 
in Different Forms of SND
The ideal pacing mode in SND is atrial pacing (AAI with 
or without sensor) which entirely avoids ventricular 
­pacing and problems associated with blocked atrial 
­premature beats (APBs), single non‐conducted P waves, 
intermittent first degree AV block, retrograde conduc-
tion, and so on. Atrial pacing mode can be chosen 
in  patients with normal AV conduction and sinus 
­bradycardia, SA block/sinus arrest, or chronotropic 
incompetence (Table 17.1).
Patients with brady‐tachy syndrome usually require 
drugs that slow AV conduction during AF and can cause 
iatrogenic AV block. Patients with bundle branch block 
and primary AV block may require ventricular pacing. 
The optimal pacing mode in these patients is DDI(R) or 
DDD(R) with mode switching to avoid rapid tracking of 
atrial tachyarrhythmias.
The risk of developing AV block in patients with SND 
is not clear. Upgrade from an AAI(R) to a DDD(R) pace-
maker because of AV block occurred in the DANPACE 
trial in 9.3% of patients over the course of 5.4 years (1.7% 
per year) [2]. Pacemaker memory shows intermittent AV 
block in approximately 20% of patients with SND.
Implanting a dual‐chamber pacemaker and program-
ming it to AAI(R) avoids the need for reoperation if AV 
block develops. Unnecessary ventricular pacing can only 
occur in dual‐chamber modes. The Wenckebach block 
heart rate should be assessed at each follow‐up (even if 
the predictive value is unclear) and the device repro-
grammed to DDD/DDI if atrial pacing at 120 bpm is not 
conducted 1 : 1 to the ventricle.
In individual patients with rare SA block or sinus arrest, 
VVI pacing might be considered. The pacing mode 
should be VVI, not VVIR, to avoid frequent ventricular 
asynchronous pacing and pacemaker syndrome. A hys-
teresis should be activated allowing pacing only if the rate 
falls below 40 bpm. Unfortunately, the frequency of “rare” 
SA block or sinus arrest is not clearly defined (one pause 
per day, per week, or every 3 months?). Patients with 
seemingly rare SA block or sinus arrest may develop more 
frequent episodes or persistent sinus bradycardia that 
causes frequent asynchronous VVI pacing. As 80% of 
patients with SND have retrograde ventriculo‐atrial (VA) 
conduction, many (30%) develop pacemaker syndrome 
and would have better results with dual‐chamber pacing.
17
How to Program Pacemakers for Patients With Sinus Node Disease
Carsten W. Israel and Lucy Ekosso‐Ejangue
J.W. Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany
Department of Medicine – Cardiology, Evangelical Hospital Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany

17  How to Program Pacemakers for Patients With Sinus Node Disease
148
­Mode Switching
Many patients with SND have paroxysmal AF causing 
rapid ventricular rates if the AV node functions normal. 
In tracking modes (DDD, DDDR), AF is tracked at the 
upper tracking limit leading to rapid ventricular pacing. 
Patients with SND can therefore be programmed to a 
non‐tracking mode [AAI(R) or DDI(R)] as long as there 
is no AV block. In patients with AV block, the DDD(R) 
should be programmed together with automatic mode 
switching to DDI(R) mode to prevent rapid tracking of 
AF and to switch back to tracking as soon as AF has 
ceased. Switching should aim at DDI(R), not to VVI(R) 
or VDI(R), because pacing until device criteria for AF 
termination are fulfilled should be DDI(R), not VVI(R).
Mode switching algorithms detect AF differently 
(e.g., mean atrial rate, consecutive atrial beats, x out of y) 
with fast or slow reaction [3]. In general, fast reacting 
algorithms and settings that facilitate AF detection are to 
be preferred. Inappropriate mode switching because of 
farfield oversensing of ventricular signals in the atrium 
can be avoided by programming long postventricular 
atrial blanking (PVAB) periods (e.g., 150 ms), or accord-
ing to farfield oversensing tests.
The atrial tachyarrhythmia detection rate should be 
programmed to 170–180 bpm because blanking periods 
(AV delay, PVAB) and intermittent undersensing can 
cause sensed AF rates <200 bpm.
Atrial flutter at 220–250 bpm may pose a problem for 
mode switching if every second flutter potential occurs 
after a QRS in the PVAB (2 : 1 lock‐in, blanked flutter). 
Some mode switching algorithms allow activation of a 
separate Atrial Flutter Reaction® (Boston‐Scientific) or 
Blanked Flutter Search® (Medtronic Inc.). These algo-
rithms should be activated (Table 17.2).
­Lower Rate Programming
Programming the lower rate limit depends on the type of 
SND, patient symptoms, and atrial lead position 
(Table  17.3). Competition between intrinsic sinus 
rhythm and atrial pacing should be avoided because 
alternating excitation from different atrial sites can be 
proarrhythmic. The lower rate limit should be pro-
grammed either slower than the intrinsic sinus rate or 
faster if sinus bradycardia is symptomatic.
Symptoms such as exercise intolerance, fatigue, and 
so on, typically result from permanent sinus bradycar-
dia and chronotropic incompetence [1]. To relieve 
these symptoms, a lower rate of 60 bpm may be 
required. In  contrast, syncope results from asystolic 
pause. In patients with normal resting sinus rate but 
intermittent sinus arrest, it may be preferable to main-
tain ­intrinsic sinus rhythm and program a lower rate 
at 50 bpm or a hysteresis (pacing at 60 bpm, hysteresis 
50 bpm).
Table 17.1  Programming pacing mode in patients with different 
forms of SND.
Permanent sinus bradycardia
1st choice: DDDR, DDIR, AAIR
2nd choice: DDD, DDI, AAI
  Contraindicated: VDD, VVI, VVIR
Intermittent SA block/sinusarrest (without permanent sinus 
bradycardia or chronotropic sinus node incompetence)
1st choice: DDD, DDI, AAI
2nd choice: DDDR, DDIR, AAIR, (in individual cases VVI with 
hysteresis 40 bpm)
  Contraindicated: VDD, VVIR
Brady‐tachy syndrome (without chronotropic 
incompetence)
1st choice: DDD with mode switching, DDI
2nd choice: DDDR with mode switching, DDIR, AAIR
  Contraindicated: VDD, VVI, VVIR, DDD without mode 
switching
Chronotropic sinus node incompetence
1st choice: DDDR, DDIR, AAIR
2nd choice: DDD, DDI, AAI
  Contraindicated: VDD, VVI, VVIR
SND with PQ >300 ms, AV block 2nd/3rd degree, BBB 
(without chronotropic incompetencen)
1st choice: DDD
2nd choice: DDDR, DDI, DDIR
  Contraindicated: AAI, AAIR, VDD, VVI, VVIR
Table 17.2  Programming of parameters pertinent to mode 
switching.
Mode switching: activation in all patients programmed to 
DDD(R) mode
Activation of algorithms to discover blanked atrial flutter 
(without delay)
Atrial tachyarrhythmia detection rate: 170–180 bpm
Non‐tracking mode during mode switching: DDI(R), not 
VVI(R)/VDI(R)
Postventricular atrial blanking (PVAB) period: long (e.g., 150 
ms) to prevent oversensing of ventricular farfield signals in the 
atrium
High atrial sensitivity (0.2–0.3 mV) to avoid intermittent AF 
undersensing with switching back and forth (mode switching 
oscillations)
AV block during AF: lower rate different from sinus rhythm 
(e.g., 70 bpm during AF and 60 bpm during sinus rhythm)
Activation of stored bipolar atrial electrograms for mode 
switching or atrial tachyarrhythmia detection

­Uppe r Sensor  Rat e and Sens or Programmin ﻿
149
In some patients with SND of the brady‐tachy type, AF 
may be associated with bradycardia or rate decrease 
(vagally induced AF). In these patients, a lower rate limit 
of ≥70 bpm may prevent AF recurrences.
Programming the lower rate should consider if atrial 
pacing prolongs PQ and increases the percentage of 
unnecessary right ventricular pacing. The lower pacing 
limit should be programmed rather low (50–60 bpm) if 
the patient tolerates this well and if atrial pacing causes 
PQ prolongation >270 ms or right ventricular pacing. 
If atrial pacing does not prolong PQ, side effects of atrial 
pacing (AV desynchronization, forced unnecessary right 
ventricular pacing leading to ventricular desynchroniza-
tion) are unlikely and a lower rate limit of 60–70 bpm can 
be programmed more liberally.
­Upper Sensor Rate and Sensor 
Programming
Data from randomized clinical trials did not show a ben-
efit of rate‐adaptive pacing. Thus, rate‐adaptive pacing 
should be restricted to patients with severe chronotropic 
incompetence.
Patients with SND should receive an exercise test or, if 
treadmill and bicycle exercise cannot be performed, a 
24 h ECG Holter or telemetrc monitoring during normal 
daily activity. Patients with a heart rate <100 bpm when 
stopping exercise due to dyspnea or exertion, at the 
anaerobic threshold, or as maximum value during 24 h 
despite normal physical exercise most likely have severe 
chronotropic sinus node incompetence that can be 
improved by pacing.
In most patients aged >65 years, the maximum sensor 
rate should be limited to 110 bpm for three reasons:
1)	 Most patients perceive “overpacing” (i.e., pacing at a 
heart rate faster than necessary) as more uncomfort-
able than “underpacing” (i.e., pacing at a rate slower 
than optimal for metabolic demands);
2)	 Pacing at a rate >110–120 bpm may cause angina 
­pectoris in patients with concomitant coronary artery 
disease;
3)	 Pacing at a rate >110–120 bpm can deteriorate hemo-
dynamics in heart failure.
Programming of parameters pertinent to sensor func-
tion has to be individualized in the absence of study data 
(Table 17.4). The activity threshold triggering the sensor 
to increase the pacing rate should be programmed indi-
vidually. The need for a rapid activity detection and rate 
increase is considered to be higher in less physically 
active patients. Most physical activities in daily life are 
short, so the sensor should react fast. The rate decay to 
the lower rate limit should be programmed slow to avoid 
rapid rate changes and to support the heart rate after 
anaerobic exercise.
Some devices offer a physical activity cross‐check pro-
gram. If this option is present, they increase the heart 
rate only moderately during “activity of daily living” 
Table 17.3  Arguments for different settings of lower rate 
programming.
Situation
Lower rate limit 
programming
Fatigue, dizziness at rest, resting 
heart rate <55 bpm
60 bpm
Syncope, usually no symptoms at 
rest, resting heart rate >55 bpm
50 bpm (or 60 bpm with 
sinus hysteresis)
Exercise intolerance, resting rate 
<55 bpm, sinus rate at maximum 
exercise <100 bpm
60 bpm, rate response on
Paroxysmal AF, sinus rate <55 bpm
60–70 bpm
Permanent sinus bradycardia  
<50 bpm
60 bpm, rate response on
Intermittent SA block/sinus arrest
50 bpm (or hysteresis)
Brady‐tachy type with sinus 
bradycardia <55 bpm
60–70 bpm
Chronotropic incompetence,  
resting heart rate >55 bpm
50 bpm, rate response on
Chronotropic incompetence,  
resting heart rate <55 bpm
60 bpm, rate response on
Atrial pacing causing PQ 
prolongation to >250 ms
50 bpm
Atrial pacing not causing PQ 
prolongation
60 bpm
(Symptomatic) AV junctional 
rhythm at 50–60 bpm
Overdrive (70 bpm, atrial 
overdrive algorithms)
Table 17.4  Programming of parameters pertinent to  
rate‐adaptive pacing.
Activation of rate‐adaptive pacing: heart rate at anaerobic 
threshold ≤90–100 bpm or during maximal exercise  
(exercise test, 24 h Holter) ≤100 bpm
Maximal sensor rate: 110 bpm in less active patients, patients 
with coronary artery disease, and patients with heart failure
Sensor activation threshold: depending on sensor and 
algorithm; usually low, low‐to‐moderate, moderate (high in 
some sensors and e.g., thin patients)
Speed of sensor activation: fast
Sensor rate increase: fast in physically less fit patients, slow in 
physically fit patients
Sensor rate decay: slow
Activity of daily living: 85 (–95) bpm, cross‐check short
Blended sensors: individually after 2 min defined physical 
activity test

17  How to Program Pacemakers for Patients With Sinus Node Disease
150
(ADL; e.g., to 85–95 bpm). Upon the threshold of activity 
being reached the device allows a further rate increase to 
the maximum sensor rate only if activity is confirmed. 
These algorithms should be activated to avoid inappro-
priately fast pacing rates. However, a slow cross‐check 
can reduce the benefit of rate‐adaptive pacing because 
the patient may be exhausted by the time the algorithm 
allows a further rate increase above the ADL rate.
Some dual‐sensor devices offer sensor blending (e.g., 
Boston‐Scientific). Rate‐adaptive pacing can be opti-
mized in these devices by an exercise test in which the 
patient performs a defined 2 minute activity protocol 
(e.g., walking slowly through a corridor for 30 s, climbing 
a stair for 30 s, walking down a stair for 30 s, walking fast 
through a corridor back to the device check‐up room for 
30 s). The heart rate during this 2 minute period can be 
stored, interrogated, and virtually modified by different 
sensor settings until a the sensor response is optimal.
­Upper Tracking Rate
In SND patients with normal AV conduction, the upper 
tracking limit is meaningless. If a tracking mode [DDD, 
DDD(R)] is programmed, however, tracking should be 
limited to 110 bpm in most patients:
1)	 Paroxysmal AF can be tracked at the upper tracking 
limit before device criteria for arrhythmia detection 
are met and mode switching occurs. If mode switch-
ing fails (algorithm deactivated, significant AF under-
sensing), ongoing rapid tracking may occur.
2)	 Atrial flutter may not be detected due to 2 : 1 lock‐in 
of every alternate flutter potential. Typical atrial 
­flutter with an atrial rate of 240–250 bpm can only be 
tracked 2 : 1 if the upper tracking rate is ≥120 bpm. 
With an upper tracking rate of 110 bpm, Wenckebach 
block occurs, atrial flutter is no longer associated 2 : 1 
with blanking times, and can be detected.
3)	 In patients with coronary artery disease and heart 
failure, tracking atrial rates >110 bpm may cause 
angina pectoris, ischemia, and deterioration of heart 
failure.
­AV Delay: Sensed and Paced
Programming the AV delay after an intrinsic P wave 
(sensed AV delay) or atrial pacing (paced AV delay) 
depends on intrinsic AV conduction and atrial lead 
­position, the latter determining paced AV conduction. 
Unnecessary right ventricular pacing should be 
avoided in patients with SND and narrow QRS. 
However, long first‐degree AV block shortens diastolic 
filling time and can cause mitral regurgitation and 
heart failure. Therefore, the decision whether to facili-
tate intrinsic AV conduction or normalize AV timing 
can be difficult. Intrinsic conduction with PQ >270 ms 
seems to be worse than right ventricular pacing at an 
optimized AV delay in most patients [4].
The sensed (spontaneous P wave, spontaneous QRS 
complex) and atrial paced (slightly above the sinus rate) 
intrinsic AV conduction should be checked. If both are 
below 250 (–300) ms, sensed and paced AV delays can 
be  programmed to 300 ms (Table  17.5). This avoids 
unnecessary right ventricular pacing (with full capture, 
fusion, or pseudo‐fusion) even if there is intermittent 
prolongation of the PQ time.
If only sensed AV conduction exceeds 250–300 ms but 
paced AV conduction does not (e.g., in atrial septal ­pacing; 
Figure 17.1), the atrial pacing rate can be ­programmed to 
provide predominantly atrial pacing (70  bpm, rate 
response, atrial overdrive). Otherwise, ­ventricular pacing 
can usually not be avoided without hemodynamic 
­compromise and sensed and paced AV delays should be 
­programmed to shorter, optimized values.
Table 17.5  Different steps in AV delay programming.
1)  Measurement of spontaneous AV conduction after atrial 
sensing (device marker for atrial sensing to device marker 
for ventricular sensing)
2)  Measurement of spontaneous AV conduction after atrial 
pacing (device marker for atrial pace to device marker for 
ventricular sensing)
3)  Both <250 (–300) ms: program AV delay (sensed and paced) 
to 300 ms
4)  AV conduction after atrial sensing <250 (–300) ms but after 
atrial pacing >250 (–300) ms: consider reprogramming to a 
low lower rate limit (e.g., 50 bpm), or program sensed and 
paced AV delay to shorter, optimized values 
(echocardiography, ECG)
5)  AV conduction after atrial pacing <250 (–300) ms but after 
atrial sensing >250 (‐300) ms (found in atrial septal pacing): 
consider reprogramming to a higher lower rate limit  
(e.g., 70 bpm), rate‐adaptive mode, or activate atrial 
overdrive algorithms. Consider reprogramming to DDIR  
(no sensed AV delay)
6)  AV conduction after atrial sensing and pacing >250 (–300) ms: 
program sensed and paced AV delay to shorter, optimized 
values (echocardiography, ECG)
7)  Varying AV conduction with PQ >250 ms alternating with 
PQ <250 ms: activate AV hysteresis function (e.g., 100 ms) 
together with shorter settings (e.g., paced AV delay 200 ms, 
sensed AV delay 150 ms)
8)  If long values for sensed and paced AV delay are 
programmed: check memory functions: (i) ventricular 
pacing <1%, (ii) endless loop tachycardia (inaccurately 
termed “PMT” in counters), (iii) occurrence of repetitive 
non‐re‐entrant VA synchrony (usually inappropriately 
stored as atrial high rate episode)

­AV  Delay:  Sense d and Pace ﻿
151
If only paced AV conduction exceeds 250–300 ms 
(atrial lead positioned at the lateral atrial wall or right 
atrial appendage; Figure 17.2), the paced AV delay should 
be programmed to a value <270 ms, lower rate to 50 bpm, 
and the pacing mode to DDI(R).
If both atrial‐sensed and paced AV conduction exceed 
250–300 ms, the AV delay should be programmed to 
shorter values hemodynamically optimized for atrial 
sensing and atrial pacing. An easy method for AV delay 
optimization is to look at the interval between the end of 
Figure 17.1  AV conduction during pacing from the atrium septum shorter than during atrial sensing. (a) During intrinsic sinus rhythm, PQ 
time is 127 ms, the double‐peaked P wave indicates atrial conduction delay. Paper speed 100 mm/s. (b) During atrial pacing, PQ time 
decreases to 101 ms, the P wave is no longer double‐peaked but narrower. Paper speed 100 mm/s.

17  How to Program Pacemakers for Patients With Sinus Node Disease
152
the P wave and the tip of the R wave. The ideal interval 
is  100 ms [5]. If this interval is, for example, 220 ms 
in  a  sequentially paced AV interval of 300 ms, it is 
220–100 = 120 ms too long. The paced AV delay should 
be shortened to 300–120 = 180 ms (Figure 17.3) [5].
The paced AV delay starts with the atrial spike which 
occurs before the beginning of the P wave, while the 
sensed AV delay starts at the time when the atrial 
lead detects activity which (depending on the implanta-
tion site) can be late within the P wave. Therefore, 
Figure 17.2  AV conduction during atrial pacing from the right atrial appendage longer than during atrial sensing. (a) During intrinsic 
sinus rhythm, PQ time is 130 ms, the P wave is double‐peaked. Paper speed 100 mm/s. (b) During atrial pacing, PQ time increases to 
171 ms, the P wave is now broad and flat. Paper speed 100 mm/s.

­Rat e Adapti ve AV  Dela ﻿
153
­hemodynamically optimal timing of ventricular pacing 
requires longer paced than sensed AV delays. Particularly 
implanting the atrial lead at the lateral free wall or in the 
right atrial appendage can cause flat, long P waves with 
significant prolongation of the intrinsic PQ time. Pacing 
from the atrial septum (high near Bachmann’s bundle or 
low near the fossa ovalis or coronary sinus ostium) in 
contrast creates P waves and intrinsic AV conduction 
times shorter during atrial pacing than sensing. In these 
cases, the paced AV delay can be programmed to the 
same value as the sensed AV delay (the paced AV delay 
cannot be programmed shorter than the sensed AV delay 
in most devices). Septal placement of the atrial lead is 
therefore useful in patients with SND to prevent unnec-
essary right ventricular pacing and a paced AV block first 
degree at the same time.
Programming long AV delays (≥250 ms) is associated 
with several problems. First, the AV delay can be com-
pletely blanked. This deteriorates AF detection and can 
synchronize every second atrial flutter wave to the R 
wave causing 2 : 1 lock‐in. Secondly, if AV conduction 
fails (vagally blocked sinus beats, blocked atrial 
­premature beats), ventricular pacing can occur at long, 
non‐physiologic AV intervals triggering endless loop 
tachycardia (ELT) with retrograde conduction through 
the AV node. Thirdly, retrograde ventriculo‐atrial (VA) 
conduction of a premature ventricular beat can be 
­followed by atrial pacing that is ineffective because it 
occurs in the myocardial atrial refractory period after a 
retrograde P wave. If this ineffective atrial paced beat is 
followed by ventricular pacing after a long AV delay, 
­retrograde VA conduction can occur again and cause 
repetitive non‐reentrant VA synchrony (RNRVAS).
Ventricular pacing at long AV delay can cause 
symptoms (e.g., palpitations, dyspnea, and thoracic 
discomfort) and deteriorate hemodynamic function. 
Therefore, programming more physiologic AV delays 
(e.g., paced AV delay 200 ms, sensed AV delay 150 ms) 
together with an automatic algorithm to search for 
intrinsic AV conduction by intermittently prolonging 
the AV delay (e.g., by 100 ms for one cycle) or with 
algorithms that provide AAI(R) pacing and switch to 
DDD(R) if significant AV block occurs are preferable 
in many SND patients.
If long AV delays are programmed, the device memory 
should be checked at each follow‐up to verify that this 
setting allows AAI(R) pacing without ventricular stimu-
lation. Ventricular pacing after atrial sensing (markers 
“AS‐VP”) and atrial pacing (markers “AP‐VP”) should 
not exceed 1%. Otherwise, the atrial paced or sensed AV 
delay can be increased if programmed to <250 ms or 
decreased to more physiologic values with an AV hyster-
esis or automatic AAI(R) ↔ DDD(R) switch. The occur-
rence of ELT and RNRVAS should be checked by looking 
through specific device memory functions including 
electrograms stored in response to detection of atrial 
high rates (Table 17.5).
­Rate Adaptive AV Delay
Algorithms such as “dynamic” or “rate‐adaptive” AV 
delay shorten the AV delay, can cause unnecessary right 
ventricular pacing in SND and should therefore be 
avoided. They are nominally “on” in some devices and 
have to be switched off.
In patients with binodal disease, rate‐adaptive short-
ening of the AV delay may be activated, shortening of 
the AV time between lower and upper rate limit should 
be limited to 30–50 ms. Rate adaptive delays are used in 
160ms
–60 ms
Figure 17.3  Optimizing the AV delay via the surface ECG. In this example, the paced P wave is very narrow, after the P wave there is a 
rather long PQ segment followed by ventricular pacing at a paced AV delay programmed to 200 ms. The interval between the end of the P 
wave and the peak of the R wave is 160 ms (left) but should be 100 ms (60 ms shorter). The paced AV delay should therefore be reduced 
by 60 ms to 140 ms (right).

17  How to Program Pacemakers for Patients With Sinus Node Disease
154
AV block patients to facilitate 1 : 1 conduction of high 
atrial rates. However, in SND, high atrial rates typically 
result from atrial tachyarrhythmias, which should not be 
tracked by the pacemaker.
­AV Hysteresis Algorithms
Most patients with SND should be programmed to allow 
intrinsic AV conduction up to 250–300 ms while at the 
same time shorter, more physiological AV delays should 
be applied when AV conduction is impaired (spontane-
ous or drug‐induced). Therefore, the use of AV hystere-
sis functions is recommended (Table  17.6). These 
prolong the AV delay as long as intrinsic AV conduction 
is detected but automatically shorten it if intrinsic con-
duction is lost. After programmable intervals (e.g., every 
32 cycles, every minute), the algorithm automatically 
prolongs the AV delay again in search for recovery of 
intrinsic AV conduction. Empirically, patients with nor-
mal AV conduction and only intermittent PQ prolonga-
tion or AV block can be programmed to a sensed AV 
delay of 150 ms, a paced AV delay of 200 ms, and an 
extension of 100 ms during an automatic search for 
intrinsic AV conduction (i.e., 300 ms AV delay after atrial 
pacing, 250 ms AV delay after atrial sensing).
Some algorithms allow progressive AV delay prolonga-
tion as long as no intrinsic conduction is observed or 
search for intrinsic conduction prolonging the AV delay 
for more than one cycle. This is useful if the right 
­ventricular lead detects ventricular sensing late (descend-
ing limb of the QRS complex) or if AV conduction recov-
ers slowly after more than one cycle.
­Automatic AAI(R)↔ DDD(R) 
Switching Algorithms
Programming the pacemaker to AAI(R) represents the 
safest way to avoid ventricular pacing, ELT, and so on. 
However, results of AAI(R) pacing in SND are disap-
pointing, as demonstrated in a large, randomized trial 
[2]. AAI(R) pacing with ventricular monitoring and 
switching to DDD(R) if criteria for AV block are fulfilled 
seems to be the best way to prevent unnecessary ven-
tricular pacing and pacing at long AV delays at the same 
time. These algorithms, depicted as AAI(R)↔DDD(R), 
do not track single blocked P waves.
The Managed Ventricular Pacing (MVP®) algorithm by 
Medtronic switches from AAI(R) to DDD(R) if two out 
of four atrial events (sensed or paced) are not spontane-
ously conducted. This algorithm should not be used in 
patients with long first‐degree AV block because it does 
not switch to DDD as long as there is a QRS after each P, 
even if the PQ period exceeds 400 ms.
Reply® DR devices by Sorin (Milan, Italy) offer a SafeR® 
mode to provide AAI(R)↔DDD(R) pacing. It can be 
­activated together with normal sensed and paced AV 
delays (e.g., 155 and 210 ms; Table  17.7). The devices 
switches back to DDD(R) if the intrinsic AV interval 
exceeds a programmed value (nominally 300 ms at rest 
and 200 ms during exercise) for six consecutive cycles 
(primary AV block criterion), if 3 out of 12 atrial events 
are not conducted spontaneously (secondary AV block 
criterion), if two consecutive atrial events (paced or 
sensed) are not conducted (tertiary AV block criterion) 
and if no ventricular beat occurs within a programmed 
interval (nominally 3 s). The device switches back to 
AAI(R) mode after sensing 12 consecutive spontaneous 
ventricular events, every 100 paced ventricular cycles, or 
at least once daily.
Table 17.6  Examples for programming AV delays and AV 
hysteresis functions in some contemporary pacemakers.
Biotronik Effecta DR
Paced AV delay: 200 ms
Sensed AV delay: 150 ms
Dynamic AV delay: off
AV delay hysteresis: medium
AV repetitive hysteresis: 3 cycles
Boston‐Scientific Insignia 
DR 1290/1291
AV delay (paced): 200 ms
Sensed AV offset: –50 ms
Dynamic AV delay: off
AV delay increase: 50%
AV search interval: 32 beats
Medtronic Sensia SEDR01
Paced AV delay: 200 ms
Sensed AV delay: 150 ms
Rate adaptive AV delay: off
Search AV +: on
Maximum increase to AV: 100 ms
St. Jude Medical  
Endurity DR
Paced AV delay: 200 ms
Sensed AV delay: 150 ms
Rate‐adaptive AV delay: off
Ventricular intrinsic preference 
(VIP): on, 100 ms
Number of cycles for conduction 
search: 3
Table 17.7  Examples for programming devices incorporating 
MVP® or SafeR® algorithms for AAI(R)⇔DDD(R) switching.
Medtronic Adapta 
ADDR01
Paced AV delay: 200 ms
Sensed AV delay: 150 ms
Rate adaptive AV delay: off
MVP: on
Sorin Reply DR
Pacing Mode: SafeR (AAI↔DDD) 
or SafeR‐R (AAIR↔DDDR)
Sensed AV delay: 155 ms
Sense/Pace AV delay offset: 65 ms
Exercise AV delay: (125–) 155 ms

­Atria l Preventi ve Pacin ﻿
155
­Atrial Sensitivity and AF Detection
Patients with SND have known AF, are at high risk of 
developing new AF, or develop undetected AF. Therefore, 
atrial sensing should be programmed sensitive to opti-
mize AF detection. Independently of the sensed P wave 
amplitude, bipolar atrial sensitivity set to 0.2–0.3 mV is 
favoured to reliably detect AF even if signals are inter-
mittently very small. To avoid farfield oversensing of 
ventricular signals in the atrium, a PVAB of at least 100–
150 ms should be programmed. Attempts to reduce the 
atrial sensitivity to 0.5–0.75 mV should be avoided 
because at these settings AF can no longer be reliably 
detected. Parts of the cardiac cycle are blanked in pace-
makers (PVAB, most of the AV delay) and cannot be 
used for AF detection. Therefore, the AF detection rate 
should be programmed to 170–180 bpm.
­PMT Intervention, PVC Reaction
Most patients with SND have normal retrograde VA 
conduction. This poses a risk for ELT and RNRVAS, par-
ticularly if long AV delays are programmed. Algorithms 
that react to premature ventricular complexes (PVC 
reaction) should be activated and set to “atrial pacing”: 
After a PVC, the postventricular atrial refractory period 
(PVARP) is prolonged, after which AV sequential pacing 
occurs to prevent ELT. Similarly, a “PMT intervention” 
should be activated that stops tracking of high sinus rates 
suspicious of ELT.
­Non‐competitive Atrial Pacing 
(NCAP®)
Some devices offer specific algorithms that prevent atrial 
pacing within a short time after atrial refractory events 
(e.g., NCAP® in devices by Medtronic Inc.). These should 
be activated to prevent RNRVAS, particularly if long AV 
delays are programmed.
­Atrial Preventive Pacing
Pacing can prevent AF in some patients with SND by 
preventing a rate decrease <60 bpm. In vagally induced 
paroxysmal AF, programming the lower rate limit to 
70 bpm together with rate‐adaptive pacing and a slow 
rate decay after exercise may reduce AF recurrences. 
Some devices offer atrial overdrive algorithms that 
adjust the atrial pacing rate just above the sinus rate to 
maintain continuous atrial pacing (e.g., Atrial Pacing 
Preference® in Medtronic devices, AF Suppression® in 
Table 17.8  Pacemaker memory functions that should be checked in patients with SND.
Parameter
Memory data
Checked events
Atrial rate
Counters, histograms
1)  High average rate?
2)  Atrial sensed rates >170 bpm (AF?)
3)  High atrial paced rates (sensor, preventive pacing algorithms?)
Ventricular rate
Counters, histograms
1)  High average rate?
2)  VP at upper tracking limit?
3)  VS above upper tracking limit (AF with intrinsic AV 
conduction?)?
Sensor‐indicated rate
Histograms
1)  Appropriate rate increase?
Atrial pacing (%)
Counter
1)  Progression of SND?
Ventricular pacing (%)
Counter
1)  <1%?
AV conduction
Counters, histograms
1)  AS‐VS%, AP‐VS%
2)  Success of AV hysteresis/AV management algorithm?
Atrial tachyarrhythmia
Counters, histograms, stored EGMs
1)  Cumulative time in AF (AF burden)?
2)  No. of AF episodes
3)  Duration of (longest) AF episode
4)  Appropriate detection?
PMT
Counters, episodes, stored EGMs
1)  Sinus tachycardia or true ELT?
AF, atrial fibrillation; AP, atrial pacing; AS, atrial sensing; AV, atrioventricular; EGM, electrogram; ELT, endless loop tachycardia; VP, ventricular 
pacing; VS, ventricular sensing.

17  How to Program Pacemakers for Patients With Sinus Node Disease
156
St. Jude Medical devices) or increase the pacing rate 
after arrhythmias (Post Mode Switching Overdrive 
Pacing, PMOP®, Medtronic, Acceleration on PAC®, 
Sorin). The maximum rate during atrial preventive 
pacing should be limited to 100–110 bpm. Atrial pac-
ing offers more antiarrhythmic properties if it starts 
from the septum (better right and left atrial synchro-
nization, no prolongation of AV conduction, no forced 
right ventricular pacing). Pacing from the right atrial 
appendage or lateral free wall may be proarrhythmic 
by increasing the dispersion of atrial refractoriness, 
prolonging AV conduction and inducing unnecessary 
right ventricular pacing.
Proarrhythmia can be detected by pacemaker memory 
functions. The percentage of ventricular pacing, average 
atrial rate, and AF burden should be assessed at each 
follow‐up.
­Memory Functions
Activation and analysis of pacemaker memory functions 
is essential in optimizing programming of dual‐chamber 
devices. The following parameters should be checked 
(Table  17.8): atrial and ventricular rates (particularly 
ventricular pacing at the maximum tracking rate), sen-
sor‐indicated rates, percentage of atrial and ventricular 
pacing, AV delay histogram, time in AF (AF burden), 
number of AF episodes, longest AF episode, atrial 
­electrograms stored upon AF detection.
Atrial rate should be checked as appropriate in rate his-
tograms. If rate‐adaptive pacing is not activated or under‐
responsive, atrial rates may be close to 60 bpm. Rate‐adaptive 
or preventive pacing may be over‐reactive, producing a 
high proportion of atrial pacing at high rates. Atrial rates 
>170 bpm indicate frequent atrial premature beats or AF.
Table 17.9  Reaction to issues detected by checking pacemaker memory functions.
Finding
Solution
Max. atrial rate <90 bpm, most pacing  
close to lower rate limit
Activate sensor or program more responsive
High atrial pacing rates
Reduce sensor reactivity, reduce max. sensor/preventive pacing rate, deactivate 
preventive pacing
>1% ventricular pacing after atrial sensing
1)  Prolong sensed AV delay (up to 270–300 ms)/activate AAI(R)↔ DDD(R) algorithm, or
2)  Set sensed AV delay to optimal values together with an AV rate hysteresis
>1% ventricular pacing after atrial pacing
1)  Prolong paced AV delay (up to 300 ms)/activate AAI(R)↔DDD(R) algorithm, or
2)  Set paced AV delay to optimal values together with an AV rate hysteresis
Increase in AF burden
1)  Consider antiarrhythmic drugs
2)  Increase atrial pacing rate or preventive pacing (particularly if from septum)
3)  Consider reduction in atrial pacing rate/deactivation of preventive pacing 
(particularly if from RAA/lateral lead position)
AF episode >48 h duration
1)  Consider oral anticoagulation
Inappropriate AF detection due to 
ventricular farfield oversensing in the atrium
1)  Prolong PVAB (e.g., to 150 ms, do not decrease atrial sensitivity!)
Inappropriate AF detection due to RNRVAS 1)  Change to AAI(R)↔DDD(R) mode if possible
2)  Activate NCAP® or similar algorithm (300 ms) if available
3)  Reduce sensor reactivity and max. sensor rate (e.g., to 90 bpm)
4)  Shorten paced AV delay if other options fail
Stored PMTs (optimal: confirmed by EGM 
analysis)
1)  Change to AAI(R)↔DDD(R) mode if available
2)  Prolong PVARP
3)  Activate PVC reaction and PMT intervention
4)  Shorten paced AV delay if other options fail
Atrial flutter not detected
1)  Activate specific atrial flutter detection algorithms
2)  Reduce upper tracking limit to ≤100 bpm
3)  Shorten PVAB and sensed AV delay if other options fail
AF (intermittently) not detected
1)  Increase atrial sensitivity (e.g., to 0.1–0.2 mV)
2)  Reduce atrial tachyarrhythmia detection rate (e.g., to 160 bpm)
3)  Shorten PVAB and sensed AV delay if other options fail

­Reference ﻿
157
AV delay programming should be checked and eventu-
ally optimized looking at AV histograms and percentages 
of ventricular pacing after atrial sensing (AS‐VP) and 
pacing (AP‐VP). Electrograms stored upon detection of 
atrial high rates should be checked for inappropriate 
detection of ventricular farfield oversensing or RNRVAS. 
If atrial high rate episodes of long duration (>48 hours) 
are appropriate, oral anticoagulation may be indicated. 
Electrograms stored upon detection of ELT should be 
checked for sinus tachycardia (Table 17.9).
­References
	1	 Brignole M, Auricchio A, Baron‐Esquivias G, Bordachar 
P, Boriani G, Breithardt OA, et al. 2013 ESC Guidelines 
on cardiac pacing and cardiac resynchronization 
therapy. Eur Heart J 2013;34:2281–2329.
	2	 Nielsen JC, Thomsen PE, Højberg S, Møller M, 
Vesterlund T, Dalsgaard D, et al. A comparison of 
single‐lead atrial pacing with dual‐chamber pacing in 
sick sinus syndrome. Eur Heart J 2011;32:686–696.
	3	 Israel CW. Analysis of mode switching algorithms in 
dual chamber pacemakers. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2002;25:380–393.
	4	 Iliev II, Yamachika S, Muta K, Hayano M, Ishimatsu T, 
Nakao K, et al. Preserving normal ventricular 
activation versus atrioventricular delay optimization 
during pacing: the role of intrinsic atrioventricular 
conduction and pacing rate. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2000;23:74–83.
	5	 Koglek W, Kranig W, Kowalski M, Stammwitz E, 
Brandl J, Oberbichler A, et al. A simple method for 
determining the AV interval in dual chamber 
stimulation. Herzschr Elektrophys 
2004;15(Suppl 1):23–32.

159
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
The artificial stimulation of the heart is based on its 
­ability to respond to an electrical impulse with a depo-
larization of the cardiac chamber where the pacemaker 
(PM) lead is placed. In PM recipients, the myocardium is 
activated in parallel by both the natural excitation‐­
conduction system and the implantable device. This 
­latter detects the presence of spontaneous rhythm and in 
condition of reduced spontaneous activation, below a 
programmed heart rate, stimulates the heart, delivering 
artificial impulses [1].
Over the years, cardiac implantable electric devices 
evolved considerably from simple life‐saving PMs to 
highly sophisticated pacing systems able to stimulate the 
atrial and ventricular chambers in a sequential manner, 
allowing physiologic stimulation. Several technologic 
algorithms have been progressed:
1)	 Rate‐responsive function to increase the heart rate 
during physical activity under the regulation of ­special 
sensors;
2)	 Rate‐smoothing function to gradually reduce the 
­pacing rate when there is an abrupt decrease in 
the  frequency of spontaneous rhythm;
3)	 Automatic atrioventricular (AV) delay function to 
physiologically modulate AV delay.
The knowledge of these complex properties is crucial to 
recognize PM functioning and avoid a mistaken diagnosis 
of malfunction. In the last few years, cardiac devices aimed 
to the resynchronization of the left ventricular mechanical 
activity in heart failure have also been developed. The 
electrocardiogram (ECG) is an essential tool to identify 
patients eligible for the procedure and verify the correct 
functioning of the system, according to the Guidelines [2].
­Normal ECG, in PM Patients: Basic 
Principles of Interpretation
The ECG is an important tool to investigate the func-
tioning of PM. The two main PM functions are sensing 
and pacing (Figure 18.1).
1)	 Sensing function is the ability of the PM to detect the 
spontaneous activity of a cardiac chamber. The level 
of sensing is broadly programmable to allow the 
exclusion of external noise signals, sources of danger-
ous malfunctions.
2)	 Pacing function is the ability of the PM to deliver 
­electrical pulses activating a cardiac chamber. On 
ECG, artificial stimulation (spike) has a needle‐like 
appearance and is usually recognizable from the 
spontaneous electrical activity for its very short 
­duration and high slope.
Unipolar and Bipolar Configuring Pacing
The spike’s morphology primarily depends on the stimu-
lation’s configuration (Figure  18.2). In the presence of 
unipolar configuration, the stimulus is provided between 
the electric pole at the apex of the lead and the metal 
generator can. On ECG recording, it results in a high 
deflection. Conversely, in the presence of bipolar con-
figuration, the stimulus is provided between the two 
electric poles both placed at the tip of the lead, resulting 
in a substantially smaller deflection on ECG. Sometimes, 
the amplitude of the bipolar spike on the ECG surface is 
so low as to require a change of configuration to unipolar 
for better visualization.
18
How to Interpret Pacemaker Electrocardiograms
Giuseppe Bagliani1, Stefania Sacchi2,3, and Luigi Padeletti 4
1 Department of Cardiology and Arrhythmology, Foligno General Hospital, Perugia, Italy
2 Institute of Internal Medicine and Cardiology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy
3 International Centre for Circulatory Health, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, UK
4 IRCCS, MultiMedica, Sesto San Giovanni, Milan, Italy

18  How to Interpret Pacemaker Electrocardiograms
160
Atrial and Ventricular Pacing
The lead for atrial pacing is commonly placed in the 
right appendage. In this case, the atrial depolarization 
following the atrial pacing is hardly visible on the 
­surface ECG. Alternative sites for the atrial pacing lead 
are possible (in particular, inter‐atrial septum) but they 
are less often used. The ventricular depolarization 
induced by ventricular pacing is usually evident on ECG 
and its morphology depends on the site of stimulation. 
Commonly, the right ventricular lead is placed in the 
apex of the right ventricle. In this case, the ventricu-
logram is characterized by a left intraventricular 
­conduction delay morphology with an axis directed 
from the bottom to the top and towards the left (marked 
left axis deviation; Figure 18.3).
Concepts of Fusion and Pseudo‐fusion
Fusion phenomenon results from the competition 
between the spontaneous and PM‐induced activation of 
the ventricles, giving rise to an intermediate QRS 
­morphology on the ECG surface (Figure  18.4). In the 
presence of a very delayed electric impulse, unable to 
depolarize the peri‐lead portion of myocardium and 
1200
1200
Sensed
V6
Paced
Figure 18.1  The functions of sensing and pacing of a single chamber pacemaker (VVI). A spontaneous ventricular event is sensed by the 
pacemaker that emits a stimulus after a programmed period of time (1.2 s in this case).
(a)
(b)
DDD unipolar 60 bpm
Sa
Sv
Sa
Sv
DDD Bipolar 70 bpm
Figure 18.2  Unipolar and bipolar stimulation in a double pacemaker (DDD). (a) Unipolar pacing configuration: both atrial and ventricular 
stimulation are well evident. (b) Bipolar pacing configuration: atrial and ventricular stimulati are extremely low compared to the unipolar 
configuration.

­Norma l EC G, in  PM Patients:  Basi c Principl es of Interpretatio ﻿
161
consequentially any portions of the cardiac chamber, a 
pseudo‐fusion phenomenon is observed. In this case, 
despite the ventricular pacing, QRS morphology is like 
spontaneous QRS on the ECG surface (Figure 18.5).
Fusion 
and 
pseudo‐fusion 
electrocardiographic 
­findings should be always recognized to prevent an 
­erroneous interpretation of abnormal PM function.
Hysteresis
In the presence of competition between spontaneous 
and paced rhythm, the first one can be favored, activat-
ing the hysteresis function. A pacing rate inferior to the 
programmed low pacing rate is set up (Figure  18.6). 
Hysteresis is the difference between the programmed 
A      V
I
II
III
aVR
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
A      V
A      V
A     V
A     V
A     V
A     V
A     V
Figure 18.3  Right ventricular apex stimulation: QRS morphology. A pacemaker DDD is present as evident by the regular succession of 
stimuli in atrium and ventricle. The QRS originates from the apex of the right ventricle and spreads to the ventricular myocardium with a 
left ventricular conduction delay: therefore the QRS morphology type is left bundle branch block. The axis in the frontal plane is markedly 
deviated to the left.
1200
1200
1080
1020
QRS paced
QRS spontaneous
QRS fused
A
B
D2
1 sec
Figure 18.4  Paced, fused, and spontaneous QRS. The basic rhythm is atrial fibrillation with a single‐chamber pacemaker (VVI) set to a 
frequency of 50 bpm (cycle of 1200 ms). The first two ventricular complexes are paced (P QRS) as evident by the presence of the spikes, a 
width of 180 ms and a monophasic and negative morphology in the inferior lead. The last two narrow QRS are spontaneous as evident by 
the lack of the spike. The third QRS has a morphology of fusion between the paced and spontaneous; its duration is only slightly increased 
(100 ms). The fusion is also evident at the level of the ventricular repolarization: the T wave is positive when the QRS is stimulated, 
negative when the QRS is spontaneous, and much less negative when the QRS is fused.

18  How to Interpret Pacemaker Electrocardiograms
162
low pacing rate and the effective heart rate leading to 
PM activation. It generally amounts to 10, 20, or 30 beats 
per minute (10 bpm in most of cases). This function can 
be applied to both single and dual chambers PMs.
Response to the Application of a Magnet
The simple analysis of the ECG changes induced by a magnet 
placed on the PM can allows immediate ­diagnosis of the 
PM mode of operation. Under the effect of magnet, the PM 
system loses sensing function and commutes to the asyn-
chronous pacing mode (A00, V00, D00) at the maximum 
amplitude of the stimulus. Analysis of the ECG allows the 
identification of single or dual chamber stimulation 
(Figure 18.7). The pacing heart rate induced by the applica-
tion of the magnet is termed magnetic ­frequency and is a 
marker of the battery charge level. A decreased magnetic 
frequency can be suggestive for an elective replacement. 
The asynchronous mode of pacing mediated by an external 
magnet can also be used to avoid an inappropriate stimula-
tion of the PM during surgery requiring electrical devices. 
The asynchronous stimulation induced by the magnet 
can generate dangerous ventricular arrhythmias; for this 
­reason its use requires appropriate precautions.
Pi
QRS
pseudofused
Sa
Sv
Sa
Sa
Sv
QRS
spontaneous
Pi
Pspont
QRS
pseudofused
Figure 18.5  Atrial and ventricular pseudo‐fusion. There are three cardiac cycles in the presence of dual‐chamber pacemaker (DDD). Atrial 
pacing: the pacemaker delivers atrial stimuli (Ap) in all three cardiac cycles, but only in the first and third atrial depolarizations are induced 
(Pi); in the second cardiac cycle a spontaneous atrial activity (Pspont) and a spike realizing an atrial pseudo‐fusion. Ventricular pacing: the 
pacemaker sends stimuli to the ventricles (Vp) only during the first and third cardiac cycle without any change of the QRS (ventricular 
pseudo‐fusion).
Sv
Sv
Sv
QRSp
QRSp
QRSp
QRSs
QRSs
QRSs
955
S2
S2
S2
S1
V5
V2
720
1055
860
860
Figure 18.6  Hysteresis function in a VVI pacemaker. Atrial fibrillation is the basic rhythm. The first three are spontaneous ventricular 
complexes (QRSs) while the last three are induced by the pacemaker (QRSp) at ventricular cycle of 860 ms. The pacemaker intervenes after 
an interval (1055 ms) that is higher than that of stimulation (860 ms) for the presence of the hysteresis function by means of which we try 
to prefer the spontaneous rhythm.

­Mod e of  PM Programmin ﻿
163
­Classifications of PM Functions by 
NBG Code (NASPE and BPEG 
Generic)
A simple code classification allows quick identification 
of both PM type and mode of operation. The code 
includes five positions [3]. The first three code positions 
(I, II, III) are related to the anti‐bradycardia functions, 
the fourth position (IV) concerns the programming 
mode, and the fifth code position (V) identifies multisite 
pacing parameters:
I)	 Paced chamber: atrium (A), ventricle (V), both 
atrium and ventricle (D), none (0).
II)	 Sensed chamber: atrium (A), ventricle (V), both 
atrium and ventricle (D), none (0).
III)	 Modality of response to a sensed event: after a sensed 
event PM can be inhibited (I) or, in case of a sensed 
atrial event, the ventricle can be paced with a trig-
gering mechanism (T); the letter D (dual) indicates 
that the device will respond to the sensed signal by 
either inhibiting the pacemaker response, tracking 
the sensed event, or inhibiting the output on the 
sensed channel and triggering an output to maintain 
AV synchrony.
IV)	 Programming mode: the fourth position identifies 
the characteristics of programmability. (0) indicates 
that PM has no programmable parameters; (P) indi-
cates that it is limited to three or fewer parameters; 
(M) means that it can be programmed in more than 
three parameters; (R) classifies it as capable of a 
rate‐responsive function, to vary the pacing rate 
depending on the physical activity of the patient.
V)	 The fifth position is used to indicate whether multi-
site pacing is present in none of the cardiac cham-
bers (0), in one or both of the atria (A), in one or 
both of the ventricles (V), or a combination of A and 
V as just described (D).
­Mode of PM Programming
Single Chamber Pacing: AAI(R), VVI(R)
In these modes of stimulation, only one cardiac chamber 
is paced, the right atrium or the right ventricle in the AAI 
and VVI mode, respectively. As a result of the detection 
of spontaneous activity, the PM is inhibited. The stimu-
lus is delivered after a predetermined interval from a 
previous either spontaneous or induced event. The AAI 
DDD 70/min’
Magnet DDD 96/min’
(a)
(b)
Sv
Sv
Sa
Sa
Sv
Sa
Figure 18.7  The magnetic frequency of a pacemaker. (a) There is an artificial atrial and ventricular stimulation at a frequency of 70/min’. 
(b) The application of a magnet above the pulse generator provides a stimulation at a frequency of 96 bpm which therefore corresponds 
to the magnetic frequency.

18  How to Interpret Pacemaker Electrocardiograms
164
mode is rarely used and the VVI mode is limited to cases 
with atrial fibrillation associated with low ventricular 
response.
Dual Chamber Pacemakers: DDD(R)
The DDD pacing mode is able to reproduce the physio-
logic events of normal heart. The DDD cardiac device 
detects spontaneous rhythm both in the atrium and in 
the ventricle. In the absence of spontaneous activity, 
when the heart rate falls below a predetermined fre-
quency, DDD‐PM sequentially paces atria and ventricles 
according to a programmed rate interval (LRI, lower rate 
interval). The AV delay, the interval between atrial and 
ventricular activation, is a programmable value. ECG in 
DDD(R)‐PM recipients shows four patterns (Figure 18.8):
1)	 When atrial activity and conduction to the ­ventricles 
are normal, both atrial and ventricular PM channels 
are inhibited;
2)	 If there is an insufficient sinus activity and an 
impaired AV conduction, both atria and ventricles 
are stimulated;
3)	 If the atrial rate is low with a preserved AV conduc-
tion, the right atrium is stimulated at the programmed 
rate while the ventricular rhythm is spontaneous (this 
electrocardiographic pattern is no different from that 
of an AAI‐PM);
4)	 When sinus atrial activation is preserved but the 
AV conduction is altered, after a spontaneous P wave, 
a ventricular spike appears.
­Particular Aspects of the Dual‐
Chamber Pacing (DDD) Identifiable 
on the Surface ECG
Rate Responsive and Automatic AV Interval
The rate responsive (RR) is a function through which the 
stimulation systems increase their frequency of stimula-
tion with physical activity. The PM is provided with a 
system of detection of physical activity (movement, 
­muscle tremors, oxygen saturation, pH, respiratory rate, 
QT interval duration) that is able to increase the 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 18.8  Possible ECG findings of a two‐chamber pacemaker (DDD). (a) In the presence of normal atrial activity and normal 
atrioventricular (AV) conduction, both the atrial and ventricular channel are inhibited and therefore any stimulus of the pacemaker is 
evident. (b) In the presence of insufficient sinus activity and delayed atrioventricular conduction, both the atria and the ventricles will be 
stimulated. The classic electrocardiogram consisting of two stimuli (atrial and ventricular, respectively) separated by the programmed AV 
interval will therefore be evident. (c) The atrial rate is compromised while the AV conduction is preserved: the pacemaker stimulates the 
atria but not the ventricles. The electrocardiographic waveform is similar to that of a AAI pacemaker. (d) The atrial rate is preserved but the 
AV is so compromised that the pacemaker triggers to the ventricles of the spontaneous atrial depolarization.

­Mechanism s of Contr ol of High  Ventricula r Paci ng Rate ﻿
165
­frequency of depolarization of the PM until a maximum 
programmed value. There is also the possibility to pro-
gram the slop of increasing heart rate. Most generators 
can also automatically shorten the AV interval as the 
­frequency of stimulation increases.
­Blanking Period and the Ventricular 
Safety Pacing (Committed)
The dual chamber pacing systems, albeit superior to 
standard single chamber pacing systems, present a 
­number of problems that must be avoided with the intro-
duction of specific functions.
One of the main problems with a dual chamber pace-
maker is the possibility that the ventricular channel can be 
inhibited by atrial depolarization. This is the phenomenon 
of crosstalk, a dangerous situation causing asystole in 
patients without spontaneous heart rhythm. The proba-
bility of the crosstalk is also dependent on the amplitude 
of atrial depolarization and is therefore more likely with 
unipolar atrial stimulation. To avoid crosstalk, a blanking 
period is present in the ventricular channel which starts 
with atrial depolarization and generally lasts 15–50 ms. 
During the blanking period, sensing of the ventricular 
channel is abolished (Figure  18.9). After the blanking 
period, to avoid further ventricular electrical activity being 
inappropriately inhibited, was introduced a further period 
during which the PM responds to any sensed event 
by ventricular safety pacing. This mode of pacing is ­usually 
defined “committed” and is characterized by a particularly 
short AV interval (usually 110 ms; Figure 18.10).
­Mechanisms of Control of High 
Ventricular Pacing Rates
AV trigger, typical of DDD pacing, is a mechanism by 
which the PM stimulates the ventricular chambers 
after a spontaneous atrial depolarization. In rapid atrial 
tachyarrhythmia, specific functions have been intro-
duced in the pacemaker to avoid high ventricular rates. 
The primary mechanism performing such protection is 
the maximum tracking rate (MTR), the achievement of 
which is followed by a Wenckebach AV sequence. The 
delivery of ventricular stimulus is progressively delayed 
until an atrial activity that is not followed by the delivery 
of a stimulus in the ventricle (Figure 18.11). This func-
tion is made possible by the introduction of the post ven-
tricular atrial refractory period (PVARP), which is a 
period of refractoriness of the atrial channel following a 
ventricular depolarization. During the PVARP, the PM 
cannot sense atrial activities. When in the course of an 
atrial tachycardia an atrial wave is inside the PVARP, it is 
Blanking
Crosstalk
detection
Atrial
stimulation
Figure 18.9  The blanking period and the period of ventricular 
safety. After an atrial stimulus, in the ventricular channel is 
generated a blanking interval that prevents the channel to be 
inhibited by the atrial depolarization. A subsequent interval is the 
window of detection of crosstalk in which each sensed event is 
followed by a ventricular safety pacing or “Committed.”
AVI
220 ms
Committed AVI = 110 ms
AVI
220 ms
Figure 18.10  Ventricular safety pacing 
(Committed) in a DDD pacemaker. In the 
first two cardiac cycles there are both atrial 
and ventricular stimulation (AV interval 220 
ms). In the following three cardiac cycles, 
ventricular safety pacing (committed) 
occurs, characterized by an AV interval of 
110 ms. In the last cardiac cycle, the AV 
interval returned to baseline (220 ms).

18  How to Interpret Pacemaker Electrocardiograms
166
not perceived and therefore it becomes impossible to 
trigger and maintain the endless loop tachycardia (ELT).
When atrial tachycardia stabilizes at high frequencies, 
the point of 2 : 1 AV block is reached; this is made pos-
sible by the regular alternation of atrial depolarizations 
into the PVARP.
The values of both MTR and of the point of AV 2 : 1 
block can be adjusted separately.
­Pacemaker‐Dependent Arrhythmias
The arrhythmias mediated by PMs are those in which 
the  pacing system participates in the trigger and/or 
­maintenance of the arrhythmia. We can divide 
­pacemaker‐dependent arrhythmias into two subgroups 
depending on the role played by the stimulation system:
1)	  Atrial tachyarrhythmias sensed by the atrial channel 
of the pacemaker and conducted passively to the 
­ventricles In this case, an atrial arrhythmia (atrial 
­flutter, atrial tachycardia, or atrial fibrillation) may be 
sensed by the atrial lead of the PM and consequently 
transferred to the ventricle at the programmed MTR 
(Figure 18.12). In this case the pacemaker is not part 
of the electrogenetic mechanism of the arrhythmia 
but only contributes to the development of high 
­ventricular rates.
2)	 Re‐entrant arrhythmias that have the PM as an 
­integral part of a circuit In such cases, also called 
P
P
P
P
P
P
QRSi
Sv
Sv
Sv
Sv
PVARP
PVARP
PVARP
PVARP
QRSi
QRSi
QRSi
720
720
800
560
560
560
560
560
Figure 18.11  Mechanism of decremental AV conduction (Wenckebach‐like) of the DDD pacemakers. An atrial tachycardia  
(cycle PP = 560 ms) is conducted to the ventricles at the maximum tracking rate (RR = 720 ms). There is an irregularity of RR intervals 
(720–720–800 ms) and the longest RR cycle is due to the fourth P‐wave non‐conducted to the ventricles because it falls within the post 
ventricular atrial refractory reriod (PVARP).The next P wave is regularly sensed and therefore it is triggered to the ventricles with the 
programmed AV interval. The AV interval exhibits a Wenckebach‐like trend, with a progressive prolongation before the blocked P and a 
shortening after that.
A
675
690
685
675
670
A
A
A
A
A
PVARP
PVARP
0.5 s
PVARP
PVARP
Figure 18.12  Atrial flutter with AV conduction 3 : 1 by a DDD pacemaker. Protective mechanism from high ventricular rates. Atrial 
recording (esophageal lead) shows an atrial flutter (cycle 230 ms) conducted to the ventricles by the pacemaker with an AV ratio of 3 : 1. 
This degree of block occurs because two F waves every three fall within the PVARP.

­Electrocardiographi c Sig ns of Biventricu lar Pacin ﻿
167
­endless loop tachycardia (ELT) or pacemaker‐medi-
ated tachycardia (PMT), the stimulation system is an 
essential part of the electrogenetic circuit. These 
arrhythmias usually develop by an ectopic atrial beat 
(or a ventricular ectopic beat retroconducted to the 
atria). If such a premature atrial depolarization is 
sensed by the atrial channel of the pacemaker, it will 
thus be triggered to the ventricles by the PM, return-
ing to the atria by retrograde conduction in the nodo‐
Hisian system (Figure 18.13). In this circus mechanism 
of the ELT the PM, the atria, and the ventricles are an 
essential part of the re‐entry circuit, and the AV ratio 
is 1 : 1. Figure 18.14 shows an example of ELT in which 
atrial activity has been recorded by a double atrial 
esophageal lead. The pacemakers have automatic sys-
tems for the interruption of such arrhythmias after a 
fixed number of beats. For preventing the ELT, many 
PMs have the ability to extend the PVARP after each 
premature beat.
­Electrocardiographic Signs 
of Biventricular Pacing
The main purpose of the biventricular pacing is to  
re‐synchronize the areas of myocardium that spontane-
ously depolarize late, recovering the contractile function. 
To better understand the ECG pattern of biventricular 
pacing, it should be remembered that the pattern of 
right ventricular pacing is characterized by a left intra‐­
ventricular conduction delay morphology with marked 
left axis deviation (Figure  18.3). Regarding the left 
­ventricular pacing ECG pattern, the stimulation of the 
left ventricle generates an activation front directed from 
Ectopic
PM
PM
Endless loop tachycardia
Trigger
Maintenance
Figure 18.13  Endless loop tachycardia: trigger and maintenance. 
The diagram shows the trigger mechanism and the subsequent 
maintenance of a re‐entrant pacemaker‐mediated tachycardia. 
The trigger is usually an atrial ectopic beat that is sensed and 
triggered to the ventricles by the pacemaker. The impulse come 
back to the atria through retrograde conduction of the nodo‐
Hisian system. The maintenance is carried out by a mechanism in 
which the pacemaker is fundamental.
V2
V3
V4
Eso
Prox
Eso 
Dist
Vp
V
A
V
A
V
A
Vp
Vp
0.5 sec
Figure 18.14  Endless loop tachycardia: 
pacemaker‐mediated re‐entrant 
tachycardia. Use of the esophageal lead in 
the identification of the electrogenetic 
mechanism.The ventricular depolarization 
induced by the pacemaker (Vp) is 
retroconducted to the atria through the AV 
conduction system (dark arrow). The atrial 
depolarization (A) is sensed in the atrial 
channel of the pacemaker with 
consequent depolarization of the 
ventricles (double arrow).

18  How to Interpret Pacemaker Electrocardiograms
168
the left to the right leading to an essentially negative QRS 
in D1. This right axis deviation in the frontal plane is 
associated with a typical morphology in V1 with a posi-
tive QRS initial component (Figure 18.15). In biventricu-
lar pacing, owing to the fusion of two fronts of activation 
(left and right), QRS duration is smaller than in a single 
left or right stimulation (Figure  18.16). Biventricular 
ECG pattern is characterized by an initial QRS negativity 
(Q‐wave) in D1 and positivity (R waves) in V1, both 
­generated by contribution of left ventricular pacing. The 
QRS axis in the frontal plane is intermediate between the 
left pacing axis directed from the bottom to the right and 
the right pacing one directed upward to the left. The tim-
ing programmability of both right and left ventricular 
channels is completely independent and a wide range of 
fusion morphologies between left and right ventricular 
activity can be realized (Figure  18.17). Figure  18.17(b) 
shows that early activation of the left ventricular cham-
ber (Vs –30 ms) makes more evident the Q wave in D1 
and R wave in V1, peculiar signs of the left ventricular 
activation. Conversely, when the left ventricular activa-
tion is delayed (Figure 18.17d; Vs 30 ms) both the Q wave 
in D1 and the R wave in V1 gradually reduce until they 
disappear (Figure 18.17e, Vs 60 ms) and QRS morphol-
ogy becomes similar to that from isolated right ventricu-
lar pacing. QRS axis in the frontal plane is directed:
1)	 1 To the top and right side when the ventricular stim-
ulation is simultaneous (Vs 0 ms);
2)	 Down and to the right side when the left ventricular 
stimulation is anticipated (Vs –30 ms);
3)	 Up and towards the left side when the right ventricu-
lar stimulation prevails (Vs 30 ms).
­PM Malfunctions
A PM malfunction occurs when there is an alteration of 
both sensing and pacing functions, either alone or in 
combination [4].
Impairment of the Pacing Function
A defect in the pacing function is usually characterized 
by the inability of the PM electrical pulse to depolarize 
the cardiac chamber in which the lead is positioned. 
I
aVR
V1
V4
II
aVL
V2
V5
III
aVF
V3
V6
Figure 18.15  ECG in isolated left ventricular stimulation. The figure refers to an ECG in which ventricular pacing is performed from the 
lateral wall of the left ventricle. This mode of stimulation generates an activation front directed from left to the right with a QRS essentially 
negative in the derivations exploring the left ventricle (D1, aVL, V5, V6) and positive in lead V1. The Q wave in D1 and the R wave in V1 are 
characteristics of the stimulation from the lateral wall of the left ventricle.

­P M Malfunction ﻿
169
ECG shows the presence of spikes not followed by 
­depolarization waves. Pacing malfunctions can occur 
both at the atrial (Figure  18.18) and ventricular level 
(Figure 18.19). Lead dislodgment, fibrosis at the site of 
insertion, and battery discharge are the main causes of 
loss of pacing.
Impairment of the Sensing Function
Alterations in the sensing function can occur either from the 
PM’s inability to detect the intrinsic depolarization of the 
chamber in which the PM lead is placed (under‐sensing) or 
from an excess of sensing (over‐sensing), resulting in a 
PM pacing inhibition.
Under‐sensing on ECG is characterized by an emission 
of spikes despite the presence of spontaneous rhythm. 
This alteration can appear at both an atrial (Figure 18.20) 
and ventricular level (Figure 18.21).
Over‐sensing occurs when electrical signals extrane-
ous to the cardiac chamber’s lead (muscle tremors or 
other) are recorded by the PM (Figure  18.22). It is an 
extremely dangerous phenomenon because the conse-
quent cessation of pacing can lead to a prolonged ­asystole 
in PM‐dependent patients.
A
V
A
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
aVF
aVL
aVR
I I I
I I
I
V
Figure 18.16  ECG with atrial and biventricular pacing (unipolar). The ECG shows a unipolar pacing in which an atrial stimulus (Ap) is 
followed by a ventricular stimulus (Vp) provided by a system of simultaneous biventricular pacing (first generation). The induced QRS is 
the result of a fusion between the left and right ventricular depolarization. The Q wave extension D1 and an R wave in lead V1 are typically 
generated by left ventricular depolarization. The QRS axis in the frontal plane is intermediate between the left ventricular pacing axis 
directed from the bottom to the right and the right ventricular pacing directed upward to the left.

18  How to Interpret Pacemaker Electrocardiograms
170
Base
I
II
III
VI
Vs = –30 ms
Vs = 0 ms
Vs = +30 ms
Vs = +60 ms
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 18.17  ECG changes of the QRS by biventricular pacing. The morphology of the QRS varies with the time sequence of the 
stimulation of the two ventricles. This figure shows morphologic variations of the QRS in leads D1, D2, D3, and V1 and the direction of the 
vector in the frontal plane with a second‐generation biventricular pacing. (a) In basic conditions, a typical left bundle branch block is 
present. The QRS duration is 180 ms. (b) The stimulator is programmed so that left ventricular pacing advances of 30 ms right ventricular 
pacing and therefore the typical signs of left ventricular stimulation (Q wave in lead D1 and R wave in lead V1) appear well evident. D3 
shows a positive QRS typically associated with right axis deviation. (c) Left and right ventricular pacing are delivered simultaneously. 
The morphology of the QRS is identical to that of a first‐generation biventricular pacing. Compared with (b), reducing the component of 
left ventricular pacing reduces the R wave amplitude in V1 and Q wave in D1. For the same reason the axis of the QRS in the frontal plane 
moves upward as evident by the morphology of the QRS in D3. (d) Left ventricular pacing is delay of 30 ms compared to right ventricular 
one; there is a further reduction of the R wave amplitude in V1 and Q wave in D1. The axis of the QRS in the frontal plane shift to the left 
becoming negative in D3. (e) Left ventricular pacing is markedly delayed (60 ms) and the global ventricular depolarization is almost 
completely determined by right ventricular pacing. The QRS morphology is similar to that of the isolated right ventricular pacing.
Ap
Vp
Ap
Vp
Ap
Vp
Ap
Vp
Ap
Vp
P
P
P
QRS
paced
QRS
spontaneous
(pseudofusion)
QRS
spontaneous
(pseudofusion)
QRS
fused
QRS
fused
P
Figure 18.18  Impairment of atrial pacing in a DDD pacemaker. A DDD pacemaker delivers both atrial (Ap) and ventricular (Vp) spikes. 
An impaired pacing function at atrial level is observed because atrial stimuli (Ap) are not followed by corresponding atrial depolarization; 
occasionally, spontaneous P wave appears. The pacemaker constantly paces the ventricles but in the first and in the third complexes the 
spontaneous atrial activity (P) appears able to reach the ventricles generating QRS of normal morphology (pseudo‐fusion).

­P M Malfunction ﻿
171
Vp
Vp
Vp
Vp
Vp
Ec.V
Ec.V
QRSp
QRSp
QRSp
Figure 18.19  Occasional impairment of ventricular pacing in a VVI pacemaker. The basic rhythm in an atrial fibrillation with the presence 
of ventricular pacemaker (Vp). The third ventricular stimulus (Vp) is not followed by an appropriate ventricular depolarization. The fourth 
ventricular stimulus appears normally transmitted to the ventricles and the next ventricular ectopic ventricular beat is normally sensed by 
the pacemaker which waits before releasing a new ventricular stimulus.
P
Pns
Pns
Ap
Vp
Ap
Vp
110
180
QRS
QRS
QRS
Period of
blanking
1 sec
Period of
blanking
Ventricular
safety
Ventricular
safety
Figure 18.20  Impairment of atrial sensing in a DDD pacemaker, the blanking and ventricular safety periods. A sequence of three cardiac 
cycles in a patient with a dual chamber pacemaker (DDD) is shown. In the first cardiac cycle, a normal activation is sensed by the 
pacemaker (P‐QRS). In the second cardiac cycle, because of a transient loss of atrial sensing, the P wave is not sensed (Pns) and an atrial 
pacing (Ap) is delivered; the next spontaneous QRS, originating from the non‐sensed P wave, falls within the “window of detection of 
crosstalk” and such that gives origin to a ventricular safety pacing (Vp); in this “committed” pacing, typically the AV interval lasts 110 ms. 
Also, in the third cardiac cycle the P wave is not sensed and therefore an atrial stimulus is delivered (Ap). The subsequent spontaneous 
QRS falls in the blanking period and therefore is not perceived by the pacemaker; a ventricular stimulus (Vp) at the programmed AV 
interval (180 ms) is delivered.

18  How to Interpret Pacemaker Electrocardiograms
172
­References
	1	 Trohman RG, Kim MH, Pinski SL. Cardiac pacing: the 
state of the art. Lancet 2004;364:1701–1719.
	2	 Vardas PE, Auricchio A, Blanc JJ, Daubert H, Ector H, 
Gasparini M, et al. Guidelines for cardiac pacing and 
cardiac resynchronization therapy. Europace 
2007;9(10):959–998.
	3	 Bernstein AD, Daubert JC, Fletcher RD, Hayes DL, 
Luderitz B, Reynolds DW, et al. The revised  
NASPE/BPEG generic code for antibradycardia, 
adaptive‐rate, and multisite pacing. PACE 
2002;25:260–264.
	4	 Maisel WH, Moynahan M, Zuckerman BD, Gross TP, 
Tovar OH, Tillman DB, et al. Pacemaker and ICD 
generator malfunctions: analysis of Food and Drug 
Administration annual reports. JAMA 
2006;295(16):1901–1906.
Vp
Vp
Ap - Vp
Vp
Spontaneous rhythm
QRSp
QRSp
QRSp
QRSp
P
P
Over-sensing
Figure 18.22  Ventricular over‐sensing. Holter recording in patients with DDD pacemaker. Electrical signals of extracardiac origin (arrows) 
are able to inhibit the emission of the stimuli. An escape rhythm is present.
Ap
Vp
P
QRS
Figure 18.21  Ventricular under‐sensing: 
loss of ventricular sensing in a DDD 
pacemaker. The ventricular channel lost 
the ability to sense the spontaneous 
activity of the ventricles: a ventricular 
stimulus (Vp) is delivered after the 
spontaneous QRS.

173
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Pacing can provide patients with adequate heart rates, 
when necessary, and, in some instances, the appropriate 
activation sequence (including atrial followed by ventric-
ular depolarization with proper timing, and with both 
ventricles in synchrony) to optimize cardiac output and 
to meet the physiologic and metabolic needs of the body. 
When considering the practical aspects and manage-
ment of the patient with a cardiac pacemaker and before 
considering the necessity for pacemaker troubleshoot-
ing, the first issue is to know the purpose of pacing for 
that patient and if the patient is pacemaker‐dependent.
When it comes to troubleshooting, it is critical to define 
what the concern is and what unique pacemaker and 
­programming characteristics are present. Oftentimes, the 
concern is observed pacing when pacing is not expected 
or, alternatively, no pacing when pacing is expected. 
Interrogation to assess electrogram characteristics and 
use of marker channels can generally provide an under-
standing of a problem or a perceived problem.
­Pacemaker Options and 
Programming Characteristics
Various modalities of pacing are available (Table  19.1). 
Selection of the appropriate modality depends on the 
patient’s clinical circumstances, including, but not ­limited 
to, heart rhythm abnormalities (indications), age, lifestyle, 
comorbidities, cardiac function, necessary medications, 
and other confounders. Pacemakers can be single cham-
ber, atrial (AAI) or ventricular (VVI) based, dual chamber 
(DDD), or triple chamber (atrium and right and left ven-
tricles – cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT)) and 
may include rate‐responsive capabilities using various 
sensors (e.g., motion, ventricular contractility, body tem-
perature, and minute ventilation) to guide increase or 
decrease in paced rate to meet ­metabolic demands.
Programmable pacemaker parameters, including tim-
ing intervals, are critical to optimize pacemaker function 
without incurring adverse parameter interactions or 
clinical problems and provide, in specific cases, atrioven-
tricular (AV) synchrony, interventricular (VV) synchrony 
(CRT), or simply appropriate rate (Table  19.2). Some 
parameters are generally not programmable. Special pro-
grammable features can vary depending on the device 
(Table  19.3). Discussion of these timing parameters is 
beyond the scope of this chapter.
In addition to timing intervals and basic programmable 
parameters, accepted and standard sensing and ­pacing 
(capture) characteristics are expected to be understood. 
Intracardiac atrial electrical signals, ­generally represent-
ing atrial depolarization, should be expected to exceed 
1.0 mV. Intracardiac right ventricular electrical signals, 
generally representing ventricular depolarization, should 
exceed 5.0 mV. Capture thresholds should generally be 
<1.0 V @ 0.5 ms in both the right ventricle and right 
atrium (but may be higher in the left ventricle).
In a normal situation, sensing and capture thresholds 
remain constant and fluctuate little. Despite the stability 
of intracardiac signal quality, sensing of the intracardiac 
electrical signals is generally programmed to be triple 
the sensed electrogram amplitude and pacing threshold 
is programmed at double the capture voltage or triple the 
pulse width to ensure consistent sensing and capture 
function, which can vary somewhat over time over time 
as a result of changes in myocardial function and 
­anatomy, medications, autonomic tone, and electrolyte 
­disturbances (particularly, potassium fluctuations).
19
How to Perform Pacemaker Troubleshooting
Brian Olshansky1,2 and Nora Goldschlager3,4
1 University of Iowa, Iowa, USA
2 Mercy Hospital-North Iowa, Mason, Iowa, USA
3 San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco, CA, USA
4 University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA

19  How to Perform Pacemaker Troubleshooting
174
The most complex pacemakers, those that involve 
leads in the atria and the ventricles, including dual and 
triple chamber pacemakers, have timing characteristics 
that include rate response using various sensors and pro-
grammed features (Table  19.4), sensed and paced AV 
intervals that vary with atrial‐driven or sensor‐driven 
rate to mimic normal AV conduction physiology and 
upper‐rate (mode‐switching) timing characteristics to 
prevent inappropriately rapid ventricular pacing in 
response to atrial sensing (tracking) such as might occur 
in atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, or atrial tachycardias. 
Mode switching is an algorithm that can be programmed 
“on” to change a DDD mode of function to one in which 
atrial electrical signals are not tracked (DDI or, much less 
commonly, VVI in dual or triple chamber systems). 
Finally, refractory periods, independently programmable 
for atrial and ventricular sensed or paced events, prevent 
inappropriate and/or unnecessary detection of electrical 
signals that could inhibit needed pacing and/or prevent 
inappropriate and unwanted pacing (such as tracking at 
the upper rate limit in pacemaker‐mediated tachycardia 
or inappropriately mode switching on sensing far‐field 
signals that mimic rapid atrial rates).
It is important to recognize that special features of a 
pacing system (including pulse generator and leads) can 
influence the analysis of the data. Therefore, before con-
sidering any pacemaker troubleshooting, it is important 
to understand the following:
1)	 The type of pacemaker and its capabilities;
2)	 The manufacturer and model of the pacing system 
with its specific intricacies and complexities;
3)	 Programming options and characteristics (such as 
rate‐drop response, rate smoothing, AV search 
­hysteresis, AAI ↔ DDD mode switch function when 
needed, mode switch);
4)	 Specific unipolar and/or bipolar lead‐related issues 
including recalls or warnings; and
5)	 Specific interventions that can affect pacemaker func-
tion (including electromagnetic interference (EMI) in 
medical and non‐medical environments (Table 19.5).
Table 19.4  Rate‐response parameters.
Rate‐adaptive pacing
Maximum sensor rate
Activity threshold
Response factor (magnitude of rate change for a given activity)
Reaction time (the interval of time for the rate to change)
Recovery time (the interval of time for heart rate to return to 
baseline)
Table 19.1  Common pacing modalities.
Chamber 
paced
Chamber 
sensed
Mode
Rate 
response
A
A
Inhibited – AAI
Asynchronous – AOO
R
V
V, A
Inhibited – VVI
Triggered – VAT  
(rarely used)
Asynchronous – VOO
R
D (A + V)
D (A + V)
Inhibited/tracked – DDD
Inhibited, no A 
pacing – VDD (rarely used)
A + V pace, no A sense or 
track – DVI
Inhibited – DDI
Asynchronous – DOO
R
Table 19.2  Basic programmable parameters.
Mode of function
Lower rate limit (base rate)
Upper tracking rate (atrial‐based)
Upper sensed rate (sensor‐based)
Post‐ventricular atrial refractory period
Ventricular refractory period
Atrial refractory period
Paced AV interval
Sensed AV interval
Dynamic AV interval
Sensitivity
Pacing output (voltage and pulse width)
Post‐ventricular atrial blanking period
Ventricular blanking period
Post atrial ventricular blanking period
Table 19.3  Special programmable (often proprietary) features.
AV search hysteresis – lengthening of the AV interval to search 
for intrinsic AV conduction at AV intervals > the programmed 
interval
Rate‐drop response – a faster rate programmed to occur 
(above the lower rate limit) if there is an abrupt drop in 
spontaneous rate
Rate smoothing – a gradual acceleration or deceleration in 
pacing rate in response to abrupt changes in intrinsic rate
MVP – (AAI ↔ DDD mode change) – AAI pacing unless there 
is AV block and then the mode switched to DDD
Hysteresis – the escape interval exceeds the pacing interval to 
allow for emergence of native rhythm
Mode change (“mode switch,” “atrial tacking response”) – when 
a specific atrial tachycardia occurs (usually atrial fibrillation) 
occurs, the DDD mode is automatically changed to DDI or VVI 
avoid tracking the atrial rate
Noise response – a feature that prevents inappropriate 
inhibition by electrical noise. Often this mode is DOO or VOO
Autocapture – lowering pacing output based on autodetection 
of an evoked potential

­Th e Fir st Step:  Interrogatio ﻿
175
Besides knowledge of the make and model of the pace-
maker and leads involved, specific issues or problems 
arising at the time of system implant (such as central 
venous obstruction and anomalous central veins), the 
precise reason(s) for pacemaker implantation, prior 
­programmed parameters including those obtained 
at implant, and known device and lead recall issues must 
be known.
It is best to store records of and choices for (and prior) 
programmed parameters in a given individual and why 
specific parameters were chosen, chest X‐rays per-
formed, electrograms recorded, timing cycle recordings, 
and any trans‐telephonic monitoring data. If the make 
and model of a pacing system are unknown and/or 
records are not available, databases retained by manu-
facturers are repositories of this information. Obviously, 
much of the information necessary to manage specific 
patients properly is obtainable by pacing system inter-
rogation, so it is essential that the proper programmers 
be applied to the correct pacing systems.
From this starting point, a practical approach to 
­troubleshooting can be undertaken. The first step in 
troubleshooting any pacemaker is to obtain the correct 
programmer for a specific pacemaker, after which, the 
“interrogate” button is pressed. When the programmer’s 
screen opens, the programmed parameters, trended 
information, such as lead impedances, sensed electrical 
events and capture thresholds, rate histograms, stored 
high rate episodes with their accompanying electro-
grams, and timing markers will be displayed (depending 
on the device) or can be obtained by pressing the ­relevant 
buttons (Tables 19.2, 19.3, and 19.6).
It is expected that the operator understands each of 
these parameters and understands that inhibiting the 
pacemaker in a dependent patient is a substantial prob-
lem. It is not essential to determine pacemaker depend-
ence at each visit, although in many facilities this is 
carried out to ascertain the natural history of the rhythm 
for which the pacemaker was implanted and to assess the 
nature and stability of the underlying native rhythm 
(if present) as well as the native P‐QRST morphology.
It is important to know the reason for the pacemaker 
interrogation. Is it for an abnormality found at remote 
monitoring? Is it for symptoms from suspected pace-
maker malfunction? Is it for a perceived abnormality 
observed on an ECG? Is it for a routine evaluation? 
Although a complete evaluation may be the best policy, 
focused interrogation will help address the needs of 
the patient.
­The First Step: Interrogation
Before interrogating the pacing system, a 12‐lead elec-
trocardiogram (ECG) should be recorded to ascertain 
the patient’s rhythm and other characteristics such as 
native or paced QRST morphology. This recording 
should be followed by a second 12‐lead ECG with the 
magnet applied to the pulse generator. The magnet rate 
and function can provide a clue as to battery function. It 
is important to know the manufacturer’s magnet rate, 
AV interval if applicable, and any specific function. 
Magnet rate and function are not programmable. 
We prefer to run the ECG as a 12‐lead rhythm strip so 
that paced and spontaneous PQRST complexes can be 
visualized in all leads.
After establishing that the correct programmer for 
the implanted pacing system is being used, ensure good 
communication between the programming head and 
the pulse generator and press “interrogate.” Unless 
there is a specific problem with communication (e.g., 
an incorrect programmer, pulse generator end‐of‐life 
or pacemaker location in an unexpected position such 
as the epigastrium), interrogation should not be prob-
lematic. It is important to be aware of any “red flag” 
messages that the programmer’s screen shows as this 
will provide a clue to pacing system function, including 
end‐of‐life. If the pulse generator is at end‐of‐life, inter-
rogation may not be possible as it requires battery 
energy; this information is generally available from the 
programmer screen.
Table 19.5  Sources of electromagnetic interference (EMI).
Endogenous – myopotentials
Medical equipment
●
●Electrocautery
●
●Magnetic resonance imaging
●
●Cardioversion, defibrillation
●
●Transcutaneous pacing
●
●Electrotherapy
●
●Transcutaneous nerve stimulation
●
●Implanted neuromuscular stimulators
●
●Ionizing radiation
●
●Lithotripsy
Table 19.6  Interrogatable parameters.
Arrhythmia burden
Impedance
Rate histogram
Sensing
Pacing output
Lower rate limit
Upper rate limit
Trends (impedance, capture threshold, sensed signal voltage)
Activity level

19  How to Perform Pacemaker Troubleshooting
176
After “interrogate” is pressed, a screen will arise show-
ing the programmed parameters of the pacemaker. All 
information should be recorded, printed and all final 
information printed and saved on a disc. Most modern 
pacemakers have algorithms to check the pacemaker 
­systematically. This includes checking sensing character-
istics, lead impedances, capture thresholds, paced and 
sensed rates, and the percentage of time pacing and sens-
ing in both chambers is occurring. Several pacemakers 
provide trended information of the above parameters, as 
well as activity levels of the patient. Often, rate response 
parameters, detection of stored arrhythmia episodes, 
and battery voltage, current, and impedance need to be 
interrogated independently. Tachycardia episodes can 
often be retrieved for analysis. Real time and stored 
­electrograms are available in most modern pacemakers, 
allowing analysis of the electrograms, the timing meas-
urements and how the pacemaker “thinks.”
Sensing Thresholds
To check sensing thresholds in any given chamber, the 
base rate needs to be programmed temporarily or per-
manently below the rate of the spontaneous rhythm. 
Tracking function must be disallowed (i.e., the mode of 
function must be programmed out of DDD mode) in 
order to check for the spontaneous ventricular rhythm 
and rate. It is important to know whether the patient is 
pacemaker‐dependent. It is not possible to test sensing 
without a spontaneous QRS rhythm >30/minute (the 
lowest programmable rate of all pacemakers) or if lower-
ing the base rate is not tolerated by the patient when the 
pacemaker is programmed to allow the spontaneous 
rhythm to become manifest.
“Inhibit pacing” is a function that can be programmed 
temporarily, but this is not advised because asystolic 
pauses without a spontaneous escape rhythm can occur. 
In most instances, it is possible to check sensing. We rec-
ommend that lowering the base rate to check for native 
rhythms be carried out decrementally, at intervals of 
5–10 pulses per minute. It is usually necessary to allow 
10–20 s at a given low base rate to observe the emer-
gence and warm‐up of the native rhythm. Programming 
from a base rate of, for example, 75–30 pulses/minute in 
a single step often causes unnecessary discomfort and 
even fear in the patient.
To start, with a spontaneous rhythm present in the 
chamber tested, sensitivity is programmed to detect the 
rhythm and inhibit pacer functioning. Then, sensitivity 
is decreased gradually until the electrical activity is no 
longer sensed and asynchronous pacing occurs. It is also 
possible to record the sensed electrogram amplitude in 
millivolts. It is important to note exactly where in the 
surface P wave or QRS complex that the electrical signal 
generated by chamber depolarization is sensed. This is 
often distinctly after its inscription on the body surface 
ECG recording because of the time it takes for the depo-
larization wave front to reach the sensing electrode; this 
can cause confusion when measuring intervals or trying 
to understand pacemaker activity. By checking sensitiv-
ity, other signals that could be sensed, including T waves, 
muscle potentials, electromagnetic interference, or noise 
generated by a faulty lead can be understood. Appropriate 
measures must be taken to avoid this latter problem of 
“oversensing.”
Pacing (Capture) Threshold
Ventricular and atrial pacing thresholds can be deter-
mined by starting at a high or programmed voltage out-
put and gradually decreasing the output until the 
pacemaker does not capture (depolarize) the chamber 
tested. If there is any question about intermittent detec-
tion and pacemaker inhibition or loss of capture, simulta-
neous recording of the local intracardiac electrograms 
and marker channel annotation can help distinguish 
sensing inhibition from lack of pacer capture (the codes 
for the annotations are available in the “help” section of 
each programmer). This annotation is accomplished 
through the “markers” that specific devices use to indi-
cate sensed events (e.g., “As” for atrial sense). A pacing 
stimulus output (e.g., “Ap” for atrial pace) does not 
­indicate capture, only that the stimulus has been ­delivered. 
Chamber capture, and its loss, must therefore be docu-
mented by the surface ECG displayed on the programmer 
screen and/or an independent ECG recording. An inde-
pendent ECG recording is not infrequently ­preferred, as 
the surface ECG displayed on the programmer screen 
does not always clearly show loss of capture in the atrium.
Rate‐Response Parameters
Rate‐response parameters and other characteristics can 
be determined and, for many pacemakers, projected rate 
response, in lieu of patient activity, can be determined. 
Rate response can be programmed “on,” “off,” and 
“­passive,” in which the sensor(s) monitor patient activity 
but are not used in device performance. Rate‐response 
sensors include body motion and vibration, accelerome-
ters and minute ventilation. The interrogated rate 
­histogram allows appropriate programming changes to 
be made that affect better patient performance during 
activities of daily living.
AV Interval
The AV interval can be programmed to be fixed or vary 
by atrial‐ or sensor‐based rate. There can be a sensed 

­Definin g Pacemak er and/or  Lea d Problem ﻿
177
­offset of the AV interval. In patients who have intact AV 
conduction, it is often best to minimize right ventricular 
pacing and adjust the AV interval for this purpose. 
However, specific adjustments, such as a very long pro-
grammed interval, may also affect hemodynamics and 
need to be considered.
AV interval adjustments are dependent upon the total 
atrial refractory period (TARP); in other words, the post 
ventricular atrial refractory period (PVARP) must be 
considered (AV interval plus PVARP = TARP). For 
patients who have AV block, it is important to adjust the 
AV interval such that it does not impinge upon the TARP 
at the programmed upper rate limit (URL) or when the 
spontaneous atrial rate exceeds the URL; should this be 
done inadvertently, 2 : 1 AV block with abrupt slowing in 
rate and symptoms may occur. If the TARP = URL (in 
milliseconds), 2 : 1 AV block will occur just above the 
URL and abrupt ventricular rate slowing at faster atrial 
rates are expected to be problematic. If not, a pro-
grammed pacemaker Wenckebach cycle will be present 
if TARP < URL. This is preferred for dependent patients 
with AV block but the settings of the AV interval are 
dependent upon the PVARP, the URL, the underlying 
rhythm, and the presence of retrograde conduction 
which can lead, potentially, to pacemaker‐mediated 
tachycardia.
­The Second Step: Pacemaker 
Troubleshooting
Prior to performing troubleshooting, the first critical 
question is: Why? Is the patient being seen simply for a 
routine follow‐up visit or is a casual interrogation being 
performed simply because the patient is being seen for 
some other reason? In these instances, troubleshooting 
may uncover a problem that has little, if any, clinical sig-
nificance or, on the contrary, may uncover a problem 
that is a “tip of the iceberg” in pacemaker function and 
malfunction.
More commonly, troubleshooting needs to be under-
taken when a specific abnormality is observed or docu-
mented on a rhythm strip. Multiple simultaneously 
recorded ECG leads help validate these issues. Examples 
include: the pacemaker does not appear to activate the 
chamber paced when expected, pacing occurs when it 
should not be, or there is an irregularity in the rhythm or 
pacing stimulus output. Pacemaker interrogation will 
generally resolve confusions.
Requests for interrogation and evaluation of patients’ 
pacemakers are appropriate if there are symptoms that 
could be explained by episodic bradycardias or unex-
pected tachycardias, in which case stored arrhythmia 
data might explain the clinical problem. Similarly, if 
patients are not regularly followed in a specialized clinic, 
pacemaker evaluation should be accomplished prior 
to operative procedures.
With trans‐telephonic monitoring, lack of effective 
rate‐response or episodic asymptomatic atrial tachyar-
rhythmias, especially atrial fibrillation, can precipitate a 
clinic visit. In some cases, patients with worsening symp-
tomatic systolic heart failure may be found to be pacing 
too frequently in the right ventricle (usually pacing >25% 
of the time), which causes functional left bundle branch 
block with consequent ventricular desynchronization 
(i.e., the left and right ventricles do not depolarize and 
contract in a synchronous fashion). This specific prob-
lem may require reprogramming of the lower rate to a 
lower rate or extending the AV interval to reduce right 
ventricular pacing. Pacemaker troubleshooting is also 
required for patients with symptoms of syncope or near 
syncope that have not been ameliorated by the pace-
maker or have begun after the pacemaker was implanted.
­Defining Pacemaker and/or Lead 
Problems
It is not uncommon for clinicians to blame the pace-
maker for any arrhythmia abnormality seen. Most of 
the time, the problem is not a result of pacemaker mal-
function but to a lack of understanding of the timing 
and programming characteristics of the device. 
Interrogation allows recording of electrograms and 
­recognition of how the pacemaker is “thinking” (timing 
cycle characteristics).
Atrial or Ventricular Non‐capture
If, on a rhythm strip, or, preferably, a 12‐lead ECG, pace-
maker stimuli are seen but there is no apparent depolari-
zation of myocardial tissue (capture) of a cardiac 
chamber, the failure to capture could reflect a problem 
with the lead as it is inserted into the pacemaker header, 
as is seen with loose connections, lead dislodgment from 
the heart, lead fracture or insulation breach with insuf-
ficient current reaching myocardium, myocardial tissue 
refractoriness or programmed outputs that are sub‐
threshold (Figures 19.1 and 19.2; Table 19.7) but appar-
ent lack of capture may require observation of several 
ECG leads (Figure 19.3).
In the case of a recently implanted pacing system in 
which there is loss of capture, consideration must be 
given to the possibility of an acute rise in pacing threshold 
because of local inflammation at the tissue–myocardial 
interface (less likely with the current use of steroid‐tipped 

19  How to Perform Pacemaker Troubleshooting
178
leads), and to micro‐ or macro‐dislodgment or perfora-
tion of the lead (Figure 19.4). Occasionally, loose connec-
tions between the lead(s) and the pulse generator header 
or inadvertent insulation breach occurring during 
implantation is the cause.
Acute Implantation
If the patient has a recently implanted lead and there 
appears to be intermittent or complete lack of capture, 
increasing the voltage output makes sense as the initial 
maneuver. However, there needs to be a check of lead 
Figure 19.1  Simultaneous Holter recording strips illustrating ventricular non‐capture. The atrial rhythm is fibrillation. Note the pacing 
stimulus with ventricular capture for the first QRS complex and the multiple pacing stimuli with no resulting QRS complex because of loss 
of ventricular capture.
Figure 19.2  Lead MCL1 and V1 rhythm strips recorded in a syncopal patient. Note the 6th native P wave with no ventricular pacing 
stimulus after it. This patient had a lead fracture. No visible ventricular output was caused by oversensing and inhibition of ventricular 
stimuli from noise from a make–break conductor wire fracture was confirmed by intracardiac electrograms and marker channel.

­Definin g Pacemak er and/or  Lea d Problem ﻿
179
position to exclude migration (dislodgement) on a highly 
penetrated chest PA and lateral chest X‐ray, lead imped-
ance measurements to exclude insulation breach or 
breakage, and careful and consistent follow‐up of lead 
sensing and pacing thresholds, which are expected to 
remain stable (Figures  19.5 and 19.6). Micro‐dislodg-
ment can resolve. If there is concern for lead perforation, 
especially in the ventricle, programming lead function 
from bipolar to unipolar, thus pacing only from the lead 
tip or ring can be more successful than for bipolar 
­capture as either the tip or ring of the lead would not 
necessarily be juxtaposed against the myocardium. 
Unipolarization of a lead, even if successful in the short 
term, not infrequently mandates revision or replacement 
to ensure permanent normal function.
A 12‐lead ECG compared with the immediate post‐
implant recording can provide insight into positioning of 
the ventricular lead as the paced QRS morphology and 
axis resulting from pacing from the right ventricular 
­apical area should result in a left bundle branch block 
pattern with a superior axis; if there is a new right bundle 
branch block morphology seen lead V1 or a change in 
paced QRS complex axis, the lead has likely moved 
(Figure 19.4). On rare occasions, a transthoracic echocar-
diogram is needed to exclude pericardial effusion result-
ing from lead perforation. Cardiac tamponade diagnosed 
clinically or by echocardiography is an unexpected 
­complication in today’s practice.
Chronic Implantation
Non‐capture in chronic pacing systems can be a result 
of a gradual increase pacing thresholds because of drugs 
(e.g., class I antiarrhythmic drugs, particularly fle-
cainide), hyperkalemia, heart failure, or a slow change in 
lead impedance, with low impedances representing 
insulation breach and high impedances indicating lead 
fracture. However, the increase in capture thresholds 
can be abrupt. Gradual increases in thresholds are more 
likely caused by fibrosis at the lead tip while abrupt 
changes are more common in lead‐related problems, 
such as those caused by fracture or insulation breaks. 
Abnormal lead impedance measurements will be pre-
sent only during the actual occurrence of the pacing 
problem, but can be normal if pacing system function is 
normal at the time of interrogation. Although generally 
accurate, with autocapture turned on, it is possible that 
noise (EMI) or stimulus artifact could inhibit appropri-
ate output for myocardial capture.
Table 19.7  Causes of pacemaker non‐capture.
Tissue refractory (functional non‐capture)  
(e.g., prior depolarization)
Lead dislodgement
Increase in myocardial stimulation threshold
Lead insulation break
Conductor wire fracture
Inappropriately low programmed output
Generator end‐of‐life
Output programmed below threshold
Figure 19.3  In lead I, the QRS complex 
occurs after the pacing stimulus but no P 
wave can be seen after the atrial stimulus. 
In lead II, no atrial stimulus or P wave can 
be seen. In lead III, there all P waves are 
clearly paced but it appears that there is 
lack of ventricular capture and a narrow 
conducted QRS complex. In reality, there 
is appropriate AV capture seen by looking 
in all three leads recorded simultaneously. 
These rhythm strips illustrate the value of 
obtaining simultaneously ECG recordings.

19  How to Perform Pacemaker Troubleshooting
180
AutoGain
(18 mm/mV)
AutoGain
(8.10 mm/mV)
Markers
V Sense Amp
VS
945
3.11 mV
2.98 mV
13 s
14 s
15 s
16 s
17 s
3.06 mV
757
1094
977
937
VS
VS
VS
VS
VP
Figure 19.5  In this recording with body surface ECG (top), marker channel, and ventricular electrogram, the ventricular sense markers are 
sensing native P waves. There is no evidence for QRS sensing or pacing. This recording illustrates dislodgement of the ventricular lead into 
the atrium.
Figure 19.4  On this MCL1 rhythm strip, there is evidence for attempted atrial pacing and apparent ventricular pacing with different QRS 
morphologies. There may be intermittent atrial capture but in the middle strip it appears that the patient is in atrial flutter or fibrillation. 
There is an atrial lead dislodgment as can be seen in the lower strip. The atrial pacing stimulus is seen to capture the ventricle and alter 
the morphology QRST complex. Following this, there is no ventricular pacing stimulus because it is inhibited by the sensed portion of the 
QRS complex.

­Definin g Pacemak er and/or  Lea d Problem ﻿
181
Undersensing
When the intracardiac electrical signal is expected to be 
sensed and the pacemaker is expected to either inhibit or 
trigger but this does not occur, undersensing is often the 
explanation (Figures  19.7, 19.8, and 19.9; Table  19.8). 
However, before any intracardiac electrical signal is con-
sidered undersensed, it must be determined that it 
occurs outside the refractory (or blanking) period of the 
specific cardiac chamber or that the myocardium is 
refractory because of a prior depolarization. For exam-
ple, an ectopic atrial depolarization occurring early after 
a paced (or sensed) QRS complex may occur in the 
PVARP and will not be acted upon. Competing rhythm 
disturbances may result in pacing in the atria or ventri-
cles around the time of an electrical signal arising from 
that specific chamber. A pacing stimulus may occur 
within a P wave that is recorded earlier on the total body 
ECG, or within a QRS complex that similarly is seen to 
begin earlier on the body surface ECG (Figure  19.10). 
It is important to recognize that this phenomenon can be 
appropriate as it can take some time (several millisec-
onds) for the electrical signal generated by the depolari-
zation wave front to propagate to the site of the lead 
electrode in that specific chamber. This is not under-
sensing, inasmuch as the escape interval of the system 
elapses before the electrical signal can be sensed. The 
resulting complex is termed “pseudo‐fusion.”
Apparent undersensing can also be a characteristic of a 
specific mode of function. For example, AOO or VOO 
(magnet mode) do not detect any atrial or ventricular 
signal, respectively. Similarly, AAI mode is not expected 
to sense ventricular events. Sensing of the electrical 
Figure 19.6  In this patient with a VVI pacing system, the rhythm strip (lead II) illustrates effective ventricular pacing except when the 
stimulus occurs in the ventricular refractory period but no evidence of sensing the native QRS complexes (undersensing). There are fusion 
QRS complexes (1st and 12th complexes).
Figure 19.7  The underlying rhythm appears to be sinus. In the top strip, there is an occasional pacing stimulus that occurs after the QRS 
complex, during the ventricular refractory period. In the bottom strip (not simultaneously recorded with the top strip), native P waves are 
not sensed and all atrial stimuli appear to be pacing the ventricle. The ventricular sense marker (Vs) re‐sensing that portion of the QRS 
complex which falls in the safety pace interval. Hence, there is a short AV interval.

19  How to Perform Pacemaker Troubleshooting
182
­signal generated in one chamber by the lead electrode in 
the other chamber is termed crosstalk and is not pace-
maker malfunction. Crosstalk inhibition can follow. It 
can result from a high amplitude electrical signal and/or 
from lead locations that are near each other. Crosstalk 
can generally be treated by programming changes 
(decreasing sensitivity, extending the refractory periods, 
or programming “safety pace” on, in which crosstalk 
inhibition is avoided by deliberate delivery of a stimulus 
within the electrical signal generated in the opposite 
chamber).
True undersensing can be caused by lead dislodgment 
or change in electrical signal amplitude. If the signal 
amplitude is less than the programmed sensitivity, pro-
gramming an increasing sensitivity may terminate 
undersensing but can cause oversensing. Furthermore, 
some electrical signals, such as those generated by 
Table 19.8  Causes of undersensing and apparent undersensing.
Poor intracardiac signal
Lead dislodgement
Insulation failure
Conductor wire fracture
Apparent undersensing – signal occurs in refractory or 
blanking period
Figure 19.8  In this rhythm strip of leads II, V1, and V5, the atrial stimulus is falling on the onset of the QRS complex (pseudo‐pseudofusion 
complex). The programmed AV interval is about 300 ms. Safety pacing is not occurring (the AV interval is the programmed one) because 
the QRS complex is occurring during the blanking period and thus there is no response to it. The ventricular stimuli do not capture the 
ventricle because they fall in its refractory period (functional non‐capture).
Figure 19.9  In this patient with a VVI pacing system there are pacing stimuli that occur near, and at the end of, the QRS complexes but do 
not change the QRS complex morphology. The QRS complexes thus represent pseudo‐fusion complexes. The reason for this is that the 
detection of the ventricular electrical signal by the ventricular electrode is dependent on the sensing at the local dipole and there is delay 
at that spot relative to the inscription of the QRS complex on the body surface ECG. Although not evident in this lead, this patient had a 
right bundle branch block and thus had delay in activation to the right ventricular apex during the conducted beats. This could appear to 
be undersensing but instead it is appropriate behavior of the pacemaker.

­Definin g Pacemak er and/or  Lea d Problem ﻿
183
­ventricular tissue (PVCs), can be undersensed even 
though normally conducted ventricular depolarizations 
would not be. This undersensing can be a result of slow-
ing in the slew rate (rate of change of voltage) at the lead 
electrode site even if the signal amplitude is large. Filters 
built in to the pacemaker may exclude detection of sig-
nals with slow rate of rise of electrical activity. Similarly, 
electrical signals generated during atrial fibrillation or 
other atrial tachyarrhythmias may not be detected as 
easily as sinus P waves from fluctuating amplitudes and 
slew rates.
Oversensing
Oversensing occurs when an apparent (“artifactual”) 
electrical signal detected by the atrial or ventricular 
electrode is brought about by a signal originating in the 
same chamber (such as T waves or double counting of a 
QRS complex by a ventricular lead), a signal originating 
in the other chamber (crosstalk), sensing of electrical 
signals extrinsic to the body (environmental “noise” or 
electromagnetic interference (EMI)) or intrinsic within 
the body such as that caused by fracture of a lead 
(“make–break” circuit) or insulation break in which 
short‐circuiting of current exists (Table 19.9).
Oversensing by the ventricular lead can inhibit stimu-
lus output, causing bradycardia or asystole. It is one of 
several causes for no stimulus output (Table  19.10). 
Oversensing by the atrial lead can cause bradycardia in 
an AAI device or, in a DDD system inappropriate ­tracking 
of the sensed signal leading to rapid ventricular pacing 
rates as well as loss of AV synchrony (Table 19.11).
Oversensing in the atrium does not apply to rhythm 
disturbances such as atrial fibrillation. In that case, if the 
“mode‐switch” function does not occur, either because it 
has not been programmed “on” or because of underde-
tection of atrial electrical signals because of change in 
amplitude, apparent oversensing which in fact is under-
sensing can lead to inappropriately rapid ventricular 
paced rates because of normal tracking function of the 
sensed fibrillatory waves. Electromagnetic interference 
can result in the same phenomenon of unwanted 
V
810
Surface ECG
1.0 sec
827
430
552
552
852
R
R
R
R
R
Figure 19.10  In this patient with a VVI pacing system, note the inhibition of pacing with sensing of “noise” (as seen on the marker channel 
on the strip below). This is caused by myopotential signals during arm movement. The pacing system designates these signals as sensed 
signals (R in this device). Myopotential oversensing is more common with a unipolar lead configuration.

19  How to Perform Pacemaker Troubleshooting
184
­stimulus output inhibition or unwanted tracking due to 
detection of electrical “noise” (Table 19.6).
Similar to EMI originating from the external environ-
ment, myopotentials (electrical muscle signals) detected 
by the atrial lead can lead to inhibition of atrial pacing 
and/or tracking of the sensed signals, or, if detected by 
the ventricular lead, can lead to inhibition of ventricular 
output. Myopotential inhibition (Figure 19.11) and envi-
ronmental EMI are more likely to occur with unipolar 
lead configuration as there is a wider “antenna” to pick 
up electrical signals.
In some pacemakers, and specifically in some individ-
uals, T waves can be detected inadvertently and 
“­designated” as R waves, leading to inhibition of stimulus 
output at the expected time. The escape interval of the 
pacing system will be timed from the detection of the 
sensed signal. Some pacemakers have less ability to filter 
out T wave signals than others.
Crosstalk oversensing of pacing stimulus outputs, with 
consequent inhibition of output, unwanted tracking, or 
false diagnosis of rapid atrial rates leading to inappropri-
ate mode switch operation has led to pacing system 
design features of built in programmable blanking inter-
vals. These prevent pacing stimuli from being detected 
as true electrical signals and thus prevent inappropriate 
responses.
Both undersensing and oversensing are treated effec-
tively by programming changes of sensitivity. However, 
increasing sensitivity to treat undersensing can result in 
unwanted oversensing and decreasing sensitivity can 
lead to undersensing of actual atrial or ventricular 
­electrical events.
Impedance Measurements
Especially with trans‐telephonic monitoring, but also 
with enhanced detection and storage capabilities, pace-
makers can now store trends in lead impedance over 
time. Small changes mean little clinically, but major 
changes, for example, a decrease to below 200 Ω, indicate 
disruption of insulation between the poles of the 
­pacemaker (Figure 19.12).
Gradual increase in lead impedance can indicate devel-
opment of fibrosis (unusual). Abrupt increase, especially 
if intermittent can indicate lead fracture (“make–break” 
fracture). Lead fracture can be related to body or upper 
torso position or arm movement. When the diagnosis is 
suspected, deliberate patient movements must be per-
formed to bring out the resulting loss of pacing stimulus 
as recorded from the body surface. On occasion, as the 
pacing output from the pulse generator itself is not 
­disturbed, complete lead fracture can present as absence 
of a visible stimulus but, when seen, is a multiple of the 
programmed pacing cycle length.
Rate‐Response Issues
Interrogation of pacemakers can provide the percentage 
of atrial and ventricular pacing. Depending on the 
­pacemaker, rate response can be programmed “on” or to 
monitor the intrinsic heart rate. For a patient who has a 
Table 19.9  Causes of oversensing.
Physiologic intracardiac signals
●
●T waves (VVI systems)
●
●R waves (AAI systems, DDDR systems with mode switch)
●
●Concealed extrasystoles (rare)
Physiologic extracardiac signals
●
●Muscle potentials (diaphragm, pectoral, seizure, shiver)
Electromagnetic interference
●
●Electrocautery
●
●Catheter ablation
●
●Cardioversion and defibrillation
●
●Ionizing radiation
●
●Magnetic resonance imaging
●
●Cell phones
●
●Antitheft devices
●
●iPhones
●
●Tasers
●
●Transcutaneous nerve stimulators
●
●Automobile “smart key” systems
●
●Chiropractic message therapy devices
Table 19.10  Causes of no stimulus output.
Normal inhibition by native atrial/ventricular events
Electromagnetic inhibition
Loose lead–generator connections
Lead insulation break – oversensing
Conductor wire fracture
Low‐amplitude stimulus not registered by recording equipment
Battery end‐of‐life
Component failure
Table 19.11  Rapid paced ventricular beats.
DDD systems
PMT
Normal tracking of rapid atrial rates Sinus tachycardia
Atrial fibrillation
Atrial flutter
Atrial tachycardia
Myopotential triggering
With subsequent PMT
Without subsequent PMT
Electromagnetic triggering
Cautery
Environmental examples
PMT, pacemaker‐mediated tachycardia.

­Definin g Pacemak er and/or  Lea d Problem ﻿
185
2000
Lead impendance trend (weekly)
Ventricular amplitude trend (weekly)
1500
1000
800
mVolts
600
Ω
400
200
>12
9
6
3
Nov ’08
Feb ’09
May ’09
Jul ’09
Oct ’09
12 Nov 2008
7 Feb 2009
5 May 2009
30 Jul 2009
25 Oct 2009
This session result
Polarity switch
This session result
A
Figure 19.11  Following trends in electrical amplitude and lead impedance can indicate changes in the lead integrity. In this case, there is 
an insulation breach causing a marked and abrupt drop in impedance and signal size.
100%
Atrial sensed
Histograms
Date of last reset
24-OCT-2005
Atrial paced
V-paced
V-paced
V-sensed
V-sensed
0%
100%
0%
30
50
70
90
Rates (ppm)
Rates (ppm)
110
130
150
170
190
30
50
70
90
110
130
150
170
190
Figure 19.12  As indicated here, the distribution of atrial sensing with ventricular pacing or ventricular sensed events are seen at various 
rates. Similarly, during atrial pacing, ventricular paced and ventricular sensed events are seen. By observing a histogram such as this, one 
can determine if there is appropriate rate response and what the changes in rate are for a given patient. This information can helpful in 
the management of rate and interval adjustments.

19  How to Perform Pacemaker Troubleshooting
186
pacemaker implanted for chronotropic incompetence 
and remains symptomatic, the rate histogram can be 
used to help determine need for rate response or its 
adjustment (Figure 19.12). The adjustment may involve a 
change in the lower rate, the degree of rate response or 
its threshold, or how much activity is required to activate 
the feature. Many devices provide a template of activity 
level to help optimize the rate response.
Other Specific Issues
Pacemaker‐mediated tachycardia (PMT) is a specific 
arrhythmia that occurs in paced patients in which the 
ventricle tracks atrial events but the atrial events are 
caused by ventricular activation with retrograde (VA) 
conduction. This is most often a result of premature ven-
tricular complex with retrograde atrial activation that is 
sensed and appropriately tracked, leading to a repetitive 
rhythm. PMT can be caused by a P wave that occurs after 
the PVARP that is sensed and then tracked (usually after 
a long P‐V‐ paced interval such that the atria are no 
longer refractory after the ventricular stimulus is given), 
leading to another retrograde P wave and establishment 
of a repetitive rhythm. One way to prevent this type of 
tachycardia is to lengthen the TARP, which can be done 
by extending the PVARP automatically after a PVC. This 
design feature recognizes the fact that a PVC tends to 
initiate PMT. As noted earlier, long programmed AV or 
PV intervals that occur in order not to violate the upper 
rate limit are more likely to be associated with PMT as 
this allows for retrograde atrial activation when the AV 
node and atria are no longer refractory. Therefore, short-
ening the AV interval may also help avoid PMT, keeping 
in mind that more ventricular pacing than desirable may 
result from such a maneuver. It is important to recognize 
that changes in AV intervals and PVARP will affect upper 
tracking rates and ventricular paced rates when the atrial 
sensed rate exceeds the upper tracking rate limit. Most 
pacemakers have automatic algorithms to terminate 
PMT, including omission of a single ventricular stimulus 
in order to re‐establish normally programmed AV or PV 
intervals.
Pacemakers can be used to detect specific rhythm dis-
turbances. This is a feature that is being used increas-
ingly in clinical practice. Pacemakers have most 
commonly been used to identify the amount and dura-
tion of atrial fibrillation episodes, the “burden of atrial 
fibrillation” (the percentage of time a patient is in atrial 
fibrillation). Devices differ in their ability to detect the 
burden of atrial fibrillation rather than simply number of 
fibrillation or mode‐switch episodes. However, pace-
makers are also important in the detection of ventricular 
tachycardias. Furthermore, pacemakers can be pro-
grammed to detect the amounts of atrial and ventricular 
pacing to associate this with symptoms and distributions 
in heart rates (Figure 19.12).
Battery life can be detected by pacemaker interroga-
tion. When the pacemaker reaches its elective replace-
ment indicator, often at least 3 months of battery life are 
available but when the pacemaker reaches an end‐of‐life, 
programming and even interrogation become difficult or 
impossible because of the energy required for these pro-
cesses. On occasion, the pacemaker near or at end‐of‐life 
can be so unstable that if it is exposed any external noise 
including electrocautery, it can immediately reprogram, 
sometimes even to a non‐pacing mode. Part of the fol-
low‐up of any pacing system is to determine battery life 
and projected longevity; the longevity of the device 
depends on the percentage of pacing, and pacing voltage 
output as well as lead impedance because current flow 
(measured in coulombs) determines the battery drain.
A “power‐on‐reset” state can occur when pacemakers 
are exposed to EMI such as electrocautery. Pacemakers 
have zener diodes to protect their sensitive circuits from 
noise in the external environment including electromag-
netic interference and DC shock used for external cardi-
oversion. If these are sensed, the signals are blocked from 
going into the pulse generator and the voltage drops 
internally causing a potential power on reset. The pace-
maker may be reprogrammed, often to a VVI mode that 
needs to be reset to the desired mode of function with 
reprogramming. Pacemakers that have low battery volt-
age are more susceptible to this phenomenon.
­Conlusions
Pacemaker troubleshooting requires a stepwise approach:
1)	 Identification of the problem and the reason for 
evaluation.
2)	 Indications for the pacemaker, determination of 
­pacemaker dependence and determination of the 
type of pacemaker and the programming characteris-
tics, including unique features.
3)	 Interrogation of the device, and evaluation of marker 
channel 
information 
and 
stored 
intracardiac 
electrograms.
4)	 Relating the abnormalities seen on the surface elec-
trocardiogram with potential issues with regard to 
programming characteristics and marker channel 
measurements.
5)	 Determination of problems resulting from electrome-
chanical interference, inappropriate pacing and 
sensing.
Ultimately, with proper troubleshooting, a pacemaker 
can provide improved quality‐of‐life and functionality 
without danger.

187
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
­Anti‐Tachy Pacing Therapy
An anti‐tachy pacing (ATP) therapy is defined as a tem-
porary high rate pacing delivered during a tachycardia. 
Ventricular ATP therapies automatically delivered by an 
implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD) can termi-
nate a relevant proportion of both slow and fast ventric-
ular tachycardias (VT).
As these therapies are painless and require far less 
energy than a DC shock, each appropriate and successful 
delivery of an ATP therapy can significantly contribute 
to improving patient’s quality of life and device longevity. 
In addition, as it has been shown that patients who 
receive shocks for any arrhythmia have a substantially 
higher risk of death than similar patients who do not 
receive such shocks [1], one may speculate that a fine 
tuning of ATP programming to maximize success rate 
and avoid shock delivery may also have a beneficial effect 
on mortality.
Pathophysiologic Background
Re‐entry is one of the most common mechanisms that 
permit a VT to persist. Myocardial infarction (MI), 
arrhythmogenic disease of right ventricle VTs, dilated 
cardiomyopathy, and more rarely hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy as well as post‐surgical diseases are the basis 
of the most common forms of VTs requiring re‐entry to 
initiate and persist.
Post‐MI VTs comprise most of the VTs normally 
encountered in clinical practice and their re‐entry mech-
anism is well understood. The anatomic substrate for 
re‐entry is the interlacing of scar tissue and vital viable 
myocardium, which represent an anatomic barrier and 
an area of slow conduction, respectively. Areas with slow 
conduction can act as a corridor between at least two 
zones of normal conduction, favoring re‐entry along 
with altered refractoriness and enhanced automaticity 
caused by the infarction.
A slowed conduction area may join proximally and dis-
tally a normally blocked pathway to form a closed circuit 
of conduction. When this happens, the slow pathway 
across the scar area can excite the alternative pathway 
distally, initiating a retrograde wavefront along the 
blocked pathway and establishing re‐entry. This type 
of VTs is particularly prone to be terminated by rapid 
pacing.
Two important elements are necessary for an ATP 
therapy to terminate a VT: first, the VT cycle must be 
sufficiently regular; secondly, pacing should be critically 
timed with the VT cycle to induce the wavefront to enter 
the refractoriness. Both these characteristics are easily 
detected by modern devices, which are able to measure 
the VT cycle stability, calculating the exact programmed 
pulse coupling according to VT cycle length and deliver-
ing the pulse train automatically.
ATP Description
Theoretically, a single critically timed pulse can termi-
nate re‐entrant VTs but practically the efficacy is low. 
Multiple pulses delivered in the form of pacing drive 
trains more effectively interact with the VT circuit 
increasing the likelihood of termination.
20
How to Program an ICD to Program ATP, and Program for VT/VF Storm
P. Pieragnoli1, G. Ricciardi1, Margherita Padeletti2, Stefania Sacchi1, Alessio Gargaro3, and Luigi Padeletti 4
1 Heart and Vessels Department, University of Florence, Florence, Italy
2 Cardiology Unit, Borgo San Lorenzo Hospital, Florence, Italy
3 Biotronik, Clinical Research Department, Vimodrone (MI), Italy
4 IRCCS MultiMedica, Sesto San Giovanni, Milan, Italy

20  How to Program an ICD to Program ATP, and Program for VT/VF Storm
188
There are several types of ATP therapy. In general, 
they consist of a sequence of one or more pulse trains, 
repeatedly delivered until episode termination is con-
firmed or high energy DC shock therapies are initiated. 
Pulses are delivered from the tip of the ventricular elec-
trode, conventionally, but not necessarily, positioned in 
the apex of the right ventricle. To ensure local tissue cap-
ture and to generate wavefronts propagating through the 
myocardium of the left ventricle, maximum pulse ampli-
tude and duration are applied during ATP.
More ATP sequences can be attempted before apply-
ing a DC shock in slow VTs, while one or very few pulse 
trains are recommended for faster and hemodynamically 
unsustainable VTs. Modern devices allow delivery of a 
single ATP sequence immediately before or during 
capacitor charging for the first shock therapy also in very 
fast regular VTs falling in the ventricular fibrillation (VF) 
detection zone.
ATP Therapies in the VT Detection Zones
ICD programming includes the definition of one or two 
VT detection zones programmed in terms of frequency 
or cycle length ranges. Typical settings are 360–300 ms 
(~167–200 bpm) for a first slow VT detection zone, with 
the addition of an optional 300–250 ms (200–240 bpm) 
fast VT zone, even if very recent evidence supports the 
view of even shorter cycle (higher rate) ranges. ATP ther-
apies may be only programmed to precede shocks in the 
therapy sequence, after a predefined number of intervals 
(NID) have been detected within the respective VT 
detection zone. Each zone has its own NID counter 
which may be either sequential or forward–backward, 
depending on the device manufacturer. The most recent 
tendency is to prolong the detection process for VT as 
much as possible in order to permit self‐termination; 
however, once the counter of a VT zone has reached the 
NID level, the first ATP therapy sequence (if pro-
grammed) is immediately initiated. The most common 
ATP types are burst and ramp pacing, even if there are 
different versions.
Burst
A single burst pacing pattern consists of a number of 
pulses (normally delivered at the maximum amplitude 
and duration output) with equal interstimulus intervals 
and a programmed coupling with the detected VT cycle 
length. For example (Figure 20.1 ), if a VT episode with 
an average cycle length of 340 ms is detected, a four‐
pulse burst with a 80% coupling implies the delivery of a 
first pulse with a 340 × 0.80 = 272 ms coupling with the 
last detected VT beat (R–S1 interval), followed by a 
sequence of further three pulses with a 272 ms mutual 
distance (S1–S1 intervals). If the first drive train is not 
effective and a VT is re‐detected in the same detection 
zone, a second drive train may be automatically deliv-
ered, after recalculating an updated VT cycle length for a 
new R–S1 and S1–S1 coupling. Some changes in the sec-
ond pulse sequences may be introduced in the therapy 
programming. For instance, a more aggressive S1–S1 
interval may be required by introducing a decrement in 
the S1–S1 interval or an additional pulse may be 
appended to each repeated sequence. As very fast pac-
ing  can have a proarrhythmic effect, accelerating the 
arrhythmia rather than terminating it, a minimum 
­pacing ­interval may be set up, preventing pulse trains 
with shorter cycle.
Ramp
A ramp stimulation pattern consists of a train of pac-
ing pulses with an automatically decrementing inter-
stimulus interval. Stimulation pattern is rate‐adaptive 
for this form of ATP: the interval from the last sensed 
ventricular event during VT to the first pacing stimu-
lus is a programmable percentage of the detected VT 
cycle length. Subsequent pulses within a pulse train 
are decremented by a fixed or adaptive quantity. As 
for burst pacing, a ramp therapy can consist of several 
repeated sequences, which may differ for the number 
of pulses, and the aggressiveness of VT cycle adapta-
tion (Figure 20.1).
These patterns can be combined in a number of ways. 
For instance, in rare cases, an extra stimulus may be 
added to a burst train with a different (generally shorter) 
coupling (S1–S2 interval). All these variations on a theme 
probably have little clinical benefit.
Figure 20.2 shows a typical programmer panel where 
ATP therapy detail can be set up in detail.
ATP Therapies in the VF Detection Zone
Many tachycardias have a fairly regular cycle while 
falling in the VF detection zone generally pro-
grammed below 300–270 ms (above 200–220 bpm). 
They are VTs in all respects, even if VF therapies are 
associated. Even for these very fast VTs, modern 
devices allow delivery of at least one burst attempt, 
immediately before or during capacitor charging for a 
high energy shock.
Basically, when a ventricular episode reaches the NID 
for VF detection, a stability criterion is applied on the 
last ventricular intervals. A typical criterion may be that 
none of the last four intervals differed more than 12% of 
the average cycle. If the stability criterion has passed a 
burst pacing with programmable number of pulses and 
adaptive coupling is immediately delivered. During 

­Anti‐Tach y Paci ng Therap ﻿
189
sequence delivering or upon the last train pulse capaci-
tor charging for a subsequent programmed shock is 
­initiated without waiting for outcome of the pacing 
­therapy (Figure 20.3).
This single ATP “one‐shot” has recently raised interest, 
as the benefits are multiple and obtained for little or no 
disadvantage. The advantages are that avoiding unneces-
sary shocks can have a positive impact on mortality as 
330
340
350
340
average: 340 ms
R-S1:
272 ms
S1-S1:
272 ms
average: 330ms
330
320
330
340
R-S1:
254ms
R-S1:
254ms
Burst train 1
Burst train 2
VT average cycle: 340 ms
Burst train 1:
R-S1: 80% = 340 x 0.80 = 272 ms
N x S1-S1: 4 x 272 ms
VT average cycle is updated: 330 ms
Burst train 2:
R-S1: 80% – 10 ms = 330 ms x 0.80 – 10 ms = 254 ms
Add S1: ON
N x S1-S1: 5 x 254 ms
330
340
350
340
average: 340 ms
R-S1:
272 ms
S1-S1 (ms): 272
average: 330ms
330
320
330
340
R-S1:
264ms
Ramp train 1
Ramp train 2
VT average cycle: 340 ms
Ramp train 1:
R-S1: 80% = 340 x 0.80 = 272ms
S1 decrement: 10 ms
N x S1: 4
VT average cycle is updated: 330 ms
Ramp train 2:
R-S1: 80% = 330 ms x 0.80 = 264 ms
Add S1: ON
S1 decrement: 10 ms
N x S1: 5
262 252
S1-S1 (ms): 264
254 244 234
Figure 20.1  (Top) Simple burst‐pacing scheme. (Bottom) Simple ramp‐pacing scheme. See text for details.

20  How to Program an ICD to Program ATP, and Program for VT/VF Storm
190
well as on the patient’s comfort and acceptance of ICD 
therapy. In addition, some ICD models are able to moni-
tor the patient’s rhythm during the capacitor charging 
period and to abort it in situations of recovery of sinus 
rhythm, with an intuitively clear benefit for battery 
­preservation. Potential downsides of this therapy are 
negligible: an irrelevant potential second delay of shock 
delivery (around 1 s) and acceleration or disorganization 
of the VT rhythm during (however, the programmed DC 
shock is committed in this case).
Figure 20.2  Typical screenshot of an anti‐tachy pacing (ATP) therapy programming in an implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD). Both 
for a burst and a ramp pacing, the following programming parameters are displayed: number of sequences, the number of pulses within a 
sequence (Number S1), whether or not an incremental pulse will be added to the sequence at each repetition, the coupling interval of 
pulses (R–S1 interval) and their reciprocal decrement (S1 decrement for a Ramp), the progressive decrement of couplings of each 
subsequent sequence and minimum pacing interval S1–S2 interval.
Figure 20.3  An example of one ATP “one‐shot” delivered during a fast and regular ventricular tachycardia (VT) episode detected in the 
programmed ventricular fibrillation (VF) zone. In this case, the therapy consisted of a burst of 5 pulses with an 85% coupling, effective in 
terminating the arrhythmia. The ATP therapy lasted less than a second, and immediately upon the last pulse capacitor charging 
(represented by the horizontal black solid line) was initiated. After three intervals outside the VT detection zone, charging was interrupted, 
saving the energy for an unnecessary full capacitor charging cycle.

­AT P Therapy  Efficac y and Programmin g Recommendatio ﻿
191
­ATP Therapy Efficacy 
and Programming Recommendation
Slow VTs
ATP efficacy in terminating slow VT episodes (cycle 
length >300–320 ms) was studied as soon as the pacing 
feature was made available in the first implantable 
­defibrillators in the early 1990s. Burst and ramp pacing 
schemes were reported to terminate 70–80% of both 
spontaneous episodes and monomorphic VTs induced 
during electrophysiologic studies. Spontaneous VTs 
appeared more prone to ATP termination then induced 
VTs. Also, burst and ramp showed similar VT termina-
tion rates, with the ramp being relatively less effective in 
fast VTs <300 ms.
Fast VTs and the Pain FREE Trials
Since then much has changed in general agreement 
about how and when to deliver ATP therapy. Rhythm 
acceleration is a possible outcome of ATP therapy, result-
ing in painful shock delivery and in hemodynamically 
unstable tachycardia with such potentially important 
clinical consequences as syncope. It was initially recog-
nized that the probability of ATP failure and acceleration 
increases as VT cycle length decreases. Therefore, there 
was a common reluctance to program repeated ATP 
trains, especially ramp schemes, to treat fast VTs with 
cycle lengths below 300–290 ms. This view has been 
overtaken by the results of the most recent trials which 
consistently showed high success rates and low accelera-
tion rates even in fast VTs.
The PainFREE trials were the first to address these 
issues. The first pilot study PainFREE Rx [2] was an ini-
tial registry applying standardized VT detection and 
ATP regimen to 220 patients with 1100 spontaneous epi-
sodes of VT. ATP success rate was 92% for slow VTs 
(cycle length ≤320 ms) and 89% for fast VTs. Later, the 
PainFREE Rx II trial used a randomized design to make a 
direct safety comparison between shock and ATP thera-
pies for fast VT >188 bpm. It included 634 patients with 
either ischemic or non‐ischemic cardiomyopathy. 
During a follow‐up of 1 year, 1760 episodes of slow VT, 
fast VT, and VF were collected. The results showed that 
a single burst sequence of 8 pulses at 88% VT cycle length 
could safely terminate 77% of fast VTs and 90% of slow 
VTs. Consequently, shocks were reduced by 70% com-
pared to the control group. ATP was not associated with 
any increase in sudden death, syncope, or even arrhyth-
mia acceleration compared to the control group. 
The quality of life of the ATP group was also found to be 
superior to the control group. This evidence represents a 
solid basis to recommend programming a single burst 
train during or immediately before capacitor charging 
for shock delivery in fast and regular 200–250 bpm VT, 
as this feature is normally available in modern devices.
Detection Count to Initiate ATP Therapy 
in Slow and Fast VT
An important finding of the PainFREE Rx II trial was 
that prolonging the counter to 18 for the first fast VT 
detection markedly reduced the number of delivered 
therapy compared with the 12 count detection of the 
first PainFREE study. This suggested that a relevant pro-
portion of spontaneous episodes self‐terminate and 
should not be treated. This first hint was subsequently 
investigated by other studies. In the ADVANCE III 
study, the intervention counter was further prolonged to 
30 out of 40 intervals and the rate of delivered therapies 
was compared with 18 of 24 interval count setting [3]. 
Simply waiting 12 more beats prior to ICD intervention 
could induce a 37% reduction in the incidence of ATPs. 
The ADVANCE III trial did not find significant effects 
of prolonged detection count on mortality and syncope. 
However, the MADIT RIT trial [4] was a three‐arm 
study which randomly assigned primary prevention 
patients to: (i) high‐rate therapy (with a 2.5 s delay before 
the initiation of therapy at a heart rate of ≥200 bpm); (ii) 
delayed therapy (with a 60 s delay at 170–199 bpm, a 12 s 
delay at 200–249 bpm, and a 2.5 s delay at ≥250 bpm); 
(iii) conventional programming (with a 2.5 s delay at 
170–199 bpm and a 1.0 s delay at ≥200 bpm). The trial 
showed that programming strategies (i) and (ii) were 
associated with a significant reduction of the hazard 
ratio of inappropriate therapy and even all‐cause mor-
tality during long‐term follow‐up. Nevertheless, the 
striking importance of this result was counterbalanced 
by the apparent inconsistency that the huge reduction of 
therapy incidence was mostly driven by fewer ATP 
deliveries rather than shocks, raising questions concern-
ing the cause–effect relationship between ICD therapy 
delivery and mortality.
Selection of ATPM  Type and Programming
When compared on the basis of VT cycle length, burst 
pacing was more likely to terminate fast VTs (cycle 
length >300 ms) than ramp pacing, while no differences 
were detected for slower VTs. The incidence of rhythm 
acceleration was low but more likely with the ramp 
­pacing in fast VTs. More recently, the randomized con-
trolled PITAGORA study directly compared the efficacy 
in terminating fast VTs (cycle length of 320–240 ms) 
between one single sequence of burst (8 pulses at 88% 
coupling interval) and ramp (8 pulses at 91% coupling 
interval). Burst pacing proved more effective in 

20  How to Program an ICD to Program ATP, and Program for VT/VF Storm
192
­terminating 75% of spontaneous fast VTs compared with 
a 54% efficacy obtained with the ramp [5].
The number of pulses within a burst sequence has also 
been investigated comparing 8 with 15 pulse trains with 
comparable results, although 15 pulses proved signifi-
cantly better in patients without a previous history of 
heart failure and in patients with a preserved ejection 
fraction.
To sum up, ATP therapies effectively terminate most 
of the spontaneous slow and fast monomorphic VTs, and 
the efficacy is not impaired by prolonged detection dura-
tions or empirical programming. On this basis, the fol-
lowing ATP programming recommendation appears 
reasonable (Table 20.1):
●
●For VTs between 170 and 200 bpm, 2–3 ATP attempts 
(preferably two bursts and one ramp);
●
●For faster VTs up to 250 bpm, one single burst imme-
diately before or during capacitor charging;
●
●For slow VTs below 170 bpm, more ATP attempts may 
be considered depending on individual patients; pro-
gramming should be tailored on a patient‐by‐patient 
basis and no recommendations can be given based on 
current evidence.
­ATP Therapy in Cardiac 
Resynchronization Therapy 
Defibrillators
As biventricular devices are able to deliver pacing pulses 
either from right ventricle, left ventricle, or both, ATP 
efficacy was also investigated in relation to the stimula-
tion site of origin. However, it is important to note that 
the pathophysiologic mechanism of re‐entrant VT is not 
dependent on, or influenced by, the site of origin of the 
VT circuit. The randomized, controlled ADVANCE 
CRT‐D trial compared the efficacy of biventricular with 
right ventricular ATP therapies in terminating all kinds 
of ventricular tachycardias. Although ATP confirmed 
their efficacy also in patients implanted with a cardiac 
resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT‐D) device, 
no significant differences emerged between biventricular 
and right ventricle delivered ATPs in the general popula-
tion. A trend toward a lower acceleration rate during fast 
VT was observed in the patients group assigned to biven-
tricular ATPs.
­ATP Therapies in Electrical Storms
Patients with an ICD, especially the subgroup implanted 
for a secondary prevention indication, have a high risk of 
developing electrical instability manifested by repeated 
stable VTs in a short period. This condition is generally 
referred to as electrical storm (ES), even if definition 
­varies remarkably among authors. Nowadays, the most 
widely used definition is ≥3 appropriate VT detections 
within 24 hours that result in ICD therapy (antitachycar-
dia pacing or shocks) or are sustained (>30 s). Of note, 
the definition neither mentions hemodynamic instability 
of VTs nor the number of shock discharges and inappro-
priate detections. In addition, VT episodes must be sep-
arate, meaning that a sequence of unsuccessful ATP or 
shock therapies is not part of this definition. In contrast, 
incessant VT (i.e., VT continuously re‐initiating within a 
few seconds after termination) should be considered as a 
particularly severe form of ES.
Incidence of ES has been reported in the range of 
10–28% in 12–36 months, with a relatively lower rate for 
primary prevention patients. A definitive explanation of 
what triggers ES is still unknown. Nevertheless, it seems 
well established that the sympathetic tone has an impact 
on ES elicitation, as indirectly shown by the finding of a 
decreased baroreflex sensitivity, therapeutic effect of beta 
blockers, and a peak incidence during the morning hours.
Table 20.1  Scheme for antitachycardia pacing therapy programming.
Detection ranges
Detection duration
Antitachy pacing scheme
(bpm)
(ms)
Burst
Ramp
VF
≥240
≤250
9–12 s
(30–40 intervals)
None
None
Fast VT
200–240
300–250
9–12 s
(30–40 intervals)
No of sequence: 1
8 S1 × 85% CL
None
Slow VT
~167–200
370–300
>12 s*
(>30–40 intervals)
No of sequence: 2*
8 S1 × 80% CL (add 1)
No. of sequences: 1*
8 S1 × 85–90% CL
CL, detected average cycle length; S1, sequence pulse; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
*For slower VTs, longer detection durations (e.g., 60 s) and multiple combinations of individually tailored antitachy pacing sequences may be 
considered.

References ﻿
193
Whatever the cause, 86–97% of ES consist of mono-
morphic VTs, revealing the presence of re‐entry and elec-
trophysiologic substrate in most cases. Therefore, 
detection and therapy programming in ICD is critical. 
First, shocks should minimize or even avoid, in slow 
incessant VTs, as sympathetic stress is an important trig-
ger. Secondly, ATP therapies can terminate the majority 
of re‐entry monomorphic VTs and should be used to 
delay or even replace high energy therapies, whenever 
possible. Some devices provide algorithms enabling shock 
discharge only when irregular VT cycles are detected. 
This feature could be usefully exploited during ES.
Detection duration certainly is another important 
parameter to be carefully programmed. Based on recent 
evidence, detection should be as long as possible to allow 
spontaneous termination, specially in hemodynamically 
tolerated VTs. It is unknown how many treated VTs 
would remain sustained if therapies were delayed fur-
ther. It is even unclear what the duration cutoff is beyond 
which a VT becomes persistent and needs treatment. It 
should also mentioned that, at least in patients for whom 
ES is not a sporadic episode triggered by reversible 
causes, ICD therapies should be considered as an ulti-
mate back‐up. Radiofrequency catheter ablation can 
suppress incessant VTs and prevent ES recurrences. 
There is also increasing evidence that prophylactic 
­catheter ablation of native VT forms can prevent ICD 
interventions.
References
	1	 Poole JE, Johnson GW, Hellkamp AS, Anderson J, 
Callans DJ, Raitt MH, et al. Prognostic importance of 
defibrillator shocks in patients with heart failure. N Engl 
J Med 2008;359(10):1009–1017.
	2	 Wathen MS, DeGroot PJ, Sweeney MO, Stark AJ, 
Otterness MF, Adkisson WO, et al; PainFREE Rx II 
Investigators. Prospective randomized multicenter trial 
of empirical antitachycardia pacing versus shocks for 
spontaneous rapid ventricular tachycardia in patients 
with implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators: Pacing Fast 
Ventricular Tachycardia Reduces Shock Therapies 
(PainFREE Rx II) trial results. Circulation 
2004;110(17):2591–2596.
	3	 Gasparini M, Proclemer A, Klersy C, Kloppe A, Lunati 
M, Ferrer JB, et al. Effect of long‐detection interval vs 
standard‐detection interval for implantable  
cardioverter‐defibrillators on antitachycardia pacing and 
shock delivery: the ADVANCE III randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA 2013;309(24):2552.
	4	 Moss AJ, Schuger C, Beck CA, Brown MW, Cannom DS, 
Daubert JP, et al; MADIT‐RIT Trial Investigators. 
Reduction in inappropriate therapy and mortality 
through ICD programming. N Engl J Med 
2012;367(24):2275–2283.
	5	 Gulizia MM, Piraino L, Scherillo M, Puntrello C, Vasco 
C, Scianaro MC, et al; PITAGORA ICD Study 
Investigators. A randomized study to compare ramp 
versus burst antitachycardia pacing therapies to treat 
fast ventricular tachyarrhythmias in patients with 
implantable cardioverter defibrillators: the PITAGORA 
ICD trial. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 
2009;2(2):146–153.

195
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Implantation of implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators 
(ICDs) has dramatically increased over the last 20 years 
because of large clinical trials supporting improved mor-
tality in secondary and primary prevention populations. 
As a result of progressive advances in medical therapy 
for ischemic heart disease and congestive heart failure, 
patients requiring ICDs are living longer. It is estimated 
that over 150 000 ICDs are implanted annually in the 
USA with three‐quarters for primary prevention and 
one‐quarter for secondary prevention. Concomitantly, it 
is increasingly recognized that although ICDs save lives, 
those receiving ICD therapies are at increased risk of 
mortality, hospitalizations, and declining quality of life 
when compared with those not receiving therapy.
First‐generation ICDs were non‐programmable and 
required surgical implantation. The devices have quickly 
evolved to be easily implanted endovascularly and highly 
programmable with the ability to deliver multi‐tiered 
therapy coupled with extensive diagnostic or monitoring 
options. Each device manufacturer has proprietary diag-
nostic and treatment algorithms, which may perform 
differently in similar clinical circumstances. Furthermore, 
the complex engineering decisions and rigorous testing 
needed to design, manufacture, gain regulatory approval, 
and implant these devices safely are enormous and elec-
tromechanical failure remains a problem.
It is highly important for the general cardiologist, heart 
failure specialist, or electrophysiologist to have a thor-
ough understanding of the algorithmic approach to 
­tachyarrhythmia detection and therapy as well as com-
mon points of failure in order to be able to evaluate and 
recognize appropriate and inappropriate ICD function.
­Basics of Ventricular 
Tachyarrhythmia Detection
Despite the sophistication and configurability of the cur-
rent generation of ICDs, the central parameter to assess 
the presence of ventricular tachyarrhythmias (VT/VF) 
remains dependent on the sensed heart rate. Appropriate 
detection and avoidance of inappropriate detection of 
ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation (VT/VF) 
depends on two factors:
1)	 Ability of the device to filter or reject all signals that 
do not represent ventricular depolarization [1,2];
2)	 Establishing appropriate rate cutoffs for VT/VF 
zones [1,2].
It is essential the device sense physiologic signals of 
interest (i.e., ventricular depolarization) to monitor and 
deliver life‐saving therapies while rejecting all other 
extraneous physiologic or non‐physiologic signals. In 
order to distinguish a ventricular depolarization prop-
erly, the raw electrical signal is sequentially passed 
though an amplifier, band pass filter, rectifier, and level 
detector (sensitivity) [1]. The band pass filter allows a 
narrow frequency range of signals to pass while 
­attenuating the remaining signals. The frequency range 
of ventricular and atrial depolarizations tend to overlap 
within this band; T waves are generally low frequency 
and myopotentials high frequency [1].
Reliable detection of VF requires the ability to sense 
signal amplitudes over a wide and rapidly changing 
dynamic range. For example, the device needs to be able 
21
How to Troubleshoot An ICD
Advay G. Bhatt, Santosh C. Varkey, and Kevin M. Monahan
Boston Medical Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA

21  How to Troubleshoot An ICD
196
to distinguish between ventricular pauses necessitating 
pacing and fine VF. This is accomplished with automatic 
gain control (AGC) where the peak or average signal 
amplitude is used to adjust the gain (sensitivity) dynami-
cally [1,3]. The programmed sensitivity sets a minimum 
amplitude or floor below which the device will not sense. 
AGC dynamically decreases the sensitivity with fixed or 
programmable decay rates in order to be able to avoid 
crosstalk, oversensing of repolarization, and at the same 
time avoid undersensing VF. The need for high sensitiv-
ity in an ICD increases the risk of oversensing thereby 
inhibiting pacing or inappropriate detection of VT/VF.
In general, VT/VF zones are programmed with high 
rate cutoffs to avoid overlap with sinus tachycardia or 
atrial tachyarrhythmias. Inappropriately programming 
low rate cutoffs or multiple zones increases the likeli-
hood of inappropriate ICD therapy.
The other programmable factor that affects whether 
ICD therapy is delivered depends on the detection inter-
val needed to establish the presence of VT/VF. VT detec-
tion is based on the concept that VT generally is regular 
with a rate slower than VF [1]. If the ICD is sensing events 
with intervals within the designated VT zone, it counts 
them consecutively until the programmed number of 
intervals to detect (NID) or duration is met. VF detection 
is based on a probabilistic counter given that VF has very 
fast and irregular intervals with marked variation in the 
amplitude of the fibrillatory waves. A probabilistic coun-
ter allows utilizing AGC to reduce oversensing and toler-
ate intermittent dropout because of fine low‐amplitude 
fibrillatory waves [1].
­Implant‐Related Problems
During device implant, the reasons for acute failure 
are  technical or related to the skill and experience of 
the implanting physician. The most common issues are 
related to lead dislodgement, perforation, and connec-
tions. These factors are readily evaluated with routine 
post‐implant interrogation and chest radiographs. All 
of these issues will require lead revision to correct 
the problem.
Lead dislodgement in single‐ or dual‐chamber ICDs 
can be inferred from loss of capture, loss of sensing, 
inappropriate shocks for sinus tachycardia or supraven-
tricular tachycardia (SVT), or undersensing of VT/VF. 
The implant techniques to minimize dislodgement 
include ensuring the lead tip is embedded in the myo-
cardium fluoroscopically, with gentle traction, or assess-
ing injury current; presence of sufficient slack to 
accommodate cardiac motion and inferior displacement 
when standing; and anchoring the leads in the pocket 
with suture sleeves.
Patients with lead perforation can present dramatically 
with hypotension or shortness of breath related to 
­cardiac tamponade which is most safely dealt with in the 
operating theatre with cardiothoracic (CT) surgery. 
Patients with lead perforation may also present suba-
cutely with pericardial pain, diaphragmatic capture, or 
intercostal muscle capture that would require lead 
­revision. In the presence of an effusion, the risk of tam-
ponade may be higher and lead revision should be under-
taken with CT surgical back‐up. An acute impedance 
rise raises the possibility of perforation. However, lead 
impedance and threshold may be unchanged if the 
ring  electrode remains in contact with myocardium. 
The implant techniques to minimize perforation include 
avoiding having the stylet fully advanced into the lead 
when deploying the screw, over‐torqueing the screw, 
assessing for out of range impedances, or diaphragmatic 
stimulation.
A loose set‐screw or reversal of the right ventricular 
(RV) and superior vena cava (SVC) coil pins in the header 
of the device would result in oversensing from electro-
mechanical interference (EMI) or myopotential sensing 
leading to inhibition of pacing or delivery inappropriate 
therapy, respectively. Low high‐voltage (HV) impedance 
or ineffective defibrillation at the time of defibrillation 
threshold testing (DFT) may indicate reversal of the coils 
in the header of the device. Other considerations for ele-
vated DFT at the time of implant include suboptimal 
lead position or pneumothorax. RV and SVC coil pin 
reversal would lead to pectoral myopotential or EMI 
oversensing (see Myopotentials and Electromechanical 
Interference).
­Clinical Reasons to Assess  
ICD Function
The most common reasons patients present for ICD 
evaluation include shocks, presyncope, syncope, palpita-
tions, audible alerts, perioperative management, or 
­routine device follow‐up.
Presyncope, syncope, and palpitations can be caused by 
a myriad of reasons including VT below the detection 
zone, VT falling in and out of the zone, VT/VF undersens-
ing, non‐sustained VT, frequent premature ventricular 
contractions, or SVT. Audible or haptic alerts are pro-
grammable parameters for battery depletion, ­prolonged 
charge time, magnet application, electrical reset, lead 
impedance warning, and intrathoracic impedance change. 
There is variability in whether the alerts are activated and 
educating patients in regards to the nature and implica-
tions of an alert. The tones or vibrations used for alerts 
may increase patient anxiety and are of decreasing utility 
as remote monitoring is adopted more widely.

­Inappropriat e I CD Therap y for  Oversensin ﻿
197
A thorough history should be taken, including medica-
tions and recent procedures; physical examination to 
assess for trauma or signs of infection; electrocardio-
gram; chest radiograph to evaluate for dislodgement, 
fracture, or other lead abnormalities; and interrogation 
allow for comprehensive device evaluation. The goal is to 
evaluate battery status, lead integrity with close atten-
tion to the high‐voltage components, programming 
­characteristics, stored tachyarrhythmia episodes, and 
appropriateness and effectiveness of delivered therapies.
The most common diagnostic issue is distinguishing 
appropriate from inappropriate ICD therapy (each are 
managed differently) and effectiveness of antitachycar-
dia pacing (ATP) or defibrillation.
ATP or shocks may be delivered for monomorphic or 
polymorphic VT, ventricular flutter, or VF. Delivery of 
ICD therapy needs careful evaluation for the presence of 
ischemia, decompensated heart failure, polypharmacy, 
and metabolic abnormalities. The presence of these 
­triggering factors should prompt admission with goal of 
medical stabilization, optimization, and evaluating need 
for ablative therapies to reduce future shocks. Device 
optimization can be performed after assessing sensing of 
VT/VF, response to ATP, effectiveness of the first shock, 
presence of unwanted pacing, or ineffective cardiac 
resynchronization (CRT).
ATP or shocks may be inappropriately delivered as a 
result of oversensing extraneous physiologic signals; non‐
physiologic signals from EMI or device malfunction; or 
SVT, most commonly atrial fibrillation (AF).
­Inappropriate ICD Therapy for 
Oversensing
Oversensing is the misinterpretation of voltage deflec-
tions not related to a QRS complex as ventricular depo-
larization, resulting in perception of a falsely elevated 
ventricular rate. This leads to inappropriate inhibition of 
pacing, ATP, or shock if sufficiently fast to be detected in 
the VT or VF zones.
The most common causes of oversensing can be classi-
fied as physiologic or non‐physiologic signals. Physiologic 
signals may be intracardiac or extracardiac in origin 
and  include T‐wave oversensing, P‐wave oversensing, 
R‐wave double counting, and myopotentials [1–4]. Non‐
physiologic signals or EMI (noise) are exclusively 
extracardiac in origin and are related to lead malfunc-
tion, electrocautery, or other external sources (see 
Electromechanical Interference and Lead or Connector 
Failure) [1–3].
Oversensing can be caused by the sensing circuit 
or   configuration, true bipolar or integrated bipolar. 
In  general, integrated bipolar leads are more prone to 
oversensing because of a wider field of sensing between 
the cathode and anode. It is reported that oversensing 
occurs more frequently when there is a lead and pulse 
generator manufacturer mismatch.
T‐wave Oversensing
T‐wave oversensing (TWOS) is the most clinically rele-
vant cause of oversensing from intracardiac signals. In 
general, TWOS is avoided in ICDs based off of the AGC 
senstivity and decay delays as well as the ventricular 
blanking period. If the initial threshold is too high, the 
decay delay too long, or the blanking period too long, VF 
detection will be delayed. TWOS therefore occurs in set-
tings with increased T‐wave amplitude, low R‐wave 
amplitude relative to T‐wave, or when the QT interval is 
prolonged beyond the ventricular blanking period.
The common clinical settings this may be encountered 
is in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, long QT syndrome, 
short QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, hyperkalemia, 
and hyperglycemia. T‐wave amplitude also varies with 
positional changes and alterations in autonomic tone 
(Figure 21.1) [1–3]. The other issue to remember is that 
each device manufacturer has different proprietary 
­algorithms to avoid TWOS that perform differently in 
clinical practice.
When TWOS occurs, the ICD may interpret the events 
as VT/VF if the sensed R‐wave to T‐wave interval falls 
within the VT or VF detection zones. This is character-
ized by alternating electrogram (EGM) morphologies 
and less often with two distinct populations of V‐V inter-
vals, one short and one long.
The ability to effectively manage TWOS primarily 
relies on the relative difference in R and T‐wave ampli-
tudes. If R‐wave amplitude is significantly greater than 
T‐wave then a simple approach is to decrease ventricular 
sensitivity. Care must be taken that VF is adequately 
detected by reassessing sensing with DFT testing. 
Theoretically, increasing the ventricular blanking period 
would correct the problem. However, not all manufactur-
ers support programmable ventricular blanking periods 
given that increasing the blanking period would lead to 
undersensing of VF. Medtronic now allows switching 
sensing between true and integrated bipolar configura-
tions, which may rectify the problem given that this phe-
nomenon is more frequently observed with true bipolar 
leads. St. Jude Medical devices allow programmable 
threshold start and decay delays, which may allow a pro-
gramming solution. Other considerations include raising 
the detection zones for VT and VF, increasing the num-
ber of intervals to detect, or treating with beta blockers to 
lower sinus rates. In cases where T‐wave oversensing is 
caused by a specific metabolic derangement, correction 
of the underlying abnormality will rectify the problem.

21  How to Troubleshoot An ICD
198
These approaches will fail and endanger appropriate 
defibrillation if T‐wave amplitude is nearly equal to or 
greater than the R wave. In these patients, the defibrilla-
tion lead may need to be repositioned or pace/sense lead 
implanted to obtain greater R‐wave amplitude or, rarely, 
try a different filtering algorithm by exchanging the pulse 
generator to that of a different manufacturer.
R‐wave Double Counting
R‐wave double counting occurs with a multifaceted 
EGM and duration that exceeds the ventricular blank-
ing period. This is now rare because of changes in 
devices. This problem may arise in the setting of 
marked intraventricular conduction delay, exacerbated 
in the setting of hyperkalemia or toxicity with sodium 
channel blocking agents, and is more common with 
integrated bipolar leads [1–3]. This was encountered 
more frequently in earlier generations of CRT‐D 
devices that allowed for bipolar sensing between the 
right and left ventricular electrodes.
R‐wave double counting results in two distinct popula-
tions of V‐V intervals, one short and one long, which 
characteristically give a “railroad track” appearance on 
the interval plot (Figure 21.2).
Increasing the ventricular blanking period can rectify 
the problem but only St. Jude Medical devices have this 
support. Older CRT‐D devices can be exchanged for 
newer models, which no longer have the extended 
­bipolar sensing configuration.
P‐wave Oversensing
P‐wave oversensing is most frequently seen if the RV 
coil of an integrated bipolar lead does not fully cross the 
tricuspid annulus, thus allowing sensing of far‐field 
atrial activity and the PR interval exceeds the ventricular 
blanking period. This may lead to inappropriate 
V-V interval (ms)
2000
V-V
VF 300 ms
34.8 J
34.8 J
34.8 J
35.1 J
35.1 J
35.1 J
1700
1400
1100
800
600
400
200
0
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
Time (sec) [0 = Detection]
40
50
60
70
80
*
*
Figure 21.2  Transient R‐wave double counting revealing classic railroad track appearance led to delivery of multiple inappropriate shocks.
Figure 21.1  T‐wave oversensing in the setting of sinus tachycardia and marked hyperglycemia that results in inappropriate shock. 
The tachycardia continues post‐shock but T‐wave oversensing is transiently not seen because of post‐shock repolarization abnormalities. 
T‐wave oversensing resumes after repolarization abnormalities resolve and VF is re‐detected. With correction of hyperglycemia, T‐wave 
oversensing was no longer appreciated. This may also be seen in hyperkalemia.

­Inappropriat e I CD Therap y for  Oversensin ﻿
199
­detection of VT/VF during sinus rhythm and SVT. It is 
most ­commonly seen with atrial flutter with proximal 
lead placement. P‐wave oversensing may be observed 
with true bipolar leads in the setting of lead dislodge-
ment or if the lead is deployed in the region of the proxi-
mal septum [1–3]. Decreasing ventricular sensitivity 
would only lead to undersensing VF; most often lead 
revision is needed.
Myopotential Oversensing
Normal electrical activity of muscle in proximity to the 
ICD system may be sensed throughout or for a fraction 
of the cardiac cycle. The two sources of myopotentials 
are the diaphragm and pectoral muscles.
Diaphragmatic myopotential oversensing (DMO) is 
most commonly observed with systems that include an 
integrated bipolar lead or sensing configuration. The 
myopotentials are high frequency electrical activity most 
prominent on the near field EGM. DMO is most often 
seen after long diastolic intervals or after ventricular 
pacing when the ICD is most sensitive; oversensing stops 
once a true R wave is sensed given AGC will readjust to 
be less sensitive [1–3]. Additionally, diaphragmatic myo-
potentials exhibit a respiratory variation as small changes 
in lead position affect sensing. This may lead to syncope 
or inappropriate delivery of therapy for VT or VF. 
Diaphragmatic myopotentials may be reproduced with 
Valsalva. It is commonly seen during straining to defe-
cate with constipation.
If myopotential sensing is discovered but does not 
result in inappropriate device therapy, then no program-
ming modifications may be necessary unless it inhibits 
pacing in pacing‐dependent cases or limits effective CRT 
(Figure  21.3). Frequent monitoring of non‐sustained 
events will accelerate battery depletion so extending the 
detection interval would be another consideration. 
If DMO leads to inappropriate shocks, ventricular sensi-
tivity may be decreased to correct the problem assuming 
adequate sensing of VF is reassessed. Less commonly, a 
new rate sensing lead may need to be inserted or the 
chronic defibrillation lead may need to be repositioned 
away from the right ventricular apex. This is most 
­commonly seen with Boston Scientific devices; 
­generator exchange may resolve the issue if lead revision 
is not possible.
Pectoral myopotential oversensing may be seen with 
true or integrated bipolar leads with electrical activity 
being most prominent on the far field electrogram [1–3]. 
This may be reproduced with isometric exercise. Pectoral 
myopotentials do not lead to inappropriate device 
­therapy given that the far field electrogram is not used 
for rate sensing and unipolar sensing is not an option. 
However, pectoral myopotentials may limit the effective-
ness of morphology‐based SVT discriminators.
Electromechanical Interference
EMI is the sensing of external electrical activity as 
­ventricular events that leads to VT/VF detection and 
therapy. The common clinical scenario is to receive 
shock without any warning or preceding symptoms. 
High frequency electrical activity is typically sensed on 
both the near and far field EGM but with greater ampli-
tude on the far field EGM. EMI will be detected in both 
the atrial and ventricular leads in dual‐chamber systems. 
This distinguishes EMI from defibrillation lead failure, 
as EMI would be confined to the affected lead [1–4].
Figure 21.3  Intermittent diaphragmatic myopotential oversensing leading to detection of VF but did not result in shock. Reducing 
ventricular sensitivity led to improvement in oversensing without undersensing of VF.

21  How to Troubleshoot An ICD
200
These are not commonly encountered routinely 
but may be seen when in proximity to industrial electro-
magnets, magnetic resonance imaging ­equipment, and 
arc welding. Vibrating devices such as jackhammers 
and chainsaws are other sources of EMI leading to over-
sensing of VF detection. Another encountered source of 
EMI is a poorly grounded swimming pool filter. This 
may lead to VF detection and shocks when attempting 
to get out of the pool or touching something outside the 
water that then provides a means of grounding the 
source of EMI (Figure 21.4). Rarely, crosstalk is an inter-
nal source of EMI in otherwise normally functioning 
devices (Figure 21.5).
More commonly encountered sources of EMI are 
medical equipment including extracorporeal shock‐
wave lithotripsy, radiotherapy, radiofrequency ablation, 
electrical nerve stimulation, MRI, or electrocautery. 
If electrocautery is used solely in short bursts, it is less 
likely to result in device therapy as detection criteria are 
often not met. Additionally, modern noise filtering on 
modern ICDs often limit inappropriate device therapy. 
Bipolar electrocautery, where both electrodes are located 
in close proximity of one another, is less likely to cause 
inappropriate detection and therapy.
­Lead or Connector Failure
Despite extensive testing, the reliability and function of 
defibrillator leads are not known until deployed widely in 
clinical practice. Although the materials used by each of 
the major lead manufacturers are similar, there are 
­differences in how these materials are applied.
The necessarily more complex design of ICD leads 
increases the probability of lead failure when compared 
with pacing leads. Longevity estimates for pacing leads 
suggests a very low rate a failure, whereas approximately 
20% of ICD leads will develop defects necessitating inter-
vention after 10 years.
Lead failure or recalls are inevitable. A clear under-
standing of the mechanisms of failure is essential. The 
etiology of lead failure includes:
1)	 Lead‐related technical factors.
2)	 Patient‐related factors:
●
●Excessive upper‐body activity;
●
●Twiddling.
3)	 Implant‐related factors:
●
●Rough lead handling or endovascular trauma;
●
●Subclavian rather than axillary/cephalic access;
Figure 21.4  EMI caused by a poorly grounded pool filter that resulted in inappropriate shock.
Figure 21.5  Phantom crosstalk caused by parasitic coupling that can lead to atrial sensing in a CRT device with an atrial port plug 
inserted. This was a CRT‐D device in which the atrial port was plugged because of permanent AF. Oversensing in the atrial channel led to 
misclassification as SVT and to delay in VT/VF therapies.

­Lea d or Connector  Failur ﻿
201
●
●Positioning the lead with a stylet fully inserted;
●
●Over‐torqueing of active‐fixation mechanism;
●
●Excessive tightening of anchoring sleeve sutures;
●
●Kinking of the lead and connector in the pocket.
The modes of failure include insulation defect, lead 
fracture, abnormal impedance, and sensing failure. 
Disruption or abrasion of lead insulation typically occur 
as a result of rough handling, clavicular crush, or lead 
friction with other components of the device or ana-
tomic structures, or inside out defects caused by the con-
ductor. Fracture of the lead conductor tends to occur at 
points of mechanical stress such as points of component 
bonding, level of the clavicle, acute angulation with the 
suture sleeve, or elsewhere within the pocket.
The common signs of a breach in lead insulation 
include low impedance, sudden rise or loss of capture, 
and over‐ or undersensing [4,5]. The common signs of 
lead fracture are erratic sensing, oversensing, high 
impedance, or intermittent or loss of capture [4,5]. 
Abnormalities in pacing impedance, if present, are 
­helpful in ascertaining the point of failure; however, they 
may be intermittent.
Oversensing because of lead or connector problems 
may be related to insulation breach, conductor fracture, 
loose set‐screw, or header failure (Figures 21.6 and 21.7). 
The oversensing of non‐physiologic signals with very 
short V‐V intervals because of these problems tend to 
be intermittent and most frequently observed on the 
Figure 21.6  Oversensing leading to inhibition of pacing and inappropriate detection of non‐sustained VF in the setting of a loose  
set‐screw following CRT‐D pulse generator change.
Figure 21.7  Undersensing of VF leading to diversion of therapy after which a 26 J shock failed to defibrillate and an external rescue shock 
was delivered. Increasing sensitivity reduced undersensing so that shock was not delayed and 26 J successfully terminated VF.

21  How to Troubleshoot An ICD
202
near field EGM. The exception is RV coil conductor 
­failure in integrated bipolar leads; oversensing is on 
seen on both the near and far field EGM. Oversensing 
can reproduced with pocket manipulation or arm 
motion. A chest radiograph or fluoroscopy may allow 
visualization that the pin is proximal to the distal screw. 
Medtronic incorporates a  Lead Integrity Alert (LIA) 
algorithm [2] that provides a repeating audible alert and 
automatically notifies the physician via remote monitor-
ing if at least two of the ­following criteria are met:
1)	 Abrupt change in lead impedance when compared to 
a calculated baseline;
2)	 Two or more non‐sustained high rate episodes with 
V‐V intervals of less than 220 ms; or
3)	 30 short V‐V intervals in the preceding 72 hours.
LIA will automatically increase number of intervals 
needed to detect both VT and VF in order to try to mini-
mize shocks. The algorithm provides advance warning, 
reduces shocks, and allows early intervention prior to 
complete lead failure.
­Evaluation of Appropriateness 
of ICD Therapy for Tachycardia
ICDs deliver therapies for any tachyarrhythmia that falls 
within the predefined detection zones and meet detec-
tion criteria including VF, VT, SVT, and, rarely, double 
tachycardia. The most common SVT leading to inap-
propriate therapies is AF. Distinguishing between VT 
and SVT can be challenging, in particular when evaluat-
ing single‐chamber ICDs compared to dual‐chamber 
ICDs. A single‐chamber ICD senses only ventricular 
events and the only stored data available are the near 
field and far field EGMs. A dual‐chamber ICD senses 
both atrial and ventricular events. Inferences can be 
made based on the regularity, sudden onset, morphol-
ogy, AV relationship, chamber onset, and response to 
premature beats or pacing as done via electrocardiogra-
phy or electrophysiologic testing; the fundamental 
­principles remain the same.
Both single‐ and dual‐chamber ICDs have diagnostic 
algorithms, SVT discriminators, in order to distinguish 
between SVT and VT based on these fundamental prin-
ciples. SVT discrimination is only applied within the VT 
zones, not VF zone, in order to minimize delays in 
detecting and treating VF. The algorithms can be helpful 
but over‐reliance should be cautioned, as the algorithms 
are imperfect. SVT discrimination times out after a 
pre‐specified time in order to avoid undertreating VT; 
however, SVT tends to be more stable and incessant 
than  VT, which may result in inappropriate shocks. 
The stored EGMs need to be reviewed systematically in 
order to determine whether the device correctly classi-
fied a tachyarrhythmia as SVT or VT.
Both single‐ and dual‐chamber ICD SVT discrimina-
tion evaluates stability, sudden onset, and morphology 
[1–3]. Dual‐chamber ICDs incorporate the ability to 
simultaneously evaluate atrial and ventricular electro-
grams, AV relationship, and chamber of onset [1–3].
Stability
The stability criterion is used to distinguish between VT 
and AF. VT generally starts suddenly with stable mor-
phology and intervals. AF starts suddenly with variable 
morphology (because of rate‐related aberrancy) and 
­variable intervals. The effectiveness of the stability dis-
criminator becomes less reliable with ventricular rates in 
excess of 180 beats per minute. AF with rapid conduc-
tion above this rate tends to be more regular. Transient 
organization into atrial flutter with regular ventricular 
conduction may result in reclassification as VT [1–3]. 
The stability criteria is programmable to allow for a 
greater degree of discrimination specificity. The most 
commonly encountered setting is variability of greater 
than 30 ms suggests AF. Triggered or automatic VTs are 
commonly seen with structural heart disease and may 
not meet stability criteria from acceleration, decelera-
tion, or irregularity, which would inappropriately be 
classified as AF.
Sudden Onset
The sudden onset criterion is used to distinguish between 
sinus tachycardia and VT. VT starts abruptly whereas 
sinus tachycardia accelerates gradually. Similar to the 
stability, sudden onset becomes less reliable with ven-
tricular rate in excess of 180 bpm. SVT starts abruptly 
and would be classified as VT should the rate fall within 
the VT zone [1–3].
Morphology
The morphology criterion is used to distinguish tachyar-
rhythmias from SVT and VT. A baseline sinus rhythm 
EGM template is required. Upon VT detection, the ICD 
in real‐time will align and compare EGM morphology to 
the template. A quantitative assessment of match will be 
made differentiate between SVT and VT based on a pre‐
specified percentage match threshold. This feature is not 
programmable across all device manufacturers [1–3].
The key to proper function is to ensure an accurate 
template that is updated periodically given that EGM 
may change because of lead maturation, development of 

­Programmin g to Avo id Inappropriat e Therap ﻿
203
conduction disease, or antiarrhythmic agents. In the 
absence of native ventricular conduction, a template will 
not be able to be obtained. The other consideration is if 
the template was that of a premature ventricular beat or 
aberrated supraventricular beat. The effectiveness of 
morphology analysis will be negatively impacted based 
on alignment errors, truncation leading to loss of mor-
phology information and misalignment, inclusion of far 
field EGM analysis would be affected by pectoral myopo-
tentials, and rate‐related aberrancy [1–3].
When visually assessing morphology, the near field 
EGM is typically used for analysis and, if different from 
that of sinus, then VT is diagnosed. However, use of the 
near field EGM alone may not be sufficiently powerful if 
the origin of VT is in proximity to the defibrillation lead; 
the use of the far field EGM may enhance discrimination. 
Another common error is to compare the tachyarrhyth-
mia morphology to the post‐shock morphology. Following 
a shock, EGM morphology remains significantly distorted 
compared to baseline because of transient local and global 
repolarization abnormalities.
AV Relationship
Dual‐chamber ICDs first evaluate the AV relationship 
to  evaluate for the presence of AV dissociation or 
association.
AV dissociation is present when there are more 
­ventricular events than atrial events (V > A) resulting in 
classification as VT. A very rare exception that would be 
inappropriately classified as VT is a dual AV nodal 
response tachycardia [1–3].
AV dissociation or association cannot be fully evalu-
ated when there are more atrial events than ventricular 
events (A > V) and as such discrimination of VT during 
AF, atrial flutter, or SVT is more difficult. Further dis-
crimination relies upon factoring morphology, stability, 
and AV relationship, which are each weighted differently 
based on the manufacturer.
AV association is present when there are equal number 
of atrial and ventricular events, which may represent VT 
with 1 : 1 ventriculoatrial (VA) conduction, AV nodal 
dependent SVT, or sinus tachycardia. Sinus tachycardia 
is the most frequent 1 : 1 SVT and would have a gradual 
onset. VT with 1 : 1 VA conduction is infrequent. 
Transient AV or VA block supports the diagnosis of SVT 
or VT, respectively; AV block effectively rules out AV 
nodal dependent SVT. Further discrimination for 1 : 1 
SVTs relies upon morphology, chamber of onset, and 
response ATP. A poor morphology match would 
­necessarily be classified as VT. Initiation with short P‐P 
interval or short V‐V interval would support an atrial or 
ventricular origin, respectively. Atrioventricular nodal 
re‐entrant tachycardia (AVNRT) would have near 
­simultaneous atrial and ventricular sensed events.
ATP may mimic ventricular overdrive pacing and 
entrain the atrium, thus allowing interpretation of the 
response following cessation of pacing (VAV and 
VAAV response). ATP often terminates VT and AV 
nodal dependent SVTs but termination of atrial tachy-
cardia, atrial flutter, AF, and sinus tachycardia is very 
unlikely [1–3].
Theoretically, dual‐chamber SVT discrimination 
should be superior in reducing delivery of ATP or shocks 
than single‐chamber SVT discrimination. However, 
this  remains unproven in clinical trials and remains 
­controversial [1–3]. Dual‐chamber SVT discrimination 
is limited by appropriate atrial sensing; P wave under-
sensing needs to be avoided but far field R wave sensing 
­minimized. P wave undersensing can lead to inappropri-
ate classification as VT and far field R wave oversensing 
would lead to inappropriate classification as SVT [1–3]. 
Programmable post‐ventricular atrial blanking peri-
ods, thresholds, and decay rates offered by certain 
­manufacturers may mitigate this problem.
­Programming to Avoid 
Inappropriate Therapy
The common practice is to program multiple VT zones 
to facilitate delivery of ATP, which is effective for both 
slow and fast VT. Device programming in this manner 
allows for substantial overlap between sinus tachycardia, 
SVT, and VT that leads to inappropriate shocks. This 
drove the development SVT discrimination algorithms 
but remain unreliable. Aggressive programming may 
lead to overtreatment for events that may be self‐limited. 
Furthermore, ATP may accelerate stable VTs into unsta-
ble rhythms requiring shock.
There is increasing recognition that delivery of ICD 
therapies are associated with poor outcomes and an 
ongoing debate continues of whether appropriate ICD 
therapies directly lead to excess morbidity and mortality 
or if it serves as a marker for poor outcomes.
The most important way to minimize delivery of 
­inappropriate therapy is careful consideration of device 
selection (single‐ or dual‐chamber ICD) and the pro-
gramming parameters at the time of implant. Clinical 
trial data supports programming a single VF zone of 
greater than 200 bpm or multiple zones with marked 
prolongation in the detection time in order to reduce 
inappropriate shocks and mortality. This theoretically 
delays treatment of hemodynamically unstable VT.
Given these considerations, most primary or second-
ary prevention devices for VF arrest may best be served 

21  How to Troubleshoot An ICD
204
with programming a single VF zone with a prolonged 
detection time; ATP during charging may be enabled if 
needed. VT zones with delivery of ATP followed by 
shocks should only be programmed when there is docu-
mented sustained VT proven to be responsive to ATP.
­Effectiveness of Shocks
The next step after determining that an ICD shock is 
appropriate is to determine the adequacy sensing and 
effectiveness of defibrillation.
Inadequate sensing of VF may lead to delays in detec-
tion, re‐detection, and delivery of shock that may result 
in syncope, hemodynamic instability, or ineffective 
­defibrillation [4,5]. A linear relationship exists between 
duration of VF and DFT. If encountered, the first 
approach is increase sensitivity and re‐evaluate sensing. 
Another possibility is to change the sensing vector in sys-
tems that allow sensing both true bipolar and integrated 
bipolar configurations. If undersensing VF persists, then 
lead revision or a new rate sensing lead may be needed.
There are several patient‐specific factors related to 
elevated DFT including dilated non‐ischemic cardiomy-
opathy, infiltrative cardiomyopathy, obesity, pleural effu-
sions, decompensated heart failure, and need for right‐sided 
implant. Moreover, success of defibrillation is modified 
by ischemia, metabolic abnormalities, autonomic tone, 
and medications. In particular, chronic oral amiodarone 
is associated with an increase in DFT. Other medications 
associated with an increase in DFT include lidocaine, 
mexiletine, verapamil, propofol, anesthetic agents, 
cocaine, venlafaxine, and sildenafil.
Elevated DFT in the setting of reversible factors or 
medications should be managed with treatment of the 
underlying condition and medication cessation, respec-
tively. DFT should be retested after an adequate period 
to allow washout. In the absence of a reversible cause, 
chest radiography should be obtained to confirm an 
appropriate apical lead position. Interrogation to evalu-
ate HV system integrity may reveal impedance out of 
nominal range that may reflect a failing lead. In particu-
lar, sudden changes in impedances should suggest 
impending lead failure. Similarly, any lead with under-
sensing, oversensing, or changes in pacing impedances 
should prompt careful evaluation for lead failure.
In the absence of reversible causes or signs of lead fail-
ure a number of changes may be attempted to improve 
defibrillation with an adequate safety margin:
1)	 Change polarity;
2)	 Exclusion of SVC coil. HV impedance of less than 
40 should prompt exclusion of the SVC coil;
3)	 Modification of tilt waveform on St. Jude Medical 
devices;
4)	 Medications that lower DFT (e.g., sotalol and 
­dofetilide) may be attempted in select cases where 
other measures fail and an invasive approach is not 
desired.
Most cases of elevated DFT can be approached non‐
invasively. When there are no other alternatives, lead 
revision or implantation of additional shock electrodes 
(azygous, subclavian, coronary sinus, or subcutaneous 
array) or use of a high‐energy device may be considered.
­Battery Status
Modern ICDs are able to estimate longevity of the device 
at the current rate of usage. The rate at which batteries 
deplete is different for each manufacturer.
ICDs such as pacemakers establish two levels of bat-
tery depletion:
1)	 Elective replacement interval (ERI); and
2)	 End of life (EOL).
The ERI criterion indicates the device still has suffi-
cient energy for full functionality for up to 3 months 
while device replacement is arranged. The EOL crite-
rion indicates insufficient energy for full function and 
the device may function unpredictably. Device replace-
ment should not be delayed as its ability to defibrillate 
is unclear.
­Charge Time
Charge time, the time between arrhythmia detection and 
shock, depends on device and battery integrity. Longer 
charge time delays treatment which may lead to syncope, 
hemodynamic instability, or ineffective defibrillation.
Prolonged charge times indicate the need to reform 
the capacitor, component failure, battery failure, or 
­battery depletion. The charge time gradually increases 
over time as a result of normal capacitor function. ICDs 
have programmable automatic capacitor reformation 
protocols to maintain appropriate function. As battery 
depletion progresses towards and reaches ERI, charge 
time will increase.
The first step when prolonged charge time is encoun-
tered is to check battery status and then to reform the 
capacitor. Charging the capacitors to full output and 
then maintaining the charge for 10 minutes reform the 
capacitor. The charge is dumped and the capacitor is 
recharged to reassess charge time.

­Reference ﻿
205
­References
	1	 Swerdlow CD, Gillberg JM, Olson WH. Sensing and 
detection. In Ellenbogen KA, Kay GN, Lau C, Wilkoff BL 
(eds). Clinical Cardiac Pacing, Defibrillation, and 
Resynchronization Therapy, 3rd edition. Saunders, 
2007: 75–160.
	2	 Koneru JN, Swerdlow CD, Wood MA, Ellenbogen KA. 
Minimizing inappropriate or “unnecessary” implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator shocks. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol 2011;4(5):778–790.
	3	 Swerdlow CD, Friedman PA. Advanced ICD troubleshooting: 
part I. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2005;28:1322–1346.
	4	 Swerdlow CD, Friedman PA. Advanced ICD troubleshooting: 
part II. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2006;29:70–96.
	5	 Epstein A. Troubleshooting of implantable  
cardioverter‐defibrillators. In Ellenbogen KA, Kay GN, 
Lau C, Wilkoff BL (eds). Clinical Cardiac Pacing, 
Defibrillation, and Resynchronization Therapy, 3rd 
edition. Saunders, 2007: 1063–1086.

207
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
As 
life‐saving 
devices, 
implantable 
cardioverter‐­
defibrillators (ICDs) and leads used with these devices 
require the highest possible standards of reliability. While 
numerous patients have benefited from these important 
technologies, these cardiac rhythm management systems 
are complex and have a finite rate of malfunction [1–5]. 
With meticulous design, careful manufacturing, rigorous 
testing, and robust monitoring cardiac rhythm devices 
and leads should continue to have a lower frequency of 
malfunction in the future. Timely detection, characteri-
zation, communication, and clinical management of 
product specific performance issues are critical to patient 
safety. While ICDs leads are designed to transfer infor-
mation and life‐sustaining therapy to and from the device 
in the hostile and mechanically stressful intravascular 
and cardiac environment of the human body, they are 
considered the weak link in cardiac rhythm management 
system. The high profile failure and recall of multiple 
ICDs and leads has served to undermine trust in the 
­therapy. Recommendations for timely detection, charac-
terization, communication, and correction of product 
performance issues have been developed to provide a 
­systematic approach to clinical management and 
improvement in ICD and lead reliability [1–5].
Definitions of lCD lead malfunction, performance, 
and  reliability are now standardized, thereby allowing 
evidence‐based comparison of devices and leads [1]. 
Reliability represents the measure of freedom of a spe-
cific device or lead from structural or functional failure 
as a function of time. This time dependence of assessing 
ICD and lead performance makes it imperative that all 
devices and leads be followed over the entire duration 
of  their functional life. Unfortunately, manufacturer 
product performance reports and independent registries 
are limited by underreporting of cardiac rhythm device 
and lead malfunction, insufficient patient follow‐up, lack 
of uniform definitions, lack of returned product for 
­failure analysis, and a passive monitoring system based 
on voluntary reporting [1].
Many recommendations related to device and lead 
­performance, communication, premarket evaluation, 
post market surveillance, lead advisories, and clinical 
management are available [1,2]. The responsibilities of 
manufacturers, regulatory agencies, and healthcare 
­providers in addressing acknowledged limitations of ICD 
and lead design, testing, manufacturing, surveillance, 
reporting, and improvement are clearly specified [1,2]. 
Among the many recommendations made for improving 
device and lead performance are registries reporting 
device and lead reliability in a logical and ­comprehensible 
manner. Independent analyses of prospective registry 
data provide the most credible, reliable, and trustworthy 
data [1,2].
Ensuring the clinical benefits of ICD systems estab-
lished by numerous clinical trials is clearly in the best 
interests of patients with ICDs. Physicians and other 
healthcare professionals implanting or following ICDs 
and leads should remain mindful of their responsibility 
to report any lead failures to the Food and Drug 
Adminstration (FDA) and return any leads removed 
to  the manufacturer, whether malfunctioning or not. 
Additional, all healthcare professionals involved with 
implanting or following ICDs and leads should be 
aware of the best management practices for reporting, 
communicating, monitoring, and managing ICD and 
lead recalls and failures [1,2].
22
Management of ICD Device and Lead Failures and Recalls
Yousef Bader and N.A. Mark Estes III
Tufts University School of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA

22  Management of ICD Device and Lead Failures and Recalls
208
­Monitoring of ICD and Lead 
Performance
The function and longevity of ICD generators and 
leads is monitored by the companies that produce them, 
independent registries, and by the FDA. The manufac-
turers of pacemakers and ICDs report their device 
and lead reliability data on a publicly available website 
which is typically updated quarterly. However, the data 
is based on a passive monitoring system with reliance on 
returned product analysis and reports by healthcare 
professionals. Thus, it is likely that this represents sig-
nificant underreporting. In the same fashion, the FDA 
Manufacturers and Users Device Experience (MAUDE) 
database relies on a passive monitoring system and as 
such there is significant underreporting [1,2]. The 
absence of mandatory post mortem pacemaker and 
ICD interrogation also ­represents a significant weakness 
of available databases.
­Definition of Recall
When an ICD generator or lead appears to be failing 
with a frequency or failure mechanism that represents a 
clinically significant risk, the product may be recalled at 
the direction of the FDA [1]. When a device is recalled, 
the manufacturer and distributor of the device have an 
obligation to remove or correct the marketed product or 
the FDA can take legal action. Recalls are classified into 
three classes: I, II, and III. A class I recall represents the 
most serious and implies there is a reasonable probabil-
ity that use of the product will result in serious adverse 
health consequences or death. Therefore, device and 
lead recalls and failures should be managed with great 
care and attention. ICDs and leads that have failed must 
be replaced and the mode of replacement should be at 
the discretion of the managing physician. Management 
of ICDs or leads that have been recalled function nor-
mally is more complex and requires a formal manage-
ment strategy. Consensus documents related to ICD and 
lead reliability have been published and serve as a valua-
ble resource [1,2]. These documents provide detailed 
information on management of advisory notifications, 
field action letters, technical notifications, performance 
updates, and other communications sent either by the 
FDA or manufacturers [1,2].
­Management of ICD Recalls or Failure
The major objective of management of patients with 
recalled or malfunctioning ICDs is preventing any 
adverse patient outcome [1–4]. Despite increased 
­awareness of device failures, device companies and the 
FDA do not make specific recommendations regarding 
management of these patients. Management decisions 
ultimately are left in the hands of physicians based on 
guidance from regulatory agencies, manufacturers, pro-
fessional organizations, and patients. Consensus recom-
mendations for the management of patients falling in 
this category have been developed (Table  22.1) [1,2]. 
Despite these recommendations, the management of 
recalled or malfunctioning ICDs varies considerably 
amongst physicians for the same clinical issue. In 
response to a recalled ICD with a low frequency of pre-
mature a battery failure, for example, overall 30% of 
recalled devices were replaced with the vast majority 
continuing to demonstrate normal function. The rate of 
replacement was physician dependent and varied 
from 0% to 100%.
When a clinician becomes aware of an ICD recall or 
failure, immediate assessment of the patient is essen-
tial with careful risk stratification of the patient for the 
potential for adverse outcomes related to the lack of 
proper device function (Table  22.2). Among the key 
­clinical issues to address at the initial evaluation is the 
Table 22.1  Considerations for implantable  
cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD) device replacement.
Consider device replacement if:
●
●The risk of malfunction is likely to lead to death or serious harm
●
●Patients are pacemaker dependent
●
●Patients with ICDs for secondary prevention of sudden death
●
●Patients with ICDs for primary prevention who have received 
appropriate therapy
Table 22.2  ICD device recall.
Clinical risk
Pacemaker 
dependent
Secondary 
prevention
Primary prevention 
with prior therapy
Primary prevention 
with no prior therapy
Risk of failure
High
High
Intermediate
Low
Management
Replace
Replace or monitor
Monitor
Monitor

­Managemen t of Le ad Rec all or Failur ﻿
209
current indication for defibrillation and pacemaker 
­therapy. Generally, there is greater potential for harm 
because of the ICD not delivering therapy appropri-
ately in individuals who have had the device implanted 
for secondary prevention of sudden death. Other 
patients who have had devices implanted for primary 
prevention with appropriate ICD therapy are also 
­considered at higher risk that those without therapy. 
It  is evident that ICD malfunction with failure to 
pace  would put ­pacemaker‐dependent patients at 
­particular risk [3,4].
Rarely, the patient’s initial indication for ICD place-
ment no longer exists and it is clinically appropriate to 
program tachycardia detection and therapies off with-
out replacing the device. When an indication for an ICD 
still exists, the ICD under advisory or recall should 
selectively be replaced based on several considerations. 
It is evident that the decision to replace an ICD or lead 
that is recalled but continues to function normally needs 
to be made on a case‐by‐case basis with careful consid-
eration of the risks and benefits. Guidance from regula-
tory agencies, the device or lead manufacturer, and 
professional ­organizations is commonly provided [1–4]. 
However, in each patient the best available evidence, 
patient preference, and the risks and benefits of all 
­management options need to be factored in to clinical 
decision‐making.
In individuals with an ICD placed for secondary pre-
vention or an ICD placed for primary prevention with a 
clinically appropriate shock, the probability of future 
device therapy for ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation 
is greater. This needs to be carefully considered in the 
decision to continue to monitor device function or 
replace the device [5]. In patients who are truly pace-
maker dependent, failure of pacing can have life‐­
threatening consequences. If a device has demonstrated 
failure and there is a continued indication for the ICD, 
replacement in a timely fashion is warranted. Any device 
or lead under advisory or recall or found to be function-
ing in an abnormal fashion should be returned to the 
manufacturer and reported to the FDA. This will allow 
investigation of the cause and frequency of failure. This 
information serves to improve monitoring strategies and 
improve future devices [1,2].
When an ICD or lead is subject to recall or is 
­demonstrated to malfunction there are several other 
responsibilities of the physician including direct 
­communication with the patient [1,2]. This should be 
carried out in a clear, concise, timely fashion. The com-
munication should include explanation of the problem 
and provide guidance regarding management strategies. 
Manufacturers do contact patients independently of 
physicians. Accordingly, it is important to contact the 
patient directly with a discussion of their specific risk 
and benefits of management strategies. A standardized 
Physician Device Advisory Notification form and Patient 
Device Advisory Notification letter provides guidance 
on the information that should be included in the letters 
regarding the lead recall [1].
Formal decision models to evaluate the risks and 
­benefits associated with immediate device or lead replace-
ment compared with continued monitoring have  been 
developed and can be a useful resource [3,4]. The goal of 
these decision‐making tools is to compare the risk of 
complications associated with device or lead replacement 
with doing nothing [3,4]. Several variables are considered 
including indications for device or lead implantation, 
anticipated course following device or lead failure, device 
failure rates from the recall ranging from 0.0001% to 1.0% 
per year. The device replacement mortality rates range 
from 0.10% to 1.00% per procedure [3,4]. The main fac-
tors influencing the decision to replace a device or lead 
were found to be the impact of device failure or lead esti-
mated device failure rate [3,4]. The procedural mortality 
rate also marginally contributes but the remaining gen-
erator life and patient’s age had no effect on the decision 
to replace a device [3,4]. For  pacemaker‐dependent 
patients, a failure rate in excess of 0.3% warrants device 
replacement and in all other patients, a failure rate of 3% 
is needed to favor device replacement [3,4]. In patients 
where device replacement can be avoided, physicians 
should increase follow‐up monitoring in order to identify 
device failure early [3,4]. When appropriate, device repro-
gramming should be performed to minimize the risks 
associated with device failure including inappropriate 
ICD shocks [3,4].
­Management of Lead Recall 
or Failure
There are many factors that merit consideration by the 
clinician when an ICD lead has been recalled or is not 
functioning normally (Table  22.3) [2–4]. Patients 
who have had a failed ICD lead should have tachycardia 
therapies deactivated if there is any risk of unnecessary 
or inappropriate shock or failure to detect and deliver 
appropriate therapy [2–4]. Typically, such patients are 
kept in an inpatient facility with continuous monitoring 
to ensure their safety until a final management strategy 
is  developed and implemented. Decision‐making with 
recalled or malfunctioning leads is more complex 
than  with ICDs [2–4]. The options for patients with 
recalled but normally functioning leads are intensified 
monitoring of lead with remote monitoring, with 
­activation of lead alerts that could identify a problem at 
an early stage [5]. Other options include replacement of 

22  Management of ICD Device and Lead Failures and Recalls
210
the lead without extraction or extraction of the existing 
lead under recall and placement of a new lead. A final 
option includes placement of a pace/sense lead while 
leaving the high voltage shock lead in place. Recently, 
another option has evolved with placement of a subcuta-
neous ICD (S‐ICD). While these devices do not have the 
capacity to provide pacing, they can be used safely with a 
pacemaker implanted with conventional transvenous 
bipolar leads. It is evident that for leads that are demon-
strated to have a malfunction, the option of intensified 
monitoring is removed and the clinician should choose 
from among the other management strategies [1–5].
There are some clinicians who advocate extraction 
and replacement of all leads that are recalled or have 
demonstrated failure. Among the arguments advanced 
to support this practice is that the presence of multiple 
leads is associated with an increased risk of subclavian 
vein and superior vena cava obstruction, stenosis, or 
occlusion. Other arguments include an increased risk of 
infection and a risk of lead–lead interaction if the lead is 
abandoned and a second lead placed. Additionally, it is 
generally accepted that the risk associated with lead 
extraction increases with time with lead maturation in 
the vascular system. For every 3 years of implant dura-
tion, the risk of failed extraction increases twofold and 
the risk of major adverse outcome increases three‐ to 
fourfold if there are multiple RV leads or old leads. 
Lead  extraction, however, is not a benign procedure. 
Even when performed at high volume centers, the risk 
of major complication is approximately 2% and risk of 
death is 0.5%. Accordingly, decisions related to the 
­strategy of lead extraction and replacement versus lead 
replacement without extraction need to be carefully 
considered. There should be particular emphasis on the 
expertise of the physician and experience of the center 
related to lead extraction. Other factors that should be 
considered in making clinical decision regarding how to 
best manage patients with recalled of malfunctioning 
leads are noted in Table 22.4.  These include many of the 
same considerations for recalled or malfunctioned 
ICDs. However, lead characteristics merit careful 
­consideration. These include the age and model of the 
lead, type of recall/failure mechanism, and failure rates.
The risk of adverse event as a result of this recall and 
the availability of monitoring techniques to detect early 
failure and reduce that risk of adverse patient outcomes 
[5]. When there is an option of following an ICD or lead 
that is functioning normally, a specific protocol for 
intensified monitoring should be developed and imple-
mented [5]. Remote monitoring allows for frequent 
automated secure information retrieval thereby decreas-
ing the necessity of frequent office visits. Manufacturer’s 
recommendations should be followed carefully [5]. 
Examples of an algorithm developed to enhance moni-
toring include the Lead Integrity Alert (LIA) to detect 
early signals of failure of the Medtronic Fidelis lead. This 
Table 22.3  Clinician recommendations for managing lead recall.
Clinician recommendations/implanting physician responsibilities
●
●Lead and generator longevity expectations and the potential 
for lead failure should be discussed with patients at the time 
of implant as a part of the consent process
●
●Implanting physicians must have a database of all patients 
with devices and leads implanted and model numbers
●
●Implanting facilities and physicians should monitor local 
outcomes and adverse events
●
●Implanting physicians must be able to maintain up to date 
with FDA recalls and advisories
●
●Implanting facilities should have the capabilities to perform 
remote monitoring, interpretation of data, and make device 
setting changes as necessary
●
●Implanting facilities should have the infrastructure and 
support to be able to contact each patient in the event of a 
lead recall. Communication with each patient should be 
performed verbally and in writing
●
●Healthcare professionals should report documented or 
suspected lead failures to the manufacturers and regulatory 
authority and all explanted leads or lead fragments should be 
returned to the manufacturer for analysis
●
●Direct physician patient contact should be performed via 
telephone, letter, or preferably in person when a lead recall 
has been established
Table 22.4  Patient and lead factors when considering 
lead revision.
Factors to consider in the risk–benefit analysis when managing 
normally functioning leads subject to advisory
Patient
Pacemaker dependence
Prior history of ventricular arrhythmia
Patient prognosis
Risk of future arrhythmia
Surgical risk of revision/replacement procedure
Patient anxiety about lead failure
Impending battery depletion
Lead
Rate of abnormal performance (observed or 
projected in advisory lead)
Lead failure rates
Malfunction characteristics (gradual vs. sudden, 
predictable vs. unpredictable)
Identified lead subset with higher failure rate
Malfunction mechanism known or understood
Adverse clinical consequences of lead failure
Availability of reporgramming to mitigate 
clinical risk
Availability of algorithms for early detection of 
lead abnormality

­Managemen t of Le ad Rec all or Failur ﻿
211
algorithm is a software download into the ICD which 
recognizes lead failure early and minimizes the risk of 
shocks. For activation, two of three criteria need to be 
met within a 60 day period:
1)	 Abnormal RV lead impedance;
2)	 Two or more high rate sensed intervals shorter 
than 220 ms;
3)	 At least 30 short V‐V interval counts within 3 days.
Once the criteria are met, the device will sound an alarm 
immediately from the ICD and every 4 hours. This noti-
fication and the device diagnostics will also be transmit-
ted via remote monitoring for appropriate action by the 
following physician. In addition, the device will extend 
its detection algorithm by increasing the number of 
intervals needed to detect VT/VF to 30/40, therefore 
further minimizing inappropriate shocks. In a rand-
omized prospective trial, when compared with standard 
monitoring, there was a 50% relative risk reduction in 
the number of patients receiving >5 shocks in the LIA 
group. Of patients in the LIA arm, 72% had no shocks or 
at least 3 days of warning before the first shock compared 
to 50% of those with standard monitoring.
Other device manufacturers have also developed sim-
ilar programs to minimize the risk of shocks. St. Jude 
Medical has developed the SecureSense Lead Noise 
Discrimination algorithm, which provides the ability to 
withhold tachycardia therapy in the presence of lead 
noise for their Riata lead. This algorithm works by com-
paring the bipolar ventricular electrogram with the far 
field electrogram. If short cycle length events are pre-
sent on the bipolar channel but not the far field channel, 
the algorithm classifies that as noise and delays or 
­withholds therapy. An alert can also be programmed to 
notify the patient and physician if this occurs. When 
this algorithm was studied, with the algorithm on, 100% 
of true ventricular fibrillation episodes were detected, 
97% of sustained RV lead noise was detected, and 90.5% 
of non‐sustained RV lead noise was detected. The 
moment a device alert is activated, the patient should 
present for a thorough ICD interrogation to assess the 
integrity of the lead. Physicians undertake a comprehen-
sive evaluation of the alert and determine whether there 
is true failure and the mechanism of failure. If lead 
or  device failure is confirmed, tachycardia therapies 
should be deactivated and the patient monitored until a 
disposition is determined.
Routine fluoroscopy of recalled leads has been recom-
mended by some manufacturers to guide management 
decisions but remains controversial. The Riata lead has 
shown a tendency to develop insulation defects and 
externalization of conductors. Not all leads with exter-
nalized conductors noted by flouroscopy demonstrate 
electrical abnormalities and some leads, which appear 
fluoroscopically normal, have failed. However, it has 
been demonstrated that leads with externalized cables 
have a 25% failure rate compared with only 6% in 
­fluoroscopically normal leads. Therefore, in select cases 
where the risk of lead failure may alter the physician’s 
management strategy, having fluoroscopic data can be 
valuable. Decisions regarding normally functioning leads 
which demonstrate externalized conductors assume par-
ticular importance at the time of device replacement.
To determine if lead revision is appropriate, one must 
balance the risk of lead failure in each individual patient 
with the risk of revising a lead. Patients should be cate-
gorized as high, intermediate, or low risk (Table 22.5). 
The main factors contributing to the decision‐making 
should be pacemaker dependence and ICD placement 
for sudden cardiac death. Other patient factors include 
prior tachyarrhythmia therapy, patient’s preference, 
and the patient’s surgical risk. Lead characteristics are 
also important, including the rate and mechanism of 
failure, the clinical consequences of failure, and the 
presence of programs and algorithms to detect failure 
early and minimize adverse events [2]. For example, in 
the case of the Fidelis lead, there have been several 
reports indicating a high failure rate at the time of or 
soon after ICD generator change, with 21% failure rate 
within 1 year of generator change. This may argue for 
prophylactic revision of the lead at the time of genera-
tor change, but all patient and lead factors should be 
carefully considered before a management decision is 
made. If a decision to revise the lead is established, the 
managing physician should decide between several 
management options based on his or her individual and 
center’s expertise [2].
Table 22.5  Recommendations for managing lead advisories.
Conservative non‐invasive management with periodic device 
monitoring should be strongly considered particularly for:
●
●Patients who are not pacemaker dependent
●
●Patients with an ICD for primary prevention of sudden 
cardiac death who have not required device therapy for a 
ventricular arrhythmia
●
●Patients whose operative risk is high or patients who have 
other significant competing morbidities even when the risk of 
lead malfunction or patient harm is substantial
Lead revision or replacement should be considered if in the 
clinician’s judgment:
●
●The risk of malfunction is likely to lead to patient death or 
serious harm; and
●
●The risk of revision or replacement is believed to be less than 
the risk of patient harm from the lead malfunction
Reprogramming of the pacemaker or ICD should be performed 
when this can mitigate the risk of an adverse event from lead 
malfunction

22  Management of ICD Device and Lead Failures and Recalls
212
­Conclusions
ICD and lead failures and recalls represent a clinical 
challenge for manufacturers, regulatory agencies, pro-
fessional organizations, physicians, and patients. While 
there is a shared responsibility of manufacturers, regula-
tory agencies, and healthcare professionals participating 
in the care of patients with these cardiac rhythm man-
agement devices, ultimately management decisions are 
made by the physician. Recent recommendations for 
timely detection, characterization, communication, and 
correction of product performance issues serve to guide 
the management process. While a systematic approach 
should be taken to ICD and lead recalls and failure, the 
physician must remain mindful that every patient is 
unique and an individualized management strategy is 
important. Robust ICD software algorithms now allow 
early detection of performance problems with recalled 
ICDs or leads through remote monitoring. Physicians 
and other healthcare professionals participating in the 
care of patients with ICDs have responsibilities related to 
communication with the manufacturers, regulatory 
agencies, and patients. Reporting all relevant data related 
to ICD and lead malfunction and recall data in their 
patients is a responsibility that will improve future 
­management decisions and ICD and lead reliability.
References
	1	 Carlson M, Wilkoff B, Ellenbogen K, Carlson MD, 
Ellenbogen KA, Saxon LA, et al. Recommendations 
from the Heart Rhythm Society Task Force on Device 
Performance Policies and Guidelines. Heart Rhythm 
2006:10;1250–1273.
	2	 Maisel W, Hauser R, Hammill S, Hauser RG, 
Ellenbogen KA, Epstein AE, et al. Recommendations 
from the Hearth Rhythm Society Task Force on Lead 
Performance Policies and Guidelines. Heart Rhythm 
2009;6:869–885.
	3	 Amin M, Matchar D, Wood M, Ellenbogen K. 
Management of recalled pacemakers 
and implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators. 
JAMA 2006;296;4:412–420.
	4	 Burri H, Combescure C. Management of 
recalled implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator  
leads at generator replacement: a decision 
analysis model for Fidelis leads. 
Europace 2014;16(8):1210–1217.
	5	 Resnic FS, Gross TP, Marinac‐Dabic D, Loyo‐Berrios 
N, Donnelly S, Normand SL, et al. Automated 
surveillance to detect postprocedure safety signals of 
approved cardiovascular devices. JAMA 
2010;304:2019–2027.

213
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators (ICDs) have 
become a dominant strategy in the prevention of sudden 
cardiac death. While there is substantial evidence 
­supporting the benefit of ICD implantation in patients at 
high risk for sudden cardiac death, there is also evidence 
to suggest that ICD shock therapy may have adverse 
effects on health outcomes, quality of life, and mortality. 
To optimize the risk–benefit ratio of ICD therapy, it is 
essential to minimize ICD shocks for rhythms other 
than clinically relevant ventricular tachycardia (VT) or 
­ventricular fibrillation (VF). A meta‐analysis of large 
clinical trials identified high rates of inappropriate shock 
(10–24% during 20–45 month follow‐up) [1]. Recent 
expansion of ICD indications to include primary preven-
tion may increase the proportion of inappropriate 
shocks to appropriate shocks.
This chapter describes strategies for prevention 
of inappropriate ICD discharge, including optimization 
of programmable settings, pharmacologic suppression of 
arrhythmias, and prophylactic catheter ablation. The 
most common causes of so‐called inappropriate therapy 
include sinus tachycardia or supraventricular arrhyth-
mias above the rate cutoff, oversensing of lead noise, 
electromagnetic interference, T waves, and QRS double 
counting. There are steps that address many of these 
causes collectively or individually. Programming options 
such as increasing the rate cutoff and increasing dura-
tion, for example, can be used to prevent most of these 
causes. Other algorithms can be used to prevent T‐wave 
oversensing or to reject lead related noise. A combina-
tion of these algorithms can be used to reduce the 
­incidence of inappropriate therapy.
­Programming
The fundamental criterion used by all ICDs is a detected 
rate above the programmed rate cutoff for the pro-
grammed duration. Other programmable features vary 
among single, dual, and subcutaneous ICDs [2].
Rate Cutoff and Duration
Selection of the appropriate rate for initial detection of 
VT is a balance between the potential to underdetect 
some slower VTs and the prevention of detecting and 
treating many of the causes of inappropriate therapy [3]. 
In addition, lengthening the detection duration may 
allow transient arrhythmias to self‐terminate and reduce 
the likelihood of non‐essential shocks. Supraventricular 
tachycardia (SVT) discriminators were included in these 
studies and thus the independent contribution of SVT 
discriminators is difficult to ascertain.
Multiple studies have investigated the effect of 
­increasing the rate cutoff and extended duration on 
­inappropriate therapy. The EMPIRIC (Comparison 
of  Empiric to Physician‐Tailored Programming of 
Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillators) trial, which 
compared standardized ICD settings to physician‐tai-
lored settings with respect to shock‐related morbidity, 
illustrates the potential value of shorter cycle lengths for 
VT detection. In this study, the intervention arm utilized 
VT detection at 150 beats per minute (bpm) with 16 beat 
duration, a Fast VT detection at 200 bpm with 18 out of 
24 intervals, and VF detection at 250 bpm with 18 of 
24 intervals. The time to first shock was non‐inferior in 
23
How to Program an ICD to Minimize Inappropriate Shocks
Paul J. Wang and Winston B. Joe
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA

23  How to Program an ICD to Minimize Inappropriate Shocks
214
the intervention arm with a reduction of patients with 
five or more shocks. There was no significant difference 
in total mortality, syncope, emergency room visits, or 
unscheduled outpatient visits. There was a reduction in 
the number of the unscheduled hospitalizations in the 
intervention arm [4,5].
The ability of rate‐cutoff settings to reduce inappropri-
ate therapy was also investigated in the MADIT‐RIT 
(Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial 
to Reduce Inappropriate Therapy) study, a randomized 
prospective study in primary prevention ICD patients. 
In  MADIT‐RIT, patients were randomized to one of 
three groups:
1)	 High‐rate therapy (detection at ≥200 bpm with a 2.5‐s 
delay to therapy);
2)	 Delayed therapy (60‐second delay at 170–199 bpm, 
12‐s delay at 200–249 bpm, and 2.5‐s delay at 
≥250 bpm); and
3)	 Conventional therapy (2.5‐second delay at 170–199 bpm 
and 1‐s delay at ≥200 bpm).
Groups with high rate‐cutoff limits and longer delays 
to therapy were found to have lower incidence of inap-
propriate shock therapy and lower overall mortality 
[4,6]. A subanalysis of the MADIT‐RIT trial also dem-
onstrated high‐rate cutoff and delayed VT therapy pro-
gramming were associated with significant reductions 
in first and  total inappropriate and appropriate ICD 
therapy in patients with ischemic and non‐ischemic 
cardiomyopathy [7].
The PREPARE study was a prospective, cohort control 
study of 700 patients. The programmed settings in this 
study included VT monitor at 167 bpm for 32 intervals, 
Fast VT at 182 bpm for 30 out of 40 beats, and VF at 
250 bpm for 30 out of 40 beats duration. ATP was used 
for regular rhythms from 182 to 250 bpm and SVT dis-
criminators were used for rhythms less than 200 bpm. 
The comparison cohort consisted of the EMPIRIC trial 
and MIRACLE ICD. The PREPARE study patients had 
8.5% shock rate compared to 16.9% shock rate in the 
­control group [8].
The RELEVANT (Role of Long Detection Window 
Programming in Patients With Left Ventricular 
Dysfunction, 
Non‐ischemic 
Etiology 
in 
Primary 
Prevention Treated With a Biventricular ICD) study ran-
domized patients with non‐ischemic cardiomyopathy 
and ICDs for primary prevention to short (12/16 
­interval) or long (30/40 interval) detection [9]. In the 
long detection window cohort, there was a decrease in 
overall ICD therapy incidence, with 90% of VT/SVT 
events self‐terminating before the end of the detection 
window [9]. Similarly, the ADVANCE‐III Trial found 
long detection times (30/40) were associated with a 37% 
reduction in shock and a lower incidence of ATP, but 
without any ­significant change in total mortality [10]. 
A  summary of these studies and an additional rand-
omized trial [11] investigating rate and duration settings 
is provided in Table 23.1.
Despite evidence in favor of longer detection windows, 
recent data from the US CareLink® Network have 
­identified that 60% of ICDs are left with relatively short 
nominal number of intervals detected (NID) settings of 
18/24 [12]. The above data suggest that selective length-
ening of NID settings in these patients may significantly 
reduce non‐essential shocks in the ICD population.
Optimizing SVT Discrimination Algorithms
Algorithms to differentiate SVT from VT have an 
important role in minimizing inappropriate therapy 
because arrhythmias may have a rate that exceeds the 
programmed detection rate [4]. Without such algo-
rithms, therapy would be delivered whenever the rate 
criteria are met. Although increasing the rate cut and 
detection duration may decrease inappropriate therapy, 
frequently atrial fibrillation (AF) is conducted very 
­rapidly. In fact, AF and other SVTs are responsible for 
up to 79% of inappropriate therapy [13]. SVT/VT dis-
crimination algorithms are particularly important in 
secondary prevention ICD patients and those taking 
antiarrhythmic agents. In such patients, the rate cut may 
be set at a lower rate and thus SVT and VT rates are 
more likely to overlap [2].
These 
discrimination 
algorithms 
can 
decrease 
­inappropriate therapy delivered for supraventricular 
arrhythmias [14]. There are a number of algorithms that 
can be used in all devices, including single and dual‐
chamber ICDs. The sudden‐onset detection algorithm, 
for example, recognizes abrupt changes in RR interval 
that occur in VT but not in sinus tachycardia. While 
capable of differentiating sinus tachycardia from VT at 
the lower boundary of VT detection, sudden‐onset dif-
ferentiation has a number of associated shortcomings. 
VT events that occur during an episode of sinus tachy-
cardia or SVT or in the presence of ventricular ectopy 
can inappropriately avert shocks by misidentifying them 
as SVT. Abrupt onset AF with rapid ventricular response 
may also be misclassified as VT and result in inappropri-
ate shocks [2]. Sinus tachycardia is gradual in onset, so 
the sudden onset detection algorithm is quite effective in 
suppressing therapy for sinus tachycardia. However, as 
other rhythms are usually sudden in onset, additional 
algorithms are usually necessary.
One such algorithm, stability, relies on the stable RR 
interval associated with VT to discriminate VT from AF 
but is not generally useful in preventing therapy for other 
supraventricular arrhythmias. This algorithm is continu-
ally applied throughout the arrhythmia so that any VT 
without initial RR variability will still be classified as VT, 
so long as the RR interval stabilizes over time [2]. Therapy 

­Programmin ﻿
215
may still be delivered for rhythms where RR interval 
­variation is minimal such as rapid AF, atrial flutter, and 
regular SVTs despite the stability algorithm. While it is 
possible for episodes of VT with irregular RR intervals to 
have therapy withheld, this occurrence is not common.
There are several forms of the morphology discrimi-
nation (MD) algorithm. A real time electrogram mor-
phology during the tachycardia is compared with a 
previously obtained sinus rhythm template. If the mor-
phology of the complexes during the tachycardia differs 
from the sinus template by a programmed threshold or 
percentage, the rhythm is designated as VT. The MD 
algorithm generally is felt to have greater sensitivity 
(92–99%) and specificity (90–97%) than onset and 
­stability algorithms [4]. Nevertheless, MD algorithms 
occasionally result in misclassification errors and 
unnecessary ICD shocks. For strategies to address these 
misclassification errors see Table 23.2.
Single and Dual‐Chamber ICDs
Single‐chamber ICD algorithms rely on interval and 
morphology‐based ventricular electrogram information 
to differentiate between SVT and VT [2,4]. Dual‐cham-
ber ICDs benefit from information gathered from the 
atrial channel. While a number of studies demonstrate 
that dual‐chamber ICDs may result in a lower incidence 
of inappropriate therapy, this effect is not uniform and 
may be relatively modest in size [15–18]. For example, 
Friedman et al. [19] found that routine implantation of 
dual‐chamber ICDs for primary prevention increased 
Table 23.1  Summary of rate cut and duration optimization studies.
Trial name
Year results 
published
Study 
size
Study design
Investigated 
parameters
Findings
EMPIRIC
2006
900
RCT
Rate cut
Cohort with shorter rate‐cutoff faired better with respect 
to avoidance of inappropriate shock in initial duration of 
12 month follow‐up
RELEVANT
2009
324
Observational
Duration
Fixed long detection windows reduced ICD therapy 
burden and HF hospitalizations without entailing 
additional syncope or death
ADVANCE‐III 2013
1902
RCT
Duration
Extended detection windows led to lower rates of shock 
due to self‐termination of non‐sustained arrhythmias
MADIT‐RIT
2012
1500
RCT
Rate cut, duration
Significant reduction in inappropriate therapy in high‐rate 
and delayed‐therapy groups. Additional reduction in all‐
cause mortality in the high‐rate group and a reduction that 
trended toward significance in the delayed‐therapy group
PROVIDE
2013
1670
RCT
Rate cut, duration, 
SVT discriminators, 
ATP for fast VT
Combination of high rate‐cutoff, long detection duration, 
SVT discriminators, and aggressive ATP results in significant 
reductions in appropriate and inappropriate shock
PREPARE
2008
1391
Observational
Rate cut, duration, 
ATP for fast VT
Reduced therapy for NSVT, ATP eliminates 75% of shocks 
for fast VT
ADVANCE III, Avoid Delivering Therapies for Non‐sustained Arrhythmias in ICD Patients III; ATP antitachycardia pacing therapy; EMPIRIC, 
Comparison of Empiric to Physician‐Tailored Programming of ICDs; ICD, implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator; MADIT‐RIT, Multicenter 
Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial‐Reduce Inappropriate Therapy; NSVT non‐sustained ventricular tachycardia; PROVIDE, 
Programming Implantable Cardioverter‐Defibrillators in Patients with Primary Prevention Indication to Prolong Time to First Shock; RCT, 
randomized controlled trial; RELEVANT, Role of Long Detection Window Programming in Patients With Left Ventricular Dysfunction, 
Nonischemic Etiology in Primary Prevention Treated with a Biventricular ICD; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; VT, ventricular fibrillation.
Table 23.2  Correcting morphology discriminator 
misclassifications.
Origin of MD 
misclassification
Correction strategy
SVT with  
rate‐related 
aberrancies
Set automatic template updating to “off” 
and acquire new template while pacing in 
the AAI mode at rate sufficient to capture 
any aberrancy. For non‐reproducible 
aberrancies, reduce fraction of electrogram 
required to exceed match threshold [14]
EGM 
misalignment 
or truncation
May be avoided with appropriate 
electrogram source selection and gain 
adjustment [2]
Myopotential 
distortion
Near‐field electrogram for MD prevents 
pectoral myopotential oversensing [14]
Lead maturation 
or bundle 
branch block
Acquire new templates periodically to update 
changes in sinus EGM, if automatic template 
updates cannot be obtained, avoid use of MD 
until completion of lead maturation (3 
months post‐implantation) [2,14]
AAI, atrial demand pacing; EGM, electrogram; MD, morphology 
discrimination algorithm; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia.

23  How to Program an ICD to Minimize Inappropriate Shocks
216
cost without improvements in quality of life or reduc-
tions in inappropriate therapy. However, the OPTION 
(Optimal Anti‐Tachycardia Therapy in Implantable 
Cardioverter‐Defibrillator Patients Without Pacing 
Indications) study demonstrated that dual‐chamber 
ICDs can reduce the risk for inappropriate shock when 
used in combination with algorithms for minimizing 
ventricular pacing [20]. Some of the factors that limit the 
benefit of dual‐chamber algorithms include atrial under-
sensing or atrial signals falling in blanking periods. 
In addition, there may be episodes misclassified as atrial 
tachycardia events because of far‐field sensing of the R 
wave on the atrial channel [2,4].
Programmable Therapeutic Settings
Anti‐tachycardia Pacing
ATP terminates re‐entrant ventricular tachycardia 
by  pacing at faster than the VT rates, depolarizing 
re‐entrant tissue in the excitable gap, and terminating 
re‐entry [21]. ATP has been shown to terminate 60–90% 
of VT episodes and has displaced defibrillation as the 
primary therapy administered by ICDs [4,8,22,23]. 
Acceleration to fast VT (FVT) follows ATP in only 1–5% 
of episodes. VTs of short cycle lengths, the nature of the 
arrhythmogenic substrate, the use of anti‐arrhythmic 
drugs, and the ATP protocol used are factors associated 
with acceleration to FVT [22].
ATP can be delivered as a train or burst, where the 
interval between consecutive stimuli is fixed, or as a 
ramp in which the interval between consecutive stimuli 
sequentially shortens. While burst and ramp settings 
appear to be equally effective for slow VT, burst pacing is 
less likely than ramp pacing to result in VT acceleration 
in the setting of FVTs [24].
Therapy Zones
Modern ICDs allow for the programming of one to three 
zones for VT detection and monitoring. A tachycardia 
must have a high enough rate to fall into these zones in 
order for the ICD to deliver ATP or shock. In the highest 
rate zone, there is usually only shock therapy, or shock 
therapy and one ATP train. If a second rate zone is used, 
more ATP trains may be employed. For patients with 
slower VTs (usually less than 240 bpm), more than one 
ATP trains are usually selected.
Recently, the RISSY‐ICD (Reduction of Inappropriate 
ShockS bY InCreaseD zones) trial found that simple 
adjustments to zone boundaries could significantly 
diminish the likelihood of non‐essential shock. In this 
study, Cay et al. [25] randomized 223 primary preven-
tion patients into a three‐zone programming group with 
conventional boundary programming, or a high‐zone 
programming group in which the lower limit of each of 
the three zones was increased. High‐zone settings were 
associated with reductions in non‐essential shocks with 
no adverse effects on mortality.
Sensing Optimization
T‐Wave Oversensing
T‐wave oversensing (TWOS) can lead to inappropriate 
shock therapy. TWOS is most commonly associated 
with low amplitude R waves (<3 mV) as well as hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy with resultant high‐amplitude 
T waves, electrolyte abnormalities such as hyperglyce-
mia and hyperkalemia, medications such as histamine‐2 
receptor blockers, injury current‐related increase in the 
T‐wave voltage, and changes in sympathetic tone [26]. 
Device‐specific filtering characteristics and programma-
ble settings can influence the occurrence of TWOS. 
Decreasing ventricular sensitivity to minimize TWOS is 
feasible only in patients with sufficiently large R : T ratios 
and adequate R‐wave amplitude and is thus not the pre-
ferred strategy [2]. Both St. Jude and Biotronik ICDs 
allow for altering the initial value, onset time, and slope 
of sensitivity algorithm after a sensed QRS. Biotronik 
devices also increase high‐pass filtering to decrease 
TWOS. The TWOS algorithm in Medtronic Protecta 
ICDs compares outputs from the standard sense ampli-
fier with output using a differential high‐pass filter [4].
Lead Fracture Surveillance
In some cases, lead fracture manifests as sudden 
changes in lead impedance and noise detection which 
may result in sensed VT. Early recognition of lead injury 
may therefore decrease the risk of inappropriate shock 
[4]. Medtronic’s Lead Integrity Alert (LIA) and Lead 
Noise Oversensing Algorithms are capable of alerting 
patient and physician to the presence of lead failure. 
The efficacy of LIA in preventing unnecessary shocks 
has been validated in a number of studies [27,28]. Lead 
Noise Oversensing algorithms compare near and far‐
field electrogram amplitudes to help identify lead and 
connection problems. Incongruities in peak‐to‐peak 
amplitudes on far‐ versus near‐field signals indicate 
that amplitude measurement windows are sensing both 
R waves and isoelectric potentials caused by lead or 
connection issues [4].
Noise Protection Algorithms
Noise protection algorithms distinguish electromagnetic 
interference from myocardial activation. The primary 
challenge is to continue to detect the rapid signal rates of 
VF. Boston Scientific’s Dynamic Noise Algorithm uses 
noise frequency and power approximation to identify 
electromechanical interference. Once this determination 
has been made, the algorithm raises a dynamic sensing 

­Cathete r Ablatio ﻿
217
floor above the noise amplitude to prevent oversensing 
and likelihood of inappropriate ICD therapy [4].
Overall Reduction in Inappropriate Therapy
Using a combination of these algorithms, a significant 
reduction in inappropriate therapy can be achieved. In a 
series of over 2500 patients, the inappropriate shock rate 
at 1 year was 2.5% for single‐chamber devices and 1.5% 
for dual or triple‐chamber devices [23].
­Pharmacologic Considerations
Antiarrhythmic medications can prevent both appropri-
ate and inappropriate shock in ICD patients by suppress-
ing atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, slowing the rates 
of VTs, and allowing for broader application of ATP [29]. 
In the OPTIC (Optimal Pharmacological Therapy in 
Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator Patients) trial, 
combined beta blocker–amiodarone therapy in ICD 
patients resulted in a 75% reduction in number of 
patients experiencing ICD discharge at 1 year [30].
While tailored antiarrhythmic therapy may reduce 
ICD shock, the benefits of class III antiarrhythmic 
­therapy must be weighed against risks and adverse effects 
on a case‐to‐case basis. Interestingly, some studies have 
shown that sotalol does not significantly reduce the risk 
of shock when compared with other beta blockers alone 
[30,31]. In a sub‐analysis of the MADIT‐CRT Trial, 
carvedilol, as opposed to metoprolol, reduced the risk of 
inappropriate ATP and shock [32].
­Catheter Ablation
Catheter ablation can minimize inappropriate shock 
therapy but the data are somewhat limited.
The frequent association between episodic SVT and 
inappropriate ICD shock suggests that prophylactic abla-
tion of SVTs may be an important potential option 
for ICD patients. Mainigi et al. [33] found that 95% of 
ICD  patients with SVT had no further inappropriate 
ICD shocks after catheter ablation of SVT. In patients 
who received multiple ICD discharges because of rapid 
AF or atrial flutter, successful AVN modification reduced 
shock frequency [34]. In a study of 22 patients with ICD 
discharge caused by atrial tachycardia, inappropriate 
shocks did not occur at a mean follow‐up of 19 months 
after SVT ablation [35].
Table 23.3  Potential rate cut and duration programming.
MADIT‐RIT Parameters
Arm
Zone
Rate/duration
Therapy
High‐Rate Arm
1
>170 bpm
Monitor
2
>200 bpm for 2.5 s
Shock + Quick Convert ATP
Duration‐Delay Arm
1
>170 bpm for 60 s
ATP + Shock
2
>200 bpm for 12 s
ATP + Shock
3
>250 bpm for 2.5 s
Shock + Quick Convert ATP
PREPARE Parameters
Detection
Rate/duration
Therapy
VT (monitor)
>167 bpm for 32 beats
None
FVT (via VF)
>182 bpm for 30 of 40 beats
Burst (1 sequence), 30–35 J (max output) × 5
VF (on)
>250 bpm for 30 of 40 beats
30–35 J (max output) × 6
ATP, antitachycardia pacing; bpm, beats per minute; J, joules; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Additional MADIT‐RIT parameters: For Zones 1 and 2 of the duration‐delay arm, set Rhythm ID Detection 
Enhancement ON; Additional PREPARE parameters: Supraventricular tachycardia criteria on (dual chamber, 
biventricular implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator): atrial fibrillation/flutter, sinus tachycardia (1 : 1 VT‐ST  
boundary = 66%), supraventricular tachycardia criteria on (single chamber): wavelet morphology discrimination 
(match threshold = 70%), supraventricular tachycardia limit = 300 ms, burst antitachycardia pacing: 8 intervals, pacing 
cycle length = 88% of tachycardia cycle length.

23  How to Program an ICD to Minimize Inappropriate Shocks
218
­Subcutaneous ICD
The entirely subcutaneous implantable cardioverter‐
defibrillator (S‐ICD) is a new alternative to transvenous 
implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators (TV‐ICDs). The 
EFFORTLESS (Boston Scientific Post Market S‐ICD 
Registry) trial and the IDE (S‐ICD System IDE Clinical 
Investigation) study showed that the incidence of inap-
propriate shocks is reduced with the addition of discrim-
inators [36].
­Conclusions
Inappropriate ICD shocks have a negative impact on qual-
ity of life. Increased rate‐cutoffs with or without increased 
duration have been shown to reduce inappropriate 
­therapy. Specific algorithms can be used to differentiate 
SVT from VT. ATP therapy may reduce overall shock 
incidence. A reduction in inappropriate shock therapy 
may decrease patient morbidity and mortality, and 
­measures should be taken to minimize therapy unless 
absolutely necessary [29,37–41].
­Guide to Programming
For primary prevention ICDs, select a rate‐off and 
­duration similar to that used in the MADIT‐RIT trial 
or PREPARE study. These parameters are summarized in 
Table 23.3. SVT discriminators should be programmed 
on. ATP should be programmed on for the VT zone 
as  well as for the VF zone if possible. Additionally, 
if  available, lead integrity algorithms should be pro-
grammed on. If evidence of TWOS exists, program 
TWOS ­algorithm on.
­References
	1	 Germano JJ, Reynolds M, Essebag V, Josephson ME. 
Frequency and causes of implantable  
cardioverter‐defibrillator therapies: is device therapy 
proarrhythmic? Am J Cardiol 2006;97(8):1255–1261.
	2	 Madhavan M, Friedman PA. Optimal programming of 
implantable cardiac‐defibrillators. Circulation 
2013;128(6):659–672.
	3	 Mansour F, Khairy P. Programming ICDs in the modern 
era beyond out‐of‐the box settings. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 2011;34(4):506–520.
	4	 Koneru JN, Swerdlow CD, Wood MA, Ellenbogen KA. 
Minimizing inappropriate or “unnecessary” implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator shocks: appropriate 
programming. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 
2011;4(5):778–790.
	5	 Wilkoff BL, Ousdigian KT, Sterns LD, Wang ZJ, 
Wilson RD, Morgan JM. A comparison of empiric to 
physician‐tailored programming of implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillators: results from the 
prospective randomized multicenter EMPIRIC trial. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;48(2):330–339.
	6	 Moss AJ, Schuger C, Beck CA, Brown MW, Cannom DS, 
Daubert JP, et al. Reduction in inappropriate therapy and 
mortality through ICD programming. N Engl J Med 
2012;367(24):2275–2283.
	7	 Sedlacek K, Ruwald AC, Kutyifa V, McNitt S, 
Thomsen PE, Klein H, et al. The effect of ICD 
programming on inappropriate and appropriate ICD 
therapies in ischemic and nonischemic cardiomyopathy: 
the MADIT‐RIT trial. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 
2015;26(4):424–433.
	8	 Wilkoff BL, Williamson BD, Stern RS, Moore SL, Lu F, 
Lee SW, et al. Strategic programming of detection and 
therapy parameters in implantable cardioverter‐
defibrillators reduces shocks in primary prevention 
patients: results from the PREPARE (Primary 
Prevention Parameters Evaluation) study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2008;12(52(7)):541–550.
	9	 Gasparini M, Menozzi C, Proclemer A, Landolina M, 
Iacopino S, Carboni A, et al. A simplified biventricular 
defibrillator with fixed long detection intervals reduces 
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) 
interventions and heart failure hospitalizations in 
patients with non‐ischaemic cardiomyopathy 
implanted for primary prevention: the RELEVANT 
[role of long detection window programming in 
patients with left ventricular dysfunction, non‐ischemic 
etiology in primary prevention treated with a 
biventricular ICD] study. Eur Heart J 
2009;30(22):2758–2767.
	10	 Gasparini M, Proclemer A, Klersy C, Kloppe A, Lunati 
M, Ferrer JB, et al. Effect of long‐detection interval vs 
standard‐detection interval for implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillators on antitachycardia pacing 
and shock delivery: the ADVANCE III randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA 2013;309:1903–1911.
	11	 Saeed M, Hanna I, Robotis D, Styperek R, Polosajian L, 
Khan A, et al. Programming implantable cardioverter‐
defibrillators in patients with primary prevention 
indication to prolong time to first shock: results from 
the PROVIDE study. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 
2014;25:52–59.

­Reference ﻿
219
	12	 Medtronic CareLink Database. Accessed July 2012.
	13	 Daubert JP, Zareba W, Cannom DS, McNitt S, 
Rosero SZ, Wang P, et al. Inappropriate implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator shocks in MADIT II: 
frequency, mechanisms, predictors, and survival 
impact. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51(14):1357–1365.
	14	 Gard JJ, Friedman PA. Strategies to reduce ICD shocks: 
the role of supraventricular tachycardia‐ventricular 
tachycardia discriminators. Card Electrophysiol Clin 
2011;3:373–387.
	15	 Kuhlkamp V, Dornberger V, Mewis C, Suchalla R, 
Bosch RF, Seipel L. Clinical experience with the new 
detection algorithms for atrial fibrillation of a 
defibrillator with dual chamber sensing and pacing. 
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 1999;10:905–915.
	16	 Deisenhofer I, Kolb C, Ndrepepa G, Schreieck J, Karch 
M, Schmieder S, et al. Do current dual chamber 
cardioverter defibrillators have advantages over 
conventional single chamber cardioverter defibrillators 
in reducing inappropriate therapies? A randomized, 
prospective study. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 
2001;12:134–142.
	17	 Theuns DA, Klootwijk AP, Goedhart DM, Jordaens LJ. 
Prevention of inappropriate therapy in implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillators: results of a prospective, 
randomized study of tachyarrhythmia detection 
algorithms. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;44:2362–2367.
	18	 Friedman PA, McClelland RL, Bamlet WR, Acosta H, 
Kessler D, Munger TM, et al. Dual‐chamber versus 
single‐chamber detection enhancements for 
implantable defibrillator rhythm diagnosis: the Detect 
SupraVentricular Tachycardia study. Circulation 
2006;113:2871–289.
	19	 Friedman PA, Bradley D, Koestler C, Slusser J, Hodge 
D, Bailey K, et al. A prospective randomized trial of 
single‐ or dual‐chamber implantable cardioverter‐
defibrillators to minimize inappropriate shock risk in 
primary sudden cardiac death prevention. Europace 
2014;16(10):1460–1468.
	20	 Kolb C, Sturmer M, Sick P, Reif S, Davy JM, Molon G, 
et al. Reduced risk for inappropriate implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator shocks with dual‐chamber 
therapy compared with single‐chamber therapy: results 
of the randomized OPTION study. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2014;2(6):611–619.
	21	 Sweeney MO. Antitachycardia pacing for ventricular 
tachycardia using implantable cardioverter 
defibrillators. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 
2004;27(9):1292–1305.
	22	 Arias MA, Puchol A, Castellanos E, Rodriguez‐Padial 
L. Anti‐tachycardia pacing for ventricular tachycardia: 
good even after being bad. Europace 
2007;9(11):1062–1063.
	23	 Auricchio A, Schloss EJ, Kurita T, Meijer A, Gerritse B, 
Zweibel S, et al. Low inappropriate shock rates in 
patients with single‐ and dual/triple‐chamber 
implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators using a 
novel suite of detection algorithms: PainFree SST 
trial primary results. Heart Rhythm 
2015;12(5):926–936.
	24	 Gulizia MM, Piraino L, Scherillo M, Puntrello C, 
Vasco C, Scianaro MC, et al. A randomized study to 
compare ramp versus burst antitachycardia pacing 
therapies to treat fast ventricular tachyarrhythmias in 
patients with implantable cardioverter defibrillators: 
the PITAGORA ICD trial. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol 2009;2(2):146–153.
	25	 Cay S, Canpolat U, Ucar F, Ozeke O, Ozcan F, 
Topaloglu S, et al. Programming implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator therapy zones to high ranges 
to prevent delivery of inappropriate device therapies in 
patients with primary prevention: results from the 
RISSY‐ICD (Reduction of Inappropriate ShockS bY 
InCreaseD zones) trial. Am J Cardiol 
2015;115(9):1235–1243.
	26	 Srivathsan K, Scott LR, Altemose GT. T‐wave 
oversensing and inappropriate shocks: a case report. 
Europace 2008;10(5):552–555.
	27	 Gunderson BD, Swerdlow CD, Wilcox JM, Hayman JE, 
Ousdigian KT, Ellenbogen KA. Causes of ventricular 
oversensing in implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators: 
implications for diagnosis of lead fracture. 
Heart Rhythm 2010;7(5):626–633.
	28	 Swerdlow CD, Gunderson BD, Ousdigian KT, 
Abeyratne A, Sachanandani H, Ellenbogen KA. 
Downloadable software algorithm reduces 
inappropriate shocks caused by implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator lead fractures: a prospective 
study. Circulation 2010;122(15):1449–1455.
	29	 Borne RT, Varosy PD, Masoudi FA. Implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator shocks: epidemiology, 
outcomes, and therapeutic approaches. JAMA Intern 
Med 2013;173(10):859–865.
	30	 Connolly SJ, Dorian P, Roberts RS, Gent M, Bailin S, 
Fain ES, et al. Comparison of beta‐blockers, 
amiodarone plus beta‐blockers, or sotalol for 
prevention of shocks from implantable cardioverter 
defibrillators: the OPTIC Study: a randomized trial. 
JAMA 2006;295(2):165–171.
	31	 Lee CH, Nam GB, Park HG, Kim HY, Park KM, Kim J, 
et al. Effects of antiarrhythmic drugs on inappropriate 
shocks in patients with implantable cardioverter 
defibrillators. Circ J 2008;72(1):102–105.
	32	 Ruwald MH, Abu‐Zeitone A, Jons C, Ruwald AC, 
McNitt S, Kutyifa V, et al. Impact of 
carvedilol and metoprolol on inappropriate 

23  How to Program an ICD to Minimize Inappropriate Shocks
220
implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator therapy: the 
MADIT‐CRT trial (Multicenter Automatic 
Defibrillator Implantation With Cardiac 
Resynchronization Therapy). J Am Coll Cardiol 
2013;62(15):1343–1350.
	33	 Mainigi SK, Almuti K, Figueredo VM, Guttenplan NA, 
Aouthmany A, Smukler J, et al. Usefulness of 
radiofrequency ablation of supraventricular tachycardia 
to decrease inappropriate shocks from implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillators. Am J Cardiol 
2012;109(2):231–237.
	34	 Korte T, Niehaus M, Meyer O, Tebbenjohanns J. 
Prospective evaluation of catheter ablation in patients 
with implantable cardioverter defibrillators and 
multiple inappropriate ICD therapies due to atrial 
fibrillation and type I atrial flutter. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol 2001;24(7):1061–1066.
	35	 Miyazaki S, Taniguchi H, Kusa S, Komatsu Y, Ichihara 
N, Takagi T, et al. Catheter ablation of atrial 
tachyarrhythmias causing inappropriate implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator shocks. Europace 
2015;17(2):289–294.
	36	 Burke MC, Gold MR, Knight BP, Barr CS, Theuns DA, 
Boersma LV, et al. Safety and efficacy of the totally 
subcutaneous implantable defibrillator: 2‐Year results 
from a pooled analysis of the IDE Study and 
EFFORTLESS Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2015;65(16):1605–1615.
	37	 Tan VH, Wilton SB, Kuriachan V, Sumner GL, 
Exner DV. Impact of programming strategies aimed 
at reducing nonessential implantable 
cardioverter defibrillator therapies on mortality: a 
systematic review and meta‐analysis. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol 2014;7(1):164–170.
	38	 Mark DB, Anstrom KJ, Sun JL, Clapp‐Channing NE, 
Tsiatis AA, Davidson‐Ray L, et al. Quality of life with 
defibrillator therapy or amiodarone in heart failure. 
N Engl J Med 2008;359(10):999–1008.
	39	 Schron EB, Exner DV, Yao Q, Jenkins LS, Steinberg JS, 
Cook JR, et al. Quality of life in the antiarrhythmics 
versus implantable defibrillators trial: impact of 
therapy and influence of adverse symptoms and 
defibrillator shocks. Circulation 2002;105(5):589–594.
	40	 Poole JE, Johnson GW, Hellkamp AS, Anderson J, 
Callans DJ, Raitt MH, et al. Prognostic importance 
of defibrillator shocks in patients with heart failure. 
N Engl J Med 2008;359(10):1009–1017.
	41	 Moss AJ, Greenberg H, Case RB, Zareba W, Hall WJ, 
Brown MW, et al. Long‐term clinical course of patients 
after termination of ventricular tachyarrhythmia by an 
implanted defibrillator. Circulation 
2004;110(25):3760–3765.

221
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Congestive heart failure (CHF) is a resource‐intensive 
and costly chronic disease. Current indications for 
implantation of cardiac resynchronization therapy 
(CRT) include the presence of severe cardiomyopathy 
and evidence of ventricular conduction delay on ECG 
with symptoms of CHF despite medications. Numerous 
studies have demonstrated the benefit of CRT in improv-
ing cardiovascular hemodynamics, functional capacity, 
and decreasing mortality. However, up to one‐third of 
patients do not experience any improvement. Patients 
classified as non‐responders to CRT are frequently sent 
for echocardiographic optimization of the device’s atrio-
ventricular (AV) and interventricular (VV) intervals. 
This chapter reviews the data behind and techniques for 
CRT optimization.
­Defining Response to CRT
The definition of response to CRT has varied across 
clinical trials and in clinical practice. This has led to a 
broad range of reported response rates. In one of the 
early randomized controlled trials of CRT, 34% of 
patients felt moderately or markedly improved in the 
control arm compared with 60% in the CRT arm [1]. 
Improvements in the three co‐primary endpoints of 
New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class, 
6‐minute hall walk, and heart failure quality of life (HF 
QOL), were all superior in the CRT arm but improve-
ment also occurred in these subjective measures in the 
“placebo” arm. For more objective secondary endpoints 
such as maximal oxygen consumption (peak VO2) or 
reduction in left ventricular (LV) end‐systolic dimen-
sion by echocardiography, the mean improvement in the 
control arm was negligible. In the MADIT‐CRT trial, 
the non‐CRT control group had a mean reduction in LV 
echocardiographic end‐systolic volume (18 mL), though 
it was far less than the CRT arm (57 mL) at 1 year com-
pared to the baseline echo [2]. Nevertheless, the placebo 
effect of CRT and ongoing effects of beta blockers and 
other medical therapy must be accounted for when con-
sidering the response rate attributable to biventricular 
pacing. When considering the response rates from 
the  large randomized trials of CRT, the percentage 
non‐response varies from about 20–30% for subjective 
measures as opposed to 30–50% for echocardiographic 
measures (Figure 24.1) [3,4].
Unfortunately, trials of CRT rarely use the same criteria 
for response to therapy and agreement is poor amongst the 
various measures [5]. In a prospective trial of 426 patients 
undergoing CRT implantation, there was particularly poor 
agreement of response criteria between subjective or 
effort‐dependent measures (NYHA class or 6‐minute walk 
time) and echocardiographic measures (ejection fraction 
or LV chamber volumes). Of the 15 most frequently used 
response criteria in the published literature, the range of 
reportable response rates was from 32% to 91% depending 
on the criteria used. Short‐term measures associated with 
long‐term survival or a reduction in “hard endpoints” such 
as heart failure hospitalization or other significant cardio-
vascular events are most useful in assessing true “response” 
to CRT. Several studies have shown that evidence of LV 
reverse remodeling after CRT, measured as a >10% reduc-
tion in LV end‐diastolic volume, ­predicts improved long‐
term survival [6]. As such, many centers use repeat 
echocardiography at 6 months post‐CRT implantation 
with careful comparison of LV dimensions compared to 
baseline as a reliable indicator of response to CRT.
A number of factors can contribute to the lack of 
improvement after CRT, whether defined as persistent 
advanced heart failure symptoms or lack of ventricular 
remodeling. Broadly, these may be grouped into issues 
24
How to Perform CRT Optimization
Kevin P. Jackson and James P. Daubert
Division of Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA

24  How to Perform CRT Optimization
222
pertaining to patient selection, device implantation 
­technique, and postoperative programming and patient 
management. The most common causes of poor 
response to CRT include improperly programmed AV 
intervals, arrhythmias (especially premature ventricular 
contractions or atrial fibrillation), poor lead position, an 
insufficient percentage of biventricular pacing, inade-
quate medical therapy, and lack of underlying wide QRS. 
A  multidisciplinary approach to the identification and 
correction of these underlying conditions has been 
shown to improve the frequency of CRT response [7]. 
In managing a patient with CRT, optimization of each of 
these factors and corrective action where possible may 
improve outcomes (Table 24.1).
­Pre‐Implant Optimization
Guidelines for CRT implantation were updated in 2012 
by the governing bodies of the American College of 
Cardiology (ACC), American Heart Association 
(AHA), and Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), in large part 
to refine patient selection criteria. These updated 
guidelines reflect evidence from multiple randomized 
controlled trials that CRT is most beneficial in patients 
with underlying left bundle branch block (LBBB) and 
wide QRS (>150 ms). In a retrospective subgroup 
­analysis of the MADIT‐CRT trial, for example, 13% of 
subjects had right bundle branch block (RBBB) and 17% 
had non‐specific intraventricular conduction delay 
(IVCD), however only patients with LBBB had a signifi-
cantly reduced risk of death, heart failure event or 
­ventricular tachycardia [8].
Measures of mechanical dyssynchrony, including 
echocardiogram‐based LV strain analysis have been 
studied in patients with marginal (120–150 ms) or nar-
row (<120 ms) QRS durations. In several single‐center 
studies, the presence of significant mechanical dyssyn-
chrony by various echocardiographic measures was 
associated with improved CRT response; however, rand-
omized controlled trials using these techniques failed to 
show benefit [9]. While the use of echocardiographic 
dyssynchrony analysis to select patients appropriate for 
CRT implantation is not indicated, evidence suggests 
that pre‐procedure dyssynchrony evaluation can be used 
to target the LV lead and improve the response rate to 
CRT. In the TARGET (Left Ventricular Lead Placement 
to Guide Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy) study, 220 
patients were randomized to either standard LV lead 
placement or targeted placement based on the latest wall 
of activation on echocardiographic speckle‐tracking 
analysis. More patients with an LV lead placed on or near 
the wall with latest activation had LV reverse remodeling 
after CRT than those with standard (unguided) LV lead 
100
Subjective
Objective
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
NYHA %
increase 1
class
QOL score %
increase
6 min walk %
increase
LVEDVI %
decrease
LVEDV %
decrease
59
38
31
15
13
3
18
2
21
Active
Control
6
Figure 24.1  Response rates in the active 
(CRT) and control (non‐CRT) arms of major 
clinical trials. Considerable placebo effect is 
observed for subjective compared with 
objective measures of response. [Data 
adapted from references 1–4].
Table 24.1  Approach to optimization of cardiac resynchronization 
therapy at each stage of care.
Pre‐operative
●
●Patient selection
●
●Dyssynchrony echocardiogram to identify 
latest activated LV segment
●
●Cardiac MRI to identify transmural scar
Intraoperative
●
●Lead placement on latest mechanically 
activated LV segment
●
●Lead placement on latest electrically 
activated LV segment (QLV)
●
●Acute hemodynamic evaluation (dP/dt max)
Postoperative
●
●Titration of evidence‐based medications
●
●Exercise training/cardiac rehabilitation
●
●Management of arrhythmias (atrial 
fibrillation, PVCs) resulting in suboptimal 
BiV pacing percentage
●
●Echocardiographic‐based optimization of 
device timing
●
●Lead revision
●
●Investigational approaches including: multiple 
site LV pacing, endocardial LV pacing
BiV, biventricular; LV, left ventricular; MRI, magnetic resonance 
imaging; PVC, premature ventricular contraction.

­Implan t Optimizatio ﻿
223
placement (70% versus 55%; p = 0.031) [10]. Similarly, the 
STARTER (Speckle Tracking Assisted Resynchronization 
Therapy for Electrode Region) study found a reduction 
in heart failure hospitalization in patients with guided 
LV lead placement versus those without (11% versus 
22%; p = 0.031) [11].
In patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy, placement 
of the LV lead on an area of transmural myocardial scar 
has been associated with worse outcomes. Contrast‐
enhanced MRI (cMRI) offers excellent spatial resolution 
and is the most validated modality for scar detection 
prior to CRT implant. Echocardiographic strain analysis 
has been compared to cMRI and may allow adequate 
determination of scar location, thereby eliminating the 
need for multiple imaging studies pre‐CRT implant [12].
­Implant Optimization
Measurement of Left Ventricular Electrical 
Activation
During the early era of CRT implantation, measure-
ment of the electrical delay at the final implant location 
of the LV lead was common practice. With data that 
posterolateral or lateral LV sites were generally prefera-
ble, however, a strictly anatomic implant strategy became 
commonplace. Given the underwhelming response rates 
to CRT with current implant strategies, there is renewed 
interest in measurement and placement of LV leads at 
sites of delayed electrical activation. Comprehensive 
mapping of electrical activation in patients with LBBB 
shows significant heterogeneity in the location of the line 
of functional block [13]. By measuring the electrical acti-
vation from the QRS onset on the surface ECG to the 
local activation on the LV lead, the implanting physician 
can optimize the lead location based on the site of latest 
electrical delay (QLV) (Figure 24.2). Placement of the LV 
lead on sites of significant electrical delay measured 
either as an absolute value (QLV >95 ms) or as a percent-
age of the QRS duration (>50%) results in improvements 
in both acute hemodynamic response and long‐term 
clinical outcomes, although randomized controlled trial 
data are lacking [14,15].
Acute Hemodynamic Response to CRT
Another method of “fine‐tuning” the LV lead position 
during CRT implantation involves placement of an open‐
lumen catheter or pressure wire into the LV chamber, 
Figure 24.2  Example of measurement of QLV. Two potential target branches are identified. A 0.014 inch wire capable of unipolar sensing 
(VisionWire, Biotronik, Berlin, Germany) is advanced into each branch and measurements are made from the onset of the QRS to the 
initial, rapid deflection on the unipolar signal (IC EGM). The posterolateral branch is found to have a significantly prolonged QLV (128 ms) 
compared to the high lateral branch (73 ms) and is targeted for LV lead implantation.

24  How to Perform CRT Optimization
224
thereby allowing real‐time assessment of hemodynamics 
with biventricular pacing, including measurement of 
stroke work and the maximum rate of left ventricular 
pressure (dP/dtmax). In small studies, positioning the LV 
lead in regions demonstrating maximal acute improve-
ment in LV hemodynamics from baseline has translated 
to improved long‐term clinical response rates [16]. 
Non‐invasive measures of hemodynamic changes during 
CRT implantation are possible using standard echocar-
diography; however, technical considerations including 
procedure sterility and maintaining adequate imaging 
windows during prolonged implant procedures limit 
this technique.
­Post‐Implant Optimization
Ensuring Biventricular Capture
One of the simplest and most important assessments of 
patients after CRT implantation is a careful examination 
of the percentage of biventricular pacing. Studies have 
shown that biventricular pacing percentage should be as 
close to 100% as possible in order to achieve an optimal 
response. In a large observational database of over 80 
000 patients, 40% of patients had <98% biventricular 
pacing, and 11% had <90% pacing [17]. Atrial fibrillation 
(AF) is the most frequent cause of loss of CRT; however, 
multiple other causes of decreased biventricular pacing 
percentage must be considered (Table 24.2).
In order to accurately assess adequate LV capture, 12‐
lead electrocardiography is essential. A baseline ECG for 
future comparison should be established intraopera-
tively or at device follow‐up when capture is confirmed 
by device interrogation. Analysis of the frontal plane axis 
as well as the R‐wave pattern across the precordial leads 
can help identify proper LV pacing. In one algorithm 
proposed by Ammann et al. [18], the presence of either 
an R/S ratio ≥1 in V1 or an R/S ratio ≤1 in lead I confirms 
the presence of LV capture with sensitivity and specific-
ity of nearly 95%. This algorithm works best when the LV 
lead is in a lateral position; however, as pacing from an 
inferior or posterior LV lead location results is absence of 
an R/S ratio ≤1 in lead I in a significant proportion of 
patients (24–36%). In addition, if the RV lead is placed in 
the outflow tract, biventricular capture may demonstrate 
a mostly negative QRS complex in V1 with a right infe-
rior frontal plane axis.
Arrhythmia Management
If a decrease in biventricular pacing percentage is deter-
mined to be secondary to the presence of atrial or ven-
tricular arrhythmias, prompt management is essential to 
restore effective CRT. Several device‐based algorithms 
have been developed to mitigate the loss of biventricular 
pacing including ones that deliver biventricular or LV 
pacing upon sensed intrinsic ventricular activation. 
Although a small study showed favorable acute hemody-
namic changes during this type of triggered pacing, long‐
term studies have not been performed [19]. It is also 
important to realize that counts of biventricular pacing 
through the device may overestimate fully paced com-
plexes because of unrecognized fusion beats during AF 
(Figure 24.3). In a study of 19 patients with CRT and per-
manent AF in which device counters showed >90% LV 
pacing, analysis of continuous Holter monitor tracings 
revealed complete biventricular capture in only 76% [20]. 
Therefore, in patients with AF where response is poor 
after CRT implant, device counters reporting an ade-
quate biventricular pacing percentage may be unreliable 
and AV node ablation or sinus rhythm restoration should 
be considered.
The presence of AF potentially reduces the benefit of 
CRT because of the competition of rapid, natively con-
ducted beats. Among patients with standard CRT 
implantation criteria and a history of atrial arrhythmia, 
the percentage biventricular pacing is a strong predic-
tor of HF hospitalization and all‐cause mortality [21]. 
In this study of over 1800 patients, those with >92% 
biventricular pacing had a 66% reduction in HF hospi-
talization or all‐cause mortality compared to patients 
with <92% biventricular pacing (p <0.001). Slowing 
intrinsic conduction to allow adequate CRT pacing may 
require high‐doses or multiple AV nodal agents that 
may have deleterious effects.
In patients with AF who otherwise meet criteria for 
CRT implantation, adequate rate control and therefore 
maximal CRT pacing percentage is best achieved with 
AV node ablation. Although the major randomized 
Table 24.2  Causes of loss of biventricular pacing.
Cardiac arrhythmia
Atrial fibrillation
Ventricular ectopic beats
Sinus tachycardia (causing upper rate 
behavior)
Mechanical factors
Lead dislodgement
Late exit block
Inoperable LV lead due to phrenic 
nerve stimulation
Programming factors
Excessively long AV interval 
programming
Fusion or pseudo‐fusion of native 
conduction
Excessive inter‐atrial conduction 
delay with inadequate AV delay
AV, atrioventricular; LV, left ventricular.

­Post‐Implan t Optimizatio ﻿
225
­controlled trials of CRT largely excluded patients with 
AF, data from observational studies supports CRT 
implantation in this population with adjunct AV node 
ablation. Gasparini et al. [22] showed that overall mor-
tality was equivalent at 3 years in patients with CRT and 
AF who underwent AV node ablation versus patients 
with CRT in sinus rhythm. Similarly, a meta‐analysis of 
three studies comparing patients with permanent AF 
and CRT who underwent AV node ablation, mortality 
was decreased 58% in comparison to patients who did 
not undergo AV node ablation [23].
Similar to AF, frequent premature ventricular contrac-
tions (PVCs) are suspected to reduce the effectiveness of 
CRT by reducing the percentage of biventricular‐paced 
beats and by causing fusion of some additional percent-
age of paced beats [24]. Although a high burden of PVCs 
is relatively common in CRT recipients, little work has 
been done to investigate the role of PVC burden in 
­predicting response to CRT therapy. In a prospective 
study assessing the effect of PVC ablation in CRT non‐
responders, subjects were included if they had no clinical 
or echocardiographic response to CRT 1 year after 
24
AT/AF total hours/day
V. rate during AT/AF
(bpm)
max/day
avg/day
%  Pacing/day
Atrial
Ventricular
Nov 2011
Jan 2012
Mar 2012
May 2012
Nov 2012
Jul 2012
Sep 2012
20
16
12
8
4
0
>200
150
100
<50
100
75
50
25
0
Figure 24.3  Example of loss of biventricular pacing in a patient with underlying atrial fibrillation. Top panel shows device interrogation 
demonstrating inadequate cardiac resynchronization therapy during prolonged periods of atrial fibrillation. Bottom panel shows 12‐lead 
ECG with loss of biventricular pacing due to natively conducted beats (asterisk) during atrial fibrillation.

24  How to Perform CRT Optimization
226
implantation and had >10 000 PVCs per day on Holter 
monitoring [25]. Sixty‐five patients underwent PVC 
ablation and follow‐up echocardiography after 6 months 
showed improvements in mean LV ejection fraction 
(LVEF; 26.2–32.7%; p <0.001), LV end‐systolic volume 
(178–145 mL; p <0.001), and median NYHA class 
(3.0–2.0; p <0.001). Whether use of anti‐arrhythmic 
medications would be as effective as ablation for PVC 
suppression in CRT has not been studied.
Adjunct Heart Failure Treatment
Optimization of heart failure medications, including 
neurohormonal blockers and diuretics, is often easier 
after CRT implantation because of improved hemody-
namics and less concern for medication‐induced 
­bradycardia. A systematic approach to medication 
titration, utilizing a heart failure specialist in a proto-
col‐driven clinic, has been shown to improve clinical 
and echocardiographic outcomes in a prospective 
study [26]. Similarly, structured exercise training after 
CRT implantation results in further response to CRT, 
although the durability of this over the long‐term has 
not been studied [27]. Prior to consideration of echo-
cardiographic‐based optimization, a thorough analysis 
of all factors contributing to CRT non‐response is 
­warranted (Figure 24.4).
­Echocardiographic‐based CRT 
Optimization
An optimally programmed A‐V delay allows adequate 
atrial diastolic filling (E wave) without truncation of 
atrial systole (A wave). Echocardiography allows direct 
visualization and real‐time adjustment of intervals to 
maximize LV filling with confirmation of beneficial 
effects via non‐invasive hemodynamic measures. Newer 
echocardiographic techniques including speckle track-
ing strain analysis may aid in the programming of 
­optimal V‐V intervals as well.
A‐V Interval Optimization
To ensure proper AV interval programming a number of 
different methodologies have been proposed. The most 
common technique is the iterative method, which uti-
lizes visual examination of the mitral inflow pattern to 
optimize the timing of left atrial systolic and diastolic 
events. In CRT, the AV interval must be short enough 
that biventricular pacing is uniformly delivered, yet not 
so short that left atrial contraction is pre‐empted. Using 
the iterative method, the first step is to determine the 
longest AV interval still providing ventricular capture; 
this will often result in fusion of E and A waves because 
of shortening of the time of atrial diastole. Next the AV 
interval is shortened in 20 ms increments until trunca-
tion of the A wave is seen on the mitral inflow pattern. 
The AV interval is then increased in 10 ms increments 
until the E and A waves are distinct (no fusion) and there 
is no evidence of A wave truncation (Figure 24.5).
An alternative echocardiographic approach to AV 
interval optimization examines LV ejection rather than 
filling, comparing the aortic velocity time integral (VTI), 
a surrogate for stroke volume, at different programmed 
AV intervals. This method is limited by technical factors 
(i.e., transducer angle) and has poor intra‐ and inter‐
observer variability [28]. Measurement of the mitral 
inflow VTI correlated better with invasively measured 
LV dP/dT in a small study compared to aortic VTI [29]. 
Measurement of cardiac output by mitral or aortic VTI 
may also be used to complement or verify iterative 
­evaluation of the mitral inflows as well.
Several small studies have demonstrated that echo‐
based CRT optimization results in improvement of acute 
hemodynamic measures and short‐term functional out-
comes. Optimization of the AV interval by the aortic 
VTI method, for example, was compared in a small 
(n = 40) randomized study to an empiric AV interval of 
120 ms. Interestingly, the mean optimal AV delay 
was 119 ms; however, the range of optimal delays was 
60–200 ms. After 3 months, NYHA functional class 
and QOL score significantly improved in the optimized 
group versus the control group and there were trends 
toward improvement in echocardiographic remodeling 
[30]. Larger trials with longer follow‐up have been 
­disappointing, however. In the SMART‐AV (SmartDelay 
Determined AV Optimization) trial, 980 patients 
were  randomized 1 : 1 : 1 to fixed AV delays, echo‐­
optimized AV delays (via the iterative method), or 
device‐based optimization using intracardiac electro-
grams. At 6 month follow‐up, there was no difference 
•  History and physical (ﬂuid status)
•  Medication compliance and optimization
•  Blood work (anemia)
•  Chest X-ray (LV lead position)
Clinical
evaluation
•  Biventricular pacing %
•  Atrial ﬁbrillation burden
•  PVC burden
•  Heart failure diagnostics
Device
interrogation
•  AV interval adjustment (mitral valve
   inﬂows)
•  VV interval adjustment (strain analysis,
   aortic VTI)
Echo
optimization
Figure 24.4  Step‐wise evaluation for CRT non‐responders.

­Echocardiographic‐base d C RT Optimizatio ﻿
227
between groups in the primary outcome of reverse 
remodeling or secondary outcomes of NYHA class, QOL 
score, or 6‐minute walk time [31].
An important aspect of AV interval optimization relates 
to whether the atrium is tracked or paced. Right atrial 
pacing may induce significant interatrial conduction 
delay depending on the location of the right atrium (RA) 
lead. Pacing from the RA free wall or appendage can aug-
ment the delay between the activation time at the RA lead 
and left atrium (LA) mechanical events. In acute hemo-
dynamic studies, atrial pacing during CRT has been 
found to have detrimental effects on dP/dT compared 
to atrial tracking using a VDD mode [32]. However, in a 
randomized study comparing atrial sensed programming 
(DDD‐40 or DDDR‐40) with atrial paced programming 
(DDD‐70), no significant clinical difference was seen at 
1  year [33]. When atrial pacing is utilized, nominal or 
“out‐of‐box” offsets for paced AV delays appear inade-
quate and may need to be programmed >70 ms longer 
than optimized sensed A‐V delays [34].
V‐V Interval Optimization
All current CRT devices allow sequential activation of 
the  right and left ventricles via adjustment of the V‐V 
interval. Normally, pre‐excitation of the RV should be 
avoided, as this may result in worsening LV function [35]. 
The ­simplest echocardiographic method of V‐V interval 
optimization involves sequential analysis of aortic VTI as 
a surrogate for maximizing cardiac output. Newer tech-
niques incorporate analysis of LV strain patterns by 
speckle tracking analysis to guide the need for V‐V inter-
val adjustment (Figure 24.6).
While V‐V interval optimization may result in acute 
hemodynamic improvement, long‐term clinical benefit 
is less clear. In the RHYTHM II ICD study, despite short‐
term hemodynamic improvement, optimization of the 
V‐V interval conferred no additional clinical benefit at 6 
months compared with simultaneous biventricular 
­stimulation [36]. Similarly, DECREASE‐HF compared 
simultaneous, sequential, and LV‐only pacing in 306 
patients and found no difference in outcomes between 
the biventricular‐paced cohorts [37]. While routine V‐V 
optimization for all recipients of CRT does not appear 
warranted, preliminary data from the RESPONSE‐HF 
trial suggests that VV interval adjustment in clinical 
non‐responders to CRT may yield some benefit [38].
The American Society of Echocardiography recom-
mends routine echocardiographic assessment after CRT; 
however, based on currently available evidence, routine 
optimization of the AV interval for all recipients of 
CRT devices is not justified [39]. In addition, echo‐based 
optimization techniques are time consuming and 
labor intensive. Whether patients who are deemed to be 
Step 3
     AV interval is extended 10 ms 
     until E and A waves are distinct and
     there is no evidence of A wave
     truncation
Step 1
     AV interval is extended until
     biventricular pacing is lost
     AV interval is shortened 30 ms to
     ensure complete biventricular
     capture
200 ms
120 ms
150 ms
MV VTI
15.1 cm
MV VTI
12.9 cm
MV VTI
17.1 cm
Step 2
     AV interval is shortened in 20 ms
     intervals until truncation of the A
     wave is noted
Figure 24.5  Steps for AV interval optimization using 
iterative analysis of mitral valve inflows. Upper panel 
demonstrates fusion of the E and A waves with an 
AV interval extended to 200 ms. Progressive 
shortening of the AV interval in 20 ms increments 
results in truncation of the A wave at a delay of 
120 ms (middle panel). The AV interval is increased 
in 10 ms increments until no A‐wave truncation is 
seen and there is no evidence of E/A wave fusion. 
Mitral valve velocity‐time integral (MV VTI) values 
confirm hemodynamic improvement using 
this method.

24  How to Perform CRT Optimization
228
non‐responders to CRT should undergo echocardio-
gram‐based optimization is still unclear. Using a proto-
col‐driven approach, one study of 75 CRT non‐responders 
found poor timing resulting from improperly pro-
grammed A‐V delays was present in nearly 50% of 
patients. Patients who were felt by the investigators to 
have had a “favorable intervention” by AV optimization 
had improved survival compared to patients without AV 
optimization (Table 24.3) [7].
­Device‐based CRT Optimization
Device‐based algorithms to find and program optimal AV 
delays eliminate the need for echocardiography and 
have other potential advantages, including automation of 
the process to allow more frequent adjustments. The 
SMART‐AV trial compared outcomes in over 1000 
patients randomized to three different optimization 
methodologies: a device‐based electrogram approach, an 
echo‐based mitral inflow iterative approach, and a fixed 
AV delay of 120 ms [31]. The device‐based electrogram 
approach had been validated against LV dp/dt and was 
found to outperform echocardiogram‐based optimiza-
tion techniques. However, in SMART‐AV, no significant 
differences were found in the primary endpoint (LV end 
systolic volume 6 months after implant) or other echocar-
diographic or clinical secondary outcomes. Similarly, the 
FREEDOM trial compared a device‐based A‐V optimiza-
tion performed every 3 months with ­standard of care 
(echo‐based optimization at investigator discretion) in 
1647 patients [40]. Similar to SMART‐AV, there was no 
Figure 24.6  Optimization of the VV interval using speckle tracking strain analysis of longitudinal left ventricular contraction. Pre‐
optimization images (upper panel) demonstrate pre‐stretching and delayed contraction of the basal and mid lateral wall with a regional 
strain of –4.8%. With pre‐excitation of the left ventricular lead by 60 ms, maximal cardiac output as determined by LVOT VTI (middle panel) 
was achieved. Post‐optimization images (lower panel) demonstrate improved contraction of the lateral wall with an increase in regional 
strain to –7.6%. Note that mid and apical lateral segments remain grossly unchanged due to transmural infarct in these regions.

­Reference ﻿
229
significant difference between these groups for the pri-
mary endpoint of improvement in heart failure clinical 
composite score or secondary endpoints of heart failure 
class or 6‐minute walk test.
More recently, the Adaptive‐CRT trial reported the 
results of a novel device‐based optimization algorithm 
compared with echo‐based optimization. This algorithm 
seeks to reduce unnecessary RV pacing in patients with 
intact right bundle branch conduction while at the same 
time fuse LV pacing to natively conducted RV contrac-
tion. In addition, the device dynamically adjusts the AV 
and VV intervals based upon timing measurement of the 
intracardiac electrograms. The results of this study 
showed that the use of this automated algorithm was 
non‐inferior to echo‐based optimization; however, 
­neither method was compared with nominal settings. 
Further studies to determine the clinical benefit of 
this  and other device‐based optimization methods 
are underway.
­Conclusions
Randomized controlled studies of routine echo‐based 
optimization of AV and VV intervals after CRT implanta-
tion have not shown benefit over nominal or “out‐of‐box” 
settings. In patients deemed to be non‐responders to 
CRT, device optimization may have a role as part of a 
comprehensive evaluation of possible contributing fac-
tors. In the future, device‐based algorithms with the 
advantage of automatic, dynamic AV and VV interval 
adjustment may further improve response rates to CRT.
­References
	1	 Abraham WT, Fisher WG, Smith AL, Delurgio DB, Leon 
AR, Loh E, et al. Cardiac resynchronization in chronic 
heart failure. N Engl J Med 2002;346(24):1845–1853.
	2	 Moss AJ, Hall WJ, Cannom DS, Klein H, Brown MW, 
Daubert JP, et al. Cardiac‐resynchronization therapy for 
the prevention of heart‐failure events. N Engl J Med 
2009;361(14):1329–1338.
	3	 Bristow MR, Saxon LA, Boehmer J, Krueger S, Kass DA, 
De Marco T, et al. Cardiac‐resynchronization therapy 
with or without an implantable defibrillator in advanced 
chronic heart failure. N Engl J Med 
2004;350(21):2140–2150.
	4	 Cleland JG, Daubert JC, Erdmann E, Freemantle N, 
Gras D, Kappenberger L, et al. The effect of cardiac 
resynchronization on morbidity and mortality in heart 
failure. N Engl J Med 2005;352(15):1539–1549.
	5	 Fornwalt BK, Sprague WW, BeDell P, Suever JD, 
Gerritse B, Merlino JD, et al. Agreement is poor among 
current criteria used to define response to cardiac 
resynchronization therapy. Circulation 
2010;121(18):1985–1991.
	6	 Solomon SD, Foster E, Bourgoun M, Shah A, Viloria E, 
Brown MW, et al. Effect of cardiac resynchronization 
therapy on reverse remodeling and relation to 
Table 24.3  Randomized, controlled trials of A‐V and V‐V interval optimization.
Trial
AV/VV
Optimization Technique
Outcome
Sawhney et al. [30]
AV
Echocardiogram (aortic VTI)
No improvement in NYHA class ≥1
RESPONSE‐HF [38]
VV
Device (QuickOPT™)
No improvement in composite endpoint (NYHA class ≥1 
and ≥10% increase in 6MWT
RHYTHM ICD II [36]
VV
Echocardiogram (LVOT VTI)
No improvement in NYHA class ≥1
DECREASE‐HF [37]
VV
Device (Expert Ease™)
No difference in LV reverse remodeling
Abraham et al. [41]
VV
Echocardiogram (SPWMD)
11% increase in clinical HF composite score
CLEAR [42]
AV + VV
Device (SonR™)
No improvement in composite endpoint (survival + HF 
hospitalization + ≥10% increase in QoL + NYHA class ≥1)
SMART‐AV [31]
AV
Device (SmartDelay™)
No improvement in NYHA class ≥1
FREEDOM [43]
AV + VV
Device (QuickOPT™)
No improvement in clinical HF composite score
ADAPTIV‐CRT [44]
AV + VV
Device (AdaptivCRT) versus 
Echocardiogram (iterative)
Non‐inferiority of device versus echocardiogram 
optimization for improvement in clinical composite score
AV, atrioventricular; HF, heart failure; LVOT, left ventricular outflow tract; 6MWT, 6‐minute walk time; NYHA, New York Heart Association; 
QOL, quality of life; SPWMD, septal‐to‐posterior wall motion delay; VTI, velocity time integral; VV, ventriculo‐ventricular.

24  How to Perform CRT Optimization
230
outcome: multicenter automatic defibrillator 
implantation trial: cardiac resynchronization therapy. 
Circulation 2010;122(10):985–992.
	7	 Mullens W, Grimm RA, Verga T, Dresing T, Starling 
RC, Wilkoff BL, et al. Insights from a cardiac 
resynchronization optimization clinic as part of a heart 
failure disease management program. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2009;53(9):765–773.
	8	 Zareba W, Klein H, Cygankiewicz I, Hall WJ, McNitt S, 
Brown M, et al. Effectiveness of cardiac 
resynchronization therapy by QRS morphology in the 
Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation 
Trial–Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy  
(MADIT‐CRT)/Clinical Perspective. Circulation 
2011;123(10):1061–1072.
	9	 Beshai JF, Grimm RA, Nagueh SF, Baker JH 2nd, Beau 
SL, Greenberg SM, et al. Cardiac‐resynchronization 
therapy in heart failure with narrow QRS complexes. 
N Engl J Med 2007;357(24):2461–2471.
	10	 Khan FZ, Virdee MS, Palmer CR, Pugh PJ, O’Halloran 
D, Elsik M, et al. Targeted left ventricular lead 
placement to guide cardiac resynchronization therapy: 
the TARGET study: a randomized, controlled trial. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;59(17):1509–1518.
	11	 Saba S, Marek J, Schwartzman D, Jain S, Adelstein E, 
White P, et al. Echocardiography‐guided left ventricular 
lead placement for cardiac resynchronization therapy: 
results of the Speckle Tracking Assisted 
Resynchronization Therapy for Electrode Region trial. 
Circ Heart Fail 2013;6(3):427–434.
	12	 Delgado V, van Bommel RJ, Bertini M, Borleffs CJ, Marsan 
NA, Arnold CT, et al. Relative merits of left ventricular 
dyssynchrony, left ventricular lead position, and 
myocardial scar to predict long‐term survival of ischemic 
heart failure patients undergoing cardiac 
resynchronization therapy. Circulation 2011;123(1):70–78.
	13	 Auricchio A, Fantoni C, Regoli F, Carbucicchio C, 
Goette A, Geller C, et al. Characterization of left 
ventricular activation in patients with heart failure and 
left bundle‐branch block. Circulation 
2004;109(9):1133–1139.
	14	 Gold MR, Yu Y, Singh JP, Stein KM, Birgerdotter‐Green 
U, Meyer TE, et al. The effect of left ventricular electrical 
delay on AV optimization for cardiac resynchronization 
therapy. Heart Rhythm 2013;10(7):988–993.
	15	 Singh JP, Fan D, Heist EK, Alabiad CR, Taub C, 
Reddy V, et al. Left ventricular lead electrical delay 
predicts response to cardiac resynchronization therapy. 
Heart Rhythm 2006;3(11):1285–1292.
	16	 Duckett SG, Ginks M, Shetty AK, Bostock J, Gill JS, 
Hamid S, et al. Invasive acute hemodynamic response 
to guide left ventricular lead implantation predicts 
chronic remodeling in patients undergoing cardiac 
resynchronization therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2011;58(11):1128–1136.
	17	 Cheng A, Gold MR, Waggoner AD, Meyer TE, Seth M, 
Rapkin J, et al. Potential mechanisms underlying the 
effect of gender on response to cardiac 
resynchronization therapy: insights from the  
SMART‐AV multicenter trial. Heart Rhythm 
2012;9(5):736–741.
	18	 Ammann P, Sticherling C, Kalusche D, Eckstein J, 
Bernheim A, Schaer B, et al. An electrocardiogram‐
based algorithm to detect loss of left ventricular 
capture during cardiac resynchronization therapy. 
Ann Intern Med 2005;142(12 Pt 1):968–973.
	19	 Aktas MK, Jeevanantham V, Sherazi S, Flynn D, Hall B, 
Huang DT, et al. Effect of biventricular pacing during a 
ventricular sensed event. Am J Cardiol 
2009;103(12):1741–1745.
	20	 Kamath G, Cotiga D, Koneru J, Arshad A, Pierce W, 
Aziz EF, et al. The utility of 12‐lead holter monitoring 
in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation for the 
identification of nonresponders after cardiac 
resynchronization therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2009;53:1050–1055.
	21	 Koplan BA, Kaplan AJ, Weiner S, Jones PW, Seth M, 
Christman SA. Heart failure decompensation and  
all‐cause mortality in relation to percent biventricular 
pacing in patients with heart failureis a goal of 100% 
biventricular pacing necessary? J Am Coll Cardiol 
2009;53(4):355–360.
	22	 Gasparini M, Auricchio A, Metra M, Regoli F, Fantoni 
C, Lamp B, et al. Long‐term survival in patients 
undergoing cardiac resynchronization therapy: the 
importance of performing atrio‐ventricular junction 
ablation in patients with permanent atrial fibrillation. 
Eur Heart J 2008;29(13):1644–1652.
	23	 Ganesan AN, Brooks AG, Roberts‐Thomson KC, Lau 
DH, Kalman JM, Sanders P. Role of AV nodal ablation 
in cardiac resynchronization in patients with coexistent 
atrial fibrillation and heart failure: a systematic review. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;59(8):719–726.
	24	 Ruwald MH, Mittal S, Ruwald AC, Aktas MK, Daubert 
JP, McNitt S, et al. Association between frequency of 
atrial and ventricular ectopic beats and biventricular 
pacing percentage and outcomes in patients with 
cardiac resynchronization therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2014;64(10):971–981.
	25	 Lakkireddy D, Di Biase L, Ryschon K, Biria M, Swarup 
V, Reddy YM, et al. Radiofrequency ablation of 
premature ventricular ectopy improves the efficacy of 
cardiac resynchronization therapy in nonresponders. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;60(16):1531–1539.
	26	 Mullens W, Kepa J, De Vusser P, Vercammen J,  
Rivero‐Ayerza M, Wagner P, et al. Importance of 
adjunctive heart failure optimization immediately after 
implantation to improve long‐term outcomes with 
cardiac resynchronization therapy. Am J Cardiol 
2011;108(3):409–415.

­Reference ﻿
231
	27	 Patwala AY, Woods PR, Sharp L, Goldspink DF, Tan LB, 
Wright DJ. Maximizing patient benefit from cardiac 
resynchronization therapy with the addition of 
structured exercise training: a randomized controlled 
study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53(25):2332–2339.
	28	 Valzania C, Biffi M, Martignani C, Diemberger I, 
Bertini M, Ziacchi M, et al. Cardiac resynchronization 
therapy: variations in echo‐guided optimized 
atrioventricular and interventricular delays during 
follow‐up. Echocardiography 2007;24(9):933–939.
	29	 Jansen AH, Bracke FA, van Dantzig JM, Meijer A, van 
der Voort PH, Aarnoudse W, et al. Correlation of 
echo‐Doppler optimization of atrioventricular delay in 
cardiac resynchronization therapy with invasive 
hemodynamics in patients with heart failure 
secondary to ischemic or idiopathic dilated 
cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 2006;97(4):552–557.
	30	 Sawhney NS, Waggoner AD, Garhwal S, Chawla MK, 
Osborn J, Faddis MN. Randomized prospective trial of 
atrioventricular delay programming for cardiac 
resynchronization therapy. Heart Rhythm 
2004;1(5):562–567.
	31	 Ellenbogen KA, Gold MR, Meyer TE, Fernndez Lozano 
I, Mittal S, Waggoner AD, et al. Primary results from 
the SmartDelay determined AV optimization: a 
comparison to other AV delay methods used in cardiac 
resynchronization therapy (SMART‐AV) trial: a 
randomized trial comparing empirical, 
echocardiography‐guided, and algorithmic 
atrioventricular delay programming in cardiac 
resynchronization therapy. Circulation 
2010;122(25):2660–2668.
	32	 Bernheim A, Ammann P, Sticherling C, Burger P, 
Schaer B, Brunner‐La Rocca HP, et al. Right atrial 
pacing impairs cardiac function during 
resynchronization therapy: acute effects of DDD pacing 
compared to VDD pacing. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2005;45(9):1482–1487.
	33	 Martin DO, Day JD, Lai PY, Murphy AL, Nayak HM, 
Villareal RP, et al. Atrial support pacing in heart failure: 
results from the multicenter PEGASUS CRT trial. J 
Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2012;23(12):1317–1325.
	34	 Gold MR, Niazi I, Giudici M, Leman RB, Sturdivant JL, 
Kim MH, et al. Acute hemodynamic effects of atrial 
pacing with cardiac resynchronization therapy. J 
Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2009;20(8):894–900.
	35	 Sogaard P, Egeblad H, Pedersen AK, Kim WY, 
Kristensen BO, Hansen PS, et al. Sequential versus 
simultaneous biventricular resynchronization for 
severe heart failure: evaluation by tissue Doppler 
imaging. Circulation 2002;106(16):2078–2084.
	36	 Boriani G, Muller CP, Seidl KH, Grove R, Vogt J, 
Danschel W, et al. Randomized comparison of 
simultaneous biventricular stimulation versus 
optimized interventricular delay in cardiac 
resynchronization therapy. The Resynchronization for 
the HemodYnamic Treatment for Heart Failure 
Management II implantable cardioverter defibrillator 
(RHYTHM II ICD) study. Am Heart J 
2006;151(5):1050–1058.
	37	 Rao RK, Kumar UN, Schafer J, Viloria E, De Lurgio D, 
Foster E. Reduced ventricular volumes and improved 
systolic function with cardiac resynchronization 
therapy: a randomized trial comparing simultaneous 
biventricular pacing, sequential biventricular pacing, 
and left ventricular pacing. Circulation 
2007;115(16):2136–2144.
	38	 Weiss R. V‐V Optimization in cardiac 
resynchronization therapy non‐responders: 
RESPONSE‐HF trial results. Abstract AB12‐5, 
HRS. 2010.
	39	 Gorcsan J 3rd, Abraham T, Agler DA, Bax JJ, 
Derumeaux G, Grimm RA, et al. Echocardiography for 
cardiac resynchronization therapy: recommendations 
for performance and reporting: a report from the 
American Society of Echocardiography Dyssynchrony 
Writing Group endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society. 
J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2008;21(3):191–213.
	40	 Abraham WT, Gras D, Yu CM, Gupta MS: Freedom 
Steering Committee. Rationale and design of a 
randomized clinical trial to assess the safety and 
efficacy of frequent optimization of cardiac 
resynchronization therapy: the Frequent Optimization 
Study using the QuickOpt Method (FREEDOM) trial. 
Am Heart J 2010;159(6):944–948.
	41	 Abraham WT, Leon AR, St John Sutton MG, Keteyian 
SJ, Fieberg AM, Chinchoy E, et al. Randomized 
controlled trial comparing simultaneous versus 
optimized sequential interventricular stimulation 
during cardiac resynchronization therapy. Am Heart J 
2012;164(5):735–741.
	42	 Ritter P, Delnoy PP, Padeletti L, Lunati M, Naegele H, 
Borri‐Brunetto A, et al. A randomized pilot study of 
optimization of cardiac resynchronization therapy in 
sinus rhythm patients using a peak endocardial 
acceleration sensor vs. standard methods. Europace 
2012;14(9):1324–1333.
	43	 Vanderheyden M, Blommaert D, Abraham W, Gras D, 
Yu CM, Guzzo L. Results from the FREEDOM trial: 
assess the safety and efficacity of frequent optimization 
of cardiac resynchronization therapy. Acta Cardiol 
2010;65(5):589.
	44	 Martin DO, Lemke B, Birnie D, Krum H, Lee KL, 
Aonuma K, et al. Investigation of a novel algorithm for 
synchronized left‐ventricular pacing and ambulatory 
optimization of cardiac resynchronization therapy: 
results of the adaptive CRT trial. Heart Rhythm 
2012;9(11):1807–1814.

233
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
In the last 50 years, the importance of cardiac implanta-
ble electronic devices (CIEDs) has increased as fast as 
their ability in improving the management of many 
­serious cardiovascular diseases and patients’ quality of 
life. This explains why the guidelines that rule their use 
are frequently updated and widened in scope. Between 
1996 and 2004, the numbers of implanted pacemakers 
(PMs) and implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators (ICDs) 
increased 19% and 60%, respectively. In the last 20 years, 
we can estimate that more than 4.5 million patients have 
been implanted with a CIED and that about 1 million 
new leads are implanted every year. Thus, it is easy to 
understand that such a high number of implants, in an 
aging population affected with several comorbidities, 
sustains a parallel increase in complications linked to 
these devices.
Device‐related complications include malfunctioning 
(which affects almost 28% of PMs within 10 years after 
implant and 40% of ICDs within 8 years), venous throm-
bosis (15–40%), infections (0.5–12%), and recalls.
Among these complications, the incidence of cardiac 
device infection is underestimated but is associated with 
the worst prognosis. Unfortunately, some reports show 
that the incidence of infection is growing faster than the 
number of new implants, and in some centers the preva-
lence of CIED endocarditis has increased from less than 
5% to more than 30% in the last 10 years.
In the LExICon trial [1], the mortality rate observed 
with any kind of infection dwarfs the rate associated with 
transvenous lead extraction. The authors showed that 
the in‐hospital death rate in non‐infected patients was 
0.3%, but increased to 1.7% in patients with local infec-
tion (i.e., limited to the device pocket) and rose to 4.3% in 
patients with device‐related endocarditis.
It is very important to remember that prophylaxis at 
the time of implant, a watchful eye for the early signs of 
infection, and prompt intervention after diagnosis are 
not only the right way to handle a CIED infection, 
but often the only way to give the patient a good chance 
of survival.
Nevertheless, there is still the need for official guide-
lines for the management of these complicated patients. 
The most recent document is the Heart Rhythm Society 
(HRS) expert consensus, endorsed by the American 
Heart Association and published in Heart Rhythm in 
July 2009 [2].
­Risk Factors
Every patient implanted with prosthetic material could 
become a potentially infected patient, and CIEDs are no 
exception. This does not mean that there is no way to 
fight and prevent the problem, but identifying patients at 
higher risk is challenging. Risk factors linked to the 
patient’s characteristics include any comorbidities, espe-
cially chronic kidney disease (defined as a glomerular 
filtration rate <60 mL/min) and diabetes mellitus, while 
chronic heart failure and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) should only be considered as minor risk 
factors [3]. Furthermore, any factor that underlies a con-
dition of immunosuppression (e.g., chronic therapy with 
steroids, neoplastic disease, or merely aging) [4], the 
presence of other focuses of infection (i.e., other infected 
prosthetic materials, infections of the oral cavity), having 
fever 24 hours before entering the operating room, and 
previous intervention related to the CIED, as in the case 
of replacement, upgrading, or revision of lead or device, 
should be regarded as potentially risky situations.
Other factors are related to the CIED itself.: ICD and 
cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) devices are 
more prone to infection, and – generally speaking – the 
25
How to Manage Device Infections and When to Reimplant 
After Device Extraction
Giosuè Mascioli
Unit of Arrhythmology and Cardiac Pacing, Cliniche Humanitas Gavazzeni, Bergamo, Italy

25  How to Manage Device Infections and When to Reimplant After Device Extraction
234
more complex the device, the higher the risk of infection, 
probably because procedures are longer and usually 
require more professionals in the operating room. 
Temporary pacing before the procedure (implant, 
replacement, or lead extraction) is another important 
risk factor, because it is allows easy venous access for 
microbes. Even the operator’s experience seems to have 
a role in infections. Centers that perform more than 100 
implant procedures per year seem to have a lower risk 
of infection.
Finally, one of the most important and controversial 
risk factors is the use of antiplatelet and/or anticoagu-
lant therapy. In most of the trials, the use of these 
drugs, particularly if in association, is linked to an 
higher incidence of subcutaneous hematoma and this 
represents an ­optimal environment for microbial 
growth, delays the tissue healing, and may sometimes 
need an evacuation procedure that can be a source 
of infection.
­Clinical Presentation of CIED 
Infection
A device infection can present in many different ways, 
but for the purposes of this chapter, we divide it into two 
groups: device pocket infection and endovascular infec-
tion without clear signs of pocket involvement.
In the first scenario, all the classic signs of inflamma-
tion can be observed: the skin can appear erythematous, 
warmer, flushed, swollen, and painful, sometimes with a 
dehiscence, secreting a serous, hematic, or purulent 
material. Occasionally, a low‐grade fever is present and 
blood inflammatory indexes are elevated. It may happen 
that, at the first contact with a specialist, the generator or 
the leads have already eroded through the skin and 
appear on the surface, totally or in part. The cause of the 
erosion can be an infection or just skin fragility, as in the 
case of chronic steroid use, radiotherapy, or chronic dis-
eases of the connective tissues. However, once exposed, 
the device inevitably becomes contaminated and must 
be considered infected.
In endovascular infection, the patient usually presents 
with fever that can be continuous or intermittent (it is 
not uncommon to record temperatures higher than 
38°C). This condition can be associated with positive 
blood cultures. With negative blood cultures, usually the 
main reason is the use of an empiric antibiotic therapy. 
In some case, transthoracic or – even better – transesoph-
ageal echocardiography shows vegetations adhered 
either to the leads or to the cardiac valves; these vegeta-
tions are often longer than 1 cm, perhaps because the 
low pressures of the right district allows their growth 
without damaging them. One of the worst presentations 
of infection is systemic embolism resulting from a friable 
cardiac vegetation: unfortunately, this can sometimes 
be the first expression of a vegetation and in many case it 
is crippling.
However, local infection is the most common 
­presentation. If we consider both cases with and without 
bloodstream infection, it represents almost 70% of all 
instances [4].
Local infections usually appear within 6 months of the 
index procedure [3], while systemic infections are 
­usually late complications; in the latter case, sometimes 
the source of infection is “outside” the CIED and this 
remote site should be identified and treated before or 
contemporaneously to device extraction.
­Aetiology
Staphylococcus is the most common class of bacteria 
responsible for device infection, both systemic and 
restricted to the subcutaneous pocket (almost 70–80% 
of  cases) [4]. Amongst this species, Staphylococcus 
­epidermidis and other coagulase‐negative staphylococci 
(CoNS) are the most frequent, followed by Staphylococcus 
aureus. The high incidence of CoNS infection is easy to 
understand, because the bacteria are part of the usual 
environment of our skin, and, moreover, can adhere to 
prosthetic materials and build a protective biofilm, which 
is able to protect them from the host defense system and 
from antibiotics. S. aureus is the most virulent bacteria; 
it is usually responsible for the majority of infections 
linked to central venous access and S. aureus bacteremia 
is harmful even if not originating by the CIED, because 
this bacteria is able to colonize the device even during 
other invasive procedures. This is the reason why a 
­persistent occult gram‐positive bacteremia has been 
proposed as an indication to promptly start specific anti-
biotic therapy and to remove the device, even before 
demonstration of its involvement in the infective process 
(class of recommendation I; level of evidence B) [2]. 
Methicillin‐resistance prevalence, both for CoNS and S. 
aureus, as reported in several studies, can be as high as 
50–60%. Other gram‐positive bacteria, as Streptococci 
and Corynebacterium, are involved in less than 5% of 
infections. Gram‐negative bacteria are involved in nearly 
10% of device infections. Only a minority of patients are 
affected with mycotic infection, mainly by Candida 
­albicans, but this happens almost exclusively in seri-
ously immunocompromised subjects. Polymicrobial 
infections affect about 10% of patients and in another 
10% both blood and pocket cultures are negative, usually 
for previous empiric antibiotic therapy.

­Diagnosi ﻿
235
­Diagnosis
In case of suspected CIED infections, patients should be 
referred to a physician with specific experience in this 
setting, so that the diagnostic evaluation could be rapidly 
started. The first step is to obtain a complete blood count 
with differential white cells count, inflammatory mark-
ers (C‐reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 
and procalcitonin), glycemia, and serum creatinine con-
centration (as markers of the most common risk factors). 
In the presence of purulent drainage from the generator 
pocket, swabs for bacterial cultures should be collected 
and sent for analysis. Needle aspiration from the pocket, 
even if swollen or fluctuant, should be absolutely avoided, 
because this can be a source of contamination. A culture 
from the inner pocket (and from the lead tips) can be 
taken only in the operating room, with the maximum 
level of asepsis.
At least two (three is better) sets of blood cultures 
(even without fever) should be obtained. Different modes 
of access must be used and, if the patient has a central 
venous catheter, blood cultures from the catheter should 
also be obtained because it can also be the source of 
infection. If blood cultures are taken during an empirical 
antibiotic therapy or in a very early phase of the infec-
tion, they can have a negative result, and therefore should 
be repeated after a few days, taking into consideration 
the possibility of withholding antibiotics. Two sets posi-
tive for the same bacteria (with same sensitivity and 
resistance to antimicrobial agent) is a diagnostic criteria 
of endocarditis, as well as the presence of a typical 
­endocarditis bacteria (i.e., S. aureus) in just one set.
Echocardiography has a fundamental role in the diag-
nostic evaluation, in order to establish the presence and 
site of vegetations. Transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE) is the gold standard to find vegetations (Figure 25.1), 
to establish their connections to leads, valves, and other 
cardiac structures, and to measure their dimensions. This 
aspect should not be neglected, because the larger the 
vegetation, the higher the embolic risk at the moment of 
lead extraction. TEE is also able to reveal the presence of 
cardiac abscesses, one of the most typical manifestations 
of S. aureus infection. However, it is important to remem-
ber that a negative TEE does not exclude the presence of 
a CIED infection. It is evident that even if TEE has a 
greater usefulness in the diagnostic iter, transthoracic 
echocardiography (TTE) plays an important part in 
­monitoring the vegetations and ­cardiac function during 
antimicrobial therapy. After lead removal, both tech-
niques can sometime show a characteristic find, described 
as a double rail image which stands on the lead way. This 
image, called “ghost” by some authors [5], is the fibrous 
sheath that previously covered the lead and seems to be 
associated with a worse prognosis.
There are many conditions that limit the resolution 
power of echocardiographic methods (i.e., valvular pros-
thesis or high thoracic impedance, as in case of obesity 
or emphysema), thus some authors suggest that other 
techniques, such as 3‐D echocardiography, CT scan, 
intravascular ultrasound (IVUS), and 18F‐FDG positron 
emission tomography (PET) should be used to study 
of cardiac vegetations. IVUS in particular appears to be 
more accurate than TEE in determining the position of 
vegetations [6]. Among these techniques, 18F‐FDG‐PET 
Figure 25.1  Huge vegetations on the 
tricuspid valve found at transesophageal 
echography in a patient with systemic 
infection of a single chamber implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator (ICD). 
(Personal case)

25  How to Manage Device Infections and When to Reimplant After Device Extraction
236
(Figure 25.2) appears as the most promising, because of 
its high sensitivity and specificity (89% and 86%, respec-
tively) in identifying CIED infections even in the initial 
phases. 18F‐FDG is a glucose analogue that is incorpo-
rated in cells with higher metabolic activity (e.g., 
­neoplastic cells, leukocytes); it was initially used in 
oncology for the localization of metastatic lesions, but its 
utility was recognized in the diagnosis of osteomyelitis, 
to find unknown sites of infection. Recent studies have 
demonstrated the usefulness of 18F‐FDG‐PET in the 
diagnostic iter of CIED infection, in order to find 
the original site of infection.
­Therapy
Antibiotic Therapy
An empirical antibiotic therapy should always be admin-
istered in systemic signs of infection. Drug therapy 
should cover both gram‐positive and gram‐negative 
­bacteria and methicillin‐resistant S. aureus. In local 
infection, however, it is appropriate to wait until the 
immediate pre‐operative period, unless the device will 
not be removed before 24 hours from the diagnosis [7]. 
In the choice of the most appropriate antimicrobial 
(a)
(b)
Figure 25.2  18F‐FDG‐PET. (a) A patient with an infection both of the pacemaker (PM) pocket and of the intravascular portion of the pacing 
system (see the gold spotting at these levels). In the lower part of the figure there is an uptake of 18F‐FDG also at the hip prosthesis, 
probable origin site of the infective process. (b) A patient who presented with mild swelling of the PM pocket, without erythema or pocket 
erosion and without any sign of systemic infection, in whom the 18F‐FDG uptake was only evident at the device pocket. In the lower part 
of the figure, there is uptake of 18F‐FDG also at the prostate; the patient underwent prostate biopsy 3 months before coming to our 
attention. (Personal cases)

­Therap ﻿
237
agent, help from an infectivologist should be obtained. 
The most often involved bacteria are staphylococci and 
streptococci (i.e., gram‐positive bacteria), so the most 
effective antibiotics are oxacillin and amoxicillin/clavu-
lanic acid for methicillin‐sensitive (MS) strains, vanc-
omicin for methicillin‐resistant (MR); daptomicin is a 
reliable alternative for both species. Ceftazidime and 
piperacillin/tazobactam are extremely useful against 
gram‐negative species. For critical patients, it is appro-
priate to include in the initial therapy one of these antibi-
otics too. The choice of drug therapy should be based 
both on the patient’s characteristics, in order to avoid 
drug‐related toxicity as much as possible, and on the 
antibiogram based on blood cultures. Unfortunately, 
there are only a few limited clinical trials that tested the 
minimal duration of antibiotic therapy or discovered 
when it is appropriate to switch from intravenous to oral 
treatment. However, many authors suggest referring to 
the same guidelines that are used to manage non‐CIED‐
related endocarditis. The duration of antimicrobial ther-
apy after device explantation should be decided on the 
basis of the results of blood cultures and TEE [7]. If blood 
cultures are positive (or negative, but after a period with 
empirical antimicrobial treatment), clinical signs and 
symptoms of systemic infection are present, and the TEE 
shows vegetations on the leads, antibiotics should be 
administered for a period of 2–4 weeks, and another 2 
weeks of treatment should be provided if vegetations are 
associated with systemic complications such as osteomy-
elitis, septic venous thrombosis, and so on. If TEE is 
­negative, 2 weeks of treatment are generally enough, but 
if the infection is determined by S. aureus, it should be 
prolonged for another 2 weeks. In negative blood cul-
tures, the infection should be considered as confined to 
the generator pocket, and 7–10 days of antibiotics after 
complete removal of the PM or ICD system should be 
sufficient. The antibiotic therapy should be considered 
as effective after the blood culture, taken every 48 hours 
starting on the day after extraction procedure, becomes 
negative and systemic signs of infection (fever, C‐reactive 
protein, leukocytes, procalcitonine) disappear. After 
the  first negative sample, no other blood cultures are 
required.
Surgical Therapy
Before performing a CIED explantation, the operator 
must be aware of the clinical condition of the patient, of 
the risk factors and comorbidities and, moreover, of the 
presence and the position of all device and leads, includ-
ing those previously abandoned. To this aim, a good 
anamnesis is fundamental and must be include all the 
steps of the device history: brand and model, indication 
to implant, eventual previous replacements, revisions 
and up‐gradings, and year of any procedure. The patient 
should be asked about previous use of antibiotic therapy, 
previous endocarditis or infection in other sites, and 
presence of other prostheses. A chest X‐ray is mandatory 
before the procedure to assess the kind of leads involved 
if not known, and their number and position; even a 
device control is necessary to document the settings and 
to check if spontaneous rhythm is present, because in 
patients with PM dependency a temporary pacing is 
required as a bridge from explantation to replacement.
The estimation of vegetation size, assessed by TEE, is 
very important in this phase because it helps in deter-
mining the embolic risk we can derive from a trans-
venous approach for the extraction or if a surgical 
intervention is needed. The literature is not helpful in 
determining a cutoff for vegetations’ dimensions, as 
there are reports of vegetations larger than 40 mm being 
removed percutaneously without any significant 
­complications. It should be remembered that percuta-
neous lead extraction is a potentially lethal procedure 
and therefore should be performed only in hospitals 
with the appropriate experience. As stated in the HRS 
document [2], cardiac surgery standby and an intensive 
care unit are necessary to perform this procedure safely.
The current guidelines suggest the following situations 
in which the benefit of lead extraction overweigh the risk 
of the procedure and of infection [2]:
Class I: Complete device and leads removal is recom-
mended in:
●
●Patients with definite CIED system infection, as evi-
denced by valvular endocarditis, lead endocarditis 
or sepsis (level of evidence B);
●
●Patients with definite CIED pocket infection, as 
­evidenced by pocket abscess, device erosion, skin 
adherence, or chronic draining sinus without 
­clinically evident involvement of the transvenous 
portion of the lead system (level of evidence B);
●
●Patients with definite valvular endocarditis without 
definite involvement of the lead/s and/or device 
(level of evidence B);
●
●Patients with occult gram‐positive bacteremia (level 
of evidence B).
Class II: Complete device and leads removal is 
­reasonable in:
●
●Patients with persistent occult gram‐negative 
­bacteremia (level of evidence B).
Class III: Complete device and leads removal is not 
indicated:
●
●For superficial or incisional infections without 
involvement of the device and/or the lead/s (level of 
evidence C);
●
●To treat chronic bacteremia from a source other 
than CIED (level of evidence C).

25  How to Manage Device Infections and When to Reimplant After Device Extraction
238
The extraction procedure in infection should always 
be performed as soon as possible; nevertheless, the 
­timing should be decided on the basis of the clinical con-
dition of the patient:
●
●In severe sepsis, even before microbial diagnosis, 
extraction should be considered as an emergency 
procedure;
●
●In the presence of vegetations, the procedure should 
follow a brief period of focused antibiotic therapy in 
order to reduce the bacterial charge and, possibly, the 
size of vegetations;
●
●In local infection, the procedure could be scheduled, 
without “losing time,” once all the required profession-
als are present for a safe procedure.
­Transvenous Lead Removal
In term of definition, there is a difference between lead 
“removal” and lead “extraction,” the former being the 
removal of a lead from the heart without any special 
technical tool (i.e., with traction alone) and the latter is 
removal of the lead with specialized equipment. Even if 
the duration of implant does not play a part in this defi-
nition, lead removal is more frequent with recently 
implanted leads, usually less than 6 months.
The success of the procedure is based on the achieve-
ment of the desired clinical outcome. We can define a 
“complete procedural success” as removal of all targeted 
leads from the vascular space without any permanently 
disabling complication or death. A “clinical success” is 
the removal of all targeted leads with retention of a small 
portion (usually less than 5 cm) of the lead that does not 
negatively impact the outcome goal of the procedure. 
A  “failure” is defined as the inability to achieve either 
complete or clinical success, or the development of 
any permanently disabling complication or procedure‐
related death.
The procedure starts with the removal of the device 
and the debriding of the leads as close as possible to the 
entrance site. Once the leads have been insulated, a 
­gentle traction can be applied, after having inserted an 
ordinary stylet, in order to try to remove the lead from 
the heart. Too much traction can result in damaging of 
the lead conductor, thus compromising the success of 
the procedure. If traction is unsuccessful, the lead must 
be prepared for the insertion of a locking stylet: the con-
nector is cut and the conductor insulated. The two most 
common kind of locking stylet (Figure  25.3) are those 
with an anchor at the distal tip or with a kind of stent that 
runs all along the stylet itself. The aim of this tool is to 
allow one to pull directly on the distal tip of the lead, 
without damaging the body of lead itself. If traction also 
fails with a locking stylet, a dilator should be used. 
Several kind of dilators have been released onto the mar-
ket, but – for the purpose of this chapter – we can divide 
them into two groups: mechanical and potentiated dila-
tors (Figure 25.4). Mechanical sheaths use their cutting 
edge to disrupt fibrous adherences that tighten the lead 
to the vascular wall; potentiated sheaths use different 
energy sources to achieve this effect. The most common 
potentiated sheaths are laser, radiofrequency, and rotat-
ing threaded sheaths.
Removal is usually performed through the same 
venous access used at the time of implant, but if this 
approach fails, other approaches have been successful, 
mainly using the femoral or the internal jugular vein. 
If performed in an adequate hospital setting and by an 
experienced operator, the success rate (putting together 
Unlocked
(a)
(b)
Locked
Figure 25.3  Locking stylets. (a) “Anchor tip” locking stylet: (b) “stenting” locking stylet.

­Timin g of Reimplantatio ﻿
239
complete radiologic and clinical success) has been 
reported to be higher than 95% in many publications.
Major complication rate has been described to be as 
high as 1.6%, but it is strictly dependent on operator 
experience. Centers that perform more than 300 
extraction procedures per year can reduce the major 
complication rate to less than 1%. Four major risk 
­factors have been found to be related to higher compli-
cation rates: time from implant; female gender; ICD 
leads; and use of laser sheaths techniques, even if the 
last point is very much debated. Major complications 
include death, ­cardiac or vascular avulsion requiring 
immediate ­invasive intervention, pulmonary embo-
lism, stroke and pacing system‐related infection of a 
previously non‐infected site. Other events are consid-
ered as minor complications: pericardial effusion, 
hematoma at the surgical site requiring drainage, arm 
swelling, migrated lead ­fragment without sequelae, 
and blood transfusion.
In patients who need temporary pacing, in addition to 
conventional temporary pacing catheter, a new tech-
nique has been demonstrated to be safe and effective. 
A permanent active fixation lead is positioned into the 
right ventricle and connected to the removed device 
which is fixed over the patient’s skin. This technique has 
the great advantage of allowing the patient’s movement, 
avoiding confining the patient to bed, possibly for a 
long period of time.
­Timing of Reimplantation
After having removed the pacing/ICD system, the indi-
cation to reimplant a new device should be carefully 
evaluated as not all patients still have an indication to 
pacing (less frequently, ICD) after removal. In some 
reports the proportion of patients not reimplanted with 
a new device is as high as 30–60%.
It should be remembered that after CIED removal for 
infection, it is mandatory to implant a new device con-
tralaterally to the previous one. For this reason, it is 
important to reimplant a new device when the risk of 
infection has been lowered to the same risk the patient 
would have for a first procedure, with two aims: safety 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Scar tissue
Laser sheath (SLS)
Target cardiac lead
Vein
Figure 25.4  Dilators and sheaths for lead extraction. (a) Different types of mechanical dilators; (b) rotating threaded sheath; (c) laser 
sheath. Source: Reproduced with permission of The Spectranetics Corporation.

25  How to Manage Device Infections and When to Reimplant After Device Extraction
240
of  the patient and avoidance of compromising the 
“last  possible” pectoral site. In patients in whom both 
pectoral sites have already been used, the easiest and saf-
est procedure probably remains the epicardial implant, 
even if new possibilities are offered by the new leadless 
devices (as the Nanostim) or the new subcutaneous 
ICDs. Use of the controlateral site and re‐evaluation of 
the need for a new CIED are considered class I recom-
mendations for the timing of reimplantation. Quite 
­surprisingly, all the guidelines that refer to this issue have 
a level of evidence C, as no randomized clinical trials 
have been published. The class II (level of evidence C) 
recommendations are the following:
●
●A new CIED can be implanted in patients who have 
no  vegetations on valve/leads, even if with positive 
pre‐operative blood cultures of lead tip cultures, 
­provided that there are no further clinical evidences of 
systemic infection and the blood cultures drawn within 
24 hours of CIED system removal remain negative for 
at least 72 hours.
●
●Transvenous reimplant of a new CIED system in 
patients who presented with valvular or lead vegeta-
tions should be delayed for at least 14 days after CIED 
system removal, time that could be reduced in case of 
surgical debridement of vegetations, provided that 
there is no more instrumental evidence of vegetations 
and blood culture are negative.
As far as antibiotic therapy is concerned, its duration 
should be established on the basis of information in the 
relevant chapter.
­References
	1	 Wazni O, Epstein LM, Carrillo RG, Love C, Adler SW, 
Riggio DW, et al. Lead extraction in the contemporary 
setting. The LExICon study: an observational 
retrospective study of consecutive lead extractions. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2010;55(6):579–586.
	2	 Wilkoff BL, Love CJ, Byrd CL, Bongiorni MG, 
Carrillo RG, Crossley GH 3rd, et al. Transvenous 
lead extraction: Heart Rhythm Society expert 
consensus on facilities, training, indications, 
and patients management (endorsed by the American 
Heart Association, AHA). Heart Rhythm 
2009;6(7):1085–1104.
	3	 Greenspon AJ, Patel JD, Lau E, Ochoa JA, Frisch DR, 
Ho RT, et al. 16‐year trends in the infection burden for 
pacemakers and implantable cardioverter‐defibrillators 
in the United States: 1993 to 2008. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2011;58(10):1001–1006.
	4	 Sohail MR, Uslan DZ, Khan AH, Friedman PA, Hayes 
DL, Wilson WR, et al. Management and outcome 
of permanent pacemaker and implantable cardioverter‐
defibrillator infections. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2007;49(18):1851–1859.
	5	 Le Dolley Y, Thuny F, Mancini J, Casalta JP, Riberi A, 
Gouriet F, et al. Diagnosis of cardiac device‐related 
infective endocarditis after device removal. JACC 
Cardiovasc Imaging 2010;37(7):673–681.
	6	 Bongiorni MG, Di Cori A, Soldati E, Zucchelli G, Arena 
G, Segreti L, et al. Intracardiac echocardiography in 
patients with pacing and defibrillating leads: a feasibility 
study. Echocardiography 2008;25(6):632–638.
	7	 Dababneh AS, Sohail MR. Cardiovascular implantable 
electronic device infection: a stepwise approach to 
diagnosis and management. Cleve Clin J Med 
2011;78(8):529–537.

241
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
The Heart Rhythm Society/European Heart Rhythm 
Association (HRS/EHRA) Expert Consensus paper in 
2008 codified remote follow‐up of cardiac implantable 
electronic devices (CIEDs) as an excellent alternative to 
in‐office follow‐up when accompanied by intermittent 
office visits [1]. Since then, remote follow‐up of patients 
with implanted pacemakers and defibrillators has 
become the standard of care. While each has different 
features and functionality, all manufacturers now offer 
such a program. The rationale for using remote follow‐
up is simple. First, it is significantly more convenient for 
the patients as well as their family members. The car-
egiver burden in pacemaker and defibrillator patient fol-
low‐up is significant because it is common for a patient 
to need a family member to take off from work to trans-
port the patient to and from the device clinic. Secondly, 
it has been clearly demonstrated that remote follow‐up is 
more effective than both trans‐telephonic telemetry 
(TTM) and intermittent in‐office follow‐up [2–4]. TTM 
is effective in identifying the elective replacement indica-
tor in most pacemakers but it is not very effective in 
managing other problems. Clinical problems are solved 
earlier with remote follow‐up and the impact of those 
problems is lessened because of the rapid response. 
Certainly, remote follow‐up allows for more effective 
problem‐solving of patient issues such as shocks, atrial 
fibrillation, and the management of the end of battery 
service. Finally, remote follow‐up is significantly more 
convenient for the device clinic staff. It is unreasonable 
to expect device clinic staff to process more than three 
patients per hour in the office. However, a skilled follow‐
up nurse can process between six and nine patients per 
hour depending upon the “user friendliness” of the data 
recording system being used. In addition, this service 
can be performed at a time that is convenient for the staff 
or it can even be performed by a staff member who is 
working from home.
The data that are available by remote follow‐up is the 
same information that is acquired in the office. There is a 
clinic splash screen that allows the staff to have an over-
view of the available data (Figure 26.1). Each patient will 
have an individual splash screen that gives the clinician 
an overview of the patient (Figure 26.2). Data are then 
available to allow for the detailed follow‐up of the patient 
(Figure 26.3).
­Staff
The opportunity to follow‐up patients with devices 
remotely is widely available to clinics of all sizes. Access 
to remote monitoring services is currently provided free 
of charge by each major device manufacturer. The spec-
trum of devices that are eligible to be followed remotely 
vary by manufacturer. Some manufacturers limit remote 
follow‐up technology to their newer device models, 
while other manufacturers have enabled nearly all of 
their devices to be followed remotely. Device manufac-
turers can provide a detailed list of their devices that are 
eligible for remote monitoring.
The staff required to launch a remote follow‐up clinic 
varies depending on the clinic’s device patient popula-
tion and financial considerations. In smaller clinics, it is 
reasonable for an experienced device nurse to manage 
patients in the clinic and spend a portion of the work week 
managing the remote follow‐up patient transmissions. 
For clinics whose device patient population exceeds 2000 
patients, it may be more reasonable to employ a device 
26
How to Implement a Remote Follow‐up Program for Patients with Cardiac 
Implantable Electronic Devices
George H. Crossley1, April Bain2, and Rachel Tidwell2
1 Vanderbilt Heart and Vascular Institute, Nashville, TN, USA
2 Medtronic Inc., Nashville, TN, USA

26  How to Implement a Remote Follow‐up Program for Patients with Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
242
nurse whose sole responsibility is the remote follow‐up 
of patients with CIEDs. This nurse may not necessarily 
be physically in the clinic each day, but can work from 
home or an alternate location. This may well be attrac-
tive in the current nursing employment environment. 
Some clinics may choose to explore more creative 
­staffing models to manage their patients remotely. One 
model is to contract with one or more experienced 
nurses who may not work full time. This person could be 
paid on a salary basis or could be paid on a “piece‐work” 
basis. This could be an experienced nurse who wants 
more flexible working hours or a former device industry 
professional with the experience to process the transmis-
sions in a fast and accurate manner.
­Qualifications
Execution of a successful remote follow‐up program 
­certainly requires that the staff be experienced device 
specialists. In general, there is an experienced nurse 
or  an extraordinarily experienced medical assistant or 
Figure 26.1  This displays the clinic splash screen for the Medtronic system. Red and yellow alerts are noted as are the transmissions that 
are new. Basic data are seen as well as the next scheduled transmission.

­Qualification ﻿
243
Figure 26.2  The patient splash screen for the Boston Scientific system is seen here. Basic settings are seen as well as recent arrhythmias, 
pacing history, and battery status.

26  How to Implement a Remote Follow‐up Program for Patients with Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
244
Figure 26.3  (a) A time‐dependent trending view of numerical data is seen here in the Boston Scientific system. Heart rate, respiratory rate, 
and other data are graphed over time. 

­Documentatio n and Da ta Managemen ﻿
245
­technician who carries out an overview of the informa-
tion. This person must be able to identify arrhythmias, 
determine nominal and unexpected device function, and 
be able to identify unexpected programmed parameters. 
A remote monitoring program will fail badly if this per-
son is an inexperienced technician who only downloads 
and prints the reports. The best practice approach is for 
this person to create a “red light, green light” approach 
where one group of reports is sent through the process 
expecting an intense clinical and physician review and 
the other is reviewed by the physician but with the 
expectation that all is well. In the practice that we ran for 
15 years, the initial review was carried out by a device 
nurse working from home. The green light reports 
go  straight to the physician for review and signature. 
The red light reports go to the office nurse who couples 
that report with the appropriate clinical information and 
gives it to the physician.
­Documentation and Data 
Management
For accurate documentation, it is necessary to utilize a 
standard report to summarize remote follow‐up trans-
missions. This form should contain the patient’s name, 
medical record number, date of remote transmission, 
and specific electrical and clinical data from the device 
interrogation. The form can be as simple as a paper 
­document that is attached to the chart, or it can also be 
electronic. It is important to remember (in the USA) that 
for the purposes of coding a separate report is necessary 
Figure 26.3 (Cont’d)  (b) Lead impedance and stimulation threshold over time are seen here in the Medtronic system. 

26  How to Implement a Remote Follow‐up Program for Patients with Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
246
for the reporting of physiologic information such as 
weight, blood pressure, or the measurement of fluid 
index. The definition of a separate report is that it must 
have a separate signature line. A separate piece of paper 
or screen in the electronic medical record (EMR) is not 
needed as long as the physician’s signature is separate.
A central hub for device patient data can be valuable for 
remote follow‐up documentation, scheduling, and billing. 
The Paceart™ system is compatible with all device manu-
facturers and acts as a central hub to store both in‐office 
and remote follow‐up patient data. This system can now 
be used to manage all device data and push the appropri-
ate data to the patient’s electronic health record (EHR). 
There are two methods for automatically pushing these 
data. It is certainly possible to create an interface between 
the Paceart™ system and the EHR such that discrete data is 
pushed over and all clinician–data interface is carried out 
on the EHR. While this is attractive, it creates a significant 
ongoing cost. That cost is created every time the device 
data are changed (a new model with new data) and you 
will need to rebuild the HL‐7 interface. This is quite costly. 
Another, more cost‐effective approach, is to let the more 
esoteric data reside in the Paceart™ system and push over 
a 2‐page summary the can be signed either in the Paceart™ 
system or in the EHR (Figure 26.4).
­Transmission Devices
All major device manufacturers produce remote follow‐
up systems that transmit data to a secure server via 
­landline. As technology continues to improve, many 
manufacturers have produced cellular adaptor accesso-
ries to enable remote transmissions via a cellular network. 
In fact, most manufacturers are now distributing remote 
follow‐up boxes that will work with either a landline or a 
cellular network. In the future, devices may transmit data 
via different technologies (Figure 26.5).
Figure 26.3 (Cont’d)  (c) In this report of a patient with a Medtronic system it is seen that there was an episode of sustained VT where 
antitachycardia pacing failed and a high energy shock was efficacious.


26  How to Implement a Remote Follow‐up Program for Patients with Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
248
Figure 26.4 (Cont’d)

­Managin g Alert ﻿
249
­Conduct of the Remote Follow‐up
Remote follow‐up is not a substitute for good medical 
care. However, it is an excellent way to provide effica-
cious and efficient care of a patient’s arrhythmias and to 
monitor the CIED function. The first part of any clinical 
encounter is taking a history. The history that is typically 
taken in a device follow‐up clinic is brief and directed, 
but it must include questioning about arrhythmic symp-
toms and any new cardiac symptoms. We feel strongly 
that an integral part of providing good remote care of the 
patient is performing the same brief history by telephone. 
The importance of this two‐way communication with 
each patient cannot be stressed enough. When patients 
are seen in the office they are interviewed before inter-
rogation of their devices. In remote follow‐up we typi-
cally reverse the order. We review the device interrogation 
and then interview the patient. The patient should never 
be left out of the puzzle. After all, he or she is the most 
important piece of this puzzle.
­Scheduling and Managing 
the Patient’s Expectations
When following hundreds or thousands of patients on 
remote monitoring, the likelihood of being able to ana-
lyze the device information and call every patient on the 
very day that a transmission is received is very low. The 
patients might envision that someone is sitting at the 
other end of their phone immediately processing their 
information and develop the expectation that an imme-
diate response will occur. The expectations of the patient 
and family must be set by the clinicians. For routine 
transmissions with no alerts, we have our patients trans-
mit one weekend and we tell them to expect to hear from 
us by the next weekend. They are clearly instructed that 
in the case of a perceived problem and a manual trans-
mission, a different protocol is needed. Our practice for 
symptomatic transmissions sent by patients is to have 
them call the office after sending in the transmission to 
let the staff know the transmission was not routine and 
needs more immediate attention.
­Managing Alerts
Alerts are typically divided into red alerts (urgent) and 
yellow alerts (important but not urgent). In our practice, 
red alerts are managed by having a staff member receive 
an immediate message by phone. Some of these alerts 
require immediate attention. An example of this is the 
Medtronic Lead Integrity Alert (LIA) that signals an 
impeding lead failure. The remote systems should be 
monitored at least several times daily and preferably 
continuously to observe for alerts. These alerts range 
from atrial arrhythmias for patients who are not antico-
agulated to improperly programmed devices. The vari-
ous companies have different methods of notifying the 
staff of an alert. The hours of notifications can be pro-
grammed. Clinicians can choose notifications of alerts 
for wireless devices in the following ways: online only, 
fax, email, phone, text, or a combination (Figure 26.6). 
Figure 26.5  Examples of the remote follow‐up home transmission devices are seen here. On the left is the St. Jude transmitter; middle 
upper is the Medtronic device; middle lower is the Boston Scientific pacemaker transmitter; and on the right is the Boston Scientific 
tachycardia ICD transmitter.

26  How to Implement a Remote Follow‐up Program for Patients with Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
250
Figure 26.6  This is the clinic notification programming screen where the method and timing of the notification is programmed.

­Codin g and Reimbursemen ﻿
251
One of the important limitations of text messaging is a 
problem in the handling of failed text messaging. If a text 
message is issued and the receiving phone is unable to 
receive the message (e.g., in a shielded part of the 
­hospital), the chance that the message will eventually be 
delivered is not 100%. In contrast, if a voice message fails, 
it will almost certainly eventually be received. Some 
manufacturers have technical staff who can receive the 
red alert information and phone the appropriate person. 
This can be helpful if the physicians covering the ­practice 
are not device experts.
Our approach is to have these alerts go to an office staff 
member during working hours and to a physician at 
night until 10 pm and on the weekend. We turn off the 
patient notification for all programmable alerts except 
those that require immediate attention, such as the LIA 
alert. Our scheme of alert notifications for the Medtronic 
system can be seen in Table 26.1.
­Missed Transmissions
Missed remote transmissions should be handled just as 
missed clinic visits. If patients are scheduled on the cal-
endar in the remote system, the system will alert you 
when a transmission has been missed. Some clinics pre-
fer to schedule in their EMR. Each method works as long 
as the clinicians are monitoring the remote schedules 
and ensuring no patient is being lost to follow‐up. Clinics 
often have different processes for notifying patients of 
missed transmissions. Our protocol is to send a letter 
and ask the patient to send in a transmission. If the trans-
mission is not received within 2 weeks, a phone call is 
then made to the patient. Documentation and follow 
through are imperative. Clinicians must document every 
effort that is made to obtain a remote transmission just 
as would be done to reschedule a missed office visit.
­Coding and Reimbursement
This section applies only to the USA (Table 26.2). Remote 
follow‐up reimbursement codes are time dependent. 
That is, each of the remote pacemaker and defibrillator 
codes specifies the reimbursement for a 90‐day period 
that starts with the first remote follow‐up. That reim-
bursement covers all remote follow‐up activity for the 
next 90 days. It is perfectly allowable to perform more 
frequent transmissions in this period, but the reimburse-
ment remains the same. Similarly, the follow‐up codes 
for implanted cardiac monitoring and implanted loop 
monitoring are for a 30‐day period. These timeframes do 
not limit the number of times a patient can transmit a 
remote transmission; they only limit the number of times 
a patient should be billed. For example, if a patient sends 
in a routine transmission on May 1 and then a sympto-
matic transmission on June 15, only one bill should be 
Table 26.1  Alert notifications for the Medtronic system.
Alert
Red alert
Yellow alert
Patient 
notification
RV lead integrity
Beeping
RV lead noise
Beeping
Electrical reset
Beeping
Charge circuit 
time out
Beeping
Pacing mode set 
to DOO, VOO, 
or AOO
Beeping
Active can off 
without SVC
Beeping
Defibrillation 
impedance
VF therapies off
Excessive 
charge time
Therapies 
exhausted
AT/AF 
burden > threshold
Fast ventricular 
rate during AT/AF
Shocks delivered 
exceed threshold
Lead impedance 
out of range 
(atrial, LV)
Low battery 
voltage
AF, atrial fibrillation; AT, tachycardia; LV, left ventricular; RV, right 
ventricular; SVC, superior vena cava; VF, ventricular fibrillation.
Table 26.2  Remote follow‐up reimbursement codes.
Device
Pacemaker
ICD
Loop recorder
Professional
93294
93295
93298
Technical
93296
93296
na
ICM
na
93297
na
TTM
93293
na
na
ICD, implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator; ICM, implantable 
cardiovascular monitor; TTM, trans‐telephonic telemetry.

26  How to Implement a Remote Follow‐up Program for Patients with Cardiac Implantable Electronic Devices
252
submitted. Another example could be that a patient 
makes an error and sends in a transmission at 89 days 
after the previous transmission. Unfortunately, this 
transmission is still covered by the original billing 
because it is still within the 90‐day timeframe. Therefore, 
wireless transmissions should be scheduled no more 
­frequently than every 91 days. It is important that both 
clinicians and the billing departments are aware of the 
timeframes with the remote billing codes. CMS consid-
ers it fraud to bill more often than every 90 days, even if 
done in error.
Paceart™ provides an efficient method for billing 
remote transmissions. There is a Visit ID field that can be 
used to mark a transmission as billable or unbillable. The 
Medtronic Carelink remote system has a field for Visit 
ID as well. This field will automatically populate into 
Paceart when the remote transmissions are download 
into Paceart. Other company’s remote systems typically 
do not have the Visit ID field and will have to be popu-
lated manually. A report for the billable transmissions 
can be run as often as needed. Depending on the clinics 
remote transmission volume, bi‐weekly may be more 
manageable for the billing office.
Most CPT codes have a scheme where there is a global 
code such as the TTM code which is 93293. The profes-
sional component is specified by the use of the 26 modi-
fier (93293‐26) and the technical component is specified 
by the TC modifier (93293‐TC). Currently, the average 
reimbursement for TTM in a pacemaker patient is about 
$15 for the professional fee and $39 for the technical fee. 
The scheme for remote follow‐up is a bit different. 
Expecting that the standard practice would be for a 
­practice to perform the professional work and that some 
commercial entity would provide the technical service, 
there are entirely separate codes for these services. The 
code 93296 is used for the technical support of remote 
follow‐up regardless of whether the device is an ICD or a 
pacemaker. The average payment for this is about $30. 
This is a 90‐day code. The professional analysis of a pace-
maker remote follow‐up is covered by code 93294 and 
averages about $33. It is also a 90‐day code. The similar 
code for ICDs is 93295. It is a 90‐day code and the aver-
age reimbursement for it is currently about $65. There is 
no difference in reimbursement for remote single, dual, 
or multiple lead systems.
The implantable loop recorder remote follow‐up code 
is 93298. It is a 30‐day code and there is no paired techni-
cal code. The average reimbursement for this code is 
currently about $25. There is also an add‐on code for the 
use of reporting physiologic information. It is intended 
for the transmission of heart failure information such as 
Optivol™ and weights and blood pressures. That code is 
93297. It is a 30‐day code. It is quite important to know 
that this code is only appropriate in patients with a 
­diagnosis of heart failure. While most ICD patients have 
heart failure, all do not. It you were to implant a device 
capable of transmitting such data in a patient with 
the long QT syndrome and collect those data as a routine 
and then bill for it, it could well be considered to 
be  fraudulent. Remember that to bill for this service 
there must be a separate report.
­TTM
This 90‐day timeframe also applies to the trans‐­
telephonic telemetry. As the pulse generator ages and the 
power source needs to be monitored more frequently, 
the timeframe still applies to the reimbursement. In a 
10‐year‐old pacer, the power source should be checked 
monthly. However, the reimbursement code is a 90‐day 
code. I suspect that this will create quite an issue for 
those of us who use an outside vendor for TTMs. The 
financial model for TTMs works well at quarterly and 
bimonthly transmission but seriously falls apart for the 
vendor when we need to do the transmission monthly. 
As we reach the point that almost all TTM transmissions 
involve devices that need monthly follow‐up, I expect 
more of the vendors to cease offering this service.
­Frequency
Practices differ somewhat in the frequency of pacemaker 
remote transmissions. Some practices follow pacemakers 
every 6 months, alternating between remote and in‐office. 
Other practices follow pacemakers every 3 months with 
quarterly remote follow‐ups and an annual office follow‐
up. Defibrillators should be followed quarterly as well, 
quarterly remotes with a yearly office follow‐up. These fre-
quencies are for devices with batteries at beginning of life. 
As the device ages and/or the battery voltage decreases, the 
frequency of monitoring should also increase. Fortunately, 
with current technology, devices give us an estimate on 
battery longevity. This can help determine when to increase 
remote transmission ­frequency. In devices with wireless 
technology it is not necessary to increase the frequency of 
follow‐up evaluations because the clinic will be notified 
automatically when the device goes to its elective replace-
ment indicator.
­Conclusions
Remote follow‐up is an effective method for following 
device patients. It provides timely transmission of appro-
priate data. It certainly improves the efficiency of the 
device clinic.

­Reference ﻿
253
­References
	1	 Wilkoff BL, Auricchio A, Brugada J, Cowie M, 
Ellenbogen KA, Gillis AM, et al. HRS/EHRA expert 
consensus on the monitoring of cardiovascular 
implantable electronic devices (CIEDs): description of 
techniques, indications, personnel, frequency and 
ethical considerations. Heart Rhythm 
2008;5(6):907–925.
	2	 Crossley GH, Chen J, Choucair W, Cohen TJ, Gohn DC, 
Johnson WB, et al. Clinical benefits of remote 
versus transtelephonic monitoring of 
implanted pacemakers. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2009;54(22):2012–2019.
	3	 Crossley GH, Boyle A, Vitense H, Chang Y, Mead RH; 
CONNECT Investigators. The CONNECT (Clinical 
Evaluation of Remote Notification to Reduce Time to 
Clinical Decision) Trial: the value of wireless remote 
monitoring with automatic clinician alerts. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2011;j.
	4	 Varma N, Michalski J, Epstein AE, Schweikert R. 
Automatic remote monitoring of implantable 
cardioverter‐defibrillator lead and generator 
performance: the Lumos‐T Safely RedUceS RouTine 
Office Device Follow‐Up (TRUST) trial. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol 2010;3(5):428–436.

255
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Heart failure (HF) is a critical challenge in cardiology 
today. The primary economic and social‐related burden 
is hospitalization rate which represents the highest costs 
within the entire healthcare management program in the 
western world and is currently extending into the eastern 
developing countries. HF is the most frequent cause of 
hospitalization in patients over the age of 65 years, whose 
numbers will almost double over the next 50 years [1], 
and poses an increasing problem for global healthcare 
systems. This burden is further worsened in those 
patients in whom the primary disease is complicated by 
comorbidities such as diabetes and renal failure.
Several models of remote care have been tried over the 
last decades in the attempt to improve patient outcomes 
while preventing hospitalizations. Models were essen-
tially based on (Figure 27.1):
●
●Monitoring of physiologic data (e.g., blood pressure, 
weight, therapy compliance) by self‐reporting via 
­telephone calls;
●
●Invasive monitoring via implantable sensors;
●
●Automatic remote monitoring based on cardiac 
­electronic implantable devices (CIEDs).
This chapter reviews the main results obtained with 
each model, and discusses future perspectives from 
recent evidence and ongoing trials.
­Monitoring Based on Self‐Reporting 
Via Telephone Contacts
Currently, a high level of real‐time interaction between 
patients and the healthcare provider through phone 
­conversations or online communications has been 
­established and may represent a successful approach. 
The critical issue though, is whether the evidence 
­documented is of real value in the remote management 
of chronic HF [2].
Telemonitoring has been accomplished, so far, by 
means of telephone‐based interactive operator or voice 
response system‐based interviews to periodically (even 
daily) record information about symptoms, weight, and 
other physiologic data, to be reviewed by the patients’ 
clinicians.
A Cochrane review and meta‐analysis reported 
that  telemedicine (telephone assistance or remote 
monitoring) significantly reduced HF‐related hospitali-
zations [3], but these results were not confirmed by two 
subsequent large randomized controlled trials [4,5]. 
A  critical ­summary of the reviews and meta‐analysis 
was recently published [6]. Out of 65 potentially rele-
vant publications, the authors identified only 7 high 
quality reviews. Although the “meta‐review” concluded 
that “remote monitoring reduced the relative risk of all‐
cause (0.52–0.96) and heart failure‐related hospitaliza-
tions (0.72–0.79)”, the authors also acknowledged the 
need for further research before considering an exten-
sive distribution of such form of remote monitoring. 
In a recent study that enrolled 602 HF patients, changes 
in New York Heart Association (NYHA) class, left ven-
tricular ejection fraction (LVEF), 6‐minute walking dis-
tance (6MWD), and Minnesota Living with Heart 
Failure Questionnaire (MLHFQ) score were evaluated 
over 6 months follow‐up with the support of home‐
based remote surveillance [7]. A significant reduction 
in clinical events occurred in association with a favora-
ble response to the program (defined by an improve-
ment in at least two of the outcomes). Of specific 
27
How to Set Up an HF Monitoring Service
Edoardo Gronda1, Emilio Vanoli1,2, Margherita Padeletti3, and Alessio Gargaro4
1 Cardiovascular Department, IRCCS MultiMedica, Sesto San Giovanni (Milan), Italy
2 Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia Margherita, Pavia, Italy
3 Cardiology Unit, Borgo San Lorenzo Hospital, Florence, Italy
4 Biotronik, Clinical Research Department, Vimodrone (MI), Italy

27  How to Set Up an HF Monitoring Service
256
interest in this context is the HHH (Home or Hospital 
in Heart Failure) study [8], conducted between 2002 
and 2004, where 461 patients with chronic HF with an 
average NYHA class 2.4 + 0.6 and a LVEF of 29 + 7% 
were enrolled at 11 centers in Italy, the UK, and Poland. 
The enrolled patients were randomized 1 : 2 to either 
standard outpatient care or home monitoring based on 
three randomized strategies involving the use of 
monthly telephone contact; associated or not with 
weekly transmission of vital signs; and monthly 24 h 
recording of cardiorespiratory activity. Over a 12‐
month follow‐up, there were no significant reductions 
in hospitalization rate or duration for HF or cardiac 
death. Post hoc analysis revealed a trend towards a 
reduction of events in Italy, but not in the other partici-
pating countries.
A possible explanation for such contrasting results is 
related to patient compliance with remote monitoring. 
In  monitoring approaches based on patients’ self‐­
reporting, patients generally have an active role, making 
daily calls or collecting self‐measurements. This may 
reduce compliance to the monitoring program, as in the 
Tele‐HF study, where less than 80% of patients com-
pleted the study procedure in the short follow‐up of 
6 months [4].
­Invasive Monitoring Via Implantable 
Sensors
The CardioMEMS Champion Heart Failure Monitoring 
System (CardioMEMS, Atlanta, GA, USA) is one of the 
first implantable devices for permanent pressure meas-
urement designed to monitor pulmonary artery (PA) 
pressure and heart rate wirelessly in patients with HF. 
The system consists of an implantable sensor/monitor, 
which is a battery‐free capacitive pressure sensor perma-
nently implanted in the PA. The device is deployed in the 
distal PA by a transvenous delivery system and the 
Champion Electronics System (CardioMEMS) acquires 
(a)
(b)
Periodic telephonic contacts
Patient monitored in home
(scheduled and unscheduled
remote transmission)
INTERNER
server provider
Central server
Scheduled
remote follow-up
React to alerts
lnteract with patient
(Telephone contact)
Clinical review
Telemonitoring
and alerts
Figure 27.1  Models of remote monitoring. (a) Non‐invasive self‐reporting telephonic monitoring; (b) remote monitoring based on 
automatic transmissions from implantable/wareble devices. Source: Boriani [28], http://www.jmir.org/2013/8/e167/?trendmd‐
shared=1#Copyright used under CC BY S.A 2.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/

­Automati c Remo te Monitor ing B ased on Ca rdiac Elec tronic Implantabl e Device ﻿
257
and processes signals from the implantable sensor/­
monitor and transfers them to a secure database accessed 
by the treating physician. This device is opening the way 
toward the extensive use of implantable monitoring to 
treat advanced HF patients, but had to overcome a num-
ber of issues before widespread use. The concept of right 
cardiac pressure measurements was already studied by 
the COMPASS HF study using the Chronicle device [9]. 
The results from this study suggested the potential con-
tribution of continuous arterial pressure monitoring to 
optimal HF management, but the primary efficacy end-
point was not met as the Chronicle group had a non‐­
significant 21% lower rate of all HF‐related events 
compared with the control group (p = 0.33). The poten-
tial efficacy of right heart parameters in implementing 
HF management was there, but the sample size available 
was probably inadequate to prove it. Also, the Chronicle 
device required skill in implanting and was the size of a 
standard pacemaker. The CardioMEMS device offers a 
totally new prospective in view of its very small size and 
no need of a power supply. The monitoring system con-
sists of a sensor, a delivery catheter, an interrogator, and 
a home‐monitoring device. The HF sensor is implanted, 
via a transcutaneous procedure, into a distal branch of 
the PA. PA pressures can be monitored using the exter-
nal device, which powers the HF sensor and transmits 
the hemodynamic data from the patient’s home to a 
secure Internet database. The accuracy of the system has 
been extensively assessed by comparison with standard 
right heart catheterization. No safety issues have been 
raised about CardioMEMS but it took more than 
one  study for the device to receive Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approval and to become available 
to HF patients as a standard of care.
The CHAMPION trial enrolled HF patients with 
NHYA class III, irrespective of LVEF, and with a previous 
hospital admission for HF in 64 centers in the USA [10]. 
Patients were randomly assigned to management with 
the wireless implantable hemodynamic monitoring (W‐
IHM) system (treatment group) or to a control group for 
at least 6 months. The conclusion was that “the addition 
of information about pulmonary artery pressure to clini-
cal signs and symptoms allows for improved HF manage-
ment.” The study received several criticisms from the 
FDA [11]. Of note, as the CardioMEMS device detects 
PA pressure, but this might not mirror immediate 
changes in left ventricular filling pressure when 
­pulmonary vascular resistances are elevated.
However, the pathophysiologic mechanisms underly-
ing the concept of continuous pulmonary pressure mon-
itoring are very straightforward: dilated hearts operate at 
the very end of the pressure–volume curve. In this set-
ting, small increases in circulating volume are sufficient 
to produce significant pressure changes leading to acute 
decompensation and pulmonary edema. This is why 
­pulmonary pressure measurements can perceive risk for 
an upcoming acute HF much earlier than other tradi-
tional markers. One might say that CHAMPION merely 
duplicates what can be seen by measuring thorax 
­impedance and even the most recent studies would 
­support this hypothesis. However, chest impedance can 
be affected by many non‐specific conditions such as 
pneumonia or a simple acute bronchitis and this lack 
of  specificity constitutes a major limitation to its use. 
Furthermore, chest impedance can be effectively meas-
ured in device carrying patients only.
A second report of the CHAMPION trial provided 
details about the prospectively identified subgroup of HF 
patients characterized by LVEF ≥40% and further evalu-
ated clinical outcomes in patients with LVEF ≥50% [12]. 
The primary efficacy endpoint of HF hospitalization rate 
at 6 months was 46% lower in the treatment group 
­compared with the control group. After an average of 
17.6  months of blinded follow‐up, the hospitalization 
rate was 50% lower in the treatment arm. In response to 
­pulmonary artery pressure information, more changes 
in diuretic and vasodilator therapies were made in the 
treatment group. Thus, the prognostic efficacy of 
CardioMEMS is related to the timely opportunity for 
appropriate therapeutic intervention.
­Automatic Remote Monitoring 
Based on Cardiac Electronic 
Implantable Devices
The expanded capabilities of implantable cardioverter‐
defibrillators (ICD) and devices for cardiac resynchroni-
zation therapy (CRT) to monitor and store a number of 
parameters related to worsening HF can become an 
established tool to facilitate risk stratification and allow 
more efficient therapeutic interventions eventually 
leading to improved clinical outcomes and cost savings. 
Nonetheless, currently, the potential of remote moni-
toring has not been fully explored.
All the diagnostic variables containing information 
related to the compensation status of the patient are 
well‐known predictors.
In the CIBIS II Trial, Lechat et al. [13] demonstrated 
that a 1 bpm reduction of the 2‐month mean heart rate is 
associated with 1.8% risk reduction in HF hospitaliza-
tion. Similarly, in the SHIFT study, Swedberg et al. [14] 
highlighted the important role of heart rate in the patho-
physiology of HF by demonstrating the impact of heart‐
rate reduction by ivabradine in reducing mortality and 
hospitalizations in patients with EF <35%, HR >70 bpm, 
and optimized medical therapy. Last but not least, in the 
IN‐CHF Registry, Opasich et  al. [15] reported a 61% 
increase in the risk of short‐term decompensation in 
patients with maximum heart rate (MHR) >100 bpm.

27  How to Set Up an HF Monitoring Service
258
The close relationship between atrial fibrillation (AF) 
and HF has been extensively studied in recent years. AF 
correlates with unfavorable outcomes in HF patients and 
significantly increases the short‐term risk of worsening 
HF. As early as in 1991, Middlekauff et al. [16] showed 
that AF is an independent predictor of both total mortal-
ity and sudden death in patients with advanced HF.
A long‐term analysis of a cohort of 352 patients with 
HF showed that frequent premature ventricular contrac-
tions (PVC) at rest remained associated with a 5.5‐fold 
increased risk of cardiovascular mortality, after adjusting 
for age, beta blocker use, rest ECG findings, resting and 
peak heart rate, ejection fraction, systolic pressure, and 
exercise capacity [17].
Reduced exercise capacity and short total daily 
­activity time may be considered as potential indicators 
of ­worsening HF. Madsen et  al. [18] showed that 
­maximal exercise duration ≤4 minutes and inability to 
increase heart rate during exercise by >35 bpm were 
both ­independent risk factors of sudden death and 
pump failure.
A decrease in heart rate variability has been associ-
ated with an increased risk of cardiovascular events in 
patients with HF. In patients with sinus rhythm, the 
standard deviation of atrial interval (SDANN) is directly 
related to the sympathetic–vagal balance and it may be 
a promising prognostic indicator. In general, a reduced 
SDANN may be an indicator of negative short‐ and 
long‐term prognosis. Fantoni et al. [19] observed that 
SDANN generally increases along with a reduction of 
the mean heart rate in CRT responders: failure to 
observe a SDANN increment after implant correlated 
with a significantly higher 2‐year risk of all‐cause 
­mortality, hospitalization for cardiovascular causes, 
and need for heart transplantation. An analysis of the 
InSync Italian Registry cohort [20] also identified 65 
and 76 ms as 1‐week and 4‐week lower thresholds, 
respectively, to  stratify patients with a higher risk of 
cardiovascular events.
New devices can nowadays estimate thoracic imped-
ance, a variable that is correlated with increased intratho-
racic fluid [21]. The underlying hypothesis is that 
thoracic impedance may detect signs of precipitating HF 
episodes before hospitalization. However, it is worth 
noting that current implantable devices implementing 
intrathoracic impedance diagnostic features, do not 
really measure the overall chest impedance, but merely 
the electric impedance of tissues between the right ven-
tricle lead and the pectoral device can. This limitation 
may result in misleading data about the true change of 
lung fluid concentration. Despite initial enthusiasm, 
­thoracic impedance alone, not combined with other 
information, reaches fair but not excellent levels of 
­sensitivity and positive predictive value. In particular, 
specific threshold values and patient‐tailored feature 
­settings still need to be defined.
The mentioned studies demonstrate the importance of 
monitoring these parameters in HF patients and high-
light the value of today’s devices to do so. Nevertheless, 
we still need to define which parameters to monitor and 
what specific detection strategies should be used to pre-
vent hospitalization. The value of monitoring several 
parameters in HF prediction has been demonstrated in 
the PARTNERS study [22] and in a more recent meta‐
analysis [23]. In these studies, two important insights 
were highlighted: (i) the use of a diagnostic algorithm 
based on multiple criteria increases the probability to 
predict HF hospitalization in comparison to individual 
measurements; (ii) the more frequent the monitoring, 
the higher the predictive capability of the algorithm. 
However, the 3.9% positive predictive value gained in the 
PARTNERS study still needs optimization, with only one 
correct alarm out of 27 and a resulting rate of 2.7 false 
alarms per patient per year. On the other hand, the pre-
dictor developed in the Home‐CARE study could gain 
65.4% sensitivity, despite a request of 99.5% specificity, 
by combining seven indexes daily sampled in a fixed time 
window of 25 days and ending 3 days before the event 
[24]. It is worth noting that 65% sensitivity is only slightly 
higher that 60% sensitivity reported in a recent large 
observational study on standard practice of Home 
Monitoring in which investigators acted on the basis 
of  their individual experience without any predefined 
algorithms or protocols [25].
This suggests that despite an optimal algorithm not 
being developed yet, the potential of remote monitoring 
in improving HF management and patient care is there. 
An indirect indication has recently been obtained in the 
In‐TIME trial [26], in which 664 ICD (with or without 
CRT) patients were randomly assigned to standard 
in‐person visit follow‐up or to multiparameter telemoni-
toring in addition to standard care with the primary out-
come of a composite Packer’s score combining all‐cause 
death, overnight hospital admission for heart failure, 
change in NYHA class, and change in patient global self‐
assessment. After 1 year of follow‐up, the combined 
Packer score worsened in 30% fewer patients in the 
telemonitoring group. Interestingly, the main drive was 
the reduction of all‐cause and cardiovascular mortalities, 
which were significantly reduced by 61% and 60%, 
respectively.
Unfortunately, the study protocol did not enforce 
standardized treatment after telemonitoring observa-
tions nor did the authors thoroughly record clinical 
actions in response to remote observations. Therefore, 
the study cannot provide information on how to analyze 

­Automati c Remo te Monitor ing B ased on Ca rdiac Elec tronic Implantabl e Device ﻿
259
remote monitoring data effectively and time trigger 
treatment changes to optimize clinical benefits. Authors 
could only speculate on three possible mechanisms that 
could explain the observed reduction in mortality asso-
ciated with telemonitoring: (i) early detection of the 
onset or progression of ventricular and atrial tachyar-
rhythmias; (ii) early recognition of suboptimal device 
function (maximization of CRT, prevention of inappro-
priate shocks, etc.); (iii) increase in patient compliance 
induced “patient interviews raised patients’ awareness of 
Long term trends
CRT
[%]
Mean cardiac
rate
[bpm]
Heart rate
variability
[ms]
Patient activity
[%/day]
Atrial Burden
[%/day]
Thoracic
impedance
[ohm]
12-Aug-2013
27-Aug
24-Sep
22-Oct
19-Nov
17-Dec
14-Jan
10-Feb-2013
Feb, 10th 2013
Last value
Follow-up
66.6 ohm
TI
55 PVC/h
PVC/h
100%/day
A. burden
11%/day
Activity
72 bpm
Rest
78 bpm
Ven.
291 bpm
Atrial
41%
CRT
---
Var. PP
PVC/h
Aug, 12th 2012
100
50
0
250
140
30
250
125
0
50
25
0
100
50
0
100
55
0
70
55
40
Figure 27.2  An example of 6‐month trends of heart failure (HF)‐related variables remotely collected with the remote monitoring system in 
a patient with a cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) device before a worsening HF episode. Note a smooth decrease in daily activity, 
starting about 3 months before the hospitalization date (right edge of the graph). A sudden onset 100% burden of atrial fibrillation 
occurred about 2 weeks before admission, resulting in sharp increases in atrial and ventricular rate and a reduction in CRT. The modest 
increase in atrial rate observed in November 2013 was caused by the onset of a retrograde conduction triggered by ventricular pacing.

27  How to Set Up an HF Monitoring Service
260
relevant developments and encouraged them to take 
more responsibility for their own health, including 
adherence to prescribed treatments.”
Currently, we still do not know how to reliably 
­interpret remote transmitted trends of HF indexes. 
Probably, the key is in the combination of more 
­parameters (Figure 27.2) and in the daily sampling rate 
of HF indexes. This hypothesis is being explored by 
the ongoing Selene HF trial [27], whose results are 
expected by 2016.
­References
	1	 Loh JC, Creaser J, Rourke DA, Livingston N, Harrison 
TK, Vandenbogaart E, et al. Temporal trends in 
treatment and outcomes for advanced heart failure with 
reduced ejection fraction from 1993–2010: findings 
from a university referral center. Circ Heart Fail 
2013;6:411–419.
	2	 Wootton R. Twenty years of medicine in chronic disease 
management: an evidence synthesis. J Telemed Telecare 
2012;18:211–220.
	3	 Inglis SC, Clark RA, McAlister FA, Stewart S, Cleland 
JG. Which components of heart failure programmes are 
effective? A systematic review and meta‐analysis of the 
outcomes of structured telephone support or 
telemonitoring as the primary component of chronic 
heart failure management in 8323 patients: Abridged 
Cochrane Review. Eur J Heart Fail 2011;13:1028–1040.
	4	 Chaudhry SI, Mattera JA, Curtis JP, Spertus JA, Herrin J, 
Lin Z, et al. Telemonitoring in patients with heart 
failure. N Engl J Med 2010;363:2301–2309.
	5	 Koehler F, Winkler S, Schieber M, Sechtem U, Stangl K, 
Böhm M, et al. Telemedical Interventional Monitoring 
in Heart Failure Investigators. Impact of remote 
telemedical management on mortality and 
hospitalizations in ambulatory patients with chronic 
heart failure: the telemedical interventional monitoring 
in heart failure study. Circulation 2011;123:1873–1880.
	6	 Conway A, Inglis SC, Chang AM, Horton‐Breshears M, 
Cleland JG, Clark RA. Not all systematic reviews are 
systematic: a meta‐review of the quality of systematic 
reviews for non‐invasive remote monitoring in heart 
failure. J Telemed Telecare 2013;19:326–337.
	7	 Giordano A, Scalvini S, Paganoni AM, Baraldo S, 
Frigerio M, Vittori C, et al. Home‐based telesurveillance 
program in chronic heart failure: effects on clinical 
status and implications for 1‐year prognosis. Telemed J E 
Health 2013;19:605–612.
	8	 Mortara A, Pinna GD, Johnson P, Maestri R, Capomolla 
S, La Rovere MT, et al; HHH Investigators. Home 
telemonitoring in heart failure patients: the HHH study 
(Home or Hospital in Heart Failure). Eur J Heart Fail 
2009;11:312–318.
	9	 Bourge RC, Abraham WT, Adamson PB, Aaron MF, 
Aranda JM Jr, Magalski A, et al; COMPASS‐HF Study 
Group. Randomized controlled trial of an implantable 
continuous hemodynamic monitor in patients 
with advanced heart failure: the COMPASS‐HF study. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:1073–1079.
	10	 Abraham WT, Adamson PB, Bourge RC, Aaron MF, 
Costanzo MR, Stevenson LW, et al; CHAMPION Trial 
Study Group. Wireless pulmonary artery 
haemodynamic monitoring in chronic heart failure: a 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2011;377:658–666.
	11	 Loh JP, Barbash IM, Waksman R. Overview of the 2011 
Food and Drug Administration Circulatory System 
Devices Panel of the Medical Devices Advisory 
Committee Meeting on the CardioMEMS Champion 
Heart Failure Monitoring System. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2013;61:1571–1576.
	12	 Adamson PB, Abraham WT, Bourge RC, Costanzo MR, 
Hasan A, Yadav C, et al. Wireless pulmonary artery 
pressure monitoring guides management to reduce 
decompensation in heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail 2014;7:935–944.
	13	 Lechat P, Hulot J‐S, Escolano S, Mallet A, Leizorovicz 
A, Werhlen‐Grandjean M, et al; CIBIS II Investigators. 
Heart rate and cardiac rhythm relationship with 
bisoprolol benefit in chronic heart failure in CIBIS II 
Trial. Circulation 2001;103:1428–1433.
	14	 Swedberg K, Komajda M, Böhm M, Borer JS, Ford I, 
Dubost‐Brama A, et al; SHIFT Investigators. 
Ivabradine and outcomes in chronic heart failure 
(SHIFT): a randomised placebo‐controlled study. 
Lancet 2010;376(9744):875–885.
	15	 Opasich C, Rapezzi C, Lucci D, Pozzar F, Zanelli E, 
Tavazzi L, et al; Italian Network on Congestive Heart 
Failure (IN‐CHF) Investigators. Precipitating factors 
and decision‐making processes of short‐term 
worsening heart failure despite “optimal” treatment 
(from the IN‐CHF Registry). Am J Cardiol 
2001;88(4):382–387.
	16	 Middlekauff HR, Stevenson WG, Stevenson LW. 
Prognostic significance of atrial fibrillation in advanced 
heart failure: a study of 390 patients. Circulation 
1991;84:40–48.
	17	 Le VV, Mitiku T, Hadley D, Myers J, Froelicher VF. 
Rest premature ventricular contractions on routine 
ECG and prognosis in heart failure patients. 
Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol 2010;15(1):56–62.

­Reference ﻿
261
	18	 Madsen BK, Rasmussen V, Hansen JF. Predictors of 
sudden death and death from pump failure in 
congestive heart failure are different: analysis of 24 h 
Holter monitoring, clinical variables, blood 
chemistry, exercise test and radionuclide angiography. 
Int J Cardiol 1997;58(2):151–162.
	19	 Fantoni C, Raffa S, Regoli F, Giraldi F, La Rovere MT, 
Prentice J, et al. Cardiac resynchronization therapy 
improves heart rate profile and heart rate variability 
of patients with moderate to severe heart failure. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2005;46(10):1875–1882.
	20	 Landolina M, Gasparini M, Lunati M, Santini M, 
Rordorf R, Vincenti A, et al; InSync/InSync ICD Italian 
Registry Investigators. Heart rate variability monitored 
by the implanted device predicts response to CRT and 
long‐term clinical outcome in patients with advanced 
heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2008;10(11):1073–1079.
	21	 Yu CM, Wang L, Chau E, Chan RHW, Kong SL, Tang 
MO, et al. Intrathoracic impedance monitoring in 
patients with heart failure correlation with fluid status 
and feasibility of early warning preceding 
hospitalization. Circulation 2005;112:841–848.
	22	 Whellan DJ, Ousdigian KT, Al‐Khatib SM, Pu W, 
Sarkar S, Porter CB, et al; PARTNERS Study 
Investigators. Combined heart failure device 
diagnostics identify patients at higher risk of 
subsequent heart failure hospitalizations: results from 
PARTNERS HF (Program to Access and Review 
Trending Information and Evaluate Correlation to 
Symptoms in Patients With Heart Failure) study. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2010;55(17):1803–1810.
	23	 Cowie MR, Sarkar S, Koehler J, Whellan DJ, Crossley 
GH, Tang WH, et al. Development and validation of an 
integrated diagnostic algorithm derived from 
parameters monitored in implantable devices for 
identifying patients at risk for heart failure 
hospitalization in an ambulatory setting. Eur Heart J 
2013;34(31):2472–2480.
	24	 Sack S, Wende CM, Nägele H, Katz A, Bauer WR, Barr 
CS, et al. Potential value of automated daily screening 
of cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator 
diagnostics for prediction of major cardiovascular 
events: results from Home‐CARE (Home Monitoring 
in Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy) study. Eur J 
Heart Fail 2011;13(9):1019–1027.
	25	 Ricci RP, Morichelli L, D’Onofrio A, Calò L, Vaccari D, 
Zanotto G, et al. Effectiveness of remote monitoring of 
CIEDs in detection and treatment of clinical and 
device‐related cardiovascular events in daily practice: 
the HomeGuide Registry. Europace 
2013;15(7):970–977.
	26	 Hindricks G, Taborsky M, Glikson M, Heinrich U, 
Schumacher B, Katz A, et al; IN‐TIME study group. 
Implant‐based multiparameter telemonitoring of 
patients with heart failure (IN‐TIME): a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2014;384(9943):583–590.
	27	 Padeletti L, Botto GL, Curnis A, De Ruvo E, D’Onofrio 
A, Gronda E, et al. Selection of potential predictors of 
worsening heart failure: rational and design of the 
SELENE HF study. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) 
2015;16(11):782–789.
	28	 Boriani G, Da Costa A, Ricci RP, Quesada A, Favale S, 
Iacopino S, et al; MORE‐CARE Investigators. The 
MOnitoring Resynchronization dEvices and CARdiac 
patiEnts (MORE‐CARE) randomized controlled trial: 
phase 1 results on dynamics of early intervention with 
remote monitoring. J Med Internet Res 
2013;15(8):e167.

263
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
As indications for the implantable cardioverter‐defibril-
lator (ICD) have expanded, the population of patients 
living with these and other cardiac implantable elec-
tronic devices (CIEDs) has continued to grow, with over 
12 000 implanted each month in the USA alone. While 
the efficacy of the ICD at preventing sudden cardiac 
death in patients at risk is well documented, all patients 
will eventually die, whether of their underlying heart 
­disease, another fatal condition, or old age.
­Why is ICD Deactivation Important?
Case reports in the palliative care literature describe, 
“Death and Dying, a Shocking Experience,” and “And it 
can go on and on and on.” The popular press has been 
even more sensational, “Devices wreak havoc at end of 
life” (NY Times). One family member described an ICD 
patient’s last days, “His defibrillator kept going off…It 
went off 12 times in one night…He went in and they 
looked at it…they said they adjusted it and they sent him 
back home. The next day we had to take him back 
because it was happening again. It kept going off and 
going off and it wouldn’t stop going off.” ICD shocks are 
painful, described by patients as “a punch in the chest,” 
“being kicked by a mule,” and “putting a finger in a light 
socket,” and have been shown to decrease quality of life. 
Thus, it is not surprising that receiving shocks at end of 
life is a distressing experience for the dying patient as 
well as his or her family.
Early reports of the frequency with which dying 
patients receive ICD shocks, relying on interviews with 
family members of deceased patients, suggested that 
20% received shocks in the last weeks, days, or hours of 
their lives [1]. A recent prospective series of post‐­mortem 
ICD interrogations found that the true number is even 
higher – one‐third of patients receive shocks in the last 
hours of life [2].
­Legally and Ethically, Can CIEDs 
be Deactivated?
In order to define the legal and ethical underpinnings 
of  CIED deactivation in the USA, as well as to define 
­clinical management of deactivation, the Heart Rhythm 
Society (HRS) convened a multidisciplinary working 
group whose recommendations were published in 
2010 [3]. The ethical and legal permission of discontinu-
ation of life‐sustaining therapies such such as hemodialy-
sis, ventilators, feeding tubes, and cardiac rhythm devices 
is well described. The primary ethical principle support-
ing the withdrawal of life‐sustaining therapies is respect 
for autonomy. In a series of cases addressing withdrawal 
of life‐sustaining therapies, the US courts have ruled that 
the right to make decisions about medical treatments is 
both a common law right (derived from court decisions) 
based on bodily integrity and self‐­determination, and a 
constitutional right based on privacy and liberty. A patient 
has the right to refuse any treatment, even if the treat-
ment prolongs life and death would follow a decision not 
to use it. Further, courts have ruled that there is no legal 
difference between withdrawing an ongoing treatment 
and not starting one in the first place. Granting requests 
28
How to Deactivate Cardiac Implantable Electric Devices in Patients Nearing 
the End of Life and/or Requesting Withdrawal of Therapies
Rachel Lampert
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
*  Relationships with industry: Dr. Lampert has received significant 
research funding from Boston Scientific, Medtronic, and  
St. Jude Medical.

28  How to Deactivate Cardiac Implantable Electric Devices in Patients Nearing the End of Life and/or Requesting Withdrawal of Therapies
264
to withdraw life‐sustaining treatments from patients, 
who do not want them, is respecting a right to be left 
alone and to die naturally of the underlying disease, a 
legally protected right based on the right to privacy. This 
has been phrased, “a right to decide how to live the rest of 
one’s life.” The Supreme Court has not specifically 
addressed the question of pacemaker (PM) or ICD 
­deactivation. However, the rulings described in Table 28.1 
did not focus on the specific therapy under question, but 
rather, on “life‐sustaining therapies.” The law applies to 
the person, and informed consent is a right of the 
patient – it is not specific to any one medical interven-
tion. Thus, because CIEDs deliver life‐sustaining 
­therapies, discontinuation of these therapies is clearly 
addressed by the Supreme Court precedents upholding 
the right to discontinue life‐sustaining treatment: 
“Procedures don’t have rights, patients do [3].” Finally, 
these rights extend to patients who lack decision‐making 
capacity, through previously expressed statements 
(e.g., advance directives) and surrogate decision‐makers.
While most physicians are comfortable with deactiva-
tion of an ICD, some are less comfortable with PM 
­deactivation, especially in a dependent patient, and have 
questioned the difference between PM deactivation and 
assisted suicide or euthanasia. However, withdrawal of 
CIED therapies and assisted suicide differ in two key 
respects: first, the clinician’s intent; and secondly, the 
cause of death. When a physician deactivates a device 
upon patient request, his or her intent is to remove a 
treatment which the patient finds an unwanted burden. 
While the effect of this may be that the patient dies of an 
underlying disease, hastening death is not the clinician’s 
primary intent. In contrast, in assisted suicide, the patient 
intentionally terminates his own life using a lethal method 
provided or prescribed by a clinician. The second key dif-
ference between withdrawal of an unwanted therapy and 
assisted suicide lies in the cause of death. In  assisted 
­suicide or euthanasia, death is caused by the intervention 
provided by the clinician. In contrast, when a patient dies 
after a treatment is refused or withdrawn, the cause of 
death is the underlying disease. These distinctions have 
been upheld by the US Supreme Court, which has ruled 
in the Vacco vs Quill case that while there is a constitu-
tional right to refuse treatment based on the right to free-
dom from unwanted touching, there is not a constitutional 
right to hasten death by assisted suicide or euthanasia 
(i.e., the courts have not confirmed a legal “right to die,” 
rather, there is a right to be left alone).
­How to Communicate With Patients 
About CIED Deactivation
Only 15–27% of patients with ICDs have had their 
device deactivated, and even among patients who have 
chosen do not resuscitate (DNR) status, still only 50% 
have had the device deactivated, most in the last days of 
life. To what extent the failure to deactivate therapies 
stems from patient choice, versus failure of the physi-
cian to communicate this option, is unknown. Studies of 
patient preferences regarding ICD deactivation at end of 
life have shown mixed results. Several written surveys of 
patients with ICDs regarding preferences for ICD deac-
tivation in hypothetical situations have found that 
patients may not wish deactivation, even in the setting 
of constant dyspnea or frequent shocks. In the only 
series of patients actually facing the decision in whom 
the option of deactivation was discussed – six patients 
with terminal malignancies, all with a history of treated 
ventricular arrhythmias – none chose to turn off shock-
ing therapies. However, we found, in a recent interview 
study, again a survey of hypothetical situations, putting 
ICD deactivation in the context of health outcomes such 
as functional and cognitive disability known to ­influence 
Table 28.1  Landmark legal cases confirming the right to withhold or withdraw life‐sustaining therapies.
In re Quinlan
1976
Supreme Court of New Jersey
Withdrawal
Ventilator
Saikewicz
1977
Massachusetts Superior Judicial Court
Withholding
Chemotherapy
In the matter of Shirley 
Dinnerstein
1978
Massachusetts Court of Appeals
Withholding
Cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation
Spring
1980
Massachusetts Superior Judicial Court
Withdrawal
Hemodialysis
Barber
1983
California Court of Appeals
Withdrawal
Intravenous fluids
Bouvia
1985
California Court of Appeals
Both
Feeding tube
Cruzan vs Director, Missouri 
Department of Health
1990
US Supreme Court
Withdrawal
Feeding tube
Schiavo*
2005
Florida Court of Appeals*
Withdrawal
Feeding tube
* The Florida Supreme Court declined to consider case, the US Supreme Court declined to hear related case.
Source: Lampert (2011) [4]. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.

­Ho w to Communicat e With Patien ts Ab out CIED Deactivatio ﻿
265
decision‐making, that most would at least hypotheti-
cally choose deactivation in some situations [5]. Thus, it 
is more likely that the high number of patients who die 
with device therapies active do so not out of conscious 
choice, but because they did not know deactivation was 
an option. In the initial report by Goldstein et al. [1], 
only one‐quarter of families of recently deceased 
patients with ICDs reported the patient or themselves 
having had a conversation with a healthcare provider 
about deactivation and, in most cases, it had been 
­initiated by the family and not the healthcare provider 
team [1].
Timely and effective communication among patients, 
families, and healthcare providers is essential to prevent 
unwanted shocks at end of life. Most patients and fami-
lies desire conversations about end‐of‐life care. Effective 
communication includes determining the patient’s goals 
of care, helping the patient understand the role the 
device plays in his or her current medical care, and 
weighing the benefits and burdens of device therapy as 
the clinical situation changes, clarifying the conse-
quences of deactivation, and discussion of potential 
alternative treatments, as well as encouraging the patient 
to complete an advanced directive [3]. Clinicians must 
take a proactive role in discussions about the option of 
deactivation in the context of the patient’s goals for care. 
Table  28.2 describes steps and suggested language to 
cover these points. These conversations should continue 
over the course of the patient’s illness. As illness pro-
gresses, patient preferences for outcomes and the level of 
burden acceptable to the patient may change. Suggestions 
for ongoing conversations over the patient’s life course 
are shown in Table 28.3.
Advanced care planning conversations improve out-
comes for both patients and their families, as patients 
with ICDs who engage in advance care planning are less 
likely to experience shocks while dying because ICD 
deactivation has occurred. Completion of an advanced 
Table 28.2  Steps for communicating with patients and families about goals of care relating to cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIEDs).
Sample phrases to use to begin conversation at each step
1)  Determine what patients/families know about 
their illness
“What do you understand about your health and what is occurring in terms of 
your illness?”
2)  Determine what patients/families know about 
the role the device plays in their health both 
now and in the future
“What do you understand the role of the [cardiac device] to be in your health now?
3)  Determine what additional information 
patients/families want to know about their 
illness
“What else would be helpful for you to know about your illness or the role the 
[cardiac device] plays within it?
4)  Correcting or clarify any misunderstandings 
about the current illness and possible 
outcomes, including the role of the device
“I think you have a pretty good understanding of what is happening in terms of 
your health, but there are a few things I would like to clarify with you”
5)  Determining the patient/family’s overall goals 
of care and desired outcomes
“Given what we’ve discussed about your health and the potential likely outcomes 
of your illness, tell me what you want from your health care at this point.”
NB: Sometimes patients and families may need more guidance at this point, so 
some potential guiding language might be: “At this point some patients tell me 
they want to live as long as possible, regardless of the outcome, whereas other 
patients tell me that the goal is to be as comfortable as long as possible while also 
being able to interact with their family. Do you have a sense of what you want at 
this point?”
6)  Using the stated goals as a guide, work to 
tailor treatments, and in this case 
management of the cardiac device, to those 
goals
Phrases to be used here depend on the goals as set by the patient and family
For a patient who states that her desired goal is to live as comfortably as possible 
for whatever remaining time she has left: “Given what you’ve said about assuring 
that you are as comfortable as possible it might make sense to deactivate the 
shocking function of your ICD. What do you think about that?”
or
For a patient who states he wants all life‐sustaining treatments to be continued, an 
appropriate response might be, “In that case, perhaps leaving the anti‐arrhythmia 
function of the device active would best be in line with your goals. However, you 
should understand that this may cause you and your family discomfort at the end 
of life. We can make a decision at a future point in time about turning the device 
off. Tell me your thoughts about this”
Source: Lampert (2010) [1]. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.

28  How to Deactivate Cardiac Implantable Electric Devices in Patients Nearing the End of Life and/or Requesting Withdrawal of Therapies
266
directive can often prevent ethical dilemmas at the end 
of life. In this process, which promotes patient auton-
omy, a patient identifies his or her values, preferences, 
and goals regarding future health care (e.g., at the end of 
life) and a surrogate decision‐maker in the event he or 
she loses decision‐making capacity. Studies have shown 
that advance directives are not common among patients 
with ICDs, and even those who have advance directives 
often do not mention their wishes regarding the ICD.
Effective discussion of device deactivation needs to 
occur in the context of overall goals of care. These 
­conversations should include a discussion of quality of 
life, functional status, perceptions of dignity, and both 
current and potential future symptoms, as each of these 
elements can influence how patients set goals for their 
health care. It is critical to ensure that the patient under-
stands the role the device has in their health, particularly 
in terms of care at the end of life. The role that each type 
of therapy – shocks, anti‐tachycardia therapy, pacing, or 
cardiac resynchronization – has in the care of each spe-
cific patient, and the consequences of deactivation of 
each type of therapy, should be discussed in detail. For 
example, pacing and cardiac resynchronization therapy 
(CRT) are indicated for prevention of symptoms, and 
discontinuation can worsen underlying heart failure of 
lead to fatigue or syncope, worsening quality of life. ICDs 
Table 28.3  Adaptations of conversations over time.
Timing of conversation
Points to be covered
Helpful phrases to consider
Prior to implantation
●
●Clear discussion of the benefits and 
burdens of the device
●
●Brief discussion of potential future 
limitations or burdensome aspects of 
device therapy
●
●Encourage patients to have some form of 
advance directive
●
●Inform of option to deactivate in the future
“It seems clear at this point that this device is in your 
best interest, but you should know at some point if you 
become very ill from your heart disease or another 
process you develop in the future, the burden of this 
device may outweigh its benefit. While that point is 
hopefully a long way off, you should know that turning 
off your defibrillator is an option”
After an episode of 
increased or repeated 
firings from an ICD
●
●Discussion of possible alternatives, 
including adjusting medications, adjusting 
device settings, and cardiac procedures to 
reduce future shocks
“I know that your device caused you some recent 
discomfort and that you were quite distressed. I want to 
work with you to see if we can adjust the settings to 
assure that the device continues to work in the 
appropriate manner. If we can’t get you to that point 
then we may want to consider turning it off altogether, 
but let’s try some adjustments first”
Progression of cardiac 
disease, including repeated 
hospitalizations for heart 
failure and/or arrhythmias
●
●Re‐evaluation of benefits and burdens of 
device
●
●Assessment of functional status, quality of 
life, and symptoms
●
●Referral to palliative and supportive care 
services
“It appears as though your heart disease is worsening. 
We should really talk about your thoughts and questions 
about your illness at this point and see if your goals have 
changed at all”
When patient/surrogate 
chooses a Do Not 
Resuscitate order*
●
●Re‐evaluation of benefits and burdens of 
device
●
●Exploration of patient’s understanding of 
device and how he/she conceptualizes it 
with regards to external defibrillation
●
●Referral to palliative care or supportive 
services
“Now that we’ve established that you would not want 
resuscitation in the event your heart were to go into an 
abnormal pattern of beating, we should reconsider the 
role of your device. In many ways it is also a form of 
resuscitation. Tell me your understanding of the device 
and let’s talk about how it fits into the larger goals for 
your medical care at this point”
Patients at end of life
●
●Re‐evaluation of benefits and burdens of 
device
●
●Discussion of option of deactivation 
addressed with all patients, though 
deactivation not required
“I think at this point we need to reconsider your [device]. 
Given how advanced your disease is we need to discuss 
whether it makes sense to keep it active. I know this may 
be upsetting to talk about, but can you tell me your 
thoughts at this point?”
* Patients may choose to forego intubation, CPR, and external defibrillation while at the same time decide to keep the defibrillation function of 
their ICD active. A patient’s choice to be “DNR” may or may not be concomitant with a decision to withdraw CIED therapy, as resuscitation 
interventions and the ICD each carries its own benefits and burdens.
Source: Adapted from Lampert (2010) [1].

­Wh o Shou ld Deactiv ate the ICD ﻿
267
alone do not improve symptoms, and shocks as the 
patient is nearing the end of life can increase emotional 
distress for both patients and families, and thus discon-
tinuation of shocks can be said to improve quality of life.
These conversations should follow the model of 
“shared decision‐making,” in which clinicians work 
together with patients and families to ensure that patients 
understand in the context of their illness the benefits and 
burdens of a particular treatment and the potential 
­outcomes that may occur as a result of its continued use 
or discontinuation. Once the patient understands the 
beneficial and negative effects of continuing or discon-
tinuing device therapies, he or she can then assess how 
the benefits and burdens of continued therapy fit with 
his or her ongoing healthcare goals.
­How to Deactivate a CIED
The HRS document lays out a series of steps for CIED 
deactivation, as shown in Table 28.4. First, the physician 
must confirm that the patient understands his or her 
medical condition and the consequences of deactivation 
and thus has capacity to make the decision. While legally, 
all adults are considered competent unless declared 
incompetent by courts, the AMA code of Medical Ethics 
[6] affirms that in most situations it is acceptable to act 
on the physician’s determination of capacity without for-
mal legal declaration of incompetence. If the physician 
does not feel able to determine decision‐making capac-
ity, either because of unclear cognitive or emotional state 
in the patient, a psychiatric colleague can be consulted, 
but psychiatric consultation is not required routinely. 
If  the patient lacks decision‐making capacity, the next 
step is identification of the legal surrogate.
Next, documentation should include confirmation of 
the decision for deactivation, confirmation that alterna-
tive therapies have been discussed, if relevant, and that 
the consequences of deactivation have been discussed, 
and are understood by the patient. The specific therapies 
to be deactivated should be delineated  –  whether the 
patient wishes to deactivate just shocks, all tachyarrhyth-
mia therapies, or bradycardia pacing in addition, 
­following a conversation as described earlier.
­Who Should Deactivate the ICD?
Deactivation should be performed, whenever possible, 
by individuals with electrophysiologic expertise such as 
physicians or device‐clinic nurses or technicians. In 
cases in which this expertise is not available, deactivation 
should be performed by medical personnel (such as a 
hospice physician or nurse) with guidance from indus-
try‐employed allied professionals. Prior surveys have 
suggested that often, industry employees are asked to 
deactivate devices on their own, yet these are individuals 
who may have no clinical training. While there may be 
rare urgent situations in which it is necessary for an 
industry representative to perform deactivation alone, 
following transmission of specific orders from a medical 
physician, in most circumstances it can be arranged for 
medical personnel to take clinical responsibility for the 
deactivation by being present while the representative 
provides the technical assistance.
While carrying out requests to withdraw device thera-
pies from patients who have (or their surrogate has) 
made this decision is ethical and legal, clinicians may 
have personal values and beliefs that lead them to prefer 
not to participate in device deactivation, particularly PM 
deactivation in dependent patients. As described in the 
AMA Code of Medical Ethics [6], clinicians and others, 
including industry employed allied professionals, should 
not be compelled to carry out any procedure they view as 
inconsistent with their personal values. Under these cir-
cumstances, the clinician should inform the patient of 
his or her preference not to perform device deactivation. 
However, as described in the AMA Code of Medical 
Ethics, the clinician should not impose his or her values 
on or abandon the patient, and should ensure that they 
do not cause the patient emotional distress [3]. If the pri-
mary clinician and patient can reach an acceptable plan, 
then the primary clinician should assist the patient in 
identifying another clinician who will deliver this legally 
permitted intervention.
Table 28.4  How to deactivate CIEDs.
Confirmation of decision‐making capacity of patient
●
●Identification of surrogate if appropriate
Documentation
●
●Confirmation of patient/surrogate request
●
●Capacity
●
●Confirmation that alternative therapies have been discussed if 
relevant
●
●Confirmation that consequences of deactivation has been 
discussed
●
●Specific therapies to be discontinued
Preparation for palliative care and patient/family support if 
appropriate
Deactivation by electrophysiology personnel
●
●or by medical personnel with assistance from  
industry‐employed allied professionals

28  How to Deactivate Cardiac Implantable Electric Devices in Patients Nearing the End of Life and/or Requesting Withdrawal of Therapies
268
­Where Should Deactivation 
be Performed?
Device deactivation can be performed in multiple set-
tings, but the logistics will vary depending on the loca-
tion of the patient, his or her clinical situation, and what 
therapies are to be deactivated. For an inpatient hospi-
talized in a facility with electrophysiologic expertise, 
members of the electrophysiology team should be con-
tacted. For outpatients who are ambulatory, deactiva-
tion of tachyarrhythmia therapies can be carried out in 
the electrophysiology clinic. If a decision is made to dis-
continue pacing in a dependent or very bradycardic 
patient, deactivation should be performed in a setting in 
which appropriate palliative care can be delivered, either 
as an inpatient or with the assistance of hospice services. 
For logistical reasons, this should not be performed in 
the outpatient setting where appropriate palliative care 
­cannot be immediately put in place. For patients in 
­facilities without electrophysiology expertise, such as 
long‐term nursing facilities or hospices, deactivation 
should be carried out by medical personnel in conjunc-
tion with industry‐employed personnel, after consulta-
tion with electrophysiologists who can assist in directing 
the plan. Deactivation for patients at home, such as 
those with home hospice, can be challenging, but can be 
managed with effective communication amongst mem-
bers of the patient’s healthcare team including hospice 
nurses, primary physicians, and electrophysiologists. 
Following direction from the electrophysiologist, the 
hospice team can perform deactivation in conjunction 
with industry representatives providing technical 
­assistance in the home.
In summary, deactivation of ICDs and pacemakers is 
legal and ethic. Proactive communication by the health-
care team can help prevent painful shocks for patients 
nearing the end of life. Clinicians caring for patients with 
ICDs should have protocols in place for deactivation.
­References
	1	 Goldstein NE, Lampert R, Bradley E, Lynn J, Krumholz 
HM. Management of implantable cardioverter 
defibrillators in end‐of‐life care. Ann Intern Med 
2004;141:835–838.
	2	 Kinch Westerdahl A, Sjoblom J, Mattiasson AC, 
Rosenqvist M, Frykman V. Implantable  
cardioverter‐defibrillator therapy before death: high 
risk for painful shocks at end of life. Circulation 
2014;129:422–429.
	3	 Lampert R, Hayes DL, Annas GJ, Farley MA, Goldstein 
NE, Hamilton RM, et al. HRS Expert Consensus 
Statement on the Management of Cardiovascular 
Implantable Electronic Devices (CIEDs) in patients 
nearing end of life or requesting withdrawal of therapy. 
Heart Rhythm 2010;7:1008–1026.
	4	 Lampert R, Hayes D. Ethical issues. In Ellenbogen KA, 
Kay GN, Lau CP, Wilkoff BL (eds) Clinical Cardiac 
Pacing, Defibrillation, and Resynchronization Therapy, 
4th edition. Elsevier: 2011.
	5	 Dodson JA, Fried TR, Van Ness PH, Goldstein N, 
Lampert R. Patient preferences for deactivation of 
implantable cardioverter defibrillators. JAMA Intern 
Med 2013;173(5):377–379.
	6	 AMA. Code of Medical Ethics: Current Opinions and 
Annotations. AMA Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. 
2008–2009 edition. Chicago, IL: AMA Press, 2010.

269
How-to Manual for Pacemaker and ICD Devices: Procedures and Programming, First Edition. Edited by Amin Al-Ahmad, Andrea Natale,  
Paul J. Wang, James P. Daubert, and Luigi Padeletti. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Companion website: www.wiley.com/go/al-ahmad/pacemakers_and_icds
Page numbers in italic refer to figures.
Page numbers in bold refer to tables.
3‐D imaging  130
6‐segment method, LV lead position 
classification  123
15‐segment method, LV lead position 
classification  123
5019HV adaptor (Medtronic)  43
6937A lead (Medtronic)  40
a
AAI(R) mode  163–164
vs DDD(R), switching 
algorithms  154
abandoned hardware  71, see also 
‘cap and abandon’ strategy
ablation
atrioventricular node  60, 
224–225
for premature ventricular 
complexes  226
supraventricular tachycardia  217
abscesses, sutures  138
Acceleration on PAC® (Sorin)  156
Accufix lead (Telectronics), 
extraction  69
active fixation leads  239
activities of daily living, sensor 
programming  149
Acuity Break‐Away catheters (Boston 
Scientific), 28, 28
Acuity Spiral Lead (Boston 
Scientific), 31
Acuity Steerable Lead (Boston 
Scientific), 31
acute implantation, 
troubleshooting  178–179
Adapta ADDR01 (Medtronic), 154
adhesion, leads  76, 85
adhesive drape, internal jugular vein 
access  24
ADVANCE III trial  191, 215
ADVANCE CRT‐D trial  192
advanced directives  265–266
advisory leads  71
AF Suppression® (St. Jude)  155–156
alerts  196
recalled leads  209, 211
remote follow‐up  249–251
allergy  137–138
alloys, allergy  137
amiodarone
on defibrillation threshold  112
shock prevention  217
sotalol and  117
Amplatz catheter  30
Amplatz Extra Stiff wires  100
Amplatz gooseneck snare  80, 81
anchor tip locking stylets  238
Angiocath, cephalic vein access  5
angiographic catheter, JR4, 39
angiography wires, left ventricular 
lead placement  32
angioplasty  57
angiotensin converting enzyme 
inhibitors, after CRT 
implantation  61
Angiovac (cannula), 75
angle of entry, extrathoracic 
subclavian vein access  14
anterior intraventricular vein 
(left)  28–29
anterior sub‐pectoral 
approach  64–65
antiarrhythmic drugs
on defibrillation threshold   
112, 204
shock prevention  217
antibiotics  138, 139, 236–237
anticoagulants
for biventricular pacing  59
inadvertent lead placement  139
management  11, 72, 85, 135
antiplatelet drugs, management   
11, 72
anti‐tachy pacing therapy  187–193, 
203, 216
assessment  197
efficacy  191–192
stimulus site  192
aortic velocity time integral  226
apical targets, see also transapical 
endocardial LV lead 
placement
left ventricular leads  58
right ventricular leads  45, 60, 
119, 122
dislodgement  127
ECG trace  160, 161
apixaban see novel oral anticoagulants
arrhythmias, see also re‐entrant 
arrhythmias; specific 
arrhythmias
diagnosis by pacemaker  186
pacemaker‐dependent  166–167
aspirin, management  11
assisted suicide  264
Index

Index
270
asynchronous pacing mode, induced 
by magnet  162
asystole, complicating extraction of 
leads  76
atrial fibrillation  60
atrial preventative pacing   
155–156
atrioventricular delay and  153
Bachmann’s bundle pacing  45
on biventricular pacing  224–225
defibrillation threshold testing and  
113, 114
detection  155
diagnosis by pacemaker  186
heart failure and  258
inappropriate ICD therapy  214
lower rate programming for  149
memory function checking  156
pacemaker conduction to 
ventricle  166
programming  148
tracking  148, 150
ventricular tachycardia vs  202
atrial flutter
atrioventricular delay and  153
memory function checking  156
programming  148
PVARP and  166
tracking  150
Atrial Flutter Reaction® (Boston 
Scientific), 148
atrial pacing  147
ECG trace  160
modalities  174
oversensing  183–184
preventative  155–156
ventriculo‐atrial conduction on   
153, 155
Atrial Pacing Preference® 
(Medtronic)  155–156
atrial rates, memory functions  156
atrial sensitivity  155
atrial septal defect, inadvertent lead 
placement  139, 140
atrial tachyarrhythmias, 
pacemaker‐dependent  166
atrioventricular association  203
atrioventricular block, sinus node 
disease  147, 148
atrioventricular conduction, intrinsic, 
detection  153
atrioventricular delay
programming  150–153, 157
rate adaptive  153–154
atrioventricular dissociation  203
atrioventricular hysteresis 
algorithms  154, 174
atrioventricular interval
echocardiography  226–227
electrocardiography  181
optimization  226–227, 229
programming  176–177
shortening  186
atrioventricular junctional rhythm, 
programming for  149
atrioventricular nodal re‐entrant 
tachycardia  203
atrioventricular node, ablation  60, 
224–225
atrioventricular trigger  165
Attain Commander catheters 
(Medtronic), 28, 28
autocapture  174
automatic gain control, ICDs  196
axilla, lateral anterior axillary 
approach  67
axillary nerve, pain  136
axillary vein  9, 10
dimpling  14
extrathoracic access  10, 15, 16
pneumothorax risk  10
lead insertion, chest X‐ray  120
venography via  98
azygos vein  37–43
extra coils in  117, 125–126
b
Bachmann’s bundle, pacing  45–46, 
47, 48
back bleeding
cephalic vein  7
pocket hematoma  14
back‐up defibrillators  116
balloons, subclavian venoplasty  100, 
101, 103, 105
band pass filters, ICDs  195
base rates, lowering  176
batteries  186, 204
remote follow‐up transmission 
frequency and  252
beta blockers
after CRT implantation  61
on defibrillation threshold  112
shock prevention  217
Biotronik
Corox Lead  31
Effecta DR, AV delay and 
hysteresis  154
ICDs, TWOS avoidance  216
Selectra catheters  28
biphasic waveform, 
defibrillation  111
bipolar left ventricular leads  32
vs quadripolar leads  57
bipolar pacing, ECG trace   
159, 160
biventricular anti‐tachy pacing 
therapy  192
biventricular pacing
capture  224
electrocardiography  167–168, 
169, 170
with endocardial stimulation  59
proarrhythmia  61
tachyarrhythmias on  224–226
triple‐site  59
Blanked Flutter Search®, 148
blanking periods  171, 184, see also 
postventricular atrial 
blanking; refractory periods
T‐wave oversensing and  197
undersensing vs  181, 182
ventricular safety pacing  165
bleeding  134–136, see also back 
bleeding
blood cultures  139, 235
blood pressure monitoring  84
blood tests, infections  235
blood transfusion, preparation 
for  71–72, 73, 85
Boston Scientific
Acuity Break‐Away catheters   
28, 28
Acuity Spiral Lead  31
Acuity Steerable Lead  31
Amplatz Extra Stiff wires  100
diaphragmatic myopotential 
oversensing  199
Dynamic Noise 
Algorithm  216–217
Insignia DR 1290/1291, AV delay 
and hysteresis  154
remote follow‐up 
transmitters  249
splash screen  243
trending data view  244–246
Bozeman uterine forceps, internal 
jugular vein access  25
brachiocephalic vein access, during 
femoral extraction  83
brady‐tachy syndrome  147
programming  148, 149

Index
271
braiding in catheters, venoplasty   
100, 101, 102, 105
bumping of leads  81
bundle branch block  170
CRT for  222
from frequent pacing  177
lead extraction and  72, 76
undersensing vs, 182
burden of atrial fibrillation  186
burst pacing, anti‐tachy pacing 
therapy  188, 189, 190, 
191–192, 216
burst pressure (rated), balloons  101
c
calcification, femoral lead 
extraction  84
Candida albicans  234
capacitors, reforming  204
‘cap and abandon’ strategy  69
capsulectomy  76
capture, see also autocapture
absence of  177–179
biventricular pacing  224
phrenic nerve  32, 57, 142
right ventricular outflow 
tract  142
capture thresholds  173, 176
raised  179
cardiac resynchronization 
therapy  123, see also 
biventricular pacing
complications  34–35
defibrillators, anti‐tachy pacing 
therapy  192
defining response  221–222
discontinuing  266
heart failure monitoring with  257
implantation  55–62
optimization  221–231
CardioMEMS Champion Heart 
Failure Monitoring 
System  256–257
cardiothoracic surgeons, 
availability  71
cardioverter‐defibrillators see 
implantable cardioverter‐
defibrillators; inappropriate 
ICD therapy
carvedilol, shock prevention  217
catheters, see also guide catheters; 
inner catheters; phrenic nerve 
capture; Swan‐Ganz catheters; 
specific proprietary catheters
angiographic, JR4, 39
deflectable, removing lead 
fragments  85
left ventricular lead placement  32
for venoplasty  99–101, 102
braiding  100, 101, 102, 105
central hubs, remote follow‐up  246
cephalic artery  3
cephalic vein  10
cut‐down  3–8
lead insertion, chest X‐ray  120
pneumothorax risk  10
small  7
CHAMPION trial  257
charge times, defibrillators  113, 204
chest impedance see thorax 
impedance
chest X‐rays
before device extraction  71
device implant complications  127
lead insertion sites  119
lead tip localization
left ventricle  123–124
right ventricle  119–122
pneumothorax  127, 128, 134, 136
chlorhexidine  92
chronic implantation, 
troubleshooting  179
Chronicle device, heart failure 
monitoring  257
chronotropic sinus node 
incompetence, 
programming  148, 149
cineography, extrathoracic subclavian 
vein access  14
clavicle, tunneling over  23, 25
clavicular head, pectoralis major 
muscle  63–64, 65
clavipectoral fascia  64
clearing stylet, extraction of 
leads  73
clinical success, removal of 
leads  238
clopidogrel, management  11, 72
closed circuits  187
coagulase‐negative 
staphylococci  234
cobra head, Needle’s Eye 
Snare  81–82
coding (USA), remote follow‐
up  245–246, 251–252
coil pins, reversal  196
collateral veins, coronary sinus 
venography  30, 31
‘committed’ pacing  165, 171
communication with patient
deactivation of CIEDs  264–267
lead recall  210
malfunctioning ICDs  209
remote follow‐up  249
companion leads
damage  85–86
on sensing of VF  114–115
complete procedural success, removal 
of leads  238
compliance, monitoring heart 
failure  256
complications  133–144
availability of emergency 
equipment  71
cardiac resynchronization 
therapy  34–35
chest X‐rays for  127
extraction of leads  76–77
femoral  85–86
rates  239
left ventricular leads  34–35
computed tomography
before device extraction  72
before implantation  55
infections  129
before lead extraction  130
lead perforation  142
right ventricular lead 
placement  120–122
conditional shock zones  21
connection problems, 
leads  139–141
consensus documents, reliability of 
ICDs and leads  208
consent  10
device extraction  71
contralateral access
previous procedures  11
reimplantation  240
contrast injection system, for 
venography  99, 102
contrast media, kidneys and   
11, 24
control of leads, during 
extraction  90
Cook Medical, Amplatz Extra Stiff 
wires  100
coronary arteriography  55
coronary artery disease
device extraction  72
upper tracking rates  150
coronary balloons  100, 101

Index
272
coronary sinus  28
angioplasty  57
cannulation  29–30
distortion  30
extra coils in  117, 126
imaging  55
inadvertent lead placement  139, 140
lead dislodgement  133
venography  30–31
inner catheters  31, 32
coronary veins  28–29
assessment  55–56
left posterolateral  29
perforation  35
Corox Lead (Biotronik), 31
counterpressure  90
countertraction  90
Covidien Whorley wire  14
CPS Direct catheters (St. Jude), 28, 28
cross‐check programs (physical 
activity)  149–150
crosstalk  182, 184
dual chamber systems  165
electromagnetic interference  200
cut‐down, cephalic vein  3–8
cutoff see rate cutoff
cutting sheaths, rotational  75
cutting tools, delivery system 
removal  33
d
D (dual), NBG code  163
dabigatran see novel oral 
anticoagulants
damage to leads  141
companion leads  85–86
databases, ICD and lead failures  208
DDD(R) mode  164–165
switching to AAI(R)  154
deactivation  263–268
procedure  267
staff  267
where performed  268
death see dying patients; mortality; 
sudden cardiac death
debridement, pockets  76
decision‐making, shared  267
decision models, malfunctioning 
ICDs  209
defibrillation
cardioverter‐defibrillators  20–21, 
see also inappropriate ICD 
therapy
failed  37, 38
defibrillation threshold
high  112, 116–117, 204
submuscular implants  68
testing  37, 111–117, 196
arguments against  113
decision to perform  113–114
reasons for  111–113
strategies  114–116
ventricular fibrillation duration 
vs  204
defibrillator leads, see also high 
voltage cables
alternative routes  124–127
femoral extraction  79, 83–84
deflectable catheters, removing lead 
fragments  85
deflectable tip electrophysiology 
catheters, for LV leads  28
deflectable tip wires  80, 81
delay, see also atrioventricular delay
electrical  58, 223
mechanical  58
delayed VT therapy  214
delivery, leads for extraction  83
delivery system removal, LV 
leads  33–34
deltopectoral groove  3, 4
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  12
overweight patients  7
dependence, on pacemaker  175, 176
detection counts, anti‐tachy pacing 
therapy  191
detection duration  213–214, 218
detection zones, ventricular 
tachycardia  188–190
dexamethasone, for exit 
block  141–142
DF4 leads  43
diabetes, medication management  11
diaphragm, see also phrenic nerve 
capture
cardioverter‐defibrillator 
placement and  19
as landmark  14
myopotential oversensing  199
stimulation  142
dilators
extraction of leads  238
internal jugular vein access  25
for venoplasty  99
diltiazem, on defibrillation 
threshold  112
dimpling, axillary vein  14
direct current, VF induction  114
discrimination algorithms,  
ICDs  21
dislodgement of leads  129, 133, 
178, 179
chest X‐rays  127
electrocardiography  180
ICDs  196
left ventricular leads  34–35
dissection, extraction of leads by  73
diuretics  11, 61
documentation
deactivation of CIEDs  267
remote follow‐up  245–246
dofetilide, on defibrillation 
threshold  112
Doppler imaging (tissues)  58
Dotter basket  80
double ballooning, Swan‐Ganz 
catheters  31
double counting, R waves  198
double‐lead access see dual chamber 
systems; two or more leads
double rail images  235
draping
cardioverter‐defibrillator 
placement  18
internal jugular vein access  24
dressings, internal jugular vein 
access  24
drive trains, anti‐tachy pacing 
therapy  187–188
driving, post‐procedure  133
dual AV nodal response 
tachycardia  203
dual chamber ICDs, avoiding 
inappropriate 
shocks  215–216
dual chamber systems, see also 
DDD(R) mode
atrioventricular block  147
cephalic vein access for  5–7
lead interaction  7
crosstalk  165
event detection  202
His bundle pacing and  48
lead extraction via internal jugular 
vein  94
modalities  174
SVT discrimination  203, 
215–216
undersensing  171
dual coil leads  37
extraction  69

Index
273
dual‐sensor systems  150
duration see detection duration
dying patients  263–268
Dynamic Noise Algorithm (Boston 
Scientific)  216–217
dyssynchrony, mechanical  222
e
ecchymosis  135, 137
echocardiography  55, 58
CRT optimization  60, 226–228
before device extraction  72
extraction of leads  76, 85
for extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  11
infections  139, 235
therapy response 
measurement  221
effusions (pericardial)  85, 139, 143, 
see also tamponade
elective replacement intervals, 
batteries  204
electrical storms, anti‐tachy pacing 
therapy  192–193
electroanatomic mapping  55
electrocardiograms, see also 
electrograms
of pacemakers  159–172
electrocardiography  159–163
biventricular capture  224
biventricular pacing  167–168, 
169, 170
cardioverter‐defibrillator 
placement  18
CRT optimization  60
DDD(R) mode 
pacemakers  164–165
before device extraction  72
lead dislodgement  180
pacemaker troubleshooting  175
ventricular lead position  178
electrocautery
cephalic artery  3
electromagnetic interference  200
extraction of leads  73
electrograms, see also 
electrocardiograms
checking  157
near field vs far field  203
optimization of CRT  228–229
electromagnetic interference  175, 
184, 186
electromechanical interference   
199–200
electronic health records  246, 
247–248
electrosurgical sheaths  75
embolism
pulmonary  143
septic  70
vegetations  234
emergency equipment, 
availability  71
EMPIRIC trial  213–214, 215
endless loop tachycardia (ELT)  153, 
155, 167
endocardial approaches, 
identification on X‐rays   
124, 125
endocardial stimulation, by LV 
leads  59
end of life (batteries)  204
end of life care  263–268
end‐of‐life pacemaker  186
endovascular infections  234
end‐systolic volume  221
energy output, defibrillators  113
enoxaparin, management  11
entrapment of nerve  136–137
epicardial approaches
identification on X‐rays  124, 125
reimplantation  240
epicardial patch implants  37
erosions  67, 138, 234
ethics, deactivation of CIEDs   
263–264, 267
Eustachian ridge  28, 29, 30
exercise intolerance
heart failure  258, 259
lower rate programming for  148
sensor programming  149
exercise tests, dual‐sensor 
systems  150
exercise training, on therapy 
response  226
exit block  141–142
explantation of leads, extraction of 
leads vs  89
extendable‐retractable leads
Bachmann’s bundle pacing  46
extraction  82
external defibrillators  116
externalized conductors
lead failure rates  211
X‐ray examination  128–129, 211
extracardiac stimulation  142, see 
also phrenic nerve capture
extraction of devices  69–78
extraction of leads by femoral 
approach after  79
failed  71
for infections  69, 237–238
extraction of leads  69–78
complications  76–77
femoral  85–86
rates  239
femoral approach  79–87, 91
force required  86–87
subclavian venoplasty with   
105–106, 107
for infections  238–239
internal jugular vein  26, 89–96
policy when recalled or  
failed  210
procedure  72–76
Extra Stiff wires (Amplatz)  100
extrathoracic access
axillary vein  10, 15, 16
pneumothorax risk  10
subclavian vein  10
f
factor Xa inhibitors, 
management  72
failed defibrillation  37, 38
far field electrograms, near field 
electrograms vs  203
fatigue, lower rate programming 
for  148
fat‐pad, deltopectoral groove  3, 4, 7
femoral approach
extraction of leads  79–87, 91
force required  86–87
subclavian venoplasty with   
105–106, 107
snares for  74–76, 80–81
femoral artery access, for extraction 
of leads  72–73
femoral snares  74–76, 80–81
femoral vein access, for extraction of 
leads  72–73
femoral workstation  76
fever, infections  234
fibrosis
double rail images  235
extraction of leads and  84, 89, 
90, 93
venoplasty for  97
Fidelis lead, prophylactic 
revision  211
15‐segment method, LV lead position 
classification  123

Index
274
fire risk, internal jugular vein 
access  24
first rib  10, 13, 14
fixation, left ventricular leads  32–33
fixation screw retraction clips  75
fixation screws
extraction of leads  73
release  76
18F‐fluorodeoxyglucose PET, 
infections  235–236
fluoroscopy
double‐lead access  14
extraction of leads  76
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  12
import of 3‐D images  130
recalled leads  211
right ventricular lead 
placement  120
time, femoral lead extraction  86
focused force venoplasty  105, 106
follow‐up see remote follow‐up
Food and Drug Administration, recall 
of ICDs and leads  208
foramen ovale, patent  46, 48
forms
Physician Device Advisory 
Notification  209
remote follow‐up  245–246
fracture of lead  141, 184, 201
risk  11
surveillance  216
fragmentation of leads  85
FREEDOM trial  228–229
free‐floating leads, extraction   
92–93
free wall
right atrium, pacing from  156
right ventricular lead placement   
119–122
fusion  160–161, 181
biventricular pacing  168, 169
on echocardiography  226
g
general anesthesia, submuscular 
implants  63
generators, replacement, 
submuscular implants  68
ghost images  235
glide wires
cephalic vein access  5
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  14
gooseneck snare (Amplatz)  80, 81
green light reports, remote  
follow‐up  245
Guidant model 0125 defibrillator 
lead, calcification  84
guide catheters
left ventricular leads  27, 28
removal  33–34
h
healthcare professionals
duties regarding device 
failures  210
experience on infection  
rates  234
remote follow‐up  241–242
heart block, see also atrioventricular 
block; bundle branch block; 
sinoatrial block
complicating extraction of 
leads  76
heart failure  55
axillary vein course  9
medications  226
monitoring  255–261
heart rate, heart failure and   
258, 259
helices
His bundle pacing  48
rotation to extract  82
RVS pacing  49
hematomas  135–136, 137, see also 
under pockets
hemiazygos vein  38
hemodynamics, CRT  223–224
hemopneumothorax  134
hemothorax
chest X‐rays  127
risk  11
heparin, management  11
HHH study  256
high voltage cables, see also 
defibrillator leads
extraction  74
His bundle pacing  47–48, 49, 50
histograms see rate histograms
history‐taking, remote  
follow‐up  249
hydration, for venography  24
hydrophilic wires  14
hyperglycemia, T‐wave 
oversensing  198
hypotension, from ventricular 
fibrillation  113
hypoxia, during extraction of 
leads  77
hysteresis  161–162
hysteresis algorithms  174
atrioventricular  154, 174
i
ibutilide, on defibrillation 
threshold  112
imaging, see also specific modalities
infections  235–236
impedance
causes of changes  184, 185
lead failure  201
thoracic  257, 258, 259
implantable cardioverter‐
defibrillators, see also 
inappropriate ICD  
therapy
anti‐tachy pacing 
therapy  187–193
deactivation  263–268
function assessment  196–197
heart failure monitoring  257
lead extraction  69–70
management  207–212
remote follow‐up transmission 
frequency  252
RVS placement  49
subcutaneous  17–21, 117, 210, 
218
troubleshooting  195–205
implantable sensors, monitoring 
heart failure  256–257
inadvertent detection,  
T waves  184
inadvertent placement of leads, left 
ventricle  139, 140
inappropriate ICD therapy
causes  213
oversensing  197–200
programming to avoid  203–204, 
213–220
incisions
bleeding  134
cardioverter‐defibrillator 
placement  19, 20
deltopectoral groove  3
extraction of devices  73
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  12
internal jugular vein access  24
lateral anterior axillary 
approach  67

Index
275
infections  138–139, 233–240
azygos vein lead placement 
after  43
CRT  34
device extraction for  69,  
237–238
pocket debridement  76
inferior approach see femoral 
approach
inferior vena cava, wire in  14
inflammation  177–178
infra‐mammary implantation  67
‘inhibit pacing’ function  176
inner catheters
coronary sinus venography   
31, 32
left ventricular lead 
placement  27, 28, 30
inner sheaths
azygos vein lead placement  40
femoral approach  82, 83
insulation failure  71, 141,  
185, 201
Riata defibrillation leads  211
testing for  112
X‐rays showing  128–129
intercostal muscles, stimulation  142
interference
electromagnetic  175, 184, 186
electromechanical  199–200
interlead distance  58
internal carotid artery, relation 
of internal jugular vein   
91, 92
internal jugular vein
access via  23–26
extraction of leads  89–96
left ventricular leads  27
anatomy  91
international normalized ratio 
(INR)  11, 72, 85, 135
interrogation  175–177
before device extraction  71
remote follow‐up  249
In‐TIME trial  258–259
intracardiac echocardiography, 
extraction of leads  76
investigations see laboratory tests
ipsilateral access, previous 
procedures  11
iris scissors, internal jugular vein 
access  25
ischemic cardiomyopathy,  
scars  223
iterative method, atrioventricular 
interval  226, 227
ivrabidine  257
j
jackhammers  200
JR4 angiographic catheter  39
jugular access see internal jugular 
vein
J wire, extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  13, 14
k
knots, extraction of leads  74
l
laboratory tests
before device extraction  71–72
infections  235
laser extraction sheaths  74,  
75, 239
Lasso (Osypka GmbH)  93
lateral anterior axillary approach   
66–67
lateral marginal veins  30
lateral pectoral nerve  64
lateral sub‐pectoral approach   
65, 66
lead failure  207–212
on DFT  204
as indication for removal  70–71
management  209–211
risk  11
submuscular implants  67
transvenous cardioverter‐
defibrillators  17, 200–202
X‐rays showing  127–129
Lead Integrity Alert algorithm 
(Medtronic)  202, 
210–211, 216
lead–lead interaction
cephalic vein access  7
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  14
on sensing of VF  114–115
Lead Noise Oversensing 
algorithm  216
learning, venoplasty  98
left anterior intraventricular 
vein  28–29
left marginal cardiac vein  29
left posterolateral coronary  
vein  29
left ventricle
inadvertent placement of leads   
139, 140
pacing, electrocardiography   
167–168
pressure measurement  223–224
left ventricular ejection fraction 
(LVEF)  257
left ventricular leads
complications  34–35
placement of  27–35, 56–57, 59
classification  123
inadvertent  139, 140
X‐rays  123–124
targeting methods  57–59, 
222–224
trans‐septal route  125
legality, deactivation of CIEDs   
263–264
local anesthetic
on defibrillation threshold  112
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  12
for small veins  7
locking stylets, extraction of 
leads  73–74, 83, 238
loop recorders, remote follow‐up 
codes  252
lower rate limits, programming   
148–149
m
MADIT‐CRT trial  221
MADIT RIT trial  191, 214, 215
magnetic frequency  162, 163
magnetic resonance imaging  56, 58
magnets
application, ECG trace  162, 163
rate and function  175
malfunctions, see also lead failure
ICDs and leads  208–209
pacemakers  168–169, 171
Managed Ventricular Pacing 
algorithm (Medtronic)  154
manual transmissions, remote 
follow‐up  249
manufacturers, monitoring ICD 
performance  208
marginal cardiac veins  29, 30
maximum tracking rate (MTR)   
165, 166
mechanical dyssynchrony  222
mechanical extraction sheaths  74, 
75, 238, 239
medial axillary vein  9

Index
276
medial pectoral nerve  64
medications
on DFT  204
heart failure  226
pre‐procedure management  11
Medtronic
5019HV adaptor  43
6937A lead, azygos vein  40
Adapta ADDR01, 154
alert notifications  251
Atrial Pacing 
Preference®  155–156
Attain Commander catheters  28, 
28
Lead Integrity Alert 
algorithm  202, 210–211, 216
Managed Ventricular Pacing 
algorithm  154
Post Mode Switching Overdrive 
Pacing (PMOP®)  156
Protecta ICDs, TWOS 
avoidance  216
remote follow‐up 
transmitters  249
Sensia SEDR01, AV delay and 
hysteresis  154
splash screens  242
StarFix Lead  31, 33
true vs integrated bipolar 
configurations  197
memory functions  156–157
mexiletine, on defibrillation 
threshold  112
microdislodgement  133
micropuncture
cephalic vein access  5
systems  99
middle cardiac vein  29
inadvertent lead placement  139
missed 
transmissions, remote 
follow‐up  251
mitral inflow velocity time 
integral  226
mode switching  148, 174
monitoring, see also remote  
follow‐up
blood pressure  84
heart failure  255–261
ICD performance  207, 208
recalled leads  209, 210, 211
trans‐telephonic
disadvantages  177, 241
reimbursement (USA)  252
morphology criterion, 
tachyarrhythmias  202–203
morphology discrimination 
algorithm  215
mortality
of ICD replacement  209
infections  233
lead extraction  210
premature ventricular complexes 
and  258, 259
Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator 
Implantation Trial II  112
multipolar pacing  57
left ventricle  58–59
muscle see myopotentials
mycotic infections  234
myocardial infarction
scars  223
ventricular tachycardia  187
myopotentials  184, 199
n
NBG code  163
near field electrograms, far field 
electrograms vs  203
needle aspiration, infected pockets 
and  235
needles, extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  14
needle’s eye snare  75, 80, 81–83, 85
nerve entrapment  136–137
Nitinol wires  99, 100
noise
algorithm detecting  211
connection problems  139
fracture of lead  141
protection algorithms  216–217
noise response  174
Non‐Competitive Atrial Pacing 
(NCAP®) algorithm  155
notification, alerts  249–251
novel oral anticoagulants, 
management  11, 135
number of intervals (NID), 
ventricular tachycardia  188, 
196, 214
nurses, remote follow‐up 
by  241–242
o
obesity see overweight patients
occult bacteremia  234
older people, sensor 
programming  149
one‐shot ATP  189–190
operator experience, on infection 
rates  234
OPTIC trial  217
optimization of devices  60
CRT  221–231
OPTION study  216
order of lead placement, left vs right 
ventricular  28
outer femoral sheaths  80, 81, 83
overdrive algorithms, atrial  155–156
oversensing
avoidance by automatic gain 
control  196
cardioverter‐defibrillators  18
inappropriate therapy  197–200
ECG trace showing  169, 172
implant‐related causes  196
from lead failure  201–202
postventricular atrial blanking 
setting to avoid  148, 155
P waves  198–199
troubleshooting  183–184
T waves  197–198, 216
over‐the‐wire techniques, left 
ventricular leads  31
overweight patients
axillary vein  9
deltopectoral groove  7
p
Paceart™ system  246, 252
paced AV delay  150–153
pacemaker‐mediated tachycardia 
(PMT)  167, 186
Intervention (program)  155
memory function checking  156
pacemakers
deactivation  264
diagnostic function  186
electrocardiograms  159–172
malfunctions  168–169, 171
remote follow‐up  241–253
transmission frequency  252
temporary  83
troubleshooting  173–186
pacemaker syndrome, ventriculo‐
atrial conduction  147
pacing function  159
loss  168–169, 177–179
pacing mode programming, sinus 
node disease  147
pain  136–138
PainFREE trials  191

Index
277
palliative care  263–268
PARTNERS study  258
Patient Device Advisory Notification 
letters  209
PEAK plasmablade  134, 141
pectoralis major muscle  63–64
clavicular head  63–64, 65
pectoralis minor muscle  64
pectoral myopotential 
oversensing  199
pectoral region  63–64
peel‐away sheath, cardioverter‐
defibrillator placement  20
perforation
coronary veins  35
myocardium  142–143, 196
chest X‐rays  127
femoral extraction  85
pericardial tamponade  35, 76, 85, 
143, 196
pericardiocentesis  85
pericardiocentesis needle, infra‐
mammary approach 
using  67
pericardium, irritation  143
phones, see also trans‐telephonic 
monitoring
monitoring heart failure  255–256
phrenic nerve capture  32, 57, 142
physical activity cross‐check 
programs  149–150
Physician Device Advisory 
Notification forms  209
pigtail catheters, for pericardial 
effusions  143
PITAGORA study  191–192
plasmablade (PEAK)  134, 141
pneumothorax  34, 134
chest X‐rays  127, 128, 134, 136
protected first rib approach  10
risk rates  10–11
pockets
creation
cardioverter‐defibrillator 
placement  19
subclavian vein access  12
debridement  76
erosions  67, 138
extraction of devices  73
hematoma
back bleeding  14
infections  34
risk rates  11
infection  34, 138–139, 234
polarity, high defibrillation 
threshold  116
positron emission tomography, 
infections  235–236
posterior electrode, 
subcutaneous  117
posterolateral coronary vein 
(left)  29
post‐implant optimization  224–226
Post Mode Switching Overdrive 
Pacing (PMOP®)  156
postoperative period  61
prevention of lead 
dislodgement  133
post‐shock morphology  203
postventricular atrial blanking 
(PVAB)  148, 155
postventricular atrial refractory 
period (PVARP)   
165–166, 177
potentiated dilators, see also powered 
sheaths
for extraction of leads  238
powered sheaths  90, see also 
potentiated dilators
power‐on‐reset state  186
PQ prolongation  149, 154
pre‐implantation evaluation  55–56
pre‐implantation optimization   
222–223
premature ventricular complexes 
(PVC)
on biventricular pacing  225–226
mortality and  258, 259
reaction  155
preparation of skin
cardioverter‐defibrillator 
placement  18
extraction of leads  72
internal jugular vein access  24, 92
subclavian vein access  12
PREPARE study  214, 215
pressure measurement, left 
ventricle  223–224
Pressure Products, SafeSheath CSG 
catheters  28
previous procedures, extrathoracic 
subclavian vein access  11
proarrhythmia, biventricular 
pacing  61
probabilistic counters, VF 
detection  196
probabilistic strength–duration 
curve, defibrillation  112
programmability, NBG code  163
programmers, troubleshooting 
with  175
Protecta ICDs (Medtronic), TWOS 
avoidance  216
protected first rib approach  10
PROVIDE trial  215
pseudo‐fusion  160–161, 162, 
181, 182
pulmonary artery
CardioMEMS System   
256–257
lead fragments in  85
RVS pacing leads in  48, 50
pulmonary embolism, risk  143
pulsed plasma radiofrequency 
energy  134, 141
pulse trains, anti‐tachy pacing 
therapy  187–188
purse string suture
cephalic vein access  7
extraction of leads  76–77
P waves, oversensing  198–199
q
QLV (interval)  223
QRS morphology
biventricular pacing  168, 
169, 170
right ventricular leads  161
quadripolar leads, left 
ventricular  57
qualifications
to extract leads  71
staff for remote follow‐up   
242–245
Quartet Quadripolar Lead  
(St. Jude), 31
r
R see rate responsive function
radial strain–time curves, left 
ventricle  58
railroad track appearance, R‐wave 
double counting  198
ramp stimulation, anti‐tachy 
pacing therapy  188, 189, 
190, 216
rate‐adaptive atrioventricular 
delay  153–154
rate‐adaptive pacing  149
rate cutoff  213–214, 218
rated burst pressure, balloons  101
rate histograms  185, 186

Index
278
rate responsive function 
(RR)  164–165
parameters  174, 176
troubleshooting  184–186
rate smoothing  174
rate zones, VT detection  216
recall of ICDs and leads  207–212
definition  208
management of  208–211
recommendations, ICD 
performance  207
records
health (electronic)  246, 247–248
for troubleshooting  175
red alerts  249
red light reports, remote  
follow‐up  245
re‐entrant arrhythmias
atrioventricular nodal 
tachycardia  203
pacemaker‐dependent  166–167, 
see also endless loop 
tachycardia; pacemaker‐
mediated tachycardia
ventricular tachycardia  187, 193
reforming, capacitors  204
refractory periods  174, 181, see also 
blanking periods; 
postventricular atrial 
blanking; total atrial refractory 
period
registries, ICD performance  207
reimbursement (USA), remote 
follow‐up  251–252
reimplantation, after infections  139, 
239–240
RELEVANT study  214, 215
reliability of ICDs and leads, 
consensus documents  208
remodeling, ventricles  221
remote follow‐up
heart failure  255–261
pacemakers and defibrillators   
241–253
transmission frequency  252
removal of leads, extraction of 
leads vs  238
renal failure  11
repetitive non‐reentrant VA 
synchrony (RNRVAS)  153
replacement
batteries, elective intervals  204
generators, submuscular 
implants  68
malfunctioning ICDs  208, 209
recalled or failed leads  210
Reply® DR (Sorin), SafeR® mode  154
retained wire approach, double‐lead 
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  14
retrograde conduction see  
ventriculo‐atrial  
conduction
reversal, coil pins  196
revision
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  12
leads, risks  60, 211
Riata defibrillation leads see under 
St. Jude Medical
right‐angle clamp, cephalic vein 
access  4
right atrial appendage
lead lodgement  45
pacing from  156
right atrium, see also AAI(R) mode
leads, dislodgement  127
pacing vs tracking on AV 
interval  227
rights, deactivation of CIEDs   
263–264
right‐sided implants, azygos vein lead 
placement  40
right ventricle, see also VVI(R) mode
apical lead lodgement  45
unnecessary pacing  149, 150, 153
right ventricle coil
conductor failure  202
pin reversal  196
position  116
right ventricular leads, see also apical 
targets
dislodgement  127, 129
ECG trace  160, 161
placement  56–57, 59–60, 61
septal placement  119, 123
tip localization  119–122
right ventricular outflow tract
capture  142
pacing  45, 48–49, 50–52
rising threshold  141–142
risks
device upgrades  60
revision of leads  60, 211
subclavian vein access  10–11
RISSY‐ICD trial  216
rivaroxaban see novel oral 
anticoagulants
rotating threaded sheaths  239
rotation, see also torque devices
extraction of leads  73, 74, 82
rotational cutting sheaths  75
R/S ratio, biventricular capture  224
R to T wave ratio, cardioverter‐
defibrillators and  18
R waves
double counting  198
vs T waves, amplitude  197, 198
VF undersensing and  114
s
SafeR® mode, Reply® DR (Sorin)  154
SafeSheath CSG catheters (Pressure 
Products), 28
saline bolus  12
scars, ischemic cardiomyopathy  223
search hysteresis, 
atrioventricular  174
SecureSense Lead Noise 
Discrimination algorithm (St. 
Jude Medical)  211
selector catheters, left ventricular 
lead placement  32
Selectra catheters (Biotronik), 28
self‐reporting, monitoring heart 
failure  255–256
sensed AV delay  150–153
sensing 
algorithms, 
cardioverter‐defibrillators  18
sensing function of pacemakers  159
malfunctions  169, 171
NBG classification  163
thresholds  173, 176
sensor programming  149–150
septic emboli, risk  70
septum, see also atrial septal defect; 
trans‐septal route; ventricular 
septal defect
pacing from  153, 156
right ventricular leads
dislodgement  127
placement  119, 123
serratus anterior muscle, 
division  67
set‐screws, loose  196, 201–202
sewing rings, extraction of 
devices  73
shared decision‐making  267
sheaths
azygos vein lead placement  40
cephalic vein access  5, 6

Index
279
for extraction of leads  74, 75, 90, 
238, 239
femoral approach  80, 81,  
82, 83
femoral vessel access  72
retained wire approach  14
for venoplasty  99, 101
shocking vectors, effect of azygos 
vein lead placement  42
shocks, see also inappropriate ICD 
therapy
DFT testing  114
effectiveness  204
at end of life  263, 265–266
symptoms of  263
shock zones, cardioverter‐ 
defibrillators  21
silicone collars, internal jugular vein 
access  26
SIMPLE trial  112, 113
single chamber ICDs, avoiding 
inappropriate 
shocks  215–216
single chamber pacing
event detection  202
programming modes  163–164
SVT discrimination  203
sinoatrial block, programming  147, 
148, 149
sinus arrest, programming  147, 
148, 149
sinus bradycardia  148, 149
sinus node disease, programming 
for  147–157
sinus tachycardia
T‐wave oversensing  198
ventricular tachycardia vs  202, 
214
6‐segment method, LV lead position 
classification  123
skin see preparation of skin
slicing tools, delivery system 
removal  33
slings  133
SMART‐AV trial  226–227, 228
snares, for femoral approach  74–76, 
80–81
Sorin
Acceleration on PAC®  156
Reply® DR, SafeR® mode  154
sotalol
on defibrillation threshold  112, 
117
shock prevention and  217
spasm, small veins  7
splash screens, remote follow‐up   
241, 242, 243
stability criteria  188, 202,  
214–215
staff see healthcare professionals
standard deviation of atrial 
interval  258
standard of care, defibrillation 
threshold testing as  114
Staphylococcus (spp.)  234
StarFix Lead (Medtronic), 31, 33
steel, allergy  137
steerable wires, extrathoracic 
subclavian vein access  14
steering handles see torque devices
stenting  57
stenting locking stylets  238
step‐up and step‐down approaches, 
DFT  115
sterile fields see preparation  
of skin
sternocostal bundle, pectoralis major 
muscle  64
steroids, for exit block  141–142
stiff wires
coronary sinus venography  31
Extra Stiff wires (Amplatz)  100
St. Jude Medical
AF Suppression®  155–156
CPS Direct catheters  28, 28
Endurity DR, AV delay and 
hysteresis  154
programming for T‐wave 
oversensing  197
Quartet Quadripolar Lead  31
remote follow‐up 
transmitters  249
Riata defibrillation leads
insulation failure  211
X‐ray examination  128–129
SecureSense Lead Noise 
Discrimination 
algorithm  211
Tigerwire  14
TWOS avoidance  216
strength–duration curve, 
defibrillation  112
stroke, defibrillation threshold testing 
and  114
stylet‐driven leads
Bachmann’s bundle pacing   
45–46
left ventricular  31, 32–33, 35
stylets, see also locking stylets
Bachmann’s bundle  
pacing  47
extraction of leads  73, 75
His bundle pacing  47–48
RVS pacing  48–49, 51
subclavian vein  9–16
access during femoral 
extraction  83
extrathoracic access  9–16
occlusions  23, 143
thrombosis risk of device 
upgrade  60
venogram  10
venoplasty  97–109
subcutaneous array implants  37
subcutaneous ICDs  17–21, 117, 
210, 218
sub‐pectoral implants  63–68
sudden cardiac death, DFT  113
sudden onset criterion, sinus 
tachycardia vs VT   
202, 214
superior vena cava
coil
exclusion  204
pin reversal  196
tears
femoral lead extraction  
and  86, 87
transjugular lead extraction  93
X‐ray showing route via  126
supraventricular tachycardia
ablation  217
ventricular tachycardia vs  202, 
203, 214–216
Supreme Court (USA)  264
sustained traction, extraction of 
leads  76
sutures, see also purse string suture
abscesses  138
cardioverter‐defibrillator 
placement  19
cephalic vein access  4–5, 6, 7
extraction of leads  74
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  14
lateral anterior axillary 
approach  67
for pain‐causing 
looseness  136–137
Swan‐Ganz catheters, coronary sinus 
venography  30, 31
swimming pool filters  200

Index
280
switching see mode switching
sympathetic tone, electrical storms 
and  192
syncope  196
lower rate programming for  148
t
tamponade, pericardial  35, 76, 85, 
143, 196
targeting methods, left ventricular 
leads  57–59, 222–224
TARGET study  222–223
Telectronics Accufix lead, 
extraction  69
telephones, see also trans‐telephonic 
monitoring
monitoring heart failure   
255–256
telescoping catheters, left ventricular 
leads  28
telescoping sheaths  75
temporary pacemakers  83
tensile response, leads  90
tension pneumothorax  127
text messaging, alerts  251
Thebesian valve  28, 29
thoracotomy  59
thorax impedance  257, 258, 259
3‐D imaging  130
thrombosis  143–144
device upgrade as risk  60
extraction of leads  77
through‐and‐through puncture  14
TightRail  74, 75
tip angle of catheter, venoplasty   
100, 102
tissue Doppler imaging  58
tongue, Needle’s Eye Snare  82
torque devices, for venoplasty   
99, 102
total atrial refractory period (TARP)   
177, 186
tracking
atrial fibrillation  148, 150
upper rates  150, 165, 166
traction  76, 90, 238
train pacing see burst pacing
transapical endocardial LV lead 
placement  59
transesophageal echocardiography
extraction of leads  76, 85
infections  139, 235
transfemoral approach see femoral 
approach
transmission devices, remote  
follow‐up  246
trans‐septal route, LV leads   
123–124, 125
trans‐telephonic monitoring
disadvantages  177, 241
reimbursement (USA)  252
transthoracic echocardiography, 
infections  235
tricuspid valve
adhesion to  76
avoidance  81, 85
crossing for RVS pacing  48
landmark for coronary sinus  29
triple‐site biventricular pacing  59
trochars, cardioverter‐defibrillator 
placement  19
troubleshooting
ICDs  195–205
pacemakers  173–186
tunneling
cardioverter‐defibrillator 
placement  19
identification on X‐rays  119, 
121, 126
internal jugular vein access  24–25
over clavicle  23, 25
T waves
inadvertent detection  184
oversensing  197–198, 216
T‐wave shock, VF induction  114
Twiddler’s syndrome  133, 135
two‐incision technique, ICD 
placement  20
two or more leads, see also dual 
chamber systems
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  14
TWOS see T waves, oversensing
two‐zone programming, 
cardioverter‐defibrillators  21
u
ultrasound
internal jugular vein access  24
tissue Doppler imaging  58
underreporting, ICD and lead 
failures  208
undersensing  204
dual chamber systems  171
ECG trace showing  169, 172, 181
situations mimicking  181–182
troubleshooting  181–183
VF  114
unipolar left ventricular leads  32
unipolar pacing
changing to  179
ECG trace  159, 160
unscrewing, extraction of 
leads  82–83
upgrade of device  60, 61
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  11, 12
internal jugular vein access  23, 26
X‐rays showing  127
upper limit of vulnerability, DFT   
115–116
upper sensor rates  149–150
v
vagus nerve, relation of internal 
jugular vein  91
vegetations  70, 234, 235
antibiotic therapy  237
device extraction and  237
vein cuff, tight  7
vein picks, cephalic vein  
access  5, 6
velocity time integral  226
venography, see also contrast media
azygos vein  40
computed tomography  55
coronary sinus  30–31
inner catheters  31, 32
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  12–14
hydration for  24
internal jugular vein access  23
left ventricular lead placement  56
for venoplasty  98
venoplasty  97–109
venotomy, cephalic vein  5, 6
venous entry approach, extraction of 
leads  91
ventricles, remodeling  221
ventricular fibrillation
detection by ICDs  195–196
duration, defibrillation threshold 
vs  204
induction testing  37, 114, 
115–116
on myocardium  113
sensing  114–115
ventricular pacing, see also 
biventricular pacing
ECG trace  160
modalities  174
oversensing  183

Index
281
ventricular safety pacing  165, 171
ventricular septal defect  140
ventricular tachycardia, see also 
anti‐tachy pacing therapy; 
electrical storms
atrial fibrillation vs  202
detection by ICDs  195–196
sinus tachycardia vs  202, 214
supraventricular tachycardia 
vs  202, 203, 214–216
ventriculo‐atrial conduction
on atrial pacing  153, 155
pacemaker syndrome  147
re‐entrant arrhythmias  167, 186
verapamil, on defibrillation 
threshold  112
verification method, DFT  115
very high frequency stimulation, VF 
induction  114
Visit ID field, billing (USA)  252
voice messages, alerts  251
voltages  173
vulnerable period, VF 
induction  115–116
VV intervals
optimization  60, 227–228, 229
R‐wave double counting  198
VVI(R) mode  163–164
w
warfarin, management  11, 72, 135
waveforms
defibrillation  111
high defibrillation threshold  116
Wenckebach AV sequence  165, 166
winging, balloons  101
wires, see also deflectable tip wires; 
glide wires
angiography wires, LV lead 
placement  32
extrathoracic subclavian vein 
access  13
for venoplasty  99, 100–101, 
102, 104
exchange  99, 105
withdrawal of therapies  263–268
wound vacuums  76
x
xiphoid process  19
X‐rays see chest X‐rays
y
Y adaptors, contrast injection 
systems  99, 102
z
zener diodes  186
zones (rate zones), VT 
detection  216

