
H U R R I C A N E S
A Reference Handbook
Second Edition

Upcoming Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
Contemporary 
World Issues
Series
Domestic Violence in America, Margi Laird McCue
Genetic Engineering, second edition, Harry LeVine, III
Global Warming, Gary C. Byner
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
International Environmental Disputes, Aaron Schwabach
Juvenile Justice, Donald J. Shoemaker and Timothy W. Wolfe
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
The United Nations System, Chadwick F. Alger
U.S. Hegemony, Raymond Tanter and Clare M. Lopez
U.S. Homeland Security, Howard Ball
Wetlands in America, William M. Lewis
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, shcoloars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly writ-
ten, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting point
for research by high school and college students, scholars, and
general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, activists,
and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, anno-
tated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an indes.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Isses series will ﬁnd
the information they need in order to have a better understanding
of the social, political environmental, and economic issues facing
the world today.


H U R R I C A N E S
A Reference Handbook
Second Edition
Patrick J. Fitzpatrick
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2006 by Patrick J. Fitzpatrick
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Fitzpatrick, Patrick J.
Hurricanes : a reference handbook / Patrick J. Fitzpatrick.—[2nd ed.].
p.
cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Rev. ed. of: Natural disasters, hurricanes. c1999.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-85109-647-7 (acid-free paper) — ISBN 1-85109-652-3 (eBook)
1. Hurricanes—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
I. Fitzpatrick, Patrick J.
Natural disasters, hurricanes.
II. Title.
III. Series.
QC944.F58 2006
551.55'2—dc22
2005025641
10
09
08
07
06
10
9
8
7 6
5
4
3
2
1
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Preface
xiii
Acknowledgments
xix
1
Background on Hurricanes, 1
Hurricane Formation and Life Cycle, 2
Genesis Stage, 3
Intensiﬁcation Stage and the  Importance of Water
Temperature, 8
Weakening Stage and 
Dissipation, 10
Extratropical Transition, 12
The Atlantic Hurricane Season, 
13
Naming Hurricanes, 14
Hurricane Structure, 15
Cloud Patterns, 15
The Eyewall and Eye, 18
Hurricane Size, 21
Lightning (Or the Lack Of), 22
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions: Hurricane
Destruction, Forecasting, Global Warming Controversy,
Mitigation, and Insurance Procedures, 25
Hurricane Destruction, 25
Forecasting Hurricanes, 35
Hurricane Opal: A Close Call, 38
Factors Controlling Hurricane Motion, 39
Computer Models, 40
Observation Platforms, 42
Summary of NHC Forecast Procedures, 44

viii
Contents
Society’s Preparation for Hurricanes: New Worries, 45
Forecasting Annual Hurricane Activity, 49
Is Global Warming Increasing the Number of 
Hurricanes?, 54
What Is the Greenhouse Effect?, 54
What Is Global Warming?, 56
Has the Number of Tropical Storms Increased, and 
Have Hurricanes Become Stronger Due to Potential 
Global Warming?, 56
Should Global Warming Occur in the Future, Will 
Hurricanes Increase in Number and Intensity?, 59
Attempts at Hurricane Modiﬁcation, 60
Mitigation and Insurance Procedures, 64
Home Protection, 64
The Roof, 65
Exterior Doors and Windows, 66
Storm Shutters, 67
Hurricane Preparedness Steps, 69
Before Hurricane Season, 69
When a Hurricane Watch or Warning Is Issued, 72
If Evacuation Is Necessary, 74
After the Hurricane Passes, 74
Make Plans for Your Pets, 77
Insurance Preparation, 78
3
Worldwide Perspective, 83
International Impact, Names, and Locations 
of Hurricanes, 83
Hurricane Categories around the World, 93
Monitoring, Forecasting, and Warning of Tropical Cyclones
Worldwide, 97
The World Weather Watch, 97
Climate Variations in Worldwide Tropical Cyclones 
and Seasonal Forecasting, 100
Worldwide Naming Conventions, 101
Storm Size Variations, 103
4
Chronology, 105
Chronology of Weather Advances Related to the 
Study and Forecasting of Hurricanes, 105
Chronology of Signiﬁcant Land-falling U.S.  
Hurricanes since 1900, 151

Contents
ix
ix
Chronology of Some Hurricanes That Impacted  
History, 187
5
Biographical Sketches, 193
6
Data, Opinions, and Letters, 231
Data, 232
Interesting Category 5 Facts, 243
World Records, 243
Deadliest U.S. Tropical Storms and Hurricanes 
during 1970–1998, 248
Opinions, 249
Excerpts from the 1996 IPCC Report on Whether 
Global Warming Is Inﬂuencing Global Hurricane 
Activity, 251
Excerpt from “Tropical Cyclones and Global 
Climate Change: A Post-IPCC Assessment,” 
by Henderson-Sellers et al. 1998, 252
Letters, 253
7
Directory of Organizations, 259
American Meteorological Society, 259
American Red Cross and the International 
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies, 262
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological 
Satellite Studies at the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, 265
Federal Emergency Management Agency, 266
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, 269
Hurricane Hunters, 270
Hurricane Research Division, 272
Joint Typhoon Warning Center, 275
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 276
National Centers for Environmental Prediction, 278
National Climatic Data Center, 279
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric 
Administration, 280
National Weather Association, 281
National Weather Service, 283
Naval Research Laboratory, 284
NOAA Aircraft Operations Center, 286

Tropical Prediction Center, 290
The Weather Channel, 292
World Meteorological Organization, 293
8
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources, 297
Young Adult (Elementary) Books on Hurricanes, 297
Mariner Books, 298
General Books on Hurricanes, 299
Popular Weather Magazines, 302
Hurricane Preparation, 303
Societal Impact of Hurricanes, 303
Technical, 304
General Meteorology Books and Textbooks, 306
Encyclopedias and Glossaries on Meteorology, 307
State Books, 308
Individual Hurricanes, 309
Historical Hurricane Tracks, 317
National Hurricane Center Annual Summaries, 318
Joint Typhoon Warning Center Annual Tropical 
Cyclone Summary, 321
Annual Summary of Australian Cyclones, 322
Annual Summary of Cyclones in the North Indian 
Ocean, 322
Annual Summary of Tropical Cyclones for All 
Ocean Basins, 322
Natural Disaster Survey Reports, 322
NCDC Storm Data Publication, 323
How to Order a U.S. Government Technical 
Report, 324
Nonprint Resources, 324
Hurricane Videos, 324
Software Tracking, 327
Emergency Preparedness, 327
Hurricane and Weather Internet Sites, 328
Epilogue, 335
Hurricane Katrina, 335
Glossary, 339
Acronyms, 339
Abbreviations for Cited Journals, 340
Terms, 340
x
Contents

Contents
xi
Conversion Tables, 350
Length, 350
Approximate Conversion of Latitude, Longitude, and 
Length (Use with Some Caution), 351
More Precise Distance Calculations between 
Two Latitude and Two Longitude Points, 351
Area, 352
Volume, 352
Time, 352
Speed, 353
Mass, 354
Pressure, 354
Converting °C to °F, 354
Converting °K to °C, 355
Converting One-Minute Maximum Sustained Winds  
Speed to Central Pressure in a Tropical Storm or  
Hurricane , 356
Computing Wind Gusts from Sustained Wind 
Speed, 357
Tracking Hurricanes and Understanding National 
Hurricane Center Forecasts, 363
Forecast Advisory, 364
Public Advisory, 366
Discussion, 368
Strike Probability, 370
Final Comments on National Hurricane Center 
Statements, 373
Aircraft Reconnaissance Information, 373
References, 379
Index, 403


xiii
Preface
T
he year 2004 was an active Atlantic hurricane season with ﬁf-
teen total storms—twelve affecting land somewhere—and per-
haps a harbinger of the next decade for the U.S. coastline. Five
hurricanes made landfall, the most hurricane landfalls since 1985.
Two major hurricanes (Charley and Jeanne) hit Florida for the ﬁrst
time since 1950, with a third hurricane (Frances) making landfall
in Florida and a fourth (Ivan) in Alabama just west of the Florida
Panhandle. Charley is the second costliest U.S. hurricane ($15 bil-
lion) on record, while Ivan is the third costliest ($14.2 billion).
Total U.S. damage by hurricanes and tropical storms in 2004 is
estimated at near $45 billion—the costliest hurricane season on
record for the United States. At press time for this book (August
2005), the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season looked prime for
another busy season, with an early-season record of ten total
storms thus far, two being major hurricanes and two making
landfall in the western Florida panhandle again!
As discussed in this book, hurricane activity tends to follow
twenty- to thirty-year cycles, so it is anticipated that future hurri-
cane seasons could be just as costly or worse. Noted hurricane
expert Dr. Bill Gray has warned for twenty years that Florida and
other developed coastal communities, which have experienced
decadesof relatively low major hurricane impact, could be in for a
rude awakening. In a recent article, Gray writes:
Florida’s four destructive hurricanes fortunately came
ashore along coastlines that were not very densely
populated. Pensacola, FL was the largest Florida com-
munity feeling the direct brunt of one of these four

xiv
Preface
damaging hurricanes. The coastal and inland areas
around Punta Gorda-Port Charlotte (where Charley
came ashore), and Stuart (where Frances and Jeanne
came ashore) do not have large coastal populations.
The three major Florida coastal population concentra-
tions from Tarpon Springs to Sarasota, West Palm
Beach to South Miami, and Daytona Beach to Mel-
bourne (and inland to Orlando) were all removed from
the direct brunt of these four hurricanes. Economic loss
many times greater could have occurred if the center of
any one of these four hurricanes had come into one of
these more concentrated Florida population areas. For
instance, it has been estimated that if Hurricane
Andrew (1992) had come inland just 15–20 miles north
of its actual landfall near Homestead that it would
have caused two to three times the $40 billion dollars
(adjusted to 2004 dollars) in property loss that
resulted. . . .
It is important that Floridians view this terribly
damaging landfall season from a longer period per-
spective. Overall Florida has been extremely fortunate
in recent years. Between 1966–2003 (38 years) the
Florida Peninsula has experienced the landfall of only
one major hurricane (Andrew, 1992). But in this long
major hurricane lull period since the mid-1960s,
Florida’s population and coastal development has
exploded. Few of the new Floridians have experienced
a major hurricane hit. Most Floridians were not pre-
pared for this unusual onslaught of four devastating
storms in such a short period of time. But old-timers
who lived in Florida in the 1930s through the 1950s
well remember that Florida used to be hit by many
hurricanes. Between 1928–1965 (41 years) the Florida
Peninsula experienced 14 major (Cat. 3-4-5) hurricane
landfalls (1 per 3 years).
For many years we have been discussing how lucky
Florida had been with regards to its few recent land-
falling major hurricanes. We said it was inevitable that
this period of few major hurricane strikes would end
and that the long period climatology would eventually
reassert itself. There was no way, however, of knowing

Preface
xv
that the law of averages would try to catch up to its
deﬁcit so rapidly in one year! (Gray and Klotzbach 2004)
The possible return of major hurricane landfalls provides
additional dilemmas besides their ﬁnancial impact. Storms such as
Ivan and Frances placed substantial strains on evacuation proce-
dures, exposing serious ﬂaws in communication and trafﬁc opera-
tions. During Hurricane Ivan, Alabama residents complained of a
lack of shelters and a delayed transition of converting both lanes of
I-65 to northbound trafﬁc. In Louisiana, evacuating New Orleans
residents sat in a clogged interstate system; it took twelve hours or
more to reach Baton Rouge, normally a one-hour trip!
This book, Hurricanes: A Reference Handbook, discusses such
issues and is the follow-up edition to Natural Disasters: Hurricanes,
published in 1999. As in the ﬁrst edition, the purpose of this book
is to provide background information on issues, people, organiza-
tions, statistics, and publications related to hurricanes and to pro-
vide guidance on where additional information can be obtained
about a speciﬁc topic. Much of the book has been meticulously
referenced so that the reader can explore these publications if he
or she wishes. Most material is based on peer-review literature
and has been updated.
The book follows the ABC-CLIO convention of background
and history (chapter 1); problems, controversies, and solutions
(chapter 2); worldwide perspective (chapter 3); chronology (chap-
ter 4); biographical sketches (chapter 5); facts and data (chapter 6);
organizations (chapter 7); and print/nonprint resources (chapter
8). However, since meteorology and hurricanes are ultimately a
scientiﬁc topic with societal impacts, some liberties have also been
used by the author. For example, “solutions” in the context of hur-
ricanes are interpreted as weather forecasting and mitigation
strategies, and the book is written in a readable but technical over-
tone in some parts.
Chapter 1 from the ﬁrst book has been divided and ex-
panded into chapters 1 and 2 in the second edition. These chap-
ters focus mostly on the Atlantic Ocean and therefore contain a
United States perspective. Chapter 1 describes hurricane forma-
tion, their life cycle, storm structure, and naming procedures.
Chapter 2 is broader in scope, discussing their destructive behav-
ior, forecasting procedures, societal issues, and annual variation
in hurricane activity. The controversial topics of potential global

warming issues and weather modiﬁcation attempts are ad-
dressed. Chapter 2 then deviates to hurricane preparation, insur-
ance, and mitigation procedures.
Chapter 3 is a new chapter discussing hurricanes from a
global perspective. It describes international naming and classiﬁ-
cation procedures, global activity, worldwide impact, the World
Meteorological Organization’s World Weather Watch, and weather
features unique to the western Paciﬁc Ocean. A Safﬁr-Simpson
Hurricane Scale, modiﬁed for the tropical Paciﬁc Ocean, is also
introduced.
Chapter 4 provides a chronology of forecast and scientiﬁc
advances with regard to hurricanes. Chapter 4 also provides a
descriptive timetable of signiﬁcant U.S. land-falling hurricanes
during the twentieth century as well as a listing of hurricanes that
have changed history. Comments received by the author from the
ﬁrst edition indicate that this was one of the most popular chap-
ters, providing a unique niche on hurricane history. As such, a
considerable amount of effort went into this chapter to expand it
and add new, interesting material on individual hurricanes and
detailed references. For example, statistics on Hurricane Camille
(1969) have been updated and myths exposed about the so-called
hurricane party.
Chapter 5 contains biographies of important hurricane sci-
entists and forecasters. Many are colorful people and should make
for enjoyable reading. Chapter 6 contains tabular data, opinions
on hurricane issues, and interesting letters from hurricane sur-
vivors. Chapter 7 describes relevant organizations involved in
hurricane forecasting, research, and mitigation. Chapter 8 con-
tains a comprehensive description of publications, electronic,
videos, and websites related to hurricanes. Separate sections in
the back of the book include acronyms, a glossary, conversion fac-
tors, a description of National Hurricane Center forecasts, the
Beaufort scale, and directions on how to interpret reconnaissance
plane measurements.
The book is not meant to be read from front to back. While
chapters 1, 2, and 3 are loosely connected, the real intention is for
each chapter to be a unique source of information. This book is a
useful reference for students, the general public, emergency man-
agers, public ofﬁcials, journalists, and meteorologists. Anyone in
a weather-sensitive ﬁeld on the ocean will also ﬁnd this book
practical.
xvi
Preface

Preface
xvii
Page space limitations, the transient nature of referenced
websites, and new weather information provided considerable
challenges in the preparation and freshness of this book. The
author has developed a website to tackle these dilemmas, located
at http://www.drﬁtz.net, that will provide additional informa-
tion not included in this book. Stale links will be updated period-
ically on this website as well. Finally, this website will serve as an
authoritative source for information during hurricane season.
Readers are also encouraged to email the author on questions
regarding these powerful and fascinating storms.

Dedicated to my beautiful daughters Megan and Katie. 
No matter what the weather, you always bring sunshine.

xix
Acknowledgments
T
his book could not have been completed without the assis-
tance and patience of many people. First of all, thanks to my
co-workers at Mississippi State University’s GeoResources
Institute, and to my daughters, parents, and sister for their under-
standing during this time-consuming but rewarding endeavor. I
also thank Lisa Bothman for her kindness and sweet nature dur-
ing the writing process.
I am indebted to Dr. Chris Landsea for recommending me to
ABC-CLIO as an author. Thanks to all the contributors and aides to
the previous edition, and to the NOAA library in Silver Spring,
Maryland, for new material acquired during my visit there for this
edition.
I gratefully acknowledge Dr. Bill Gray for opening many
opportunities involving the study of hurricanes while I was a
graduate student at Colorado State University, and to Texas A&M
University for developing my weather aptitude in the early years
of college. 
This publication was made possible through support pro-
vided by NASA through the University of Mississippi’s Enterprise
for Innovative Geospatial Solutions under the terms of Agreement
No. NAG13–03012. NASA also supported this work with Grant
NCC13–99001.The opinions expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of NASA, the Uni-
versity of Mississippi, or Mississippi State University.


1
1
Background 
on Hurricanes
T
he term hurricane—derived from the Caribbean Indian word
harakan, meaning “evil spirit and big wind”—is a large rotat-
ing system of oceanic tropical origin with sustained surface
winds of at least 74 mph somewhere in the storm. Due to the
earth’s rotation, these storms spin counterclockwise in the North-
ern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere. Both
types of hemispheric spins are referred to as cyclonic rotation,
because the sense of spin about a local vertical axis is the same as
the earth’s rotation when viewed from above. These storms occur
worldwide and are called different names in different locations
(see chapter 3 for details). In deference to U.S. readers, and for
consistency, storms in this 74-mph or faster category will be called
hurricanes in this book except in chapter 3.
Wind and rain, as experienced by most people worldwide,
typically occur along the boundary of air masses with different
temperature and moisture properties—a boundary known as a
front. Along a front, warmer air is forced to rise over colder air, the
ascending air condenses into clouds, and under favorable condi-
tions the cloud droplets grow large enough so that gravity over-
comes the ascending air and they fall as rain. These contrasting air
masses also result in winds up to 25 mph. Many other situations
can also cause inclement weather associated with local topograph-
ical conditions or wind patterns several miles or more above the
ground. One unique aspect of hurricanes is that they form over the

ocean in the tropics, typically removed from contrasting air
masses. It is for this reason that hurricanes are somewhat rare,
requiring a conﬂuence of special conditions to form.
A hurricane does not form instantaneously but reaches this
status in an incremental process. Initially, such a system begins as
a tropical disturbance when a mass of organized, oceanic thunder-
storms, not associated with a front, persists for 24 hours (NHC
2005). Sometimes partial rotation is observed, but this is not
required for a system to be designated a tropical disturbance. The
tropical disturbance becomes classiﬁed as a tropical depression
when a closed circulation is ﬁrst observed and sustained winds
are less than 39 mph everywhere in the storm. When these sus-
tained winds increase to 39 mph somewhere in the storm, it is
then classiﬁed as a tropical storm and given a name.
It is important to note that these categories are deﬁned by
sustained winds, not instantaneous winds. Sustained winds are the
average speed over a period of time at 33 feet above the ground.
In the Atlantic, this averaging is performed over a 1-minute
period (Holland 1993). The actual wind will be faster or slower
than the sustained wind at any instantaneous period of time. For
example, a hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 90 mph
will actually contain gusts of 100 mph or more. Also, one should
note that these categories are deﬁned by maximum winds some-
where in the storm, almost always near the center, and that winds
may be slower in other parts of the storm. For example, maximum
sustained winds of 90 mph may only be concentrated in the
northeast section near the hurricane center, with the southwest
quadrant containing weaker winds.
Hurricane Formation and Life Cycle
Hurricane formation occurs in two distinct phases. The ﬁrst phase
is called the genesis stage and includes tropical disturbances and
tropical depressions. The second phase includes the tropical
storms and hurricanes and is called the intensiﬁcation stage. These
phases are separated because most disturbances and a few
depressions never reach tropical storm intensity and dissipate.
Eventually all storms will weaken in the weakening stage. Most dis-
sipate in this stage. However, a decaying hurricane can evolve
into a nontropical storm and possibly even reintensify in the extra-
tropical stage.
2
Background on Hurricanes

Background on Hurricanes
3
Genesis Stage
Tropical disturbances form in regions where there is a net inﬂow
of air at the surface, known as convergence. When convergence
occurs at the surface, it must ascend to balance this accumulation
of air. As air rises, it will saturate and form the base of a cloud.
Once the air is saturated, ascent may be enhanced where the
atmosphere is in a state of static instability. In a statically unstable
atmosphere, saturated air forced upward by convergence is less
dense than surrounding unsaturated air. As a result, it accelerates
upward because the air is buoyant relative to its environment,
forming towering puffy clouds. The concepts of cloud formation
and atmospheric instability are beyond the scope of this book, and
the reader is referred to other meteorology books on the subject
(Ahrens 1994; Nese and Grenci 1998; Danielson, Levin, and
Abrams 1998).
While convergence in a statically unstable atmosphere is a
ﬁrst criterion, thunderstorm formation is common in the tropics,
and much of the warm, humid tropics are already in a state of
static instability. Therefore, these two conditions, while necessary,
are only a prerequisite. Several conditions must simultaneously
exist for a tropical disturbance to develop complete rotation and
become a tropical depression. First, the disturbance must be in a
trough, deﬁned as an elongated area of relatively low atmospheric
pressure. Atmospheric pressure is the weight of a column of air on
a given area of earth, typically 1 meter squared or 1 centimeter
squared. The most frequent unit of pressure is the millibar, or mb,
although it is also popularly measured as the height of a column
of mercury supported by the atmosphere’s weight. Troughs fall in
four general categories: equatorial troughs, monsoon troughs,
frontal troughs, and surface troughs.
For genesis to occur, troughs must contain a weak, partial
cyclonic rotation. However, all troughs at least 5 degrees from the
equator will obtain a partial cyclonic spin due to the Coriolis force.
The Coriolis force results from an apparent twisting of the north-
south-east-west coordinate system as the earth spins. If the earth
was not rotating, air moving north, south, east, or west would
continue in those directions unchanged (known as an inertial, or
absolute, coordinate system). However, since the earth is rotating,
air motion experiences an apparent deﬂection since the coordinate
system is changing relative to the earth (known as a noninertial, or
relative, coordinate system). This effect becomes increasingly

inﬂuential away from the equator where the earth’s curvature
increases. To someone living on earth, it appears that the wind is
deﬂected to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left
in the Southern Hemisphere. This is important, because without
the Coriolis force, areas of low pressure such as a trough would
“ﬁll up” as air ﬂows toward it in an attempt to compensate for air
pressure differences. Instead, air is deﬂected around the trough by
the Coriolis force, and a balance develops between the pressure
differences and the Coriolis force, maintaining the trough’s exis-
tence. The result is that troughs away from the equator will have
a partial cyclonic spin due to the Coriolis force. This also explains
why hurricanes do not form on or near the equator.
Troughs do occur near the equator. In some places around
the earth, the warmest oceanic regions straddle the equator. As a
result, air converges near the equator where persistent Southern
Hemisphere and Northern Hemisphere winds (called trade
winds) meet, often resulting in towering thunderstorms—a
region known as an equatorial trough (also called the InterTropical
Convergence Zone, [ITCZ]). However, since the Coriolis force is too
weak, the equatorial trough does not have any cyclonic rotation.
Therefore, genesis does not occur in the equatorial trough even
though thunderstorm activity is rampant.
In situations where air temperature increases away from the
equator, monsoon troughs occur. In monsoon troughs, Southern
Hemisphere and Northern Hemisphere air converges at 10–20
degrees latitude, and the Coriolis force induces the partial
cyclonic spin necessary for genesis. Some monsoon troughs occur
where a large land mass exists poleward of an ocean basin; they
exist because the land is warmer than the ocean during the warm
months. Examples include the Indian monsoon, the Australian
monsoon, and the eastern Paciﬁc monsoon. However, they can
also occur without any land inﬂuence where water is warmer
away from the equator, such as in the western North Paciﬁc
Ocean. Likewise, monsoon troughs can form entirely over land
masses without the nearby presence of water. The most notable
example is North Africa’s desert, where the Sahara results in con-
siderably warmer temperatures than Central Africa during the
summer.
The vast majority of genesis cases are associated with the
monsoon trough. However, the dynamics can be complex and are
still not well understood. Some disturbances undergo the transi-
4
Background on Hurricanes

tion to tropical depression directly inside monsoon troughs. How-
ever, others experience this transition as tropical waves (called east-
erly waves in the United States) that form when a monsoon trough
“breaks down” into a cyclonic wavelike pattern in the wind ﬁeld
and travels westward away from the monsoon trough. This
breakdown is associated with another kind of instability called
dynamic instability, which occurs under certain ﬂow conﬁgura-
tions and/or temperature patterns. This instability results
because a perturbation in the monsoon trough acquires kinetic
energy (the energy of motion) from another source and grows with
time. This source may be from the kinetic energy of the large-scale
wind ﬂow or from potential energy (stored energy) due to certain
temperature patterns. Often, both sources may be available.
For example, the African monsoon is in the vicinity of a
strong easterly wind. This easterly wind can accumulate too
much kinetic energy, break down, and transfer its energy into
wave formation; the waves then propagate downstream in the
easterly current. As the waves move westward, they enter a
region where potential energy is available due to the unique tem-
perature pattern in North Africa. The desert air north of the wave
is warmer than in Central Africa. The warm air ascends as it ﬂows
toward the western edge of the wave, while the cooler southern
air sinks on the eastern edge. This lowers the wave’s center of
mass, releasing stored energy that increases the wave’s rotation.
In this example, the dynamic instability occurs by the transferring
of kinetic energy from the easterly wind into wave growth and the
conversion of potential energy (from the temperature ﬁeld) into
kinetic energy for wave growth. While one wave-growth mecha-
nism may dominate, the processes are not always exclusive but
may occur simultaneously. Likewise, one process may initiate the
growth of a small perturbation in the monsoon trough, and the
other may help it amplify afterward, as is the case over Africa.
About 60 percent of the U.S. hurricanes originate from trop-
ical waves that break off from the African monsoon trough and
propagate into the Atlantic! Tropical waves are fairly persistent
features and can propagate long distances. Some eastern Paciﬁc
hurricanes can even be linked to easterly waves that originated in
Africa! Dynamic instability can also be initiated in monsoon
troughs when very strong thunderstorm activity creates the nec-
essary potential energy conditions. Tropical waves are not unique
to the African monsoon, though, and form in many other regions
Background on Hurricanes
5

in the Atlantic such as the Caribbean Sea (Molinari et al. 1997) as
well as in other ocean basins when dynamic instability is present.
The remaining genesis cases are associated with frontal
troughs and surface troughs away from the equator. A frontal
trough is the remnant of a front that has lost its contrasting tem-
perature characteristic and entered the tropics. A surface trough
encompasses all other kinds of troughs, such as those associated
with a region of moisture contrast or broad thunderstorm com-
plexes. Some surface troughs are even triggered by weather fea-
tures 40,000 feet aloft.
In summary, one prerequisite for genesis is a trough at least 5
degrees from the equator where the Coriolis force can induce a partial
cyclonic rotation, and these troughs fall into three categories: a monsoon
trough, frontal trough, and surface trough. Tropical (easterly) waves
sometimes break off from monsoon troughs due to dynamic instability
and are also a source of genesis. The role of dynamic instability for
genesis within troughs is still unclear but appears to play a major
role in some cases. In the Atlantic about ﬁfty-ﬁve to seventy-ﬁve
tropical waves are observed annually, but only 10–25 percent of
these develop into a tropical depression or beyond. Only a small
percentage of frontal troughs and surface troughs also become
tropical depressions or stronger. A trough 5 degrees or more from
the equator is necessary for convergence, partial cyclonic rotation,
and sometimes dynamic instability, but clearly genesis requires
additional conditions.
The second condition required for genesis is a water temperature of
at least 80°F. Heat transferred from the ocean to the air generates
and sustains static instability (and therefore thunderstorms) in the
disturbance. The third genesis condition is weak vertical wind shear,
deﬁned as the difference between wind speed and direction at
40,000 feet aloft and the surface. In other words, for genesis to
occur the wind must be roughly the same speed and blowing
from the same direction at all height levels in the atmosphere.
This allows thunderstorms and the wind structure to grow unim-
peded (more detail is presented in the intensiﬁcation section).
The three conditions (warm water, surface trough, and weak
vertical wind shear) are apparently necessary but insufﬁcient con-
ditions to develop complete rotation (and, by deﬁnition, a tropical
depression). In the Atlantic, even when all these conditions appear
favorable, sometimes genesis does not occur, and predicting when
a tropical depression will form remains a vexing forecast problem.
6
Background on Hurricanes

There is much speculation on what the “missing link” (or links)
might be. Studies have shown that subsidence, which suppresses
cloud formation by: (1) drying the atmosphere (2) impeding
ascending air; and (3) evaporating cloud droplets, stiﬂes genesis
(Gray 1968; DeMaria, Knaff, and Connell 2001). Indeed, a general
rule of thumb used by forecasters is that genesis does not occur
until surface pressure falls below 1010 mb in the Atlantic; pressure
above this indicates subsidence. Dust storms accompany the
African monsoon and propagate far into the Atlantic, and some
forecasters speculate that their accompanying dust, dry air, and
wind shear impede genesis (Dunion and Velden 2002; Dunion and
Velden 2004). A few researchers theorize that some tropical waves
need an additional “kick” by propagating into another dynami-
cally unstable region (Molinari, Moore, and Idone 1997), another
monsoon trough (Holland 1995), or a region of enhanced conver-
gence (Ritchie and Holland 1999) for the additional growth neces-
sary to reach tropical depression stage. In some occasions, wind
surges from the Southern Hemisphere into a disturbance have
been correlated to genesis, perhaps creating these favorable condi-
tions (Love 1985; Zehr 1992; Tomas and Webster 1997).
One interesting observation is that genesis tends to be clus-
tered with time in global basins (Gray 1979). Sometimes, genesis
may not occur for several weeks, then suddenly several tropical
storms and hurricanes form. Research shows that this clustering
is partially due to a sinking/ascending undulation that travels
eastward from India to North America and is called the Madden-
Julian Oscillation. This oscillation, with a repeat time of thirty to
sixty days, tends to favor genesis when the ascending branch
occurs in the presence of a monsoon trough or tropical wave. The
ascending branch is favorable for cloud growth in disturbances
and increasing the number of disturbances, while the descending
branch suppresses clouds. This phenomenon forms in the near-
equatorial Indian Ocean and propagates eastward. Its inﬂuence is
strongest in the Indian Ocean and western Paciﬁc Ocean, becom-
ing less signiﬁcant as it propagates eastward; it also has less
impact away from the equator. Nevertheless, research shows that
it does impact genesis in the eastern Paciﬁc (Maloney and Hart-
mann 2000a), the Atlantic (Maloney and Hartmann 2000b), and
other ocean basins such as Australia (Hall, Matthews, and Karoly
2001). So, tropical genesis is more likely in the ﬁfteen- to thirty-
day favorable phase of the Madden-Julian Oscillation. However,
Background on Hurricanes
7

most clustering in the Atlantic is likely due to the juxtaposition of
favorable conditions, with the Madden-Julian Oscillation playing
a minor role.
Once a tropical depression forms, the favorable conditions
of wind shear, warm water, and complete cyclonic rotation pro-
vide the “ignition” process for further development. The ascend-
ing air in the depression stimulates low-level inﬂow toward the
center. This inﬂow slowly increases the cyclonic circulation of the
disturbance. The system starts to develop a warm-core tempera-
ture pattern aloft, which lowers surface pressure. As long as the
depression remains over warm water in a low vertical wind shear
environment and maintains thunderstorm activity near the cen-
ter, the system will likely develop. Weak wind shear is a crucial
factor, because it allows vertical orientation of the thunderstorms,
preserves the structure of the system, and maintains the low-level
inﬂow. Should the disturbance move into an environment where
wind speed increases dramatically with height (or wind direction
changes dramatically with height), the thunderstorms tilt down-
wind and rotate cyclonically to the left (Corbosiero and Molinari
2002; Black et al. 2002), and the warm core aloft is eroded (Knaff et
al. 2004). As a result, strong wind shear disrupts the vertical struc-
ture of the system, and inﬂow weakens. Likewise, dry air intru-
sion, movement over colder water, or movement over land is
detrimental. Should adverse conditions occur, the depression
weakens and eventually dissipates.
Typically, the genesis time frame of both disturbance and
depression lasts for several days or longer. However, under ideal
conditions, a disturbance or depression can evolve much quicker.
When the cyclonic sustained winds increase to 39 mph some-
where in the depression, the system is upgraded to a tropical
storm. At this point, the intensiﬁcation stage begins.
Intensiﬁcation Stage and the Importance 
of Water Temperature
For tropical storm intensiﬁcation into a hurricane, the same con-
ditions that allowed its initial development (warm water, moist
air, and weak wind shear) must continue. When favorable envi-
ronmental factors persist, the rate of development increases com-
pared to the genesis stage. This is because as the wind increases,
more moisture is transferred from the ocean to the air, and when
8
Background on Hurricanes

this moisture changes from a gas to a liquid stage during cloud
formation, latent heat associated with this phase change is re-
leased into the vortex. Furthermore, because the system has com-
plete rotation, a larger percentage of this latent heat is retained in
the storm (unlike in a nonrotating thunderstorm, in which all the
latent heat released by the clouds just propagates away). The col-
umn of air begins to warm, which lowers surface pressure. More
air will ﬂow toward the lower surface pressure, trying to redis-
tribute the atmosphere’s weight, resulting in faster winds. The
faster cyclonic winds also enhance convergence. Both factors
increase thunderstorm production and low-level inﬂow. A feed-
back mechanism now occurs in which faster cyclonic winds breed
more potent thunderstorms, dropping central surface pressure
more and creating stronger inﬂow, which breeds faster cyclonic
winds, etc. Under favorable environmental conditions, a tropical
storm can “spin up” rather quickly, with winds increasing as
much as 50 mph or more in a day. When sustained winds reach 74
mph somewhere in the storm, it is classiﬁed as a hurricane.
Water temperature is unquestionably linked to the develop-
ment of these storms. Hurricanes rarely form over water colder
than 80°F (although exceptions do occur, for reasons discussed in
chapter 3). They also weaken dramatically if a mature system
moves over water colder than 80°F or if they make landfall, since
their heat and moisture source has been removed. For a hurricane
to maintain thunderstorms through static instability, warm, moist
surface air is required near the low-pressure center. This warmth
is provided by sensible heat transfer from warm ocean water,
because otherwise air ﬂowing toward lower pressure would
expand and cool. (To convince yourself of this, let air out of a tire
and feel how cool it is. When one lets air out of a high-pressure
tire, the air expands as it enters the lower pressure environment
and cools. This cooling occurs because the motion of gas mole-
cules slows down as the air expands, and temperature is essen-
tially a measurement of molecular motion). In other words,
sensible heat ﬂux from the warm water compensates for expan-
sional cooling due to lower pressure, maintaining warm surface
air near the storm center required to maintain the thunderstorms.
This sensible heat ﬂux at the surface also increases with wind
speed, providing another positive feedback.
The warmer the water, the greater are the chances for gene-
sis, the faster is the rate of development, and the stronger these
Background on Hurricanes
9

storms can become. Under conditions of prolonged weak wind
shear and water temperature greater than 85°F, sustained winds
may reach almost 200 mph. Table 1.1 shows the potential intensity
that a tropical storm or hurricane can achieve for a given water
temperature (DeMaria and Kaplan 1994).
Weakening Stage and Dissipation
Fortunately, due to some inhibiting factor, few hurricanes reach
their maximum potential. Conditions that stop intensiﬁcation
include wind shear, landfall, dry air intrusion, storm-induced
ocean cooling by mixing or upwelling colder water beneath the
warm surface water, and movement over colder water. Tempo-
rary occurrence of any (or a combination) of these inﬂuences will
stall development or cause weakening.
10
Background on Hurricanes
TABLE 1.1
Potential intensity (as measured by sustained winds in mph) of a mature hurricane
for a given water temperature (in °F). 
Potential sustained winds for a mature tropical 
storm or hurricane once it is past
Water temperature (°F)
the genesis stage (in mph)
70
101
71
104
72
107
73
110
74
114
75
118
76
122
77
127
78
132
79
138
80
145
81
152
82
160
83
169
84
178
85
189
86
201
This table is not valid for the genesis stage since hurricanes do not form over water colder than
80°F. However, it is valid for a mature hurricane moving over colder water. Adapted from
DeMaria and Kaplan (1994).

When hurricanes signiﬁcantly weaken over warm water,
there are two possible culprits. The primary cause is usually ver-
tical wind shear. Wind shear is the result of environmental wind
direction changing with height, the environmental wind increas-
ing by 20 mph or more with height, or a combination of both.
Wind shear disrupts the vertical structure of the hurricane. Large
hurricanes can withstand wind shear better than small hurricanes
(Wong and Chan 2004), making prediction of the impact of wind
shear on hurricanes sometimes difﬁcult. The other weakening fac-
tor is sometimes dry air intrusion into the hurricane’s inner core,
which disrupts its inner-core thunderstorms. 
Even when no inhibiting factors are evident over warm
water, hurricanes that reach their potential intensity rarely main-
tain their intensity for any appreciable period. Apparently, the
internal physics of a hurricane preclude a steady-state storm.
Instead, strong wind conditions promote interior adjustments
near the storm’s center. These inner processes are discussed in the
“Hurricane Structure” section later in this chapter.
Persistent occurrence of any or several inhibiting factors will
cause disintegration of the hurricane. Of these possibilities, most
dissipating cases occur due to landfall or movement over colder
water. When a hurricane moves over cold water, expansional cool-
ing dominates that stabilizes the atmosphere, disintegrates the
thunderstorms, and weakens the hurricane. In addition, while
warm water is signiﬁcant, it is just as important that the warm
water be at least 100 feet deep. The upper ocean layer under a 
hurricane can cool due to enhanced air-sea exchanges, mixing 
of the layer by wind forcing, and mixing by ocean currents (Shay
et al. 1998). A thick layer of warm water is required to reduce or
offset these effects. In general, mixing results in 1–3°F cooling of
the ocean under a hurricane (Cione and Uhlhorn 2003). In addi-
tion, a sluggish process occurs in slow-moving hurricanes where
ocean water is transported away from the storm’s center; this is
known as upwelling (Black 1983). Water from below is required to
replenish the lost surface water. If the warm ocean layer is too thin,
cold water from below the layer will be upwelled to the surface,
cutting off the storm’s warm-water energy supply and weakening
the storm. In fact, sometimes a hurricane will kill itself when it
becomes stationary for an extended period of time. Should a hur-
ricane stop moving for several days, it can mix and upwell the
ocean signiﬁcantly, replacing all the warm water with cold water,
Background on Hurricanes
11

and the hurricane will dissipate. An example is Hurricane Rox-
anne in 1995 when it became stationary in the Bay of Campeche.
When a hurricane moves over land, the weakening occurs
even faster because not only has the surface heat ﬂux been lost but
also the moisture source for cloud formation. Since land has more
friction than water, this also weakens land-falling hurricanes, but
it’s a minimal inﬂuence compared to the loss of sensible heat and
moisture ﬂux. As a result, hurricanes making landfall experience
rapid decay. If the storm remains over land, its maximum sus-
tained winds will decrease on average 45 mph per day, and the
rate of dissipation is even faster for initially strong storms (Kaplan
and DeMaria 1995; Emanuel 2000). Thirty-six hours after landfall,
inland storms rarely contain winds above tropical depression
strength.
Extratropical Transition
Often, public interest in a hurricane diminishes when a hurricane
moves to higher latitudes or makes landfall, weakens, and begins
to lose its tropical characteristics. However, a decaying storm can
evolve into a fast-moving and occasionally rapidly developing
extratropical cyclone that produces intense rainfall, very large
waves, and even hurricane-force winds. Such a situation poses a
signiﬁcant risk to midlatitude locations during the summer and
fall, demanding public attention.
Extratropical transition is a gradual process whereby a hur-
ricane moves northward into a nontropical environment with sig-
niﬁcant temperature and moisture contrasts, wind shear, and
colder water temperature. As discussed above, these situations
are destructive to tropical systems, and about half completely
decay. However, extratropical low-pressure systems (the ones
with cold fronts and warm fronts that affect the U.S. year-round)
thrive in such an environment, and the remaining 50 percent 
of weakening hurricanes experience an extratropical transition
(Hart and Evans 2001). In particular, if the hurricane’s remnants
interact with an upper-level trough, a preexisting extratropical
cyclone, or a region of large temperature contrasts, it may trans-
form itself into an extratropical system.
During extratropical transformation, the inner core of the
hurricane loses its symmetric cloud appearance with diminishing
thunderstorm activity. The nearly axisymmetric wind and rain
distributions evolve into broad asymmetric patterns that expand
12
Background on Hurricanes

greatly in area (Jones et al. 2003). A cold front to the south and a
warm front to the east form on the system, resembling a comma-
shaped cloud pattern. The storm motion increases dramatically,
with translation speeds greater than 45 mph, further contributing
to the asymmetric structure of the storm, expanding the area of
gale-force winds, and posing serious forecast difﬁculties. If the
storm is over the ocean, the fast motion and expanded winds gen-
erate large waves and swell. The extratropical cyclone itself may
gradually decay, but about half reintensify, with a few experienc-
ing rapid development with winds up to hurricane strength (Hart
and Evans 2001). In either situation (decay or reintensiﬁcation),
substantial rain can occur, resulting in severe ﬂooding. During
extratropical transition, precipitation expands poleward of the
storm center, with rainfall maximums on the left of the storm
track (Jones et al. 2003).
The Atlantic Hurricane Season
Hurricane season is limited to the warm seasons. In the Atlantic,
the ofﬁcial hurricane season begins June 1 and ends November 30,
although activity has been observed outside this time frame on
rare occasions. However, hurricanes are most numerous and
strongest in late summer and early fall. This is because the favor-
able conditions—deep warm water, moist air, weak wind shear,
and cyclonic disturbances—are optimum in late summer. In par-
ticular, water’s temperature peaks in late summer. This seems
paradoxical since the longest day is in June. However, days are
still longer than nights until fall; therefore, the water is still accu-
mulating heat into late summer. The monsoon troughs are most
active in late summer as well, and large-scale circulation patterns
favor weak wind shear in late summer. Exceptions to this late-
summer/early-fall peak in hurricane activity occur in certain
parts of the world such as India (see chapter 3). In addition, while
activity does peak in late summer, the western North Paciﬁc hur-
ricane season lasts all year.
Genesis locations also vary during the hurricane season
(Neumann et al. 1999). For example, genesis patterns in the
Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico can be categorized into three time
periods: early season (June 1–July 15), midseason (July 16–
September 20), and late season (September 21–November 30).
Early-season storms mostly originate in the western Caribbean
Background on Hurricanes
13

Sea and the Gulf of Mexico. Midseason storms form in the main
basin of the tropical Atlantic Ocean. Genesis still occurs in the
Gulf of Mexico, but not in the majority of cases, and is virtually
nonexistent in the Caribbean Sea. Genesis in the tropical Atlantic
Ocean peaks in the midseason (during the so-called Cape Verde
season) because water temperatures are warm enough to immedi-
ately impact tropical waves propagating off the African continent.
The late season witnesses a more gradual change in which gene-
sis in the main basin of the tropical Atlantic Ocean quickly
declines and the Gulf of Mexico slowly declines; however, the
Caribbean Sea experiences a revival of storm formation. The mid-
summer genesis lull in the Caribbean Sea is possibly due to local
enhancement of trade winds mixing the ocean in that area (Inoue,
Handoh, and Bigg 2002) or because conditions favorable for
dynamic instability only occur in the early season and late season
(Molinari et al. 1997).
Naming Hurricanes
When a tropical depression is upgraded to a tropical storm, it is
assigned a name. Before this practice was started, tropical storms
and hurricanes were identiﬁed in many confounding ways. Some
legendary storms have been inconsistently named for the holiday
they occurred on (Labor Day Hurricane of 1935), the nearest
saint’s day (Hurricane Santa Anna of 1825), the area of landfall
(Galveston Hurricane of 1900), or even for a ship (Racer’s Storm
in 1837). However, most storms before the 1940s never received
any kind of designation.
During the early 1940s, storm identiﬁcation remained per-
plexing. At ﬁrst, forecasters used cumbersome latitude-longitude
identiﬁcations. This naming convention was too long and was
confusing when multiple storms were present in the same ocean
basin. Right before World War II, this procedure was changed to a
letter designation (e.g., A-1943).
The naming of hurricanes was pioneered by the Australian
forecaster Clement Wragge (Holland 1993), who used letters of
the Greek alphabet, characters from Greek and Roman mythol-
ogy, and, amusingly, the names of politicians with whom he was
displeased. Wragge is apparently also the ﬁrst person to give hur-
ricanes female names. In 1941, George Stewart published the
novel Storm in which an intense snowstorm on the U.S. West
14
Background on Hurricanes

Coast was given the female name “Maria” (Stewart 1941). As a
result, Stewart is sometimes given credit for the notion of naming
U.S. storms, although in this case it was a winter storm. However,
the naming convention began in earnest during World War II
when western North Paciﬁc forecasters began informally naming
tropical storms after their girlfriends and wives. This practice
became entrenched in the system, and beginning in 1945 North-
west Paciﬁc storms ofﬁcially were given female names. Atlantic
storms were ofﬁcially given names starting in 1950 that were
radio code words (e.g., Able, Baker, Charlie). Hurricane Easy and
Hurricane King in 1950 are well-known Florida storms that had
phonetic names. In 1953 the U.S. Weather Bureau switched to a
female list of names, with male names added in 1979.
Today, six lists of names for Atlantic storms are used. Table
1.2 shows a list of Atlantic Ocean names for the 2005–2010 sea-
sons. Each list is used alphabetically for a particular year. Then,
should an Atlantic storm be very destructive or should it have a
noteworthy impact on human lives or the economy, its name is
retired (table 1.3) and replaced by a new name beginning with the
same letter (LePore 1996). The letters “Q,” “U,” “X,” “Y,” and “Z”
are not used by the National Hurricane Center (NHC), leaving
twenty-one names on the list. It has never happened in the histor-
ical database, but should more than twenty-one Atlantic storms
occur in a year, they would be given Greek letter names (Alpha,
Beta, etc.). Also, NHC names subtropical cyclones even though they
have different characteristics compared to tropical storms and
hurricanes. More information on hurricane naming procedures
from the international perspective and on subtropical cyclones is
provided in chapter 3.
Hurricane Structure
Cloud Patterns
The structure of a hurricane is certainly one of the most fascinat-
ing, awesome, and bizarre features in meteorology. Distinct cloud
patterns exist for each stage of a hurricane’s life cycle. These 
patterns are so unique that a meteorologist can estimate the 
intensity of a depression, tropical storm, or hurricane solely based
on cloud organization and cloud height using a methodology
known as the Dvorak technique (Dvorak 1975). Dvorak identiﬁed
Background on Hurricanes
15

ﬁve patterns related to a storm’s development stage and environ-
mental inﬂuences. By picking which pattern conforms to the 
situation, combined with a set of rules, one uses a ﬂowchart to
estimate a storm’s intensity. Different ﬂowcharts exist for visible,
infrared, and enhanced infrared satellite imagery. These ﬁve pat-
terns are the curved band pattern, the shear pattern, the eye pat-
tern, the central dense overcast pattern, and the embedded center
pattern. 
One of the most common types of cloud evolution is the
curved band pattern, which occurs when wind shear is weak.
During genesis, typically a mass of thunderstorms with a weak
rotation is ﬁrst observed, known as stage 1 of genesis. Usually
these thunderstorms will temporarily dissipate or weaken, leav-
ing a residual circulation, although in the case of a tropical wave
sometimes a cloud pattern resembling an upside-down “V” is
observed. Often, no further development occurs, and the distur-
16
Background on Hurricanes
TABLE 1.2
Tropical storm and hurricane names for the Atlantic Ocean from 2005 to 2010. 
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Arlene
Alberto
Andrea
Arthur
Ana
Alex
Bret
Beryl
Barry
Bertha
Bill
Bonnie
Cindy
Chris
Chantal
Cristobal
Claudette
Colin
Dennis
Debby
Dean
Dolly
Danny
Danielle
Emily
Ernesto
Erin
Edouard
Erika
Earl
Franklin
Florence
Felix
Fay
Fred
Fiona
Gert
Gordon
Gabrielle
Gustav
Grace
Gaston
Harvey
Helene
Humberto
Hanna
Henri
Hermine
Irene
Isaac
Ingrid
Ike
Ida
Igor
Jose
Joyce
Jerry
Josephine
Joaquin
Julia
Katrina
Kirk
Karen
Kyle
Kate
Karl
Lee
Leslie
Lorenzo
Laura
Larry
Lisa
Maria
Michael
Melissa
Marco
Mindy
Matthew
Nate
Nadine
Noel
Nana
Nicholas
Nicole
Ophelia
Oscar
Olga
Omar
Odette
Otto
Philippe
Patty
Pablo
Paloma
Peter
Paula
Rita
Rafael
Rebekah
Rene
Rose
Richard
Stan
Sandy
Sebastien
Sally
Sam
Shary
Tammy
Tony
Tanya
Teddy
Teresa
Tomas
Vince
Valerie
Van
Vicky
Victor
Virginie
Wilma
William
Wendy
Wilfred
Wanda
Walter
Unless a hurricane name is retired and replaced by a new name, the list is recycled every six years (i.e., the names
used in 2005 will be used again in 2011, the names used in 2006 will be used again in 2012, etc.). From NHC (2005).

bance is merely a maritime nuisance. Should strong thunder-
storms return (sometimes within twelve hours, often taking sev-
eral days) and a complete circulation forms, stage 2 of genesis,
which coincides with the depression stage, commences (Zehr
1992). A dominant band of clouds gradually takes on more curva-
ture around a cloud-minimum center. When the band curves at
least one-half distance around the storm center, typically tropical
storm intensity has been achieved.
This curved band consists of a 100-mile-wide region of
clouds with embedded potent thunderstorm bands reaching
50,000 feet in height; the cloud shield extends another 400 miles
farther out with less potent thunderstorm squall lines. These
thunderstorm bands, known as spiral bands, are 5–30 miles wide
Background on Hurricanes
17
TABLE 1.3
Retired Atlantic Hurricane names and the year of their occurrence in alphabetical order.
A
Audrey (1957) 
Agnes (1972)
Anita (1977)
Allen (1980)
Alicia (1983)
Andrew (1992)
Allison (2001)   
B
Betsy (1965) 
Beulah (1967) 
Bob (1991)
C
Connie (1955) 
Carla (1961) 
Cleo (1964)
Carol (1965) 
Camille (1969)
Celia (1970)
Carmen (1974)  
Cesar (1996) 
Charley (2004)  
D
Diane (1955) 
Donna (1960) 
Dora (1964)
David (1979) 
Diana (1990) 
E
Edna (1968) 
Eloise (1975)
Elena (1985) 
F
Flora (1963) 
Fiﬁ(1974)
Frederic (1979)
Fran (1996) 
Floyd (1999)
Fabian (2003) 
Frances (2004)   
G
Gracie (1959) 
Gloria (1985) 
Gilbert (1988) 
Georges (1998)
H
Hazel (1954) 
Hattie (1961) 
Hilda (1964) 
Hugo (1989) 
Hortense (1996)
I
Ione (1955)
Inez (1966) 
Iris (2001) 
Isidore (2002) 
Isabel (2003)
Ivan (2004) 
J
Janet (1955) 
Joan (1988) 
Juan (2003)
Jeanne (2004)
K
Klaus (1990) 
Keith (2000)
L
Luis (1995) 
Lenny (1999)
Lili (2002)
M
Marilyn (1995)
Mitch (1998) 
Michelle (2001)
O
Opal (1995)
R
Roxanne (1995)
Before retiring practices were established, some names were simply not used anymore. For example, in 1966 “Fern”
was substituted for “Frieda” and no reason was given. Also, Carol was used in 1965, but was probably retired retro-
spectively for the damage a 1954 storm of the same name caused. From NHC (2005).

and 50–200 miles long. In between the bands is light to moderate
rain or areas of sinking air (downdrafts). Spiral band evolution
and motion can be explained by a special class of wave solutions
called vortex Rossby waves (Montgomery and Kallenbach 1997;
Chen, Brunet, and Yau 2003), discussed in the chapter 5 biography
on Carl-Gustav Rossby. In the periphery of a tropical storm, wind
speed will ﬂuctuate, with fastest sustained winds of 30–40 mph in
the spiral bands. As one approaches the center of a tropical storm,
winds will consistently increase, with the strongest winds close to
the center.
As the tropical storm strengthens, the dominant cloud band
continues coiling around the storm center. When the band com-
pletely coils around the center, hurricane intensity usually has
been reached. At this point, a clear region devoid of clouds forms
in the center known as the eye, surrounded by a ring of thunder-
storms known as the eyewall.
The Eyewall and Eye
The eyewall contains the ﬁercest winds and often the heaviest
rainfall, making this feature the most dangerous part of a hurri-
cane. The eyewall slants outward with height, giving the eye a
“coliseum” appearance, as if one is in a giant football stadium
made of clouds. In the eye, winds become weak, even calm! This
transition from hurricane force winds to calm is rather sudden
(often within minutes) and is truly a bizarre weather feature. The
average eye-size diameter is between 20 and 40 miles. Typically
an eye starts at about 35 miles wide during the transition from
tropical storm to hurricane. As the hurricane intensiﬁes, usually
the eye contracts. Small eyes are correlated to very intense hurri-
canes, with diameters as little as 9 miles. However, intense hurri-
canes with large eyes also occur.
The cause of eye formation is still not understood, but there
is some consensus among meteorologists that near 74 mph the
strong rotation impedes inﬂow to the center, causing air to instead
ascend 10–20 miles from the center. Consider what happens as
one drives at fast speeds in a vehicle. As the driver makes a sharp
turn, an “invisible” force makes the driver lean outward. This out-
ward-directed force, called the centrifugal force, occurs because the
driver’s momentum wants to remain in a straight line, and since
the car is turning, there is a tugging sensation outward. The
sharper the curvature or the faster the rotation, the stronger is the
centrifugal force.
18
Background on Hurricanes

As rotation increases in a developing hurricane, air is sub-
jected to these outward accelerations that counteract inﬂowing
air. The centrifugal force eventually dominates near hurricane
strength, causing inﬂowing air to not reach the center and instead
ascend about 15 miles from the center (Zhang, Liu, and Yau 2001).
This strong rotation also creates a vacuum of air at the center,
causing some of the air ﬂowing out the top of the eyewall to turn
inward and gently sink to balance this loss of mass. This subsi-
dence suppresses cloud formation, creating a pocket of generally
clear air in the center (although low-level short clouds or high-
level overcast skies may still exist). People experiencing an eye
passage at night often see stars. Trapped birds are sometimes seen
circling in the eye, and ships trapped in a hurricane eye report
hundreds of exhausted birds resting on their decks. The landfall
of Hurricane Gloria (1995) on southern New England was accom-
panied by thousands of birds in the eye.
The sudden change of violent winds to a calm state is a dan-
gerous situation for people ignorant about a hurricane’s structure.
Those experiencing the calm of an eye may think that the hurri-
cane has passed, when in fact the storm is only half over with dan-
gerous eyewall winds returning from the opposite direction
typically within 20 minutes or less, although sometimes the pause
is longer. Marjory Stoneman Douglas, the famous Florida Ever-
glades activist, writes in the well-known book The Everglades:
River of Grass of the eye passage experienced by survivors in the
1926 Miami hurricane:
Late that night, in absolute darkness, it hit, with the far
shrieking scream, the queer rumbling of a vast and
irresistible freight train. The wind instruments blew
away at a hundred twenty-ﬁve miles [per hour]. The
leaves went, branches, the bark off the trees. In the
slashing assault people found their roofs had blown
off, unheard in the tumult. The water of the bay was
lifted and blown inland, in streaming sheets of salt,
with boats . . . , coconuts, debris of all sorts, up on the
highest ridge of the mainland. . . .
At eight o’clock next morning the gray light lifted.
The roaring stopped. There was no wind. Blue sky
stood overhead. People opened their doors and ran,
still a little dazed, into the ruined streets. . . . Only a few
remembered or had ever heard that in the center of a
spinning hurricane there is that bright deathly stillness.
Background on Hurricanes
19

It passed. The light darkened. The high shrieking
came from the other direction as the opposite whirling
thickness of the cyclonic cone moved on over the dark-
ened city. (Douglas 1997, 339–341)
In fact, many killed in the Labor Day Hurricane had wan-
dered outside during the passage of the eye. In addition to the
return of ﬁerce winds, sometimes the highest storm surge (to be
discussed in chapter 2) occurs on the back side of the eye.
The ﬁrst appearance of an eye on a satellite picture is also an
indicator that rapid intensiﬁcation could occur. Because air sinks
in the eye, it compresses and warms, enhancing the warm core of
air aloft. This upper-air warmth reduces the weight of the air col-
umn and causes surface pressure to drop in the eye dramatically,
producing large pressure differences between the storm and its
environment. In response to this pressure gradient, winds
increase substantially. The positive-feedback process between
winds, surface ﬂuxes of heat and moisture, convergence, thunder-
storms, and eye warming accelerates. Satellite imagery shows
that as a hurricane intensiﬁes, the eye becomes warmer and the
eyewall clouds grow taller. If conditions remain favorable (weak
wind shear and warm water temperature), the positive relation-
ship among all these processes can lead to rapid intensiﬁcation
where maximum sustained winds increase by 40–50 mph in one
day (Fitzpatrick 1997).
Sometimes a second eyewall forms outside the original eye-
wall about 40–60 miles from the center. This outer eyewall “cuts
off” the inﬂow to the inner eyewall, causing the inner one to
weaken and dissipate. Because the eye is wider, temporary weak-
ening occurs. The outer eyewall will begin to contract inward to
replace the inner eyewall, and about twelve to twenty-four hours
later intensiﬁcation resumes. This internal adjustment process,
known as the concentric eyewall cycle (Willoughby, Clos, and
Shoeibah 1982), is one reason strong hurricanes experience inten-
sity ﬂuctuations even in otherwise favorable conditions. On rare
occasions, the second eyewall forms far from the center, resulting in
a gigantic eye with a diameter greater than 150 miles (Lander 1999).
Another factor that causes minor intensity ﬂuctuations is
diurnal temperature swings (Browner, Woodley, and Grifﬁth
1977). Apparently, daytime heating and nighttime cooling affects
a storm cloud’s top temperature, enhancing or reducing static sta-
bility. The result is considerable variability in cloud patterns. In
20
Background on Hurricanes

addition, air outside tropical thunderstorms sinks more at night,
possibly enhancing convergence into the hurricane (Gray and
Jacobson 1977). As a consequence, thunderstorms tend to “pul-
sate,” being strongest at sunrise and weakest at sunset (all other
environmental factors being equal), causing intensity bursts at
these periods. Diurnal oscillations are also obvious in the forma-
tive stages of hurricanes.
Once a hurricane reaches a mature state and exists in a
favorable environment of warm water temperature, weak wind
shear, and moist air, it obtains the classic appearance of a nearly
circular eye, surrounded by a nearly uniform ring of thunder-
storms in the eyewall region with little deep thunderstorm activ-
ity outside this ring. This type of symmetric storm is called an
annular hurricane and tends to experience little intensity change
(unless a concentric eyewall cycle occurs) until the environment
changes or it makes landfall (Knaff, Kossin, and DeMaria 2003).
Hurricane Size
Outside the eyewall region, the weaker spiral bands accompany-
ing the hurricane typically affect a large area. On average, the
width of a hurricane’s cloud shield is about 500 miles, but it may
vary tremendously. For example, the cloud shields of Hurricane
Gilbert (1988) and Hurricane Allen (1980) covered an impressive
one-third of the Gulf of Mexico. Some are giants, such as Super-
typhoon Tip (1979) that was twice the size of Gilbert or Allen!
However, cloud size is not an accurate indication of hurri-
cane size. Hurricane size is typically categorized by the radial
extent of gale-force winds (32–54 mph). Mariners and the navy
typically avoid winds stronger than gale-force. Furthermore,
many hurricane preparedness exercises are required to be com-
pleted before gale-force winds begin, and often bridges are closed
when gale-force winds ensue. It should be noted that other more
sophisticated means exist to quantify hurricane size (Liu and Chan
1999, 2002; Carr and Elsberry 1997), but gale-force winds are the
most relevant. Therefore, using winds of 35 mph as the gale-force
criteria, the average Atlantic hurricane size has a radius of 150
miles, or equivalently a diameter of 300 miles (Liu and Chan 1999).
There are seasonal, latitudinal, and life cycle variations of
hurricane size in the Atlantic (Merrill 1984). Small hurricanes are
more common early in the season, and large ones are more com-
mon late in the season. Hurricanes tend to also be larger farther
Background on Hurricanes
21

north. As a tropical depression intensiﬁes, the size tends to con-
tract, while during the mature and weakening stages, the radius of
gale-force winds tends to expand. As will be discussed in chapter
2, hurricane size also plays a small role in its own movement. It is
sufﬁcient to state here that larger hurricanes inﬂuence their own
motion more than smaller hurricanes (Carr and Elsberry 1997).
However, storm size does not correlate with storm intensity.
Both small and large hurricanes can have sustained eyewall
winds in excess of 100 mph and even 150 mph. Examples of small
category 5 hurricanes include Camille (1969) and Andrew (1992).
Likewise, gale-force winds in tropical storms or category 1 hurri-
canes can extend over a large region.
Very small hurricanes are called midgets. Hurricane-force
winds are typically conﬁned to a region 25 miles wide, and gale-
force winds may only extend 40 miles from the center. However,
again, there is no correlation between size and intensity. While
many midgets are tropical storms or minimal hurricanes, the dis-
astrous Labor Day Hurricane of 1935 was a midget, with hurri-
cane-force winds conﬁned within 17 miles of the storm center.
Likewise, Tropical Cyclone Tracy that hit Australia in 1974 was
extremely devastating but very small. Gale-force winds only
extended 25 miles from Tracy’s center, with hurricane-force winds
extending 13 miles. Midget hurricanes are very rare in the
Atlantic, but a little more frequent elsewhere in the world.
Lightning (Or the Lack Of)
One would assume that the most dangerous storm on earth con-
tains abundant lightning. However, lightning is surprisingly
infrequent in hurricanes within 60 miles of the storm center (Moli-
nari, Moore, and Idone 1999). Lightning is a discharge of electric-
ity and requires two regions containing opposite charges. To
understand why hurricanes lack electrical activity, a discussion
on lightning processes is required ﬁrst.
Charge separation can only occur in strong thunderstorm
updrafts—in other words, where abundant buoyancy is avail-
able—so that air can accelerate upward at speeds of 15 mph or
more. Strong updrafts transport cloud water droplets aloft into
regions where the temperature is below freezing; some droplets
become ice, and the rest remain in a liquid state (known as super-
cooled water). The stronger the updraft, the more plentiful are the
supercooled droplets. When supercooled droplets are abundant,
22
Background on Hurricanes

ice crystals collide with the supercooled droplets, freeze on con-
tact, and stick together, a process called riming. The icy matter
(rime) that forms is called graupel. In this situation, a mixture of
three substances now exists—graupel, smaller ice crystals, and
supercooled water droplets.
Current theory suggests that charge separation involves col-
lisions between the graupel and small ice particles in the presence
of supercooled droplets (Illingworth 1985; Saunders 1993). The
key is the existence of supercooled droplets; without them, no
charge separation occurs, and there is no lightning. Laboratory
experiments show that, in the presence of supercooled water,
graupel colliding with ice crystals acquire a positive charge when
temperatures are colder than –4°F; for temperatures between 
– 4°F and 32°F, charging is reversed, with graupel acquiring a neg-
ative charge. Some studies show that this charge reversal may be
related to relative humidity distribution in clouds (Berdeklis and
List 2001), but this process requires more research. Nevertheless,
cloud electriﬁcation studies show that typically thunderstorms
have a positive charge at the top and a negative charge at the bot-
tom. Because of this charge difference, intracloud lightning, which
is the most common type of lightning and looks like a diffuse
brightening that ﬂickers, can occur. Intercloud lightning is also pos-
sible when two clouds exist next to each other with a charge dif-
ference. Finally, because the earth’s surface becomes positively
charged beneath a thunderstorm from a process known as induce-
ment, cloud-to-ground lightning also occurs.
The reason hurricanes contain little lightning activity is rela-
tively weak updrafts. A hurricane contains a warm-core center
aloft, and furthermore the ocean often lacks sustained surface
heating. As a result, less buoyancy is available for the inner-core
thunderstorms. Because the updrafts are weak, fewer water
droplets are transported above the freezing level. Hurricanes also
experience much horizontal mixing in the rapidly rotating core,
splintering ice crystals in the below 32°F layer, effectively creating
an abundance of “baby” ice crystals. What little supercooled
water exists in the subfreezing region is quickly diffused onto
these ice splinters. Consequently, hurricanes lack supercooled
water, and without this key agent, charge separation cannot occur
(Black and Hallet 1986; Cecil and Zipser 2002). Therefore, most
hurricanes lack lightning activity.
A dozen or less cloud-to-ground strikes per hour occur
within the storm’s eyewall. Lightning is more common in the outer
Background on Hurricanes
23

core of hurricanes, with ﬂash rates on the order of hundreds per
hour where the thunderstorms are farther removed from the warm
core and cloud buoyancy is less impeded, allowing stronger
updrafts. In contrast, a typical (land-based) thunderstorm may
have lightning ﬂash rates greater than 1,000 per hour.
Exceptions are observed where a hurricane or tropical
storm’s inner core experiences a burst of electrical activity, and
these have been correlated to storm intensiﬁcation. Examples
include Hurricanes Diana (1984), Elena (1985), Florence (1988),
Bob (1991), and Andrew (1992) (Molinari, Moore, and Idone
1999). Since lightning is dependent on updraft strength, this sug-
gests that unusually vigorous eyewall thunderstorms are associ-
ated with sudden storm intensiﬁcation. It also shows that the
National Lightning Detection Network, consisting of 100 mag-
netic direction ﬁnders across the U.S. that sense lightning strike
location, may provide forecasters a tool for anticipating rapid
intensiﬁcation in hurricanes near the coast.
24
Background on Hurricanes

2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
Hurricane Destruction
Coastal communities devastated by strong hurricanes usually
take years to recover. Many forces of nature contribute to the
destruction. Obviously, hurricane winds are a source of structural
damage. As winds increase, pressure against objects increases at a
disproportionate rate, roughly the square of the wind speed. For
example, a 50-mph wind causes a pressure of 5.5 pounds per
square foot. In 100-mph winds, that pressure becomes 30 pounds
per square foot. When the wind exceeds design speciﬁcations,
structural failure occurs. Debris is also propelled by strong winds,
compounding the damage. Other concerns include downed trees
and power poles, causing power outages sometimes for weeks.
Isolated pockets of enhanced winds also occur in hurricanes.
Accompanying the steady winds will be several seconds of wind
gusts that can amplify or initiate destruction. More powerful
wind entities also occur in isolated regions. As hurricanes make
landfall, interactions with the thunderstorms form columns of
rapidly rotating air in contact with the ground,known as tornadoes.
Also accompanying the thunderstorms are areas where heavy rain-
fall accelerates air to the ground, known as downbursts, and spreads
out at speeds greater than 100 mph. In addition, another phenom-
ena called mesoscale vortices, or sometimes mesovortices, was docu-
mented in Hurricane Hugo (1989) and Hurricane Andrew (1992)
25

(Willoughby and Black 1996; Fujita 1993). These are whirling vor-
tices that form at the boundary of the eyewall and eye where there
is a tremendous change in wind speed. The updrafts in the eyewall
stretch the vortices vertically, making them spin faster with winds
up to 200 mph. Damage by these three wind phenomena occurs in
narrow swaths inland, although sometimes it is difﬁcult to discern
during the poststorm analysis which wind event caused a particu-
lar swath’s destruction.
Flooding produced by the rainfall can also be quite destruc-
tive and is currently the leading cause of hurricane-related fatali-
ties in the United States. A majority (57 percent) of the 600 U.S.
deaths between 1970 and 1999 due to hurricanes or their remnants
was associated with inland ﬂooding (Rappaport 2000). Most of
these ﬂood-related deaths occur at night to people in cars. Typi-
cally, they result from ﬂash ﬂoods in which rivers and streams run
out of their banks with strong currents, and these currents are par-
ticularly dangerous when they cross a roadway. Moving water
just 2 inches deep can cause a driver to lose control of the car and
crash, and 1 foot of water will carry most cars off the road and
drown the occupants. Other drivers drown when they drive into
a ﬂooded road, not realizing the water is several feet deep, or into
a canal or stream because the road is obscured with water. Non-
vehicular drownings occur when people get caught in currents;
just 6 inches of fast-moving water will sweep people off their feet.
Poor vision at night, especially when power is out, enhances these
problems.
Hurricanes average 6–12 inches of rain at landfall regions,
but this amount varies tremendously. Hurricane Floyd (1999)
dumped 15–20 inches of rain over portions of eastern North Car-
olina and Virginia; 12–14 inches over portions of Maryland,
Delaware, and New Jersey; 4–7 inches over eastern Pennsylvania
and southeastern New York; and up to 11 inches over portions of
New England. Since the soil was already saturated from Hurri-
cane Dennis (1999) and other recent rain events, an inland ﬂood-
ing disaster ensued that drowned ﬁfty people.
Flooding potential is not proportional to intensity. In fact,
weaker tropical storms often produce greater amounts of rain,
such as a U.S.-record 42 inches of rain in twenty-four hours by
Tropical Storm Claudette (1979) near Houston, Texas, causing
$400 million in damage. Rainfall accumulation generally in-
creases for slow-moving storms. Hurricane Danny (1997) sat over
26
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Mobile Bay for almost one day before moving inland, dumping at
least 37 inches of rain in coastal Alabama in thirty-six hours, of
which 26 inches fell in seven hours! More recently, Tropical Storm
Allison’s (2001) heavy rains of 20–35 inches produced cata-
strophic ﬂooding over portions of the upper Texas coastal area
(especially Houston) and signiﬁcant ﬂooding along the remainder
of its track through Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama. Forty-
one deaths are attributed to Allison’s heavy rain, ﬂooding, torna-
does, and high surf.
Heavy rainfall is not just conﬁned to the coast. The remnants
of hurricanes can bring heavy rain far inland, particularly danger-
ous in hills and mountains where acute concentrations of rain turn
tranquil streams into raging rivers in a matter of minutes. In addi-
tion, mountains “lift” air in hurricanes, increasing cloud formation
and rainfall. Rainfall rates of 1–2 feet per day are not uncommon in
mountainous regions when hurricanes pass through. In fact, the
highest hurricane rainfall amounts have occurred in the moun-
tains of La Reunion Island (see chapter 4 for details).
Some examples regarding rainfall damage and fatalities fol-
low. Hurricane Camille (1969), which made landfall in Mississippi,
dumped 30 inches of rain in six hours in the Blue Ridge Moun-
tains, triggering ﬂash ﬂoods and mud slides that killed 114 people
in Virginia and 2 in West Virginia. One of the most widespread
ﬂoods in U.S. history was caused by Hurricane Agnes (1972),
resulting in 188 deaths and $2.1 billion in property damage along
most of the Eastern United States. Mud slides are also often a prob-
lem in hilly terrain, burying homes and destroying property par-
ticularly in underdeveloped mountainous countries where the
warning system, hurricane preparedness, and infrastructure are
insufﬁcient. Many of these countries have high terrain near the
coast where mud slides and ﬂoods can occur with tragic results.
Eastern Hemisphere countries sustain the worse fatalities, since
more storms occur there. A few of many examples include the
Philippines, where Typhoon Kelly (1981) killed 140 and Tropical
Storm Thelma (1991) killed 3,000; China, where Typhoon Peggy
(1986) killed 170, Typhoon Herb (1996) killed 779, and Typhoon
Nina (1975) killed at least 10,000; and Korea, where Typhoon
Thelma (1987) resulted in 368 killed or missing. However, West-
ern Hemisphere countries also suffer sizable casualties due to
ﬂooding and mud slides, such as in the Caribbean nations, where
Hurricane Fiﬁ(1974) killed 8,000–10,000; Hurricane Flora (1963)
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
27

killed 8,000, and Hurricane Gordon (1994) killed 1,145; Mexico,
where Hurricane Gilbert (1988) killed 202 and Hurricane Pauline
(1997) killed 230; and Central America, where Hurricane Mitch
(1998) killed 11,000–18,000.
When it comes to ﬂooding fatalities, Hurricane Mitch (1998)
is the most deadly hurricane to strike the Western Hemisphere in
the last 200 years. Mitch produced an estimated 75 inches of rain-
fall in the mountainous regions of Central America, resulting in
ﬂoods and mud slides that destroyed the entire infrastructure of
Honduras and devastated parts of Nicaragua, Guatemala, Belize,
and El Salvador. Whole villages and their inhabitants were swept
away in the torrents of ﬂoodwater and deep mud that came rush-
ing down the mountainsides, destroying hundreds of thousands
of homes. The president of Honduras, Carlos Flores Facusse,
claimed that the storm destroyed ﬁfty years of progress. Typically
in all the examples listed above, the number of homeless is in the
10,000–100,000+ range.
Although all these elements (wind, rain, ﬂoods, and mud
slides) are obviously dangerous, historically most people have
been killed in the storm surge, deﬁned as an abnormal rise of the
sea along the shore. The storm surge, which can reach heights of
20 feet or more, is caused by the winds pushing water toward the
coast. As the transported water reaches shallow coastlines, bot-
tom friction slows the motion, causing water to pile up. Ocean
waters begin to rise gradually, then quite quickly as the storm
makes landfall (storm surge does not occur as a tidal wave, as
depicted in at least one Hollywood movie).
Some factors that determine a storm surge’s height include
storm intensity, storm size, storm speed, and the angle at which
the hurricane makes landfall. The storm surge increases with
storm intensity and size. Slow-moving storms allow more time
for water to pile up on the coast, whereas fast-moving storms
cause the surge to spike over a few hours with an overall lower
surge. The storm surge is greater when landfall is perpendicular
to the coastline, since some of the surge will be deﬂected offshore
when storms land at a sideways angle. The shape of the coastal
estuary is another important component, since coastal points and
channels tend to enhance the surge in certain regions. One more
element is the proximity of shallow water near the coast. Low-
lying regions adjacent to shallow seas (such as the Gulf of Mexico
in the southern United States and the Bay of Bengal bordering
28
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Bangladesh and India) are particularly vulnerable to the storm
surge, since this allows more water to pile up before inundating
the coast. Another minor contribution to the storm surge is the
low pressure of a hurricane, which allows water to expand
(known as the inverse barometer effect). For every 10-mb pressure
drop, water expands 3.9 inches. The storm surge is always highest
on the side of the eye corresponding to onshore winds, which is
usually the right side of the point of landfall in the Northern
Hemisphere, called the right front quadrant. Winds are also fastest
in the right front quadrant because storm motion (which averages
about 10 mph but varies substantially) is added to the hurricane’s
winds. Because winds spiral inward, the storm surge is greatest
along the eyewall.
The total elevated water includes three additional compo-
nents—the astronomical tide, the steric effect, and ocean waves.
The astronomical tide results from gravitational interactions
between the earth and the moon and sun, generally producing
two high and two low oceanic tides per day in most locations.
Should the storm surge coincide with the high astronomical tide,
additional feet will be added to the water level; the highest
oceanic tides occur when the earth, sun, and moon are aligned
(known as syzygy). The total water elevation due to the storm
surge, astronomical tides, and wave setup (see next paragraph) is
known as the storm tide. Therefore, storm surge is ofﬁcially de-
ﬁned as the difference between the actual water level under the
hurricane’s inﬂuence and the level due to astronomical tides and
wave setup. In practice, water-level observations during posthur-
ricane surveys are always storm tides, and it is difﬁcult to distin-
guish between storm surge and storm tide elevations. Therefore,
the two terms are used interchangeably.
Waves are another important contributor. Under normal
conditions, waves that reach the coast break, and the water sinks
and ﬂows back out to the sea under the next incoming wave.
However, in hurricane conditions, excessive incoming water is
not balanced by outgoing water. As a result, water levels increase
due to wave setup. This process is most pronounced when deep
water is near the shore, because in shallow water waves break far
offshore. The ﬁnal contributor is water temperature. Because
warm water expands, water levels are naturally highest in the
summer. This process, known as the steric effect, is always present
during the hot hurricane season.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
29

Water is very powerful, weighing some 1,700 pounds per
cubic yard, and therefore most inundated structures pounded by
waves and the storm surge will be demolished. Ocean currents set
up by the surge, combined with the waves, can severely erode
beaches, islands, and highways. Most people caught in a storm
surge will be killed by injuries sustained during structural col-
lapse or by drowning. Death tolls for unevacuated coastal regions
can be terrible. The worst natural disaster in U.S. history occurred
in 1900 when a hurricane-related 8–15-foot storm tide inundated
the island city of Galveston, Texas, and claimed more than 6,000
lives. In 1893, nearly 2,000 were killed in Louisiana and 1,000 in
South Carolina by two separate hurricanes.
Hurricane Camille (1969), with sustained winds of at least
180 mph, produced a storm tide of 23 feet in Pass Christian, Mis-
sissippi. As the storm tide penetrated far inland, Camille killed
172 people in Mississippi and 9 in Louisiana. In Louisiana,
Camille produced a storm tide that pushed water over both levees
near the mouth of the Mississippi River, “removing almost all
traces of civilization,” as one U.S. Department of Commerce
(1969) report states (ESSA 1969). Floods from the storm surge pen-
etrated 8 miles inland in the Waveland-Bay St. Louis region, and
in river estuaries the ﬂood extended 20–30 miles upstream. When
combined with the ﬂood deaths in Virginia (114) and West Vir-
ginia (2), Camille killed a total of 297 people. A total of $1.5 billion
in property damage was incurred, with total devastation on the
immediate coastline and severe damage further inland.
However, these statistics pale in comparison to the lives
taken in coastal India and surrounding countries by storm tides.
The most vulnerable area is coastal Bangladesh, a huge river delta
fertile enough to support large numbers of farmers and ﬁshermen
(about 1,500 per square mile). Many are essentially nomads, stak-
ing claims on frequently changing temporary islands. The geog-
raphy of this area favors large storm surges, because the narrow
inlet of the bay funnels large amounts of water inland and be-
cause shallow water extends 60 miles offshore. Storm surge warn-
ings are issued more than a day in advance, but communicating
this information is difﬁcult due to the rural and nomadic nature of
the population. Furthermore, many choose to ignore the warnings
or ﬁnd it too difﬁcult to evacuate since no transportation infra-
structure exists (Rosenfeld 1997). The results have been the worst
storm surge fatalities in history.
30
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Six hurricanes have hit Bangladesh since 1960, killing at least
10,000 each time (Rosenfeld 1997). The most tragic incident oc-
curred on November 12, 1970, when a hurricane with 125-mph
winds caused a 20-foot storm tide that killed at least 300,000 peo-
ple. This storm triggered a revolution against Pakistan that
brought independence for Bangladesh. In 1991, 139,000 people
perished in another Bangladesh hurricane. In general, this area has
a history of hurricane-induced fatalities: 300,000 people were
killed near Calcutta, India, in 1737; 20,000 were killed in Coringa,
India, in 1881; and 200,000 were killed in Chittagong, Bangladesh,
in 1876. Unfortunately, evacuation procedures and public response
has not changed much since 1991, so the chance of similar
tragedies remains high. China, Thailand, and the Philippines have
also seen smaller but signiﬁcant losses in the tens to hundreds of
people by a single storm in recent years due to storm surges.
The combination of heavy rainfall and a storm surge can be
particularly devastating, especially along coastal streams. Under
these conditions, residents will ﬁrst experience the surge, which
typically last for one day, followed by ﬂooding from runoff that
persists for weeks. For example, coastal homes in Pascagoula,
Mississippi, were devastated by slow-moving Hurricane Georges
(1998) because the storm surge ﬁrst inundated the region, fol-
lowed by ﬂooding from the Pascagoula River.
The expected level of damage for a given hurricane intensity
is described by the Safﬁr-Simpson Hurricane Scale (Simpson 1974). It
was devised in 1971 by Herbert Safﬁr, an engineer in Miami, for
the World Meteorological Organization, and was given to the
National Hurricane Center (NHC). Robert Simpson, the director of
NHC, then added the storm surge portion. This scale, only valid
for the Atlantic Ocean, classiﬁes hurricanes into ﬁve categories
according to central pressure, maximum sustained winds, storm
surge, and expected damage (table 2.1). An alternative scale for the
tropical Paciﬁc Ocean is shown in table 3.1. Although all categories
are dangerous, categories 3, 4, and 5 are considered major hurri-
canes, with the potential for widespread devastation and loss of
life. Whereas only 21 percent of U.S. land-falling tropical systems
are major hurricanes, they historically account for 83 percent of the
damage (Pielke and Landsea 1998). On average, the Atlantic has
two major hurricanes per year (see table 3.2). Fortunately, category
5 hurricanes are infrequent in the Atlantic Ocean and seldom sus-
tain themselves at such intensities for very long before weakening
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
31

32
TABLE 2.1
The Safﬁr-Simpson Hurricane Scale for Atlantic Hurricanes (Simpson 1974)
Central pressure
Maximum
Storm surge
Potential
in mb inches 
sustained winds 
in feet
damage
Category
(approximate)
in mph
(approximate)
scale
Damage
1 (Minimal)
< 979
> 28.91 
74–95
4–5
1
Damage primarily to shrubbery, trees, foliage, and unanchored
mobile homes. No real damage to building structures. Low-lying
coastal roads inundated, minor pier damage, some small craft in
exposed anchorages torn from moorings.
2 (Moderate)
965–979
28.50–28.91
96–110
6–8
10
Considerable damage to shrubbery and tree foliage; some trees
blown down, and major damage to exposed mobile homes. Some
damage to rooﬁng, windows, and doors of buildings. Coastal
roads and low-lying escape routes inland cut by rising water two
to four hours before arrival of hurricane center. Considerable pier
damage, marinas ﬂooded, small craft torn from moorings.
Evacuation of shoreline residences and low-lying island areas
required.
3 (Extensive)
945–964
27.91–28.47
111–130
9–12
50
Large trees blown down. Foliage removed from trees. Structural
damage to small buildings; mobile homes destroyed. Serious
ﬂooding at coast, and many smaller coastal structures destroyed.
Larger coastal structures damaged by battering waves and
ﬂoating debris. Low-lying inland escape routes cut by rising
waters three to ﬁve hours before arrival of hurricane center. Low-
lying areas ﬂooded 8 miles or more inland. Evacuation of low-
lying structures within several blocks of shoreline possibly
required. 

33
4 (Extreme)
920–944
27.17–27.88
131–155
13–18
250
All signs blown down. Extensive damage to rooﬁng, windows,
and doors. Complete failure of roofs on smaller buildings. Flat
terrain 10 feet or less above sea level ﬂooded as far as 6 miles
inland. Major damage to lower ﬂoors of coastal buildings from
ﬂooding, battering waves, and ﬂoating debris. Major erosion of
beaches. Massive evacuation: all residences within 500 yards of
shore and single-story residences on low ground within 2 miles of
shore. 
5 (Catastrophic)
< 920
< 27.17
> 155
> 18
500
Severe and extensive damage to residences and buildings. Small
buildings overturned or blown away. Severe damage to windows
and doors; complete roof failure on homes and industrial
buildings. Major damage to lower ﬂoors of all structures less than
15 feet above sea level. Flooding inland as far as 10 miles.
Inland escape routes cut three to ﬁve hours before arrival of
storm center. Massive evacuation of residential areas on low
ground within 5–10 miles of shore. 
In practice, the maximum wind speed determines the category. Many factors affect central pressure and storm surge, so these values are only estimates for a particular category. In fact, the storm surge may vary
by a factor of 2 depending on the coastline's proximity to deep or shallow water. This scale is not valid for other ocean basins, since some countries (e.g., Australia and India) use different deﬁnitions of sustained
winds, contain different types of foliage with different damage thresholds than U.S. foliage, have different building construction standards (some of which may be further weakened by termites), and have coral
reefs that modify storm surge damage. An alternative scale for the tropical Paciﬁc Ocean is shown in table 3.1 "Potential Damage Scale" provides a scale relative to a category 1 hurricane, where a category 1 hur-
ricane is scaled as "1" (Pielke and Landsea 1998). For example, a category 3 hurricane typically causes ﬁfty times as much damage as a category 1 hurricane.

to a lower category. Only three recorded category 5 hurricanes
have made landfall in the United States (the Labor Day Hurricane
of 1935 in the Florida Keys, Hurricane Camille in 1969, and Hur-
ricane Andrew in 1992).
Another danger from hurricanes is extreme ocean currents.
In calm conditions, when waves strike the beach at an angle, the
leading edge of the wave hits the shallow water sooner than the
rest of the wave front and slows down, bending the wave as it
moves ashore. This results in a current with a net ﬂow parallel to
the coast, known as a longshore current. A hurricane can disrupt (or
“rip”) the longshore current with its large incoming waves, caus-
ing a narrow band to be deﬂected offshore, known as a rip current.
(This is also called a riptide, a misleading name since there is no
tidal component, or incorrectly an undertow, because rip currents
do not pull you under the water.) Rip currents occur even if the
hurricane is far away or making landfall elsewhere since their
waves can travel far from the storm, and this is why they are an
unexpected threat to beach swimmers. This powerful current
pulls people away from the shore, and a number of swimmers
drown each year from it. Hurricanes enhance rip current activity,
but rip currents are always a threat when wave activity is strong
and account for 80 percent of lifeguard rescues. Swimmers caught
in a rip current should try to swim parallel to shore—rather than
directly into the current—until out of the rip (about 10 to 20 yards
sideways on average), then swim back to the beach. Rip currents
appear as a plume of dirty water (from stirred-up sediment) mov-
ing away from shore—often carrying foam, seaweed, or debris—
with a break in incoming waves. Rip currents are also common
near jetties and piers even in calm conditions, so these are areas
swimmers should always avoid.
While hurricanes cause much misery, they can also be bene-
ﬁcial. Hurricanes often provide much-needed rain to drought-
stricken coastlines. Their ocean interactions can ﬂush bays of
pollutants, restoring the ecosystem’s vitality. After the record
rainfall from Hurricane Claudette (1979) in Texas, ﬁsh were being
caught in the northern industrialized reaches of Galveston Bay
that had vanished from there for several years. Finally, in cruel
Darwinism fashion, weak sea life and plants will perish, leaving
only the strong to survive and reproduce.
Another positive consequence is that sometimes hurricanes
“correct” man’s mistakes. For example, in the early 1900s nonna-
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

tive foliage such as Australian pine trees had been planted on the tip
of Key Biscayne, Florida (now the Bill Baggs State Park). These non-
native plants had few natural enemies in their new environment
and quickly dominated plant life, resulting in a loss of natural habi-
tat. However, these Australian nonnatives lacked the ability to with-
stand hurricane-force winds, and Hurricane Andrew destroyed
them all in 1992. Park ofﬁcials seized the opportunity to replant the
park with native foliage.
Forecasting Hurricanes
Hurricanes are one of the most difﬁcult phenomena to forecast in
meteorology. Aforecaster must understand all facets of meteorology
for hurricane prediction since these storms encompass all weather
processes, from individual thunderstorms to rainband physics to
air-sea coupling to interaction of the hurricane itself with the sur-
rounding atmosphere. These large and small-scale weather features
interact with each other in complicated ways. Only a computer
model can predict these processes, and sometimes with limited suc-
cess. Even worse, since hurricanes occur over the data-sparse ocean,
forecasters have few observations for seeing the current state of a
hurricane or inputting into the computers. Without knowing what
the storm is doing now, how can one anticipate its future? Forecast-
ing hurricanes is indeed a challenge.
For evacuation and emergency preparedness purposes, fore-
casters are most concerned with predicting where the storm will
go and, should the hurricane threaten land, where the eye will
make landfall. Of nearly equal importance is forecasting hurri-
cane intensity and the width of the tropical- and hurricane-force
winds around the hurricane. Forecast statements are also issued
for expected rainfall and storm surge. A tornado watch, which
means conditions are favorable for tornado development, is
always issued by the Storm Prediction Center in Norman, Okla-
homa, preceding hurricane landfall. When a tornado has been
observed by spotters (trained volunteers in the SKYWARN pro-
gram) or inferred by an instrument called Doppler radar (which
can detect areas of rapid rotation in a thunderstorm), a tornado
warning is issued by the local National Weather Service ofﬁce.
Inland ﬂooding is a big concern with hurricanes, as it causes
enormous economic damage, social disruption, and the largest
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
35

loss of lives. These ﬂoods can occur far from the coast anywhere in
the path of a hurricane. Therefore, in recent years the National
Weather Service has increased its focus on predicting hurricane
rainfall. Hurricanes undergoing extratropical transition (see chap-
ter 1) or interacting with other weather features are particularly
susceptible to creating ﬂoods. Other factors that enhance ﬂooding
potential are storm speed, because the slower the system moves,
the more time for rain to fall over a location; orography, in which
geographical barriers such as hills and mountains promote lifting
air; and antecedent conditions (soil wetness and preexisting water-
levels). The wetter the soil, the greater the chance of runoff. Also,
the higher the water level in rivers, lakes, and reservoirs, the
greater the chance of ﬂooding when heavy rain falls.
Uprooted trees are also a problem in hurricanes. A wet soil
makes trees more susceptible to uprooting. If the soil is saturated,
30–40 mph winds will blow trees down. If the soil is dry, trees will
stay upright until the wind reaches 60 mph. The type of tree is
also important, since shallow-rooted trees are more susceptible to
uprooting, all other conditions being equal. Common shallow-
rooted trees susceptible to hurricane winds along the coast are
dogwood, water oak, pecan, sweet bay, and red maple. Common
deep-rooted trees that can withstand strong winds are live oak,
longleaf pine, pond cypress, and bald cypress. The type of soil
also matters, as trees growing in sandy soils are more deeply
rooted than trees growing in soils with an inhibiting clay layer or
a high water table. Another factor is the height of the tree. The
taller the tree, the greater is its chance of breaking, especially if the
trunk’s diameter decreases little with height. For this reason, tall,
slim slash and longleaf pines are extremely vulnerable. Open-
crowned and lacy-foliaged trees, such as cypress and mimosa,
offer less resistance to the wind and thus are better able to survive.
On the other hand, magnolia trees with their heavy, wind-catch-
ing foliage are more susceptible to damage than their root system
and trunk structure would indicate. Palm trees offer little surface
to the wind because they have almost no laterally extended crown
and branches. This characteristic makes them fairly wind-ﬁrm,
despite their limited root systems. 
Predicting heavy rain events is the responsibility of the
Hydrometeorological Prediction Center (HPC). The HPC inter-
acts with the NHC, discussing the potential for ﬂooding due to
precipitation. A crude technique for predicting total rainfall in
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

inches is to divide 100 by the forward speed of the hurricane in
miles per hour; for example, a hurricane moving 10 mph would
produce 10 inches of rain. But rainfall can vary, so this is only a
rule of thumb. Of particular concern are slow-moving storms,
which can dump rain for days. In addition, rivers can swell from
copious rain. The National Weather Service has twelve special-
ized centers at some local ofﬁces, called River Forecast Centers,
that generate forecasts for U.S. rivers and streams.
While storm surge is always a concern, generally evacuations
mandate that people leave areas susceptible to the surge. There-
fore, storm surge fatalities in the United States have decreased
immensely since Hurricane Camille (1969). The United States has
two tools for locating storm surge-prone areas. First, for several
decades, the Army Corps of Engineers has surveyed areas hit by a
storm surge. Therefore, the United States has an excellent storm
surge historical record for decision making. Second, using a storm
surge computer model called the Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges
from Hurricanes (SLOSH), hundreds of simulations can be con-
ducted to explore hurricane scenarios for each local region. These
scenarios include different storm paths, intensities, size, transla-
tion speed, and landfall locations. These calculations are then com-
posited to determine the highest storm surge value possible for a
category 1–5 hurricane based on a particular family of tracks,
known as Maximum Envelop of Water (MEOW) maps. Emergency
planners and local government ofﬁcials design evacuation plans
based on the MEOW maps generated by SLOSH. These maps are
also particularly important for studying the scenarios in which the
hurricane storm surge could topple local levees, such as in the
New Orleans area. For a “second opinion,” the Army Corps of
Engineers also uses a separate storm surge model, called the
ADvanced CIRCulation (ADCIRC) model, for its own studies.
Hurricanes have a reputation for being unpredictable at
times. They can suddenly turn, speed up, slow down, stall, or loop.
They can also reform their center of rotation when thunderstorms
are not uniformly distributed around the center, making the storm
suddenly “jump” from one spot to the next (an example is Hurri-
cane Earl in 1998). Track forecasts have improved considerably the
past twenty years, but errors still occur. Intensity forecasts, how-
ever, currently exhibit little skill. The process of anticipating
whether a hurricane will strengthen, weaken, or not change in
intensity—and predicting how quickly any intensity change may
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
37

occur—is still an unsolved forecasting problem. Such uncertain-
ties are fraught with potential disasters, such as occurred in the
“near-miss” with Hurricane Opal (1995).
Hurricane Opal: A Close Call
Hurricane Opal formed in the southern extent of the Gulf of 
Mexico off the Yucatán peninsula. Initial computer models fore-
casted that it would accelerate toward Florida. However, it only
slowly drifted northward. Therefore, NHC forecasters became
skeptical as each subsequent model-run projected a fast north-
ward motion that did not materialize. Opal was also a category 1
hurricane and was not expected to intensify past category 2.
Based on Opal’s slow motion and the fact that it was a minimal
hurricane, at 5 P.M. on October 3, 1995, NHC decided that a hurri-
cane warning was not necessary until the following morning for
the Florida panhandle.
Late that night, Opal intensiﬁed explosively to a category 4
with winds of 150 mph, just shy of category 5 status. (Later analy-
sis attributed this rapid development to movement over an iso-
lated pool of very warm water. Interactions with environmental
40,000-foot winds may have also promoted the intensiﬁcation.)
Even worse, Opal ﬁnally began accelerating toward Florida. Since
most people were sleeping, it was difﬁcult to alert the public about
this new, unanticipated danger. Many people near Pensacola
Beach awoke the next morning with a near-category 5 hurricane
just offshore. The last-minute evacuation procedures clogged the
roads and Interstate 10, creating trafﬁc jams that moved less than
10 mph. It was NHC’s worst nightmare coming true.
Fortunately, Opal weakened before landfall from a category
4 to category 3 hurricane. While still dangerous and destructive,
this was a bit of a reprieve. Furthermore, while many residents
were unable to use the roads and had to stay home during the
storm, most residents on the immediate coast did manage to evac-
uate. Opal caused $3 billion in damage and killed nine people in
Florida, Alabama, Georgia, and North Carolina, but none of these
deaths were from the storm surge. The people of Florida had
dodged a bullet.
Opal demonstrated that large track forecast errors still occur,
and when combined with unexpected intensiﬁcation, many con-
gested coastal regions are today toying with human catastrophe
since seashore development has proceeded without seemingly
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

any considerations for speedy evacuation. These issues will be
discussed later, but ﬁrst a background on storm motion and its
prediction is necessary.
Factors Controlling Hurricane Motion
To understand hurricane motion, it is helpful to use the analogy of
a wide river with a small eddy rotating in it. To a ﬁrst approxima-
tion, the river transports the eddy downstream. However, the
eddy will not necessarily move straight because the speed of the
current varies horizontally; for instance, it may be faster in the cen-
ter and slow down toward the riverbanks. As a result, the eddy
may wiggle off a little to the left or right as it moves downstream
and, depending on the situation, may speed up or slow down. Fur-
thermore, this eddy’s rotation may alter the current in its vicinity,
which in turn will alter the motion of the eddy.
Likewise, one may think of a hurricane as a vortex embed-
ded in a river of air. The orientation and strength of large-scale
pressure patterns basically dictate the hurricane’s motion, except
that the steering depends on both the horizontal and vertical
wind distribution. In general, hurricanes are steered by the deep-
layer mean of the wind averaging 500–700 miles around the storm
(Dong and Neumann 1986). However, there is a tendency for
stronger hurricanes to be steered by winds higher aloft because
the storm has more vertical development (Velden and Leslie
1991), thus requiring the forecaster to identify the best “steering
height” for a particular storm. To make a track forecast, one must
ﬁrst predict the large-scale ﬂow within which the hurricane is
embedded, and this can be difﬁcult. How does one separate the
hurricane winds from the environmental winds, and how does
one know what height best represents the steering ﬂow?
Forecast errors also occur when the steering current is weak
and ill-deﬁned, thus causing the hurricane to stall or slowly drift.
However, the largest errors are associated with rapid changes in
the strength and orientation of the steering current. Under these
situations, a hurricane may accelerate its motion and/or turn. For
example, sometimes forecasters are faced with the dilemma of a
hurricane moving toward the U.S. East Coast, not knowing for
sure whether it will hit land before being turned back to the right
by westerly steering currents poleward of the hurricane.
Studies show that the hurricane motion deviates a little from
the environmental steering ﬂow. This is because a hurricane can
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
39

internally change its course as well. Just as in the river example,
the hurricane can interact with surrounding pressure ﬁelds, thus
altering its own steering current. Research has also shown that the
earth’s rotation interacts with the hurricane’s rotation, inducing a
weak poleward and westward drift, known as the beta drift. The
beta drift results in a 1–2 mph northwest motion in small storms
(for the Northern Hemisphere), while in large storms the motion
is 3–4 mph (Carr and Elsberry 1997).
On rare occasions when two hurricanes get too close to each
other—especially in the Paciﬁc and Southern Hemisphere oceans—
they may begin to move toward each other and rotate cyclonically
about a common midpoint between them, known as the Fujiwhara
effect. This consists of three phases: (1) approach and capture, when
the two hurricane tracks become impacted by each other rather
than by steering currents, a process in which the two hurricanes
usually begin to feel each other’s inﬂuences at a distance of 1,300
miles, with approach and capture dominating at a distance of 850
miles or less; (2) mutual orbit, which is the actual mutual rotation
about a common center; and (3) cessation of orbit, either by a rapid
escape of one hurricane from another or, on rare occasions, when
one of the systems is destroyed by merging into the other (Lander
and Holland 1993). Since the beginning (capture) and end (release)
of the mutual cyclonic rotation are relatively rapid, anticipation of
these events is critical to the track forecast.
Even when a hurricane moves relatively straight, a detailed
analysis shows small oscillations about the mean path, called 
trochoidal motion. These small oscillations are due to a variety of 
factors, which include a nonsymmetrical distribution of thun-
derstorms surrounding the center, shifting the center of mass
(Willoughby 1988); mesoscale vortices in the eye inducing a track
meander (Smith, Ulrich, and Dietachmayer 1990), as well as other
eye and eyewall dynamics; and a tilted storm, causing the upper-
and lower-level centers to rotate about a midlevel center (Wang
and Holland 1996).
Computer Models
Until the late 1970s, NHC forecasters relied on meteorological
intuition, statistical schemes, and the storm’s past trend to make
track predictions. They would also look at past tracks from other
years to see which way similar storms moved. These techniques
are still used today.
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

However, forecasters began to realize that such difﬁcult pre-
dictions required the use of computer models. Computer models
ingest current weather observations and approximate solutions to
complicated equations for future atmospheric values such as
wind, temperature, and moisture. The NHC uses a suite of mod-
els that differ in their mathematical assumptions and complexities
in describing atmospheric processes. Some of these differences
exist because certain atmospheric features have been removed to
make the computer program run faster. Other differences exist
because meteorologists are still uncertain about how to formulate
certain weather features such as cloud process on a computer. The
most complex models must be run on the fastest computers in the
world, known as supercomputers. Model predictions can vary
because of these mathematical differences. Model forecasts also
contain small errors because the mathematical solutions contain a
small amount of uncertainty, which accumulates with time; there-
fore, all forecast errors grow with time. Models will also produce
incorrect forecasts if they are initialized with bad data, which is a
frequent problem over the data-sparse ocean (as the saying goes,
“garbage in, garbage out”). Even where observations exist, meas-
urements contain small errors that cause forecast inaccuracies to
grow with time. The result is that even a slight difference in meas-
urements will cause diverging long-range forecasts. Ultimately,
even if the model was perfect in a utopian world, these measure-
ment errors cause long-range weather forecasts to be unpre-
dictable beyond 5–7 days. This is why the NHC only issues
hurricane forecasts covering ﬁve days. A historical perspective on
the science of predictability limits is presented in chapter 4.
Surprisingly, it is possible to manipulate these uncertainties
to a forecaster’s advantage. In theory, by generating multiple fore-
casts with slightly different weather observations that represent
the probable error distribution of the measurements, the true
weather forecast will emerge within these computer solutions.
This technique is called ensemble forecasts (Toth and Kalnay 1993).
Generally, the mean of the forecast ensemble represents the most
accurate forecast. Also, many of the forecasts will cluster together
around the true prediction. Furthermore, the forecast spread indi-
cates the possible forecast error and forecast uncertainty. When
the ensemble technique indicates widely varying forecasts, one
knows there is considerable uncertainty in the hurricane predic-
tion; likewise, when the spread is small, the forecaster will have
conﬁdence in the prediction. Again, this technique is only useful
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
41

for up to ﬁve days, at which point all the forecasts begin to widely
diverge.
In addition, because hurricanes exist in data-sparse regions,
one can locate the most useful region to take plane measurements
by using a complicated mathematical technique known as a breed-
ing cycle. The breeding technique simulates the development of
growing forecast error (Toth and Kalnay 1997). The region where
observations beneﬁt computer models the most will be located
where these breeding modes grow with time (Aberson 2003).
Such “targeted observations” allow reconnaissance planes to
maximize the positive impact of additional observations on track
forecasts.
Computer models have revolutionized all aspects of meteor-
ology, including hurricane track forecasts, and they are improving
each year. The NHC has access to multiple models from the United
States (including the U.S. Navy), Britain, Canada, Japan, and
Europe. Just as in ensemble forecasts, often the best forecast is an
average of these different models, called a consensus forecast (Goerss
2000). However, in general the most reliable models, which use
sophisticated hurricane wind-proﬁle software, are the Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL), developed speciﬁcally for
hurricanes, and the Global Forecast System (GFS), developed by
the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) (Els-
berry 2005). The NHC leans toward these two models more than
other models. The history and recent improvements to the GFDL
model are listed in chapter 4. Unfortunately, computer guidance for
intensity forecasts is still unreliable. Forecasters use statistical
schemes and intuition to make their intensity predictions.
Observation Platforms
Hurricane forecasters monitor the latest observations from satel-
lites, ships, radar, buoys, oil rigs, and other sources to assess any
track or intensity changes. When a hurricane is far offshore in
data-void regions, the intensity is estimated from satellite cloud
patterns using the Dvorak technique (see chapter 1 for details).
While generally robust, the Dvorak technique can produce wrong
intensity values, as in the case of Typhoon Omar (1992). The Dvo-
rak technique estimated Omar to be a category 1 storm, but it was
discovered to actually be a category 2 storm hours before hitting
Guam, surprising the island’s inhabitants and perhaps amplify-
ing damage due to lack of preparation.
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Therefore, the most important data platform is reconnaissance
planes that ﬂy into the hurricane’s eye and take critical meteorolog-
ical measurements. The precise information required for obtaining
hurricane structure, location, and intensity cannot be obtained in
any other way and is crucially important for forecasts and evacua-
tion procedures. Forecasters credit a reconnaissance plane for dis-
covering that Hurricane Camille (1969) had strengthened from
sustained winds of 115 mph to 150 mph on August 16, 1969, at 5
p.m. CDT, thirty hours before landfall. Based on this new informa-
tion, additional evacuations were prompted that may have saved
up to 10,000 lives by one estimate. A reconnaissance plane also
measured Hurricane Opal’s (1992) unexpected rapid intensiﬁca-
tion. Reconnaissance ﬂights are expensive and only occur in the
Atlantic Ocean since just the U.S. government has the ﬁnancial
capability to fund them. At one time, Congress had considered
halting reconnaissance ﬂights. However, once their forecast and
evacuation impacts were made clear by scientists and evacuation
managers, not only was funding preserved but a line item was
added to the U.S. budget explicitly setting aside funds for Atlantic
reconnaissance ﬂights. At one time, U.S. Air Force reconnaissance
ﬂights also occurred in the western Paciﬁc Ocean, but budget
restrictions forced those ﬂight missions to end in 1987. Occasional
surprises such as Typhoon Omar are the result.
Continuous reconnaissance ﬂights begin once a tropical sys-
tem moves close enough to land. The 53rd Weather Reconnais-
sance Squadron (also known as the “Hurricane Hunters”) at
Keesler Air Force Base near Biloxi, Mississippi, takes most of these
measurements on WC-130s. Two additional P-3 Orion planes with
more sophisticated instruments (including a radar) are also avail-
able by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Adminis-
tration (NOAA) Aircraft Operations Center at MacDill Air Force
Base in Tampa Bay, Florida. The P-3s are deployed on less routine
ﬂights to perform analysis of hurricane structure in conjunction
with scientists at the Miami NOAA Hurricane Research Division
(HRD). The P-3s also transmit data to the NHC.
Obviously, reconnaissance ﬂights carry an element of risk. In
September 1955, a navy plane and its crew of nine plus two Cana-
dian newsmen were lost in the Caribbean Sea while ﬂying in Hur-
ricane Janet. Three air force aircraft have been lost ﬂying in
typhoons in the Paciﬁc. Fortunately, no planes have been lost in
the last twenty-ﬁve years, but scary moments still happen. In one
extreme circumstance during Hurricane Hugo (1989), one of the
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
43

P-3 planes encountered a severe mesoscale vortex that damaged
the plane, causing it to sink and then regaining altitude only
moments before it would have crashed into the ocean. Most
ﬂights are less eventful but do contain some “bumps” between
thunderstorm updrafts and downdrafts, and there are occasional
roller-coasterlike drops (or ascents) of 3,000 feet in less than a
minute due to strong updrafts and downdrafts. Since hurricane
winds are strongest just above the earth’s surface (about 1,000
feet) and weaken with height, reconnaissance ﬂights are per-
formed at 5,000 or 10,000 feet. During the hurricane penetration,
information about the horizontal wind and temperature structure
is transmitted to the NHC. Once the plane enters the eye, it
deploys a tube of instruments (called a dropsonde) that parachutes
downward from ﬂight level to the sea, sending valuable intensity
measurements back to the NHC.
Summary of NHC Forecast Procedures
Forecasters at the NHC critically evaluate each individual com-
puter prediction, as well as forecast ensembles, for reasonableness
and consistency with other forecasts, observed data, statistical
projections, the historical record, and extrapolated positions.
They also monitor the latest observations and satellite imagery for
last-minute adjustments. Based on all of this information, every
six hours the forecasters produce a new forecast of the storm’s
projected center location, intensity (deﬁned as maximum one-
minute sustained winds at 33 feet elevation), and storm size for
the next ﬁve days in several text and graphical packages. Exam-
ples of these NHC forecast products are provided in the glossary.
When hurricane conditions on the coast are possible within
thirty-six hours, a hurricane watch is issued. When hurricane con-
ditions are likely within twenty-four hours, a hurricane warning is
issued. These watches and warnings refer to the arrival of hurri-
cane-force winds of 74 mph, not eye landfall that generally occurs
a few hours later.
Track forecasts have signiﬁcantly improved in the last thirty
years, especially the two- and three-day forecasts (Franklin,
McAdie, and Lawrence 2003). In 1970, the forty-eight- and sev-
enty-two-hour track forecast errors were 300 and 480 miles,
respectively; today they are 170 and 250 miles, respectively. The
twenty-four-hour error has decreased more slowly, from 140
miles in 1970 to 90 miles today. The annual rate of improvement,
on average, is 1.0 percent, 1.7 percent, and 1.9 percent for the
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

twenty-four-, forty-eight-, and seventy-two-hour track forecasts,
respectively. These improvements are average errors, so individ-
ual predictions can be substantially better or worse. The four- and
ﬁve-day forecasts, which were issued starting in 2003, contain sig-
niﬁcant uncertainty with average errors of 290 and 370 miles,
respectively, and should only be used as general guidance.
Because of these errors, the predicted track is shown graphically
on the NHC’s website and on most TV stations as a widening
cone showing the uncertainties, with the track forecast of the
storm center usually in the middle of this cone. Generally, the
edge of this cone represents the most deviating models.
The NHC also predicts storm size (radius of strong wind
values), such as the radius of tropical storm force (39 mph) winds.
Storm size forecasts can also contain errors, so areas not in the
path of the storm center still need to be on guard. Typically, the
twenty-four-, thirty-six-, and forty-eight-hour error for storm size
averages 25, 30, and 35 miles, respectively. The NHC also predicts
intensity, but this is a tough challenge. There is much about how
the hurricane core interacts with the ocean and atmosphere that is
not understood. As a result, intensity forecasts are often signiﬁ-
cantly in error and are a priority research topic. The twenty-four-,
forty-eight-, and seventy-two-hour intensity error averages 10, 17,
and 22 mph, respectively. As illustrated in the Hurricane Opal
example, rapid intensity swings are often unpredictable as well.
Because of these potential track, storm size, and intensity
prediction errors, it is important that all communities in the 
hurricane-warning area take the threat seriously, even though the
landfall forecast may be 50 miles or more away. Never was this
more apparent than for Hurricane Charley (2004), which was
forecast to hit Tampa Bay as a category 3 but hit 100 miles south in
Port Charlotte as a category 4, surprising many residents. Port
Charlotte was in the hurricane-warning region, but many resi-
dents conﬁdently believed that the storm was going to Tampa and
did not expect the slight track turn or the rapid intensiﬁcation.
Society’s Preparation for Hurricanes: 
New Worries
Since Hurricane Camille’s storm surge killed 181 people in 1969
along the coast of Mississippi and Louisiana, U.S. hurricane-
related storm surge fatalities have dropped dramatically as storm
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
45

surveillance, evacuation procedures, public awareness, and fore-
casts have improved. However, new concerns have emerged as
coastal population growth and property development have ex-
ploded. In fact, U.S. population increases are currently largest in
coastal communities. The population has grown on average by 3–4
percent a year in hurricane-prone regions, and in some states such
as Florida the growth is greater. As a consequence, property dam-
age costs due to hurricanes skyrocketed in the 1990s (table 2.2).
This trend is disturbing in other ways. First of all, during
this period of higher property costs, the number of major hurri-
canes (category 3 or better) actually decreased between 1970 and
1995 (Landsea et al. 1996). This decrease follows an active period
of intense hurricanes during the 1940s to 1960s. Such shifts in
weather activity are known as multidecadal changes. This change is
likely due to a cooling in the Atlantic Ocean water temperature
and may also be related to a drought that started in 1970 in Africa,
where many tropical waves form before propagating out into the
Atlantic.
Second, the number of major hurricanes making landfall on
the U.S. East Coast dramatically decreased between 1965 and
1995. During the period 1944–1964, seventeen major hurricanes
hit the East Coast (Landsea 2000). In contrast, only ﬁve major hur-
ricanes made landfall on the East Coast between 1965 and 1995
(with a period between 1965 and 1983 where no East Coast land-
fall occurred). It is during this period that much population
growth and property development occurred on the East Coast,
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
TABLE 2.2
Hurricane-induced property damage costs by 
decade, adjusted to 1990 dollars
Decade
Property damage
1900–1909
$1 billion
1910–1919
$2.5 billion
1920–1929
$2 billion
1930–1939
$4.5 billion
1940–1949
$4.4 billion
1950–1959
$10 billion
1960–1969
$18 billion
1970–1979
$14 billion
1980–1989
$15 billion
1990–1995
$32.5 billion

with people apparently ignoring or not knowing what happened
during 1944–1964.
Some evidence suggests that major hurricane activity occurs
in forty- to sixty-year cycles, where twenty to thirty years of active
Atlantic hurricane seasons will be followed by twenty to thirty
years of relatively quite hurricane seasons (Gray, Sheaffer, and
Landsea 1996). In fact, it appears that an active period began in
the mid-1990s. The year 1995 was extraordinarily active, with
nineteen total storms; eleven reached hurricane status, and ﬁve
became intense hurricanes. The years 1996 and 1998 were also
above normal. In fact, the four-year period of 1995–1998 had a
total of thirty-three hurricanes—an all-time record in the Atlantic
Ocean. And in 2004, three major hurricanes made devastating
landfalls in the Florida peninsula, and a fourth major hurricane,
Ivan, demolished Gulf Shores and Pensacola! Global weather pat-
terns are also emerging that are favorable for more active hurri-
cane seasons in the future, such as a return of warm Atlantic water
temperatures (Gray et al. 1998). When the more active hurricane
phase returns (if it hasn’t already), property damage costs could
easily exceed $50 billion in one year, especially should a major city
be hit. Regardless of trends in Atlantic hurricane season activity,
each year the United States has at least a one in six chance of expe-
riencing hurricane-related damage of at least $10 billion (Pielke
and Landsea 1998).
Even more disturbing is the sharp population increase. In
Florida alone, the population has increased from 500,000 in 1930
to 13 million today. Some coastal regions are so congested now
that it is becoming more difﬁcult to perform a timely evacuation.
As discussed earlier, track forecasts have improved by 1–2 percent
per year (Franklin, McAdie, and Lawrence 2003), but the 3–4 per-
cent population growth could overwhelm these better predic-
tions, resulting in higher casualties again. Even worse, should a
hurricane unexpectedly change course or accelerate its motion,
there may not be enough lead time for orderly evacuation of
intensively developed coastal regions, trapping many residents
when the hurricane makes landfall.
In addition to potential casualties, hurricanes are expensive.
A typical hurricane warning costs an estimated $192 million due
to preparation, evacuation, and lost commerce. At least $300,000
of business losses and hurricane-preparation costs are incurred
per day for every mile of coastline evacuated. Some experts claim
that the cost is even larger, perhaps $1 million per mile. Therefore,
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
47

a top priority has become accelerating the improvements in fore-
casting accuracy through expanded and more accurate reconnais-
sance observations. In the late 1990s, HRD modernized the
dropsonde using Global Positioning System (GPS) technology,
which improved hurricane observations with unprecedented
accuracy. In addition, the new dropsondes have the ability to take
observations below 1,500 feet—something the older dropsondes
could not do. A new, faster plane has also been added to the
ﬂeet—the Gulfstream IV. Since the Gulfstream is a jet, it can reach
altitudes of 45,000 feet, unlike older propeller-driven planes
belonging to the Hurricane Hunters and to the Aircraft Opera-
tions Center, which can only reach 25,000 feet at best. The Gulf-
stream data, combined with new data assimilation techniques in
models, has improved track forecasts by 15–35 percent.
If this track improvement can be sustained, it may allow the
NHC to shrink the warning zone by 50–80 miles, which would
save millions in evacuation costs, especially if a major city is
excluded from the warning area. It would also reduce trafﬁc con-
gestion, speeding up evacuation from the most threatened region.
Furthermore, if homeowners take advantage of more accurate
forecasts by seriously protecting their homes, it is estimated that
another 10–15 percent in costs would be saved. And, any lives
saved by the improved forecasts would be priceless.
Other exciting technological developments have occurred. In
1999 the Hurricane Hunters replaced their WC-130H aircraft with
WC-130J planes, which are faster, more fuel-efﬁcient (resulting in
longer ﬂights), and, most importantly, can travel at 37,000 feet or
more. This augments operational measurements critical to hurri-
cane forecasting. In addition, NASA scientists, NOAA scientists,
and universities have collaborated on several ﬁeld programs to
collect data at all levels of hurricanes using multiple aircraft,
remote sensing technologies, and portable surface-measuring plat-
forms (see chapter 4 for details about the Third Convection and
Moisture Experiments, the China LAndfalling Typhoon EXperi-
ment, and The Coupled Boundary Layer Air Sea Transfer). The
data sets produced by this and future missions will be unprece-
dented in their comprehensiveness, providing researchers with
new information toward understanding hurricanes.
In the next few decades, another new type of plane may be
taking oceanic observations. Scientists in Australia and Canada
are experimenting with small, pilotless aircraft, typically called
drones or sometimes aerosondes. These drones theoretically can be
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

programmed to ﬂy a ﬁxed path for more than twenty-four hours,
continuously ingesting weather observations that would im-
prove forecasts. The ﬁrst successful cross-Atlantic ﬂight by an
unmanned aerosonde was accomplished on August 22, 1998. The
unique aerodynamic structure and relative weightlessness of
drones also allows them to theoretically withstand hurricane
winds and strong updrafts in thunderstorms, thereby providing
timely and continuous crucial weather data at a cheaper cost
than airplane reconnaissance.
Forecasting Annual Hurricane Activity
In the early 1980s, Dr. William Gray at Colorado State University
asked the question, “Why do some Atlantic hurricane seasons
have many storms, and why are other seasons inactive?” He fur-
ther wondered if one could predict, months in advance, the num-
ber of tropical storms and hurricanes for the upcoming Atlantic
tropical season. Based on his research, in 1984 Gray began to pub-
licly predict how active the Atlantic hurricane season would be
before it starts. His predictions have been remarkably accurate at
times and have proven to be skillful (Owens and Landsea 2003).
His forecasts, which are well publicized in the media, are issued
every December, April, June, August, and September. His fore-
casts are also available at http://tropical.atmos.colostate.edu.
Gray and his students have discovered several surprising
global signals that affect Atlantic hurricane activity (Gray et al.
1998). The reasons for some of these associations remain unclear
and are still under research. These include:
1. El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), also known as El
Niño. El Niño occurs when warm water in the equatorial
western Paciﬁc Ocean shifts east, which occurs about
every three to seven years. What does the Paciﬁc Ocean
have to do with Atlantic hurricanes, you ask? This change
in the Paciﬁc Ocean alters global wind patterns and mod-
iﬁes many weather elements, including reducing hurri-
cane activity. In El Niño years, wind shear is enhanced in
the Atlantic Ocean that is destructive to tropical storm
formation. An El Niño ofﬁcially ends when the warm
eastern Paciﬁc waters cool to average temperatures; 
however, usually the cooling continues, which is called
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
49

La Niña. La Niña years are associated with weaker than
average Atlantic wind shear and enhanced Atlantic hurri-
cane activity. The occurrence of an El Niño or La Niña is
one of the most important modulators of Atlantic hurri-
cane activity.
2. African rainfall. There is a strong correlation between rainy
years in the western Sahel of Africa and major (category 3,
4, or 5) hurricane activity. Likewise, during drought years
in Africa, major hurricane activity is reduced. Most major
hurricanes come from tropical waves that originate over
Africa. It has been hypothesized that during rainy years,
tropical waves are stronger and more conducive to genesis
as they move westward off the African coast. However,
Goldenberg and Shapiro (1996) show that years with
strong (weak) wind shear are associated with droughts
(rain) in Africa. Rainfall is also likely related to changes in
water temperature in the Atlantic Ocean, where years with
warm (cold) water are correlated with wet (dry) years in
Africa and more (fewer) strong hurricanes (C. Landsea,
personal communication, 1998).
3. Pressure and temperature difference between the western African
coast and the Sahel region during the previous February–May
period. When these differences are conducive to onshore
ﬂow that transports moisture over Africa, hurricane
activity is often enhanced; when it is conducive to off-
shore ﬂow, hurricane activity is often suppressed.
4. Caribbean Sea surface pressure. When pressure is lower
(higher) than normal in the Caribbean Sea, Atlantic hurri-
cane activity is enhanced (suppressed). High pressure
indicates sinking air, which suppresses thunderstorm for-
mation in easterly waves and other tropical disturbances.
Knaff (1997) also showed that higher pressure is corre-
lated with strong wind shear.
5. Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO). The QBO is an oscilla-
tion of equatorial winds between 13 and 15 miles aloft.
These winds change direction between westerly and east-
erly every twelve to sixteen months. Westerly winds are
associated with more hurricanes than easterly winds,
especially when the wind is westerly at both 13 and 15
miles aloft. It has been postulated that a westerly QBO
reduces wind shear, but the reason for this hurricane
association remains unclear.
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

6. Caribbean wind shear. During seasons when shear is
greater than normal in the Caribbean Sea, hurricane
activity is suppressed, and vice versa for seasons with
weak wind shear.
7. Atlantic Ocean water temperature. Obviously, warmer than
normal sea-surface temperature is favorable for active
hurricane years, and vice versa for colder than normal
water.
8. Strength of Azores high-pressure system. The Azores High is
a permanent feature located 20–30° west in the Atlantic
Ocean. When pressure is higher than normal in the
Atlantic, tropical northeast winds tend to be stronger
than normal. This, in turn, upwells cold water to the sur-
face off the northwest African coast, thereby reducing the
chance of tropical genesis as tropical waves propagate off
Africa. There also is some long-term feedback, such that a
strong Azores High in the fall results in high pressure in
the Caribbean Sea the following year (Gray et al. 1998;
Knaff 1997). Therefore, when the Azores high is stronger
(weaker) than normal in the central Atlantic, hurricane
activity is enhanced (suppressed).
In general, when more of these predictors are favorable 
for hurricane activity than unfavorable, Gray predicts an above-
average hurricane season, and when most are unfavorable, a quiet
hurricane season is predicted. When the same number of predic-
tors have positive and negative inﬂuences, an average hurricane
season is predicted—about nine named storms, six of which will
become hurricanes and two of these becoming intense (table 2.3).
However, caution must be advised here since some predictors are
more important than others. For instance, despite the fact that
most factors were favorable for an active hurricane season in 1997,
a record El Niño that year dominated the weather, resulting in a
quiet hurricane season. Also, one should be careful about attribut-
ing Atlantic hurricane activity to one feature in any year, because
many of these features are interrelated; for example, an El Niño
tends to be associated with strong Caribbean wind shear.
Gray quantitatively predicts several parameters using statis-
tical techniques and intuition, such as the number of named
storms (which includes tropical storms and hurricanes), the 
number of hurricanes, the number of days with tropical storms or
hurricanes, etc. He also forecasts the number of major hurricanes,
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
51

which includes category 3, 4, or 5 hurricanes, since these are the
storms that cause about 83 percent of total hurricane damage
(Pielke and Landsea 1998). Table 2.3 summarizes Gray’s forecast
of named storms versus the observed number.
Note in table 2.3 that in sixteen of the twenty-one forecasts,
Dr. Gray correctly predicted whether the observed number of
storms would be above or below the average of nine named
storms. However, years that were incorrect (1989, 1993, 1997,
1998, and 2002) are instructive because they lead to new insights
on how to improve the forecasts. For example, after analyzing the
1989 underforecast of storm activity, the importance of African
rain was discovered, since 1989 was the only nondrought year
that decade. Starting in 1990, African rainfall was included in
Gray’s seasonal forecasts. Also, since the predictions are based on
statistical probabilities, the forecast will fail in some years (just as
local National Weather Service statistical forecasts of rain and
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
TABLE 2.3
Number of named storms (including both tropical storms and hurricanes) pre-
dicted by Dr. Bill Gray each year in August, versus the number actually observed
Number of named
Number of named
Year
storms forecasted
storms observed
1984
10
12
1985
10
11
1986
7
6
1987
7
7
1988
11
12
1989
9
11
1990
11
14
1991
7
8
1992
8
6
1993
10
8
1994
7
7
1995
16
19
1996
11
13
1997
11
7
1998
10
14
1999
14
12
2000
11
14
2001
12
15
2002
9
12
2003
8
7
2004
13
14

temperature will occasionally fail). Gray has to also make a cor-
rect prediction of parameters such as African rain and El Niño for
an accurate seasonal hurricane forecast. If he forecasts a basic pre-
dictor incorrectly (such as not predicting the record El Niño of
1997), the seasonal forecast will probably be wrong. Starting in
1998, Gray also began issuing forecasts for hurricane landfall
probability based on Atlantic sea surface temperature patterns.
These seasonal forecasts draw immense public interest each
year. In addition, insurance companies ﬁnd them useful in prepa-
ration for the upcoming hurricane season. Insurance companies
also use this information to buy insurance for themselves, called
reinsurance. A reinsurance program is divided into layers with dif-
ferent reinsurers assuming the risk of different layers (Murnane
2004). For example, a direct insurer may be responsible for the
ﬁrst $50 million of losses, then reinsurer A assumes 90 percent of
the next $50 million, reinsurer B assumes 90 percent of the subse-
quent $75 million, and reinsurers C and D split 90 percent of the
next $50 million. The direct insurer is then responsible for losses
in excess of $250 million. In this way, reinsurers retain a fraction of
the losses to help avoid excessive claims. The top property catas-
trophe loss is due to hurricanes (see chapter 6). Therefore, know-
ing the activity of the upcoming hurricane season ﬁve months or
more in advance allows reinsurers to adjust their exposure during
annual negotiations. Direct insurers beneﬁt because they can
enlarge their underwriting capacity and reduce the probability of
ﬁnancial ruin.
Gray’s pioneering work has inspired other universities and
organizations, such as Dr. Jim Elsner at Florida State University
and the Tropical Storm Risk group at University College London,
to issue seasonal forecasts using different statistical methodolo-
gies. It also motivated NOAA’s Climate Prediction Center (CPC)
to start issuing seasonal hurricane forecasts in 2002. Using basi-
cally the same predictor’s as Gray, the CPC issues a more general
outlook in terms of probability. For example, the August 2003
forecast predicted a high likelihood (60 percent) of an above-
normal season, a 35 percent probability of a normal season, and
only a 5 percent chance of a below-normal season. The CPC then
give a range of predicted named storms, hurricanes, and major
hurricanes (i.e., twelve to ﬁfteen named storms) rather than a spe-
ciﬁc number. These numbers are clumped together into an Accu-
mulated Cyclone Energy (ACI) index, a measure of overall
activity. The goal is to actually predict a correct range of the ACI
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
53

index, with generally two of the three predictors in the correct
range. These forecasts are issued in May with an update in
August and are available at http://www.cpc.noaa.gov.
All hurricane seasons should be taken seriously by coastal
residents, even if the seasonal forecast is “below normal.” Many
devastating hurricanes have occurred in otherwise inactive sea-
sons, such as Hurricane Andrew (1992), Hurricane Alicia (1983),
and Hurricane Allen (1980).
Is Global Warming Increasing 
the Number of Hurricanes?
Some environmental groups claim that hurricanes are becoming
stronger and more numerous (Leggett 1994) due to a reputed phe-
nomena known as global warming. Media outlets also have made
such assertions (Anon. 1996). First of all, the topic of global warm-
ing is itself very political and controversial. Although a majority
of scientists believe that global warming is occurring, many scien-
tists still discredit these allegations with solid arguments. This
book will not discuss the global warming controversy in any
detail, since many other books are devoted to the subject, includ-
ing the ABC-CLIO book Global Warming (Newton 1993).
However, we will discuss two issues concerning any links to
possible global warming and hurricanes. The ﬁrst question is:
Have hurricanes increased in numbers or intensity in the past two
decades due to possible global warming? The second question is:
Will hurricane activity increase in the future due to possible
global warming?
In short, the answer to the ﬁrst question is “no.” The answer
to the second question is “maybe,” although reductions in hurri-
cane activity are also possible. Before addressing these issues in
detail, a review of the greenhouse effect and global warming is
required.
What Is the Greenhouse Effect?
A balance between incoming solar radiation from the sun and out-
going radiation from the earth primarily regulates the atmos-
phere’s temperature. This is a complicated process requiring some
explanation. When an object becomes warmer than –273.15°C (the
temperature where all molecular motion ceases, also called
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

absolute zero on the Kelvin temperature scale, and equivalent to
–459.67°F), it begins to emit electromagnetic radiation. Therefore,
as the sun warms the earth environment, the earth begins to emit its
own radiation. However, radiation is dependent on temperature.
The hotter an object is, the shorter the wavelength of peak emission.
The much hotter sun emits most of its radiation as visible light. The
cooler earth emits its energy at a much longer wavelength, which
human eyes cannot see, called the infrared spectrum.
It turns out that molecules in the atmosphere behave differ-
ently with regard to the passage of infrared radiation and visible
radiation through them. It’s a complex process: the end result is
that some air molecules allow visible radiation to pass through
them but obstruct infrared radiation. With this background, we
can now discuss the heat balance of the earth and its atmosphere.
As solar radiation ﬂows from the sun toward the earth, it
passes freely through the atmosphere and warms the earth. How-
ever, as the earth tries to emit this heat back to space in the
infrared spectrum, some of it becomes “trapped” by the atmos-
phere, thus warming the air. A portion of this energy is radiated
back to the earth, which warms the surface. The earth, in turn,
reradiates this infrared energy upward, where it is again absorbed
and warms the lower atmosphere some more. In this way, the
atmosphere acts as an insulating layer, keeping part of the
infrared radiation from escaping rapidly into space. Conse-
quently, the earth’s surface and lower atmosphere are much
warmer than they would be without this selective absorption of
infrared radiation. This process is often called the greenhouse effect
since it is analogous to a glass building that allows visible light
inside but prevents some infrared radiation from leaving, thus
keeping the plants inside warm (even in winter). It’s important to
realize that the atmosphere’s greenhouse effect is a natural
process, and without it the earth would be a much colder, unliv-
able planet with an average surface temperature of 0°F.
There is a distinction between the atmosphere and a green-
house: in a greenhouse, the glass allows visible light to pass
through but restricts the passage of infrared, while in the atmos-
phere molecules are differentiating between visible and infrared
radiation. Also, a greenhouse warms quickly because glass is a
physical barrier to air movement, while in the atmosphere mixing
occurs freely between warm air at the ground and cooler air aloft,
thus slowing down warming. Nevertheless, the phrase “green-
house effect” is used throughout the media and meteorology, so
the nomenclature will be used in this book as well.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
55

Certain molecules are more effective at trapping infrared
radiation than others. The most important greenhouse gas is
water vapor, because it strongly absorbs a portion of outgoing
infrared radiation and is a plentiful gas. The other greenhouse gas
is carbon dioxide CO2, which is equally as absorptive but far less
plentiful than water vapor and therefore plays a much smaller
role in the greenhouse effect. CO2 is a natural component of the
atmosphere, produced mainly by the decay of vegetation.
What Is Global Warming?
However, CO2 is also produced by the burning of fossil fuels such
as coal, oil, gasoline, and natural gas. Observations show that CO2
has increased by more than 10 percent since 1958, coinciding with
increases in fossil fuel emissions from automobiles, factories, and
other power sources. Global warming theory states that the green-
house effect will be enhanced as CO2 increases, because more out-
going infrared radiation will be absorbed. There is also the
possibility that increasing the temperature will increase water
vapor concentrations (the major greenhouse gas) due to increased
evaporation rates, further enhancing warming prospects. Some
scientists contend that global warming will increase the earth’s
average surface temperature by 2–8°F. However, other scientists
contend that feedback processes involving clouds and the ocean
may cancel that potential warming. Some scientists, based on
decades of observations, also say that global warming is already
occurring. However, other scientists using different observation
techniques show that no true warming has happened yet; still
others attribute any perceived warming to natural climate vari-
ability. The honest truth is, no reputable scientist is 100 percent
conﬁdent that global warming has occurred or will ever occur. But
let’s play devil’s advocate for the moment and discuss how these
scenarios could change hurricane activity.
Has the Number of Tropical Storms Increased,
and Have Hurricanes Become Stronger Due to
Potential Global Warming?
The global average of eighty-nine tropical storms (see table 3.2)
has not changed in the last few decades, which suggests that even
if global warming is occurring, it hasn’t altered the number of
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

these tropical systems (Landsea 2000). Furthermore, while annual
and decadal variations in hurricane numbers occur in regional
ocean basins, no long-term trends are observed. Indeed, some
ocean basins experience ten- to twenty-year cycles where the total
number of storms changes. For example, since 1980 the number of
tropical storms has increased in the Northwest Paciﬁc, but this
increase was preceded by a nearly identical decrease from about
1960 to 1980. A recent analysis also shows a slight decreasing trend
in hurricanes in the Northwest Paciﬁc, even though water temper-
ature has shown a slight upward trend during 1960–2003 (Chan
and Liu 2004). A downward trend in tropical storm number since
the mid-1980s for the Australian region has also been observed,
but this is probably an artiﬁcial decrease due to a change in tropi-
cal cyclone wind designation by that country in the mid-1980s.
As discussed earlier, the number of Atlantic tropical storms
has substantial year-to-year variability. However, no signiﬁcant
trend in tropical storm number has been observed since 1944
(Landsea et al. 1996). In contrast, the number of major hurricanes
(category 3 or better) has shown a signiﬁcant downward trend dur-
ing this period, corresponding with an active period of intense
hurricanes during the 1940s to 1960s that suddenly changed to a
quiet period of intense hurricanes during the 1970s to 1990s. (Such
shifts in weather activity are known as multidecadal changes). This
change is likely due to a cooling in the Atlantic Ocean water tem-
perature during this period and may also be related to a drought
that started in 1970 in Africa, where many tropical waves form
before propagating out into the Atlantic.
The early 1990s was a particularly inactive period in the
Atlantic. No hurricanes were observed over the Caribbean Sea
during the years 1990–1994—the longest period of lack of hurri-
canes in the area since 1899. The period 1991–1994 is the quietest
four-year period on record since 1944 in terms of frequency of
total storms (7.5 per year), hurricanes (3.8 per year), and major
hurricanes (1.0 per year). However, one major hurricane that
made landfall during this period was Andrew (1992), which
caused record amounts of damage in Miami.
Because Andrew, a category 5 hurricane, hit a metropolitan
area, it attracted much attention, including claims that global
warming must have caused such a powerful storm because of the
unprecedented damage (Leggett 1994; Newsweek 1996; U.S. Senate
Bipartisan Task Force on Funding Disaster Relief 1995; Dlugolecki
et al. 1996). However, it is normal to have two major hurricanes
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
57

each year (see table 3.2). In fact, it is unusual to have only one
major hurricane per year during a four-year period! Andrew just
happened to hit a highly developed coastal region.
Therefore, claims of global warming increasing hurricane
activity or intensity has little supporting evidence thus far,
because a signiﬁcant decrease occurred between 1970 and 1995
during this period of increased fossil fuel emissions. The long-
term climate record does not support possible global warming
contributing to increased hurricane activity.
The moral is that a reader should view most sensational sci-
ence reports with some skepticism. Stories about global warming
(and most sensational science stories in general) need not neces-
sarily be dismissed as incorrect, but they should be carefully scru-
tinized. Questions one should ask when reading a science report
or trying to learn about a particular science topic are:
1. Who is the source for the report? For example, is it in a sci-
entiﬁc magazine written by an author with a science
degree from college or in a newspaper/news/TV report
by an author with no background in the sciences? Just
because an article is in a popular media outlet doesn’t
mean it’s shoddy, but it does depend on the quality of the
journalist, his or her interview procedures, and scientiﬁc
aptitude. Some writers work hard to produce an accurate,
informative article. On the other hand, many scientists
can describe instances where a journalist inaccurately
reported their information or took a quote out of context.
2. Was the report peer-reviewed? The most reputable reports
are in journals that undergo a peer-review process. The
peer-review process involves rigorous commentary by
several experts in the ﬁeld who either accept or reject the
article based on its scientiﬁc merit. Usually several re-
writes are needed. Examples of general science journals
available at bookstores and newsstands that at least
undergo some minimal peer review are Scientiﬁc Ameri-
can, Nature, and Science. Examples of peer-reviewed jour-
nals in meteorology are Monthly Weather Review, Weather
and Forecasting, Journal of Climate, and the Bulletin of the
American Meteorological Society. The latter are all pub-
lished by the American Meteorological Society (see chap-
ter 7). Other clues that a publication is from a journal are
the usage of footnotes and references, few to no adver-
tisements, quarterly or monthly publications, and a tech-
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

nical format written for experts. In contrast, magazines
and newspaper articles are written by journalists or
laypersons, have few footnotes or references, are written
for the general public, and appear weekly or daily.
3. Is it a well-balanced report presenting all the issues, or is it
strongly biased toward one point of view? Often a journalist
or a magazine funded by a particular special interest
group or political party, will strongly skew a report
toward the individual’s or group’s point of view. These
reports may have legitimate information, but one should
investigate other sources before jumping to conclusions.
To assess whether a report is biased, simply look at other
reports by the same reporter or magazine to see if similar
topics are reported in the same context. Even peer-
reviewed articles can contain biases.
In summary, one should be skeptical and inquisitive about
most controversial or sensational scientiﬁc information they
encounter and should always obtain their information from more
than one source.
Should Global Warming Occur 
in the Future, Will Hurricanes 
Increase in Number and Intensity?
Research has shown that global warming could increase sea sur-
face temperature, humidity, and rainfall in the tropics. Based on
this research, some have suggested that hurricanes may increase
in frequency, area of occurrence, intensity, and rainfall amounts
(Ryan, Watterson, and Evans 1992; Emanuel 1987; Tuleya and
Knutson 2002). A recent study suggests global warming has
increased hurricane intensity and storm lifetime in the Atlantic
and North Paciﬁc (Emanuel 2005). However, any changes in hur-
ricane activity will also be associated with large-scale changes in
the tropical atmosphere (Landsea 2000; Henderson-Sellers et al.
1998; Chan and Liu 2004). For example, the static instability
threshold necessary for thunderstorm maintenance could change,
since temperature may increase throughout the atmosphere, not
just at the surface.
In addition, any changes in global wind patterns will pro-
foundly affect hurricane activity. For instance, if global warming
increases wind shear, one would see a signiﬁcant decrease in 
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
59

hurricane activity. Likewise, a reduction in wind shear would dra-
matically increase hurricane activity. If monsoon activity in-
creases, then tropical cyclogenesis will increase, and vice versa for
weakened monsoon troughs. Another wildcard is how global
warming would change El Niño activity—if more El Niños occur,
hurricane activity would be reduced, and vice versa for fewer El
Niños. In summary, the combined changes in water temperature,
wind shear, monsoon activity, atmospheric instability, tropical
moisture, and El Niño will dictate how hurricane activity
changes. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to assess how potential global
warming could alter hurricane activity. Besides, there is consider-
able motivation for society to better prepare for hurricanes inde-
pendent of global warming concerns!
Attempts at Hurricane Modiﬁcation
Because of the destructive and life-threatening nature of hurri-
canes, experimental attempts have been made to weaken them.
The main hypothesis involved converting liquid cloud water to
ice just outside the eyewall. Water gives off enormous quantities
of stored heat (also called latent heat) when it changes phase from
liquid to ice. Many clouds in the atmosphere exist in a supercooled
state, which means that the temperature of the liquid droplets is
below freezing (32°F), but the droplets lack a “triggering” mecha-
nism to turn to ice. For this conversion to occur, supercooled liq-
uid water needs to attach to a ﬂoating aerosol with a molecular
structure similar to ice, known as ice nuclei. However, ice nuclei
are often sparse in the atmosphere, and many supercooled
droplets are never converted to ice. If somehow one could intro-
duce artiﬁcial ice nuclei (such as silver iodide) into a supercooled
cloud, the water would be converted to ice, thus releasing lots of
heat into the air and causing the cloud to grow. This premise,
known as cloud seeding, has been attempted to increase rainfall in
drought-stricken regions (with unproven results) and snowpack
in the mountains (with successful results).
The seeding process to theoretically weaken a hurricane is
more complicated. At ﬁrst scientists thought they could seed the
eyewall and perturb the hurricane’s wind outward, thus weaken-
ing the hurricane (Anthes 1982; Willoughby et al. 1985). By the
mid-1960s, scientists realized that this theory was ﬂawed. A
revised theory involved seeding the clouds just outside the eye-
wall to stimulate cloud growth away from the eyewall. The new
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

outer eyewall would grow, depriving inﬂow into the older inner
eyewall. The result is a weakening inner eyewall, resulting in less
subsidence in the eye and a rise in central pressure. If the pressure
increases, inﬂowing air is unable to penetrate to as small a radius,
and most of the new ascent occurs at the new outer eyewall. Even-
tually the new eyewall would replace the old eyewall, but at a
larger distance from the center. Just as ice-skaters slow their rota-
tion when their arms are spread out, a larger eyewall radius
would cause a reduction in wind speed.
Cloud seeding was ﬁrst tested when several U.S. govern-
ment agencies collaborated in a pioneering weather modiﬁcation
effort known as Project Cirrus (Willoughby et al. 1985). Among
other notable ﬁrsts was the cloud seeding of a hurricane. On Octo-
ber 13, 1947, a plane dropped silver iodide into a hurricane mov-
ing to the northeast. Observers on the plane noted changes in the
visual appearance of the cloud but could not demonstrate any
changes in structure or intensity. However, shortly afterward the
hurricane reversed course to the west, making landfall on the
coasts of Georgia and South Carolina. It is extremely unlikely that
seeding altered the course, since hurricanes are mostly guided by
constantly shifting large-scale atmospheric currents. However,
the political and legal implications taught scientists to be more
careful about where they conducted their hurricane seeding
experiments. Future attempts at hurricane modiﬁcation occurred
only in hurricanes that were far from all land masses and unlikely
to make landfall within twenty-four hours.
The next experiment occurred on September 16, 1961, when a
naval aircraft dropped eight canisters of silver iodide into Hurri-
cane Esther. Esther, which had been intensifying, stopped strength-
ening and the eyewall’s distance from the center increased. The
next day, a second seeding attempt was made, but the canisters
missed the eyewall and the hurricane’s intensity did not change. At
the time, the experiment was considered successful, although we
now know that the eyewall-seeding hypothesis was ﬂawed and
that Esther’s changes must have occurred naturally. The encourag-
ing results from Esther led to the formal establishment of a hurri-
cane modiﬁcation program known as Project STORMFURY in 1962
(Willoughby et al. 1985). 
STORMFURY was a collaboration between NOAA and the
U.S. Navy and was directed by the National Hurricane Research
Project (now called the Hurricane Research Division). STORM-
FURY started out apparently well when Hurricane Beulah’s eye-
wall was seeded on August 24, 1963. The eyewall disintegrated,
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
61

followed by formation of a new eyewall at a larger distance from
the eye. The maximum winds decreased by 20 percent and moved
farther away from the center. STORMFURY seemed to have a
promising beginning.
Four more years were to pass before the next modiﬁcation
experiment. The years 1964–1968 were generally inactive hurri-
cane seasons, and the hurricanes that did occur were either too
close to land or out of ﬂight range. Scientists also realized that the
eyewall-seeding hypothesis was incorrect, resulting in the revised
hypothesis of seeding outside the eyewall. The modiﬁed hypoth-
esis was tested on Hurricane Debbie on August 18 and August 20,
1969, when more than 1,000 seedings of silver iodide were made
each day. The eyewall shifted outward each day, and the winds
decreased by 31 percent and 15 percent, respectively.
Ironically, this was essentially the end of Project STORM-
FURY. The 1970 hurricane season yielded no suitable candidates for
seeding. In 1971, the only eligible storm was Hurricane Ginger, a
late-season, diffuse system. It was seeded twice but was a poor can-
didate because it lacked a small, well-deﬁned eye; the seeding had
no effect on Ginger. In 1972, all the storms were too weak, too close
to land, or out of ﬂight range. In fact, in general the 1970s were a
period of below-average hurricane activity, especially for intense
hurricanes. Other difﬁculties also plagued STORMFURY. The U.S.
Navy ended its support to pursue goals more closely related to
national defense. Several of the aircraft had become too old for reli-
able use anymore. Permissions for seeding from Caribbean coun-
tries and Mexico became more difﬁcult to obtain, and the State
Department increased the time restriction for seeding before land-
fall (Posey 1994). Eventually, only a narrow zone north of Puerto
Rico in which hurricanes were at least thirty-six hours from land-
fall was allowed for seeding. Unfortunately, no storms ever
passed through the small permissible trapezoid of ocean north of
Puerto Rico between 1973 and 1979. STORMFURY scientists
attempted to move the project into the Paciﬁc where storms are
more numerous, but Japan and Australia blocked that move. The
Chinese government also was not in favor of the project. Chinese
ofﬁcials were convinced that seeding during the Vietnam War had
been successful in muddying the Ho Chi Minh Trail, making it
impassible, and were concerned that seeding hurricanes offshore
would remove beneﬁcial rainfall to their continent (List 2004).
Finally, weather modiﬁcation experiments in general were falling
into public disfavor (Pielke and Pielke 1997). In 1983, Project
STORMFURY was terminated.
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Also, from the very beginning of STORMFURY and through-
out the project’s lifetime, several scientists expressed concerns about
the seeding hypothesis as well as the interpretation of STORM-
FURY’s experiments. These doubts became substantiated by addi-
tional reconnaissance observations in the 1970s and 1980s and by
increased knowledge of hurricane structure and evolution during
this period. These ﬁndings (Willoughby et al. 1985), which refute the
basic premise of project STORMFURY, are summarized below:
1. Observational evidence shows that hurricanes actually
contain too little supercooled water and too much natural
ice for seeding to be effective.
2. Hurricanes go through a natural (but temporary) weak-
ening process in which a new eyewall forms outside the
original eyewall. The outer eyewall “chokes off” inﬂow to
the inner eyewall, causing it to dissipate. The outer eye-
wall then propagates inward, replacing the original eye-
wall. This process, known as the concentric eyewall cycle,
lasts twelve to thirty-six hours and is associated with
temporary weakening (Willoughby, Clos, and Shoreibah
1982). Therefore, much of the observed weakening in
Esther, Beulah, and Debbie may be the result of natural
internal evolution rather than seeding. Hurricane inten-
sity is also controlled by external inﬂuences, such as
water temperature and wind shear. For example, some
evidence exists that Debbie moved into a strong wind
shear environment conducive to weakening (P. Black,
personal communication, 1994). Therefore, the expected
results of seeding are indistinguishable from naturally
occurring intensity changes.
Project STORMFURY should not be viewed as a failure,
however. Even though only a few seeding experiments were per-
formed, many reconnaissance ﬂights were conducted into hurri-
canes to understand their formation, structure, and evolution. The
legacy of Project STORMFURY is a wealth of observations that
has augmented our understanding of hurricanes and improved
hurricane forecasts. For more information about Project STORM-
FURY, see Posey (1994), Willoughby et al. (1985), and chapter 6.
The notion of hurricane modiﬁcation still remains, though
(Posey 1994). Occasionally, someone will ask, “Why don’t we just
nuke a hurricane and destroy it?” Radioactivity aside, such a
question demonstrates an extreme underestimate of hurricane
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
63

power. For example, Hurricane Andrew (1992) generated the
equivalent energy of a 10-megaton bomb continuously during its
existence—not in a split second as in a bomb explosion! It is
doubtful that a hurricane would even be affected by a nuclear
blast; the storm would simply spew radioactive fallout throughout
the region. Another hypothesis suggests that future earth-orbiting
solar power stations could beam microwaves around a hurricane
at a frequency where water vapor would absorb it, altering the
temperature and pressure ﬁelds and ultimately the storm path
(Hoffman 2004). Other ideas involve removing a hurricane’s
energy source. Some commercial entrepreneurs have proposed
covering the ocean ahead of a hurricane with an impermeable
chemical ﬁlm or biodegradable powder that would impede evapo-
ration from the sea, thus weakening the hurricane as it moves into
that region (Posey 1994). This is unrealistic, though, because it is
unlikely that any surface ﬁlm or powder could withstand the 30- to
50-foot ocean waves in a hurricane, and covering hundreds of
square miles of ocean with a substance is a formidable task. Others
have promoted stimulating cloud growth in the outer core of a hur-
ricane by increasing the surface temperature with carbon black,
which possibly would restrict inﬂow to the hurricane’s inner core
(Gray and Frank 1993); however, such a scheme would suffer the
same obstacles as Project STORMFURY. Chemical ﬁlms and carbon
black also pose environmental problems. The wisest course of
action is to reduce societal exposure to hurricane impacts, not use
modiﬁcation attempts. Pielke and Pielke (1997) offer several rec-
ommendations to improve hurricane preparedness policies.
Mitigation and Insurance Procedures
Proper preparation for hurricanes is of paramount importance.
Dealing with insurance companies after a hurricane damage like-
wise can be a harrowing experience. This section discusses proce-
dures for mitigation and insurance. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) produces authoritative documents
on these issues. The following is based on FEMA’s guidelines, but
with signiﬁcant additions from other sources.
Home Protection
Hurricane-force winds are destructive to homes. In extreme
storms, such as Hurricane Andrew, the force of the wind alone can
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

cause weak places in your home to fail. Flying debris also breaks
windows and doors, allowing high winds inside the home. After
Hurricane Andrew, a team of experts examined homes that had
failed and ones that had survived. They found four areas that
should be checked for weakness: roof, windows, doors, and
garage door.
The Roof
Wind damage begins with items such as television antennas,
satellite dishes, unanchored air conditioners, wooden fences, gut-
ters, storage sheds, carports, and yard items. As winds increase,
the home becomes vulnerable. Wind interacting with a building is
deﬂected over and around it. Positive (inward) pressure occurs on
the windward walls and tries to push the building off its founda-
tion. Therefore, the building needs to be anchored properly to its
foundation to resist these lateral forces. Negative (outward) pres-
sure occurs to the side and leeward walls. The resulting suction
tries to peel away siding. In addition, wind ﬂowing over a roof
creates lift similar to that on an airplane wing, especially along
windward eaves, roof corners, and leeward ridges. Because wind
pressure increases with height, building damage typically begins
at roof level and progresses downward and inward. Therefore,
roof protection is of critical importance.
Damage depends on the type of roof. Homes with gabled
roofs are more likely to suffer damage during a hurricane. A
gabled roof looks like an “A” on the ends, with the outside wall
going to the top of the roof. The end wall of a home with a gabled
roof takes a beating during a hurricane, and those that are not
properly braced can collapse, causing major damage to the roof.
In most homes, gabled roofs are built using manufactured
trusses. Sheets of roof sheathing, often plywood, are fastened to
the trusses with nails or staples, and rooﬁng material is fastened
to the sheathing. In many cases, the only thing holding the trusses
in place is the plywood on top. This may not be enough to hold
the roof in place during a hurricane. Installing additional truss
bracing makes the roof’s truss system much stronger. If most of
the large nails or staples coming through the sheathing have
missed the trusses, then the sheathing is not properly installed.
In gabled roofs, truss bracing usually consists of 2×4s that
run the length of the roof. The 2×4s should extend the length of
your roof, overlapping the ends of the 2×4s across two trusses.
Braces should be installed 18 inches from the ridge, in the center
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
65

span, and at the base, with 8–10 feet between the braces. Two 
3-inch, 14-gauge wood screws or two 16d (16 penny) galvanized
common nails should be used at each truss. Because space in attics
is limited, 3-inch, 14-gauge screws can be used instead; they are
easier to install but are discouraged.
Gable end bracing consists of 2×4s placed in an “X” pattern
from the top center of the gable to the bottom center brace of the
fourth truss, and from the bottom center of the gable to the top
center brace of the fourth truss. Most hurricane building codes
require two 16d galvanized common nails to attach 2×4s to the
gable and to each of the four trusses. If 2×6s are required, then
four nails must be used.
Regardless of the roof type, hurricane straps consisting of
galvanized metal are designed to help hold the roof to the walls.
Hurricane straps may be difﬁcult for homeowners to install and
so require a professional. Also, in some communities, the law
requires hurricane straps.
Even if the roof survives, shingles typically are blown away.
Furthermore, many shingles simply shed water and are not
waterproof. As a result, wind-driven rainwater can enter the
home because of lost shingles, ﬂapping loose shingles, or through
cracks, damaging the ceiling and other household items. To mini-
mize this damage, aged shingles should be replaced, and all shin-
gles should be inspected for looseness before a hurricane.
Hurricane building codes require that shingles be sealed with
wet/dry cement or class 3 silicon with at least six nails; the nails
should go cleanly into the truss. If excessive numbers of shingles
are loose or if the roof is more than ten years old, it is best to
replace the roof, preferably with a roof covering and sheathing
designed to withstand high winds. However, high-wind proof
doesn’t mean hurricane proof—many manufacturers do not
include a hurricane warranty since the designs are for short-term
fast winds, not the sustained strong winds of hurricanes. Because
shingles are high maintenance, some people forego shingles and
have a metal roof installed instead.
Exterior Doors and Windows
The exterior walls, doors, and windows are the protective shell of
your home. If the home’s protective shell is broken, high winds can
enter and put pressure on the roof and walls, causing damage. There-
fore, the doors and windows should be strengthened or protected.
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Many homes have a double entry door, with an active and
an inactive (ﬁxed) door. The bolts or pins that secure most doors
are not strong enough for hurricane-force winds. Some door man-
ufacturers provide reinforcing bolt kits made speciﬁcally for their
doors. The door bolt materials should cost from $10 to $40,
depending on the type and ﬁnish. Doors with windows will need
additional protection from ﬂying debris. The section on storm
shutters describes how to protect windows.
Double-wide (two-car) garage doors can pose a problem
during hurricanes because they are so large that they wobble as
the high winds blow and can pull out of their tracks or collapse
from wind pressure. If garage doors fail, high winds can enter the
home through the garage and blow out doors, windows, walls,
and even the roof.
Certain parts of the country have building codes requiring
garage doors to withstand high winds. Some garage doors can be
strengthened with retroﬁt kits, usually costing $70 to $150. Many
garage doors can be reinforced at their weakest points. Retro-
ﬁtting the garage doors involves installing horizontal bracing
onto each panel. This horizontal bracing can be part of a kit from
the garage door manufacturer. Garage doors may also need heav-
ier hinges and stronger center and end supports. The garage door
track should also be checked. If the track is loose or can be
twisted, then a stronger track should be installed.
After the garage door is retroﬁtted, it may not be balanced.
Lower the door about halfway and let go. If it goes up or down,
the springs will need adjusting. The springs are dangerous and
should be adjusted by a professional.
If the garage door cannot be retroﬁtted, a specially rein-
forced garage door can be purchased that is designed to with-
stand winds of up to 120 miles per hour. These doors can cost
from $400 to $450 (excluding labor) and should be installed by a
professional.
Storm Shutters
Installing storm shutters over all exposed windows and other
glass surfaces is one of the easiest and most effective ways to pro-
tect your home. All windows, French doors, sliding glass doors,
and skylights should be covered. Before installing a shutter, check
with a local building ofﬁcial to ﬁnd out if a building permit is
required.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
67

Plywood shutters can offer a high level of protection from
ﬂying debris during a hurricane. After measuring each window
and each door that has glass, 8 inches should be added to both the
height and width to provide a 4-inch overlap on each side of the
window or door. Sheets of plywood are generally 4 × 8 feet. Ply-
wood shutter installation requires bolts, wood or masonry
anchors, large washers, and 5⁄8-inch exterior-grade plywood. Win-
dows 3 × 4 feet or smaller installed on a wood-frame house can
use 1⁄4-inch lag bolts and plastic-coated permanent anchors. The
lag bolts should penetrate the wall and frame surrounding the
window at least 13⁄4 inches. For larger windows, 3⁄8-inch lag bolts
should be used that penetrate the wall and frame surrounding the
window at least 21⁄2 inches. Windows 3 × 4 feet or smaller installed
on a masonry house can use 1⁄4-inch expansion bolts and galva-
nized permanent expansion anchors. The expansion bolt should
penetrate the wall at least 11⁄2 inches. For larger windows, 3⁄8-inch
expansion bolts should be used that penetrate the wall at least 
11⁄2 inches. Required tools include a circular or hand saw, a drill
with the appropriately sized bits, a hammer, and a wrench to ﬁt
the bolts. Eye protection and work gloves are needed for safety.
After cutting the plywood to the measurements for each
opening, holes should be drilled 21⁄2 inches from the outside edge
of the plywood at each corner and at 12-inch intervals. You should
also drill four holes in the center area of the plywood to relieve
pressure during a hurricane. Each hole position needs to be
marked on the outside wall. On wood-frame houses, make sure
that the anchors are secured into the solid wood that frames the
door or window and not into the siding or trim. Each shutter
should be marked to indicate where it is to be installed. The shut-
ters and bolts then need to be stored in an accessible place.
Obviously, protecting windows with plywood can be incon-
venient, and wood is not the best protection against strong winds.
Plywood shutters, if not adequately fastened, will be ripped off in
a hurricane. Furthermore, wood can rot and warp with time and
may be useless when it is needed the most. As a result, some
homeowners have elected to use aluminum shutters instead.
They are considerably more expensive but are effective against
hurricane winds. Different types include storm panels, Bahama or
awning, accordion, and rolldown. These shutters meet the tough
building code standards of Miami Dade County and are therefore
sufﬁcient for all hurricane-threatened regions.
The cheapest and most popular shutters are storm panels,
which require a preinstalled steel channel on the top and bottom of
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

the window in which the panels are slid into and must be anchored
prior to installation of the shutters. They require some physical
effort to install and may cost from $7 to $15 per square foot of cov-
erage. They need to be stored when not in use, but because they
overlap they use little space. Bahama and awning shutters are
mounted above the window. They provide shade when not in use
but are lowered and fastened to the wall when a hurricane threat-
ens. Prices are $15 to $20 per square foot. Accordion shutters are
made of aluminum blades connected to each other vertically, mov-
ing horizontally between an upper and lower track. They fold
away on each end of the window when not in use and then are
pulled out during a hurricane threat (hence the name “accordion”).
They cost from $15 to $25 per square foot. The rolldown shutters
are motorized and can be lowered with the ﬂip of a switch. In addi-
tion to protecting against hurricanes, they provide effective secu-
rity against theft. They are very expensive, costing from $20 to $35
per square foot of window area, but are the easiest to use.
A ﬁnal suggestion is to install impact-resistant windows in
addition to a storm shutter. This type of window can provide suf-
ﬁcient protection in weaker storms, thereby avoiding the trouble
of using shutters except in strong hurricanes. As a weak alterna-
tive, you can also use safety ﬁlm on windows that will hold glass
shards together if the window is broken; however, safety ﬁlm is
generally not adequate protection for windows in hurricanes.
Source: Against the Wind: Protecting Your Home from Hurricane
Wind Damage, FEMA, 7 pp. (also available at http://www.fema.
gov); Hurricane Shutter Information, Hurricane Research Division,
http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd/shutters/; Rollac Shutter of Texas,
Inc., http://www.rollac.com.
Hurricane Preparedness Steps
The following is a list of hurricane preparedness steps.
Before Hurricane Season
• Be familiar with escape routes, with several routes for dif-
ferent contingencies. Also know the location of the near-
est shelter.
• Know the storm surge history and elevation of area and
home.
• Post emergency phone numbers (ﬁre, police, and ambu-
lance) by the telephone.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
69

• Teach children how to call 911 and the emergency num-
bers for help.
• Teach your family basic safety measures, such as CPR and
ﬁrst aid.
• Know how to turn off utilities.
• Identify family meeting places in case you are separated.
Choose a place in a building or park outside your neigh-
borhood. Everyone should be clear about this location.
• Develop an emergency communication plan. Identify a
dependable out-of-state contact and provide this phone
number to all family members.
• Check your home for loose and clogged gutters and
downspouts.
• Test smoke detectors monthly and change batteries twice
a year.
• Keep trees and shrubbery trimmed. Cut weak branches
and trees that could brush against the house.
• Determine where to move cars and boats in case of ﬂoods
or evacuation.
• Purchase and learn how to use a generator. A 3,500-watt
generator can run a refrigerator, window air conditioner,
TV, and a few lights. A 5,000-watt generator provides
more ﬂexibility for running additional appliances and is
preferred for backup power. Run it monthly to be certain
it is operational.
• Also purchase an inverter, which converts direct current
from a car battery to alternate current and can be used to
run a few small appliances such as a light, fan, and TV. A
$70 model can power up to 800 watts. By idling the car
outside (not in the garage, which can cause carbon
monoxide poisoning), the battery will be continuously
charged by an alternator, and small appliances hooked to
an extension cord can be used. A car is actually quieter
and more fuel-efﬁcient than a generator!
• A rechargeable portable power unit and a 40-watt solar
panel are recommended in addition to an inverter and
generator. This setup also can provide light and electricity
to small appliances, and the power unit can be recharged
in eight hours using the solar panel.
• Make a homemade air conditioner, which consists of an ice
chest, a styrofoam lid to cover the cooler, and a battery-
powered 6-inch fan. Make a 1-inch hole on one end of the
lid and a 6-inch hole on the other end where the fan is
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

placed on its side, pointing upward. Fill the cooler with
ice. With the fan on, warm air enters the small hole and
cold 50°F air comes out the fan. This will cool a very small
room for a few hours and then will require fresh ice. Com-
mercial ice chest air conditioners are also available at a cost
of about $40. This is a decent alternative when not enough
power is available for a conventional air conditioner.
• Prepare a disaster supply kit, which consists of:
Flashlight and extra batteries
Portable battery-operated radio and extra batteries
Deluxe ﬁrst-aid kit
Nonelectric can opener
Extra cash and credit cards
Extra keys
Sturdy shoes, rubber boots, a change of clothing, and rain
gear
Portable cooler
Matches or butane lighters
Water puriﬁcation pills (available at sporting good stores
and drugstores)
Pure, unscented liquid chlorine bleach for water puriﬁ-
cation
Fire extinguisher
Rope
Duct tape
Tarp
Baby food, diapers, and formula
Soap, shampoo, toiletries, and hygiene items
Insect repellent and mosquito netting
Heavy-duty trash bags
Alarm clock
Blankets and pillows
Eating and cooking utensils
Emergency cooking facilities (grill or camp stove)
Gloves and goggles
Pots and pans
Sleeping bags
Sponges and paper towels
Toys (for children)
Lanterns and extra fuel
Sunscreen
Signal ﬂare
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
71

Paper and pencil
Cards, games, and books
Waterproof containers
• Assemble clean-up and repair supplies:
Hand ax
Wrecking and crow bars
Corner braces
Brooms and mops
Caulk and caulking gun
Steel chain
Chain saw and handsaw
Cleaning supplies and disinfectant
Dust pan
Extension cords
Hammers and hatchets
Ladders
Paint
Plastic sheeting
Rakes and shovels
Wheelbarrow
When a Hurricane Watch or Warning Is Issued
• Listen to radio or television for hurricane progress reports.
• Store at least three days’ worth of nonperishable (canned or
packages) food and beverages. This includes staples (sugar,
salt, and pepper), high-energy (carbohydrate) foods and
protein bars, vitamins, and comfort/stress foods (cookies
and candy). Two weeks’ worth is recommended.
• Check the disaster supply kit.
• Fill bathtub and large containers with water for sanitary
purposes. 
• Bring in outdoor objects such as lawn furniture, toys, and
garden tools. Anchor objects that cannot be brought
inside but that could be wind-tossed. Remove outdoor
antennas, if possible.
• Secure home by closing or installing window shutters.
• Turn the refrigerator and freezer to the coldest setting.
Open only when necessary and close quickly if power is
lost.
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

• Unplug small appliances.
• Turn off propane tanks.
• Fuel and service car.
• Moor boat securely with storm lines or move it to a desig-
nated safe place. However, many insurance companies
will not cover a boat outside a ﬂood protection levee sys-
tem, so it’s best to move the boat at least inside the levees.
Also, boat owners who use stackable storage marinas
should move their boats, as stackable systems can col-
lapse in hurricanes and marinas typically absolve them-
selves of responsibility in their contracts. Fill the boat
with fuel and charge the battery in case the boat is needed
during a ﬂood. Remove loose items from trailored boats,
and also remove the drain plug. Loosen the trailer straps
and tie a bowline to a sturdy object that will hold the boat
in case of high ﬂoodwaters.
• Store valuable items and irreplaceable items (such as pho-
tos) that must be left behind in lockable plastic storage
containers or waterproof containers.
• Gather vital documents such as deeds, insurance papers,
birth certiﬁcates, stocks and bonds, legal papers, credit
card and bank account numbers, and immunization
records, and keep these in a mobile waterproof container.
• Purchase a two-week supply of essential medicines, espe-
cially prescription drugs.
• Mobile home owners: Mobile homes are particularly vul-
nerable to high winds. Anchor the mobile home with
frame ties and leave.
• High-rise occupants: Hurricane winds are faster at higher
elevation, and residents should plan to leave.
• Pool owners: Drop water level 1–2 feet. Turn off pool
pump. Add extra chlorine to compensate for heavy rains.
• Identify a safe room in case of high winds. Close all inte-
rior doors. Secure and brace external doors. Also be wary
of tornadoes spawned in a hurricane. The safest room will
be an interior room on the ﬁrst ﬂoor with small or few
windows. Lie on the ﬂoor under a table or another sturdy
object. Wait for the all clear on the radio; don’t be fooled
by the calm winds in the eye.
• Sewage could be interrupted. Keep 5-gallon buckets for
use as emergency toilets. Line each bucket with a heavy-
duty plastic trash bag.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
73

• Have camera ready for insurance documentation.
• If you have a gas grill, ﬁll the propane tank for cooking
after the storm if the power is lost.
• Put vehicles in the garage.
If Evacuation Is Necessary
• Unplug appliances and turn off electricity and the main
water valve.
• Elevate furniture to protect it from ﬂooding or move it to
a higher ﬂoor.
• Take disaster supply kit.
• Contact family members to coordinate evacuation efforts.
• Leave early, preferably during daylight. In urban areas,
take a back road instead of an interstate highway, since
these can become jammed.
• Eat before you leave. Meals may be difﬁcult to obtain dur-
ing the evacuation.
• Take important documents and insurance papers. Bring
identiﬁcation. These are needed for a variety of reasons.
In addition, they show proof of residence when you
return after the storm.
• Back up computer on a portable media and bring it with
you.
After the Hurricane Passes
• Return home only after authorities say it is safe.
• Beware of downed or loose power lines. Report them
immediately to the power company, police, or ﬁre de-
partment.
• Enter your home with caution. Open windows and doors
to ventilate or dry your home.
• Check for gas leaks. If you smell gas or hear a blowing or
hissing noise, quickly leave the building and leave the
doors open. Call the gas company.
• Look for electrical system damage. If you see sparks or
frayed wires, turn off electricity at the main switch box. If
you have to step in water to reach the electric box, call an
electrician for advice.
• Check for sewage- and water-line damage. If you suspect
there is such damage, call the water company and avoid
using water or toilets until repairs are made.
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

• Take pictures of the damage for insurance. Make a list of
damage to property.
• If the water supply becomes exhausted, water puriﬁca-
tion procedures are necessary. First, let any suspended
particles settle to the bottom or strain the water through
layers of clean cloth. Then, purify by boiling (safest way),
using liquid chlorine bleach or puriﬁcation tablets. The
water heater also is a source of water.
• Be wary of unlicensed contractors, con artists, and door-
to-door repairmen who will offer to do the work quickly
but at inﬂated prices. Insist on written estimates from sev-
eral companies, and be sure a contract or business card
has an address, a telephone number, and a license num-
ber. Contact the Better Business Bureau to do a back-
ground check. Don’t be pressured into quick decisions.
Use contractors known in the community, and check their
references. Make sure the contractor can furnish a license
and has general liability and workers’ compensation
insurance. The website http://www.contractors-license.
org may be useful. Insist on start and completion dates,
and limit down payments to one-third of the total price.
Do not pay the balance until the work is completed to
your satisfaction and you have proof that any subcontrac-
tors have been paid (subcontractors can ﬁle a lien against
you if the contractor does not pay them).
• Beware of price gouging. Most states have laws against
this practice, and some have hotlines to report price 
gouging.
• The storm surge can drive poisonous snakes from their
usual habitats. Be on the lookout for them.
• Avoid using candles and other open ﬂames indoors.
• Do not plug generator directly into house system. Plug
appliances directly into the generator.
• Hurricanes moving inland can cause severe ﬂooding. Stay
away from riverbanks and streams until all potential
ﬂooding is past.
• The IRS is usually generous about extending ﬁling dead-
lines to October 15, and estimated tax payments deadlines
are also usually extended. In addition, an unusual tax
break is available to those who suffer a casualty loss in
regions the president declares as federal disaster areas.
Details are in IRS Publication 547 (“Casualties, Disasters,
and Thefts”). Here are a few key points. One has to itemize
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
75

the deductions to claim a loss for personal-use property.
Also, one can deduct personal-property losses not covered
by insurance or reimbursements. However, there are some
important, steep limits. First, subtract $100 for each “casu-
alty event.” Then, the total casualty (and theft losses) must
exceed 10 percent of your adjusted gross income (AGI).
For example, suppose a household with $70,000 adjusted
gross income experiences $10,000 uninsured storm dam-
age to the house. The casualty loss deduction can be com-
puted by subtracting $100 from the $10,000 ($9,900), minus
10 percent of the $70,000 AGI ($7,000), resulting in a
deduction of $2,900. Additional uninsuranced casualty
events can also be added, minus $100.
• A common question is whether evacuation costs such as
gasoline, hotel room, meal, and snack expenses are tax
deductible. Unfortunately, these are considered personal
expenses and are not tax deductible.
• If you are short on cash, you can borrow from your indi-
vidual retirement account without penalty if you repay
the money within sixty days. This should be done with
extreme caution and only as a last resort. If you miss the
deadline, you will pay a 10 percent penalty as well as
taxes on the amount withdrawn.
• Another option for retrieving cash is to amend your pre-
vious year’s tax return with damages incurred from the
current year.
• Several key FEMA disaster air programs exist in the event
of a presidential major disaster declaration. This includes
rental payments for temporary housing; grants for home
repairs and replacement of essential household items not
covered by insurance; grants to replace personal property
and help meet medical, dental, funeral, transportation,
and other serious disaster-related needs not covered by
insurance or other federal, state, and charitable aid pro-
grams; unemployment payments up to twenty-six weeks
for workers who temporarily lose jobs because of the dis-
aster and who do not qualify for state beneﬁts, such as
self-employed individuals; low-interest loans to cover
residential losses not fully compensated by insurance;
loans up to $1.5 million for small businesses that have 
suffered disaster-related cash ﬂow problems and need
funds for working capital to recover from the disaster’s
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

adverse economic impact; loans up to $500,000 for farm-
ers, ranchers, and aquaculture operators to cover produc-
tion and property losses, excluding primary residence;
crisis counseling for those traumatized by the disaster;
income tax assistance for ﬁling casualty losses; and advi-
sory assistance for legal, veteran beneﬁts, and social secu-
rity matters. To see if you qualify, contact FEMA at
1-800-621-FEMA (3362).
• The Red Cross will provide shelter, food, and health and
mental health services as well as help individuals and fam-
ilies to resume their normal daily activities independently.
This may include a referral or a way to pay for what is
needed most: groceries, new clothes, rent, emergency
home repairs, transportation, household items, medicines,
materials for short-term repairs, and occupational tools.
The Red Cross may also help those needing long-term
recovery assistance when all other available resources,
including insurance, government, private, and community
assistance, are either unavailable or inadequate to meet the
needs. All assistance is based on veriﬁed disaster-caused
needs, and all assistance is free—literally a gift as a result of
the generous support of the American people. The Red
Cross also feeds disaster victims and emergency workers,
handles inquiries from concerned immediate family mem-
bers outside the disaster-affected area, provides blood and
blood products to disaster victims, and links disaster vic-
tims to other available resources.
Make Plans for Your Pets
• If you evacuate your home, do not leave pets behind.
• Be sure you have up-to-date identiﬁcation tags, a pet car-
rier, and a leash for your pets.
• Most emergency shelters will not accept pets. In the event
of evacuation, make alternative arrangements for pets,
such as with family, friends, veterinarians, or kennels in
safe locations. Send medicine, food, feeding information,
water, and other supplies with them that will last for two
weeks. Be sure to provide food, a water bowl, blankets,
your pet’s toys, a brush, a nonelectric can opener, news-
papers, cat litter, litter box, scoop, and plastic bags for
handling waste. Ask if a crate should be provided.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
77

• While hotels generally do not allow pets, some will make
exceptions for those leaving evacuation areas. If you are
staying at a hotel, be sure to ask if they will allow pets in
this circumstance. 
• Store a copy of current vaccination records in a plastic bag
for safekeeping.
Insurance Preparation
Homeowners insurance should be evaluated before each hurricane
season. In particular, homeowners should check the hurricane or
windstorm deductible. Most insurance companies require a 2 per-
cent deductible of the value of the house (or policy). This means
that for a $100,000 policy, the homeowner has to pay the ﬁrst $2,000
in damages from a tropical storm or hurricane. Some policies can be
as high as 5, 10, or 15 percent. Many homeowners, used to paying a
$500 or $1,000 deductible for other damage, are not prepared for
such costs. The hurricane deductible was added in 1996 to enable
insurance companies, scared by the $20 billion damage caused by
Hurricane Andrew in 1992, to continue selling policies in coastal
states. Therefore, homeowners should set money aside each year in
an emergency fund. Note that this applies to each storm as well.
Florida residents suffering damage from both Hurricane Charley
and Frances had to pay two deductibles!
You should also check the type of coverage. Replacement
cost coverage, which will pay the cost of replacing the home at
today’s costs up to the limits of coverage on the policy, is recom-
mended. A minimum 80 percent coverage of the current house
value (or the maximum amount of insurance available) is
required or there will be a penalty applied to reimbursements, so
it is important that the replacement cost policy stays current with
any house value appreciation. Some policies instead use actual
cash value, which is replacement cost minus depreciation. This is
a bad deal, because repairs for a ten-year-old home will be cov-
ered less than for a one-year-old home. A third alternative, if it’s
available, is guaranteed replacement cost, which means that the
insurer will pay the cost of repairs even if it’s greater than the
insured amount.
Sometimes obtaining homeowner’s insurance can be difﬁcult.
For example, insurance companies have reduced their exposure in
the coastal regions of Florida and Louisiana. Homeowners who
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

make three or more claims in three years, are identiﬁed as high
risk and may lose coverage. Other factors, such as bad credit and
even making insurance inquiries about home damage but not ﬁl-
ing a claim (which some insurance companies will count as
unpaid losses!), can count against the homeowner. For those who
lose or can’t obtain coverage, state-sponsored programs exist for
homeowners in hurricane-prone regions. Typically, these rates are
higher than standard rates.
Also, when a hurricane is threatening the region, insurance
companies will not issue any new policies. This region can be
rather large. For example, once a hurricane enters the Gulf of
Mexico, no insurance companies will issue policies along the
entire Gulf Coast.
Homeowners policies do not cover damage from rising
waters, and therefore ﬂood insurance is highly recommended
(and often required) for a home. Flood insurance is backed by the
federal government and is available to any homeowner, renter, or
business owner whose property is in a community that partici-
pates in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The NFIP
is paid by policyholder premiums, not taxpayer dollars. In order
to participate, the community must adopt and enforce local ﬂood-
plain management ordinances designed to reduce the risk of
future ﬂood losses. If you live in such a community, you can pur-
chase ﬂood insurance from any licensed agent or company—the
same one, for example, who handles your homeowners or auto-
mobile insurance. The NFIP can also be contacted at 1-800-638-
6620. The rates are set by the federal program, and do not vary
from insurer to insurer. The rates do vary on whether you are in a
ﬂood zone or nonﬂood zone, the selected deductible, amount of
coverage, type of building, and the elevation of the base of the
home. Flood insurance covers structural damage, ﬂood debris
cleanup, and ﬂoor surfaces such as carpeting and tile. However,
the standard version of ﬂood insurance does not cover house con-
tents, so make sure this is added to the policy as well (some states
require this). Renters can buy ﬂood insurance to cover their
belongings. It is important to remember that no claims can be
made unless the policy has been in effect for thirty days.
Some people resist buying ﬂood insurance in the faulty belief
that if ﬂooding occurs, the government will bail them out. Federal
disaster assistance is available only if a ﬂood (or other disaster) is so
large and widespread that it warrants a major disaster declaration
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
79

from the president. More than 90 percent of ﬂood events are not
presidentially declared (although generally hurricanes are de-
clared). Furthermore, even for ﬂoods that are declared major dis-
asters, the aid available is limited. Most assistance is in the form of
loans that must be repaid, with interest, in addition to the mort-
gage loan that still has to be paid.
Unfortunately, the NFIP is not a perfect system. The NFIP
was created in 1968 in response to large-scale ﬂooding of the Mis-
sissippi River. When insurance companies threatened to stop cov-
erage because of the escalating costs, the government decided to
offer insurance in exchange for local government’s adopting strict
mitigation standards. However, with time, the NFIP has become a
complex system of public agencies and private corporations, fur-
ther complicated in 1983 when the program authorized private
insurers to sell the service. The NFIP has also issued a myriad of
policy interpretations over the years. The result has been some
insurers not understanding ﬂood insurance policies and making
unfair settlement offers. The problems became apparent after
Tropical Storm Isabel (2003) caused extensive storm surge dam-
age in Maryland. Many settlement offers were far below (by tens
of thousands of dollars) the rebuilding costs. Other policyholders
were also unaware that they needed a separate policy for house-
hold contents. The State of Maryland eventually had to provide
help with a low-interest loan program. Complaints were so
numerous that congressional hearings on the NFIP were held, and
reforms as of this writing are currently being pursued in Con-
gress. Recommendations include establishing an appeal process
through FEMA, clearer paperwork for ﬁling claims and to under-
stand what is covered, and better training of insurance agents.
Currently, Congress is also investigating whether the NFIP is suf-
ﬁcient to restore policyholders to their predisaster states as well as
investigating its practices and the fairness of insurance adjusters.
Despite these problems, the NFIP has been successful in obtaining
a large pool of policyholders (4 million) in 20,000 communities
and is better than no ﬂood insurance.
Here are some tips regarding insurance:
• Document your belongings. If possible, compile a room-
by-room inventory with manufacturers’ names, dates, and
places of purchases, serial numbers, and prices, especially
for major appliances. Use a camera to record images of
your belongings. Also, save any appraisals.
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

• Check the amount of coverage. If you have upgraded the
house or bought expensive furnishings, increase the 
coverage.
• Don’t make claims unless there is signiﬁcant damage.
Insurance companies may drop a policy based on the
number of claims, and not the total cost of the claim.
• Gazebos, piers, and landscaping generally are not cov-
ered by either ﬂood insurance or homeowners insurance.
Here are some tips regarding insurance claims:
• If your property is damaged, contact the agent who sold
you the policy. Provide her or him with a phone number
where you can be reached. A cell phone number is recom-
mended if the cell phone network is functioning.
• Report claims as soon as possible.
• While your ﬁrst instinct is to make major repairs, it’s
important to wait until the insurance adjuster visits the
property. However, do take actions to prevent further
damage, such as putting a tarp over roof damage to stop
further water damage. If you must hire repair crews,
make sure all work is documented. Keep receipts for any
related expenditures.
• Be patient and expect delays having an adjuster view
your property. It can take weeks or months after a major
disaster. Try to schedule an appointment if possible. The
wait could be worthwhile, because the adjuster could
make allowances for damage you did not know were cov-
ered by the policy. When the adjuster arrives, present her
or him with a copy of the policy, pictures, and a list of pos-
sessions. Pictures of the property before and after the
storm will be beneﬁcial as well. Separate the damaged
from the undamaged property. Take good notes on all
conversations with adjusters. Check to see if your insur-
ance company has a mobile catastrophe center where a
settlement can be obtained with receipts and pictures.
• The ﬁrst check is often an advance, not a ﬁnal payment.
• On-the-spot settlement checks can be accepted right
away. If other damage is found, a claim can be reopened
within one year of the disaster.
• If both the home’s structure and personal belongings are
damaged, generally two checks are sent. A separate check
may also be sent for living expenses.
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
81

• If the home is mortgaged, the check will be made out to
both you and the mortgage lender. The lender gets equal
rights to the insurance check to ensure that the necessary
repairs are made. Therefore, the mortgage company will
have to endorse the check. Lenders generally put the
money in an escrow account and pay for the repairs as the
work is completed. Unfortunately, the mortgage com-
pany may withhold funds until the work is completed,
forcing the homeowner to pay ahead of time with her or
his own cash to get the work completed.
• If possessions are insured and you have a replacement
cost policy, normally the items have to be replaced before
the insurance company will pay for the replacement cost.
If you decide not to replace some items, you will be paid
the actual cash value. Generally, the insurance company
allows several months to replace items.
• If the home is destroyed and you decide not to rebuild,
the settlement amount depends on state law, court poli-
cies, and the insurance policy.
• Compare your list of damages to the proposed settlement
offer. Don’t settle until you understand what is covered.
• If you disagree with an insurance settlement, several
options exist. First, talk to your agent or claims manager
to explain your situation, and provide supporting docu-
ments. If no success, then call the National Insurance Con-
sumer Helpline at 1-800-942-4242. Also, contact your state
insurance department, who will try to resolve the matter.
If the matter involves ﬂood insurance, appeal the process
through the NFIP. If still no success, hire a public adjuster
or attorney and provide all relevant paperwork, the insur-
ance policy, and settlement offers. Usually the public
adjuster will get 10–15 percent of the settlement offer, and
an attorney will get 30 percent.
Source: Surviving the Storms: A Guide to Hurricane Prepared-
ness, FEMA, 6 pp. (available from http://www.fema.gov); New
Orleans Channel 6 WDSU, http://www.theneworleanschannel.
com; Mary Judice, “It’s Time to Check Insurance Coverage,”
Times-Picayune, June 8, 2003; Andrew Green, “Panel OKs Flood
Insurance Reforms,” Baltimore Sun, March 31, 2004.
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Worldwide Perspective
International Impact, Names, 
and Locations of Hurricanes
Every tropical ocean except the South Atlantic and eastern South
Paciﬁc contains tropical depressions, tropical storms, and hurri-
canes. The international generic term for such storms is tropical
cyclones, and this designation will be used throughout this chapter
when not referring to a storm-intensity category. Tropical
cyclones occur in the tropical North Atlantic Ocean (including the
Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico); the Eastern North Paciﬁc (off
the west coast of Mexico); the Central North Paciﬁc (near Hawaii);
the western North Paciﬁc (including the China Sea, Philippine
Sea, and Sea of Japan); the North Indian Ocean including the Bay
of Bengal and the Arabian Sea; the Southwest Indian Ocean off the
coasts of Madagascar and extending almost to Australia; the
Southeast Indian Ocean off the northwest coast of Australia; and
the Southwest Paciﬁc Ocean from the east coast of Australia to
about 140°W.
Regardless of location, tropical cyclones pose the same triple
threat of powerful winds, storm surge, and heavy rains through-
out the world. The societal impacts depend on storm intensity, the
topography of the area, the localand regional economy, the state
of development in the country, community demographics, and
the status of physical and social infrastructure. A World Meteoro-
logical Organization (WMO) survey revealed the following
annual statistics: 1,145 dead or missing, 700,000 houses destroyed,
83

1.5 million people left homeless, and ﬁnancial losses of $3.6 bil-
lion. Land-falling tropical cyclones can devastate regions and
cause situations where authorities can no longer provide the basic
necessities of food, safe drinking water, adequate health care, and
electricity, resulting in social upheaval. Medium- and long-range
consequences include the physical and emotional drain on peo-
ple, breakdown of family and community support systems,
destruction of crops and livestock, loss of business revenues, com-
munication failures, and transportation problems.
These problems are compounded in less-developed, highly
populated countries. As discussed in chapter 2, India and
Bangladesh have historically suffered astounding fatalities—
often in the tens of thousands and sometimes in the hundreds of
thousands—from storm surge in the Bay of Bengal. The shallow
water and the bay’s funnel conﬁguration, combined with large
astronomical tides, result in storm surges of 20 feet or more.
Unfortunately, the societal structure makes evacuations problem-
atic. The delta region is heavily cultivated and densely settled
with poor people living in ﬂimsy housing, and many are resistant
to evacuation because they don’t want to leave their land and
meager possessions. The remoteness also makes evacuation difﬁ-
cult. Charitable organizations such as the World Bank and the Red
Crescent Society have funded approximately 2,000 shelters, but
each can only accommodate 1,000 people. The result is a situation
prime for exorbitant fatalities. Since each storm also devastates
their livelihood based on agriculture and cattle, the economic
hardship magniﬁes the situation.
Latin America and the Caribbean are also susceptible to large
death tolls, as illustrated by Hurricane Mitch (1998) that killed
more than 10,000 people, affected 6.7 million, and caused $8.5 bil-
lion in damage. Mitch produced the equivalent of a year’s worth of
rain in some areas of Honduras and Nicaragua, resulting in ﬂash
ﬂoods and landslides that killed thousands in exposed areas. El
Salvador, Guatemala, Belize, and Costa Rica were also impacted.
Other countries such as China and Cuba experience similar prob-
lems in remote regions (with fortunately lower fatalities).
Pielke et al. (2003) identify that hurricane disasters are cor-
related to increasing populations, widespread poverty, lack of
access to adequate land, deforestation, and urbanization. Popula-
tion growth increases vulnerability, because more people can be
impacted and more people settle in exposed areas. Impoverished
people often lack access to favorable land, since much of it is
84
Worldwide Perspective

owned by a few large farms, businesses, etc. Others seek employ-
ment in cities but can’t afford housing. The result is that some live
on steep hillsides and ﬂood-prone areas. Agricultural, farming,
mining, and logging practices cause deforestation, which in-
creases vulnerability to soil erosion, landslides, and ﬂooding. In
addition, population growth is related to poverty, because some
of the poorest countries have the highest fertility rates. Because of
these factors, international calamities in poorly developed coun-
tries are still a major concern.
Aspects of the innovative Safﬁr-Simpson Hurricane Scale
(see chapter 2) do not apply to the tropical Paciﬁc. The scale does
not consider: (1) tropical storm-force winds than can do consider-
able destruction to agriculture and poorly built structures, (2) the
effects of termites and wood rot on weakening wood structures,
(3) differing building practices compared to the United States, 
(4) Paciﬁc vegetation; (5) the detrimental effects of salt spray on
metals and vegetation, and (6) the effects of coral reefs on storm
surge and waves. To address these differences, Guard and Lander
(1993) developed a Safﬁr-Simpson scale for the tropical Paciﬁc,
shown in table 3.1.
A variety of regional or local names exists for tropical
cyclones throughout the world (Jennings 1970). Probably the best
known is typhoon (derived from the Chinese word ty-fung, mean-
ing “great wind”), which is the equivalent to the Atlantic hurri-
cane, used for storms over the Western Paciﬁc Ocean west of
180°E. In the Philippines, tropical cyclones are called “chubasco”
or “baguio.” Japan calls them “reppu,” while Mexico calls storms in
the eastern North Paciﬁc “cordonazo.” Some Australians give
intense hurricanes the colorful name “cock-eyed Bob.”
It is a popular belief that modern Australians call tropical
cyclones “willy-willies.” The word was coined by a colonial set-
tler sometime in the early 1900s and was only used for tropical
cyclones in Northwest Australia. However, this practice ended
more than ﬁfty years ago. Further confusing matters is that South-
east Australians use the same term (willy-willy) to describe dust
devils. A dust devil is a small, short-lived whirl of dust, sand, or
debris in rising columns of air created by strong solar heating near
the ground; only occurs over land; and is a different phenomenon
than tropical cyclones.
Many U.S. residents perceive the North Atlantic Ocean basin
as a proliferate producer of tropical cyclones due to the publicity
these storms generate. In reality, the North Atlantic is a marginal
Worldwide Perspective
85

86
TABLE 3.1
The modiﬁed Safﬁr-Simpson Tropical Cyclone Scale for the tropical Paciﬁc
Maximum sustained
Category
winds in mph
Coastal inundation and wave action
Damage
Category A: 
30–49 
On windward coasts, sea level rise of less than 2 ft above normal in open 
Damage done to only the ﬂimsiest lean-to type structures. 
Weak Tropical Storm
(peak gusts 40–64)
bays and inlets due to storm surge and wind-driven waves; breaking waves 
Unsecured light signs blown down. Minor damage to banana
inside bays can reach 2–3 ft; less than 1 ft over reefs. Rough surf at reef 
trees and near coastal agriculture, primarily from salt spray. 
margin with moderately strong longshore currents and rip currents inside 
Some small dead limbs, ripe coconuts, and dead palm fronds 
reefs.
blown from trees. Some fragile and tender green leaves blown
from trees such as papaya and ﬂeshy broad leaf plants.
Category B: 
50–73
On windward coasts, sea level rise of 2–4 ft above normal in open bays 
Minor damage to buildings of light material; major damage to 
Severe Tropical Storm
(peak gusts 65–94)
and inlets due to storm surge and wind-driven waves; breaking waves 
huts made of thatch or loosely attached corrugated sheet metal 
inside bays can reach 4–6 ft; 1–2 ft over reefs. Very rough surf at reef 
or plywood. Unattached corrugated sheet metal and plywood 
margin with strong longshore currents and rip currents inside reefs.
may become airborne. Wooden signs not supported with guy
wires are blown down. Moderate damage to banana trees,
papaya trees, and most ﬂeshy crops. Large dead limbs, ripe
coconuts, many dead palm fronds; some green leaves, and small
branches are blown from trees.
1
74–95
On windward coasts, sea level rise of 4–5 ft (1.2–1.5 m) above normal 
Corrugated metal and plywood stripped from poorly constructed 
Minimal Typhoon
(peak gusts 95–120)
in open bays and inlets due to storm surge and wind-driven waves; 
or termite-infested structures; and may become airborne. A few 
breaking waves inside bays can reach 5–7 ft (1.5–2.1 m) above normal; 
wooden, nonreinforced power poles tilted, and some rotten  
2–3 ft (0.6–1.0 m) additional water across reef. Wind-driven waves 
power poles broken. Some damage to poorly constructed, loosely 
may inundate low-lying coastal roads where reefs are narrow. Minor pier 
attached signs. Major damage to banana trees, papaya trees, 
damage. Some small craft in exposed anchorages break moorings.
and ﬂeshy crops. Some young trees downed when the ground is
saturated. Some palm fronds crimped and bent back through the
crown of coconut palms; a few palm fronds torn from the crowns
of most types of palm trees; many ripe coconuts blown from 

87
coconut palms. Less than 10% defoliation of shrubbery and trees;
up to 10% defoliation of tangantangan. Some small tree limbs
downed, especially from large bushy and frail trees such as
mango, African tulip, poinciana, etc.
2
96–110
On windward coasts, sea level rise of 6–8 ft above normal in open bays 
Some rotten wooden power poles snapped and many 
Moderate Typhoon
(peak gusts 121–139)
and inlets due to storm surge and wind-driven waves; breaking waves 
nonreinforced wooden power poles tilted. Some secondary power 
inside bays can reach 7–9 ft above normal; water is about 3–5 ft above 
lines downed. Damage to wooden and tin roofs and to doors and 
normal across reef ﬂats. Wind-driven waves will inundate low-lying 
windows of termite-infested or rotted wooden structures, but no 
coastal roads below 4 ft on windward locations where reefs are narrow. 
major damage to well-constructed wooden, sheet metal, or 
Some erosion of beach areas, some moderate pier damage, and some 
concrete buildings. Considerable damage to structures made of 
large boats torn from moorings.
light materials. Major damage to poorly constructed signs.
Exposed banana trees and papaya trees totally destroyed;
10–20% defoliation of trees and shrubbery; up to 30%
defoliation of tangantangan. Light damage to sugarcane and
bamboo. Many palm fronds crimped and bent through the crown
of coconut palms, and several green fronds ripped from palm
trees. Some green coconuts blown from trees. Some trees blown
down, especially shallow-rooted ones such as small acacia,
mango, and breadfruit, when the ground becomes saturated.
3
111–130
On windward coasts, sea level rise of 9–12 ft above normal in open bays 
A few nonreinforced hollow-spun concrete power poles broken or 
Strong Typhoon
(peak gusts 140–165)
and inlets due to storm surge and wind-driven waves; breaking waves 
tilted and many nonreinforced wooden power poles broken or 
inside bays can reach 11–14 ft above normal; water is about 5–7 ft 
blown down; many secondary power lines downed. Practically all 
above normal across reef ﬂats. Wind-driven waves will inundate low-lying 
poorly constructed signs blown down, and some stand-alone 
coastal roads below 7 ft of elevation on windward locations where reefs 
steel-framed signs bent over. Some roof, window, and door 
are narrow. Considerable beach erosion. Many large boats and some 
damage to well-built, wooden, and metal residences and utility 
large ships torn from moorings.
buildings. Extensive damage to wooden structures weakened by 
continues

88
TABLE 3.1
(Continued)
Maximum sustained
Category
winds in mph
Coastal inundation and wave action
Damage
termite infestation, wet and dry wood rot, and corroded roof
straps (hurricane clips). Nonreinforced  cinder block walls blown
down. Many mobile homes and buildings made of light materials
destroyed. Some glass failure due to ﬂying debris, but only
minimal glass failure due to pressure forces associated with
extreme gusts. Some unsecured construction cranes blown down.
Air is full of light projectiles and debris. Major damage to
shrubbery and trees; up to 50% of palm fronds bent or blown off;
numerous ripe and many green coconuts blown off coconut
palms; crowns blown off of a few palm trees. Moderate damage
to sugarcane and bamboo. Some large trees (palm trees,
breadfruit, monkeypod, mango, acacia, and Australian pines)
blown down when the ground becomes saturated; 30–50%
defoliation of most trees and shrubs; up to 70% defoliation of
tangantangan. Some very exposed panax, tangantangan, and
oleander bent over.
4
131–155
On windward coasts, sea level rise of 13–18 ft above normal in open 
Some reinforced hollow-spun concrete and many reinforced 
Very Strong Typhoon
(peak gusts 166–197)
bays and inlets due to storm surge and wind-driven waves; breaking 
wooden power poles blown down; numerous secondary and a few 
waves inside bays can reach 15–24 ft above normal; water is about 
primary power lines downed. Extensive damage to nonconcrete 
8–12 ft above normal across reef ﬂats. Wind-driven waves will inundate 
roofs; complete failure of many roof structures, window frames, 
coastal areas below 12-ft elevation. Large boulders carried inland with 
and doors, especially unprotected, nonreinforced ones; many 
waves. Severe beach erosion. Severe damage to port facilities including 
well-built wooden and metal structures severely damaged or 
some loading derricks and gantry cranes. Most ships torn from moorings.
destroyed. Considerable glass failure due to ﬂying debris and

89
explosive pressure forces created by extreme wind gusts. Weakly
reinforced cinder block walls blown down. Complete
disintegration of mobile homes and other structures of lighter
materials. Most small- and medium-sized steel-framed signs bent
over or blown down. Some secured construction cranes and
gantry cranes blown down. Some fuel storage tanks may rupture.
Air is full of large projectiles and debris. Shrubs and trees
50–90% defoliated; up to 100% of tangantangan defoliated. Up
to 75% of palm fronds bent, twisted, or blown off; many crowns
stripped from palm trees. Numerous green and virtually all ripe
coconuts blown from trees. Severe damage to sugarcane and
bamboo. Many large trees blown down (palms, breadfruit,
monkeypod, mango, acacia, and Australian pine). Considerable
bark and some pulp removed from trees; most standing trees are
void of all but the largest branches (severely pruned), with
remaining branches stubby in appearance; numerous trunks and
branches are sandblasted. Patches of panax, tangantangan, and
oleander bent over or ﬂattened.
5
155–194
On windward coasts, sea level rise of > 25 ft above normal in open bays 
Severe damage to some solid concrete power poles, numerous 
Devastating Typhoon
(peak gusts 198–246)
and inlets due to storm surge and wind-driven waves; breaking waves 
reinforced hollow-spun concrete power poles, many steel towers, 
inside bays can be > 30 ft above normal; water is about 12–18 ft above 
and virtually all wooden poles; all secondary power lines and 
normal across reef ﬂats. Serious inundation likely for windward coastal 
most primary power lines downed. Total failure of nonconcrete 
areas below 18-ft elevation. Very large boulders carried inland with 
reinforced roofs. Extensive or total destruction to nonconcrete 
waves. Extensive beach erosion. Extensive damage to port facilities 
residences and industrial buildings. Some structural damage to 
including most loading derricks and gantry cranes. Virtually all ships, 
concrete structures, especially from large debris such as cars, 
regardless of size, torn from moorings.
large appliances, etc. Extensive glass failure due to impact of
ﬂying debris and explosive pressure forces during extreme gusts.
Many well-constructed storm shutters ripped from structures. 
continues

90
TABLE 3.1
(Continued)
Maximum sustained
Category
winds in mph
Coastal inundation and wave action
Damage
Some fuel storage tanks rupture. Nearly all construction cranes
blown down. Air full of very large and heavy projectiles and
debris. Shrubs and trees up to 100% defoliated; numerous large
trees blown down. Up to 100% of palm fronds bent, twisted, or
blown off; numerous crowns blown from palm trees; virtually all
coconuts blown from trees. Most bark and considerable pulp
removed from trees. Most standing trees are void of all but the
largest branches, which are very stubby in appearance and
severely sandblasted. Overall damage can be classiﬁed as
catastrophic.
Source: Adapted from Guard and Lander (1993).

basin in terms of activity. Several oceans produce more hurricanes
annually than the North Atlantic. For example, the most active
ocean basin in the world—the Western North Paciﬁc—averages
seventeen hurricanes (typhoons) per year. It is for this reason that
China has the highest frequency of land-falling tropical cyclones,
about nine per year. The second most active is the eastern North
Paciﬁc, which averages ten hurricanes per year. In contrast, the
North Atlantic mean annual number of hurricanes is 6. Table 3.2
summarizes each basin’s average number of hurricanes and total
storms (Landsea 2005).
Also notable is where these storms do not occur. Tropical
cyclone formation is conﬁned to the tropical and subtropical
regions where water is warm. In addition, tropical cyclones do not
form along the equator. As discussed in chapter 1, these storms
require the Coriolis force, which is too weak within 5° of the equa-
tor. It is also noteworthy that tropical cyclones do not form in the
South Atlantic and eastern South Paciﬁc. Water tends to be colder in
these regions, especially the eastern South Paciﬁc. However, even
in the warm-water regions, tropical cyclones still do not occur. One
factor is that few troughs occur in these regions, possibly due to the
unique shape of South America and southern Africa, which
decrease in width toward the South Pole. However, the primary
Worldwide Perspective
91
TABLE 3.2
Mean number of total storms (hurricanes and tropical storms), hurricanes, 
and intense hurricanes per year in all tropical ocean basins 
Mean annual tropical 
Mean annual 
Mean intense
Tropical ocean basin
storms and hurricanes
hurricanes
hurricanes
Northwest Paciﬁc
27
17
8
North Paciﬁc and Northeast Paciﬁc
16
9
4
Eastern Australia and Southwest Paciﬁc 
11
5
2
Western Australia and Southeast Indian
7
4
2
North Atlantic
10
6
2
Southwest Indian
13
7
3
North Indian
5
2
Between 0 and 1
South Atlantic
0
0
0
Southeast Paciﬁc
0
0
0
Global
89
50
21
Numbers based on years 1967 to 2003, except for North India. North India data is from 1980 to 2003. The Atlanta
data includes subtropical cyclones. From Landsea (2000), updated by Landsea (2005).

reason is probably because wind shear is large in these two basins.
Satellite images show several disturbances on the verge of devel-
oping each year, only to be torn apart by westerly winds aloft
(Sheets and Williams 2001). Nevertheless, on rare occasions, it is
possible for tropical cyclones to form in the South Atlantic. A trop-
ical cyclone with winds possibly of 34 knots formed off the coast
of Congo in April 1991 and drifted westward for ﬁve days into the
central South Atlantic before dissipating. In March 2004 a hurri-
cane formed in the South Atlantic Ocean and made landfall in
Brazil. These are the only known occurrences, but quite possibly
other tropical cyclones have developed but went unobserved
before satellites were launched.
Also, systems with structure similar to tropical cyclones are
occasionally observed over arctic and polar regions. This mar-
itime cyclone, known as a polar low, forms poleward of zones of
strong temperature contrasts, ranges in sizes from 120–700 miles,
and has winds near or above gale force. A spectrum of polar low
classiﬁcations exists. Some form along the frigid continental arctic
air near the sea ice boundary over a relatively warmer body of
water, others develop in unstable air masses with strong ﬂuxes
from the water, and still others are initiated by upper-level forcing
from jet stream features. In all cases, water temperatures are in the
40–50°F range, well below the 80°F range observed for tropical
cyclones. A polar low can have banding features with an eye sim-
ilar to a tropical cyclone, so some scientists refer to them as arctic
hurricanes. However, polar lows form over cold water, have a
short life cycle of three to thirty-six hours, have weaker but still
signiﬁcant winds, and are smaller in size. They are observed in
the Northern Hemisphere around the Nordic Seas (near Green-
land, Iceland, and Norway), the Labrador Sea, the Bering Sea, the
Gulf of Alaska, and the Sea of Japan. In the Southern Hemisphere,
the eastern Weddell, the Bellinghausen, and the Ross Seas are
favored locations. A system with a similar structure to a polar low
also occurs in the cold Mediterranean Sea every ten or ﬁfteen
years. Since the key ingredient is cold air moving over relatively
warmer water in all cases, a key driver of polar lows is heat ﬂux
from the ocean. The dynamics of polar lows have some tropical
cyclone researchers speculating that too much attention is being
paid to water temperature and that heat ﬂux is a more important
quantiﬁer for better understanding tropical cyclones. Rasmussen
and Turner (2003) provide a comprehensive review of polar lows.
92
Worldwide Perspective

Hurricane Categories around the World
By international agreement, the most general term for all large,
cyclonically rotating systems with organized thunderstorms orig-
inating over tropical or subtropical water is tropical cyclones. This
category includes depressions, tropical storms, and hurricanes in
addition to two other type of cyclones, monsoon depressions and
subtropical cyclones. Monsoon depressions are weak, cyclonic dis-
turbances that form in the Bay of Bengal with no inner-core struc-
ture and track northwestward into the Indian subcontinent,
bringing moderate winds and heavy rains. However, should a
monsoon depression remain over the ocean long enough to
develop an inner-core structure, it can transform itself into a trop-
ical storm or hurricane. Subtropical cyclones are hybrid systems
that form over the subtropical waters in the Atlantic and Paciﬁc
Oceans and contain a mixture of tropical and polar characteristics.
Subtropical cyclones derive some of their energy from horizontal
temperature contrasts (whereas tropical storms and hurricanes do
not) as well as heat ﬂux from the sea (similar to tropical storms
and hurricanes). Subtropical cyclones may have winds up to 74
mph, and the maximum sustained winds tend to be farther from
the center (on the order of 60–125 miles) than in a tropical storm
or hurricane. Sometimes, the heat ﬂux component begins to dom-
inate, and a subtropical cyclone will transform itself into a tropi-
cal storm or hurricane. Even if these transformations do not occur,
both types of systems are still a serious threat, and forecasters will
issue watches and warnings on them even though they are not
entirely tropical in structure. In this chapter, in deference to inter-
national readers and to avoid confusion, the term “tropical
cyclone” will be used. In the remaining chapters, for U.S. readers,
the term “hurricane” will be used generically in the place of “trop-
ical cyclone.”
Tropical cyclones are generally a summer phenomenon, but
the length of the tropical cyclone season varies in each basin, as
does the peak of activity (table 3.3). For example, the Atlantic trop-
ical cyclone season ofﬁcially starts on June 1 and ends November
30, but most tropical storms and hurricanes form between August
15 and October 15. The Atlantic season peaks around September 10.
In contrast, tropical cyclones occur year-round in the Northwest
Paciﬁc, with a longer active period lasting from July to November
and peaking around September 1. In general, this late-summer
Worldwide Perspective
93

peak exists for all basins, although Southern Hemisphere tropical
cyclones are six months out of phase. This is because the three
favorable conditions—warm water, weak wind shear, and
cyclonic disturbances—are optimized in late summer. In particu-
lar, water temperature peaks in late summer. This seems paradox-
ical since the longest day is June 22. However, the days are still
longer than nights until fall; therefore, the water is still accumu-
lating heat into late summer. The monsoon troughs are most
active in late summer as well, and large-scale circulation patterns
favor weak wind shear in late summer. The exception to the late-
summer peak pattern is the North Indian basin, where there are
peaks in both May and November. This is because strong wind
shear occurs over India during the summer and because the
Indian monsoon moves inland during the summer.
The classiﬁcation schemes used in the United States for trop-
ical systems—tropical disturbance, tropical depression, tropical
storm, and hurricane—are often called different names in other
94
Worldwide Perspective
TABLE 3.3
Length of the ofﬁcial hurricane season, when the season is most active, 
and day when the season typically peaks for all tropical ocean basins 
Tropical ocean basin
Hurricane season
Active regime
Peak day(s)
Northwest Paciﬁc
Year-round
July 1–December 1
September 1
(1945–1988)
Northeast Paciﬁc 
May 15–November 30
June 1–November 1
August 25
(1966–1989)
Eastern Australia and 
October 15–May 1
December 1–April 1
March 1
Southwest Paciﬁc 
(1958–1988)
Western Australia 
October 15–May 1
January 1–April 1
January 15
and Southeast Indian 
and February 25
(1958–1988)
North Atlantic
June 1–November 30
August 15–October 15
September 10
(1886–1989)
Southwest Indian 
October 15– May 15
December 1–April 15
January 15 and
(1947–1988)
February 20
North Indian 
April 1–December 30
April 15–June 1,
May 15 and 
(1891–1989)
September 15– 
November 10
December 15
“Active” is subjectively deﬁned relative to each basin's hurricane history (dates are shown in parentheses), and is
deﬁned as the period when most tropical storms and hurricanes occur. Adapted from Neumann (1993).

regions of the world. For example, in the Northwest Paciﬁc Ocean,
the equivalent name to the hurricane category is “typhoon,” and in
India it is “very severe cyclonic storm.” Unfortunately, the naming
conventions can also be confusing. For example, the Australia
region uses the term “tropical cyclone” for storms with maximum
sustained winds starting at 39 mph (the U.S. tropical storm cate-
gory), while countries in the Southwest Indian Ocean region
reserve it for maximum sustained winds of at least 74 mph (the
U.S. hurricane category); both conﬂict with the international deﬁ-
nition of tropical cyclones, which has no wind speed restriction
and only requires a low pressure system in the tropics or subtrop-
ics with organized thunderstorms. Furthermore, these categories
are further subdivided into additional names by other countries,
such as “cyclonic storm” and “severe cyclonic storm,” which are
actually both tropical storms (by U.S. standards) but of different
intensities. These different naming categories are synthesized in
table 3.4.
Recall from chapter 2 that intense tropical cyclones are the
most destructive. Countries give special recognition to strong trop-
ical cyclones as a result. A tropical cyclone with winds of 111 mph
or more are classiﬁed as “major hurricanes” in the United States.
Countries surrounding the North Indian Ocean call storms with
winds above 137 mph “super cyclones,” while the Australian
region calls them “severe tropical cyclones” for the same wind
regime. Similarly, for winds greater than 132 mph, the Southwest
Indian Ocean calls them “very intense tropical cyclones.”
Finally, in the most active region in the world, the Western
North Paciﬁc, extremely intense storms with winds greater than
150 mph are common enough that the special category of “super-
typhoon” exists for them. However, it is not known how or when
this classiﬁcation was ﬁrst conceived. The ﬁrst use of this term
was by Kinney (1955) in reference to large typhoons, but this had
no correlation to intensity. The ﬁrst ofﬁcial use with reference to
the 150-mph threshold was in a 1963 Joint Typhoon Warning Cen-
ter (JTWC) annual typhoon report (JTWC 1970). It is quite proba-
ble that the 150-mph delineation was chosen because it is roughly
twice the 74-mph threshold for classiﬁcation as a typhoon.
Recall from chapter 1 that tropical cyclone intensity is deﬁned
by maximum sustained winds at a height of 33 feet somewhere
near the storm’s center, averaged over a time period to remove
wind ﬂuctuations. Unfortunately, U.S. forecast centers use one-
minute averaging, while the rest of the world uses ten-minute aver-
aging, which adds further confusion to these categories. Statistics
Worldwide Perspective
95

96
TABLE 3.4. 
Different names and wind categories for tropical cyclones used around the world 
Eastern Australia Ocean,
Maximum sustained
North Atlantic Ocean,
Western Australia Ocean,
surface wind
Northeast Paciﬁc Ocean,
North Indian
Southwest Paciﬁc Ocean, 
Northwest 
Southwest
speed
Central North Paciﬁc Ocean
Ocean
Southeast India Ocean
Paciﬁc Ocean
India Ocean
<20 mph
Tropical depression
Low
Tropical depression
Tropical depression
Tropical depression
20–31 mph
Tropical depression
Depression
Tropical depression
Tropical depression
Tropical depression
32–38 mph
Tropical depression
Deep depression
Tropical depression
Tropical depression
Tropical depression
39–54 mph
Tropical storm
Cyclonic storm
Tropical cyclone (gale)
Tropical storm
Moderate tropical storm
55–73 mph
Tropical storm
Severe cyclonic storm
Tropical cyclone (storm)
Severe tropical storm
Severe tropical storm
74–102 mph
Hurricane
Very severe cyclonic storm
Tropical cyclone (hurricane)
Typhoon
Tropical cyclone (hurricane)
102–110 mph
Hurricane
Very severe cyclonic storm
Tropical cyclone (hurricane)
Typhoon
Intense tropical cyclone
111–132 mph
Major Hurricane
Very severe cyclonic storm
Tropical cyclone (hurricane)
Typhoon
Intense tropical cyclone
133–137 mph
Major Hurricane
Very severe cyclonic storm
Tropical cyclone (hurricane)
Typhoon
Very intense tropical cyclone
138–148 mph
Major hurricane
Super cyclone
Severe tropical cyclone
Typhoon
Very intense tropical cyclone
>148 mph
Major hurricane
Super cyclone
Severe tropical cyclone
Supertyphoon (valid for 
Very intense tropical cyclone
winds >150 mph)
Maximum sustained winds are averaged over one minute in the Atlantic and North Paciﬁc and ten minutes in other basins. Conversion factors for ten- and one-minute averaging are provided in the glossary.

show that ten-minute averaging results in winds 13 percent
weaker than one-minute averaging. Sometimes, sea-level pres-
sure estimates of the tropical cyclone center from maximum sus-
tained wind speeds are also desired, and unfortunately this will
vary by ocean since pressure patterns differ around the world.
The lack of international standards can be confusing. For the
reader’s convenience, wind speed and pressure conversions are
contained in the glossary.
One fascinating aspect of Southern Hemisphere tropical
cyclones is their direction of rotation. Recall in chapter 1 that trop-
ical cyclones around the United States (as well as the whole
Northern Hemisphere) spin counterclockwise due to the Coriolis
force. However, in the Southern Hemisphere, the earth’s rota-
tional inﬂuence is opposite and tropical cyclones there spin clock-
wise. Visitors to the Southern Hemisphere are often surprised by
this observation.
Monitoring, Forecasting, and Warning 
of Tropical Cyclones Worldwide
The World Weather Watch
The monitoring, forecasting, and warning of tropical cyclones are
carried out within the framework of the WMO’s World Weather
Watch (WWW). The WMO is part of the United Nations and is
located in Geneva, Switzerland. The WWW program is based on
the international cooperation of approximately 185 participating
countries and territories. The main purpose of the WWW is to
ensure that each participant’s national meteorology service has
access to the information it needs to provide effective services.
Thus, the WMO’s main mission is to facilitate establishing an
international network of weather data in order to promote the
rapid exchange of this data. This consists of consolidating weather
data from 10,000 land-based stations, 8,000 ships and other marine
stations, 3,000 aircraft, geostationary and polar-orbiting meteoro-
logical satellites, and vertical proﬁle measurements using balloons
(called radiosondes) needed for analyzing and forecasting the
weather. The weather analysis is then conducted by three World
Meteorological Centers (the Bureau of Meteorology in Australia,
the National Centers for Environmental Prediction in the United
Worldwide Perspective
97

States, and the HydroMeteorology Center in Russia) and thirty-
four_Regional Specialized Meteorological Centers (RSMCs). Each
RSMC has speciﬁc tasks and roles for countries and territories
within its region. Some roles of these individual RSMCs include
drought monitoring, transport forecasts of pollutants or radiation
in the event of an environmental emergency, and tropical cyclone
forecasts. These specialized analyses and forecasts are then dis-
seminated back to the national meteorological service in each
country or region.
Five of the RSMCs are directly concerned with tropical
cyclones. These RSMCs monitor and forecast tropical cyclones; issue
information to the international community, including the interna-
tional media; and provide advisory information and guidance to
each country’s or territory’s national meteorological service in their
region. However, ofﬁcial warnings are the responsibility of each
national meteorological service. The RSMCs’ responsibilities also
include assigning names to tropical cyclones, training tropical
cyclone forecasters of each national meteorological service, prepar-
ing operational performance statistics and annual summaries of
tropical cyclone seasons, archiving tropical cyclone data, conducting
tropical cyclone research, and leading tropical cyclone public aware-
ness programs. In addition, the RSMCs provide specialized tropical
cyclone advisory services to the aviation community and provide
information and warnings through the Global Maritime Distress
and Safety System to marine interests. The ﬁve centers are located in
La Réunion Island; Miami, Florida; Nadi, Fiji; New Delhi, India; and
Tokyo, Japan. Each center forms part of its country’s or territory’s
national meteorology service (respectively, Météo-France, the U.S.
National Weather Service’s Tropical Prediction Center, the Fiji
Meteorological Service, the India Meteorological Department, and
the Japan Meteorological Agency). The centers are called, respec-
tively: RSMC Miami—National Hurricane Center; RSMC Tokyo—
Typhoon Center; RSMC—Tropical Cyclones New Delhi; RSMC La
Réunion—Tropical Cyclone Centre; and RSMC Nadi—Tropical
Cyclone Centre.
The WMO has deﬁned twelve regions with tropical cyclone
activity, each designated with a roman numeral (table 3.5). Six of
these regions cover a wide area and are the responsibility of the
RSMCs—the Tropical Prediction Center covers both the North
Atlantic Ocean (Region I) and the eastern North Paciﬁc (Region
II). The other areas, which include only a single or a few countries
or territories, are the responsibility of Tropical Cyclone Warning
98
Worldwide Perspective

Centers (TWTCs). The TWTCs monitor and forecast tropical
cyclones, provide local warnings (unlike the RSMCs), and assign
tropical cyclones names. The TWTCs include the U.S. National
Weather Service facility in Honolulu, Hawaii; three Australian
Bureau of Meteorology facilities in Perth, Darwin, and Brisbane;
the U.S. National Weather Service facility in Papua, New Guinea;
and the Meteorological Service of New Zealand, Ltd., in Welling-
ton, New Zealand. Tropical cyclone forecasts follow the same pro-
cedures as in the United States. Forecasters utilize numerical
models for guidance, with subjective alterations based on new
observations, satellite imagery, and human intuition.
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) also plays a special
role in tropical cyclone forecasting worldwide. With a combined
staff of air force and navy personnel, the JTWC, located at the
Naval Paciﬁc Meteorology and Oceanography Center in Pearl
Harbor, Hawaii, conducts forecasts for all the tropical oceans in
the Eastern Hemisphere (the North Indian, the Southwest Indian,
Southeast Indian/Australian, and the Australian/Southwest
Paciﬁc basins) as well as the western Paciﬁc Ocean. The U.S.
Naval Western Oceanography Center in Pearl Harbor performs
the same task for the eastern Paciﬁc Ocean. The forecasts are
intended for DOD decisions regarding ship movements, aircraft
sorties, and operational planning, as well as for other U.S. gov-
ernment agency requirements. However, these products are also
available to the general public and are a valuable second opinion
Worldwide Perspective
99
TABLE 3.5
Ocean regions, designated by roman numerals I–XII, and their respective Regional 
Specialized Meteorology Centers (RSMC) and Tropical Cyclone Warning Centers (TCWC)
Region
Ocean Basin
RSMC and TCWC Centers
I–II
Atlantic and Eastern Paciﬁc
National Hurricane Center (RSMC Miami)
III
Central Paciﬁc
Central Paciﬁc Hurricane Center (RSMC Honolulu)
IV
Northwest Paciﬁc
Japan Meteorological Center (RSMC Tokyo)
V
North Indian Ocean
India Meteorological Department (RSMC New Delhi)
VI
Southwest Indian Ocean
Meteo France (RSMC La Reunion)
VII–X
Southwest Paciﬁc and Southeast 
Australian Bureau of Meteorology (TCWC Perth),
Indian Ocean
Australian Bureau of Meteorology (TCWC Darwin),
Papua New Guinea (TCWC Port Moresby),
Australian Bureau of Meteorology (TCWC Brisbane)
XI–XII
South Paciﬁc
Fiji Meteorological Service (RSMC Nadi),
Meteorological Service of New Zealand, Ltd. (TCWC
Wellington)

to the WMO-based forecast centers. But, since JTWC uses one-
minute averages, its wind information will be higher than
described by a non-U.S. tropical cyclone warning center for the
same cyclone. JTWC also archives hurricane track data and pub-
lishes an annual tropical cyclone summary (see chapter 7).
Climate Variations in Worldwide Tropical
Cyclones and Seasonal Forecasting
Just as in the Atlantic Ocean, the most inﬂuential modulator of
tropical cyclone activity in other ocean basins tends to be El Niño
and La Niña events (see chapter 2). In contrast to the Atlantic
Ocean, El Niño events increase the number of tropical cyclones in
some ocean basins while altering the location of tropical cyclones
in others. Because El Niño warms ocean waters in the eastern
North Paciﬁc, more tropical cyclones form in this location during
such events. Likewise, during an El Niño, tropical cyclones tend
to form farther east in the western North Paciﬁc. However, the
number of tropical cyclones remains the same (Lander 1993). Aus-
tralia also sees a similar eastward shift during El Niño years, and
storms form earlier in the year (Nicholls 1992). The Southwest
Indian Ocean experiences an overall reduction in tropical cyclone
activity (Jury, Pathack, and Parker 1999). Generally, opposite
results are seen for La Niña years. Thus far, while the North
Indian Ocean experiences considerable year-to-year variations in
tropical cyclone activity, any correlation to El Niño has thus far
been inconclusive (Singh, Khan, and Rahman 2001), and no other
climate signals have been detected as an explanation.
The Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO), which plays a pivotal
role in Atlantic tropical cyclone activity (see chapter 2), apparently
only plays a weak role in other ocean basins. However, it is known
that intense typhoons in the western North Paciﬁc are twice as
likely during the westerly phase of the QBO (Gray 1993). In addi-
tion, clustering of tropical cyclone activity is also observed in the
Paciﬁc Ocean and Australia, and some researchers have correlated
this to the phase of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (see chapter 1).
Based on the pioneering work of Bill Gray (see chapter 2),
other organizations are attempting seasonal forecasting for some
of these basins. Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology and Research
has issued monthly and seasonal tropical cyclone forecasts for
years (Nicholls 1992), as has the University of Hong Kong for the
100
Worldwide Perspective

western North Paciﬁc (Chan 2000; Chan, Shi, and Liu 2001). In
addition, the U.S. Climate Prediction Center recently started issu-
ing seasonal forecasts for the eastern North Paciﬁc.
Worldwide Naming Conventions
Just as in the Atlantic, names are assigned to tropical cyclones in
most basins. However, the number of lists varies, as does the rota-
tional cycle of each list. The NHC performs forecasts for the east-
ern North Paciﬁc (WMO Region II) in addition to its Atlantic
responsibilities (WMO Region I) and uses six lists of eastern
Paciﬁc names on an annual rotating basis similar to that described
in chapter 1. All other regions follow different, and sometimes
unique, procedures. The western North Paciﬁc (Region IV) uses
ﬁve lists, the central North Paciﬁc (Region III) and the Fiji Area
(Region XI) use four lists, and all other regions use lists consisting
of two or three sets of names. While the Southwest India region
follows the NHC’s practice of rotating a list each year, most other
active basins rotate not based on whether it’s a new tropical
cyclone season but on when the last name is reached on the list.
There are a few exceptions. The northern Indian Ocean (Region V)
does not assign names but instead gives an identiﬁcation number
followed by the letter “A” or “B” depending on whether the trop-
ical cyclone originates in the Arabian Sea or the Bay of Bengal.
Wellington (Region XII) also does not assign names. The Papua
New Guinea region has few tropical cyclones and picks names
randomly off its two lists.
Whenever a tropical cyclone has had a major impact in
terms of damage or fatalities, any country affected by the storm
can request that the name be retired by agreement of the WMO.
Retiring ofﬁcially means that a name cannot be used for at least
ten years, although thus far no name has ever been reused after a
protracted retirement. As with the United States, all regions have
retired names.
All names are determined at international meetings of each
region’s RSMC or TWTC and reﬂect the regional culture. For
example, eastern Paciﬁc storms tend to have Hispanic names,
while central North Paciﬁc storms have Hawaiian names. In
regions with multiple countries, names will vary and reﬂect the
different cultures. For example, Southwest Indian tropical cyclone
Worldwide Perspective
101

names are based on French, Madagascan, and many African
countries.
Before 2000, the U.S. Navy and the U.S. Air Force assigned
names for the western North Paciﬁc. Beginning in January 2000, the
naming convention in the western North Paciﬁc underwent a dra-
matic transformation to Asian names. The names used in the west-
ern North Paciﬁc have the following origin: Cambodia, China,
Korea, Japan, Lao, Macau, Malaysia, Micronesia, the Philippines,
Thailand, the United States, or Vietnam. These countries also do not
endorse the use of people’s name to represent these destructive
storms. For instance, Korea, Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia, and Viet-
nam prefer to name tropical cyclones after natural objects (such as
trees, ﬂowers, rivers, or animals); China chose female “pet names”
but no pronouns in addition to natural objects; the Philippines
chose “stormy” adjectives (such as “swift,” “strong,” “sharp,”
“fast”); and Micronesia chose the names of gods and goddesses.
Examples include Hagibis (Philippine for “swift”), Nepartak (a
famous warrior in Micronesia), and Linfa (a Chinese water lily).
The meaning of each western Paciﬁc name, its phonetic pronunci-
ation, and the name pronounced by a native speaker are available
on the Hong Kong Observatory website at http://www. weather.
gov.hk/informtc/sound/tcname2000e.htm. A list of tropical cy-
clone names for all ocean basins is available on the tropical cyclone
section of the WMO website at http://www.wmo.ch/ web/
www/TCP/Storm-naming.html. These names are also available on
Chris Landsea’s Hurricanes, Typhoons, and Tropical Cyclones FAQ
website at http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd/ tcfaq/tcfaqHED.html
as well as the National Hurricane Center’s website at http://
www.nhc.noaa.gov.
The Philippines independently name tropical cyclones that
form in the area bordered by 115°E, 135°E, 5°N, and 25°N. These
names are in addition to the designations given by the Japanese
Meteorological Agency. This list is used locally since it is felt that
familiar names are more easily remembered in the rural areas and
that the names emphasize a threat to the Philippines. It also pro-
vides more leverage in naming a tropical depression or monsoon
depression to indicate that the situation is a serious ﬂash ﬂood
threat to the general public. In contrast, by WMO standards, only
tropical cyclones with winds greater than 39 mph will have a
name. So, when a tropical cyclone in this region has winds greater
than 39 mph, it will have two names!
102
Worldwide Perspective

The Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea storms do not follow the
WMO conventions. Tropical cyclone names are called BOB (Bay of
Bengal) followed by a four-digit number in which the ﬁrst two are
the year and the last two are the sequential number. Similarly,
Arabian Sea tropical cyclones are called ARB with a four-digit
number. For example, the second tropical cyclone of 2004 in the
Bay of Bengal will be identiﬁed as BOB 0402.
Storm Size Variations
Tropical cyclones can vary tremendously in size. Using the radius
of gale-force winds as a criterion (see chapter 1), four categories are
deﬁned based on a literature review (Liu and Chan 1999; Carr and
Elsberry 1997; Merrill 1984). A small tropical cyclone with gale-
force winds (35 mph or faster) extending only 40 miles or less from
the storm center is known as a midget. A small tropical cyclone will
have gale-force winds between 40 and 100 miles radially. An aver-
age tropical cyclone’s gale-force winds will extend between 150
miles and 200 miles outward. Gale-force winds extending out
beyond 200 miles would be considered a large tropical cyclone.
The smallest on record is the midget tropical cyclone Tracy, with
gale-force winds out to 25 miles, that devastated Darwin, Aus-
tralia, on December 24, 1974. The largest is the western North
Paciﬁc tropical cyclone Tip, with gale-force winds extending out-
ward to 683 miles on October 12, 1979. As stressed in chapter 1,
storm size is not correlated with intensity, and indeed some of the
midget tropical cyclones were catastrophic, such as Tracy as well
as the Labor Day Hurricane that hit the Florida Keys in 1935.
It is noteworthy that the largest storm did not occur in the
Atlantic. Indeed, the average North Paciﬁc tropical cyclone has a
radius of 450 miles, 1.5 times the size of the average Atlantic trop-
ical cyclone of 300 miles. The reason for these size differences is
that Atlantic storms, on average, form from tropical waves. In
contrast, elsewhere in the world, tropical cyclones form in associ-
ation with the monsoon trough, a large-scale feature that can
stretch across much of the regional ocean. The monsoon trough
can also exhibit some bizarre conﬁgurations. Every two years in
the western North Paciﬁc, the monsoon trough will become a
large-scale vortex with a diameter of 1,500 miles, known as a mon-
soon gyre. The monsoon gyre is a very large, nearly circular vortex
Worldwide Perspective
103

that rotates counterclockwise for two weeks with a cloud band
rimming the southern and eastern periphery (Lander 1994). A
series of small tropical cyclones may emerge from the leading
edge of the cloud band. It is also possible for the monsoon gyre to
become a large tropical cyclone, such as the giant typhoon Gladys
in 1991.
104
Worldwide Perspective

4
Chronology
T
his chapter is divided into three parts. The ﬁrst part chronologi-
cally lists scientiﬁc weather advances related to hurricane
research and forecasting. The second part chronologically lists
signiﬁcant U.S. land-falling hurricanes since 1900 with commentary
about their impact. The last part discusses a few pre-1900 hurricanes
that have altered history.
Chronology of Weather Advances Related 
to the Study and Forecasting of Hurricanes
1675
Gottfried Leibniz invented calculus, a branch of
mathematics that expresses how a math expression
changes dependent on space or time (Sorbjan 1996).
Isaac Newton actually invented it ﬁrst in 1665 but
kept the discovery to himself.
1686
Edmond Halley, known mainly as a great astronomer
who predicted the famous comet now named after
him, also contributed to meteorology. In 1686, he pub-
lished the ﬁrst meteorology map. This map showed
that tropical winds have a prevailing direction from the
northeast in the Northern Hemisphere and from the
southeast in the Southern Hemisphere (Nebeker
1995). These winds are known as trade winds. This
oceanic surface wind pattern is now known to be
very constant in the tropical Atlantic, eastern half of
105

the Paciﬁc, and southern Indian Ocean. The wind
consistency gave them the obsolete English use of
“trade,” meaning steady course; later, it meant a reli-
able breeze for sailing goods from Europe to North
America (Sheets and Williams 2001). Halley also
identiﬁed pressure differences as the cause of wind.
1687
At the urging (and funding) of Edmond Halley, Isaac
Newton published The Mathematical Principles of Nat-
ural Philosophy (Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathe-
matica in Latin, often just referred to as The Principia),
the most important book in the history of the physical
sciences. Its laid the foundation of modern mathe-
matical theory for all the physical sciences, including
meteorology, by writing them in calculus notation. In
addition, Newton demonstrated that the universe
operates by certain natural laws. Newton’s principles
describe acceleration, inertia, ﬂuid dynamics, and
planetary motion. It set forth the fundamental three
laws of motion and the law of universal gravity.
Weather forecasting and analysis ultimately are
applications of Newton’s second law, force equals
mass times acceleration (Atkinson 1981b; Panofsky
1981). Finally, the book revolutionized the method of
scientiﬁc investigation. A translation is presented in
Newton, Cohen, and Whitman (1999).
1735
George Hadley, a lawyer with a dedication to the nat-
ural sciences, proposed that as air warms at the sultry
equator, it rises high aloft 30,000 feet or higher, moves
poleward to the middle latitudes, and sinks. This cir-
culation is today known as the Hadley cell (Allaby
1998). Satellite photos show a band of thunderstorms
near the equator known as the InterTropical Conver-
gence Zone (ITCZ), conﬁrming that this branch of the
cell exists, although the atmospheric general circula-
tion is much more complicated than what Hadley
postulated. Hadley also deduced that the general
direction of the winds in the tropics is due to the
earth’s rotation (Nebeker 1995). The sinking midlati-
tude air ﬂows back to the equator, and an easterly
106
Chronology

component is added from the earth’s rotation. This
helped explain the direction of the trade winds (see
“1686” above). The mathematical details were later
formulated by Gaspard-Gustave de Coriolis (see
“1835” below).
1743
Benjamin Franklin discovered that storms do not
move in the same direction as the surface wind direc-
tion. The cloud cover from a hurricane in 1743 blocked
the eclipse Franklin wished to see one night in
Philadelphia. Later, he wrote to his brother in Boston
about his disappointment and was surprised to ﬁnd
out that the eclipse had been visible in Boston, and
soon afterward a violent storm followed. Franklin
noted the difference in time between the onset of the
storm in Philadelphia and Boston and the reasons it
must have been the same storm traveling from south-
west to northeast. Typically when New England is
affected by a low-pressure system such as a hurri-
cane, the area is on the back side of the storm system.
Due to the counterclockwise rotation of low-pressure
systems, this results in a wind blowing from the
northeast. Before Franklin’s discovery, it had been
assumed that these storms move northeast to south-
west because the wind is from the northeast. Franklin
discovered that this often was not true. This laid the
foundation for the discovery that cyclones are rotary
in nature (Fleming 1990; Ludlum 1989).
The 1743 hurricane is noteworthy also because it is the
ﬁrst one accurately measured by scientiﬁc instruments.
John Winthrop, a professor of natural philosophy at
Harvard College, measured the pressure and ocean
water level during the storm passage (Ludlum 1989).
1752
Leonhard Euler derived the equation of ﬂuid ﬂow,
which today is used to predict wind. These equations
were written for a ﬁxed point in space (in 1760 Joseph
Lagrange derived a similar set of equations, but 
following the ﬂuid ﬂow). Another consequence of
Euler’s work was the development of the continuity
Chronology
107

equation. The continuity equation states that the
mass of a system remains constant (Atkinson 1981a;
Sorbjan 1996).
1768
Leonhard Euler published a technique for approxi-
mating prognostic calculus equations such that future
values can be predicted (Chabert 1999). This tech-
nique is an application of the ﬁeld of ﬁnite differenc-
ing. Finite differencing converts calculus equations
into a set of algebraic equations with functions repre-
sented on a grid in the x-y-z plane. By representing
values on a grid (instead of an inﬁnite amount of
points as calculus requires), approximate solutions
can be obtained using arithmetical procedures in
space. Euler extended this concept by rewriting the
prognostic calculus term such that future values on a
grid can be related to previous, slightly older values,
thus making forecasts possible. Many calculus equa-
tions cannot be solved analytically, including the pre-
dictive meteorology equations, and this technique
allows approximate solutions that make weather pre-
diction possible. Lewis Fry Richardson is the ﬁrst to
test this technique for weather forecasts (see “1922”
below). Finite differencing is part of the science of
numerical methods in which approximations to calcu-
lus equations are solved on computers (Durran 1999).
1806
Admiral Francis Beaufort proposed a scale for wind
forces, allotting values from 0 to 12. (See the glossary
for more detailed information.)
1819
Professor John Farrar of Harvard University docu-
mented the Boston hurricane of September 23, noting
that “it appears to have been a moving vortex and not
the rushing forward of the atmosphere.” Farrar then
described the extent of the storm damage, the veering
of the wind, and how it turned in opposite directions
at Boston and New York, as well as the different times
of impacts on these two cities (Ludlum 1989).
1822
The French engineer Claude-Louis Navier, and a few
colleagues, added terms to the equation of ﬂuid ﬂow
108
Chronology

to account for intermolecular viscous forces (internal
friction). A Cambridge professor, George Stokes, un-
familiar with French research on this subject, inde-
pendently derived the mathematical formulation for
the viscous terms in 1845. The resulting set of equa-
tions is today called the Navier-Stokes equations
(Nebeker 1995; Sorbjan 1996).
1831
William Redﬁeld made the ﬁrst comprehensive analy-
sis of the cyclonic rotation of hurricanes, noting that
winds rotate counterclockwise around hurricanes “in
the form of a great whirlwind.” (In the Southern
Hemisphere, the rotation is clockwise; see comments
in “1835” below). It should be noted here that several
people in the 1600s, mostly mariners, documented
that hurricanes had rotary winds (most notably the
British explorer William Dampier), but apparently
few had knowledge of these reports, so Redﬁeld gen-
erally gets the credit (Colon 1980; Sheets and Williams
2001). See chapter 5 for more on Redﬁeld.
1834
Emile Clapeyron derived the ideal gas law, which
expresses a relationship between pressure, tempera-
ture, and volume (Von Baeyer 1999). It combined 
previous expressions relating pressure to volume de-
rived by Robert Boyle in 1661, temperature to pres-
sure derived by Jacques Charles in 1787, and volume
to temperature derived by Joseph Gay-Lussac in 1802
(Sorbjan 1996). Lord Kelvin also derived a tempera-
ture scale based on these results in 1851, showing that
an object cannot be colder than – 273.15°C. 
1835
Gaspard-Gustave de Coriolis published a paper de-
scribing how the earth’s rotation causes motion to be
deﬂected to the right (left) in the Northern (Southern)
Hemisphere (Persson 1998). Twenty years later,
William Ferrel, a self-taught mathematician and
schoolteacher, realized that Coriolis’s concepts could
be applied to weather systems (Sheets and Williams
2001). This apparent force due to the earth’s rotation,
known as the Coriolis force, causes a deﬂection of the
wind to the right of its intended path in the Northern
Chronology
109

Hemisphere. Without a rotating earth, air would ﬂow
toward low-pressure systems such as hurricanes, but
the Coriolis force deﬂects the airﬂow to the right. As
a result, cyclones (including hurricanes) rotate coun-
terclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere. In the
Southern Hemisphere, the Coriolis force is reversed,
deﬂecting wind to the left of its intended path; there-
fore, all cyclones in the Southern Hemisphere rotate
clockwise. The Coriolis force is added to the equation
of ﬂuid ﬂow.
1839
Henry Piddington coined the word cyclone, from the
Greek words kyklon and kyklos, meaning “moving in a
circle, whirling around” and also “coiling of the
snake,” to describe all rotary storms (see chapter 5 on
Piddington).
1843
James Prescott Joules, along with other scientists such
as Rudolf Clausius, Willard Gibbs, and Julius Robert
von Mayer in the period, developed the ﬁeld of ther-
modynamics (Von Baeyer 1999). Thermodynamics is
the study of energy and energy conversion. Applica-
tions of thermodynamics to meteorology include
cloud formation, static instability, and prediction
equations for temperature and moisture. The ideal
gas law (see “1834” above) is also considered a ther-
modynamic equation.
1845
The ﬁrst telegraph line is completed between Wash-
ington, D.C., and Boston on April 1, providing the
necessary infrastructure for rapid communication of
weather observations. Joseph Henry, secretary of the
new Smithsonian Institution, envisioned the oppor-
tunity to create an observational weather network
based on this technology (Fleming 1990). In 1848,
Henry issued a press release requesting volunteers to
transmit weather data to the Smithsonian. By 1849
there were 150 volunteers, and by 1860 there were 500
volunteers (NOAA 1991; Shea 1987). This network
was severely interrupted by the Civil War. The suc-
cess of this network, and renewed efforts after the
war by the Mitchell Astronomy Observatory’s direc-
110
Chronology

tor Cleveland Abbe (who obtained cooperation from
the U.S. Army, telegraph companies, and the Smith-
sonian), paved the way for the ﬁrst government-
sponsored synchronous weather observations in 1870
(Sheets and Williams 2001).
1847
Lt. Col. William Reid of the Royal Engineers of
England established the ﬁrst American hurricane
warning system while on duty in Barbados. His
warning system is primarily based on pressure meas-
urements. See chapter 5 for more on Reid.
1870
President Ulysses S. Grant signed a joint resolution of
Congress authorizing the secretary of war to organize
a national meteorological service under the auspices
of the Army Signal Corps on February 9 (NOAA
1991; Shea 1987). It was thought that a military ser-
vice would secure the greatest promptness, regular-
ity, and accuracy. Later that year, on November 1, the
ﬁrst synchronous weather observations ever taken in
the United States were made at twenty-two stations
and telegraphed to Washington, D.C. Fairly primitive
weather forecasts also were issued from these obser-
vations. This service established a system for receiv-
ing daily observations in the Caribbean to monitor
hurricane activity in 1873 (Sheets and Williams 2001).
The ﬁrst ofﬁcial weather map emerged from this net-
work on September 28, 1874, showing a hurricane off-
shore of the Florida-Georgia state line. Originally
called The Division of Telegrams and Reports for the
Beneﬁt of Commerce, this agency was the forerunner
to the U.S. Weather Bureau, later to be called the
National Weather Service.
1873
The Army Signal Corps issued its ﬁrst hurricane
warning on August 23 for New England and the Mid-
dle Atlantic states.
1875
Father Benito Viñes, director of Belen College at
Havana, Cuba, developed the ﬁrst systematic scheme
for hurricane forecasts and warnings. This scheme
was based on meticulous daily observations of sea
Chronology
111

swells, surface winds, and cloud motion aloft, from
which he deduced patterns that occurred with hurri-
canes. Viñes issues the ﬁrst forecast in 1875 for a hur-
ricane that hit Hispanola and Cuba, then began
issuing hurricane warnings routinely for this region.
The hurricane system consisted of a pony express
between isolated villages and an organization of hun-
dreds of observers around the Cuban coastline. See
chapter 5 for more on Father Viñes.
1890
The weather service was made a civilian agency on
October 1 after two decades of public dissatisfaction
with the Army Signal Corps’ weather forecasting and
the 1881 indictment of the service’s disbursing ofﬁcer
for embezzlement (Larson 1999; Shea 1987). For exam-
ple, the Signal Corps failed to issue a warning for the
1875 hurricane that destroyed Indianola, Texas, and
killed 176 people (Sheets 1990). There is also internal
strife in the Signal Corps and a general lack of interest
for continuing the labor-intensive observational net-
work since it interfered with military duties. President
Benjamin Harrison named the new civilian agency the
U.S. Weather Bureau (NOAA 2001).
1898
A concerted effort to establish a comprehensive hur-
ricane warning system for North America was begun
in preparation for the Spanish-American War at the
urging of Willis Moore, the chief of the U.S. Weather
Bureau (Sheets 1990). Fearing for the safety of the
American navy, Moore voiced his concerns to Presi-
dent William McKinley, recalling the 1896 hurricane
that killed 114 people from Florida to Pennsylvania as
an example. Impressed by Moore’s concerns, McKin-
ley stated that he feared a hurricane more than the
Spanish navy. In response, Congress authorized
funds to establish observation stations in the islands
of the Caribbean. A Weather Bureau center was estab-
lished in Kingston, Jamaica, to issue hurricane fore-
casts for the West Indies. After the war was over,
additional observing stations were added, and the
headquarters was transferred to Havana, Cuba.
However, the Havana ofﬁce was only authorized to
issue hurricane forecasts for the West Indies; hurri-
112
Chronology

cane warnings for the continental United States had
to be ofﬁcially issued by the Weather Bureau in Wash-
ington, D.C. The reason is not known, but perhaps
the Weather Bureau thought the Cuban forecasters
lacked the skill (an unfounded notion, since they
were schooled in the techniques of Father Viñes) or
were afraid that the Cubans would outperform the
Weather Bureau. Either way, this turned out to be a
tragic mistake. Communications between these two
facilities was very slow, and the Washington, D.C.,
ofﬁce turned out to be inept with regard to hurri-
canes. See “1902” and “1935” below for more details.
1900
The ﬁrst serious study of hurricanes by the U.S.
Weather Bureau—West Indian Hurricanes, by E. B. Gar-
riot—was published (Garriot 1900). The main contri-
bution was an update of hurricane statistics. Quotes
from Redﬁeld, Viñes, and others as well as known hur-
ricane tracks for 1875–1900 were also included.
A major hurricane struck Galveston, Texas, killing at
least 6,000 people on the island and 2,000 more in
nearby coastal regions with no formal warning from
Washington, D.C. (Larson 1999; Sheets 1990). The
death toll may actually be higher. This is still the
worst natural disaster in U.S. history with regard to
number of fatalities.
1902
The Cuban hurricane forecasting ofﬁce was moved to
Washington, D.C., in the hope that it would improve
the U.S. warning system (Sheets 1990). However, the
move may also have been made to avoid political
embarrassment from the Galveston hurricane. Weather
Bureau administrators in Washington, D.C., and
Havana ignored warnings from Cuban meteorolo-
gists that a hurricane was in the Gulf of Mexico and
instead stated that the storm was headed into the
Atlantic; no warning was ever issued from Washing-
ton D.C. (Larson 1999). This rearrangement ultimately
was a failure (see “1935”).
1905
Advances in wireless telegraphy (radio), developed
by Guglielmo Marconi in the previous decade, began
Chronology
113

to make important contributions to weather informa-
tion. On December 3, 1905, the ﬁrst marine weather
report was broadcast at sea by the SS New York
(NOAA 1991), and on August 26, 1909, the SS Cartago,
near the coast of Yucatan, radioed the ﬁrst ship report
about an existing hurricane. This wireless transmis-
sion provided critical information, which the U.S.
Weather Bureau utilized in its decision to issue warn-
ings to south Texas for a hurricane that later impacted
the Texas/Mexico border. No American lives or ships
were lost (Garriot 1909; Tannehill 1956).
1913
O. L. Fassig published a study titled Hurricanes of the
West Indies, which contains statistics and information
on hurricane characteristics and swells (Fassig 1913).
Vilhelm Bjerknes proposed that weather be studied
using physical laws governed by the following set of
equations: ﬂuid ﬂow (see sections “1752,” “1822,” and
“1835”), continuity (see “1752”), and thermodynamics
(see “1834” and “1843”). The result is seven basic vari-
ables (pressure, temperature, relative humidity, den-
sity, and wind components in the x-y-z plane) with
seven equations that in principle could be solved
(Lynch 2002). This was a dramatic change in thinking,
as most scientists at that time concentrated on empiri-
cal methods. These equations form a mathematically
complete set and today are used in weather forecast
models. While other earlier scientists had similar ideas
(notably the Russian meteorologist M. F. Spasskii in
1851 and Cleveland Abbe in 1901), Bjerknes deserves
the credit for being most passionate about the idea
(Nebeker 1995). Bjerknes’s idea inspired Lewis Rich-
ardson to formulate a way to solve these equations
(see “1922” below). Bjerknes was also the ﬁrst to
employ the technique of graphical calculus to these
physical laws.
1922
Lewis Richardson described how solutions to meteor-
ological equations may be approximated for weather
prediction using ﬁnite differencing (see “1768”). His
ﬁrst forecast attempt using this technique failed due
to inadequate formulation of the equations as well as
114
Chronology

other numerical reasons. The sheer enormity of the
tedious calculations also discouraged further work
by other meteorologists (Nebeker 1995). However,
this groundbreaking research laid the foundation for
the ﬁrst successful numerical weather forecasts as
certain numerical problems related to the equations
were solved over the next two decades, and when the
invention of the computer made the calculations
achievable. See chapter 5 for more on Richardson.
Edward H. Bowie published an article on the forma-
tion and movement of West Indian hurricanes. He
stated that a hurricane moves in the general motion
of the air surrounding it and tends to move clockwise
around the periphery of a semipermanent feature 
in the central Atlantic known as the Bermuda high-
pressure system (Bowie 1922).
1923
Sir Gilbert Walker discovered a west-to-east circula-
tion pattern in the west Paciﬁc Ocean, today called the
Walker circulation. He also noted that this circulation
pattern periodically shifts, today known as the South-
ern Oscillation, and is correlated with an El Niño
event (Allaby 1998). El Niño is a signiﬁcant increase in
water temperature over the eastern and central equa-
torial Paciﬁc occurring at irregular intervals between
three and seven years, shifting the Walker circulation.
El Niño is the largest modulator of seasonal Atlantic
hurricane activity (see “1983” below) and also inﬂu-
ences hurricanes in other ocean basins. See chapters 2
and 3 for more discussion on El Niño.
1924
C. L. Mitchell published West Indian Hurricanes and
Other Tropical Cyclones of the North Atlantic Ocean,
which tracks all known tropical storms and hur-
ricanes from 1887 to 1923, with statistics on their 
frequency, formation points, and motion (Mitchell
1924). This is the most comprehensive study up to
that time.
1926
Isaac Cline, the Weather Bureau meteorologist in
charge on Galveston Island during the 1900 Galve-
ston Hurricane and in the New Orleans Weather
Chronology
115

Bureau during the 1915 hurricane, published Tropical
Cyclones, which was the most authoritative book in
the United States on hurricanes at that time. It con-
tains considerable original work on hurricane rain-
fall, tides, storm surge, and waves, with the focus on
Gulf of Mexico storms. See chapter 5 for more on
Cline.
1929
Robert Goddard launched a rocket that included a
barometer, a thermometer, and a camera (Purdom
and Menzel 1996). When the parachute deployed, the
camera recorded the instrument readings. The roots
of high-altitude photography and weather monitor-
ing, and ultimately weather satellites, can be traced to
this moment (see “1954” below).
1935
Congress appropriated $80,000 to revamp the hurri-
cane warning service. New local hurricane forecast
centers were established in Jacksonville, Florida; New
Orleans, Louisiana; San Juan, Puerto Rico; and later in
Boston, Massachusetts. A twenty-four-hour hurricane
teletype system network was set up from Wilmington,
North Carolina, to Brownsville, Texas, so that no more
hurricanes are “lost” for several days (Sheets 1990;
DeMaria 1996). These actions were motivated by dis-
content from coastal communities, who felt that the
Washington, D.C., Weather Bureau hurricane warning
service had been inadequate. For example, warnings
were issued only six hours before the devastating 1926
hurricane hit Miami; even worse, the warning was
issued at 11 p.m., after most residents had gone to
sleep. Coastal residents also felt that federal ofﬁcials
lacked sensitivity to hurricane problems since Wash-
ington, D.C., was rarely affected by hurricanes. The
best example occurred in August 1934, when the
Weather Bureau issued a hurricane warning for 
the Texas coast one Sunday afternoon. Since no addi-
tional observations would be available until 7 p.m.,
and because the forecaster’s shift had ended, he went
home, planning to return to work at 7 p.m. During his
absence, an anxious Galveston Chamber of Com-
merce wired the Washington Weather Bureau for an
116
Chronology

update, and the map plotter on duty honestly but
imprudently wired back, “Forecaster on golf course—
unable to contact” (DeMaria 1996).
Bernhard Haurwitz provided evidence that hurri-
canes extend from the surface to 20 miles aloft and
that the air is anomalously warm at the top of a hur-
ricane (Haurwitz 1935).
Floating automatic weather instruments mounted on
buoys began collecting weather data (NOAA 1991).
1937
The ﬁrst ofﬁcial Weather Bureau radio meteorograph
(more commonly called a radiosonde) was made at
East Boston, Massachusetts. A radiosonde is an in-
strument attached to a balloon that measures the ver-
tical proﬁle of temperature, moisture, pressure, and
wind to 50,000 feet and sends the data with a radio
transmitter. Before the radiosonde, real-time upper-
air observations were provided by either kites
(1894–1931), pilot balloons manually monitored to
deduce cloud height and air motion, or aircraft
(1931–1939). Before the radiosonde, balloons could
measure weather data, but the measurements had to
be retrieved by ﬁnding the instruments dropped by a
parachute after the balloon burst, often an impossible
task. The radiosonde network proved superior and
was ﬁrmly established by 1939 (NOAA 1991), provid-
ing a three-dimensional picture of the atmosphere
around the United States. Pan American World Air-
ways, the ﬂagship airline for the United States to
Latin America and the Caribbean, also started pro-
viding a dense pilot balloon network in the Carib-
bean (Sheets and Williams 2001), augmenting the
network. With the emergence of the radiosonde net-
work and Pan Am data, forecasters quickly realized
that mid- and upper-level winds steer hurricanes,
providing valuable information for track forecasts
(Dunn 1940a).
1940
Gordon Dunn published a paper showing that most
Atlantic tropical storms and hurricanes form from
Chronology
117

tropical waves—not due to cold fronts, which was the
popular theory at that time (Dunn 1940b). This was
also the ﬁrst paper documenting and describing trop-
ical waves. See chapter 5 for more on Dunn.
President Roosevelt ordered the Coast Guard to
establish ocean weather ships (NOAA 1991).
1941
RAdio Detection And Range (RADAR) with wave-
lengths capable of detecting rain and snow was ﬁrst
used (Rogers and Smith 1996). Radar detects precipi-
tation by transmitting and receiving reﬂected radia-
tion from raindrops. In 1942, the U.S. Navy gave the
Weather Bureau twenty-ﬁve surplus aircraft radar to
be modiﬁed for ground meteorological use (NOAA
1991). Up to 1957, all Weather Bureau radars were
actually military in origin and modiﬁed for rain
detection.
1942
To increase surveillance of weather systems during
World War II, the U.S. Army Air Force began aerial
weather reconnaissance operations between North
America and Allied Western Europe on August 16. In
the summer of 1943, they also began “weather scout”
missions in Europe (Nolan and Murphy 2000).
1943
The ﬁrst intentional (but unauthorized) ﬂight into a
hurricane occurred on July 27. British pilots at a ﬂight
school in Bryan, Texas, overheard that the AT-6
planes may be moved because of a hurricane off
Galveston. Not knowing what a hurricane was, and
used to bigger airplanes from their combat experi-
ence, the British students started taunting their train-
ers about ﬂying in bad weather and about the
durability of the smaller AT-6 planes. One of the
trainers, Army Air Corps Col. Joseph Duckworth (an
unassuming man who specialized in teaching mili-
tary pilots how to ﬂy in bad weather), bet that he
could ﬂy into the hurricane and back with an AT-6
plane. Because of this dare, Duckworth ﬂew into the
eye of the storm twice that day, once with a navigator
and again with a weather ofﬁcer (Sheets and Williams
2001; Fincher and Read 1999). This same hurricane
118
Chronology

also seriously damaged reﬁneries in Texas, hurting
wartime production of fuel.
1944
Motivated by Duckworth’s successful ﬂight and the
threat of hurricanes to navy ships and wartime pro-
duction (such as the reﬁnery incident in Texas), the
Joint Chiefs of Staff approved hurricane reconnais-
sance over the Atlantic using U.S. Army Air Force
and Navy planes. The Jacksonville hurricane forecast
center was moved to Miami, Florida, to establish the
Joint Hurricane Warning Center with the U.S. Air
Corps and the U.S. Navy; Grady Norton was ap-
pointed as its chief. The ﬁrst ofﬁcial, authorized
ﬂights occurred early in the summer into tropical
storms, and on July 17 Capt. Allan Wiggins made the
ﬁrst authorized ﬂight into a hurricane. In September,
the hurricane reconnaissance ﬂights had their ﬁrst
success tracking an East Coast hurricane (see Great
American Hurricane in table 4.1), providing forecast-
ers unprecedented detailed information on a hurri-
cane (Sheets and Williams 2001).
On December 16, the U.S. naval ﬂeet, commanded by
Adm. William “Bull” Halsey en route to support the
invasion of the Philippine Islands, suffered devastat-
ing damage from a typhoon. The meteorologist in
charge, Cdr. George F. Kosco, used what very limited
information he had to make a forecast upon which
Halsey could steer the ﬂeet. Unknown to anyone at
the time was that a scout plane had information
about a typhoon that would have altered the ﬂeet’s
path. The ﬂeet inadvertently sailed into Typhoon
Cobra with winds up to 130 mph and 70-foot waves.
Three destroyers were sunk, 146 carrier-borne aircraft
were destroyed, 9 additional ships were severely
damaged, and 778 sailors were killed. After this in-
cident, Halsey requested dedicated reconnaissance
ﬂights for hurricanes, but it was turned down be-
cause such heavy-duty aircraft were needed for the war
effort. A similar incident again occurred to Halsey’s
ﬂeet in June 1945 en route to an invasion of Okinawa,
damaging 33 ships, destroying 76 planes, and killing 6
men. Halsey once again requested regular weather
Chronology
119

reconnaissance ﬂights for the Paciﬁc (Sheets and
Williams 2001).
Horace Robert Byers showed in his classic book Gen-
eral Meteorology that heat and moisture transmitted
from the ocean partially balance adiabatic expansional
cooling as the pressure in a hurricane falls. He showed
that surface air temperature does not cool much; oth-
erwise, the surface heat source support for cloud
updrafts would become disrupted, and the storm
would decay. This explains why hurricanes develop
over the ocean, because over land they lack the neces-
sary heat and moisture energy sources. This also
explains why hurricanes weaken rapidly upon land-
fall or when they move over cold water (Byers 1944).
World War II radar observations showed that rainfall
in hurricanes occurs in well-deﬁned spiral bands
rather than being uniformly distributed throughout
the storm. The ﬁrst radar picture of a hurricane eye
was taken at the U.S. Naval Air Station, Lakehurst,
New Jersey, on September 14 (Wexler 1947).
Herbert Riehl and Maj. Robert Schafer published a
paper showing that hurricanes do not develop or
intensify if the vertical wind shear is too strong (Riehl
and Shafer 1944). See chapter 5 for more on Riehl.
1945
The hurricane eyewall was discovered (Wexler 1945;
Depperman 1946).
Motivated by the need to ﬁnd faster ways to compute
World War II ballistic ﬁring tables, the U.S. Army
funded the University of Pennsylvania’s Moore
School of Electrical Engineering to develop the ﬁrst
general purpose electronic digital computer, called
the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer
(ENIAC), for delivery to the army’s Ballistic Research
Laboratories (Weik 1961; Ralston and Reilly 1993).
Developed by Professor John Mauchly and his grad-
uate student J. Presper Eckert, the top-secret ENIAC
was a huge machine, covering 1,800 square feet (150
120
Chronology

feet long by 12 feet width) with a height of 10 feet
high and weighing 30 tons. It required approximately
17,500 vacuum tubes, 70,000 resistors, 10,000 capaci-
tors, 1,500 relays, 6,000 manual switches, and 5 mil-
lion soldered joints. ENIAC consumed 160 kilowatts
of electricity and caused the city of Philadelphia to
experience brownouts. ENIAC could perform 5,000
additions, 357 multiplications, or 38 divisions in a
second—slow by today’s standards, but 1,000 times
faster than any machine of its era and much, much
faster than doing the same task by hand. ENIAC also
included other computer hardware innovations such
as a gate (for the logical “AND” statement) and a
buffer (for the logical “OR” statement). Not com-
pleted in time before the war ended, ENIAC was
used ﬁrst for classiﬁed studies of thermonuclear
chain reactions to design a hydrogen bomb. Later
tasks included cosmic ray studies, random number
studies, wind tunnel design, thermal ignition, and
weather prediction (see “1950” below). Since the fail-
ure of even one vacuum tube could corrupt the calcu-
lations, another by-product of ENIAC was progress
in vacuum tube development (Platzman 1979).
During ENIAC’s development, it becomes obvious
that the computer had a number of shortcomings: it
could only store 20 ten-decimal numbers, and manual
wiring was required to program the machine. Moore
school researchers and world-renowned mathemati-
cian John von Neumann (who acted as a consultant)
proposed a new computer design to overcome these
deﬁciencies (Ralston and Reilly 1993)—the concept of
a “stored-program” computer, in which instructions
as well as data are stored together in the primary
memory, with the memory being conﬁgured to be as
large, random access, and fast as possible. Previous
computer designs, including ENIAC, stored instruc-
tions on external devices such as a tape. This new
concept proposed transferring an instruction from
memory to the processor, decoding the instruction,
and executing it with respect to data that was also
retrieved from memory. This radically new design
Chronology
121

was called the Electronic Discrete Variable Automatic
Computer (EDVAC) and would make computer pro-
gramming easier. EDVAC also contained new hard-
ware conﬁgurations to maximize internal memory and
used binary math rather than decimal math, which is
more economical on vacuum tubes. These key con-
cepts ushered in the academic discipline of computer
science. Thus, the need to solve complex math prob-
lems in ﬁelds such as meteorology spawned the mod-
ern computer era.
1946
The U.S. Army Air Force began organized reconnais-
sance ﬂights scouting for typhoons in the Paciﬁc
(Nolan and Murphy 2000). The U.S. Navy also for-
mally began weather reconnaissance, with units sta-
tioned in Miami, the Philippines, and Guam (Sheets
1990). The motivation for these ﬂights resulted from
the massive damage incurred by Halsey’s ﬂeet.
John von Neumann organized the Electronic Com-
puter Project at the Institute for Advanced Study
(IAS) in Princeton, New Jersey. The goal of this proj-
ect was to design and build an electronic computer
based on the EDVAC concept that exceeded the
power and capabilities of existing computers such as
ENIAC to advance mathematical science (Nebeker
1995). The computer architecture, designed by Neu-
mann, proved to be the model for more advanced
computers built in the next decade. In 1947, Neu-
mann decided that the main application of the com-
puter would be for weather forecasting and started
the Meteorology Group at IAS.
The science of weather modiﬁcation was initiated by
two discoveries in 1946. Rainfall development gener-
ally requires the formation of ice crystals in a cloud.
Under proper (and complex) conditions, the ice crys-
tals will grow heavy enough to overcome the cloud’s
updrafts and fall as precipitation, ﬁrst as snow, then
melt to rain if the air below the cloud is above freez-
ing. However, ice crystal initiation needs a ﬂoating
particle with a molecular structure similar to ice,
122
Chronology

known as ice nuclei. Natural ice nuclei include certain
kinds of clay, bacteria, and amino acids, as well as ice
crystals from another cloud or another section of the
same cloud (Stull 2000). Hence, in theory, if one drops
nuclei in a cloud with a structure similar to ice, rain
could result. In 1946, Vincent Schaefer accidentally
discovered that dry ice (solid carbon dioxide) injected
into moist air at –9.5°F causes water vapor to sublime
into ice crystals. Realizing the importance of this dis-
covery, on November 13 he ﬂew over a supercooled
(meaning below freezing) stratus cloud, dropped six
pounds of dry ice into the cloud, and triggered snow
(Byers 1974; Chisholm 2003). Dr. Bernard Vonnegut
(the older brother of novelist Kurt Vonnegut) was also
involved in the study of ice nucleation (Chisholm
2003). On November 14, he released silver iodide
smoke particles in a refrigerated chest containing
supercooled liquid water droplets. Swarms of ice
crystals were produced. Vonnegut later found that sil-
ver iodide gets better results in nucleating clouds than
does dry ice. These successes lead to many attempts at
weather modiﬁcation, including Project Cirrus in 1947
where clouds were seeded with artiﬁcial ice nuclei to
induce rainfall. The ﬁrst attempt to seed a hurricane
was also done in Project Cirrus in a hurricane off
Georgia, which then changed track and hit Savannah,
causing much controversy (Sheets and Williams
2001). The storm motion shift was actually caused 
by a change in steering currents, not the seeding, 
but demonstrated that scientists need to be diligent
about public perception in weather modiﬁcation ex-
periments. Later, a more carefully constructed cloud-
seeding experiment called Project STORMFURY was
conducted on hurricanes and contained strict guide-
lines on storms eligible for seeding (see “1962” below
and chapter 2).
1947
A celebrated paper from the Department of Meteorol-
ogy at the University of Chicago provided a rudi-
mentary understanding of the jet stream (a term
coined by C. G. Rossby; see chapter 5), its relationship
to fronts, and its three-dimensional structure (Lewis
Chronology
123

2003). This work was motivated by World War II
bombers’ unexpected encounters with narrow bands
of strong westerly winds at 30,000–35,000-foot levels.
Other noteworthy works include observation of
strong upper-level winds during a European ﬁeld
experiment in 1935 and the obscure research of Japa-
nese meteorologist Wasaburo Ooishi, who used upper-
air kite measurements to document strong westerly
winds aloft over Japan in the winter of 1924. The jet
stream is intricately related to atmospheric ﬂow and
evolution.
1948
Erik Palmen showed that hurricanes do not form
over water colder than 80°F, demonstrating that
warm water is a requirement for hurricane formation
and intensiﬁcation (Palmen 1948).
Jules Charney became director of the IAS’s Meteor-
ology Group. Charney brought key leadership to 
the program, proposing that a hierarchy of weather
models of varying complexity be tested. He derived 
a simpliﬁed system of equations for weather fore-
casts, making weather models feasible on computers
(Nebeker 1995).
1950
The IAS group performed feasibility tests of numeri-
cal weather forecasting on the ENIAC computer. The
simulations were not good but had potential, show-
ing meteorological features (Nebeker 1995; Cressman
1996).
1952
The IAS computer was completed, and researchers
tested a model simulation of an unusually severe
storm on the new machine. On November 24, 1950, a
strong cyclone formed off the East Coast that had
been unpredicted by the Weather Bureau. The simu-
lation accurately predicted the development of the
storm. More impressively, the computer only took
forty-eight minutes to complete the forecast. The suc-
cess of this and other computerized test forecasts
motivated the formation of the Joint Numerical
124
Chronology

Weather Prediction Group (JNWPU) in 1954, jointly
funded and staffed by the Weather Bureau, the U.S.
Air Force, and the U.S. Navy. The JNWPU pioneered
operational weather forecasts on computers, becom-
ing operational in 1955 (Cressman 1996; Nebeker
1995). In 1958, the JNWPU divided into three organi-
zations, which still exist today: the National Meteoro-
logical Center (for civilian needs), now called the
National Centers for Environmental Prediction; the
Global Weather Central (for air force needs); and 
the Fleet Numerical Oceanography Center (for navy
needs), now called Fleet Numerical Meteorology and
Oceanography Center. All three units, particularly
the NCEP, interact with the National Hurricane 
Center and operational forecast centers worldwide
for day-to-day operational situations. The IAS also
spawned a new unit, now called the Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL), that later devel-
oped the most skillful Atlantic hurricane track model
in the 1990s.
1954
In October, the ﬁrst color pictures taken from a high-
altitude Viking rocket (launched by the Navy
Research Laboratory) revealed a tropical depression
or tropical storm (D. Roth, personal communication,
2004) over the southwestern United States that had
moved inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Vaughan
1982; Vaughan and Johnson 1994; Amato 1997). The
photo of the storm’s circulation pattern explains why
rain occurs in that region. The discovery of this
storm, which had not been detected by the conven-
tional weather-observing network, demonstrated the
usefulness of high-altitude photography in detecting
or enhancing knowledge of weather systems. It con-
vinced the U.S. government that routine meteorolog-
ical imagery from higher altitudes was needed. The
success of the high-altitude rocket experiments,
which began in 1944, encouraged scientists that, with
a more powerful engine and the addition of upper
stages, the Viking rocket could be made a vehicle
capable of launching an earth satellite. This led to the
Chronology
125

Vanguard satellite program in 1955. Satellites repre-
sent the single greatest advancement in observing
weather over the tropics.
1955
The Miami Weather Bureau ofﬁce was ofﬁcially des-
ignated the National Hurricane Center (NHC) (De-
Maria 1996; Sheets 1990). Gordon Dunn was the ﬁrst
ofﬁcial NHC director, although many, including
Dunn, recognize the well-respected Miami forecaster
Grady Norton as the “honorary” ﬁrst director. Dunn,
who suffered from migraines and high blood pres-
sure, performed forecast duties against his doctor’s
advice during Hurricane Hazel, died of a stroke at his
home after the forecast shift. See chapter 5 for more
on Norton.
A donated military radar was installed at Hatteras,
North Carolina, and all three storms that made land-
fall in 1955 passed within its range, demonstrating the
usefulness of radar for tracking hurricanes (DeMaria
1996). This was further motivation that the Weather
Bureau should complete its own radar system, which
had been in development since the end of World War
II (Rogers and Smith 1996) and already had coopera-
tive networks in Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana, and
Arkansas due to local concerns about tornadoes
(Zipser 1989). In 1959, the Weather Bureau commis-
sioned its own ﬁrst radar at Miami’s NHC (NOAA
1991). By the early 1960s, radars thoroughly cover the
U.S. coastline from Brownsville, Texas, to Eastport,
Maine, and are known as the WSR-57 network.
1956
The National Hurricane Research Laboratory (NHRL)
was established through the efforts of Robert Simp-
son (see chapter 5) and other scientists (Sheets and
Williams 2001; Sheets 1990; Zipser 1989). Six signiﬁ-
cant hurricanes hit the northeastern United States in
1954 and 1955 (Carol, Edna, and Hazel in 1954; Con-
nie, Diane, and Ione in 1955), causing massive dam-
age. This heightened awareness in Washington, D.C.,
of hurricanes, and Congress authorized funding for
the NHRL. Its goals are to examine the structure of all
stages of hurricanes and to determine important
126
Chronology

parameters for hurricane forecasting using instru-
mented planes and other data sources. Originally
located in West Palm Beach, Florida, the NHRL was
later moved to Miami in the same building as the
NHC. Today the lab is called the Hurricane Research
Division (HRD) and is located at Virginia Key,
Florida, just east of Miami. HRD research ﬂights have
provided our most complete understanding of the
three-dimensional structure of hurricanes.
Herbert Riehl (see chapter 5) and colleagues devel-
oped the ﬁrst track forecasting scheme based on
empirical statistics. This technique assembled past
meteorological observations and developed an equa-
tion that predicts what a current storm may do based
on similar past situations. The advantage of empirical
equations is that they are easy to develop and simple
to run on computers. The disadvantage is that the
atmosphere responds in a much more complicated
fashion than suggested by simple statistics, and
therefore statistical schemes often do not work well,
especially in unusual situations or when a hurricane
is rapidly changing track or intensity. Nevertheless,
many schemes have been devised over the years
using statistics.
Julian Adem published a paper showing that a vortex
could slowly propagate to the northwest even in the
absence of a steering current. This is known as the
beta drift. Adem demonstrated that hurricane motion
is more complicated than a vortex simply following a
steering current and that complex interactions
between the hurricane and the environment also
determine a hurricane’s track.
The ﬁrst meteorological satellites were launched in
1956. Pioneer I and Pioneer II contained television
cameras, but the equipment failed (Purdom and
Menzel 1996).
1959
On May 1, weather forecasting elements of the U.S.
Navy and Air Force in the western North Paciﬁc 
are combined into a single tropical cyclone warning
Chronology
127

center, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) in
Guam (now located in Hawaii). Over the years, the
role of JTWC grew to include the entire Indian and
Paciﬁc Oceans.
Attempts at satellite weather monitoring continued.
Vanguard II was launched in February 1959, but an
uneven separation from the launch vehicle and
improper balancing resulted in a wobbling axis, mak-
ing the data unusable (Schnapf 1982; Vaughan and
Johnson 1994). Explorer VI, launched on August 7,
captured the ﬁrst crude images of the earth’s cloud
cover. Explorer VII, launched on October 13, contained
a radiometer designed by Verner Suomi and Robert
Parent of the University of Wisconsin. This radiometer
contained black and white ping-pong balls on the end
of transmission antennas that measure solar and
infrared radiation, providing the ﬁrst radiation budget
of the earth—and the ﬁrst successful measurement of
the earth’s atmosphere by a satellite (Purdom and
Menzel 1996; Vaughan and Johnson 1994).
1960
The meteorological satellite era ofﬁcially began on
April 1 when the ﬁrst successful experimental
weather satellite with a camera, the Television
InfraRed Observation Satellite-1 (TIROS-1), was
launched by NASA (Vaughan and Johnson 1994).
TIROS-1’s primary objective was to demonstrate the
feasibility of observing the earth’s cloud cover by
means of slow-scan television cameras in a polar-
orbiting, spin-stabilized satellite (Schnapf 1982). The
potential of satellites for hurricane monitoring
became obvious in April when TIROS-1 photographs
a previously unreported hurricane 800 miles east of
Brisbane, Australia.
TIROS-1 is an example of a polar-orbiting satellite.
These spacecraft follow a north-south orbit around
the earth’s poles, providing pictures centered on dif-
ferent longitudes each hour as the earth rotates
underneath them. Today’s polar orbiting satellites are
important research tools because they provide high-
resolution pictures. They are also used to infer (but
128
Chronology

not directly measure) cloud-top heights, moisture
proﬁles, temperature proﬁles, sea surface tempera-
ture, wind, and many other useful quantities.
Nine more experimental TIROSs followed during the
next ﬁve years. Other notable achievements include
technology called Automatic Picture Transmission
(APT), which allowed the direct transmission of real-
time pictures; the change to a “wheel-mode” opera-
tion so that a sequence of overlapping pictures could
be taken and a mosaic of the whole globe could be
constructed; and the introduction of sun-synchro-
nous orbits (which means that a satellite passes over
any given location at the same solar time each day).
The initiation of the TIROS program, its transition
from the Department of Defense to the NASA God-
dard Space Flight Center, and TIROS’s legacy are an
interesting story, and readers are referred to Schnapf
(1982), Vaughan and Johnson (1994), and Purdom
and Menzel (1996) for details.
1961
Swirling vortices in the low cloud decks were ob-
served by high-altitude U-2 aircraft photographic
reconnaissance inside the eyes of hurricanes (Fletcher,
Smith, and Bundgaard 1961). These small regions of
rotation embedded on the inner edge of the eyewall
are known today as mesovortices (Kossin, McNoldy,
and Schubert 2002; Kossin and Schubert 2004) and
can be associated with locally strong, damaging
winds. It is postulated that mesovortices may be
responsible for localized extreme damage in Hurri-
cane Andrew (1992) and perhaps Hurricane Celia
(1970). They may also be responsible for nearly crash-
ing a WP-3D NOAA research aircraft during Hurri-
cane Hugo (1989).
1962
Project STORMFURY, a study to assess whether man
could modify hurricanes by introducing artiﬁcial ice
nuclei into the eyewall region, began at the NHRL. See
chapters 2 and 6 for more on Project STORMFURY.
1963
Edward Lorenz published a landmark paper show-
ing that there are inherit limits to the predictability 
Chronology
129

of weather (Lorenz 1963; Nebeker 1995). This is
because weather forecasts are sensitive to the accu-
racy of weather observations fed into computers—
even a slight change in the decimal point of an
observation will yield completely different long-term
forecasts. Since measurements of temperature, wind,
and moisture will always contain some small errors,
long-term weather forecasts will always contain large
errors (although short-term forecasts of less than two
days generally will be accurate). This discovery
started a new science called chaos theory, the study of
erratic behavior in predictive equations in the sense
that very small changes in the initial state lead to large
and apparently unpredictable changes in the late
state. This chaotic property eventually makes long-
term weather forecasts completely inaccurate. In the-
ory, the predictability limit is ten days, but in practice
it is about four to ﬁve days. This is because any addi-
tional errors introduced into the computer models
accelerate forecast inaccuracies. These additional
errors are due to (1) data gaps in certain parts of the
world, especially over the oceans; (2) incomplete
understanding of certain atmospheric features such as
clouds, radiation, and rain; and (3) the approximate
solution of calculus equations using numerical meth-
ods. As a result, forecast errors grow faster in time,
especially after two days. Chaos theory also applies to
hurricanes, and some research has shown that
twenty-four-hour track forecast errors may never be
less than 75 miles, on average (Abbey, Leslie, and Hol-
land 1995; Leslie, Abbey, and Holland 1998).
When someone sues the federal government, a legal
doctrine known as sovereign immunity becomes
important. Under this doctrine, which is based on the
ancient English notion that “the King can do no
wrong,” the government cannot be sued without its
consent. The U.S. government does not consent to be
sued for exercising discretion or for misrepresenta-
tion, and as a result typically the courts dismiss law-
suits involving weather forecasts by the government
without even deciding on the merits of the case. An
130
Chronology

example is Bartie v. United States, when Whitney Bartie
and hundreds of others sued the federal government,
claiming that the New Orleans Weather Bureau was
negligent in giving adequate warnings on the inten-
sity, track, and landfall of Hurricane Audrey (1957).
The Weather Bureau issued warnings that Audrey
would make landfall late on the evening of June 26,
1957, as a category 2 storm, but instead the storm’s
motion increased and it also rapidly intensiﬁed to a
category 4 storm. By sunrise of June 26, high water
had already inundated the southwest Louisiana coast,
and many surprised residents (most several miles
inland and thinking they were safe) were unable to
leave. The storm surge killed 390 people, including
Bartie’s wife and ﬁve children. The court, however,
held that their suit was barred by the discretionary
exception because weather forecasting is a subjective
process requiring discretion, as are the means of com-
municating with the public. The court also cited that
their suit was barred by the misrepresentation excep-
tion, since a bad forecast is generally viewed in this
manner. The court observed that the New Orleans
weather service advisories did not convey the neces-
sary urgency of the hurricane threat but dismissed
the suit based on sovereign immunity (Klein and
Pielke 2002).
In truth, the Weather Bureau did give adequate warn-
ing of a landfall, but communication problems and
complacency on the part of long-time residents con-
tributed to the disaster. First, newly elected city ofﬁ-
cials in Lake Charles edited text from the warning
and advisories before dissemination (Zipser 1989).
Second, the warnings directed people to evacuate
from “low or exposed areas,” but many residents sev-
eral miles inland at 7–8 feet elevation didn’t consider
themselves to be at low elevation. Third, the message
lacked a compelling sense of urgency or emergency.
Finally, some long-time residents stayed because they
had experienced many hurricanes with no serious
consequences and thought Audrey posed no threat
(Sheets and Williams 2001).
Chronology
131

1964
The American Meteorological Society (AMS) wrote to
the Taiwanese ambassador to the United States deplor-
ing the bad treatment of Kenneth Cheng, head of the
Taiwan Weather Service, who had been indicted for an
incorrect typhoon forecast. The AMS pointed out that
if forecasters are indicted for an incorrect forecast, soon
there would be no forecasters (NOAA 1991).
Recognizing the importance of meteorological satel-
lites, the U.S. government formed the Environmental
Science Services Administration (ESSA), a new labo-
ratory to transition the TIROS program into opera-
tional weather satellites (Purdom and Menzel 1996).
This laboratory was renamed the National Oceano-
graphic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in
1970 and has evolved into a department of NOAA
today called the National Environmental Satellite
and Data Information Service (NESDIS).
In parallel with the TIROS transition, NASA began a
new experimental satellite program known as Nim-
bus, with the ﬁrst of seven successful satellites
launched on August 24. The most notable achieve-
ment of Nimbus 1 is its infrared radiometer, which
produced the ﬁrst high-quality photographs taken at
night. It also shows an exceptionally clear photo of
Hurricane Cleo on its ﬁrst day, immediately con-
tributing valuable information to hurricane forecast-
ers (Haas and Shapiro 1982).
Six more Nimbus launches followed. Other notable
achievements include improved camera and stabi-
lization technology, improved radiometers for heat
balance studies, and the ability to derive temperature
and moisture proﬁles from onboard spectrometers.
Nimbus provided other scientiﬁc ﬁrsts, laying the
foundation for satellite data use in interdisciplinary
earth sciences. The roots of NASA’s LANDSAT pro-
gram can be traced to Nimbus. Readers are referred
to Haas and Shapiro (1982) and Purdom and Menzel
(1996) for details.
132
Chronology

1965
George Cressman, the director of the Weather
Bureau, issued a plan to improve the hurricane warn-
ing service by concentrating the responsibilities at the
NHC in Miami. This plan included increasing public
awareness, more reliable service, mitigating the cost
of hurricane destruction, and minimizing excessive
preparation costs resulting from overwarning. The
plan also called for hurricane specialists, who would
issue ofﬁcial track and intensity forecasts for the
Atlantic and eastern Paciﬁc oceans. This essentially
describes the mission and forecast staff at NHC
today. Cressman’s plan also initiated the ﬁrst of many
administrative changes during the next ﬁfteen years
involving forecast ofﬁces in New Orleans; San Juan;
Washington, D.C.; Boston; San Francisco; and Hon-
olulu. Details are contained in Sheets (1990).
1966
ESSA launched its ﬁrst operational satellite, ESSA-1,
on February 3, and a second satellite, ESSA-2, twenty-
ﬁve days later. These and later ESSA satellites are 
part of the TIROS Operational System (TOS). Odd-
number ESSA satellites provide photos and global
weather data to major forecast centers, while even-
number ESSA satellites provide direct real-time read-
outs of the APT pictures to APT ground stations
throughout the world. The original ESSA program
evolved into the Improved TIROS Operational Sys-
tem (ITOS) in 1970, which combined the abilities of
the odd- and even-number ESSA satellites (Purdom
and Menzel 1996). It was not until the ESSA series of
satellites that routine hurricane surveillance was
assured, and the ESSA satellites also motivated fore-
casters to develop satellite techniques for hurricane
forecasting.
On December 6, the ﬁrst experimental geostationary
satellite—the Applications Technology Satellite–1
(ATS-1)—was launched. Geostationary spacecraft
orbit at the same speed as the earth’s rotation,
enabling the satellite to remain over the same location
and thus providing continuous coverage. In contrast,
Chronology
133

polar-orbiting satellites lack temporal continuity since
the spacecraft only passes over a particular location
once or twice a day; but, since polar-orbiting satellites
are closer to the earth, they capture better resolution
than geostationary. What made ATS-1 even more spe-
cial, however, was a new camera based on spin-scan
technology developed by satellite pioneer Verner
Suomi at the University of Wisconsin. It worked by
constructing a narrow east-to-west image one strip at
a time whenever the camera pointed at earth, with
each successive spin recording the next narrow strip
below the previous one until a complete picture of the
earth was captured (Sheets and Williams 2001). This
camera was able to provide full-disk visible images of
the earth every twenty minutes, astounding meteorol-
ogists with the full-disk view and the ability to see
clouds in motion when the pictures are put in motion
(Purdom and Menzel 1996). By the early 1970s, ATS
imagery was used in operational forecast centers.
The merging of defense and civilian satellite require-
ments proved impractical, and the Department of
Defense initiated its own the satellite system, the
Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP), on
September 16 (Purdom and Menzel 1996).
The Weather Bureau was renamed the National
Weather Service and was administered by ESSA
(NOAA 1991).
1968
Robert Simpson (see chapter 5) replaced the retiring
Gordon Dunn as director of the NHC. Simpson
placed a renewed effort on research and development
at the NHC, including the development of satellite
applications and statistical equations for predicting
hurricane tracks.
Congress created the National Flood Insurance Pro-
gram (NFIP) in response to the rising cost of tax-
payer-funded disaster relief for ﬂood victims and the
increasing amount of damage caused by ﬂoods (from
rain events and hurricane storm surge). See chapter 2
for details.
134
Chronology

1968–1969
Numerical solutions of hurricanes began (Yamasaki
1968; Ooyama 1969). Vic Ooyama (see chapter 5)
makes the ﬁrst two-dimensional computer simula-
tion of a symmetrical hurricane. Ooyama also
hypothesized that hurricane genesis occurs as a coop-
erative interaction between cloud elements and a
tropical disturbance—a theory known as conditional
instability of the second kind (Ooyama 1969). The
technical details of this theory have since either
evolved considerably or been discredited but did
open new ideas on hurricane genesis.
1970
The ﬁrst successful operational hurricane computer
model, called the SANders’ BARotropic (SANBAR)
model, was implemented. Over the years other nu-
merical hurricane models became available, including
the Moveable Fine Mesh (MFM) model, from 1976 to
1987; the Quasi-Lagrangian Model (QLM), from 1988
to 1993; the Beta and Advection Model (BAM), from
1989 to the present; the VICBAR model, from 1989 to
the present; the Limited-area sine transform BARo-
tropic (LBAR) model, from 1996 to the present; and the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL)
model, from 1995 to the present (DeMaria 1996; Vigh et
al. 2003; Weber 2001).
ESSA was renamed the National Oceanographic and
Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA (NOAA
1991).
1971
Richard Anthes (see chapter 5) made the ﬁrst three-
dimensional computer simulation of a hurricane
(Anthes 1982).
Roger Lhermitte proposed the installation of Doppler
radar on airplanes (Lhermitte 1971). The develop-
ment of this concept became an important research
platform on HRD aircraft.
U.S. Air Force weather reconnaissance missions
began to be cut. In addition, the U.S. Navy ended
ﬂights in the western Paciﬁc. This indicates that with
the advent of satellites, the military considered
Chronology
135

weather reconnaissance not of a military nature and
less of a priority (Nolan and Murphy 2000).
1972
The National Data Buoy Center was formed (Sheets
1990). Its mission was to establish and maintain a
buoy network for the coastal United States, Atlantic
Ocean, and Gulf of Mexico (see http://www.ndbc.
noaa.gov for details). Buoys provide key maritime
data that would otherwise be unavailable in these
data-sparse regions.
Charles Neumann (see chapter 5) developed the
CLIPER (CLImatology and PERsistence) statistical
equation, which is still used today for predicting
storm tracks. CLIPER is considered a benchmark for
the evaluation of prediction schemes and models; if
the scheme has smaller errors than CLIPER, it is con-
sidered skillful (DeMaria 1996).
Vern Dvorak (see chapter 1) developed a methodol-
ogy using visible polar satellite data for estimating
hurricane intensity based on the storm’s cloud shape
and banding, since the amount of cloud organization
is directly related to tropical storm and hurricane
intensity. This methodology, later reﬁned to include
infrared and geostationary pictures as well as sat-
ellite-measured eye temperature, is known as the
Dvorak technique. It is still used worldwide today
when no direct measurements of hurricane intensity
are available (Dvorak 1984; Velden, Olander, and
Zehr 1998).
The third satellite in the ITOS series, NOAA-2
(named after its parent organization), was launched
October 15. It marked the end of the video camera era
and the beginning of the current era of calibrated
multichannel sensing data in different regimes of the
electromagnetic spectrum other than visible and
infrared using high-resolution radiometers (Purdom
and Menzel 1996). The use of other spectrums allows
the development of many new satellite weather tools,
such as accurate sea-surface temperature mapping
136
Chronology

(important for hurricanes), temperature proﬁles,
moisture proﬁles, improved cloud detection, land
types, and many other applications.
1973
After Hurricane Camille devastated the Gulf Coast in
1969, Congress pushed for the Atlantic Air Force Hur-
ricane Hunters to be closer to the Gulf Coast. In 1973,
the squadron moved to its current post, Keesler Air
Force Base, Mississippi. Previous posts include
Bermuda (1947–1953), England (1953–1960), Ber-
muda (1962–1963), Georgia (1963–1966), and Puerto
Rico (1966–1973) (see http://www.hurricanehunters.
org for details).
Neil Frank (see chapter 5) replaced the retiring Robert
Simpson as NHC director. Frank placed a renewed
emphasis on hurricane preparedness and was partic-
ularly skillful at using the media to motivate people
in hurricane-threatened areas to respond appropri-
ately (DeMaria 1996).
1974
The GARP (Global Atmospheric Research Program)
Atlantic Tropical Experiment (GATE) occurred. This
was the ﬁrst full-phase tropical weather ﬁeld pro-
gram and involved sixty-six countries, thirty-nine
ships, and thirteen aircraft (Kuettner and Parker
1976). This experiment, which occurred in the eastern
tropical Atlantic Ocean, provided some of the most
complete and well-sampled observations of the trop-
ical atmosphere using a combination of surface, 
rawinsonde, satellite, radar, and the ﬁrst use of
Omega dropwindsonde (Hock and Franklin 1999)
measurements. This allowed better understanding of
cloud structure, thunderstorms, radiative processes,
and turbulence in the tropics. It also produced some
of the most detailed data of tropical waves propagat-
ing off of Africa, generating new knowledge about
the genesis of hurricanes.
The transition of the experimental ATS satellite sys-
tem began. A prototype operational geostationary
satellite, the Synchronous Meteorological Satellite-1
Chronology
137

(SMS-1) was launched in May, followed by SMS-2 the
following year (Purdom and Menzel 1996).
1975
The increased use of satellites and data buoys
reduced the need for general weather reconnaissance.
The U.S. Navy stopped Atlantic hurricane ﬂights. The
U.S. Air Force also ended all weather reconnaissance
except for hurricane ﬂights, which continued for the
Atlantic and West Paciﬁc. Instead, nonhurricane
weather reconnaissance was transferred to the U.S.
Air Force Reserve, and a new squadron known as the
Storm Trackers was formed at Keesler Air Force Base
(Nolan and Murphy 2000; see also http://www.hur-
ricanehunters.org).
NOAA assumed a fully operational geostationary
satellite system based on the SMS prototypes, known
as the Geostationary Operational Environmental
Satellite (GOES) program. GOES-1 was launched on
October 16. Today’s GOES provides nearly continu-
ous pictures of the Atlantic and eastern Paciﬁc from
60°N to 60°S. GOES provides multispectral imagery,
transmits weather facsimile to low-cost receiving sta-
tions, and relays data for a wide range of weather
applications (Purdom and Menzel 1996).
1976
NOAA purchased two WP-3D aircraft for hurricane
research. More details are contained in chapter 7 (see
“Hurricane Research Division” and “NOAA Aircraft
Operations Center”).
1977
Meteosat, the ﬁrst European meteorological satellite
to be placed in geostationary orbit, was launched on
November 23. Meteosat provided the ﬁrst continuous
pictures of tropical waves as they formed over Africa
and propagated westward. The Meteosat satellite
(currently in its seventh generation) still is the most
important tool for monitoring tropical waves, with
images and measurements taken every ﬁfteen min-
utes (Schmetz et al. 2002).
The Meteosat also included the ﬁrst water vapor
channel (Morel, Desbois, and Szewach 1978), which
138
Chronology

shows regions of high- and low-moisture content.
Unprecedented moisture structure can now be seen,
even if no clouds are present. Animation of this
imagery reveals circulation patterns that can affect a
hurricane’s track and wind shear patterns. Today,
water vapor imagery is a prominent tool in analyzing
the hurricane environment.
The ﬁrst Geostationary Meteorological Satellite
(GMS) satellite was launched on July 14, providing
continuous satellite information of the western
Paciﬁc region.
The success of weather satellites caused elimination
of the last U.S. weather observation ships (NOAA
1991), leaving only commercial ships to provide mar-
itime weather observations on a voluntary basis.
1978
The experimental Seasat satellite was launched and
contained a new instrument called a scatterometer. A
scatterometer indirectly measures wind speed by
emitting microwave radiation toward the ocean and
computes the amount of radiation scattered by short,
centimeter-scale (capillary) ocean waves. Since capil-
lary waves are in equilibrium with the local wind ﬁeld,
the wind speed can be deduced. By measuring the
scattered radiation with multiple beams from different
angles, complex algorithms also give wind direction.
Based on the success of this technique, other scat-
terometers have been launched, including the Euro-
pean Remote Sensing (ERS) satellite system, the NASA
SCATerometer (NSCAT) on the short-lived ADEOS
satellite, and the SeaWinds instrument on the
QuikSCAT satellite. Scatterometers are important tools
for hurricane forecasters monitoring tropical distur-
bances as well as for measuring winds on the periph-
ery of hurricanes (Sharp, Bourassa, and O’Brien 2002;
Leidner, Isaksen, and Hoffman 2003).
1979
Brian Jarvinen and Charles Neumann developed the
statistical scheme SHIFOR (Statistical Hurricane
Intensity FORecast) for predicting intensity change.
SHIFOR is analogous to CLIPER in that it’s used to
Chronology
139

assess the skill of other intensity prediction schemes
(DeMaria 1996).
1981
The ﬁrst prototype ﬂight using Doppler radar data in
Hurricane Gert was performed; no data was taken
(Lee, Marks, and Walther 2003).
1982
The Synoptic Flow Experiment conducted by HRD
began. In this experiment, HRD research ﬂights
released numerous Omega dropwindsondes within
600 miles of a hurricane’s center, obtaining critical
temperature, moisture, and wind data required for
improved track forecasts. Eighteen hurricanes were
sampled from 1982 to 1993, and the experiment suc-
cessfully showed that extensive measurements of the
hurricane environment can yield improved track
forecasts by computer models (Burpee et al. 1996). As
a result, NOAA later purchased a high-altitude jet,
the Gulfstream IV, capable of taking meteorological
measurements over a large area (see “1997”).
The ﬁrst HRD ﬂight using Doppler radar data was
performed in Tropical Storm Debbie (Lee, Marks, and
Walther 2003). A single Doppler radar enables scien-
tists to infer the primary circulation pattern of a 
hurricane. Doppler radar uses the Doppler effect to
measure motions of objects toward or away from the
instrument. The Doppler effect, ﬁrst discovered by
Austrian scientist Christian Doppler, is a shift in
wavelength of radiation emitted or reﬂected from an
object moving toward or away from the observer.
Essentially, incoming waves are “squeezed,” and out-
going waves are “stretched.” A single Doppler radar
translates this change in frequency into whether air
particles, cloud droplets, and raindrops are moving
toward or away from the radar and computes their
incoming or outgoing speed relative to the radar.
(The same principle also applies to sound waves,
which explains why the sound of an oncoming train
increases in pitch, then suddenly becomes a low pitch
after the train passes.)
140
Chronology

1983
A workstation running Man computer Interactive
Data Access System (McIDAS) software, developed
by the University of Wisconsin, was installed at the
NHC (Sheets 1990). This system processes, displays,
enhances, and animates satellite data and can also
overlay the imagery with meteorological measure-
ments. McIDAS is still actively used today by many
university institutions and governmental agencies,
including the NHC. Also included with McIDAS are
cloud-drift winds, which are computed from anima-
tion of infrared cloud imagery or water vapor imagery.
This provides the NHC with abundant wind infor-
mation in normally data-void regions and is particu-
larly helpful in determining the environmental ﬁelds
impacting storm motion and assessing wind shear
events that can weaken a hurricane.
William Gray (see chapter 5) discovered in 1983 that
fewer Atlantic tropical storms and hurricanes occur
in El Niño years (Gray 1984a). A year later Gray
began forecasting months in advance the number of
tropical storms and hurricanes that would occur
(Gray 1984b) and has since assembled a forecasting
team, issuing skillful forecasts several times each
year (Owens and Landsea 2003). Gray considers El
Niño as well as other atmospheric phenomena such
as the Quasi-Biennial Oscillation, wind shear, and
Caribbean surface pressure in making his seasonal
hurricane prediction. See chapter 2 for more details.
Project STORMFURY ended (Willoughby et al. 1985).
1984
The ﬁrst Airborne eXpendable Current Proﬁler
(AXCP) was dropped into Hurricanes Norbert and
Josephine, providing the ﬁrst high-resolution ocean
current and sea temperature proﬁles in hurricanes
(Sanford et al. 1987).
1987
The U.S. Air Force, convinced that satellite technol-
ogy made aircraft reconnaissance obsolete, proposed
ending the expensive ﬂights in all oceans. However,
Chronology
141

meteorologists and emergency management ofﬁcials
persuaded Congress that the ﬂights provided the
most accurate measurements of a storm’s location,
central pressure, wind speeds, and other critical data
that satellites cannot measure (or can only estimate),
and Congress mandated the U.S. Air Force to continue
ﬂights in the Atlantic Ocean. Congress did permit the
termination of ﬂights in the western North Paciﬁc,
leaving only the Atlantic basin with routine ﬂight
monitoring of hurricanes (although occasionally
ﬂights will be conducted into hurricanes in the eastern
Paciﬁc and near Hawaii). A few years later, in 1991,
the U.S. Air Force then ended its active participation
in Atlantic hurricane reconnaissance due to budgetary
constraints, and the Hurricane Hunters were merged
with the Storm Spotters in the U.S. Air Force Reserve
(Nolan and Murphy 2000; Sheets and Williams 2001;
see also http://www.hurricanehunters.org).
The Improved Weather Reconnaissance System
(IWRS) became operational onboard the Hurricane
Hunter’s Air Force WC-130 (Sheets 1990). This sys-
tem automatically calculates wind, temperature,
humidity, pressure, and heights continuously during
a ﬂight. When combined with a direct satellite uplink,
IWRS system provides a continuous ﬂow of high-
density data to the NHC. Prior to IWRS and its satel-
lite communication system, critical weather data (i.e.,
sea-level pressure) was calculated manually using
tables or handheld calculators, then transmitted over
high-frequency voice radio circuits across thousands
of miles to military radio operators, who then passed
the data by phone to Miami.
In June, the ﬁrst Special Sensor Microwave/Imager
(SSM/I) polar-orbiting satellite was launched as part
of the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program. The
suite of passive microwave channels at 19, 22, 33, and
85 GHz permits the sensor to “see through” most
upper-level cloud decks such as cirrus clouds, which
can cover a whole hurricane. Upper-level clouds
142
Chronology

obscure visible and infrared images used by most
satellites, but not SSM/I. This unique ability allows a
variety of new remote sensing applications to hurri-
canes (Hawkins et al. 2001). For example, SSM/I’s
frequencies are insensitive to nonraining clouds but
sensitive to raining portions of hurricanes (rain-
bands), allowing meteorologists to identify signiﬁ-
cant spiral bands, locate the storm center more
accurately, estimate rain rates, and develop new
intensity-estimation algorithms. In addition, SSM/I
can estimate wind speeds (but not direction) by sens-
ing changes in ocean roughness and sea foam (where
rain does not interfere with the signal).
1988
Robert Sheets became the NHC director, replacing the
retiring Neil Frank (Sheets 1990). Sheets’s term is
marked by major technological improvements and a
continued emphasis on hurricane preparedness issues
related to coastal development and growth.
HRD research ﬂight winds were made available
operationally to the NHC through the Aircraft Satel-
lite Data Link (ASDL). Prior to ADSL, data was trans-
mitted by radio or voice links, severely limiting the
type of data that could be transmitted from research
aircraft to the NHC (Sheets 1990).
For the ﬁrst time, in Hurricane Gilbert, two planes
simultaneously took Doppler radar measurements.
Since the simultaneous use of Doppler radars pro-
vides detailed wind information about a storm’s vor-
tex structure (while a single Doppler radar only
provides information about incoming and outgoing
airﬂow), this is a milestone data set (Lee, Marks, and
Walther 2003).
The Ofﬁce of Naval Research and NOAA sponsored a
ﬁeld program to study the upper-ocean response
before, during, and after hurricane passage by deploy-
ing seventy-six AXCPs and ﬁfty-one Airborne eXpend-
able BathyThermographs (AXBTs) (Shay et al. 1992).
Chronology
143

1990
Mark DeMaria (see chapter 5) and John Kaplan
developed a statistical scheme that incorporates some
environmental factors known to affect hurricane
intensity, such as wind shear (DeMaria 1996). This
scheme is called SHIPS (Statistical Hurricane Inten-
sity Prediction Scheme).
The Tropical Cyclone Motion (TCM-90) Experiment
was conducted over the western North Paciﬁc Ocean
during August and September 1990 (Elsberry 1990).
The objective of this experiment was to test several
hypotheses regarding hurricane motion, with a focus
on the Beta effect. Seven typhoons were analyzed
every twelve hours throughout the lifetime of each
storm. Two more ﬁeld programs follow: the Tropical
Cyclone Motion miniﬁeld experiments in July and
August 1992 (TCM-92) and in July and August 1993
(TCM-93). The primary objective of these two follow-
up experiments was to obtain simultaneous aircraft
measurements and satellite imagery of typhoons and
nearby cloud complexes. Their objectives were to test
hypotheses regarding tropical cyclogenesis in the
cloud complexes and determine how nearby cloud
clusters might cause nearby typhoons to deviate from
their track (Harr and Elsberry 1996). These ﬂight 
missions support theories that cyclonic rotation in
tropical disturbances begins in the midlevels of the
atmosphere.
1991
The Tropical EXperiment in MEXico (TEXMEX) was
conducted over the eastern North Paciﬁc Ocean from
July 1 to August 8 (Bister and Emanuel 1997).
TEXMEX’s objectives were to test several hypotheses
regarding tropical cyclogenesis. Six cloud clusters
with the potential for formation into a tropical storm
were investigated, revealing new insights into the
rotational development of tropical disturbances.
NASA started a comprehensive program to under-
stand the earth’s environmental system (today called
the Earth Science Enterprise). Included in these plans
is a coordinated series of Earth Observing System
144
Chronology

(EOS) polar-orbiting satellites for long-term global
observations of the land surface, biosphere, solid
earth, atmosphere, and ocean (see “1999”).
1993
Radar pictures and Omega dropwindsonde data
from HRD research ﬂights were included in the oper-
ational database for the NHC and NCEP’s use, thus
providing more real-time information about a hurri-
cane’s cloud pattern and vertical structure (DeMaria
1996).
Installation of the WSR-88 (NEXRAD) Doppler radar
network began to replace the WSR-57 radar network.
This network is useful for detecting tornadoes in
severe thunderstorms and for measuring the wind
ﬁeld of hurricanes near coastal Doppler radars. The
NEXRAD network can also detect precipitation, rain-
fall rate, accumulated rainfall, and the location of the
rainfall.
1994
Techniques for extracting the primary circulation of
hurricanes from a single airborne Doppler radar were
developed (Lee, Marks, and Carbone 1994; Roux and
Marks 1996). This allows real-time estimates of a hur-
ricane’s vortex ﬁeld, since dual-Doppler analysis is a
time-consuming procedure not suitable for opera-
tional use.
1995
High-resolution GOES-8 pictures of hurricanes are
taken in one-minute sequences (called “rapid scan”),
revealing unsurpassed imagery of a hurricane’s
small-scale structure (Purdom 1995).
Bob Sheets retired as NHC’s director and was
replaced by Dr. Bob Burpee. During Burpee’s tenure,
he was credited with bringing closer collaborations
between the NHC’s forecasters and researchers.
The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory model
became operational at the NCEP (Kurihara, Tuleya,
and Bender 1998; Soden, Velden, and Tuleya 2001).
This is currently the most sophisticated model and
Chronology
145

generally has the smallest track errors compared to
other model guidance.
1997
Building on the success of the SSM/I program,
NASA, in a joint venture with Japan, launched the
Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satel-
lite on November 27 with a unique orbit that oscil-
lates around the equator (Kummerow et al. 2000).
This satellite, essentially a “ﬂying rain gauge,” con-
tains several sensors for detecting moisture and rain-
fall. A spaceborne radar is used to measure tropical
and subtropical rainfall, and another instrument, the
Microwave Imager (MI), measures the vertical distri-
bution of precipitation. The resolution of the radar is
two to three times better than the SSM/I satellites,
and the MI can penetrate deeper into clouds. Its 
primary purpose is to calibrate rainfall estimate rou-
tines used on other satellites and to understand the
global moisture cycle. However, TRMM has proven
immensely useful to hurricane forecasting due to
these improved sensors—the higher resolution is
providing better information on hurricanes in all
stages of development, especially since the MI can
penetrate deeper into the hurricane. More accurate
placement of the storm center is also achieved using
TRMM as compared to SSM/I, and new rainfall esti-
mation techniques are being developed (Hawkins et
al. 2001).
Starting with Hurricane Claudette in 1997 and many
subsequent hurricanes in 1998, routine high-altitude
reconnaissance observations were taken in the envi-
ronment surrounding hurricanes by NOAA’s new
Gulfstream IV jet, providing valuable data about the
steering currents that inﬂuence hurricane motion
(Aberson 2003).
The Global Positioning System (GPS) dropwind-
sonde system was ﬁrst deployed into a hurricane
(Guillermo in the eastern Paciﬁc on August 3) during
an HRD research ﬂight. This new device measures
wind speeds with unprecedented accuracy and verti-
cal resolution. In addition, it works in heavy rain and
146
Chronology

has the ability to take observations below 1,500 feet—
neither of which the older Omega dropwindsondes
could do (Franklin, Black, and Valde 2003). Ten of the
GPS dropwindsondes were deployed into the eye-
wall, providing the ﬁrst high-resolution wind, tem-
perature, and moisture proﬁles of a hurricane eyewall
(Hock and Franklin 1999). The Hurricane Hunters
started using GPS dropwindsondes one year later.
Between twenty and thirty dropwindsondes are 
now routinely deployed in hurricanes from both the
Gulfstream jet and reconnaissance planes to im-
prove computer-guided track forecasts (Aberson
2002; Aberson 2003).
1998
The ﬁrst weather robotic aircraft, the Aerosonde, was
successfully ﬂown across the Atlantic Ocean on
August 21–22 (McGeer and Vagners 1999). The Aero-
sonde was developed in Australia under the direc-
tion of Dr. Greg Holland (see chapter 5) of the Bureau
of Meteorology. The Atlantic ﬂight was conducted by
the University of Washington and a U.S. engineering
company, The Insitu Group. The unmanned 29-
pound plane departed from St. John’s, Newfound-
land, Canada, and completed the 2,000-mile trip to
the west coast of Benbecula in the Outer Hebrides of
Scotland in just over twenty-six hours. The trip is
completed using less than 2 gallons of fuel, con-
tinuously measuring meteorological observations the
entire time. These drones theoretically can be pro-
grammed to ﬂy a ﬁxed path for more than twenty-four
hours, continuously ingesting weather observations
that improve weather forecasts. Their unique aero-
dynamic structure and relative weightlessness also
allow them to theoretically withstand hurricane
winds and strong updrafts in thunderstorms, thereby
providing timely and continuous crucial weather
data at a cheaper cost than airplane reconnaissance.
More information is available at http://www.
aerosonde.com.
NASA and NOAA collaborated in the Third Convec-
tion And Moisture EXperiment (CAMEX-3) in an effort
to collect comprehensive data on Atlantic hurricanes
Chronology
147

using multiple aircraft, including high-altitude meas-
urements using the Gulfstream IV and NASA’s ER-2
aircraft, and a variety of remote sensing technologies
(scanning radar altimeter, Doppler radar). On August
20, Hurricane Bonnie became the ﬁrst storm to be
sampled in this project, which included up to six
planes at once (the Gulfstream IV, ER-2, NASA DC8,
two WP-3D research ﬂights conducted by HRD, and
one WC-130 ﬂown by the Hurricane Hunters).
Details are provided at http://www.aoml.noaa.
gov/hrd.
The largest coordinated measurements to date of
land-falling hurricanes were performed for Hurri-
canes Bonnie, Charley, Earl, and Georges. These
include portable instrumented towers, portable wind
proﬁler, and a portable Doppler radar. Texas Tech
University, Clemson University, the University of
Oklahoma, and the University of Alabama at Hunts-
ville are the principal investigators. Details are pro-
vided at http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd.
The NHC’s director Bob Burpee retired and was
replaced by Jerry Jarrell, who is talented at interact-
ing with the media.
NOAA’s ﬁrst polar-orbiting satellite containing an
Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit (AMSU) was
launched in May. This passive microwave radiometer
can capture the three-dimensional depiction of a hurri-
cane’s warm core structure. These temperature proﬁle
retrievals also allow the estimation of the storm’s sur-
face pressure (Brueske and Velden 2003) and axisym-
metric wind structure (Zhu, Zhang, and Weng 2002).
1999
The satellite ﬂagship of NASA’s EOS program, Terra,
was launched on December 18 (Jones et al. 2004). It
contained state-of-the-art radiometers that provide
high-resolution measurements of clouds, tempera-
ture, moisture, and radiation.
Data was transmitted operationally for the ﬁrst time
to the NHC from the Stepped Frequency Microwave
148
Chronology

Radiometer (SFMR), a remote sensing instrument on
the NOAA WP-3D research planes. Details are pro-
vided at http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd.
2000
Britain sponsored JET2000, in which four ﬂights dur-
ing August 25–30 deploy dropwindsondes in data-
sparse West Africa to study the tropical waves that
form over this region (Thorncroft et al. 2003).
2001
NASA sponsored CAMEX-4 from August 16 to 
September 24 using NASA-funded aircraft (a DC-8
and ER-2) and NASA satellites (TRMM, Terra, and
QuikSCAT) to study Tropical Storm Chantal, Tropical
Storm Gabrielle, Hurricane Erin, and Hurricane Hum-
berto as they approached landfall in the Caribbean,
Gulf of Mexico, and U.S. East Coast. The Hurricane
Research Division also participated in this ﬁeld pro-
gram. The NASA aircraft investigated upper-altitude
regions of these storms not normally sampled by
NOAA, providing validation against satellite accu-
racy. In addition, the NASA aircraft can sample cloud
microphysics data and humidity data with more
sophisticated instruments than the NOAA aircraft.
The goal is to use this knowledge to improve hurricane
landfall predictions and to better understand the
three-dimensional structure of hurricanes. Details are
provided at http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd.
An ocean prediction system was included in the
GFDL so that the atmospheric and ocean components
are coupled (Bender and Ginis 2000). In the past,
water temperature was held constant, which is not
realistic because the ocean can experience signiﬁcant
mixing under hurricane-force winds, resulting in
colder waters under the storm.
2002
NASA launched its second EOS satellite, Aqua, in
May (Jones et al. 2004). Its mission, as implied by the
name, is more focused on water properties and the
hydrological cycle of the earth’s system (whereas
Terra is geared toward land properties). In addition to
radiometers, state-of-the-art microwave and infrared
sounders were included for measuring temperature
Chronology
149

and moisture proﬁles. These sounders have 100 times
more channels than previous satellites. The sounders
will lead to large improvements in deﬁning the tem-
perature and moisture ﬁelds surrounding the hurri-
cane environment and above cloud tops. Aqua also
has a next-generation microwave imager for deter-
mining storm position, structure, and rain estimation.
The China LAndfalling Typhoon EXperiment (CLA-
TEX) was implemented during July and August
(Lianshou, Mingyu, and Xiangde 2004). The objective
was to better understand the impact of land topogra-
phy on hurricane intensity change, track, and rainfall.
The Coupled Boundary Layer Air Sea Transfer
(CBLAST) experiment was conducted. Its goal was to
understand the air-sea interaction in the hurricane
environment to help improve hurricane intensity pre-
dictions, with a particular focus on the role of waves,
sea spray, and turbulence. The experiment resulted in
the deployment of numerous instruments that meas-
ure ocean waves, ocean currents, and ocean tempera-
ture during the passage of a hurricane. Details are
provided at http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd.
2003
The ﬁrst detailed study of the GPS dropwindsondes
was published (Franklin, Black, and Valde 2003), pro-
viding new insight into low-level winds. It shows
that, on average, surface winds are 90 percent of
winds at the 700-mb reconnaissance ﬂight level. In
the past, the NHC used a conversion factor of 70–90
percent, suggesting that many hurricane surface
wind estimates based on ﬂight data had been too low.
The study also shows that winds peak at a height 
of 1600 feet and that people should not stay near 
the top of tall buildings in a hurricane where winds
can be 17–25 percent stronger than surface winds
(roughly one Safﬁr-Simpson Hurricane Scale cate-
gory larger).
The success of the U.S. Gulfstream IV jet research 
program motivated Taiwan to initiate a three-year
150
Chronology

research reconnaissance program called the Drop-
sonde Observations for Typhoon Surveillance near
the Taiwan Region (DOTSTAR). The purpose was to
assess the impact of GPS dropsondes in weather
models at the NCEP, the Fleet Numerical Meteorol-
ogy and Oceanography Center (FNMOC), and Tai-
wan’s Central Weather Bureau (Huang et al. 2004).
The CBLAST experiment continued. An Imaging
Wind and Rain Airborne Proﬁler (IWRAP) was
installed on the WP-3D planes. When used in combi-
nation with SFMR, continuous measurements of the
turbulent wind proﬁle right above the surface were
available for the ﬁrst time (Fernandez et al. 2004;
Black 2004). In addition, near-surface ﬂights obtain
heat ﬂux, moisture ﬂux, and sea spray spectra meas-
urements with unprecedented detail, providing valu-
able data for understanding hurricane intensity
changes (Black 2004).
Chronology of Signiﬁcant Land-falling 
U.S. Hurricanes since 1900
Land-falling tropical storms, for the most part, have been
excluded from table 4.1. This does not imply that tropical storms
should not be taken seriously. Tropical storms can still cause dam-
aging storm surges, especially if the storm is large and moving
slowly. Moreover, they are notorious for heavy deluges that can
cause serious ﬂooding. For example, Tropical Storm Claudette
(1979) dumped 42 inches of rain in one day on Alvin, Texas
(Hebert 1980). Tropical Storm Alberto (1994) dumped 10–27
inches of rain in Georgia, Alabama, and western Florida, resulting
in large-scale ﬂoods that killed thirty people (Avila and Rappa-
port 1996).
More recently, Tropical Storm Allison’s (2001) heavy rains of
20–35 inches produced catastrophic ﬂooding over portions of the
upper Texas coastal area (especially Houston) and signiﬁcant ﬂood-
ing along the remainder of its track through Louisiana, Mississippi,
and Alabama (Beven et al. 2003). Forty-one deaths are attributed to
Allison’s heavy rains, ﬂooding, tornadoes, and high surf.
Chronology
151

152
TABLE 4.1
Chronological order of some signiﬁcant U.S. land-falling hurricanes since 1900 
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
1900, 
Texas
Category 4
At least 6,000  
Principal damage and most fatalities caused by an 8–15-foot storm surge that inundated 
August 27–September 15 
on island, and 
Galveston Island. Flying debris, including slate shingles from roofs, caused some deaths. 
Galveston Hurricane
2000 more
Damage was widespread along Texas coast. Of the island's approximately 12,000 inhabitants 
inland
who stayed (roughly another 12,000 evacuated), 6,000 were killed, and the others were
bruised and battered. Another 2,000 were killed inland. This is still the worst U.S. natural
disaster in terms of fatalities. In the postanalysis, it is discovered that most survivors were
located behind concentrated elongated areas of debris that acted as a break against the full
force of the storm surge, and the notion of a seawall is conceived to help prevent future
disasters. A 6-mile-wide seawall was completed in 1905, and the elevation of the entire city
was raised 8 feet to a height of 17 feet (Weems 1997; Larson 1999; Hughes 1990).
1906, 
Florida
Category 3
134
Destructive winds and unprecedented tides accompany the storm upon landfall on 
September 19–29
panhandle to 
September 27. At Pensacola, FL, the tide is 10 feet above normal, and this is the city's 
Mississippi
most violent storm in 170 years. At Mobile, AL, property damage is severe with a 10-foot storm
surge (NOAA 1993; Tannehill 1956).
1909, July 13–22
Texas and Louisiana
Category 3
41
The hurricane passes directly over Velasco, TX, on July 20. The town is in the calm of the eye
for forty-ﬁve minutes, followed by devastating winds that destroy half the town. A storm surge
of 10 feet occurs at Galveston, with higher surges farther west peaking in Velasco (NOAA 1993;
Bunnemeyer 1909; Tannehill 1956). No lives are lost in the seawall region of Galveston, and
there is only minimum damage in this protected area while devastation elsewhere is heavy,
showing that the seawall can provide satisfactory protection. South Texas receives heavy
rainfall with amounts of almost 9 inches reported. Southwest Louisiana also experiences a
storm surge and winds that drown hundreds of cattle and destroy the cotton crop.
1909, September 14–21
Louisiana and 
Category 4
353
The hurricane center passes 50–75 miles west of New Orleans on September 20. A wide 
Mississippi
region of the Louisiana coast is inundated with a 15-foot storm surge (NOAA 1993; Tannehill

153
1956). New Orleans and the whole southern state experiences extensive damage to property,
vessels, crops, and the railroad system. Half of the coal ﬂeet, anchored in the Mississippi River
for shelter, is lost, but this is considered a partial victory since otherwise all would have been
lost without the Weather Bureau's warnings to seek protection. Most deaths occur outside the
New Orleans levee system in rural ﬁshing communities, where timely warnings are not
possible. A few deaths in New Orleans result from falling chimneys or contact with live power
lines.
1915, August 5–21
Texas and Louisiana
Category 4
275
This hurricane makes landfall on the western end of Galveston Island at 1 A.M. on August 17.
Despite the seawall and recently raised island, a 12-foot storm surge inundates the Galveston
business district, with water rising up to 6 feet in parts. Nevertheless, the value of the seawall
and raised elevation is evidenced by the fact that only 8 are killed in the city (Hughes 1990).
Along adjacent coastal areas, Galveston Bay, and the parts of Galveston Island without the
seawall, destruction is massive. Vessels of all sizes are sunk or damaged. The causeway bridge
connecting the island is badly damaged. Fires also destroy buildings. Houston experiences
severe infrastructure damage, and crops in half the state are wiped out. Strong winds and
heavy rain cause destruction from Texas northeastward to New York, with eastern Missouri in
particular experiencing wind damage. Several marine vessels in the open Gulf of Mexico and
in Texas are sunk, causing a large number of fatalities. The biggest tragedy is the sinking of
the steamship Marowijne in the Yucatan Channel with its crew of 96 people. Sixty-nine people
are killed on dredge boats and a tugboat in Galveston Bay. When combined with other lost
vessels, 8 in Galveston city, 42 on Galveston Island, and other scattered fatalities, 275 are
killed (Frankenﬁeld 1915; NOAA 1982). Louisiana also experiences gale-force winds and high
water.
1915, 
Louisiana
Category 4
275
This dangerous hurricane makes landfall in southeast Louisiana on September 29 and 
September 22–October 1
passes 12 miles west of New Orleans. The 15–20 foot storm surge tops the Mississippi River
levees south of New Orleans. The surge also overﬂows levees in western New Orleans,
ﬂooding a large section of the city. Because the city is below sea level, it takes 3–4 days for
the drainage system to remove this water. Ninety percent of buildings are destroyed 
(continues)

154
TABLE 4.1.
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
over a large area of Louisiana south of New Orleans and along Lake Pontchartrain. The
area's infrastructure and businesses (shipping, coal, crops, and railroads) are severely
impacted. Most heed warnings, but 275 casualties result from those who stay in low-lying
areas (Cline 1915; NOAA 1993; Tannehill 1956).
1916, June 29–July 10
Mississippi to 
Category 3
7
This hurricane arrives unexpectedly on July 5 with a 12-foot storm surge, leaving shoppers 
northern Florida
and businessmen stranded in downtown Mobile hotels. Eight feet of water inundates the
lobby of the Grand Hotel at Point Clear. This hurricane is very destructive along the coast
from Mobile to Pensacola (NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).
1919, September 2–15
Florida, Louisiana
Category 4 in Florida 
287 on land, 
This hurricane is severe in both Florida and Texas. The slow-moving storm reaches an 
and Texas
Keys and category 
500 on ships 
intensity of 927 mb 65 miles west of Key West on September 10. Ten vessels are lost at sea, 
4 in Texas
at sea
accounting for 500 casualties. The hurricane moves slowly westward, causing minor storm
surge along the Gulf Coast, such as a 6-foot storm surge on Louisiana's central coast. The
hurricane goes inland south of Corpus Christi on September 14, inundating the region with 16
feet of water and killing 287 people. Additionally, much of the Texas coast is devastated by
high water (NOAA 1993; Tannehill 1956).
1926, September 11–22
South Florida, Florida 
Category 4 in 
Ofﬁcially 243,  
This hurricane is very destructive in the Miami area and from Pensacola into southern 
Great Florida Storm; 
panhandle, and
southeast Florida; 
probably 372
Alabama. The hurricane makes landfall in Miami on September 18 with an 8–12 foot 
also call the Miami  
Alabama
category 3 at 
(Mykle 2002; 
storm surge. Many go outside during the eye's calm interval and are killed when the strong 
Hurricane
Alabama-Florida
Pfost 2003)
winds return (Mitchell 1926). The storm bends Miami's newest skyscraper, the Myer-Kiser 
border
Bank Building, 15 degrees, forcing the building to be torn down. The 12-foot surge drives a
steamer into the middle of Miami. Miami's economy, which had been experiencing a
development boom, suffers due to the destruction and lost investment. The hurricane's winds

155
push water out of Lake Okeechobee and cause extensive ﬂooding in the town of Moore
Haven on the lake's western shores, killing about 150 (Reardon 1986).
The hurricane makes landfall between Pensacola and Mobile at Perdido Beach on
September 20, hammering the region with a 5-foot storm surge. It takes an unusual inland
path, going west along the coast. The eye passes over Biloxi, Gulfport, and Pass Christian,
ﬁnally passing northwest of New Orleans and dissipating in Texas. The back side of the
hurricane actually ﬂushed water out into the sea along this path. For example, water levels in
Mobile River decreased by 9 feet, stranding boats seeking shelter and causing mud slides
along the riverbanks (Mitchell 1926).
1928, September 6–20 
Southern Florida
Category 4
Ofﬁcially 1,836, 
After making landfall near Palm Beach on September 16, the storm travels up the Florida 
Okeechobee Hurricane
probably at 
peninsula over Lake Okeechobee. This hurricane ofﬁcially kills 1,836 people and injures 
least 2,500; could 
1,849 on the shores of Lake Okeechobee, the second largest freshwater lake in the 
be as high as 
United States. More likely, at least 2,500 are killed; water covers the region for weeks 
3,000 (Mykle 
after the storm, making recovery efforts difﬁcult, and bodies are still being discovered 
2002; Pfost 2003). after funding ends for the posthurricane recovery, (Mykle 2002; Pfost 2003). Moreover,
many are poor migrant agricultural laborers with no easy way to trace their origin; their
bodies are buried in mass graves or burned. Unfortunately, racial attitudes probably also
contribute to a lack of concern for the deceased individuals. This hurricane is the second
deadliest natural event in U.S. history. Most of the deaths are by drowning, but some are due
to snakebites as people climb into trees to escape the ﬂoodwaters, only to ﬁnd hordes of
venomous water moccasins also seeking shelter. Although the lake is actually inland, the
hurricane forces a storm surge that breaks the eastern earthen dike on the southern end of
Lake Okeechobee (Reardon 1986). This calamity occurs within a few miles of a large city and
a world-famous resort, yet so isolated is the location that no one knows about the tragedy for
three days afterward. As a result of ﬂooding from this storm and the 1926 hurricane, a levee
(called the Herbert Hoover Dike in honor of the president who supported its construction) that
compares in size to the Great Wall of China is built to prevent further disasters (Will 1990). 
(continues)

156
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
1932, August 11–14
North Texas coast
Category 4
40
Landfall occurs slightly east of Freeport and directly over eastern Columbia on August 13. The
hurricane is small in diameter; winds damage rice and some cotton near the coast, but
accompanying rains are beneﬁcial to the drier interior areas (NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).
1933, August 17–26 
North Carolina, 
Category 3
47
The storm makes landfall August 23 at Nag's Head on the Outer Banks and then impacts
Chesapeake-Potomac 
Virginia, Maryland
Norfolk, VA; Washington, D.C.; Baltimore, MD; and Atlantic City, NJ. It is the only storm to 
Hurricane
strike the Chesapeake-Potomac area this century. Heavy damage occurs in northeastern North
Carolina and resorts on Marlyand, Delaware, and New Jersey coasts. Downtown Norfolk is
ﬂooded. Crop damage is heavy in Maryland and Virginia (NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).
1933, 
South Texas coast
Category 3
40
The hurricane goes inland just north of Brownsville on September 1. Heavy property 
August 28–September 5
damage takes place from Corpus Christi to northeastern Mexico. The citrus crop is almost
completely destroyed (NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).
1933, 
Florida
Category 3
2
The hurricane makes landfall on September 3 at Jupiter Inlet. Much property destruction 
August 31–September 7
occurs between Jupiter Inlet and Fort Pierce. The citrus loss is nearly complete along the coast
(NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).
1933, 
North Carolina
Category 3
21
The hurricane strikes just west of Cape Hatteras on September 16. However, it then recurves 
September 8–21
to the north and northeast off the Atlantic coast, thus avoiding a repeat of the Chesapeake-
Potomac Hurricane. There is damage at Norfolk and Cape Henry, but less than the recent August
storm. However, a high storm surge inundates Pamlico and Albermarle Sounds. South of the
Virginia Capes to New Bern, NC, damage is very severe. Beaufort, NC, is hit particularly hard
(NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).
1934, June 4–21
Louisiana
Category 3
6
This hurricane hits the central Louisiana coast on June 16, moving at an unusual rate of 27
mph. Property and crop damage is moderate (NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).

157
1934, July 21–25
Florida and Texas
Category 2
11
This storm has an unusual track. It forms off the North Carolina coast, then travels
southwest and hits Florida as a weak disturbance. Upon entering the Gulf of Mexico, it
intensiﬁes into a moderate hurricane and makes landfall just north of Corpus Christi on July
25. Heavy rains severely damage the Texas cotton crop (NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).
1935, 
Florida Keys and 
Category 5 in 
409
The September 3 barometer reading of 26.35 inches (892 mb) on Long Key is lowest on 
August 29–September 10 
Northwest Florida
Florida Keys; 
record in the Western Hemisphere until Hurricane Gilbert (1988). It is still the strongest 
Labor Day Storm
category 2 in 
U.S. land-falling hurricane (Gilbert never hit the U.S.). Peak winds are estimated at 
Northwest Florida
150–200 mph on some keys with an 18-foot storm surge. The Labor Day storm is an
example of a midget hurricane in which hurricane-force winds are conﬁned to a diameter
less than 35 miles, and a striking example that hurricane intensity has little to do with size.
It clears the entire landscape of every tree and every building on Matecumbe Key. The dead
include residents and at least 160 World War I unemployed veterans building a road as part
of the Work Projects Administration. A train is sent to evacuate them, but when it returns
north the storm surge had washed out the track. Shortly thereafter, all cars but the
locomotive and the tender are washed off the track, killing many (McDonald 1935; NOAA
1982; Tannehill 1956; Sheets and Williams 2001). Ernest Hemingway visits the site and
writes about the incident in a scathing article titled “Who Murdered the Vets?” for New
Masses magazine (Hemingway 1935).
1935, 
Southern Florida
Category 2
5
This storm forms near Bermuda and moves north to south along the East Coast, hitting the  
October 30–November 8 
Miami area. Because of its unusual track, locals called it the "Yankee Storm" to counter 
Yankee Storm
hecklers in the Northern states who started calling these storms "Florida hurricanes" because
of the recent frequency of Florida landfalls. The storm hits Miami on November 4, causing
considerable damage. It enters the Gulf of Mexico, then turns around and hits southwest
Florida on November 8 (NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).
1938, 
Long Island, N.Y.; 
Category 3
564
This hurricane is usually called the New England Hurricane but is also called the "Long 
September 10–22 
southern 
Island Express" because of its rapid northward motion (up to 56 mph) toward the Long 
New England Hurricane
New England
Island coast, making landfall on September 21. This storm surprises New England residents,
who are unaccustomed to hurricanes (the last hurricane had hit New England seventy years
earlier). Because of the hurricane's fast motion as it undergoes an extratropical transition, 
(continues)

158
TABLE 4.1 
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
and because the Weather Bureau had thought it would recurve offshore and not hit the
United States, there is little preparation time available. Even worse, the storm hits during
some of the higest tides of the year. Ten-foot waves atop a 14–18-foot storm surge kill 564
people and cause immense property damage. Damage to the marine industry and ﬁshing
ﬂeet is catastrophic. Barrier islands are swept so bare that rescue workers used phone
company charts to determine where houses once stood. Sustained hurricane winds penetrate
far inland, causing extensive damage to roofs, trees, and crops. In Connecticut, downed
power lines result in catastrophic ﬁres to sections of New London and Mystic. Rainfall of 7
inches or more results in severe ﬂooding across sections of Massachusetts and Connecticut
(Fisher 2003). This storm holds the record for the most property damage in the United States
until 1954 (McCarthy 1969; Allen 1976; Minsinger 1988; Pierce 1939).
1940, August 5–15
Georgia and the 
Category 2
50
This is the ﬁrst severe hurricane to directly strike the Charleston-Savannah area in 
Carolinas
thirty years, making landfall on August 11. Severe damage to crops and property occurs.
Heavy ﬂooding in the southeastern states penetrates as far inland as Tennessee from
hurricane-induced rains. Thirty deaths result from the ﬂoods (NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).
1941, September 16–25
Texas
Category 3
4
This major hurricane hits Matagorda on September 23. Local property damage is high, and
the rice crop is ruined. The storm then turns northeast, passing near Houston where
considerable damage occurs. Most low, exposed places are evacuated in response to good
warnings, resulting in low casualties (NOAA 1982; Tannehill 1956).
1943, July 25–29 
Upper Texas coast
Category 2
19
Because of a dare from his students, U.S. Army Air Corps Col. Joseph P. Duckworth ﬂies 
The Surprise Hurricane
the ﬁrst intentional ﬂight into this hurricane (Sheets and Williams 2001). This hurricane is
also noteworthy because it hit with little warning on July 27, killing nineteen people, injuring

159
hundreds, and causing signiﬁcant property damage along Galveston Bay. Eleven of these lost
lives are due to the sinking of the dredge Galveston at the entrance to Galveston Bay.
Because of World War II censorship, a forecaster's major source of informatio—ship
reports—is unavailable so that German U-boats would not get weather information.
Therefore, the Weather Bureau thought this was a tropical storm and did not know it was a
category 2 hurricane until it makes landfall. Even after landfall, the forecast advisories are
delayed several hours since they required security clearance. Finally, barometer readings are
also restricted from the general public as the hurricane approached. All of this contributes to a
confused and uninformed public. It could have been much worse if Galveston had no seawall
or if the storm had hit the island itself (it made landfall on the Bolivar peninsula to the east).
It is also a small hurricane in diameter, limiting the areal extent of the damage (Tannehill
1956). After this, never again are forecast advisories censored from the general public
(Fincher and Read 1999). This hurricane also seriously damages reﬁneries in Texas, hurting
wartime production of fuel (Sheets and Williams 2001).
1944, September 9–16
North Carolina 
Category 3
46 in U.S., 298 
This storm receives its name because it travels up the Atlantic coast from North Carolina 
The Great American 
to New England
offshore
to the Northeast, making landfall in Rhode Island on September 14. (It's also called
Hurricane
the Great Atlantic Hurricane of 1944.) Heavy damage occurs, but it is one-third as great as the
1938 hurricane. This storm is the ﬁrst success for the Hurricane Hunters; U.S. Navy and Army
Air Force planes track the storm all the way from Puerto Rico, thus enabling better warnings
(Sheets and Williams 2001). U.S. fatalities are reduced (46 killed) due to better preparation.
New England is less impacted than the 1938 hurricane because the stronger portion of the
storm remains offshore of New England, so winds and surge are less than in 1938. However, a
higher storm surge occurs farther north in New Jersey, where there is great damage (Tannehill
1956). The U.S. Navy and the U.S. Coast Guard lose ﬁve ships offshore, killing 298
servicemen.
1944, October 12–23
Southwest Florida
Category 3
18
Damage from the storm surge at landfall on October 19 between Sarasota and the Everglades
is heavy. Crop damage is excessive. Warnings and evacuation prevent heavier casualties
(Tannehill 1956; NOAA 1982).
(continues)

160
TABLE 4.1 
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
1945, September 11–20
Southeast Florida
Category 3
4
This hurricane makes landfall on September 15, causing very heavy damage in Dade 
Kappler’s Hurricane
County in a 40-mile swath, particularly to the area south of Miami. Evacuation of exposed
locations prevents heavy loss of life (Sumner 1946). This hurricane is named after U.S. Army
Air Corps 2nd Lieutenant Bernard Kappler, a Hurricane Hunter who discovered the storm
during a weather reconnaissance mission (Tannehill 1955). His ﬂight and subsequent ﬂights
encountered extreme turbulence, which the new Hurricane Hunters had never seen before. 
1947, September 4–21
Southeast Florida, 
Category 4 in Florida; 
51
This severe hurricane crosses over Florida and hits Louisiana and Mississippi. The center
Louisiana, and 
category 3 in 
of this very large and intense storm hits Pompano, FL, on September 17. Most of the Florida 
Mississippi
Louisiana and 
east coast is subjected to hurricane-force winds. Fortunately, this region is sparsely 
Mississippi 
populated. Lake Okeechobee's levee holds, but rains of 6–8 inches fall on the already-
saturated soil in the croplands. The sugarcane crop is devastated, and a large number of
cattle are lost. After passing over the Everglades, the storm retains much of its energy and
impacts the lower west coast of Florida. Heavy damage occurs from Everglades City to
Sarasota, with the greatest damage in the Fort Myers-Punta Gorda area from winds and a
surge as high as 5 feet.
After leaving Florida, the huge hurricane takes a northwesterly course with increased
forward motion over the Gulf of Mexico and sweeps onto the Mississippi and Louisiana coasts
on September 19. Tides rise to 12 feet at Biloxi Bay, St. Louis, and Gulfport, MS. The eye of
the storm passes directly over New Orleans and later Baton Rouge, LA. Mississippi and
Louisiana suffer heavy damage, mostly from the surge. A few levees in Louisiana are
breached. A total of 51 lives are lost--17 in Florida, 12 in Louisiana, and 22 in Mississippi.
(NOAA 1993; Sumner 1947).

161
1947, October 9–16
Southern 
Category 1 in south 
1
This northeast-moving hurricane passes over the extreme southern portion of the 
Florida: Georgia 
Florida; category 2 in 
Florida peninsula on October 12. It moves offshore east of Florida, then turns west. 
and South Carolina
Georgia and South 
The Sarasota region is skirted by the storm but has hurricane-force winds. Because
Carolina
of the previous month's hurricane, there is little left to destroy. However, heavy rains of
5–13 inches from Lake Okeechobee southward climax a very wet season, causing
ﬂooding. The hurricane makes landfall just south of Savannah, GA. Hurricane-force winds
are conﬁned to a 40-mile region. A 12-foot surge, winds, and falling trees cause much
structural damage along the Georgia-South Carolina border (NOAA 1982; Sumner 1947).
1948, September 18–25
Southern Florida
Category 3
3
This hurricane skirts just east of Key West on September 21, then makes landfall just east
of Everglades City with a signiﬁcant storm surge, crosses Lake Okeechobee, and enters the
Atlantic at Jenson Beach near Stuart. Eight to eleven inches of rain cause ﬂooding
throughout the region. High water drowns cattle and destroys the citrus crop (NOAA 1982;
Sumner 1948).
1948, October 4–9
Southern Florida
Category 2
0
The center passes over the Florida Keys on October 5 at noon, and seven hours later the
eye passes over Miami. The damage is not as great as could be expected, since much of
area had been hit by the September storm two weeks earlier (NOAA 1982; Sumner 1948).
1949, August 23–31
Florida to the Carolinas
Category 3
2
This hurricane makes landfall in West Palm Beach on August 26, causing signiﬁcant
property damage, then passes over Lake Okeechobee. The water rises 12 feet on the
lake's east side, but the levees built since 1928 prevent overﬂow and casualties. The
center then passes northwestward through the heart of the citrus belt, devastating the
crops (Zoch 1949).
1949, 
Texas
Category 2
2
This hurricane makes landfall in Freeport, TX, on October 3, then curves northeast 
September 27–October 6
over Houston. The Houston Ship Channel has an 11-foot storm surge. Heavy rain values up
to 14.5 inches are observed. Four-ﬁfths of the damage is to crops, with oil rigs and roads
also being damaged (Zoch 1949).
1950, September 1–9
Northwest Florida 
Category 3
2
Also called the "Cedar Key Hurricane," this storm's path exhibits an unusual double l
Hurricane Easy
Peninsula
oop near the ﬁshing village of Cedar Key. During the ﬁrst loop it made landfall just 
(continues)

162
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
south of Cedar Key on September 5, where it made another loop; in making this loop the
calm center moved over Cedar Key from the southeast and then moved south. This path
resulted in Cedar Key being exposed to the same side of a hurricane twice, with 1.5 hours of
calm in between. The coast from Sarasota northward suffers extensive wind, storm surge,
and ﬂood damage, and Cedar Key's ﬁshing ﬂeet is destroyed. Rain amounts are also heavy,
between 10 and 25 inches in most places. Nearly 39 inches of rain fall on Yankeetown, FL, in
twenty-four hours. The coastal area inland from Yankeetown to Tampa is ﬂooded for several
weeks (NOAA 1982; Norton 1951).
1950, October 13–19
Southeast Florida
Category 3
4
This small, violent storm passes directly over Miami on October 17, then up the entire 
Hurricane King
inland Florida peninsula. Property and crop damage is heavy along the entire path (NOAA
1982; Norton 1951).
1954, August 25–31
North Carolina 
Category 2 in 
60
This hurricane passes near Cape Hatteras on August 30 with minimal damage. The storm 
Hurricane Carol
to New England
North Carolina; 
moves rapidly north-northeast and crashes into the New England states. Sixty are killed, 
category 3 in New 
and there is record (up to this time period) property and crop damage. A signiﬁcant storm 
York, Connecticut, 
surge inundates many low-lying regions in New England. Providence, RI, is under 
and Rhode Island
8–10 feet of water for several hours (Davis 1954).
1954, September 2–14 
New Jersey to 
Category 3
21
Edna skirts east of Cape Hatteras with minimal effect. On September 11, it passes over Cape 
Hurricane Edna
New England
Cod and then into eastern Maine. Heavy damage occurs again in New England (NOAA 1982;
Davis 1954).
1954, October 5–18 
South Carolina 
Category 4 in 
95
Hazel makes landfall at Holden Beach on October 15, inﬂicting heavy damage on the 
Hurricane Hazel
to New York
South and North 
North and South Carolina coasts due to a high storm surge superimposed on the highest 
Carolina
ocean tide of the year. Structural damage is immense, and downed trees litter the state.
Rainfall is heavy along and to the west of the storm track in North Carolina, with amounts up

163
to 11 inches. Hazel is the most destructive storm in North Carolina's history (Barnes 1998;
Davis 1954). Hazel retains its intensity inland as it joins with another storm system during
an extratropical transition to devastate inland communities from Virginia to Ontario,
Canada. Washington, D.C., experiences its strongest winds on record. A consequence of
Carol, Edna, Hazel, as well as other previous East Coast hurricanes, is that Congress
increases funding for hurricane research, and the National Hurricane Research Laboratory
is established (Sheets 1990).
In addition to the U.S. casualties of 95, Hazel also kills 83 people in southern Ontario
(Palmen 1958; Knox 1955). 
1955, August 3–14 
North Carolina
Category 2
25
Connie makes landfall at Morehead City on August 12, causing a 5–8 foot storm surge
Hurricane Connie
and considerable beach erosion. Crops are devastated. Heavy rains of 6–12 inches falls
between North Carolina and New England. This rainfall saturates the ground and ﬁlls the
streams, thus setting the stage for the destruction caused by Diane (NOAA 1982; Dunn,
Davis, and Moore 1955).
1955, August 7–21
North Carolina to 
Category 1
184
The weak and poorly deﬁned Diane makes landfall near Wilmington on August 17. 
Hurricane Diane
New England
Surge and damage is minimal on the North Carolina coast. As Diane moves inland, a
catastrophic situation emerges. Due to high watersheds and saturated soil from Connie,
Diane's heavy rainfall (up to 12 inches in some spots) causes severe ﬂoods for the entire
Northeast. Relatively small river basins rise quickly from mountain streams, and ﬂooding
occurs within hours, killing many. The worst-hit areas are Pennsylvania, Massachusetts,
Rhode Island, Connecticut, and southeastern New York, but ﬂooding is widespread in the
northeastern United States. Damage exceeds any prior storm on record, earning the storm
the nickname the “Billion-dollar Hurricane”—the ﬁrst storm to reach this damage
threshold. Ironically, later estimates show the dollar ﬁgure to be less, but damage is truly
extensive (NOAA 1982; Dunn, Davis, and Moore 1955).
1955, September 10–23 
North Carolina 
Category 3
7
Ione hits North Carolina on September 19. It is the third hurricane in eastern North 
Hurricane Ione
Carolina within ﬁve weeks and the fourth in eleven months. It then recurves back out to
sea. Most damage is to crops (Dunn, Davis, and Moore 1955).
(continues)

164
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
1956, September 21–30 
Louisiana to 
Category 2 in 
15
Flossy crosses the Mississippi delta just north of Burrwood near Pilottown on September 24. 
Hurricane Flossy
northern Florida
Louisiana; category 
The center then passes just south of Pensacola, FL, and makes landfall near Fort  
1 in Florida
Walton. The storm becomes extratropical shortly afterward and travels over Virginia out
into the Atlantic. Damage occurs from the mouth of the Mississippi River to New Orleans
and eastward to western Florida, with a storm surge up to 8 feet near Louisiana and
Florida landfall points. Flossy completely submerges Grand Isle and causes extensive
coastal erosion in Louisiana marshlands. Flossy also dumps 16 inches of rain along its
track, resulting in ﬂooding. Hundreds lose homes, cattle drown, and citrus, sugar, and
pecan crops are heavily damaged. Eastern sections of New Orleans seawall are overtopped
with inland ﬂooding. Heavy rain also occurs in Alabama. Gulf Coast evacuations are a
success, as deaths are mainly due to plane and car accidents. An extratropical Flossy also
causes a surge in Norfolk, VA, with 2.5 feet of water in its streets. Beach erosion occurs as
far north as Delaware (NOAA 1982; Dunn, Davis, and Moore 1956).
1957, June 25–28 
Texas and Louisiana
Category 4
526
Hurricane Audrey makes landfall near the Texas-Louisiana border on June 27 with 
Hurricane Audrey
devastating effects and is the most destructive hurricane to strike southwestern Louisiana in
history. Its central pressure deepens considerably in the last ﬁve hours before landfall. Its
forward motion also increases, making landfall earlier than expected. There are many
deaths as the result of a storm surge in excess of 12 feet, which inundates the ﬂat coast of
Louisiana as far as 25 miles inland in some places. Many homes are destroyed, and
offshore oil installations are heavily damaged. Texas also experiences a high storm surge,
with 450 people injured. Loss of life is the greatest since the New England 1938 hurricane.
Audrey later undergoes extratropical transition, generating heavy ﬂoods south of the Great
Lakes, particularly in Illinois and Indiana. Strong winds also occur from western
Pennsylvania through New York (Moore and Staff 1958).

165
This storm generates much controversy regarding emergency communication issues and
adequate hurricane preparedness, including an unsuccessful lawsuit ﬁled by one of the
survivors (Klein and Pielke 2002; Sheets and Williams 2001).
1959, 
South Carolina 
Category 3
22
Storm passes inland on the South Carolina coast near Beaufort on September 29. 
September 20–October 2
to Virginia
Some ﬂooding occurs, particularly in the Carolinas and Virginia. Crop damage due 
Hurricane Gracie
to wind and rain is heavy in South Carolina and eastern Georgia. Wind damage is severe
near the eye's landfall and is the most severe in the history of Beaufort, SC. However,
landfall at low tide minimizes storm surge damage. Twelve deaths are associated with
tornadoes in Virginia; car accidents, falling trees, and live wires cause ten deaths (NOAA
1982; Dunn et al. 1959).
1960, 
Florida to New 
Category 4 in 
50
Donna devastates southwest Florida from the combination of strong winds and storm 
August 29–September 13 
England
Southwest Florida 
surges up to 13 feet, particularly northeast of the track. It makes landfall as a hurricane 
Hurricane Donna
and Keys; category 
in the Florida Keys, southwest Florida, North Carolina, New York, and Connecticut—the 
2 in North Carolina; 
ﬁrst time that happens since records were ﬁrst taken. Vast expanses of mangrove stands
category 1 in New 
in the western areas of Everglades National Park incur losses from one-half to total 
York and Connecticut 
destruction. The great white heron population is decimated by 35–40%. Peak maximum
sustained winds of 135 mph affect the central Florida Keys, with a broad swath of category
3 winds from Maderia Bay to Cape Sable, FL, northward to Fort Myers Beach. This is the
costliest hurricane to strike the Florida region up to this time period. Serious damage takes
place along northeast sections of coastal North Carolina. Considerable damage to coastal
properties from the combined effects of wind and storm surge occurs all along the Middle
Atlantic and New England coasts. Serious ﬂooding happens farther inland, particularly from
the Catskills to Long Island (Dunn 1961; Dunion et al. 2003).
1961, 
Central Texas 
Category 4
46
Carla is the largest and most intense Gulf Coast hurricane in decades, impacting Corpus 
September 3–15 
coast to Louisiana
Christi to the Louisiana border with hurricane-force winds. The eye passes over Port 
Hurricane Carla
O'Connor on September 11, totally devastating the town. However, severe damage occurs 
(continues)

166
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
along a wide expanse of the Texas coast from unusually prolonged winds, high surges up
to 16 feet, and ﬂooding due to the hurricane's slow movement. In addition, Galveston is
seriously impacted by a tornado. The region's rice crop is ruined, and entire herds of cattle
drown (Dunn and Staff 1962; Hogan 1961).
1964, 
Southern Florida, 
Category 2
0
This is the ﬁrst hurricane in the Miami area since 1950. Moderate wind damage is 
August 20–September 5 
Georgia, Eastern 
conﬁned to a 20–30-mile strip between Miami and Melbourne. Record rainfall amounts up 
Hurricane Cleo
Virginia
to 14 inches in twenty-four hours fall in Hampton Roads southward in Virginia, resulting in
widespread ﬂooding. Tornadoes are reported in southeast Florida and the Carolinas (Dunn
and Staff 1965).
1964, 
Northeastern 
Category 2
5
First storm of full hurricane force on record to move inland from the east over extreme 
August 28–September 16 
Florida, Southern 
northeastern Florida, causing extensive wind damage, inland ﬂooding, and crop damage in 
Hurricane Dora
Georgia
the Jacksonville area; Georgia also suffers damage. Storm slows considerably before
landfall, perhaps allowing time for residents who are unaccustomed to hurricanes to
evacuate. The persistent onshore winds produce an estimated storm surge of 12 feet,
which severely erodes beaches, inundates several coastal communities, and washes out
beach roads (Dunn and Staff 1965).
1964, 
Louisiana, North 
Category 3 in 
38
Damage from wind, rain, and tornadoes is extensive in southeast Louisiana. On the 
September 28–October 5 
Carolina
Louisiana; remnants 
morning of October 3, several tornadoes occur in southeastern Louisiana in prehurricane 
Hurricane Hilda
in North Carolina
squall lines. One tornado at Larose, LA, kills 22 and injures 200 people. Three other
tornadoes cause much damage but no deaths in the New Orleans metropolitan area. Most
nontornado fatalities occur in Erath, LA, when a large water tower falls on City Hall, where
Civil Defense activities are being directed. Almost a complete evacuation of the entire
Louisiana coast accounts for the low death toll, aside from the tornado and water tower

167
incidents. Offshore oil facilities also are damaged, and a storm surge on Lake Pontchartrain
causes damage to the New Orleans lakefront. Remnants of Hilda cause heavy rains and
ﬂooding in North Carolina, already saturated from recent rains (Dunn and Staff 1965).
1965, 
Southern Florida, 
Category 3 in Florida 
75
Betsy moves south through the Bahamas, then west over the Florida Keys. Damage from 
August 27–September 12 
Louisiana
and Louisiana
winds, high tides and wave action is conﬁned to an area from Ft. Lauderdale, FL, southward. 
Hurricane Betsy
Flooding over the upper Keys is extensive. Betsy turns to the northwest upon entering the
Gulf of Mexico, with its eye arriving at Grand Isle, LA, the evening of September 9. High
water causes great devastation on the central Gulf Coast from the point where the center
makes landfall to Mobile, AL. In addition, Betsy pushes a storm surge up the Mississippi
River. Since it also impedes the river's ﬂow, unprecedented ﬂooding occurs as water topples
or breaches New Orleans' weak levees composed mostly of trees and mud (Adler 2001).
The city's worst ﬂooding in decades occurs, with water reaching the eaves of houses in the
eastern part of the city. Ships, tugs, and barges are torn from their moorings. Hundreds of
barges between New Orleans and Baton Rouge are either sunk or driven aground. In
Louisiana, 300,000 people evacuate to safe shelters. However, 58 people lose their lives
because of widespread wind gusts in excess of 100 mph and ﬂoods. In particular, because
the New Orleans area is 5 feet below sea level, an extensive pumping system removes
rainwater, but the system becomes overloaded and also experiences power failures. Four
deaths take place in Florida, and other lives are lost in the adjacent waters of the Gulf and
the Atlantic. The total of 75 deaths in Betsy is the greatest loss of life along the Gulf Coast
since Audrey in 1957. Extensive crop damage occurs in Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, and
Louisiana. Louisiana oil and marine industries suffer heavy economic losses (Sugg 1966).
Since Betsy, the Army Corps of Engineers has raised the levees to 16 feet surrounding the
city, added material that improves the strength of the levees, and improved the pumping
system. However, many think this city, which essentially lies in a depressed bowl below sea
level, is still the most vulnerable to a catastrophic hurricane that would topple the levees,
especially since the land is subsiding about a foot every 30 years (Bazile 2004) and because
its surrounding marsh has experienced severe erosion (Brouwer 2003). Moreover, the
levees are not designed to protect the city from a category 4 or 5 hurricane.
(continues)

168
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
1967, 
Southern Texas 
Category 3
15
Beulah makes landfall between Brownsville, TX, and the mouth of the Rio Grande about 
September 5–22 
daybreak on September 20. A storm surge of at least 18 feet occurs, creating thirty-one new 
Hurricane Beulah
cuts on Padre Island. This slow-moving, erratic storm dumps torrential rains of 10–30
inches in a 40,000-square-mile area between San Antonio, the Rio Grande, and the south
Texas coast. Rivers swell, with levels 10–20 feet above ﬂood stage. The ensuing ﬂoods
cause considerable damage and kill 10 people. In addition, a record number of
tornadoes—155—form, which kill 5 people (Sugg and Pelissier 1968). 
1969, August 14–22 
Mississippi, 
Category 5
297
Camille, with sustained winds of at least 180 mph, produces a storm surge of 25 feet in 
Hurricane Camille
Louisiana, Alabama, 
Pass Christian, MS, at landfall on August 17. Floods from the storm surge penetrate 8 miles 
Virginia, West 
inland in the Waveland-Bay St. Louis region, and in river estuaries the surge extends 
Virginia
20–30 miles upstream. Total devastation on the immediate Mississippi coastline and severe
damage farther inland result. Camille kills 172 people in Mississippi, including 41 who are
missing and assumed swept out to sea (Bergeron 1999; Sullivan 1987; Pielke, Simonpietri,
and Oxelson 1999; Wilemon 1999). The bodies of three unidentiﬁed females are buried in
a permanent memorial and renamed “Faith,” “Hope,” and “Charity”--a testimony to this
sad event and to the perseverance of this community, which has fully recovered and today
has a booming tourism and casino economy.
Hurricane Camille spawns several myths as well. Legend states that 24 residents of the
Richilieu Apartments stayed, threw a “hurricane party,” and then are killed by the storm
surge. The truth is that only 8 stayed, believing the building to be safe because they were
told it was steel-reinforced and a designated bomb shelter; 4 of these residents perished.
No hurricane party ever occurred (Bergeron 2000; Bergeron 2003). The origin of the myth
is unknown, but it has been perpetuated by one resident; it has since been documented
that the "hurricane party" did not happen.

169
Camille’s storm surge also pushes water over both levees near the mouth of the
Mississippi River in Louisiana, “removing almost all traces of civilization” as one U.S.
Department of Commerce report states (ESSA 1969). The marsh region northeast of New
Orleans, close to the storm’s center, also suffers extreme damage (Roberts 1969). Alluvial
City, Shell Beach, Hopedale, and Ycloskey suffer a 7–12 foot storm surge and 120–150
mph winds. Some camps in this region, which had been standing for 30–50 years, are
destroyed. Many summer homes along the north shore of Lake Pontchartrain and the
Rigolets are also wiped out. Nine in Louisiana die.
Camille slices or erodes many offshore islands; Pelican Island off Mobile Bay is
completely washed away, and other islands are gouged with new cuts, including slashing
Ship Island into two pieces. The Chandeleur Islands decreases from 7800 acres to 5016
acres (a 35% decrease), and it takes almost 20 years for the breaches to seal and for the
island chain to begin growing (Penland and Coauthors 1999a).
Camille dumps 12–30 inches of rain in 6 hours in the Blue Ridge Mountains, triggering
devastating ﬂash ﬂoods and mud slides that killed 114 people in Virginia and 2 in West
Virginia (Simpson, Sugg, and Staff 1970).
1970, July 23–August 5 
Texas
Category 3
11
Celia intensiﬁes rapidly during the ﬁfteen hours before it crosses the coast north of Corpus 
Hurricane Celia
Christi, TX. As it moves over land, spectacular damage occurs from high-energy winds of
short duration (also called downbursts or microbursts), which exceed the prevailing
sustained hurricane-force winds by a factor of 2 or 3. It is also possible that these localized
extreme winds are from mesovortices. The extreme winds rake across the residential and
business areas in less than half an hour. It is estimated that winds reach as high as 160
mph for several seconds. During those disastrous seconds, incredible damage occurs at the
airport and an adjacent mobile home park which is completely demolished. These winds
cause most of the damage, as only a tiny fraction can be attributed to the storm surge and
ﬂooding. Storm surges of 9 feet are observed in Port Aransas, however. Fortunately, only
11 die in the Corpus Christi area due to the state of preparedness by its disaster prevention
agencies. This is the costliest hurricane to strike the Texas coast up to this time period
(Simpson and Pelissier 1971).
(continues)

170
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
1972, June 14–23 
Florida to 
Category 1 in 
117
Agnes is one of the largest June hurricanes in history, with a circulation over 1,000 miles in 
Hurricane Agnes
New York
Florida and New York
diameter. It makes landfall in Cape San Blas in the Florida panhandle already in a
weakening state due to an unfavorable environment. A storm surge of 6–7 feet, local
windstorms on Lake Okeechobee, and tornadoes kill 9 people. As it moves northward,
Agnes interacts with another storm system, becomes an extratropical system, and actually
regains winds of tropical-storm strength over land in North Carolina. The remnants of
Agnes move offshore, and the storm intensiﬁes a little more and makes landfall on the
western tip of Long Island, NY. At the same time, the other storm system moves northeast
as well. The combination of heavy rains from this complex weather system and saturated
soil from recent rains produce devastating ﬂoods from North Carolina to New York, with
many record river crests and 108 deaths. This storm is the costliest natural disaster in U.S.
history up to that time period, even exceeding Betsy and Camille (Simpson and Hebert
1973).
1974, 
Southern Louisiana
Category 1
1
Carmen moves inland just east of Vermilion Bay. Damage occurs primarily to the sugarcane 
August 29–September 10 
crop, offshore installations, and the shrimping industry (Hope 1975).
Hurricane Carmen
1975, September 13–24 
Florida panhandle 
Category 3
21
Eloise makes landfall between Fort Walton Beach and Panama City, FL, early on September 
Hurricane Eloise
and eastern Alabama
23, producing a storm surge of 12–16 feet. It's the ﬁrst major hurricane to impact the
Panama City area in ﬁfty years. The storm surge and wind cause extensive damage to
structures along the 25-mile beach strip from Fort Walton Beach to Panama City, FL. High
winds destroy property and crops over eastern Alabama. The moisture from Eloise
combines with a stalled front, causing 10 inches of rain in mountainous regions of New
York and 14 inches of rain near Harrisburg, PA. The resulting ﬂoods drown 17 and
damages property and crops (Hebert 1976).

171
1979, 
Eastern Florida 
Category 2 in Florida, 
5
This storm makes landfall just north of Palm Beach, parallels the eastern coast of Florida, 
August 25–September 7 
through Middle Atlantic Georgia, and South 
and enters the Atlantic Ocean just north of Cape Canaveral. David is the ﬁrst hurricane to 
Hurricane David
States
Carolina
strike the Cape Canaveral area since 1926. It moves inland again near Savannah, GA.
Damage is not great in any one area, but the cumulative total caused by winds, storm
surge, ﬂoods, and tornadoes is large because of the wide area affected. Numerous
tornadoes occur along inland path. Wind and rain are responsible for widespread power
outages all along the eastern seaboard (Hebert 1980).
1979, 
Southern Alabama, 
Category 3
5
The eye passes over Dauphin Island, AL, on September 13 with sustained winds of 120 
August 29–September 14 
southern Mississippi, 
mph. Frederic is the ﬁrst hurricane to strike Mobile directly since 1932. This storm causes 
Hurricane Frederic
and Florida panhandle
extensive damage due to a 15-foot storm surge near the mouth of Mobile Bay. Major wind
damage occurs in southern Alabama, southern Mississippi, and the extreme western Florida
panhandle, causing it to be one of the most costly Gulf Coast hurricanes in history. Heavy
rains in Ohio and New York result from the interaction of a weakening Frederic and a cold
front that produce record ﬂoods and major damage in this region (Hebert 1980).
1980, August 1–11 
South Texas
Category 3
15
Originally a very powerful category 5 hurricane, Allen slows down and weakens to a 
Hurricane Allen
category 3 hurricane before making landfall just north of Brownsville, hitting a largely
unpopulated area. Allen deluges south Texas with 15–20 inches of rain 100 miles inland,
causing severe local ﬂooding. A storm surge up to 12 feet along Padre Island causes
numerous cuts. Two oil rigs are destroyed, and 13 people perish in a helicopter crash
during an oil rig evacuation (Lawrence and Pelissier 1981).
1982, November 19–24 
Kauai and Oahu, 
Category 1
2
Iwa's center moves just north of Kauai on November 24. Hurricane Iwa's intensity had 
Hurricane Iwa
Hawaii
peaked, but its rapidly accelerating forward motion of 25–30 mph make winds and swell
conditions within the dangerous right semicircle extend over Kauai. Iwa is the most
damaging Hawaiian storm of record up to this time. The south shore of Kauai is particularly
hard hit by wave action with very severe damage around Poipu. The Waianae coast of
Oahu also has stretches of severe surf damage. In fact, all islands reported some surf
damage along their southwest-facing shores. Wind damage is widespread on Kauai. 
(continues)

172
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
Pockets on Oahu also receive heavy wind damage, such as the Wahiawa area of central
Oahu and portions of the windward coast (NWSTM 1982).
1983, August 15–21 
North Texas
Category 3
21
An unusual hurricane, Alicia forms in an environment that appears unfavorable for 
Hurricane Alicia
development. Galveston ofﬁcials decide against complete evacuation of coastal areas.
When Alicia intensiﬁes signiﬁcantly the last 18 hours before landfall, it is too late to
evacuate these areas. Only the presence of Galveston's seawall prevents a large loss of life.
Alicia makes landfall 25 miles southwest of Galveston, then passes directly over Houston,
blowing out skyscraper windows and causing extensive damage. This is the ﬁrst major
hurricane to impact the Houston area since Hurricane Carla (1963), and the ﬁrst hurricane
in forty years to pass directly over Houston. Alicia also produces twenty-six tornadoes. Even
though Alicia is only a small- to medium-sized storm, it leaves a legacy as the costliest
hurricane in Texas history up to this time period (Case and Gerrish 1984; Kareem 1985;
Hohertz and Coauthors 1983; Sallee 1993).
1985, 
Louisiana to 
Category 3 near
4
Elena is best remembered for its bizarre track that confounded forecasters. On August 29, 
August 28–September 4 
west Florida
Apalachicola, Florida; 
Elena moves northwest, which would have brought landfall somewhere between Louisiana 
Hurricane Elena
category 2 in Biloxi, 
and Florida. But, on August 30, the steering currents change and Elena moves east toward 
Mississippi
the west coast of Florida. Within a couple hundred miles of Cedar Keys, FL, Elena stalls for
two days before turning back to the west-northwest, ﬁnally making landfall near Biloxi,
MS. Nearly a million people are evacuated, with a large section of the middle Gulf Coast
being asked to evacuate twice within a three-day period. Elena's maximum intensity is
reached when its center is 75 miles from Apalachicola, FL, devastating its oyster industry.
Extensive beach erosion and damage from the mouth of the Mississippi River to Fort Myers,
FL, occurs during this storm's lifetime (Case 1986). 

173
1985, 
North Carolina
Category 3 in North 
8
Gloria reaches a minimum pressure of 919 mb about 900 miles southeast of Cape 
September 16–October 2 
to New York
Carolina; category 2 in 
Hatteras, which is the lowest pressure ever measured by reconnaissance aircraft over the 
Hurricane Gloria
Long Island
East Coast Atlantic region. Gloria receives much attention from the media because of the
threat it poses to the Northeast. Fortunately, Gloria weakens as it moves northward,
somewhat minimizing casualties and damage. It crosses over the Outer Banks of North
Carolina on September 27, passes just offshore of the mid-Atlantic states, and makes
landfall over western Long Island, NY, ten hours later. The strongest winds of Gloria
generally remained offshore throughout this period, and the hurricane hits New York
during low tide, thus minimizing the 3–6-foot storm surge. Downed trees cause extensive
power outages for hundreds of thousands in the Long Island and New England areas. Beach
erosion is severe from North Carolina to New York, and North Carolina experiences coastal
ﬂooding (Case 1986).
1985, 
North Texas 
Category 1 in Louisiana; 12
Juan is a weak but persistent storm that creates much havoc on the northern Gulf Coast, 
October 26–November 1 
to Florida
tropical storm in 
with three landfalls resulting from multiple loops in its track. Even before Juan became a 
Hurricane Juan
Florida
tropical storm, the tropical disturbance creates a broad zone of gale-force winds, making
evacuation of offshore rigs very difﬁcult as Juan is developing. Nine deaths are caused by
toppled oil rigs or sunken boats rescuing oil workers. Juan makes its ﬁrst loop just off the
Louisiana coast on October 28 and then makes landfall near Morgan City on October 29.
The following day, Juan makes a second loop around Lafayette and emerges over
Vermilion Bay, where it becomes better organized. It moves over the mouth of the
Mississippi River near Burrwood, LA, and then makes its ﬁnal landfall just west of
Pensacola, FL. Because of Juan's slow, erratic movement, much damage is caused by its
persistent onshore ﬂow (prolonging and enhancing the storm surge with water as high as 8
feet) and excessive rain (8–17 inches) from the upper Texas coast to the extreme western
Florida panhandle over a ﬁve-day period. This includes damage to offshore oil rigs; crop
devastation; drowned livestock when high water overﬂows levees in south Louisiana; and
ﬂooding in Louisiana’s marsh and Lake Pontchartrain (Case 1986). 
(continues)

174
Chronology
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
1988, September 8–19 
South Texas
Did not hit U.S.; hit 
3
Gilbert is noteworthy because it produced the lowest surface pressure ever recorded in the 
Hurricane Gilbert
Mexico as category 3
Western Hemisphere of 26.23 inches (888 mb) while over open ocean. This storm causes
much damage and a number of fatalities in Mexico, Jamaica, Haiti, and Central America.
U.S. damage is conﬁned to twenty-nine tornadoes in south Texas from the remnants of
Gilbert, beach erosion along Padre Island, and minor wind damage from the coast through
the lower Rio Grande Valley (Lawrence and Gross 1989; Willoughby, Masters, and Landsea
1989).
1989, September 10–22 
South Carolina 
Category 4
21
Hugo is the most powerful hurricane to strike the United States since Camille in 1969, with 
Hurricane Hugo
and North Carolina
sustained winds of 130 mph or more and extreme storm surges of 20 feet in some places.
It is also the costliest hurricane until Andrew in 1992. Hugo makes landfall near Charleston
at Sullivans Island on September 22, devastating waterfront properties and beaching (or
destroying) an incredible number of watercrafts. Hugo's fairly swift motion carries the
hurricane well inland before it can signiﬁcantly weaken. Almost two-thirds of South
Carolina suffers wind damage, as does much of central North Carolina along a wide north-
south band through the Charlotte area. Falling trees and limbs do much of the damage;
otherwise, roof damage is common. Almost 9,000 square miles of forest (seven times the
area of Rhode Island) are ﬂattened, wiping out the timber industry. Long-term power
outages are widespread (Case and Mayﬁeld 1990; Fox 1992; Barnes 1998). A NOAA WP-
3D hurricane research aircraft nearly crashes when it is damaged by an eyewall
mesovortex during a low-level penetration a week before landfall (Black and Marks 1991;
Marks and Black 1990).
1991, August 16–29 
New England
Category 2
17
Bob makes landfall on Rhode Island, then passes between Boston and Sciuate, MA. 
Hurricane Bob
Although Bob is a weakening hurricane, it still causes widespread damage. Dozens of
cottages and boats on Buzzards Bay and Narragansett Bay are damaged or destroyed by a

Chronology
175
7-foot storm surge. Heavy rains of 4–7 inches in northwest Rhode Island cause considerable
urban ﬂooding. Other portions of New England also experience damage from storm surge,
downed trees, ﬂooding from heavy rain, and tornadoes. Power outages are widespread.
Apple crops in southern Maine suffer extensive damage. Three people survive for ten days
on a life raft after their boat is sunk off Cape Hatteras (Pasch and Avila 1992).
1992, August 16–28 
South Florida 
Category 5 in Florida; 
49
Andrew is a small but extremely destructive hurricane that devastates south Florida and is 
Hurricane Andrew
and Louisiana
category 3 in 
the most expensive natural disaster in U.S. history. Originally classiﬁed as a category 4 
Louisiana
hurricane at landfall, later analysis shows that Andrew is a category 5, only the third U.S.
land-falling hurricane of this status in the twentieth century (Landsea et al. 2004; NOWCAST
2002). Injuries are numerous, and 250,000 people are left homeless. A record 17-foot
storm surge is recorded near the Burger King headquarters south of Miami, causing much
localized damage However, most inland damage is caused by winds in Andrew's eyewall
that level homes and businesses. Exceptional devastation occurs from the Kendall district
southward through Homestead and Florida City to near Key Largo, with government ofﬁcials
saying that this area looks like a “war zone.” The damage is comparable to a 10-mile
tornado. In addition, smaller-scale trails of devastating damage are evident (Wakimoto and
Black 1994). Some have speculated that this damage is caused by eyewall mesovortices.
The National Guard set up tent cities and enforced a curfew to stop rampant looting. So
expensive is the damage that eight insurance companies cannot cover the claims and are
driven out of business. Fifteen people are killed as a direct result of the storm, mostly from
ﬂying debris and collapsing roofs or walls or falling furniture. Twenty-six others are killed
indirectly during the clean-up process. Natural coral reefs and marine life are damaged.
Andrew inﬂicts catastrophic damage to the mangrove forests in Everglades National Park
and Biscayne National Park (Smith et al. 1994).
A weaker but still potent Andrew makes landfall in a sparsely populated area of central
Louisiana on August 26. Damage is still signiﬁcant to offshore platforms, barrier islands,
boats, barges, freighters, and coastal properties due to winds and an 8-foot storm surge.
One strong tornado causes damage in Laplace and Reserve, LA. An upwelling of bottom
sediment kills 187 million ﬁsh in the Atchafalaya Basin, tremendously impacting the ﬁshing 
(continues)

176
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
industry. Louisiana’s sugar and soybean crops are devastated. More than 200 oil and gas
platforms are damaged, and a few are destroyed. Six ﬁshermen are killed when their boat
sinks offshore, and two are killed by the strong tornado (Mayﬁeld, Avila, and Rappaport
1994). 
1992, September 5–13 
Kauai, Hawaii
Category 4
6
A rare land-falling major Hawaii hurricane, Iniki pummels the south side of the Kauai 
Hurricane Iniki
island around Poipu. The northern shores of the island are equally ravaged. Wind damage
is extremely heavy throughout Kauai. Many homes and buildings are ﬂattened or lose
their roofs; 14,350 homes are severely damaged, making a third of the population
temporarily homeless. Nearly all of the island's seventy hotels suffer severe damage.
Seven thousand of the island's 8,202 hotel, condo, and bed and breakfast rooms are shut
down after the hurricane. Electricity and telephone service are not restored to many areas
for several months. The hurricane cripples the island's tourist industry, which accounts for
45% of the island's economy. The high winds and surf also annihilate the island's entire
crop of macadamia nuts and sugarcane, the island's other two large industries. Newly
planted coffee trees and guava crops are destroyed. It takes years for Kauai's tourism
industry to rebuild and recover.
Other islands are also impacted. The areas most affected on Oahu are the leeward coast
from Barbers Point through Makaha and Kaena Point, with lesser damage along the south
shore from Ewa Beach to Hawaii Kai. Some damage also occurs on the islands of Maui
County and the Big Island of Hawaii, where swell and heavy surf from southwesterly
direction pound exposed shorelines and anchorages (NWSTM 1992). 
1993, 
North Carolina
Category 3
3
Emily's western eyewall passes over the North Carolina Outer Banks. Damage is conﬁned 
August 22–September 6 
mainly to Hatteras Island, where a 10-foot storm surge impacts the area and severely 
Hurricane Emily
damages coastal dwellings (Pasch and Rappaport 1995). 

177
1995, July 31–August 6 
East Florida and 
Category 1
6
Erin comes ashore near Vero Beach on August 1, causing widespread wind damage and 
Hurricane Erin
Florida panhandle
beach erosion, mostly in Brevard County. Some ﬂooding occurs in the Melbourne and Palm
Bay areas. A 234-foot gambling and cruise ship sinks east of Cape Canaveral, killing its
three crew members. After reemerging over the Gulf of Mexico, Erin makes landfall on
August 3 near Pensacola, causing signiﬁcant structural damage in Navarre Beach and
Pensacola Beach. Farther inland, Erin knocks down trees and power lines. About half of the
cotton crop and 25% of the pecan crop is damaged. This is Pensacola's ﬁrst direct hit by a
hurricane since 1926. Remarkably, it would be hit by Opal two months later (Lawrence et
al. 1998).
1995, 
Florida, Alabama, 
Category 3
9
Opal makes landfall on October 4 near Pensacola Beach as a minimal category 3 
September 27–October 5 
Georgia, and the 
hurricane, causing storm surge damage and erosion from southeastern Mobile Bay and 
Hurricane Opal
Carolinas
Gulf Shores, AL, eastward through the Florida panhandle to Cedar Key, FL. The structural
damage is most extensive in the Fort Walton Beach area. Strong winds spread damage well
inland. Opal downs numerous trees and knocks out power to 2 million people in Florida,
Alabama, Georgia, and the Carolinas. The combination of Opal and a front result in heavy
rains, with up to 10 inches in Florida, Alabama, and Georgia; up to 5 inches in the
Carolinas; and less farther north. The remnants of this system bring beneﬁcial rains to the
Northeast, which was experiencing a drought.
Opal generates much concern the day before landfall. During the night of October 4,
Opal unexpectedly intensiﬁed to a strong category 4 with sustained winds of 150 mph.
Even worse, Opal begins accelerating as it approaches Florida. Since most people are
sleeping, it’s difﬁcult to alert the public about this new, unanticipated danger. Many people
near Pensacola Beach awake the next morning with a near-category 5 hurricane just
offshore. The last-minute evacuation procedures clog the roads and Interstate 10.
Fortunately, Opal begins weakening, and coastal evacuations are completed in time
(Lawrence et al. 1998).
1996, July 5–July 14 
Carolinas
Category 2
12
Bertha makes landfalls on July 12 between Wrightsville Beach and Topsail Beach in the 
Hurricane Bertha
southern North Carolina coastal area, east of Wilmington. Many homes and businesses on 
(continues)

178
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
barrier islands sustain heavy damage, mostly due to the 6–8 foot storm surge. High winds
cause a large loss in the corn, soybean, and tobacco crops. This same area will be impacted
by the even more intense Hurricane Fran two months later (Pasch and Avila 1999).
1996, 
Carolinas, Virginia, 
Category 3
34
Fran makes landfall on September 5 over Cape Fear, NC, but hurricane-force winds extend 
August 23–September 8 
West Virginia, Maryland, 
over a wide area, causing extensive damage to trees, roofs, and power lines. A storm surge 
Hurricane Fran
and Pennsylvania
as high as 12 feet destroys or seriously damages numerous beachfront houses on the North
Carolina coast. Most of the deaths are caused by ﬂash ﬂooding from 6–12 inches of rain in
the Carolinas, Virginia, West Virginia, Maryland, Washington D.C., and Pennsylvania (Pasch
and Avila 1999). 
1997, July 16–26 
Louisiana, Mississippi, 
Category 1
9
Danny forms right off the Louisiana coast and within forty-eight hours makes landfall on 
Hurricane Danny
Alabama
July 18 at Grand Isle, LA. It moves across the Mississippi River marsh, drifts slowly
eastward, and stalls just south of Mobile Bay. On July 19, it moves into the lower reaches
of Mobile Bay and stalls again, where it acquires its peak intensity. It ﬁnally drifts ashore in
southern Baldwin County that evening and slowly meanders northward. The very slow
movement produces extraordinary rains of 20–25 inches in Mobile Bay. When combined
with a 4–5-foot storm surge, serious ﬂooding results throughout the bay system. Danny's
remnants also cause signiﬁcant inland ﬂooding in Charlotte, NC, with rain totals of 8–12
inches (Rappaport 1999). 
1998, August 19–30 
North Carolina and 
Category 2
3
Bonnie passes just east of Cape Fear and makes landfall near Wilmington, NC, on August 
Hurricane Bonnie
Virginia
27. A storm surge of 5–8 feet occurs on the eastern beaches of Brunswick County. Winds
cause tree, roof, and structural damage, with Hampton Roads, VA, hardest hit. Widespread
power outages affect eastern North Carolina and Virginia (Pasch, Avila, and Guiney 2001).

179
1998, September 21–30 
South Florida, 
Category 2 in 
1
After leaving a trail of destruction with more than 600 dead in the Caribbean region, 
Hurricane Georges
Louisiana, and 
Florida; category 
Georges (pronounced "Zhorzh") strikes the Florida Keys, leaving more than 900 homes 
Mississippi
2 in Mississippi
with minor damage, 500 with major damage, and more than 150 completely destroyed,
including 75 houseboats on so-called "Houseboat Row."
Georges then heads toward Mississippi, with the eye passing within 5 miles of the
Chandeleur Islands. Georges ravages this island chain, causing worse damage than Camille,
scouring away land and creating new inlets. The Chandeleur Islands decreases in size from
5,013 acres to 3,003 acres, a 40% reduction (Penland and Coauthors 1999b). Georges
makes its ﬁnal landfall on September 28 just east of Biloxi, MS, causing a 6–8 foot storm
surge east of the eyewall all the way to Mobile Bay, AL, where parts of downtown Mobile are
inundated. Beaches in this area are badly eroded. Storm surges above 7 feet also occur in
Lake Pontchartrain, LA, destroying or damaging a number of ﬁshing camps there. Rainfall
totals of 15 inches in southeast Mississippi and Alabama, along with an incredible 26 inches
in the Florida panhandle, cause widespread ﬂooding. Pascagoula, MS, is particularly hard hit
due to the combination of an 11-foot storm surge and ﬂooding on the Pascagoula River.
However, the Biloxi, Tchoutacabouffa, Mobile, Peridido, Escambia, Blackwater, Yellow, and
Choctawhatchee river basins also experience near-record or record levels. Approximately
200 residents in the Florida panhandle are rescued by the Coast Guard due to ﬂooding in
that region, and a portion of Interstate 10 near the Alabama-Florida state line is destroyed
or washed over (Pasch, Avila, and Guiney 2001; Turnipseed et al. 1998).
1999, August 18–23 
South Texas
Category 3
0
Bret is a potentially devastating storm but makes landfall over sparsely populated Kenedy 
Hurricane Bret
County on August 23. Furthermore, Bret is a small storm, with hurricane-force winds
conﬁned to a radius of 35 miles from the center in the north semicircle and only 12–24
miles in the south semicircle. As a result, Corpus Christi, 40 miles to the north, and
Brownsville, 50 miles to the south, are spared. Most wind damage is to ranch lands, and an
estimated 10-foot storm surge causes some cuts in Padre Island. Rain amounts of 12 inches
cause notable river ﬂooding in the Rio Grande Valley, and heavy rains are also observed in
nearby Mexico. Bret is the ﬁrst hurricane to strike Texas since Hurricane Jerry (1989) and
is the strongest Texas hurricane since Hurricane Alicia (1983) (Lawrence et al. 2001).
(continues)

180
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
1999, 
North Carolina, 
Tropical Storm
0
Dennis threatens the southeastern United States as a category 2 storm but turns sharply 
August 24–September 5 
Virginia
away from the coast as it nears landfall. Its legacy is its persistent nature—Dennis loops 
Hurricane Dennis
back, then stalls for a week before making landfall. The result is days of rain, gusty winds,
and high surf. Its rain is particularly important in North Carolina, as it saturates the ground
and sets the stage for the severe inland ﬂooding from Hurricane Floyd (Lawrence et al.
2001).
1999, September 7–17 
North Carolina 
Category 2
56
Floyd is one of the most destructive and deadly hurricanes of the decade. Because of its 
Hurricane Floyd
to New York
size and intensity, hurricane warnings are issued from south Florida to Massachusetts. The
last hurricane to require warnings for as large a stretch of coastline was Hurricane Donna
(1960). As a result, the largest evacuation in U.S. history occurs as coastal residents from
south Florida to North Carolina leave their homes.
Floyd eventually hits Cape Fear, NC, on September 16. Floyd's center passes over
extreme eastern North Carolina later that morning and then across Norfolk, VA. Storm
surge values up to 10 feet are reported along the North Carolina coast. About ﬁfteen
tornadoes occur, causing structural damage. However, Floyd's legacy will be extraordinary
ﬂooding, dumping 15–20 inches of rain over portions of eastern North Carolina and
Virginia; 12–14 inches over portions of Maryland, Delaware, and New Jersey; 4–7 inches
over eastern Pennsylvania and southeastern New York; and up to 11 inches over portions
of New England. Since the soil is already saturated from Hurricane Dennis and other recent
rain events, an inland ﬂooding disaster ensues that drowns 50 people (Lawrence et al.
2001). Six others die from other factors. Floyd is the deadliest U.S. hurricane since Agnes
(1972). In Bound Brook, NJ, serious ﬂooding from the Raritan River results in the rescue
of 800 people, many stranded on the second ﬂoors of homes or on porch roofs.

181
However, North Carolina is hardest hit, with towns such as Franklin, Rocky Mount, and
Greenville under 10 feet of water and 30,000 homes ﬂooded. In addition, more than
100,000 hogs and 1 million chickens are killed in the ﬂooding. When combined with
damaged water treatment plants, sewage plants, chemical plants, farming operations, and
water wells, water pollution and environmental problems result. This also wipes out the
oncoming shrimp harvest.
On October 16, the fringes of Hurricane Irene dump more rain in North Carolina. Rain
from all three hurricanes (Dennis, Floyd, and Irene) alter the nation’s largest lagoonal
estuary, the Pamlico Sounds. The salinity in Pamlico Sound declines by two-thirds, and
nitrogen levels increase by 50%, causing serious damage to the area’s marine life. 
2002, September 14–27 
Louisiana
Isidore, tropical storm; 
5 from Isidore, 
Isidore and Lili hit Louisiana with back-to-back-blows, making landfall a week apart. It is 
Tropical Storm Isidore 
Lili, category 1
2 from Lili
difﬁcult to discuss Lili without describing Isidore (a tropical storm at landfall, but a large  
2002, September 21–
storm and therefore still devastating), so both storms will be treated as a single event here. 
October 4 Hurricane Lili
Lili is the ﬁrst hurricane to make landfall in the United States since Irene hit Florida in 
1999.
Isidore makes landfall as a large tropical storm just west of Grand Isle, LA, on
September 26, bringing a 6–8-foot storm surge to the Louisiana marshes, inland bays, and
Mississippi coast and causing considerable structural water damage. The storm surge is the
worst since Hurricane Juan (1985). It also unleashes torrential rains of 15–18 inches in
southern Louisiana. The area's water pumps are unable to keep up, resulting in some
homes ﬂooding. The combination of surge and rain damage homes and property along the
northshore of Lake Pontchartrain. The lake breaches nearby levees, ﬂooding homes in
Slidell, LA. Beaches in Mississippi and Alabama suffer erosion (Pasch et al. 2004; Krupa
2002; Krupa, Staley, and Bartels 2002; Brown and Cannizaro 2002).
Already suffering from high water and heavy rain from Tropical Storm Isidore,
Hurricane Lili makes landfall along the south-central coast of Louisiana near Intracoastal
City on October 3. A tide gauge at Crewboat Channel near Calumet measures a storm surge
of 12.3 feet, and another at Vermillion Bay measures 11.7 feet. Water levels are already
2–4 feet above normal from Isidore before Lili’s landfall, enhancing the storm surge. Lili 
(continues)

182
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
brings less rain, with the highest amount of 8.5 inches just north of landfall, but contains
stronger winds. Still, it could have been much worse. Lili had rapidly intensiﬁed tc a 
category 4 hurricane the day before landfall, and forecasters predicted it would make
landfall as a major hurricane. Fortunately, Lili’s eyewall collapsed, and it rapidly weakened
during the thirteen hours before landfall. A combination of storm surge and heavy rain
caused levees to fail at Montegut and Franklin, Louisiana. Tide gauge water levels were
already 2–4 feet above normal prior to Lili’s arrival. Because the soil is saturated from
Isidore, Lili’s strong winds topple trees onto houses and into roadways. Winds strip shingles
from roofs and blow out windows. The wind and driving rain from both storms ﬂatten
sugarcane ﬁelds throughout southern Louisiana (Pasch et al. 2004).
Lili’s maximum sustained winds increased by 40 mph within twenty-four hours, then
weakened by 45 mph the following twelve hours before landfall. This is a truly
remarkable—and fortunate—collapse. No hurricane on record has ever weakened at a
greater rate immediately after rapid intensiﬁcation in the Gulf of Mexico (Frederick 2003).
2003, September 6–19 
North Carolina to 
Category 2
16
Isabel makes landfall near Drum Inlet, NC, on September 18. The storm brings hurricane 
Hurricane Isabel
New Jersey
conditions to portions of eastern North Carolina and southeastern Virginia, with a 6–8 foot
storm surge at landfall. Widespread wind and storm surge damage results in this region.
Wind damage also occurs northward to New York. Downed trees are particularly numerous
in Virginia due to a three-year drought, which weakened tree roots, along with a wet
summer that loosened the soil (BAMS 2004).
Normally, the storm surge is still signiﬁcant but less away from the landfall area.
However, because the storm's inland track parallels Chesapeake Bay, southeast winds
continue to pile water into the estuary system. Surge values of 6–8 feet are observed in
the upper reaches of Chesapeake Bay near Annapolis and Baltimore, MD, and in most

183
adjacent rivers. The Potomac River in Washington, D.C., also has an 8-foot storm surge.
Even higher surges occur at the heads of rivers, such as 8.5 feet at the Richmond City locks
along the James River. Water levels exceed previous record levels established in the
Chesapeake-Potomac Hurricane (1933) in Washington D.C., Baltimore, Annapolis, and
communities near the Blackwater National Wildlife Refuge. Because this storm surge occurs
far from Isabel’s landfall, many residents are also caught by surprise. Structural and boat
damage is extensive. Losses to recreational boats alone total $150 million (Anon. 2003).
2004, August 9-14 
Southwest Florida,  
Category 4 in Florida; 
10
Charley came ashore August 13 with 145-mph winds at Charlotte Harbor and Punta Gorda, 
Hurricane Charley
South Carolina, North 
category 1 in the 
causing severe damage in southwest and central Florida. Ten thousand homes are 
Carolina
Carolinas
destroyed in Charlotte Harbor with another 16,000 severely damaged. Charley tracks
northeastward across central Florida, severely affecting Orlando and Daytona Beach. It
moves offshore, making another landfall as a weak hurricane at Cape Romain, SC,
followed by landfall in Myrtle Beach, NC.
Charley's hurricane-force winds are conﬁned to a narrow region, but the devastation is
immense. Damage totals $15 billion, making Charley the second costliest hurricane in
history (only Andrew in 1992 is worse). North Carolina and South Carolina also suffer
between $20–30 million in damage.
Charley is a controversial storm because it was forecast to hit Tampa Bay as a category
3 but hit 100 miles south in Port Charlotte as a category 4, surprising many residents. Port
Charlotte was in the hurricane warning region, but many residents conﬁdently believed it
was going to Tampa and did not expect the slight track turn or the rapid intensiﬁcation.
Charley deepened explosively just before landfall, going from a Category 2 to a Category
4 hurricane in ﬁve hours. Charley serves as a lesson that all residents in a hurricane
warning region should prepare for landfall even if not directly in the track forecast. Track
forecast errors within twenty-four hours can still be 50–100 miles wrong, and rapid
intensiﬁcation is often not predicted.
Incredibly, south Florida will be hit by two more hurricanes this year: Frances and
Jeanne. 
(continues)

184
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
2004, 
Southeast Florida,
Category 2
6
Frances hit Labor Day weekend with 105-mph winds on the Atlantic coast near Stuart, FL. A 
August 25–September 8 
Georgia
very large, slow-moving storm, Frances damaged much of the state's central east coast, 
Hurricane Frances
inundating the shoreline with a storm surge of 6–8 feet, stripping roofs, smashing boats,
and damaging space and military facilities in Cape Canaveral.
Frances also produces copious amounts of rain in excess of 10 inches over large
portions of the central and northern Florida peninsula and southeastern Georgia, with some
areas receiving almost 16 inches. Totals of 5–10 inches were common elsewhere along
Frances's inland track.
Frances spawns 101 tornadoes—23 in Florida, 7 in Georgia, 45 in South Carolina, 11
in North Carolina, and 15 in Virginia. Many of the tornadoes occur in an outbreak over
South and North Carolina on 7 September. 
2004, September 2–24 
Alabama, west 
Category 3 in Alabama; 26
Ivan rakes the eastern Alabama and western Florida panhandle on September 16 after 
Hurricane Ivan
Florida panhandle, 
tropical depression
landing on the Alabama coast with 130-mph winds and a 10–15 foot storm surge. Ivan 
southwest Louisiana
in Louisiana
also produces incredible waves as high as a record 91 feet offshore and 10–15 feet
inshore. The combination of wind, surge, and high surf levels Perdido Key, FL, with extreme
damage along the eastern Alabama coast and western Florida panhandle. Extensive beach
erosion undermines homes, apartments, and condominiums, and the coastal highway
system is ruined. Ivan damages or destroys thousands of coastal homes. The severe wave
action combined with the storm surge dismantles a quarter of a mile of the Interstate 10
bridge over Pensacola Bay, sliding the roadway off its concrete pilings and pushing much of
it into the water. Millions of acres of forest are wiped out. Gulf of Mexico oil production is

185
severely disrupted, resulting in higher oil and natural gas prices. Underwater mudslides
damage thirteen pipelines, with many more pipelines damaged by the anchors of mobile
drilling rigs pushed by Ivan. Twenty-four drilling platforms are signiﬁcantly damaged, and
seven completely destroyed. Ivan spawns 111 tornadoes inland, with the majority in
Virginia, Georgia, and Florida. Ivan is the most destructive hurricane in this region in 100
years. The total damage cost is 14.2 billion dollars, the third costliest hurricane ever behind
Andrew (1992) and Charley (2005).
Ivan will also be remembered for its quirky path and rebirth after going inland. Its
remnants track northeastward into the mid-Atlantic, then its low-level circulation turns
southwestward across Florida into the Gulf of Mexico, where it reintensiﬁes into a weak
and short-lived tropical storm. It makes landfall as a tropical depression in Cameron Parish,
LA, on September 23. 
2004, September 13–28 
Southeast Florida
Category 3
4
After doing a loop in the Atlantic, Jeanne makes landfall near Stuart, FL, with 120-mph 
Hurricane Jeanne
winds on September 25, within a startling 2 miles of Frances's landfall three weeks earlier.
Many homes already damaged by Frances were leveled. Being a stronger hurricane, Jeanne
also inﬂicts new damage with its stronger winds and higher storm surge. Jeanne undercuts
foundations and guts the ﬁrst ﬂoors of condominiums, leaving bedrooms and lobbies ﬁlled
with sand and debris; breaches seawalls; washes away walkovers and decks; and seriously
erodes the beachfront, turning the dunes into sheer sand cliffs, some 10 feet tall.
Widespread rainfall up to 8 inches occurs in its path along east, central, and northern
Florida, with isolated amounts up to 13 inches. Rainfall amounts of 4–7 inches also are
observed in central Georgia, the western Carolinas, and Virginia.
The combined effect of Charley, Frances, and Jeanne decimates the area's citrus crops
of oranges, grapefruits, and tangerines, resulting in the smallest crop in thirteen years.
For the ﬁrst time in recorded history, four hurricanes hit Florida in a single season. The
four hurricanes that strike Florida this season match the most to hit a single state since 
(continues)

186
TABLE 4.1
(Continued)
Areas Most
Safﬁr-Simpson
Deaths 
Dates of Hurricane
Affected
Category at Landfall
(U.S. Only)
Comments and Damage
1886, when Texas was battered four times. The havoc caused by Hurricanes Charley,
Frances, Ivan, and Jeanne prompts the largest relief effort ever undertaken by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. Property damage in the U.S. is estimated at near $45
billion—the costliest hurricane season on record.
2005, August 23–30, 
south Florida, 
Category 1 in 
estimated 
see epilogue at back of book
Hurricane Katrina
Louisiana, Mississippi, 
Florida, Category 4 
between 1000 
Alabamai
n Louisiana
and 2000 at 
press time
Also included are (1) the area or areas affected; (2) the Safﬁr-Siimpson category at landfall (should be treated with caution); (3) the number of U.S. fatalities associated with the storm (earlier storms are gener-
ally estimates, and some numbers include direct and indirect deaths, while others are direct deaths only); and general comments on the storm and the damage it caused.

A ﬁnal example is Tropical Storm Gabrielle (2001), which
made landfall on Florida’s west coast near Venice. This storm
strengthened with sustained winds to 65 mph right before land-
fall, causing storm surges of 3–6 feet. Rainfall totals were gener-
ally in the 4- to 7-inch range along the storm track over
west-central Florida, resulting in major ﬂoods on the Manatee
River, Little Manatee River, Myakka River, Peace River, and Horse
Creek. The combination of storm surge from northeasterly ﬂow
ahead of the storm, high astronomical tides, and 6–12 inches of
rain in northeast Florida caused near-record ﬂooding of the lower
St. Johns River.
In addition, many weak land-falling hurricanes that caused
relatively little damage or few fatalities have been excluded from
table 4.1. However, be assured that any land-falling storm is a
major event to the community it impacts. Detailed tables of all
U.S. land-falling hurricanes, as well as yearly storm tracks, are
provided in Neumann et al. (1993), the National Hurricane Center
website at http://www.nhc.noaa.gov, and the Unisys weather
website at http://weather.unisys.com.
Finally, the United States is blessed with solid emergency
preparedness, stout infrastructure, and ﬁrst-rate communication
outlets. Other countries along the Atlantic Ocean are not as fortu-
nate. Many hurricanes in table 4.1 also devastated nations along
the Caribbean Sea and south of the United States. History is lit-
tered with hurricanes that killed thousands of people in ﬂoods,
mud slides, poorly constructed buildings, and storm surges and
left 100,000 or more homeless. Hurricane Georges (1998) killed
almost 600 and left 350,000 homeless in the Dominican Republic
and Haiti (Pasch, Avila, and Guiney 2001). Hurricane Mitch (1998)
killed 9,000 in Honduras and Nicaragua with severe destruction
of those countries’ infrastructure (Pasch, Avila, and Guiney 2001).
Hurricane Donna (1960) produced 114 fatalities from the Leeward
Islands to the Bahamas, including 107 in Puerto Rico in ﬂoods
(Dunn 1961).
Chronology of Some Hurricanes 
That Impacted History
1274
A ﬂeet from the Mongolian Empire consisting of
40,000 men and 1,000 ships attempted to invade
Japan when a powerful storm sank 300 of the ships
Chronology
187

and killed 13,000. It is not known if this was a
typhoon. Undaunted, Mongolia again attempted to
invade Japan in 1281 with a massive ﬂeet of 150,000
men. Once again, a strong storm (probably a
typhoon) annihilated the ﬂeet, sinking 4,000 ships
and drowning 100,000 men. Japan believed it had
been protected from certain conquest with godly pro-
tection. This great fortune for Japan gave rise to the
term “kamikaze,” or “divine wind” (Jennings 1970;
Sheets and Williams 2001).
1565
France established a settlement east of the present site
of Jacksonville, Florida, in 1564, naming it Fort Caro-
line. Spain, which had amassed a huge colonial
empire in Mexico, Central America, parts of South
America, and much of the Caribbean Sea considered
the small outpost a threat to its shipping routes. Spain
quickly established a fort at St. Augustine 40 miles to
the south. Religious differences between Protestant
France and Catholic Spain only enhanced tensions. 
In September 1565, France sailed from Fort Caroline
to attack St. Augustine. At the same time, Spain,
unaware of the pending assault, marched northward
and attacked the outnumbered Fort Caroline with an
easy victory. Spain immediately started to march
back to St. Augustine when it became clear that an
attack was imminent. However, bad weather (possi-
bly a tropical storm or hurricane) shipwrecked the
French ﬂeet. Spain captured or killed stranded
French soldiers along the coast. The French therefore
lost their bid for control of North America to the
Spanish (Rappaport and Partagas 1995; Sheets and
Williams 2001).
1588
Spain, at war with England over religious differences
(England is Protestant, Spain is Catholic) and sea-
power superiority for trade and expansion in the
New World of the Americas, dispatched 130 ships of
the largest naval force in history to invade England.
The English stopped the invasion, and the armada
attempted to return to Spain by sailing north around
Scotland so as to avoid the English Channel.
188
Chronology

Although it’s difﬁcult to know for certain, the armada
encountered a bad storm that was quite possibly a
hurricane in an extratropical stage. Many of the ﬂee-
ing Spanish ships were sunk or wrecked on the coasts
of Scotland and Ireland. Because of the storm and the
battle, only half (65) of the armada made it back to
Spain. The Englishman Lord Burghley sarcastically
called the Spanish Fleet “The invincible armada”
after England’s victory. Spain lost control of the sea,
and therefore its domination of the New World, to
England (Mattingly 1974; Martin and Parker 2002).
1609
The British ship Sea Venture, en route to Jamestown,
Virginia, was grounded on Bermuda by a hurricane.
The stranded people are the island’s ﬁrst inhabitants,
who think the island is “paradise” and claim it for
England. Ten months later, the passengers and crew
arrive in Jamestown in boats built from the island’s
cedar trees and the wreckage of the ﬂagship (Hughes
1990). This incident inspired Shakespeare to write
one of his best plays, The Tempest. Today Bermuda is a
territory of the United Kingdom.
1640
A hurricane partially destroyed a large Dutch ﬂeet
poised to attack Havana, Cuba. This helped the
Spaniards secure control of Cuba (Rappaport and
Partagas 1995).
1666
England loses a ﬂeet of seventeen ships and 2,000
troops in a hurricane near Guadeloupe. The French
captured the remaining survivors, resulting in
France’s control of Guadeloupe through the twenti-
eth century (Rappaport and Partagas 1995).
1780
A catastrophic hurricane, called the Great Hurricane,
struck the Lesser Antilles in the Caribbean Sea on
October 10 and was the most deadly hurricane in
Western Hemisphere history. Approximately 22,000
deaths occurred, with 9,000 lives lost in Martinique,
4,000–5,000 in St. Eustatius, and 4,326 in Barbados
(Rappaport and Partagas 1995). Thousands of deaths
also occurred offshore, including great losses to the
Chronology
189

ﬂeets of Britain and France, who were planning
assaults on each other to claim the Antilles Islands.
After the Great Hurricane of 1780, the governor of
Martinique freed the imprisoned English soldiers,
even though the French and English were at war. He
declared that in such disasters all men are brothers
(Ludlum 1989).
1837
A large major hurricane, dubbed Racer’s Storm, trav-
eled along much of the Gulf of Mexico coastline. The
storm, with an estimated diameter of 1,600 miles, lit-
erally ﬁlled the Gulf of Mexico. Racer’s Storm crossed
the Yucatán Peninsula, headed north along the Texas
and Mexico coast, then turned east along the
Louisiana coast before ﬁnally making landfall along
the Alabama-Florida border. It then exited into the
Atlantic just below Charleston, South Carolina. It
caused destruction all over the Gulf Coast, wiped out
the Mexican navy, and destroyed several U.S. ships.
Another ship, the Racer, survived the storm; went to
Havana, Cuba, for repairs; and provided valuable
information about the storm to William Reid. The
storm was named after this ship (Ludlum 1989). Off
North Carolina, the paddlewheel steamer Home, then
hailed as the nation’s fastest ship and on pace to set a
new speed record during the trip, encountered the
hurricane and sank off the North Carolina coast. Only
two life preservers were on the ship. Forty passengers
struggled to shore, and the rest (mostly women and
children) drowned. This event caused Congress to
rewrite maritime laws requiring a life preserver for
every person on a ship (Hughes 1990).
1889
In March 1889, war was prevented between the
United States and Germany by a typhoon. Late in
1888, a German naval force removed the native chief
of the Samoans and set up a German protectorate in
his place. The natives rebelled, and twenty-two Ger-
man soldiers were killed. The Germans retaliated by
sending three warships into the island’s harbor and
shelling a native village, incidentally destroying
property of U.S. citizens located there. The Germans
190
Chronology

also ripped down and burned an American ﬂag. The
United States sent three warships of its own to protect
its citizens’ lives and property. On March 16, the U.S.
and German ﬂeets were in the harbor, poised to
attack should either side provoke the other. However,
before any overt action occurred, a typhoon struck
the island (Hughes 1990).
The six warships and six other merchant ships
were pummeled against reefs, sunk, or beached.
About 150 sailors lost their lives. But during the
storm, all three factions—the Germans, Americans,
and Samoans—united as allies and helped each other,
performing many heroic acts. Afterward, Germany
and the United States decided to resolve their differ-
ences peacefully, resulting in the Act of Berlin of 1889,
which states that Samoa should remain an independ-
ent territory with its own ruler advised by the U.S.,
British, and German consuls. This treaty lasted until
tribal warfare broke out in 1899, resulting in the death
of several U.S. soldiers. The treaty was annulled,
western Samoa became German territory, and the
United States gained what is now called American
Samoa. Britain withdrew in exchange for Tonga and
part of the German Solomons. Nevertheless, this inci-
dent made the United States realize that it was a
major power in the world and required a larger navy
to curb other aggressive countries. In other words,
the Samoa incident is indirectly responsible for the
founding of the modern U.S. Navy. Robert Lewis
Stevenson was a witness to the whole event and pub-
lished a book on it (Stevenson 1997).
1898
This section now ends on a lighter note. In 1898, Cuba
was part of the oppressive Spanish Empire. The USS
Maine was sunk under mysterious circumstances in
Havana, Cuba, and the United States declared war on
Spain. A U.S. regiment called the Rough Riders under
Lt. Col. Theodore Roosevelt quickly overwhelmed the
Spanish garrison and liberated Cuba. Lookout posts
were established along the Cuban coastline to watch
for a Spanish counterattack. On August 12, the war
ended and Cuba was free. The U.S. weather service
Chronology
191

saw great potential in the Cuban lookout posts and
took them over as part of a hurricane early warning
system. Outpost employees were dismayed to ﬁnd
that the outdoor privy (an outhouse) had been stolen
from one of the stations. This caused such uproar that
the local who had stolen it for his own personal use
returned it. Very shortly afterward, on October 2,
both the observation post and its privy were
destroyed by a hurricane, immortalizing the Privy
Hurricane of 1898 (Hughes 1990).
192
Chronology

5
Biographical Sketches
M
any individuals have contributed to hurricane research, fore-
casting, and preparedness in the past two centuries. Bio-
graphical sketches of past and current hurricane scientists
who have made important contributions to the ﬁeld are included
below. This list should be considered just a sample, since many
people have provided key contributions to tropical meteorology,
weather forecasting, disaster mitigation, and hurricanes in the
last 200 years.
Much of the information in these biographical sketches was
provided by the researchers themselves. Additional resources
consulted include Burpee (1988, 1985), Byers (1960), Cabbage
(1998), Daintith et al. (1994), DeAngelis (1989), Gillispie (1975),
Kessler (2004), Kutzbach (1996), LeMone (1989), Sheets and
Williams (2001), Williams (1992, 1998), and Zipser (1989).
Sim Aberson (1964–)
Sim D. Aberson has worked as a meteorologist with the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Hurricane Research
Division (HRD) in Miami, Florida, since his senior year in high
school in 1981. He was born in Herkimer, New York, and moved
to the Miami area when he was 7 years old. His next door 
neighbors were retired public school science teachers who ﬁrst
got him interested in hurricanes by showing him how to listen to
NOAA Weather Radio and plot the coordinates of hurricanes on
a tracking map. That eventually led to his work in independent
study on hurricanes and ﬁnally to a position with the Community
193

Laboratory Research Program of Miami-Dade Public Schools
working at the HRD.
He attended Pennsylvania State University to earn his bach-
elor of science (1985) and master of science (1987) degrees and
continued working at the HRD during school breaks. Upon grad-
uation, he returned to the HRD as a full-time meteorologist to
work on hurricane track forecasting with dynamical models. His
work improved dynamical track forecast models based on simpli-
ﬁed mathematics of the atmosphere known as barotropic equa-
tions. This led to early research into prediction of the forecast
errors of models, predictability of tracks, probabilistic forecasting,
ensemble forecasting (see chapter 2 for an explanation of this tech-
nique), and techniques to target regions where observations will
most improve track forecasts. He then attended the University of
Maryland at College Park to achieve his doctorate in meteorology
in 2003 while continuing research on track forecasts.
Aberson’s current research involves collaborations with sci-
entists at the National Taiwanese University and Taiwanese Cen-
tral Weather Bureau on targeting regions for improved typhoon
forecasts and with scientists at the University of Munich and the
Canadian Hurricane Centre on improvements to forecasts of trop-
ical cyclones undergoing extratropical transition. He was coau-
thor of a paper on targeted observations in 1996 that won the
Environmental Research Laboratories Outstanding Scientiﬁc
Paper Award, was part of a team awarded a Department of Com-
merce Gold Medal, and was named NOAA Research Employee of
the year in 2003.
Richard Anthes (1944–)
Richard A. Anthes, president of the University Corporation for
Atmospheric Research (UCAR) since September 1988, is a highly
regarded atmospheric scientist, author, educator, and administra-
tor who has contributed considerable research to weather model-
ing, thunderstorms, and hurricanes. Anthes was born March 9,
1944, in St. Louis, Missouri. Growing up in Waynesboro, Virginia,
he knew as a very young child that he wanted to be a meteorologist.
While attending the University of Wisconsin-Madison to
earn his bachelor’s degree, Anthes pursued his interest in meteor-
ology by working as a student trainee for the U.S. Weather Bureau
194
Biographical Sketches

at the (NOAA) during the summers of 1962 through 1967. During
this period, he discovered that an area of particular interest to him
was hurricanes. His theses for his masters and doctorate degrees,
obtained in 1967 and 1970, respectively, from the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, reﬂected this interest. In particular, Anthes’
doctorate work resulted in the ﬁrst three-dimensional computer
simulation of a hurricane. During 1968–1971, he was also a
research meteorologist at NOAA’s National Hurricane Research
Laboratory.
In 1971, Anthes started teaching and conducting research at
Pennsylvania State University, where he attained a full professor-
ship in 1978. During this period, he also was a visiting research
professor at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Califor-
nia. Anthes’ research group studied a variety of weather issues
related to hurricanes and thunderstorms. He frequently pub-
lished papers on hurricanes, including one book titled Tropical
Cyclones: Their Evolution, Structure, and Effects.
Since hurricanes and thunderstorms contain small-scale 
features requiring high-resolution and more complicated equa-
tions, Anthes modiﬁed the weather model he used for his doctor-
ate to incorporate the proper physics for studying them. Research
and development of this model has continued ever since, and 
several universities and government laboratories are continu-
ously improving the model. Today this model, known as the
Fifth-Generation NCAR/Penn State Mesoscale Model (MM5), is a
state-of-the-art public domain model available from the Univer-
sity Corporation for Atmospheric Research. MM5 has been used
by hundreds of graduate students and scientists for conducting
modeling research and weather forecasts.
The National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) wel-
comed Anthes in 1981 when he became the director of NCAR’s
Atmospheric Analysis and Prediction Division. In 1986 Anthes
was selected to become the director of NCAR, and in 1988 he was
selected to become the president of the University Corporation
for Atmospheric Research (UCAR). UCAR is a nonproﬁt consor-
tium of sixty-one member universities that awards doctorates in
atmospheric and related sciences. UCAR manages NCAR in addi-
tion to collaborating with many international meteorological
institutions through a variety of programs.
Anthes was elected as an American Meteorological Society
(AMS) fellow in 1979. In 1980, he was the winner of the AMS’s
Biographical Sketches
195

Clarence L. Meisinger Award as a young, promising atmospheric
scientist who had shown outstanding ability in research and mod-
eling of tropical cyclones and mesoscale meteorology. In 1987, he
received the AMS’s Jule G. Charney Award for his sustained con-
tributions in theoretical and modeling studies related to tropical
and mesoscale meteorology.
Anthes has participated in or chaired more than thirty dif-
ferent national committees (for agencies such as NASA, NOAA,
AMS, NSF, the National Research Council, and the National
Academy of Sciences), including his present chairmanship on the
National Weather Service Modernization Committee. Anthes has
published more than ninety peer-reviewed articles and books.
One book in particular, Meteorology (7th ed., 1996) is widely used
at colleges and universities as a general introductory book to the
ﬁeld of meteorology for nonmeteorological majors.
Isaac Cline (1861–1955)
Isaac Cline is known for being the Weather Bureau’s meteorolo-
gist in charge at Galveston Island during the Galveston Hurricane
of 1900, which killed 6,000 people. He was also a distinguished
forecaster and proliﬁc author. Isaac Monroe Cline was born in
1861 and entered the U.S. Army Signal Corps in 1882. At that time,
he entered the weather service school at Fort Myer, Virginia. Some
of his instructors were distinguished physicists, such as William
Ferrel, T. C. Mendenhal, and Cleveland Abbe. Upon completing
school, Cline was assigned to ofﬁces in Little Rock, Arkansas. In
his spare time, Cline attended the University of Arkansas medical
school so that he could study how climate affected health; he
graduated in 1885. Cline next served posts at Fort Concho, Texas
(near San Angelo), and Abilene, Texas. In 1889, Cline was
assigned as chief meteorologist of the Galveston, Texas, Weather
Bureau ofﬁce. Cline turned this ofﬁce, which had failed an inspec-
tion prior to his arrival, into a showpiece for the Weather Bureau
and received rave reviews at the next inspection.
Unfortunately, in July 1891, Cline wrote an article for the
Galveston News stating that Texas was “exempt” from intense hur-
ricane landfalls and that any landfalls would be from weak hurri-
canes. He reasoned that since no intense hurricanes had made
landfall in recent history on Galveston, strong hurricanes must
196
Biographical Sketches

recurve before reaching Galveston. In fact, two deadly hurricanes
had hit Indianola 120 miles to the south in 1875 and 1886, but he
unknowingly or deliberately labeled these as weak storms and
did not mention the fatalities. He also wrote that “it would be
impossible for any cyclone to create a storm wave which could
materially injure the city.” Cline theorized that “the shallow slope
of the seabed off Galveston would wear down incoming seas
before they struck the city” (in fact, the opposite is true) and that
the storm surge would spread ﬁrst over the lowlands surround-
ing Galveston. It is unclear how this article impacted his judg-
ment of the Galveston Hurricane or that of the general public nine
years later, but it possibly may have contributed to some facets of
the disaster.
On September 5, 1900, a tropical system passed over Cuba
and developed into a hurricane in the eastern Gulf of Mexico. The
Weather Bureau in Washington, D.C., had mistakenly concluded
that this system instead was east of the Florida Keys and would be
moving into the Atlantic. Tragically, Cuban meteorologists had
telegraphed a statement concluding that a hurricane had formed
in the Gulf, but for political and competitive reasons the Weather
Bureau banned all Cuban weather telegraphs. After the disaster,
Weather Bureau chief William Moore released a statement falsely
claiming that his agency had warned Galveston a hurricane was
coming, and unfortunately many journalists accepted Moore’s
statement. In fact, no hurricane warning was ever issued from
Washington, D.C., to Galveston.
Cline’s role in warning the local public preceding the hurri-
cane is controversial. On September 8, 1900, Cline observed
increasing ocean swells, stronger winds, and minor ﬂooding, and
he relayed these observations to Washington, D.C., every two
hours. By the afternoon, with the water level at several feet and
winds increasing rapidly, Cline undoubtedly became concerned.
By 2:30, Isaac had his brother Joseph (who also worked for the
Weather Bureau) telegraph Washington, D.C., with the statement,
“Gulf rising, water covers streets of about half of the city.” Both
brothers then waded home to Isaac’s house. This was the last 
message out of Galveston. It is not known how much interaction
Cline had with the public between telegraphs to Washington,
D.C. In his autobiography, Cline claims that he hitched up his
horse and cart and traveled up and down the beach, telling home-
owners to move to higher ground and vacationers to go home.
Biographical Sketches
197

However, no survivor remembers seeing Cline on the beach or
even receiving a warning. Cline’s autobiography also says that he
told the Weather Bureau “of the terrible situation, and stated that
the city was fast going under water, that great loss of life must
result, and stressed the need for relief.” However, no Weather
Bureau documents state anything about a hurricane. In fact, Cline
may have not even known it was a hurricane or thought a hurri-
cane was a serious threat until it was too late. One of his Wash-
ington, D.C., statements claims that the inclement weather may be
an “offspur” of a Florida storm.
By late afternoon, the full fury of the hurricane hit. That
evening Cline’s house, already pummeled by the still-increasing
storm surge, started to ﬂoat. When his house rolled, he brieﬂy lost
consciousness but recovered and found all his family except his
pregnant wife, who had been ill in bed. Cline drifted for several
hours on one sinking piece of debris after another. With him were
his three daughters, his brother Joseph, and a little girl Joseph had
pulled from the water. Finally, they came to rest on wreckage that
turned out to be right back in their own neighborhood. One
month later the body of Cline’s wife was found under that very
wreckage.
Despite his personal grief, Cline later wrote a technical paper
for Monthly Weather Review on the Galveston Hurricane titled “Spe-
cial Report on the Galveston Hurricane of September 8, 1900.”
Cline was promoted to chief of the Forecast Center for the
Gulf States, located in New Orleans, and moved from Galveston
with his three daughters in 1901. The tragedy motivated Cline to
conduct research on hurricanes, particularly on the storm surge.
Cline noted that water rising above tide levels was a precursor to
hurricane landfall. This research paid off in 1915 when a hurri-
cane was in the Gulf of Mexico. Water levels continued to rise rap-
idly in Burrwood, Louisiana, while receding in Galveston, so
Cline concluded a landfall just west of the Mississippi River was
imminent. Cline’s ofﬁce issued warnings by telegraph, telephone,
and special messenger, resulting in mass evacuations. A category
4 hurricane made landfall later that afternoon, passing directly
over New Orleans (see chapter 4). Many lives were saved, and the
New Orleans newspaper The Times Picayune wrote the next day,
“Never before, perhaps in the history of the Weather Bureau, have
such general warnings been disseminated as were sent out by the
local bureau.” In this respect, Cline issued one of the ﬁrst National
198
Biographical Sketches

Weather Service local-impact statements. (It should be noted that
relying on the storm surge as the sole determinant for landfall
prediction is only effective for small storms moving slowly in a
straight path, such as the 1915 New Orleans hurricane). Cline also
distinguished himself in 1927 during the great Mississippi Valley
ﬂood, and for this he later received a special commendation from
President Herbert Hoover.
Cline was the author of a multitude of meteorological
papers and books, of which the most noteworthy was his book
Tropical Cyclones, published in 1926 and the most authoritative
book in the United States on hurricanes at that time. It contains
considerable original work on hurricane rainfall, tides, and
waves, with the focus on Gulf of Mexico storms. Another note-
worthy book is Storms, Floods, and Sunshine, which contains two
parts. The ﬁrst part is his memoirs, and the second part describes
the characteristics of hurricanes.
Cline spent his later years in the New Orleans Weather
Bureau. In 1935 he retired and opened a small art shop in the city’s
French Quarter. Isaac Cline died in 1955 at the age of 95.
Mark DeMaria (1955–)
Mark DeMaria was born September 30, 1955, in Middleburg, Penn-
sylvania, although he spent most of his early life in Miami, Florida.
He developed an interest in hurricanes at a young age after wit-
nessing Hurricanes Cleo, Betsy, and Inez during 1964–1966. He
obtained a bachelor of science degree in meteorology from Florida
State University in 1977 and a master of science and doctorate
degrees in atmospheric science in 1979 and 1983, respectively, from
Colorado State University. He developed a hurricane model under
the direction of Dr. Wayne Schubert for his doctorate research. After
short periods of employment at the National Center for Atmos-
pheric Research (NCAR) and North Carolina State University,
DeMaria returned to Miami in 1987 to work at the Hurricane
Research Division (HRD). In 1995, he left the research community
to become the chief of the technical support branch at the Tropical
Prediction Center/National Hurricane Center in Miami.
The primary emphasis of DeMaria’s work is on the develop-
ment of techniques for hurricane track and intensity forecasting.
His early research focused on track forecasting, and he won the
Biographical Sketches
199

Banner Miller Award from the American Meteorological Society
(AMS) in 1985 and again in 1987 for studies on barotropic vortex
motion. As part of his work at the HRD, DeMaria implemented an
experimental hurricane track forecast model (VICBAR) using a
nested spectral method developed by Dr. K. V. Ooyama. The
VICBAR model was also used in the ﬁrst study to demonstrate sta-
tistically signiﬁcant track forecast improvements for cases that
included experimental dropwindsonde data collected in the vicin-
ity of hurricanes with the NOAA WP-3D aircraft; both VICBAR
and dropsondes are now used operationally. In collaboration with
John Kaplan of the HRD, DeMaria developed a Statistical Hurri-
cane Intensity Prediction Scheme (SHIPS) for the Atlantic basin. In
1996, SHIPS became part of the routine forecast guidance run in
real time at the NHC. After the 1996 hurricane season, SHIPS was
reformulated to more accurately evaluate the forecast predictors.
Since that time, SHIPS is the only model that has demonstrated
statistically signiﬁcant intensity forecast skill for Atlantic storms.
Also with John Kaplan, DeMaria developed an empirical model
for predicting the inland decay of hurricane winds. In cooperation
with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), results
from this algorithm were distributed to many emergency manage-
ment agencies in the southeastern United States for planning pur-
poses. DeMaria (with John Kaplan) received an NOAA Bronze
Medal in 1997 and the AMS Banner Miller Award in 2002 for this
work on intensity forecasting.
In late 1998, DeMaria returned to Colorado to become the
leader of the NESDIS Regional And Mesoscale Meteorology
(RAMM) Branch at Colorado State University. He is continuing
his research on hurricane forecasting, with emphasis on the use 
of remote sensing data. His current work is focused on further
improving the SHIPS model by incorporating storm inner core
and subsurface ocean information obtained from geostationary
satellite observations and satellite ocean altimetry data. He is also
actively involved in research to optimize the use of future opera-
tional polar-orbiting and geostationary satellites for hurricane
and severe weather analysis and prediction. DeMaria has pub-
lished more than forty refereed articles and book chapters on hur-
ricanes and tropical meteorology, and in 1995 he was invited to
contribute a review article on the history of hurricane forecasting
to a special Diamond Anniversary volume of the American Mete-
orological Society. In 2003, he was invited (with James Gross from
200
Biographical Sketches

the NHC) to a write a review article on the history of Atlantic hur-
ricane forecast models for a special American Geophysical Union
book on hurricanes edited by Robert Simpson.
Gordon Dunn (1905–1994)
Gordon Dunn was a weather enthusiast with an innate ability to
synthesize observations and forecast weather and hurricanes
accurately. Dunn was born on August 9, 1905, in Brownsville, Ver-
mont. He developed a fascination with the weather as a young
boy, and as a teenager he would hitch rides to the Weather Bureau
ofﬁce 18 miles away to study weather charts and discuss weather
events with the station’s sole employee. Dunn applied this knowl-
edge to practical weather problems on his father’s dairy farm.
Dunn accepted a job as a messenger with the Weather
Bureau in Providence, Rhode Island, in 1924, where he took sur-
face observations, carried messages to the Western Union ofﬁce,
and drew the weather map for the morning paper. He transferred
to the Weather Bureau in Tampa, Florida, with a promotion to jun-
ior observer two months later. In 1926 he requested relocation to
an area where he could complete his college education and trans-
ferred to the Weather Bureau’s Central Ofﬁce in Washington, D.C.
In this location, he attended George Washington University to
pursue an associate bachelor’s degree in political science, which
he completed in 1932. However, he also took courses in meteorol-
ogy at other universities whenever possible, such as Florida State
University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the
University of Chicago. In 1931, he was promoted to a meteorolo-
gist in the Washington Weather Bureau.
In 1935 Congress appropriates $80,000 to revamp the
Weather Bureau’s hurricane warning service. Four new hurricane
forecast centers were established, including one in Jacksonville,
Florida. Grady Norton (see biography in this chapter) was trans-
ferred to Jacksonville as the senior forecaster, and Dunn was
transferred there as the junior forecaster. Dunn and Norton faced
the challenge of forecasting several devastating and deadly hurri-
canes, including the Labor Day Hurricane (1935) and the New
England Hurricane (1938) (see chapter 4). During this period,
Dunn noticed areas of rising and falling pressure that progressed
westward every three to four days in the Atlantic Ocean with an
Biographical Sketches
201

inverted, wavelike pressure signal; he also noticed that some of
these systems became hurricanes. In 1940 Dunn published a
paper showing that most Atlantic tropical storms and hurricanes
form from these disturbances, called tropical waves (also called
easterly waves), not due to cold fronts, which was the popular
theory at that time. This was also the ﬁrst paper documenting and
describing tropical waves.
In 1939, Dunn was transferred to Chicago, where he soon
became the meteorologist in charge, a position he held until 1955.
Dunn developed close ties between the Weather Bureau and the
well-respected University of Chicago meteorology program and
is credited for improving working relationships between forecast-
ers and professors. During World War II, Dunn was assigned to
Calcutta, India, where he assisted the military in weather fore-
casts in the China-Burma-India region. The military awarded
Dunn the Medal of Freedom for his outstanding weather analyses
and forecasts.
In 1955 the Miami Weather Bureau ofﬁce was ofﬁcially desig-
nated the National Hurricane Center. Dunn was named the ﬁrst
ofﬁcial NHC director, although many, including Dunn, recognized
the well-respected Grady Norton, who died in 1954 at home after
performing forecast duties during Hurricane Hazel, as the hon-
orary ﬁrst director. Dunn continued to work there until his retire-
ment in 1968. During this period, Dunn originated procedures for
improving public awareness of the hurricane threat and improved
international cooperation, including training and upgrading of
meteorological services throughout the Caribbean.
Dunn received many awards for his efforts as the NHC
director. The Department of Commerce awarded him its Gold
Medal in 1959. In 1966, the University of Miami awarded Dunn an
honorary doctorate of science. The American Meteorological Soci-
ety named him an honorary member in 1992. Dunn coauthored
the 1960 book Atlantic Hurricanes with Banner Miller.
Dunn died in south Miami on September 12, 1994.
Russell Elsberry (1941–)
Russell Elsberry grew up in Colorado and attended Colorado
State University, where he earned a bachelor of science degree in
mechanical engineering in 1963. During his undergraduate stud-
ies, he worked as a computational assistant for Herbert Riehl (see
202
Biographical Sketches

biography in this chapter) performing tasks related to meteorol-
ogy. He decided that studying hurricanes was more exciting than
mechanical engineering and pursued a doctorate with Riehl as an
advisor. Upon completing his doctorate in 1968, Elsberry became
an assistant professor in the Department of Meteorology at the
Naval Postgraduate School, where he has remained. Elsberry was
promoted to associate professor in 1972 and to professor in 1979
and was awarded distinguished professor status in 1994.
Elsberry has remained very active in hurricane research
using observational and numerical modeling approaches, par-
ticularly with regard to understanding hurricane motion. His
research group has studied how hurricane circulation’s interac-
tion with the environment affects the motion. The researchers
have also developed a systematic approach for forecasting hurri-
cane motion that is being extended from the western North Paciﬁc
to other hurricane basins. Elsberry was technical director of the
Ofﬁce of Naval Research Tropical Cyclone Motion Project, which
coordinated a ﬁeld program called the Tropical Cyclone Motion
(TCM-90) Experiment over the western North Paciﬁc in August
and September 1990. TCM-90’s objectives were to test several
hypotheses regarding hurricane motion, with a focus on environ-
mental interactions. This was followed by the Tropical Cyclone
Motion (TCM-92 and TCM-93) miniﬁeld experiments in July and
August 1992 and 1993. The primary objective of TCM-92 and
TCM-93 was to obtain simultaneous aircraft measurements into
typhoons and nearby cloud complexes. The objectives were also
to test hypotheses regarding how these nearby cloud clusters may
cause typhoons to deviate from their track and how tropical
cyclogenesis may occur from the cloud complexes.
Elsberry was editor of two books that provided an interna-
tional overview on tropical cyclones: AGlobal View of Tropical Cyclones
(published in 1987 by the University of Chicago Press) and Global
Perspectives on Tropical Cyclones (published in 1995 by the World
Meteorological Organization). Elsberry has published numerous
papers on hurricanes and is a fellow of the American Meteorologi-
cal Society. He has served as the Hurricane Landfall Science Coor-
dinator for the U.S. Weather Research program since 1998. The
hurricane landfall program has included cooperative ﬁeld experi-
ment activities during 1998 and 2001 by NASA and the NOAA
Hurricane Research Division that resulted in extensive data sets. In
addition, the Ofﬁce of Naval Research Coupled Boundary Layer
Air-Sea Transfer ﬁeld experiments have collected unique atmos-
Biographical Sketches
203

pheric and oceanic measurements in category 4 and 5 hurricanes.
Elsberry has also been a leader in the USWRP-sponsored Joint
Hurricane Testbed that has as its objective rapidly and efﬁciently
moving transfer research results to operational practice.
Elsberry has participated actively in all ﬁve International
Workshops on Tropical Cyclones (IWTC) sponsored by the World
Meteorological Organization to bring together forecasters and
researchers to review progress over the past four years and plan
for the future. He served as director of the Fifth IWTC in Cairns,
Australia, during 2002.
Neil Frank (1931–)
Neil Frank is credited with improving public awareness on hurri-
cane preparedness. He attended Southwestern College in Kansas,
where he played on the basketball team for four years. Encour-
aged by his coach to pursue a degree in the sciences, Frank earned
a bachelor of science degree in chemistry with intentions of being
a science and physical education teacher. After college, Frank
joined the U.S. Air Force and served in Okinawa, Japan, where he
became fascinated by the typhoons that frequently impacted that
region. As a result, he pursued graduate studies in tropical mete-
orology at Florida State University, where he earned master of sci-
ence and doctorate degrees in meteorology. In 1961, Frank began
work at the NHC as a forecaster and in 1974 became its director. In
1987, Frank left government employment for his current position
as chief meteorologist at KHOU-TV in Houston, Texas.
Frank’s interest in public awareness began in 1965 while
investigating Hurricane Betsy’s storm surge in Miami. While sur-
veying a damaged area, a muddy survivor of the storm surge
angrily asked Frank why no one at the NHC had informed her
that she would have been safe across the street where the surge
ended. Based on this experience, Frank emphasized hurricane
preparedness during his tenure as NHC director, frequently giv-
ing slide show presentations to coastal audiences, presenting
background hurricane brieﬁngs to the press, and effectively using
the news media as a means to disseminate information when a
hurricane threatened the United States. Frank was one of the ﬁrst
to employ storm surge models to graphically demonstrate possi-
ble hurricane landfall scenarios. He also encouraged upgrades to
local community hurricane preparedness plans, because most
204
Biographical Sketches

civil defense plans still focused on Cold War plans for a nuclear
attack. He served as chairman of an International Hurricane Com-
mittee that coordinated hurricane warning procedures for North
American countries.
Frank is married with three grown children. He has pub-
lished in journals, been quoted in popular magazines, and won
ﬁrst place in the 1989 Texas Associated Press Awards for Best
Weathercast.
William M. Gray (1929–)
William M. Gray is probably the best-known hurricane scientist
among the general public today, frequently being quoted by
media sources throughout the country. Gray was born October 9,
1929, in Detroit, Michigan. Afﬂicted with a stuttering problem, he
struggled in school but excelled at sports. Hours after graduating
from high school in Washington, D.C., Gray left for Florida to join
the Washington Senators training camp but didn’t make the team.
Instead, he pitched in college while pursuing a degree in geogra-
phy at Wilson Teachers College (1948–1950) and George Washing-
ton University (1950–1953). He hurt his knee at the university, so
instead of pursuing a sports career after earning his degree, he
joined the U.S. Air Force, which utilized his scientiﬁc background
as a weather forecaster from 1954 to 1957 in the Azores Islands
and England. Gray then attended the University of Chicago to
study meteorology under the mentorship of the famous tropical
weather scientist Dr. Herbert Riehl (see biography in this chapter),
where he earned a master of science degree in 1959 and a doctor-
ate in 1964. However, much of the PhD work was actually com-
pleted as a faculty member at Colorado State University, where
Riehl started a new meteorology program in 1961 and invited
Gray along. During graduate school, Gray developed a passion
for hurricane research.
From 1961 to 1983, Gray developed a reputation as one 
of the premier hurricane researchers in the world. He formulated
the general conditions for genesis to occur and developed detailed
data sets of hurricane structure by compositing observations from
data-sparse regions and reconnaissance ﬂights. In 1983 Gray dis-
covered that fewer Atlantic hurricanes occur during El Niño years.
However, while he was well-respected among his peers, he was
relatively unknown to the general public during this period.
Biographical Sketches
205

In 1984, Gray announced a scheme for forecasting the number
of tropical storms and hurricanes in the Atlantic. He also boldly
made this forecast available to the general public. The forecasts ini-
tially generated skepticism from scientists and nonscientists alike.
However, with each year the forecasts showed skill, making Gray a
household name among coastal residents. Gray’s success is consid-
ered one of the most inﬂuential works in the ﬁeld of seasonal pre-
dictions, in which a forecaster predicts below-average, average, or
above-average weather conditions months in advance; the weather
conditions may be temperature, rainfall, hurricane activity, etc.
Gray’s seasonal hurricane forecasts are based on the relationship
between hurricane activity and factors such as El Niño, African
rainfall, sea-surface temperature, and Caribbean surface pressure,
as described in chapter 2. These forecasts are initially issued in
December and updated in April, June, and August of each year.
These predictions are widely distributed by the press and are avail-
able at http://tropical.atmos.colostate.edu.
Gray has served on or chaired more than twenty important
committees and panels and is author or coauthor of eighty-three
reviewed publications. He has served as a visiting scientist in
many countries such as Japan, China, and England. Among the
awards he has received are the Jule G. Charney Award (1993) and
the Neil Frank Award of the National Hurricane Conference
(1995). He was the ABC television Person of the Week in Septem-
ber 1995 after accurately predicting a very active Atlantic hurri-
cane season. He was an invited lecturer to the Twelfth WMO
Congress, Geneva, in June 1995, an honorary award given to sen-
ior scientists in recognition of lifetime research achievements.
Gray has graduated several dozen students with a master’s of sci-
ence or PhD, many of whom have also enjoyed successful mete-
orology careers. Gray is a fellow of the American Meteorological
Society.
Greg Holland (1948–)
Greg Holland is an Australian meteorologist who has studied
many aspects of tropical meteorology and hurricanes with a
unique Southern Hemisphere perspective. Holland was born
August 15, 1948, in Sydney and grew up on a farm. He obtained a
bachelor of science in physics with ﬁrst-class honors in mathe-
matics and a minor in mathematics from the University of New
South Wales in 1972. He joined the Australian Bureau of Meteo-
206
Biographical Sketches

rology as a cadet while still at the university and also received a
diploma of meteorology from the Central Training School in the
Bureau of Meteorology in 1972. From 1973 to 1975, Holland was a
forecaster for the Darwin Tropical Analysis and Regional Fore-
casting Centre. He was on forecast duty when Tropical Cyclone
Tracy wreaked havoc on the town. From 1975 to 1977, he lectured
at the Central Training School in the Bureau of Meteorology in
Melbourne, Victoria. From 1978 to 1984, the Bureau of Meteorol-
ogy sent Holland to Colorado State University, where he obtained
a master’s of science in 1981 and a PhD in 1983 with William Gray
(see biography in this chapter) as his advisor. Holland remained
at the Bureau of Meteorology after graduation under a variety of
titles. He was also an honorary associate of the faculty at Monash
University and an honorary professor at the University of New
South Wales, under which he advised several doctoral students.
The concept of ﬂying unmanned robotic aircraft (Aero-
sonde) into hurricanes drew Holland into the private sector,
where he led the development and commercialization of these air-
craft, ﬁrst as a research director and later as CEO of the company.
Holland returned to meteorology research in 2004 as director of
the Mesoscale and Microscale Meteorology Division at NCAR, his
current position.
Holland has participated in numerous hurricane research
activities during his career. He has studied mechanisms for their
formation, intensiﬁcation, and motion. He has participated and
even been lead investigator in many major ﬁeld experiments. For
twelve years, Holland served as the chairman of the Tropical
Meteorology Research Program, and he is active on a variety of
other WMO committees related to weather in the tropics. Holland
is a fellow of the American Meteorological Society.
His publications include major contributions to six text-
books and forecast manuals, and he is the chief editor of the
WMO manual Global Guide to Tropical Cyclone Forecasting. He has
published more than eighty research papers on hurricanes, mon-
soons, the sea breeze, severe thunderstorms, and the Aerosonde.
Yoshio Kurihara (1930–)
Yoshio Kurihara has been a leader in theoretical and operational
hurricane modeling since 1980. He was born on October 24, 1930,
in Japan. Kurihara obtained a bachelor of arts degree at the Uni-
versity of Tokyo in 1953 and a PhD at the University of Tokyo in
Biographical Sketches
207

1962. He worked at the Japan Meteorological Agency in Tokyo
from 1953 to 1959, at the Meteorological Research Institute in
Tokyo from 1959 to 1963, at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Lab-
oratory (GFDL) from 1963 to 1965, and again at the Meteorologi-
cal Research Institute from 1965 to 1967. In 1967, Kurihara
returned to GFDL, where he remained until his retirement in 1998.
Kurihara then returned to Japan, where he is conducting hurri-
cane research at the Frontier Research System for Global Change
in Tokyo.
Kurihara was the group leader of the hurricane research
project at GFDL that was initiated in 1970. His group developed
one of the ﬁrst three-dimensional models of hurricanes and has
conducted a number of numerical simulation studies in order to
understand the basic mechanism of hurricane evolution. Many of
these early studies dealt with spiral band structure and hurricane
landfall. While this model was originally developed for pure
research, tests from 1986 to 1992 showed that their model was
adept at operational track forecasts. The GFDL was tested semi-
operationally in 1993. Unlike several other models, the GFDL
model correctly predicted that Hurricane Emily would take a
sharp turn from North Carolina’s Outer Banks and just graze the
area. The GFDL model has ofﬁcially been used as a hurricane fore-
cast model since 1995 and generally has the smallest track errors
compared to other model guidance. A similar model is used by
the U.S. Navy in the western Paciﬁc. 
Kurihara has received the following awards during his
career: the Meteorological Society of Japan Society Award in 1975,
the Distinguished Authorship Award from NOAA in 1983, the
Banner Miller Award from the American Meteorological Society
in 1984 and in 1997, the Environmental Research Laboratories
Distinguished Authorship Award from NOAA in 1992, the
Department of Commerce Gold Medal Award in 1993, the Meteo-
rological Society of Japan Fujiwara Award in 1994, and the Jule G.
Charney Award from the American Meteorological Society in
1996. Kurihara has been a fellow of the American Meteorological
Society since 1980.
Chris Landsea (1965–)
Chris Landsea was born February 2, 1965, in Urbana, Illinois, but
considers himself a native of south Florida, where he developed
208
Biographical Sketches

an interest in the hurricanes that are always a threat to that region.
He ﬁrst participated in hurricane research as a high school intern
at NOAA’s Hurricane Research Division (HRD), then attended
the University of California in Los Angeles where he earned a
bachelor of science degree in atmospheric science in 1987. He then
studied under the mentorship of Dr. William Gray (see biography
in this chapter) and obtained a master’s of science and PhD in
atmospheric science in 1991 and 1994, respectively. He then spent
seven months as a visiting scientist at the Australian Bureau of
Meteorology Research Centre in Melbourne and Macquarie Uni-
versity in Sydney to study the monsoon environment of hurri-
canes in that region. He is currently employed as a research
meteorologist at HRD.
Landsea’s hurricane research determined the connection
between African rainfall and Atlantic hurricane activity. He noted
that the occurrence of major hurricanes (category 3 or better)
increases during rainy years in Africa. He also noted that the U.S.
East Coast had experienced a downturn in major hurricane land-
fall during the 1970s to early 1990s at the same time that Africa
experienced a drought. Both the major hurricane and African
rainfall variations have been explicitly linked to the Atlantic Mul-
tidecadal Mode (AMM), a natural ﬂuctuation of the Atlantic
Ocean. The AMM switched to a favorable warm phase in the late
1990s, and along with it have come more intense hurricanes and
increased African rainfall. Such conditions are hypothesized to
last another two to three decades. Landsea has also been a coau-
thor of Gray’s and NOAA’s annual hurricane seasonal forecasts.
His most recent research has been toward a reanalysis of the
Atlantic basin hurricane database, which is utilized in meteorol-
ogy, emergency risk assessment, insurance rates, building codes,
and climate change and variability studies.
Landsea is the corecipient of the American Meteorological
Society’s Banner I. Miller Award along with William M. Gray,
Paul W. Mielke Jr., and Kenneth J. Berry for the paper “Predicting
Atlantic Seasonal Hurricane Activity 6–11 Months in Advance” at
the May 1993 meeting of the 20th Conference on Hurricanes and
Tropical Meteorology. The award was given for the “best contri-
bution to the science of hurricane and tropical weather forecasting
published during the years 1990–1992.” Landsea is also the recip-
ient of the American Meteorological Society’s Max A. Eaton Prize
for the Best Student Paper given at the 19th Conference on Hurri-
canes and Tropical Meteorology in May 1991. He is on the
Biographical Sketches
209

1997–2000 AMS committee for Hurricanes and Tropical Meteorol-
ogy and is an associate editor for the AMS journal Weather and
Forecasting.
Landsea served as the chair of the AMS Committee on Trop-
ical Meteorology and Tropical Cyclones for the years 2000–2002.
In 2000, Landsea was a corecipient of a U.S. Department of Com-
merce Bronze Medal “for issuing the accurate and ﬁrst ofﬁcial
physically based Atlantic seasonal hurricane outlooks for the
1998/1999 seasons, based upon new research.” In 2002, Landsea
was given the AMS Editor’s Award for reviews for Weather and
Forecasting. He currently is serving on the Editorial Board for the
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society as the subject matter
editor in tropical meteorology. The media frequently interviews
Landsea about hurricanes.
Frank Marks (1951–)
Frank Marks became interested in meteorology at 13 years old
through the inﬂuence of his neighbor, a science teacher at the local
high school who was also an amateur meteorologist and ran a
weather club as part of his science class. During the next ﬁve years
Marks learned how to take weather observations, plot and ana-
lyze the observations on a map, analyze the observations, and
make forecasts of the local weather by posting them and reading
them with the high school morning announcements. He obtained
an undergraduate degree in meteorology at Belknap College in
New Hampshire in 1973, followed by graduate studies at the Mass-
achusetts Institute of Technology, where he received a master of sci-
ence in 1975 and a doctorate in 1980. While a graduate student he
participated in the Global Atmospheric Research Program Atlantic
Tropical Experiment (see chapter 4), spending 100 days in Dakar,
Senegal, during the summer of 1974, and six weeks in Borneo for the
Winter Monsoon Experiment (WMONEX) during the winter of
1978–1979. These two experiences were invaluable in setting his
future path as a research meteorologist, because Marks experienced
how scientists design and execute experiments in the ﬁeld. In addi-
tion, these scientists became mentors and one (Dr. Robert Burpee)
eventually offered him a job at NOAA’s Hurricane Research Divi-
sion (HRD).
Marks specializes in radar remote sensing (ground-based,
airborne, and satellite) of hurricanes and tropical disturbances in
order to understand their wind, temperature, moisture, and pre-
210
Biographical Sketches

cipitation structure. He has ﬂown in more than 160 research
reconnaissance missions and has participated in ﬁeld experiments
throughout the world. He is the recipient of several honors,
including an award for best wireless application for development
of satellite-cell based WLAN for NOAA WP-3D aircraft in 2002,
the U.S. Department of Commerce Silver Medal for performance
as the Research Mission Manager for the NOAA High Altitude Jet
procurement in 1997, the U.S. Department of Commerce Gold
Medal for HRD’s Performance in Hurricane Andrew in 1992
(group award), and a Distinguished Authorship Award from
NOAA in 1989. He is the lead author or coauthor on numerous
journal publications and is a fellow of the American Meteorologi-
cal Society. He is currently the director of HRD.
Charles Neumann (1925–)
Charles Neumann participated in some of the earliest typhoon
reconnaissance ﬂights and is the primary developer of statistical
hurricane track forecasts still being used today. Neumann was
born in 1925 in New York City, New York. Participating in a World
War II extension of the Naval ROTC program, he spent his fresh-
man year at Holy Cross College in 1943, then transferred to the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology where he earned a bache-
lor of science in meteorology in 1946. Upon graduation, he volun-
teered as a U.S. Naval ﬂight meteorologist for the ﬁrst organized
typhoon reconnaissance missions in the western North Paciﬁc
and served in that capacity in 1946 and 1947. Upon discharge
from the navy in 1947, he entered graduate school at the Univer-
sity of Chicago, where he earned a master of science degree in
meteorology in 1949. From 1950 to 1952, Neumann was a civilian
research meteorologist at the Air Weather Service Scientiﬁc Ser-
vices Directorate in Washington, D.C. In 1952, he resumed his
navy career, having been recalled to active duty during the
Korean War, and again served as a ﬂight meteorologist—this time
on Atlantic hurricanes. After one such ﬂight in September 1953,
which terminated at a Caribbean Island, he contracted polio and
retired from the navy in 1954.
After two years of partial recovery from that illness, Neu-
mann became involved in operational forecasting, serving as chief
forecaster at Homestead Air Force Base (1956–1962) and aviation
forecaster in Miami (1962–1966). During 1966–1971, he was a
meteorologist with the NOAA Spaceﬂight Meteorology Group,
Biographical Sketches
211

which was collocated with the National Hurricane Center, and
provided forecasts for the Gemini and Apollo programs. In 1971,
he joined a newly formed National Hurricane Center Research
and Development Unit and became its chief in 1976, a position he
held until his NOAA retirement in 1987. Since 1987, Neumann has
been semiretired but works part-time as a senior scientist for Sci-
ence Applications International Corporation (SAIC) providing
hurricane risk information to military and insurance interests. He
is currently working as a team member in revising the Atlantic
hurricane historical database and will apply this data to a revised
hurricane risk model for the Atlantic.
Neumann is the developer of numerous global statistical
and statistical-dynamical models for the prediction of hurricane
motion and intensity. These models include the Atlantic NHC 72,
NHC 73, and NHC 90; SHIFOR; CLIPER; Eastern Paciﬁc PE90;
and many versions of these models for other ocean basins. Many
of these models are still being used today at various worldwide
forecast centers, including the National Hurricane Center. Neu-
mann has also developed statistical models for the assessment of
hurricane risk and hurricane strike probability.
Neumann has authored more than 100 papers, mainly on
hurricanes, and is the recipient of several awards. In 1971 he
shared the Department of Commerce Silver Medal with fellow
forecaster John Hope for “highly competent skill and ingenuity in
developing objective techniques for use in hurricane predictions.”
He is the recipient of the 1977 American Meteorological Society’s
Banner I. Miller Award for “best published paper in tropical mete-
orology,” and NOAA awarded NHC’s Research and Develop-
ment organization a citation for the “development of objective
hurricane forecast aids in the eastern Paciﬁc Ocean.” In 1983, he
was awarded the AMS Award for Outstanding Contributions to
Applied Meteorology. In 1986 Neumann received the Department
of Commerce Gold Medal for “exceptional scientiﬁc achievement
in statistical/dynamical track prediction modeling.” Neumann is
a fellow of the American Meteorological Society and has been a
member of that organization for more than ﬁfty years.
Grady Norton (1894–1954)
Grady Norton was an extraordinary hurricane forecaster in an era
before computers and satellite provided weather guidance, and
212
Biographical Sketches

he was blessed with the ability to communicate with coastal resi-
dents during hurricane threats. The son of a farmer, Norton was
born in 1894 in Womack Hill, Alabama, and became fascinated
with severe weather as a young boy. He entered the Weather
Bureau in 1915 and was drafted into the army near the end of
World War I. He served ten months with the Signal Corps in
1918–1919 and attended a Signal Corps’ meteorology program at
Texas A&M University.
Upon completing his military service, Norton returned to
the Weather Bureau and worked at several different weather
ofﬁces in the south-central United States, where he developed a
reputation for having a knack at making good forecasts. Norton
originally did not specialize in hurricane forecasting, but in 1928
he visited some relatives in south Florida in late summer and hap-
pened to drive into West Palm Beach during a mass funeral for the
2,500 victims of the Lake Okeechobee hurricane. Norton over-
heard a remark that such loss of life would not have occurred had
adequate warnings been issued by the weather service. Although
the comment was not entirely true, this event made a lasting
impression on Norton, and he resolved to dedicate his life to the
prevention of such tragedies.
In 1935, Congress appropriated funding for four hurricane
forecast centers, one of which was established in Jacksonville,
Florida. Norton was transferred there and named the chief hurri-
cane forecaster at the Jacksonville ofﬁce. A few months later the
Labor Day Hurricane hit the Florida Keys, killing 409 people even
though Norton had issued warnings more than twelve hours in
advance. This renewed Norton’s resolve to make accurate fore-
casts and to better communicate warnings to the public. Fortu-
nately, in the 1940s the number of upper-air observations from
radiosondes increased dramatically, and Norton studied the rela-
tionship between hurricane tracks and upper-air wind observa-
tions provided by the radiosondes. He noted that hurricanes tend
to follow upper-air winds and developed the concept of steering
current. Norton applied this concept with some intuition, and
short-term track predictions improved as a result during the next
ten years, reducing the number of fatalities.
Norton also effectively communicated warnings to the pub-
lic. Whenever a hurricane threatened the state, he transmitted hur-
ricane information to more than twenty Florida radio stations in a
strong, clear, calm, and folksy manner, sometimes for two days
without rest. As a result, he became the most trusted hurricane
Biographical Sketches
213

forecaster in the region. Norton was also an active public aware-
ness advocate, giving many after-dinner talks on hurricane prepa-
ration. He also worked with government ofﬁcials and engineers
to improve building codes.
Due to minimal human resources at the busy Jacksonville
ofﬁce, in 1943 this forecast center was moved to Miami to estab-
lish a joint hurricane warning service with the U.S. Air Corps and
the U.S. Navy. Norton continued as the meteorologist in charge
during this transition. In 1949, he received the Department of
Commerce Silver Medal in recognition of his outstanding hurri-
cane work.
Norton suffered from high blood pressure, which resulted in
severe migraine headaches in the last decade of his life. However,
he kept working against his doctor’s advice, partly because the
general public wanted to know his personal predictions. After a
twelve-hour stint forecasting for Hurricane Hazel on October 9,
1954, Norton suffered a stroke at home and passed away later that
day. In 1955, the Miami ofﬁce was ofﬁcially designated as the
National Hurricane Center (NHC), with Norton’s understudy,
junior forecaster Gordon Dunn, named as the ﬁrst director. How-
ever, most people, including Dunn, recognized Norton as the hon-
orary ﬁrst director of the NHC.
Katsuyuki V. Ooyama (1929–)
Katsuyuki V. Ooyama (often referred to as “Vic” by colleagues)
was born in Japan on March 5, 1929. He obtained a bachelor’s of
science in physics in 1951 at the University of Tokyo. From 1951 to
1955, he worked at the Japan Meteorological Agency as a fore-
caster. During 1955, he enrolled at New York University where he
earned a master’s of science and PhD under the mentorship of Dr.
A. K. Blackadar and Dr. B. Haurwitz to study atmospheric
processes near the earth’s surface. From 1958 to 1962, he partici-
pated in remote sensing of the ozone layer. From 1962 to 1973 he
was a faculty member at New York University, and from 1973 to
1979 he was a senior research scientist at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research. Since 1980, he has been a senior research
scientist at NOAA’s Hurricane Research Division, developing a
three-dimensional weather model.
In 1969, Ooyama was the ﬁrst scientist to realistically dupli-
cate the basic two-dimensional features of a hurricane using a
214
Biographical Sketches

computer model, which he described in the landmark paper
“Numerical Simulation of the Life Cycle of Tropical Cyclones.” In
the same paper, Ooyama also performed the ﬁrst multiscale per-
turbation analysis to explain how tropical genesis can occur based
on the growth of small disturbances. This analysis launched a
decade of theoretical research on tropical genesis and hurricane
development based on similar mathematical theories. Ooyama is
the recipient of the Meisinger Award (1968), the Fujiwhara Award
(1971), and several Distinguished Authorship awards from the
Environmental Research Laboratory of NOAA.
Henry Piddington (1797–1858)
Henry Piddington was the ﬁrst person to coin the word “cyclone”
for rotary storms (from the Greek words kyklon and kyklos mean-
ing “moving in a circle, whirling around” and also “coiling of the
snake”). He was also a proliﬁc writer about these weather sys-
tems. Born in Uckﬁeld, East Sussex, England, Piddington began
his career in the mercantile marines, eventually becoming a ship
commander in the British East India Company. In the late 1820s,
Piddington became the curator of the Calcutta Museum, and dur-
ing the next two decades he wrote articles for the Journal of the Asi-
atic Society on iron ore, minerals, plants, and soil chemistry. While
in Calcutta, Piddington also became the president of the Marine
Court and held the positions of ofﬁciating secretary, assistant sec-
retary, and curator of the Geological Department of the Asiatic
Society of Calcutta.
In the mid-1840s, Piddington became interested in rotary
storms after reading William Reid’s (see biography in this chap-
ter) book Law of Storms. Recalling past experiences with such
storms, especially one that shipwrecked Piddington’s vessel from
which he narrowly escaped death, Piddington began collecting as
many ship logs as possible that involved cyclones. Based on this
data, Piddington published twenty-ﬁve memoirs and a variety of
books and journal articles. His most famous book has the mind-
boggling title The Sailor’s Horn-book for the Law of Storms: Being 
a Practical Exposition of the Theory of the Law of Storms, and Its Uses
to Mariners of All Classes in All Parts of the World, Shown by Trans-
parent Cards and Useful Lessons. This book, typically called The
Sailor’s Horn Book, taught mariners how to navigate around the
circulation of a hurricane; it describes how the barometer changes
Biographical Sketches
215

as a storm approaches and also describes typical storm tracks
throughout the world. This book identiﬁes the storm’s right side
as the “dangerous” semicircle (because the storm’s translation
speed is the same direction as the circulation, causing faster
winds) and the left side as a “safe” semicircle (where the storm
motion is opposite of the circulation). Mariners utilize these rules
even today.
Piddington also performed research on ocean waves and the
storm surge. He studied storm surges in India and warned
against a port being built south of Calcutta, which was con-
structed anyway. Three years later, the port was destroyed by a
hurricane.
Piddington went blind in 1855 and died in 1858.
William Redﬁeld (1789–1857)
William Redﬁeld made the ﬁrst comprehensive analysis of the
cyclonic rotation of hurricanes. Redﬁeld was born on March 26,
1789, and after his seafarer father’s death he apprenticed as a sad-
dle and harness maker in 1803. He completed his apprenticeship in
1810, and after some traveling in Ohio he made saddles and ran a
store in Connecticut for a decade. Stimulated by an encounter with
Fulton’s steamboat during the Ohio trip, in 1822 Redﬁeld began a
career as a marine engineer and transportation promoter with a
steamboat on the Connecticut River. He moved to New York in
1824 after the steamboat operations expanded to the Hudson
River. In 1829, Redﬁeld served as the superintendent of the steam-
boat company, in which he promoted a towboat operation for
barges. He was also involved in railroad promotion and planning.
Redﬁeld was a self-taught scientist with an insightful and
remarkable organizational ability. While traveling around Con-
necticut after a strong hurricane in September 1821, he noted that
trees and corn in some areas were pointing toward the northwest,
while those a few miles away were pointing to the southeast. He
hypothesized that storms (and not just hurricanes) have a coun-
terclockwise rotation, which he conﬁrmed ten years later when
two more storms hit the New York area. A chance meeting with
Professor Denison Olmsted of Yale, who thereafter constantly
urged Redﬁeld to print his theories, led Redﬁeld to publish an
article in the American Journal of Science in 1831 that concluded:
“This storm exhibited in the form of a great whirlwind.” This
216
Biographical Sketches

paper brought Redﬁeld instant recognition, and sea captains pro-
vided Redﬁeld with ship logs from which he published updated
theories on storm rotation for the next twenty-ﬁve years in British
and American journals. These later theories, explaining the source
of rotation and storm development, were sometimes incorrect or
incomplete and were the source of many lively discussions
among scientists. However, Redﬁeld correctly noted the follow-
ing observations about cyclones and hurricanes:
1. That winds do not rotate in horizontal circles but spiral
inward toward the center.
2. That cyclones rotate counterclockwise in the Northern
Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere,
with wind speeds increasing toward the center.
3. That cyclones move at a variable rate.
4. That hurricanes generally form deep in the tropics and
travel west-northwest with the tropical trade wind ﬂow,
eventually turning back to the east as they propagate
away from the tropics.
5. That hurricane size is large, frequently with a diameter
greater than 1,000 miles.
6. That pressure decreases with increasing rapidity near the
center of a hurricane.
Stimulated by his son’s paper on fossil ﬁsh in 1836, Redﬁeld
also developed an interest in paleontology, publishing seven
papers on the subject between 1838 and 1856 that established him
as America’s ﬁrst specialist on fossil ﬁsh. He transformed the
Association of American Geologists and Naturalists into the
American Association for the Advancement of Science and was its
ﬁrst president in 1848. Yale University awarded Redﬁeld an hon-
orary degree in 1839; his name is commemorated by one genus
and several species of ﬁsh and by Mount Redﬁeld in the Adiron-
dacks.
Redﬁeld died on February 12, 1857.
William Reid (1791–1858)
William Reid was one of the ﬁrst researchers on hurricanes and
the author of a key book on the subject titled the Law of Storms.
Born in Kinglassie, Reid was educated at the Royal Military 
Biographical Sketches
217

Academy at Woolwich, England. He entered the British army as
an engineer in 1809, participated in many military engagements,
and survived several conﬂict-induced injuries (including one
diagnosed as fatal). His life is characterized by a lifetime of public
service and scientiﬁc achievement.
After the wars, Reid was appointed major of engineers to
restore government buildings after a hurricane hit Barbados in
1831. Upon seeing the destruction, Reid sought additional infor-
mation about previous hurricanes in hopes of understanding
them better. He collected detailed information about a number of
hurricanes while in Barbados, corresponded with William Red-
ﬁeld (see biography in this chapter), and developed theories on
the circulation and movement of hurricanes. He spent the next
few years writing papers about hurricanes and three editions of
his book The Law of Storms. This book contained rules for mariners
on how to avoid the most dangerous quadrants of hurricanes.
During 1838, Reid was appointed governor of Bermuda, and
in this position he aspired to improve the country’s agriculture,
education, and general welfare. In 1847 he established the ﬁrst hur-
ricane warning display system when the barometer indicated the
approach of a hurricane. He returned to England in 1848 after the
government refused to support the removal of a judge who
oppressed the people. In 1849 he was appointed commanding
engineer at Woolwich and was appointed governor of Malta in
1851 during the Russian war, in which he was promoted to general.
In 1851 he also received the Order of Knighthood from the queen.
Reid died on October 31, 1858.
Lewis Fry Richardson (1881–1953)
Lewis Fry Richardson, a British mathematician and meteorolo-
gist, was born on October 11, 1881, in Newcastle. He was edu-
cated at Durham College and at Cambridge University, from
which he graduated in 1903. In 1913 he became superintendent of
the meteorological observatory at Eskdalemuir, Scotland. From
1920 to 1929 he was head of the physics department at Westmin-
ster Training College. He then became the principal of Paisley
Technical College, Scotland, where he remained until his retire-
ment in 1940.
In 1922 Richardson published the classic book Weather Pre-
diction by Numerical Procedures, which described how meteorolog-
218
Biographical Sketches

ical equations can be approximated to forecast the weather and
also described the ﬁrst attempt at numerical forecasting. This
effort was very laborious since there were no electronic calcula-
tors or computers then, requiring many tedious hand calculations
and a large support staff. In fact, Richardson estimated that an
operational numerical forecast for 2,000 locations would require
64,000 people just to carry out the calculations! Richardson
attempted a six-hour pressure forecast for just one location, and
unfortunately it produced a grossly inaccurate prediction of 145
mb. It is now known that this failure was due to an improper
approximation method and incorrect formulation of the equa-
tions. This forecast failure, along with the incredible amounts of
labor involved, discouraged further numerical modeling efforts
for decades until computers were invented.
Nevertheless, Richardson’s attempt at applying mathemat-
ics to weather forecasting was truly visionary. As computer speed
increased, and as understanding of the atmosphere and its gov-
erning equations improved, computer forecasts improved dra-
matically, eventually becoming the most important tool for
hurricane forecasts (and weather forecasts in general). Richardson
was also the ﬁrst to envision a roomful of people performing
mathematical calculations to predict the weather. Today, the staff
at the National Centers for Environmental Prediction performs
such a task on supercomputers.
Richardson worked on other aspects of meteorology, includ-
ing turbulence studies in which a fractional value called the
Richardson number, using wind and temperature values, is
named after him. Richardson also attempted to apply a mathe-
matical framework to the causes of war, publishing several papers
on the subject.
Richardson died on September 30, 1953, at Kilmun, Scotland.
Herbert Riehl (1915–1997)
Widely regarded as the father of tropical meteorology, Herbert
Riehl was born in Munich, Germany, on March 30, 1915. He immi-
grated to the United States in 1933 and became a citizen in 1939. In
1942, he received master’s degree in meteorology from New York
University and taught in the Department of Meteorology at the
University of Washington. When the U.S. Army Air Corps (Air
Force) and the University of Chicago established the Institute of
Biographical Sketches
219

Tropical Meteorology on the campus of the University of Puerto
Rico in 1943 to provide weather research in equatorial regions,
Riehl was a member of the team. He served as director of the Insti-
tute in 1945–1946. He earned a PhD from the University of
Chicago in 1947 and remained on staff there until 1960, when he
moved to Fort Collins, Colorado, and established the Department
of Atmospheric Science at Colorado State University. He served as
department head until 1968 and as a professor until 1972. Even
after Riehl left, Colorado State University continued its reputation
as a premier research institute on tropical meteorology.
In 1972, Riehl accepted the post of director of the Institute of
Meteorology and Geophysics at the Free University of Berlin. In
1976, he moved to Boulder to join the staffs of the National Center
for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) and Co-operative Institute for
Research in Environmental Sciences (CIRES), a joint laboratory of
the federal government and the University of Colorado, as senior
scientist. He held those posts until 1989. After retirement, Dr.
Riehl remained active in tropical meteorology research as a con-
sultant in both North and South America. One of his passions was
mountain climbing. He climbed many mountains in Colorado
and the United States and major peaks throughout the world,
including Kilamanjaro and Mont Blanc.
Riehl profoundly inﬂuenced tropical meteorology with land-
mark papers and books on hurricane genesis, motion, intensiﬁca-
tion, wind shear interaction, and energetics. During his career he
received many honors, including the AMS Meisinger Award in
1948, the Losey Award of the American Institute for Aeronautics
and Astronautics in 1962, and the Carl-Gustav Rossby Research
Medal in 1979. In May 1997, Riehl’s contributions to tropical mete-
orology were honored at the 22nd Conference on Hurricanes and
Tropical Meteorology of the American Meteorological Society.
Riehl died on June 1, 1997.
Carl-Gustav Arvid Rossby (1898–1957)
Carl-Gustav Rossby was born on December 28, 1898, in Stock-
holm and educated at the University of Stockholm. In 1919 he
joined the Geophysical Institute at Bergen, Norway, one of the
world’s main centers for meteorological research at that time, as
an apprentice forecaster on Vilhelm Bjerknes’ team. In 1922, he
220
Biographical Sketches

joined the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute
(SMHI), where he established a pilot balloon network and served
as bench forecaster with four other meteorologists, analyzing
maps and issuing nationwide forecasts that were read over the
newly established radio network. He also served two summers as
forecaster on a sailing ship, gave lectures to the crew, and took
pilot balloon observations.
In 1926, the Swedish-American Foundation and SMHI spon-
sored Rossby to study dynamics and meteorology in the United
States. Because the Weather Bureau’s observation network was
superior to Europe’s, Rossby decided to stay in the United States.
Rossby originally worked in Washington, D.C., performing
research, pioneering aviation forecasting techniques, and teach-
ing the Bergeron methods of forecasting. Rossby then was
employed by the Scandinavian-American Foundation to develop
an aviation forecast system for a ﬂight between San Francisco and
Los Angeles; this system was later transitioned to the Weather
Bureau. He then joined academia, ﬁrst as a professor at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, then to found a meteorology
program at the University of Chicago. He returned to Sweden in
1948 and founded the Institute of Meteorology.
Rossby was one of the most eminent meteorologists of the
twentieth century. Although he never actually performed any
hurricane research, his inﬂuence was so encompassing in meteor-
ology that his accomplishments must at least be mentioned. He
had an aptitude for theoretical research but often focused on prac-
tical applications of his work. He made major contributions to our
understanding of air masses and air movements. In the late 1930s
Rossby simpliﬁed the equations that Richardson attempted to
solve by noting that certain terms could be neglected for large-
scale weather. From these simpliﬁed equations, he also derived an
expression for large undulations in the upper atmosphere, now
known as Rossby waves. Because Rossby’s research laid the foun-
dation for many future scientiﬁc advances in weather, he is
known as the Father of Modern Meteorology.
Rossby wave motion is linked to the north-south variation of
planetary vorticity and the upper atmosphere’s westerly winds.
Vorticity is the rate an imaginary paddle wheel placed in ﬂuid
would rotate due to curved ﬂow or horizontally sheared ﬂow.
Because the earth’s rotation varies with latitude, planetary vorticity
varies poleward. Wave motion also depends on wavelength, with
Biographical Sketches
221

shorter waves propagating faster to the east than long waves.
Very long waves will actually move backwards against the west-
erly ﬂow, called retrograding. Because a hierarchy of wavelengths
exists in any situation, atmospheric ﬂow evolution can become
complicated.
Other types of Rossby waves exist, such as in hurricanes.
Due to their curved ﬂow and rapid variation in wind speed away
from the storm center, storm vorticity varies radially. The result is
a special class of Rossby waves known as vortex Rossby waves.
Recent research shows that hurricane spiral bands are explained
by the properties of vortex Rossby waves.
Rossby died on August 19, 1957, in Stockholm, Sweden.
Joanne Simpson (1923–)
Joanne Simpson was the ﬁrst woman meteorologist to earn a PhD
and has made many contributions to cloud physics and hurri-
canes. The daughter of an editor of the Boston Herald who re-
ported on aviation as a hobby, Simpson was fascinated by ﬂying
and earned her student pilot’s license at age 16. Since ﬂying is
weather-dependent, Simpson subsequently developed an interest
in meteorology. She earned a bachelor of science degree in mete-
orology in 1943 at the University of Chicago. She then taught
meteorology to aviation cadets and military forecasters while she
pursued her master of science degree, which she completed in
1945. Unable to obtain a fellowship for a PhD in an era when
women were strongly discouraged from such aspirations, Simp-
son became a physics and meteorology instructor at the Illinois
Institute of Technology. Because faculty could take classes for free,
she took many of her graduate courses there after taking the min-
imum required at the University of Chicago. In 1947, Herbert
Riehl lectured on aircraft observations of wind ﬂow and cloud
structure in the tropics. Fascinated by this new ﬁeld of tropical
meteorology, Simpson ended up completing her PhD work in
1949 at the University of Chicago with Riehl as her advisor.
Riehl and Simpson wrote several landmark papers about
hurricane structure, hurricane energetics, the thermodynamic
structure of the tropics, and key concepts regarding the role of the
tropical general circulation. Simpson left Illinois Tech in 1951 to
become a research meteorologist at the Woods Hole Oceano-
graphic Institute to learn more about weather over the ocean.
222
Biographical Sketches

During this period, she constructed some of the ﬁrst mathematical
models of clouds based on buoyancy-driven motion (a novel idea
at the time) and ﬂew into clouds to validate her computations. In
1954 she won a Guggenheim fellowship to work in England, and
in 1955 she was an honorary lecturer at the Imperial College in
London.
In 1960, Simpson served as a professor at UCLA. In 1962, she
wrote a chapter in volume 1 of the landmark book The Sea. This
book presented the most comprehensive treatment to date of the
coupling between the ocean and the atmosphere. Simpson’s chap-
ter dealt with the complexity of how large- and small-scale atmos-
pheric features interact, and in particular how difﬁcult it would be
to explicitly compute the individual contributions of small-scale
clouds and turbulence on large-scale weather patterns. This was a
factor leading to the concept of parameterization, in which the net
effect of nonmeasurable small-scale weather features is computed
in terms of large-scale (measurable) weather variables. Simpson
also showed that much energy in the InterTropical Convergence
Zone is transferred through narrow clouds with strong updrafts,
the so-called hot tower concept.
After ﬁve major hurricanes made landfall on the eastern
United States in 1954 and 1955, Congress established the National
Hurricane Research Project and named Simpson as an advisor.
There she met the ﬁrst director of the project, Robert Simpson (see
next section), whom she married in 1965. From 1965 to 1974, she
was director of NOAA’s Experimental Meteorology Laboratory in
Coral Gables, Florida, and participated in attempts to modify
clouds and hurricanes using cloud-seeding techniques (see chap-
ter 2 about Project STORMFURY). In 1974, she again accepted a
professorship, this time at the University of Virginia. In 1979 she
went to the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center as head of the
Severe Storm Branch; she has remained at Goddard ever since.
She served as the project scientist for the Tropical Rainfall Mea-
suring Mission from 1986 until launch in 1997 and is now chief
scientist for meteorology. Simpson has published 150 reviewed
papers, been on many scientiﬁc committees, and been an editor
on several journals. She has won numerous awards for her
achievements, including the Los Angeles Times Woman of the Year
in 1963; the American Meteorological Society’s Meisinger Award;
and the American Meteorological Society’s highest honor, the
Carl-Gustav Rossby Research Medal. She is a former president of
the American Meteorological Society.
Biographical Sketches
223

Robert Simpson (1912–)
Robert Simpson’s experience with hurricanes began when he was
a 6-year-old boy in Corpus Christi, Texas, when a category 4 hur-
ricane hit the region in 1919 (see chapter 4). Simpson’s family,
with Robert hanging on his father’s back, swam through the rap-
idly rising water three blocks to the only high building down-
town, the courthouse, for shelter, where they then watched the
hurricane decimate Corpus Christi. However, initially Simpson’s
career was not in science, but music and architecture. He served
as an apprentice architect until the Great Depression, when he lost
his job. He then attended Southwestern University at Georgetown
as ﬁrst chair in its orchestra but ended up earning a degree in
physics and mathematics. Afterward, he embarked on graduate
studies at Emory University and earned a masters in physics, but
he was unable to obtain employment and instead became a music
director in the Corpus Christi school system. However, he wanted
to apply his science education, so he took Civil Service exams to
qualify for government work and was offered a job with the
Weather Bureau in Brownsville. To advance in the Weather
Bureau, he became a weather observer in Swan Island and even-
tually earned employment at the New Orleans ofﬁce. To advance
further, Simpson took classes at an aviation cadet program
designed to create a pool of 10,000 forecasters in the early years of
World War II, then was sent to the Miami hurricane ofﬁce to be a
forecaster under Grady Norton. In 1945, Simpson taught classes
to the Air Force School of Tropical Meteorology in Panama.
Simpson’s experiences in Panama and Miami sparked his
interest in tropical meteorology and hurricanes. He started pub-
lishing papers, which led to a research assignment at the Weather
Bureau in Washington, D.C., in 1947. During 1945–1947, Simpson
also participated in the ﬁrst reconnaissance ﬂights into hurri-
canes. Based on a 1946 ﬂight, Simpson published a paper docu-
menting the vertical structure of the hurricane eye. He also
published several observational and theoretical papers on the eye
and eyewall thermodynamic properties. Simpson took part in
hundreds of ﬂights during his career.
To further his career advancement, Simpson accepted a
management position for the Weather Bureau ofﬁces in Hawaii.
He established the Mauna Loa summit laboratory to take ozone
measurements (used as a tracer) to study upper-level cyclones. A
few years later, through a chance encounter with a government
224
Biographical Sketches

astronomer while on vacation, Simpson was able to expand this
facility into the now-famous Mauna Loa Observatory by agreeing
to also measure carbon dioxide. These carbon dioxide measure-
ments today provide the most conclusive evidence on the increase
of this greenhouse gas. Simpson returned to Washington, D.C., in
1952, when several tornado incidents inspired him to establish the
ﬁrst national radar network.
After the East Coast was hit by a series of hurricanes (Carol,
Edna, and Hazel), Simpson convinced Congress to fund the
National Hurricane Research Program (now the Hurricane
Research Division), for which he became its ﬁrst director in 1955.
In 1959, Simpson went to the University of Chicago to ﬁnish his
PhD, which had been interrupted by World War II. His advisor,
Herbert Riehl (see biography in this chapter), obtained permis-
sion from the U.S. Navy to accompany a ﬂight through Hurricane
Donna in 1960. Riehl noticed during this ﬂight that the jet experi-
enced icing, and the idea that perhaps a hurricane’s structure and
development could be modiﬁed with artiﬁcial ice nuclei was
born. This ultimately culminated in the hurricane modiﬁcation
program known as Project STORMFURY (see chapter 2), in which
Simpson was the chief proponent and ﬁrst director.
In 1960, Simpson was assigned as deputy director in the
Washington, D.C., ofﬁce. The accuracy of plane data was question-
able and required more research. Therefore, Simpson approved
the establishment of the National Severe Storms Laboratory in
Norman, Oklahoma, for radar development and aircraft pro-
grams. Today, this laboratory is a leading research organization
on severe weather.
In 1968, Simpson became director of the National Hurricane
Center (NHC), where he remained until 1973. Simpson estab-
lished a small research and development unit at the NHC that
developed many forecast applications. Simpson created the hurri-
cane specialist position, which has forecast responsibilities during
the hurricane season and research and public service in the
remainder of the year. As NHC director, Simpson collaborated
with a consulting engineer (Herbert Safﬁr) to devise a scale to
quantify hurricane damage based on ﬁve intensity categories,
known as the Safﬁr-Simpson Hurricane Scale. In 1974, Simpson
founded Simpson Weather Associates, where he continued con-
tract work on matters related to hurricanes. In 1981, he coau-
thored with Herbert Riehl the important book The Hurricane and
Its Impact (see chapter 6).
Biographical Sketches
225

Simpson’s career ambitions unfortunately led to his ﬁrst
marriage ending in 1948. However, he later married researcher
Joanne Malkus (now Joanne Simpson). His marriage with Joanne
Simpson “has meant more to me both professionally and person-
ally than any other factor in my life,” says Simpson.
Chris Velden (1956–)
Chris Velden has been a leader in the development of satellite
applications to meteorology, with the primary focus on hurricane
forecasting. Velden received his bachelor’s of science in 1979 from
the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point in natural science with
a minor in physics. This was followed by a master’s of science in
meteorology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1982
dealing with satellite images of hurricanes in the microwave spec-
trum. For much of his career afterward he has remained at the
University of Wisconsin to continue pursuing satellite research,
except for a visiting scientist position at the Australian Bureau of
Meteorology in 1987–1988. Currently Velden is a physical science
senior researcher at the Cooperative Institute for Meteorological
Satellite Studies in the Space Science and Engineering Center
located at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Velden and his colleagues have developed and automated
cloud-drift wind data derived from satellites, which is invaluable
in data-sparse regions, particularly in tropical oceans. Cloud-drift
winds are computed by tracking individual cloud elements and
deducing their motion. These winds are used to identify steering
currents and to visualize atmospheric features that affect tropical
cyclone genesis and intensiﬁcation. This data is being assimilated
in computer models, resulting in improved weather forecasts and
hurricane track predictions. For this effort, Velden received an
award from the AMS in 1997. Velden and his team have also
developed an objective satellite-based scheme that estimates a
tropical cyclone’s intensity. This technique is now operational at
the National Hurricane Center and is supplementing the current
subjective satellite scheme known as the Dvorak technique. For
this work, Velden and his colleagues won the AMS Banner Miller
Award in 2000. His team at CIMSS is now focussing on a
microwave-based method to augment this objective method, with
promising results. Velden has participated in numerous meteoro-
logical ﬁeld experiments and has published more than sixty jour-
nal articles, approximately twenty as lead author.
226
Biographical Sketches

Benito Viñes (1837–1893)
In his day, Father Benito Viñes was the greatest authority on hur-
ricanes. Also known as the “Hurricane priest,” Viñes contributed
to both theory and forecasting techniques and laid the foundation
for today’s observational and hurricane warning network. Viñes
was born on September 19, 1837, in Poboleda, Spain. A fugitive
from revolutionary Spain with training in physics, Viñes came to
Cuba from France in 1870 to serve as director of the Magnetic and
Meteorological Observatory of the Royal College of Belen in
Havana, which had been established by Jesuit priests in 1857.
After arriving, Viñes investigated ways to help people prepare for
hurricanes by studying twelve years of records at the observatory,
old newspaper accounts, and eyewitness accounts. His documen-
tation was detailed and exhaustive, with hourly weather observa-
tions from 4 a.m. to 10 p.m. every day of pressure, temperature,
moisture, and cloud height. He also measured wind direction and
speed at the surface and inferred wind aloft from cloud motion.
After hurricane disasters, Viñes rummaged through debris and
questioned survivors, meticulously documenting everything.
Based on this work, Viñes was the ﬁrst to develop a method-
ology for locating a hurricane’s center based on cloud motion
aloft and sea swells. Implicit in this work was a remarkably accu-
rate deduction of a hurricane’s three-dimensional wind ﬂow.
Viñes was also the ﬁrst to forecast hurricane movement based on
the motion of high clouds that ﬂow out from the storm center. He
also developed a methodology for predicting when a hurricane
will recurve to the north and for predicting average storm motion
based on the latitude and time of year. This effort was augmented
through the development of an observational network consisting
of hundreds of observers along the Cuban coastline so that rou-
tine hurricane warnings could be issued. Routine forecasts began
in 1875, with a pony express system distributing observations and
forecasts between villages.
Viñes issued his ﬁrst printed forecast on September 11, 1875,
stating accurately that an intense hurricane would strike southern
Cuba two days later. Many lives were saved, and a legend was
born. Later that year he issued another successful forecast. On
September 14, 1876, Viñes warned of a dangerous hurricane off-
shore, and the captain of the ship Liberty ignored him, only to sail
directly into the path of the storm and sink. Viñes’s success gar-
nered funding and complimentary services. In 1877 he expanded
Biographical Sketches
227

his operation with more observation posts, supported by the
Havana Chamber of Commerce and several private companies.
Telegraph companies didn’t charge him, and railroads and
steamships provided free passage. The railroads even provided a
special express if immediate transportation was needed.
In September 1877 Viñes accurately predicted that a hurri-
cane would pass south of Puerto Rico but hit Santiago de Cuba.
The same year Viñes published his most famous work, Practical
Hints in Regard to West Indian Hurricanes, which quickly became
standard learning material for mariners. In 1888, Viñes developed
the Antilles cyclonoscope, similar to Henry Piddington’s horn
cards, designed to detect the center of a hurricane far away for
mariners.
The revered Father Viñes died on July 23, 1893, in Havana,
Cuba, three days after he mailed to the U.S. Weather Bureau
another exceptional technical report about the three-dimensional
wind ﬂow of hurricanes, titled “Cyclonic Circulation and the
Translatory Movement of West Indian Hurricanes.”
Hugh E. Willoughby (1945–)
Hugh Willoughby’s impact on hurricane research consists of an
interesting combination of high-level theory and observational
analysis. Willoughby obtained a bachelor’s of science in geophysics
geochemistry from the University of Arizona in 1967, followed by a
master’s of science in 1969 from the Naval Postgraduate School. As
a commissioned navy ofﬁcer, he served as a ﬂight meteorologist in
the Airborne Early Warning Squadron One from 1970 to 1971. From
1971 to 1974, Willoughby was a faculty member of the Naval Acad-
emy, where he taught meteorology, oceanography, geology, and
computer science to midshipmen. Willoughby left active duty as a
lieutenant to pursue a PhD in atmospheric science at the University
of Miami, which he earned in 1977.
While completing the PhD, Willoughby began working at
NOAA’s Hurricane Research Division (HRD) in 1975. He used the
data collected on the HRD reconnaissance ﬂights to study hurri-
cane structure and to formulate theoretical ideas. He ﬁrst ob-
served that hurricanes go through a natural (but temporary)
weakening process in which a new eyewall forms outside the
original eyewall. The outer eyewall chokes off inﬂow to the inner
eyewall, causing it to dissipate. The outer eyewall then propa-
228
Biographical Sketches

gates inward, replacing the original eyewall. This process, known
as the concentric eyewall cycle, lasts twelve to thirty-six hours and is
associated with temporary weakening of the hurricane. The ram-
iﬁcations of this result was that hurricanes experience internal
processes that inﬂuence intensiﬁcation and that any perceived
man-made changes to hurricanes in Project STORMFURY may
have been the result of natural internal evolution instead.
Willoughby has made more than 400 research and reconnais-
sance ﬂights into the eyes of typhoons and hurricanes in his career.
He has held the position of G. J. Haltiner visiting research chair at
the Naval Postgraduate School (January–July 1991); was a visiting
research scientist at the Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre in
Melbourne, Australia (June–July 1988); and was a visiting lecturer
at the Shanghai Typhoon Institute (December 1985). He has pub-
lished dozens of articles on hurricanes and is a fellow of the Amer-
ican Meteorological Society. He also has served as the director of
the Hurricane Research Division. He currently is a faculty member
at Florida International University in Miami, Florida.
Biographical Sketches
229


6
Data, Opinions, 
and Letters
T
his chapter provides data, opinions, and letters relevant to
hurricanes. Data is presented in a tabular format concerning
record events and annual ﬁgures since 1900. The opinion arti-
cles present topics including global warming and an attempt to
control hurricanes in Project STORMFURY. Letters from survivors
of hurricane landfalls in the 1700s and 1800s are included at the
end of the chapter. Updates of these tables will be available on
www.drﬁtz.net.
231

Data
232
Data, Opinions, and Letters
TABLE 6.1
The thirty deadliest land-falling tropical storms and hurricanes for the U.S. mainland, 1900–2004
Ranking
Hurricane
Year
Category
Deaths
1
Texas (Galveston)
1900
4
8,000*
2
Florida (Lake Okeechobee)
1928
4
2,500*
3
Florida (Keys)/South Texas
1919
4
600†
4
New England
1938
3‡
600
5
Florida (Keys)
1935
5
408
6
Audrey (Southwest Louisiana/North Texas)
1957
4
390
7
NE United States
1944
3‡
390§
8
Louisiana (Grand Isle)
1909
4
350
9
Louisiana (New Orleans)
1915
4
275
10
Texas (Galveston)
1915
4
275
11
Camille (Mississippi/Louisiana)
1969
5
256
12
Florida (Miami/Pensacola), Mississippi,
1926
4
243
Alabama
13
Diane (NE United States)
1955
1
184
14
Southeast Florida
1906
2
164
15
Mississippi/Alabama/Florida (Pensacola)
1906
3
134
16
Agnes (NE United States)
1972
1
122
17
Hazel (South Carolina/North Carolina)
1954
4‡
95
18
Betsy (Southeast Louisiana/
1965
3
75
Southeast Florida)
19
Carol (NE United States)
1954
3‡
60
20
Floyd (Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern U.S.)
1999
2
57
21
Southeast Florida/Louisiana/Mississippi
1947
4
51
22
Donna (Florida/Eastern U.S.)
1960
4
50
23
Georgia/South Carolina/North Carolina
1940
2
50
24
Carla (Texas)
1961
4
46
25
Allison Texas/ Louisiana/Mississippi/
2001
TS**
41
Alabama
26
Texas (Velasco)
1909
3
41
27
Texas (Freeport)
1932
4
40
28
South Texas
1933
3
40
29
Hilda (Louisiana)
1964
3
38
30
Southwest Louisiana
1918
3
34
Addendum: Pre-1900, California, and Caribbean Islands
"Chenier Caminada" (Louisiana)
1893
4
2,000
"Sea Islands" (South Carolina/Georgia)
1893
3
1,000–2,000
"Brunswick" (Georgia/South Carolina)
1881
2
700
San Felipe (Puerto Rico)
1928
4
312
U.S. Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico
1932
2
225
Donna (St. Thomas, Virgin Islands)
1960
4
107
Southern California
1939
TS††
45
Eloise (Puerto Rico)
1975
TS††
44
(continues)

Data, Opinions, and Letters
233
TABLE 6.1
(Continued)
Ranking
Hurricane
Year
Category
Deaths
Addendum: Most Deadly Hurricanes in the Western Hemisphere
The Great Hurricane (Martinique, 
1780
Unknown§§
22,000
St. Eustatius, Barbados) plus sinking 
of ships
Mitch (Central America, including Honduras
1998
1
11,000 to 
and Nicaragua)
18,000‡‡
Texas (Galveston)
1900
4
8,000*
Fiﬁ(Honduras)
1974
2
8,000
Dominican Republic
1930
4
8,000
Flora (Haiti, Cuba)
1963
4 in Haiti, 
7,200
3 in Cuba
Martinique (Point Petre Bay)
1776
Unknown
>6,000
*May actually been as high as 10,000 to 12,000.
†More than 500 of these lost on ships at sea; 600–900 estimated deaths.
‡Moving more than 30 miles an hour.
§Some 344 of these lost on ships at sea.
**TS = tropical storm.
††Only of tropical storm intensity.
‡‡Exact death toll count unknown at press time.
§§Unknown = intensity not sufﬁciently known to establish category.
Source: Hebert,  Jarrell, and Mayﬁeld (1997); updated based on Landsea (2005).

234
Data, Opinions, and Letters
TABLE 6.2
The thirty-six costliest land-falling hurricanes for the U.S. mainland for 1900–2004 
Ranking
Hurricane
Year
Category
Damage (U.S.)
1
Andre (SE Florida/SE Louisiana)
1992
5*
$26,500,000,000
2
Charley (SE Florida)
2004
4
$15,000,000,000
3
Ivan (Alabama, NW Florida)
2004
3
$14,200,000,000
4
Frances (SE Florida)
2004
2
$8,900,000,000
5
Hugo (South Carolina)
1989
4
$7,000,000,000
6
Jeanne (SE Florida)
2004
3
$6,900,000,000
7
Allison (Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi,
2001
TS†
$5,408,000,000
Alabama)
8
Floyd (Mid-Atlantic and
1999
2
$4,500,000,000
Northeastern U.S.)
9
Isabel (North Carolina, Virginia, 
2003
2
$3,370,000,000
New York, New Jersey, Maryland)
10
Fran (North Carolina)
1996
3
$3,200,000,000
11
Opal (NW Florida, Alabama)
1995
3
$3,000,000,000
12
Georges (Florida Keys, Mississippi,
1998
2
$2,310,000,000
Alabama)
13
Frederic (Alabama, Mississippi)
1979
3
$2,300,000,000
14
Agnes (Northeastern U.S.)
1972
1
$2,100,000,000
15
Alicia (N Texas)
1983
3
$2,000,000,000
16
Bob (North Carolina, Northeast U.S.)
1991
2
$1,500,000,000
17
Juan (Louisiana)
1985
1
$1,500,000,000
18
Camille (Mississippi, Alabama)
1969
5
$1,420,700,000
19
Betsy (Florida, Louisiana)
1965
3
$1,420,500,000
20
Elena (Mississippi, Alabama, NW Florida)
1985
3
$1,250,000,000
21
Gloria (Eastern U.S.)
1985
3‡
$900,000,000
22
Diane (Northeastern U.S.)
1955
1
$831,700,000
23
Bonnie (North Carolina, Virginia)
1998
2
$720,000,000
24
Erin (Central and NW Florida, SW Alabama)
1995
2
$700,000,000
25
Allison (N Texas)
1989
TS§
$500,000,000
26
Alberto (NW Florida, Georgia, Alabama)
1994
TS§
$500,000,000
27
Frances (Texas)
1998
TS§
$500,000,000
28
Eloise (NW Florida)
1975
3
$490,000,000
29
Carol (Northeastern U.S.)
1954
3§
$461,000,000
30
Celia (S Texas)
1970
3
$453,000,000
31
Carla (Texas)
1961
4
$408,000,000
32
Claudette (N Texas)
1979
TS§
$400,000,000
33
Gordon (S and Central Florida, 
1994
TS§
$400,000,000
North Carolina)
34
Donna (Florida, Eastern U.S.)
1960
4
$387,000,000
35
David (Florida, Eastern US)
1979
2
$320,000,000
36
New England
1938
3§
$306,000,000
Addendum: Non-Atlantic or non-Gulf Coast Systems
4
Georges (U.S. Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico)
1998
3
$3,600,000,000
10
Iniki (Kauai, Hawaii)
1992
Unknown**
$1,800,000,000
(continues)

Data, Opinions, and Letters
235
TABLE 6.2
(Continued)
Ranking
Hurricane
Year
Category
Damage (U.S.)
09
Marilyn (U.S. Virgin Islands/Eastern 
1995
2
$1,500,000,000
Puerto Rico)
09
Hugo (U.S. Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico)
1989
4
1,000,000,000
09
Hortense (Puerto Rico)
1996
4
$500,000,000
09
Olivia (California)
1982
TD††
$325,000,000
09
Iwa (Kauai, Hawaii)
1982
Unknown
$312,000,000
Costs are not adjusted for inﬂation, personal property increases, and population changes. Note that 2004 hurricanes
are only estimates at time of publication and could change.
*Reclassiﬁed as category 5 in 2002.
†TS = tropical storm.
‡Moving more than 30 miles an hour.
§Only of tropical storm intensity but included because of high damage.
**Unknown = intensity not sufﬁciently known to establish category.
††TD—Only a tropical depression.
Source: Hebert, Jarrell, and Mayﬁeld (1997); updated by author.

236
Data, Opinions, and Letters
TABLE 6.3
Costliest land-falling hurricanes of 1900–2004, adjusted to 2003 dollars by inﬂation, 
personal property increases, and coastal county population changes
Rank
Hurricane
Year
Category
Damage (U.S.)
1
SE Florida, Alabama
1926
4
$98,051,000,000
2
Andrew (SE Florida, Louisiana)
1992
5
$44,878,000,000
3
N Texas (Galveston)*
1900
4
$36,096,000,000
4
N Texas (Galveston)*
1915
4
$30,585,000,000
5
SW Florida
1944
3
$22,070,000,000
6
"New England" (New York, Rhode Island)
1938
3
$22,549,000,000
7
SE Florida, Lake Okeechobee
1928
4
$18,708,000,000
8
Betsy (SE Florida/Louisiana)
1965
3
$16,863,000,000
9
Donna (Florida, Eastern U.S.)
1960
4
$16,339,000,000
10
Charley (SE Florida)
2004
4
$15,000,000,000
11
Camille (Mississippi, Louisiana, Virginia)
1969
5
$14,870,000,000
12
Agnes (NW Florida, Northeastern U.S.)
1972
1
$14,515,000,000
13
Ivan (Alabama, NW Florida)
2004
3
$14,200,000,000
14
Diane (Northeastern U.S.)
1955
1
$13,875,000,000
15
Hugo (South Carolina)
1989
4
$12,718,000,000
16
Carol (Northeastern U.S.)
1954
3
$12,291,000,000
17
SE Florida, Louisiana, Alabama
1947
4
$11,266,000,000
18
Carla (N and Central Texas)
1961
4
$9,587,000,000
19
Hazel (South Carolina, North Carolina)
1954
4
$9,545,000,000
20
Frances (SE Florida)
2004
2
$8,900,000,000
21
Northeastern U.S.
1944
3
$8,763,000,000
22
SE Florida
1945
3
$8,561,000,000
23
Frederic (Alabama, Mississippi)
1979
3
$8,534,000,000
24
SE Florida
1949
3
$7,918,000,000
25
S Texas*
1919
4
$7,253,000,000
26
Jeanne (SE Florida)
2004
3
$6,900,000,000
27
Alicia (N Texas)
1983
3
$5,501,000,000
28
Allison (Texas/Louisiana/Mississippi/
2001
TS†
$5,408,000,000
Alabama)
29
Floyd (Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern U.S.)
1999
2
$5,264,000,000
30
Celia (S Texas)
1970
3
$4,526,000,000
31
Dora (NE Florida)
1964
2
$4,215,000,000
32
Fran (North Carolina)
1996
3
$4,201,000,000
33
Opal (NW Florida, Alabama)
1995
3
$4,068,000,000
34
Isabel (North Carolina, Virginia, New York, 
2003
2
$3,370,000,000
New Jersey, Maryland)
Costs for 2004 hurricanes are estimates only at time of publication and could change.
*Hurricanes included from years 1900–1924 using simplifying assumptions to extend the normalization methodology
to 1900.
†TS = tropical storm.
Source: Pielke and Landsea (1998); updated from Landsea (2005) and by author.

Data, Opinions, and Letters
237
TABLE 6.4
Distribution of top nine (of thirty) insured property 
catastrophe losses from 1970 to 2002 
Total insured loss 
Fraction of top
Hazard
(Billions of 2002 U.S. dollars)
30 largest losses
U.S. hurricane
44
0.31
U.S. earthquake
17
0.12
U.S. tornado
7
0.05
European wind
21
0.15
European ﬂood
7
0.05
Japanese typhoon
12
0.08
Japanese earthquake
3
0.02
Man-made
24
0.17
Caribbean hurricane
5
0.04
Note that $19 billion of the $24 billion in insured losses from man-made catastrophes were
caused by the September 11, 2001, attack on the World Trade Center. However, total
insured losses may exceed $40 billion when liability risks are included. Of U.S. hurricane
losses, $20 billion was due to Hurricane Andrew (1992). Note that tropical cyclones
(typhoon and hurricanes) account for 43 percent of the total losses worldwide.
Source: Murnane (2004).
TABLE 6.5
Median and mean losses by the three phases of the El
Niño cycle: La Niña, El Niño, and neither (neutral) 
Median ($ millions)
Mean ($ millions)
La Niña
3,292
5,887
Neutral
927
6,979
El Niño
152
2,056
This table shows that hurricane damage is strongly modulated by
the phase of El Niño, with increased losses during La Niña and
reduced losses during El Niño.
Source: Pielke  and Landsea (1999).

238
Data, Opinions, and Letters
TABLE 6.6
Major U.S. hurricanes at landfall during 1900–2004 
Category 
Pressure 
Ranking
Hurricane
Year
(at Landfall)
(Millibars)
1
Florida (Keys)
1935
5
892
2
Camille (Mississippi, SE Louisiana, Virginia)
1969
5
909
3
Andrew (SE Florida, SE Louisiana)
1992
5*
922
4
Florida (Keys), S Texas 
1919
4
927
5
Florida (Lake Okeechobee)
1928
4
929
6
Donna (Florida, Eastern U.S.)
1960
4
930
7
Texas (Galveston)
1900
4
931
7
Louisiana (Grand Isle)
1909
4
931
7
Louisiana (New Orleans)
1915
4
931
7
Carla (N and Central Texas)
1961
4
931
11
Hugo (South Carolina)
1989
4
934
12
Florida (Miami, Pensacola), Mississippi, Alabama
1926
4
935
13
Hazel (South Carolina, North Carolina)
1954
4†
938
14
SE Florida, SE Louisiana, Mississippi
1947
4
940
15
N Texas
1932
4
941
15
Charley (SW Florida)
2004
4
941
17
Gloria (Eastern U.S.)
1985
3†‡
942
17
Opal (NW Florida, Alabama)
1995
3‡
942
19
Audrey (SW Louisiana, N Texas)
1957
4§
945
19
Texas (Galveston)
1915
4§
945
19
Celia (S Texas)
1970
3
945
19
Allen (S Texas)
1980
3
945
23
New England
1938
3†
946
23
Frederic (Alabama, Mississippi)
1979
3
946
23
Ivan (Alabama, NW Florida)
2004
3
946
26
"Great Atlantic" (Northeastern U.S.)
1944
3†
947
26
South Carolina, North Carolina
1906
3
947
28
Betsy (SE Florida, SE Louisiana)
1965
3
948
28
SE Florida, NW Florida
1929
3
948
28
SE Florida
1933
3
948
28
S Texas
1916
3
948
28
Mississippi, Alabama
1916
3
948
33
Diane (North Carolina)
1955
3**
949
33
S Texas
1933
3
949
35
Beulah (S Texas)
1967
3
950
35
Hilda (Central Louisiana)
1964
3
950
35
Gracie (South Carolina)
1959
3
950
35
Central Texas
1942
3
950
35
Jeanne (SE Florida)
2004
3
950
40
SE Florida
1945
3
951
40
Bret (S Texas)
1999
3
951
42
Tampa Bay, Florida
1921
3
952
42
Carmen (Central Louisiana)
1974
3
952
44
Edna (New England)
1954
3†
954
(continues)

Data, Opinions, and Letters
239
TABLE 6.6
(Continued) 
Category 
Pressure 
Ranking
Hurricane
Year
(at Landfall)
(Millibars)
44
SE Florida
1949
3
954
44
Fran (North Carolina)
1996
3
954
47
Eloise (NW Florida)
1975
3
955
47
King (SE Florida)
1950
3
955
47
Central Louisiana
1926
3
955
47
SW Louisiana
1918
3
955
47
SW Florida
1910
3
955
52
North Carolina
1933
3
957
52
Florida Keys
1909
3
957
54
Easy (NW Florida)
1950
3
958
54
N Texas
1941
3
958
54
NW Florida
1917
3
958
54
N Texas
1909
3
958
54
Mississippi, Alabama
1906
3
958
59
Elena (Mississippi, Alabama, NW Florida)
1985
3
959
60
Carol (Northeastern U.S.)
1954
3†
960
60
Ione (North Carolina)
1955
3
960
60
Emily (North Carolina)
1993
3
960
63
Alicia (N Texas)
1983
3
962
63
Connie (North Carolina, Virginia)
1955
3
962
63
SW Florida, NE Florida
1944
3
962
63
Central Louisiana
1934
3
962
67
SW and NE Florida
1948
3
963
68
NW Florida
1936
3
964
Hurricanes may have had greater intensities at other times before landfall.
*Reclassiﬁed as category 5 in 2002.
†Moving more than 30 miles an hour.
‡Highest category justiﬁed by winds.
§Classiﬁed category 4 because of estimated winds.
**Cape Fear, North Carolina, area only; was a category 2 at ﬁnal landfall.
Source: Hebert,  Jarrell, and Mayﬁeld (1997); updated statistics from http://www.nhc.noaa.gov.

240
Data, Opinions, and Letters
TABLE 6.7
Estimated annual deaths and damages (1900–1995)
Unadjusted
Adjusted
Unadjusted
Adjusted 
Damage
Damage 
Damage
Damage
Year
Deaths
($ millions)
($ millions)
Year
Deaths
($ millions)
($ millions)
1900
8,000
$30
$790
1948
3
$18
$113
1901
10
$1
$26
1949
4
$59
$370
1902
0
Minor
Minor
1950
19
$36
$222
1903
15
$1
$26
1951
0
$2
$11
1904
5
$2
$53
1952
3
$3
$16
1905
0
Minor
Minor
1953
2
$6
$33
1906
298
$3
$79
1954
193
$756
$4,180
1907
0
$0
$0
1955
218
$985
$5,348
1908
0
$0
$0
1956
19
$27
$139
1909
406
$8
$211
1957
400
$152
$758
1910
30
$1
$26
1958
2
$11
$55
1911
17
$1
$26
1959
24
$23
$116
1912
1
Minor
Minor
1960
65
$396
$2,006
1913
5
$3
$79
1961
46
$414
$2,101
1914
0
$0
$0
1962
3
$2
$10
1915
550
$63
$1,660
1963
10
$12
$59
1916
107
$33
$723
1964
49
$515
$2,564
1917
5
Minor
Minor
1965
75
$1,445
$6,996
1918
34
$5
$71
1966
54
$15
$70
1919
287
$22
$278
1967
18
$200
$900
1920
2
$3
$30
1968
9
$10
$43
1921
6
$3
$38
1969
256
$1,421
$5,647
1922
0
$0
$0
1970
11
$454
$1,699
1923
0
Minor
Minor
1971
8
$213
$747
1924
2
Minor
Minor
1972
122
$2,100
$6,924
1925
6
Minor
Minor
1973
5
$3
$9
1926
269
$112
$1,415
1974
1
$150
$396
1927
0
$0
$0
1975
21
$490
$1,191
1928
1,836
$25
$315
1976
9
$100
$233
1929
3
$1
$12
1977
0
$10
$22
1930
0
Minor
Minor
1978
36
$20
$38
1931
0
$0
$0
1979
22
$3,045
$5,210
1932
0
$0
$0
1980
2
$300
$463
1933
63
$47
$701
1981
0
$25
$36
1934
17
$5
$68
1982
0
Minor
Minor
1935
414
$12
$163
1983
22
$2,000
$2,751
1936
9
$2
$28
1984
4
$66
$88
1937
0
Minor
Minor
1985
30
$4,000
$5,197
1938
600
$306
$3,864
1986
9
$17
$21
1939
3
Minor
Minor
1987
0
$8
$10
1940
51
$5
$66
1988
6
$9
$11
1941
10
$8
$98
1989
56
$7,670
$8,640
1942
8
$27
$286
1990
16
$57
$63
(continues)

Data, Opinions, and Letters
241
TABLE 6.7
(Continued) 
Unadjusted
Adjusted
Unadjusted
Adjusted 
Damage
Damage 
Damage
Damage
Year
Deaths
($ millions)
($ millions)
Year
Deaths
($ millions)
($ millions)
1943
16
$17
$169
1991
16
$1,500
$1,637
1944
64
$165
$1,641
1992
24
$26,500
$28,687
1945
7
$80
$773
1993
4
$57
$59
1946
0
$5
$41
1994
38
$973
$973
1947
53
$136
$935
1995
29
$3,723
$3,582
Both unadjusted and inﬂation-adjusted values are shown in the mainland United States from land-falling hurricanes
and tropical storms during 1900–1995. The adjusted values are based on 1994 dollars using the U.S. Department of
Commerce Implicit Price Deﬂator for Construction. "Minor" applies to years with less than $1 million in unadjusted 
damage.
Source: Hebert,  Jarrell, and Mayﬁeld (1997).
TABLE 6.8
Progress of the average Atlantic hurricane season (1944–1996) 
Number
Tropical storms
Hurricanes
Category 3 or Greater
1
July 11
August 14
September 4
2
August 8
August 30
September 28
3
August 21
September 10
—
4
August 30
September 24
—
5
September 7
October 15
—
6
September 14
—
—
7
September 23
—
—
8
October 5
—
—
9
October 21
—
—
Average chronological date upon which each tropical storm, hurricane, and major hurricane forms. This will exhibit con-
siderable variability from year to year. However, in general most tropical storms and hurricanes occur from late August
to early October. Only occasionally will a major hurricane (category 3 or better) occur in June or July.
Source: National Hurricane Center,  http://www.nhc.noaa.gov.

242
Data, Opinions, and Letters
TABLE 6.9
Number of hurricanes by category to strike the United States during 1900–2004 
Category*
Number of Hurricanes
5
3
4
15
3
50
2
41
1
64
Total
173
This shows that on average  two major hurricanes make landfall in the United States every three years and that
when all categories are combined, an average of ﬁve hurricanes strike the United States every three years.
*Major hurricanes (categories 3, 4, and 5) total 68.
Source: Hebert, Jarrell, and Mayﬁeld (1997); updated from http://www.nhc.noaa.gov.
TABLE 6.10
List of category 5 Atlantic hurricanes since 1886
Number 
Storm Name 
Maximum Winds 
Date Attained (UTC)
Landfall as Category 5 
1
Not named
160 mph
September 13, 1928
Puerto Rico
2
Not named
160 mph
September 5, 1932
Bahamas
3
Not named
160 mph
September 3, 1935
Florida Keys
4
Not named
160 mph
September 19, 1938
—
5
Not named
160 mph
September 16, 1947
Bahamas
6
Dog
185 mph
September 6, 1950
—
7
Easy
160 mph
September 7, 1951
—
8
Janet
175 mph
September 28, 1955
Mexico
9
Cleo
160 mph
August 16, 1958
—
10
Donna
160 mph
September 4, 1960
—
11
Ethel
160 mph
September 15, 1960
—
12
Carla
175 mph
September 11, 1961
—
13
Hattie
160 mph
October 30, 1961
—
14
Beulah
160 mph
September 20, 1967
—
15
Camille
190 mph
August 17, 1969
Mississippi
16
Edith
160 mph
September 9, 1971
Nicaragua
17
Anita
175 mph
September 2, 1977
—
18
David
175 mph
August 30, 1979
Dominica
19
Allen
190 mph
August 4–5, 7, 8–9, 1980
—
20
Gilbert
185 mph
September 14, 1988
Mexico
21
Hugo
160 mph
September 15, 1989
—
22
Andrew
165 mph
August 24, 1992
South Florida
23
Mitch
155–180 mph
October 26–28, 1998
—
24
Isabel
155–165 mph
September 11–14, 2003
—
25
Ivan
165 mph
September 8, 11, and 12, 2004
—
To qualify as a category 5 hurricane on the Safﬁr-Simpson scale, maximum sustained winds must exceed 155 mph.
Through 2004, only twenty-ﬁve Atlantic storms have reached this intensity, and only ten were of category 5 strength
at landfall. Of these twenty-ﬁve, only three made U.S. landfall: the 1935 Florida Keys hurricane; Hurricane Camille,
which hit the Mississippi coast in 1969; and Hurricane Andrew, which devastated south Florida. This table lists all known
category 5 Atlantic hurricane since records began in 1886.

Interesting Category 5 Facts
• Hurricane Allen reached category 5 intensity three times
along its path through the southern Caribbean and Gulf
of Mexico: twice these periods were of twenty-four-hour
duration, and the third lasted 18 hours.
• With the exception of Camille, no category 5 hurricanes
have ever existed north of 30°N or south of 14°N.
• Areas that have never experienced a land-falling hurri-
cane of category 5 intensity include the U.S. East Coast,
Cuba, Jamaica, and most of the Windward or Leeward
Islands.
Source: National Climatic Data Center, http://www.ncdc.
noaa.gov. Updated by author.
World Records
Most Intense Ever
870 mb (over 180 mph) in Supertyphoon Tip, western North
Paciﬁc Ocean, October 12, 1979; reports from JTWC indicate that
the twelve most intense cyclones on record occurred in the west-
ern North Paciﬁc Ocean.
Most Intense, Atlantic Ocean
888 mb in Hurricane Gilbert, in September 1988. Although the
pressure is almost 20 mb higher than western Paciﬁc storms, the
maximum sustained winds are comparable at over 180 mph.
Fastest Intensiﬁcation
100 mb (from 976 to 876 mb) in just under twenty-four hours in
Supertyphoon Forrest, western North Paciﬁc Ocean. Estimated sur-
face winds increased from 75 mph to 173 mph during this period.
Extreme Storm Surge
42 feet in the Bathurst Bay Hurricane, Northern Australia, 1899;
this value was derived from reanalysis of debris sightings and
Data, Opinions, and Letters
243

eyewitness reports and, as a result, is controversial. But clearly a
phenomenal storm surge occurred.
Highest Wave
112 feet from USS Ramapo in the western North Paciﬁc, 6–7 Febru-
ary, 1933; also in the western North Paciﬁc, 82 feet on 26 Septem-
ber, 1935. Hurricane Ivan produced an Atlantic record 91-foot
wave on September 15, 2004, in the Gulf of Mexico.
Highest Rainfall
All have occurred at La Reunion Island.
12 hours
45 inches at Foc-Foc (7,511 feet altitude) in
Tropical Cyclone Denise, 7–8 January 1966
24 hours
71 inches at Foc-Foc in Tropical Cyclone
Denise, 7–8 January 1966
48 hours
96 inches at Aurere (3,083 feet altitude), 8–10
April 1958
72 hours
126 inches at Grand-Ilet (3,773 feet altitude) in
Tropical Cyclone Hyacinthe, 18–27 January
1980
10 days
221 inches at Commerson (7,610 feet altitude)
in Tropical Cyclone Hyacinthe, 18–27 January
1980
Largest
683-mile radius of gale-force winds (35 mph) in Supertyphoon
Tip, western North Paciﬁc Ocean, October 12, 1979.
Smallest
25-mile radius of gale force winds (35 mph) for Tropical Cyclone
Tracy, Darwin Australia, December 24, 1974. A storm this small is
called a midget tropical cyclone.
Smallest Eye
4-mile radius from radar in Tropical Cyclone Tracy, Darwin, Aus-
tralia, December 24, 1974; 5-mile radius of Supertyphoon Tip (1979).
244
Data, Opinions, and Letters

Largest Eye
115-mile radius from radar of Typhoon Carmen as it passed over
Okinawa, western North Paciﬁc, August 20, 1960; 115-mile radius
from radar of Typhoon Winnie, western North Paciﬁc, August 17,
1997; 56-mile radius from aircraft reconnaissance, Tropical Cyclone
Kerry, Coral Sea, February 21, 1979.
Longest Lived
Hurricane/Typhoon John lasted 31 days as it traveled across both
the northeastern and northwestern parts of the Paciﬁc Ocean dur-
ing August and September 1994. In the Atlantic, the longest lived
was Hurricane Ginger, which lasted 28 days in 1971.
Most Deaths
As quoted from Holland (1993a), “The death toll in the infamous
Bangladesh Cyclone of 1970 has had several estimates, some
wildly speculative, but it seems certain that at least 300,000 people
died from the associated storm surge in the low-lying deltas.”
Also, several disastrous ﬂoods from land-falling typhoons in the
Yangtze River valley occurred in the mid-1850s and resulted in
many millions of deaths.
Costliest
Hurricane Andrew (1992) in Florida and Louisiana is estimated to
have caused at least $25 billion in damage.
Source: Holland (1993a); Landsea (2005); Lander (1999);
Anon. (2005).
Data, Opinions, and Letters
245

246
Data, Opinions, and Letters
TABLE 6.11
Record number of storms by ocean basin
Hurricanes, Typhoons, and 
Total Storms  or Greater with 
Severe Tropical Cyclone with 
Sustained Winds of 39 mph or More
Sustained Winds of 73 mph or More
Basin
Most
Least
Average
Most
Least
Average
Atlantic
19
4
10.6
12
2
5.9
NE Paciﬁc
27
8
16.3
16
4
9.0
NW Paciﬁc
35
17
26.7
24
9
16.9
N Indian
11
2
5.4
5
0
2.2
SW Indian
18
7
13.3
11
2
6.7
SE Indian
13
1
7.3
8
0
3.6
SW Paciﬁc
18
4
10.6
12
0
4.8
N Hemisphere
76
39
58.7
47
24
33.7
S Hemisphere
38
19
29.0
22
7
14.5
Globally
106
68
87.7
64
36
48.3
Based on data from 1968–2003 for all Northern Hemisphere ocean basins except the Atlantic Ocean, and from
1968/1969 to 1989/2003 for the Southern Hemisphere. Starting in 1944, systematic aircraft reconnaissance was
commenced for monitoring tropical storms and hurricanes in the Atlantic, hence these records are valid since 1944 in
this basin. Atlantic records also contain a storm similar to hurricanes called subtropical cyclones.
Source: Landsea (2005).
TABLE 6.12
More speciﬁc record information for the Atlantic Ocean from 1944 to 2004 
(coincident with the reconnaissance ﬂight era)
Category
Maximum
Minimum
Tropical storms/hurricanes
19 (1995)*
4 (1983)
Hurricanes
12 (1969)
2 (1982)
Major hurricanes (category 
7 (1950)
0 (many times, 1994 last)
3 or more)
U.S. land-falling tropical storms/ 
8 (1916)
1 (many times, 1991 last)
hurricanes
U.S. land-falling hurricanes
6 (1916, 1985)
0 (many times, 2001 last)
U.S. land-falling major hurricanes
3 (1909, 1933, 1954, 2004)
0 (many times, 2003 last)
Because of highly populated coastlines along the U.S. East Coast and Gulf Coast, data with good reliability extends back
to around 1899 for land-falling storms. Thus, the landfall records include the time period 1899–2004.
*The year 1933 is recorded as being the most active of any Atlantic basin season on record (reliable or otherwise) with
twenty-one tropical storms and hurricanes. However, since reconnaissance ﬂights were not conducted at that time, it is
excluded from this table.
Source: Landsea (2005).

Data, Opinions, and Letters
247
TABLE 6.13
Number of U.S. land-falling hurricanes for each state during 1900–2004, 
stratiﬁed by the Safﬁr-Simpson scale 
Major
Hurricanes
All Categories
(Categories
Area 
Category Number
(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
3, 4, 5)
1
2
3
4
5
U.S. (Texas to Maine)
65
41
50
15
3
174
68
Texas
13
9
10
6
0
38
16
N Texas
7
3
3
4
0
17
7
Central Texas
3
2
1
1
0
7
2
S Texas
3
4
6
1
0
14
7
Louisiana
10
5
8
3
1
27
12
Mississippi
1
2
5
0
1
9
6
Alabama
5
1
6
0
0
12
6
Florida
19
18
19
6
2
64
27
NW Florida
10
8
8
0
0
26
8
NE Florida
2
7
0
0
0
9
0
SW Florida
7
4
6
3
1
21
10
SE Florida
5
11
8
3
1
28
12
Georgia
1
4
0
0
0
5
0
South Carolina
8
4
2
2
0
16
4
North Carolina
11
7
10
1*
0
29
11
Virginia
3
1
1*
0
0
5
1*
Maryland
0
1*
0
0
0
1*
0
Delaware
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
New Jersey
1*
0
0
0
0
1*
0
New York
3
1*
5*
0
0
9
5*
Connecticut
2
3*
3*
0
0
8
3*
Rhode Island
0
2*
3*
0
0
5*
3*
Massachusetts
2
2*
2*
0
0
6
2*
New Hampshire
1*
1*
0
0
0
2*
0
Maine
5*
0
0
0
0
5
0
Some of these hurricanes may have hit land more than once, and each hit is counted individually. As a result, state
totals will not equal U.S. totals, and Texas and Florida totals will not necessarily equal sum of sectional totals. The data
is shown starting from Texas eastward, then up the East Coast. 
*Hurricanes moving faster than 30 mph.
Source: Hebert,  Jarrell, and Mayﬁeld (1997); updated from http://www.nhc.noaa.gov.

Deadliest U.S. Tropical Storms 
and Hurricanes during 1970–1998
Historically, most deaths associated with tropical storms and hur-
ricanes were caused by storm surge. The Hurricane Camille
tragedy made emergency ofﬁcials and the general public more
conscientious about the hurricane storm surge. As evacuation
procedures have improved in the United States, fatalities due to
the storm surge have dramatically diminished. In fact, most
deaths in tropical storms and hurricanes are now associated with
inland ﬂooding, as shown in the tables below.
248
Data, Opinions, and Letters
TABLE 6.14
Deadliest top ten U.S. tropical storms and hurricanes during 1970–1998 
Rank
Name
Year
Dead
1
Agnes
1972
125
2
Alberto
1994
34
3
Amelia
1978
33
4
Celia
1970
25
5
Andrew
1992
23
6
Fran
1996
22
7
Hugo
1989
17
8
Alicia
1983
13
8
Chantal
1989
13
8
Charley
1998
13
This is the post-Camille period where deaths from the storm surge are fewer due to better hur-
ricane awareness and preparation. Fatalities  from heart attacks, house ﬁres, and vehicle acci-
dents during the storms are considered indirect and are excluded from the database.
TABLE 6.15
Causes of 1970–1998 tropical storm and hurricane deaths
Percentage of 517 
Number of 
Total  Deaths (Rounded
Cause of Death
Deaths
to Whole Number)
Drowned
415
80%
Wind*
66
13%
Tornado
20
4%
Other†
16
3%
This is the post-Camille period where deaths from the storm surge are fewer due to better hurri-
cane awareness and preparation. 
*From building failures, airborne debris, etc.
†Nine of these deaths are from lightning, hypothermia, and downed aircraft. Seven are from
unknown causes.

Opinions
Excerpts from “Project STORMFURY: A Scientiﬁc Chron-
icle, 1962–1983,” by Willoughby et al., 1985.
This article chronicles Project STORMFURY, in which
reconnaissance ﬂights attempted to weaken hurricanes by
seeding them with silver iodide. Please refer to chapter 1
for a discussion on Project STORMFURY.
Data, Opinions, and Letters
249
TABLE 6.16
Causes of tropical storm and hurricane deaths by drowning between 1970 and 1998
Drowned (415 Total Deaths)
Percentage of  
Cause
Number
Percentage
517 Total Deaths
Freshwater
292
70%
57% 
Shoreline*
62
15%
12% 
Offshore†
52
13%
10% 
Storm Surge
5
1%
1% 
Other
4
1%
.8%
Note that most deaths are from inland ﬂooding, not the storm surge, in the post-Camille period.
*Rough surf, rip currents, large swells.
†Beyond breakers to 50 nautical  miles from shore.
TABLE 6.17
Location of U.S. tropical storm and hurricane deaths between 1970 and 1998 
Number of 
Percentage of 
Location
Deaths (517 Total)
517 Total Deaths
Inland county
295
57%
Coastal county*
128
25%
Offshore†
55
11%
Unknown
39
7%
*Includes storm surge, large swells, and rip current areas.
†Beyond breakers to 50 nautical miles from shore.
Source: Rappaport, Fuchs, and Lorentson (1998).

Willoughby et al. explain the motivation for Project
STORMFURY:
The years 1954 and 1955 each brought three major hur-
ricanes to the East Coast of the United States. Hurri-
canes Carol, Edna, Hazel, Connie, Diane, and Ione
together destroyed more than six billion dollars in
property (adjusted to 1983) and killed nearly 400 U.S.
citizens. Six hurricane landfalls in two years seemed to
call for some sort of governmental action. In the spring
of 1955, the U.S. Congress appropriated substantially
more money for hurricane research. After the 1955 hur-
ricane season, it mandated that the U.S. Weather
Bureau establish the National Hurricane Research
Project (NHRP), which was to become the National
Hurricane Laboratory in 1964 and the Hurricane
Research Division of the Atlantic Oceanographic and
Meteorological Laboratory in 1983. The mission of
NHRP was fourfold: to study the formation of hurri-
canes; to study their structure and dynamics; to seek
means for hurricane modiﬁcation; and to seek means for
improvement of forecasts. The third objective was, in
time, to provide justiﬁcation for Project STORMFURY.
For a variety of political and scientiﬁc reasons, funding for STORM-
FURY was threatened in the late 1970s. Below Willoughby et al. list
ﬁve criterion needed to justify the continuation of STORMFURY,
and they then explain why it was eventually abandoned.
STORMFURY had to be viable in ﬁve different respects
[to justify continuation]:
Political. Governments had to be willing to accept the
risk of a public outcry if a seeded hurricane (or
typhoon) devastated a coastal region. This outcry
and its legal consequences might arise even if
human intervention had no effect at all on the
hurricane.
Operational. The aircraft, instrumentation, and person-
nel to do the seeding and to document the result
had to be available.
250
Data, Opinions, and Letters

Microphysical. Convection in hurricanes had to contain
enough supercooled water for seeding to be
effective.
Dynamic. The hurricane vortex had to be sufﬁciently
labile for human intervention to change its 
structure.
Statistical. The experiment had to be repeatable, and
the results had to be distinguishable from natural
behavior.
STORMFURY itself, however, had two fatal ﬂaws: it
was neither microphysically nor statistically feasible.
Observational evidence indicates that seeding in hurri-
canes would be ineffective because they contain too lit-
tle supercooled water and too much natural ice.
Moreover, the expected results of seeding are often
indistinguishable from naturally occurring intensity
changes. By mid-1983, none (or perhaps only one:
dynamic feasibility) of the ﬁve conditions for develop-
ment of an operational hurricane amelioration strategy
could be met, and Project STORMFURY ended. Its last-
ing legacies are the instrumented aircraft and two
decades of productive research. Of the four original
objectives for hurricane research set down in 1955 at
the establishment of NHRP, three—understanding for-
mation, understanding structure and dynamics, and
improvement of forecasts—remain areas of active
investigation.
Source: Willoughby et al. (1985).
Excerpts from the 1996 IPCC Report 
on Whether Global Warming Is Inﬂuencing
Global Hurricane Activity
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is a
group of more than 200 scientists that originally met in 1990 to
discuss issues related to possible man-induced climate change.
Based on these and subsequent meetings in 1992, 1994, and 1996,
the IPCC issued conclusions regarding global warming based on
Data, Opinions, and Letters
251

current data and the state of the science. The 1996 IPCC report
states the following:
The state-of-the-art for [hurricane simulations in
numerical models] remains poor because: (i) tropical
cyclones cannot be adequately resolved in general cir-
culation models; (ii) some aspects of ENSO [El Niño-
Southern Oscillation] are not well-simulated in general
circulation models; (iii) other large-scale changes in the
atmospheric general circulation which could affect
tropical cyclones cannot yet be discounted; and (iv)
natural variability of tropical cyclones is very large, so
small trends are likely to be lost in the noise.
This report also concludes that
It is not possible to say whether the frequency, area of
occurrence, mean intensity, or maximum intensity of
tropical cyclones will change.
Source: Houghton et al. (1996).
Excerpt from “Tropical Cyclones and Global
Climate Change: A Post-IPCC Assessment,” 
by Henderson-Sellers et al. 1998
As a follow-up to the 1996 IPCC report, a group of tropical
cyclone experts issued some more deﬁnitive statements regarding
any relationships to possible global warming and tropical cyclone
activity in 1998:
Our knowledge has advanced to permit the following
summary.
• There are no discernible global trends in tropical
cyclone number, intensity, or location from his-
torical data analyses;
• Regional variability, which is very large, is being
quantiﬁed slowly by a variety of methods;
• Empirical methods do not have skill when applied
to tropical cyclones in greenhouse conditions;
252
Data, Opinions, and Letters

• Global and mesoscale model-based predictions
for tropical cyclones in greenhouse conditions
have not yet demonstrated prediction skill;
• There is no evidence to suggest any major
changes in the area or global location of tropical
cyclone genesis in greenhouse conditions;
• Thermodynamic “upscaling” models seem to
have some skill in predicting maximum potential
intensity (MPI); and
• These thermodynamic schemes predict an in-
crease in MPI of 10%–20% for a doubled CO2 cli-
mate but the known omissions [from MPI theory]
all act to reduce these increases.
Source: Henderson-Sellers et al. (1998).
Letters
Alexander Hamilton and the 
1772 St. Croix Hurricanes
It was hurricanes that indirectly brought Alexander Hamilton to
America. Hamilton experienced two hurricanes on August 3 and
September 3, 1772, on St. Croix in the West Indies. His description
of this experience in a letter to his father so impressed local
planters that they took up a collection to send him to King’s Col-
lege (now Columbia University) in New York. He was in America
when the ﬁrst rumblings of revolution occurred, and the rest is
history.
The following is an excerpt of Hamilton’s letter to his father:
Good God! What horror and destruction! It is impossi-
ble for me to describe it or for you to form any idea of
it. It seemed as if a total dissolution of nature was tak-
ing place. The roaring of the sea and wind, ﬁery mete-
ors ﬂying about in the air, the prodigious glare of
almost perpetual lightning, the crash of falling houses,
and the ear-piercing shrieks of the distressed were suf-
ﬁcient to strike astonishment into Angels. A great part
Data, Opinions, and Letters
253

of the buildings throughout the island are leveled to
the ground; almost all the rest very much shattered,
several persons killed and numbers utterly ruined—
whole families roaming about the streets, unknowing
where to ﬁnd a place of shelter—the sick exposed to
the keenness of water and air, without a bed to lie upon,
or a dry covering to their bodies, and out harbors
entirely bare. In a word, misery, in its most hideous
shapes, spread over the whole face of the country.
Source: Hughes (1976, 1987).
The Great Hurricane of 1780
One of the most destructive hurricanes of the 1700s struck the
West Indies in October 1780, killing around 22,000 people. This
storm, called “The Great Hurricane” by many in that century, also
inﬂicted great losses on the ﬂeets of both Britain and France, who
were planning assaults on each other to claim the Antilles Islands
during the American Revolution.
The ﬁrst news of the hurricane disaster was published in the
England journal The Political Magazine in a letter from Major Gen-
eral Vaughan, commander-in-chief of British forces in the Lee-
ward Island, dated October 30, 1780:
I am much concerned to inform your Lordship, that this
island was almost entirely destroyed by a most violent
hurricane, which began on Tuesday the 10th instant.
And continued almost without intermission for nearly
forty-eight hours. It is impossible for me to attempt a
description of the storm; sufﬁce it to say, that few fami-
lies have escaped the general ruin, and I do not believe
that 10 houses are saved in the whole island: scarce a
house is standing in Bridgetown; whole families were
buried in the ruins of their habitations; and many, in
attempting to escape, were maimed and disabled: a
general convulsion of nature seemed to take place, and
an universal destruction ensued. The strongest colours
could not paint to you Lordship the miseries of the
inhabitants: on the one hand, the ground covered with
mangled bodies of their friends and relations, and on
254
Data, Opinions, and Letters

the other, reputable families, wandering through the
ruins, seeking for food and shelter: in short, imagina-
tion can form but a faint idea of the horrors of this
dreadful scene.
British Admiral George Rodney was in New York during the hur-
ricane, and when he visited Barbados he incorrectly concluded
that the storm must have been accompanied by an earthquake to
achieve such total destruction: In describing the ruin, Rodney
writes:
The whole face of the country appears an entire ruin,
and the most beautiful island in the world has the
appearance of a country laid waste by ﬁre, and sword,
and appears to the imagination more dreadful than it
is possible for me to ﬁnd words to express.
Source: Ludlum (1963).
Eyewitnesses Account of Hurricane Landfall 
on the Florida Panhandle in 1843
The following is an excerpt from the September 15, 1843, Commer-
cial Gazette describing the damage on Port Leon (about 30 miles
south of today’s city of Tallahassee near St. Marks):
Our city is in ruins! We have been visited by one of the
most horrible storms that it ever before devolved upon
us to chronicle. On Wednesday [13 September] about 11
o’clock A.M. the wind lulled and the tide fell, the weather
still continued lowering. At 11 at night, the wind fresh-
ened, and the tide commenced ﬂowing, and by 12
o’clock it blew a perfect hurricane, and the whole town
was inundated. The gale continued with unabated vio-
lence until 2 o’clock, the water making a perfect breach
ten feet deep over our town. The wind suddenly lulled
for a few minutes, and then came from southwest with
redoubled violence and blew until daylight.
Every warehouse in the town was laid ﬂat with the
ground except one, Messers Hamlin & Shell’s, and a
Data, Opinions, and Letters
255

part of that also fell. Nearly every dwelling was
thrown from its foundations, and many of them
crushed to atoms. The loss of property is immense.
Every inhabitant participated in the loss more or less.
None have escaped, many with only the clothes they
stand in. St. Marks suffered in like proportion with
ourselves. But our losses are nothing compared with
those at the lighthouse. Every building but the light-
house gone—and dreadful to relate fourteen lives lost!
And among them some of our most valued citizens.
We cannot attempt to estimate the loss of each individ-
ual at this time, but shall reserve it until our feelings
will better enable us to investigate it.
Source: Ludlum (1963).
The Last Island Disaster
On August 10, 1856, a violent hurricane struck Isle Derniere
(Cajun for “Last Island”), a pleasure resort southwest of New
Orleans. The highest points were under 5 feet of water. The resort
hotel and surrounding gambling establishments were destroyed,
and the island was cut in half by the storm. Crew members on the
ferry boat Star rode out the storm and rescued survivors seen
ﬂoating among the debris. A total of about forty people survived
on the Star; the rest—hundreds of people—were killed. The fol-
lowing letter was sent to the Daily Picayune (the New Orleans
newspaper) from a survivor of this event and published on
August 14, 1856:
Dear Pic.—You may have heard ere this reaches you of
the dreadful catastrophe which happened on Last
Island on Sunday the 10th inst. As one of the sufferers
it becomes my duty to chronicle one of the most melan-
choly events, which have ever occurred. On Saturday
night, the 9th inst., a heavy northeast wind prevailed,
which excited the fears of a storm in the minds of
many; the wind increased gradually until about ten
o’clock Sunday morning, when there existed no longer
any doubt that we were threatened with imminent
256
Data, Opinions, and Letters

danger. From that time the wind blew a perfect hurri-
cane; every house upon the island giving way, one
after another, until nothing remained. At this moment
everyone sought the most elevated point on the island,
exerting themselves at the same time to avoid the frag-
ments of buildings, which were scattered in every
direction by the wind. Many persons were wounded;
some mortally. The water at this time (about 2 o’clock
P.M.) commenced rising so rapidly from the bay side,
that there could no longer be any doubt that the island
would be submerged. The scene at this moment for-
bids description. Men, women, and children were seen
running in every direction, in search of some means of
salvation. The violence of the wind, together with the
rain, which fell like hail, and the sand blinded their
eyes, prevented many from reaching the objects they
had aimed at.
At about 4 o’clock, the Bay and Gulf currents met
and the sea washed over the whole island. Those who
were so fortunate as to ﬁnd some object to cling to,
were seen ﬂoating in all directions. Many of them,
however, were separated from the straw to which they
clung for life, and launched into eternity; others were
washed away by the rapid current and drowned before
they could reach their point of destination. Many were
drowned from being stunned by scattered fragments of
the buildings, which had been blown asunder by the
storm; many others were crushed by ﬂoating timbers
and logs, which were removed from the beach, and met
them on their journey. To attempt a description of this
sad event would be useless. No words could depict the
awful scene which occurred on the night between the
10th and 11th inst. It was not until the next morning the
11th, that we could ascertain the extent of the disaster.
Upon my return, after having drifted for about twenty
hours, I found the steamer Star, which had arrived the
day before, and was lying at anchor, a perfect wreck,
nothing but her hull and boilers, and a portion of her
machinery remaining. Upon this wreck the lives of a
large number were saved. Toward her each one
directed his path as he was recovered from the deep,
Data, Opinions, and Letters
257

and was welcomed with tears by his fellow-sufferers,
who had been so fortunate as to escape. The scene was
heart-rending; the good fortune of many an individual
in being saved, was blighted by the news of the loss of
a father, brother, sister, wife or some near relative.
Source: Jennings (1970); Ludlum (1963).
258
Data, Opinions, and Letters

7
Directory of Organizations
T
his chapter describes some organizations relevant to hurricane
research and forecasting. Other organizations are included be-
cause of their importance to meteorology as a whole or
because of their commitment to disaster mitigation or assistance.
A description of each group’s function and history is included, as
well as the address, point of contact, and website. Relevant pub-
lications are also listed. Updates of websites and addresses will
also be provided on http://www.drﬁtz.net.
American Meteorological Society
The American Meteorological Society (AMS) is a nonproﬁt, pro-
fessional society whose objectives are the development and dis-
semination of knowledge of the atmospheric and related oceanic
and hydrologic sciences and the advancement of its professional
applications. Charles Franklin Brooks of the Blue Hill Observa-
tory in Milton, Massachusetts, founded the AMS in 1919. 
Its initial membership came primarily from the U.S. Signal
Corps and U.S. Weather Bureau. Its initial publication, the Bulletin
of the American Meteorological Society, was meant to serve as a 
supplement to the Monthly Weather Review, which, at the time, 
was published by the U.S. Weather Bureau. However, during the
1930s and 1940s, because of the key role meteorologists played in
support of military activities, as well as associated technology
259

260
Directory of Organizations
developments, the AMS substantially grew in numbers and in
purpose. 
Carl-Gustav Rossby served as president of the AMS for 1944
and 1945 and developed the framework for its ﬁrst scientiﬁc jour-
nal, the Journal of Meteorology, which later split into the two cur-
rent AMS journals: the Journal of Applied Meteorology and the
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences.
This role as a scientiﬁc and professional organization serving
the atmospheric and related sciences continues today. The AMS
now publishes eight scientiﬁc journals and an abstract journal, in
addition to the Bulletin, and sponsors and organizes more than a
dozen scientiﬁc conferences each year, including a biannual Hurri-
cane and Tropical Meteorology Conference where scientists and
forecasters present the latest research on these storms. The AMS
has published almost ﬁfty monographs in its continuing series, as
well as many other books and educational materials. The journals
are directed toward an audience with at least bachelor of science
degrees in meteorology, and many are written for advanced
degrees. However, the Bulletin (provided with annual dues) strives
toward general public readability, and many of the educational
materials are also quite readable. Internet access and CD-ROMS of
all journals and some other publications are available.
The AMS administers two professional certiﬁcation pro-
grams—the Radio and Television Seal of Approval and the Certi-
ﬁed Consulting Meteorologist programs—and also offers an array
of undergraduate scholarships and graduate fellowships to sup-
port students pursuing careers in the atmospheric and related
oceanic and hydrologic sciences. Local AMS chapters for many
cities and universities also exist, providing a means for commu-
nity interaction among those interested in meteorology and pro-
fessional meteorologists.
Professionals in the ﬁeld of atmospheric or related oceanic
or hydrologic sciences holding a baccalaureate or higher degree
can join the AMS under the classiﬁcation of “member.” Those
who do not meet this criterion but are interested in joining the
AMS can apply under the classiﬁcation of “associate member.”
Classiﬁcations for students also exist. Annual dues are required,
with many optional purchases detailed on the AMS website.
The address is:
American Meteorological Society
45 Beacon Street

Boston, MA 02108-3693
Phone: (617) 227-2425
URL: http://www.ametsoc.org
Educational Material and Publications 
For professional meteorologists, the following journals are pub-
lished by the AMS: The Bulletin of the American Meteorological Soci-
ety; Weather and Forecasting; Journal of Climate; Monthly Weather
Review; Journal of Physical Oceanography; Journal of the Atmospheric
Sciences; Journal of Applied Meteorology; Journal of Atmospheric and
Oceanic Technology; Journal of Hydrometeorology; Earth Interactions;
and Meteorological and Geoastrophysical Abstracts. Conference
papers are also available for download in the “Conferences” sec-
tion of the website, and presentation recordings with their corre-
sponding PowerPoint ﬁles are also available.
In addition to its journals, the AMS publishes many mono-
graphs on weather topics. The following partially or exclusively
discuss hurricanes: Historical Essays on Meteorology; Early American
Hurricanes: 1492–1870; Tropical Cyclones: Their Evolution, Structure,
and Effects; Glossary of Weather and Climate; The 1938 Hurricane; and
Cloud Systems, Hurricanes, and the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mis-
sion (TRMM): A Tribute to Dr. Joanne Simpson. Another authorita-
tive book, containing more than 12,000 meteorological terms and
deﬁnitions based on input from an editorial board of forty-one
distinguished scientists, is the Glossary of Meteorology.
The AMS’s educational program supports students at all
education levels (K–12, college, and graduate school). For college
students, the AMS offers Online Weather Studies, a course with
electronic and printed components. The course focuses on the
study of weather as it happens by utilizing Internet-delivered
learning materials. The course is available for licensing by colleges
and universities. The AMS offers approximately ﬁfty minority and
other undergraduate scholarships and also offers graduate fel-
lowships to the nation’s future meteorologists, oceanographers,
hydrologists, and climatologists each year. Students interested in
becoming meteorologists are encouraged to read the online AMS
documents Careers in Atmospheric Research and Applied Meteorology
and A Career Guide for Atmospheric Sciences, in the “Student Re-
sources” section.
To promote weather education at the elementary and second-
ary school levels, Project ATMOSPHERE has trained more than
Directory of Organizations
261

70,000 teachers and provided instructional material for classes.
DataStreme Atmosphere Project, a distance-learning weather
course based on Internet-delivered information, is also available.
Equivalent oceanography classes—the Maury Project and the
DataStreme Ocean Project—are also offered. Another distance-
learning class, the DataStreme Water in the Earth System (WES)
Project, teaches about the global water cycle and related issues.
Other countries also use these programs, including Canada, 
Australia, Great Britain, Argentina, Croatia, Japan, Mexico, South
Africa, and Switzerland. The AMS book Hands-on Meteorology is
an excellent source of ideas for teachers to use in the classroom.
American Red Cross and the 
International Federation of Red Cross 
and Red Crescent Societies
The American Red Cross is a humanitarian organization, led by
volunteers, that provides relief to victims of disasters and helps
prevent, prepare for, and respond to emergencies. It is the largest
volunteer emergency service organization in the United States,
with numerous chapters nationwide, as well as regional Blood
Service and Tissue Service centers. The Red Cross is not a U.S.
government agency; it is a private, nonproﬁt organization relying
on charitable donations for funding.
The Red Cross was founded by Henri Dunant in June 1859
when he visited the battleﬁelds of Solferino in Italy and encoun-
tered thousands of wounded and dying with no medical care. He
organized a group to assist and wrote a book about the experience
afterward. This promoted a movement that authorizes medical
personnel, wearing a red cross on a white armlet to distinguish
them as noncombatants, to assist wounded soldiers. A second
component of the movement required governments to sign
treaties that protected these workers and fostered the formation of
national volunteer societies to carry out his mission. During this
movement, a volunteer named Clara Barton cared for soldiers
during the American Civil War. After the Civil War, Barton visited
Europe and learned of Dunant’s movement. She returned to the
United States deeply committed to persuading U.S. participation
in this movement. In 1864, the United States and many other
countries signed such a treaty, known as the Geneva Convention.
262
Directory of Organizations

It established that “wounded or sick combatants, to whatever
nation they belong, shall be collected and cared for” by personnel
wearing the Red Cross emblem, and that persons and facilities
bearing the symbol are protected from attack. On May 21, 1881,
Barton founded the American Red Cross, and in 1900 the U.S.
Congress chartered the organization to provide services to the
U.S. military forces and to victims at home and abroad. In a typi-
cal year, the Red Cross responds to more than 66,000 natural and
man-made disasters including hurricanes, ﬂoods, earthquakes,
tornadoes, ﬁres, hazardous materials spills, civil disturbances,
explosions, and transportation accidents.
The American Red Cross is part of the larger International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC), con-
sisting of different Red Cross organizations in various countries.
The IFRC is the largest humanitarian network in the world with a
presence in almost every country. The IFRC’s mission is to
improve the lives of vulnerable people. Vulnerable people are
those at greatest risk from situations that endanger their survival
or threaten their capacity to live with an acceptable level of social
and economic security and human dignity. Often, these are victims
of natural disasters, poverty brought about by socioeconomic
crises, refugees, and victims of health emergencies. The IFRC car-
ries out relief operations to assist victims of disaster, and combines
this with development work to strengthen the capacities of its
member national societies. The IFRC’s work focuses on four core
areas: promoting humanitarian values, disaster response, disaster
preparedness, and health and community care.
For more information in the United States, contact the local
Red Cross or the U.S. headquarters at:
American Red Cross National Headquarters 
2025 E Street N.W. 
Washington, DC 20006 
Phone: (202) 303-4498
URL: http://www.redcross.org
Educational Material and Publications 
The American Red Cross publishes several pamphlets related to
hurricane preparedness and hurricane relief. Available online are:
Hurricanes . . . Unleashing Nature’s Fury!; Are You Ready for A Hurri-
cane?; Against the Wind: Protecting Your Home from Hurricane Wind
Directory of Organizations
263

Damage; Your Family Disaster Plan; Your Family Disaster Supplies Kit;
Chain Saw Safety Fact Sheet; Using a Generator When Disaster Strikes;
and Safety Information for Short-Term Power Outages or “Rolling Black-
outs.” Some of these pamphlets are also available from the National
Weather Service. Two coloring books for children can be ordered
for a nominal fee: Jason and Robin’s Awesome Hurricane Adventure
and After the Storm Coloring Book. Hurricane tracking charts can also
be purchased. The American Red Cross sells videos on hurricane
preparedness, including Against The Wind; Home Preparedness for
Hurricanes; Before the Wind Blows; Hurricane Information Guide for
Coastal Residents; and (for children) Jason and Robin’s Awesome Hur-
ricane Adventure. Lesson plans known as the Master of Disaster cur-
riculum kit are available for teachers of K–8 for disaster safety.
For international information, contact the IFRC at:
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
P.O. Box 372 CH-1211 
Geneva 19 Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 730 42 22
Fax: +41 22 733 03 95
URL: http://www.ifrc.org
Educational Material and Publications 
The IFRC publishes a variety of documents on the subjects of
emergency response and disaster relief, disaster preparedness,
and health and social welfare. An Annual Report and World Disas-
ter Report are published every year. The Red Cross Red Crescent
magazine is published quarterly. This magazine tackles humani-
tarian issues and features the activities of Red Cross and Red
Crescent societies as they seek to help vulnerable people in their
different environments.
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological
Satellite Studies at the University 
of Wisconsin-Madison
The Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies
(CIMSS) was established in 1980 to formalize and support coopera-
264
Directory of Organizations

tive research between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration’s (NOAA) National Environmental Satellite, Data,
and Information Service (NESDIS) and the University of Wiscon-
sin-Madison’s Space Science and Engineering Center. Sponsor-
ship and membership of the CIMSS was expanded to include the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in 1989.
During the 1980s, a need emerged for joint federal-university
research centers to support the NOAA weather research program.
CIMSS was established to focus on the development and testing
of the operational utility of new weather satellite observing sys-
tems to improve weather forecasts.
The CIMSS develops techniques for using weather satellite
observations to improve forecasts of severe storms, including 
tornadoes and hurricanes. One notable achievement has been the
development and automation of cloud-drift winds, which are
invaluable in data-sparse regions, particularly in tropical oceans.
Cloud-drift winds are computed by tracking individual cloud 
elements and deducing their motion. These winds are used to
identify steering currents and to visualize atmospheric features
that affect tropical cyclone genesis and intensiﬁcation. This data 
is being assimilated into computer models to improve weather
forecasts, including hurricane track predictions. The CIMSS 
also conducts research on satellite techniques for estimating trop-
ical storm and hurricane intensity. One research area uses the
Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit (AMSU) on board the
NOAA polar-orbiting satellites to measure a storm’s upper-level
warm core; this can indirectly quantify the spatial distributions 
of winds as well as a storm’s central surface pressure. The 
CIMSS has also developed an objective Dvorak technique using
satellite data that supplements the subjective Dvorak technique
currently being used at operational hurricane forecast centers
worldwide.
In addition, the CIMSS participates in satellite instrument
design, international ﬁeld programs, and computer visualization
of satellite measurements. For example, software called the Man
computer Interactive Data Access System (McIDAS) displays,
enhances, and animates satellite data and can also overlay the
imagery with meteorological measurements. McIDAS is still
actively used today by many governmental and university insti-
tutions, including the NHC.
The CIMSS’s address is:
Directory of Organizations
265

The Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies
1225 West Daytona Street
Madison, WI 53706
Phone: (608) 263–7435
Fax: (608) 262–5974
URL: http://cimss.ssec.wisc.edu
Educational Material and Publications 
Their website is the best source for information about hurricane
research at CIMSS. Under the “Tropical Cyclones” link, world-
wide satellite images of hurricanes are displayed in a variety of
formats, as are cloud-drift winds. Infrared, visible, water vapor,
and AMSU satellite images are available. Tropical cyclone fore-
casters from around the world use this state-of-the-art website.
Federal Emergency Management Agency
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is a former
independent agency that became part of the new Department of
Homeland Security in March 2003. Since its founding in 1979,
FEMA’s mission is to reduce loss of life and property and protect
our nation’s critical infrastructure from all types of hazards
(including hurricanes) through a centralized, comprehensive,
risk-based, emergency management program of mitigation, pre-
paredness, response, and recovery. FEMA has about 2,500 full-
time employees and nearly 5,000 standby disaster assistance
employees who help out after disasters. Often FEMA works in
partnership with other organizations that are part of the nation’s
emergency management system. These partners include state and
local emergency management agencies, twenty-seven federal
agencies, and the American Red Cross. During hurricane threats,
FEMA provides coordination efforts to federal, state, and local
governments.
FEMA is called in to help when the president declares a dis-
aster. Disaster areas are declared after hurricanes, tornadoes,
ﬂoods, earthquakes, or other similar events strike a community.
The governor of the state must ask for help from the president
before FEMA can respond. FEMA helps provide disaster victims
266
Directory of Organizations

with temporary housing if their homes are damaged or destroyed
and furnishes loans for uninsured disaster victims during major
disaster declarations.
FEMA is actively involved in disaster mitigation. Services
include:
1. Evaluation of emergency evacuation plans and shelters.
2. Training and outreach programs to increase public
awareness of disaster hazards (including hurricanes).
3. The National Flood Insurance Program, an important
program since homeowners insurance does not cover
ﬂood damage (see chapter 2 ).
4. Grants in the form of matching funds to states, local gov-
ernments, and property owners to implement long-term
mitigation measures after a major disaster declaration.
Examples include elevating properties that repeatedly
ﬂood from rain or storm surges; buy-outs, administered
through state or community programs, of properties that
repeatedly ﬂood and are deemed no longer suitable for
residence or development; improvement of drainage
ditches in ﬂood-prone areas; installation or improvements
of ﬂood pumps; retroﬁtting homes through second-story
conversion, which entails cutting the roof off the house,
building a second story on top of the existing ﬁrst story,
placing the roof back on the house, and gutting the bot-
tom ﬂoor; and dry ﬂood-prooﬁng in which the exterior of
a building is completely sealed to prevent the entry of
ﬂoodwaters.
5. Funding for HAZards US (HAZUS) software, which pro-
vides potential loss estimates for a variety of earthquake,
ﬂood, and hurricane scenarios. Current scientiﬁc and
engineering knowledge is coupled with the latest Geo-
graphic Information Systems (GIS) technology to pro-
duce estimates of hazard-related damage before or after a
disaster occurs. With regard to hurricanes, HAZUS esti-
mates potential damage and loss to residential, commer-
cial, and industrial buildings. It also allows users to
estimate direct economic loss, poststorm shelter needs,
and building debris on the Atlantic and Gulf Coast.
Future versions will include the capability to estimate
wind effects in island territories, storm surge, indirect
Directory of Organizations
267

economic losses, casualties, and impacts to utility and
transportation lifelines and agriculture.
FEMA’s headquarters is located at:
Federal Emergency Management Agency
Federal Center Plaza
500 C. Street S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20472
URL: http://www.fema.gov
FEMA has ten regional ofﬁces and two area ofﬁces. Each region
serves several states, and regional staff works directly with the
states to help plan for disasters, develop mitigation programs,
and meet needs when major disasters occur. These regions are
shown on the home page of FEMA’s website. For more immediate
responses to emergency management issues, contact the nearest
regional ofﬁce.
Educational Material and Publications 
FEMA’s website contains extensive information and numerous
documents on hurricane preparedness, hurricane recovery issues,
ﬂood insurance, and ﬂood protection, with many in electronic
form for downloading to a computer. Too many exist to list them
all here, and new ones become available routinely. A few of the
many publications are Hurricanes: Floods and Flood Safety Tips for
Coastal and Inland Flooding; Safety Tips for Hurricanes; Hurricane
Awareness: Action Guidelines for Senior Citizens; Hurricane Aware-
ness: Action Guidelines for School Children; Against the Wind: Protect-
ing Your Home from Hurricane Wind Damage; After a Flood: The First
Steps; How the NFIP Works; Things You Should Know about Flood
Insurance; Avoiding Hurricane Damage: A Checklist for Homeowners;
and Hurricane Preparedness in Marinas. Publications, videos, CDs,
and coloring books on hurricanes and disaster preparedness are
also available for children. The FEMA website contains a HAZUS
section that provides detailed information on this software. The
publication Battling Hazards with a Brand New Tool is also available
on HAZUS. The software is free and can be ordered through a
form on the website, and its manuals can be downloaded off the
website.
268
Directory of Organizations

Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory
The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) is a NOAA
research laboratory. The GFDL conducts research of the physical
processes that govern the behavior of the atmosphere and the
oceans as complex ﬂuid systems. These systems can then be mod-
eled mathematically, and their phenomenology can be studied by
computer simulation methods. The GFDL focuses on predictabil-
ity and climate issues at all scales in the atmosphere and ocean, as
well as the air-sea interface. It conducts leading-edge research on
many topics of great practical value, including weather and hur-
ricane forecasts, El Niño prediction, and global warming. The
GFDL also collaborates with Princeton University on these topics.
The GFDL has developed a hurricane model that provides
forecast track and intensity guidance to the National Hurricane
Center. A similar version is used by the U.S. Navy for the western
Paciﬁc Ocean and is called the GFDN model. GFDL’s model, on
average, produces the smallest track errors with respect to most
other operational models.
The GFDL is continuously upgrading the hurricane model.
Recently, ocean model coupling has been added to the hurricane
model so that important wind and ocean temperature feedbacks
are incorporated. Hurricanes mix the upper ocean, resulting in
colder water beneath the hurricane that affects storm intensity.
Computer upgrades at the National Centers for Environmental
Prediction (discussed later in this chapter) have also allowed the
hurricane model to simulate higher-resolution features, which
will improve the model’s forecasts. Better physics and land algo-
rithms (after a hurricane makes landfall) are in development.
The GFDL is also investigating hurricane sensitivity to cli-
mate change. In particular, should global warming occur, the
GFDL is exploring whether, on average, hurricanes will become
stronger or more numerous.
The GFDL’s address is:
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory/NOAA
Princeton Forrestal Campus
201 Forrestal Road
Princeton, NJ 08542-0308
Phone: (609) 452-6500
Directory of Organizations
269

Fax: (609) 987-5063
URL: http://www.gfdl.gov
Mail correspondence should be sent to P.O. Box 308.
Educational Material and Publications 
The GFDL’s website is the best source for information about hur-
ricane research at GFDL. Topics include hurricanes and climate
change, information and statistics on the hurricane model, and
animations of well-known hurricanes. One section of the website
contains bibliographies of researchers’ abstracts going back as far
as 1965.
Hurricane Hunters
The 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron, known as the Hurri-
cane Hunters of the U.S. Air Force Reserve, is the only Depart-
ment of Defense organization ﬂying into tropical storms and
hurricanes on a routine basis. Moreover, they are the only organi-
zation conducting operational hurricane reconnaissance in the
world. The 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron (WRS) is a
component of the 403rd Wing located at Keesler Air Force Base in
Biloxi, Mississippi. A detailed history on hurricane reconnais-
sance is provided in chapter 4.
The mission of the Hurricane Hunters is to recruit, organize,
and train assigned personnel to perform aerial weather recon-
naissance. During the hurricane season, from June 1 to November
30, they provide surveillance of tropical disturbances and hurri-
canes in the Atlantic (west of 55°W), Caribbean, and Gulf of Mex-
ico for the National Hurricane Center in Miami, Florida. They also
may provide aerial weather reconnaissance for the Central Paciﬁc
Hurricane Center in Honolulu, Hawaii.
From November 1 through April 15, the unit also ﬂies win-
ter storms off both coasts of the United States in support of the
National Centers for Environmental Prediction. These missions
are ﬂown at high altitude (30,000 feet) and can be just as challeng-
ing as the hurricane missions, with turbulence, lightning, and
icing. These hurricane reconnaissance ﬂights provide the most
270
Directory of Organizations

accurate measurements of the storm’s location, central pressure,
wind speeds, and other critical data that satellites cannot measure
(or can only estimate). Even though the ﬂights are expensive, the
information provided to forecasters, emergency preparedness
ofﬁcials, and the general public more than compensates for the
cost. Studies have shown that the plane observations improve
forecast accuracy by about 25 percent. The planes also have
detected sudden, dangerous changes in hurricane intensity and
movement that are currently very difﬁcult to detect by satellite
alone. A typical hurricane warning costs an estimated $192 mil-
lion due to preparation, evacuation, and lost commerce. Narrow-
ing the warning area can save $640,000 per mile or more.
Furthermore, as coastal populations continue to grow, evacuation
decisions need to be made earlier.
The reservists bring a wide variety of experience with them.
Their primary occupations include airline pilot, meteorologist,
teacher, electrician, computer systems operator, law enforcement
ofﬁcer, ﬁreﬁghter, medical doctor, veterinarian, and businessper-
son. While most live in the Gulf Coast area, the reservists are
drawn from ﬁfteen states and frequently travel at their own
expense to perform their duties. Reservists schedule their annual
two-week training tour to coincide with the peak of the storm sea-
son in the summer. Reservists may also be given short notice to
participate in additional storm missions, with the generous coop-
eration of their civilian employers.
Colocated with the National Hurricane Center is a small
group of U.S. Air Force Reserve civilian personnel assigned to the
53rd WRS. The supervisory meteorologist of the unit serves as
Chief, Aerial Reconnaissance Coordination, All Hurricanes, better
known as CARCAH. These personnel are responsible for coordi-
nating Department of Commerce requirements for hurricane
data, tasking weather reconnaissance missions, and monitoring
all data transmitted from the weather reconnaissance aircraft.
To arrange for an interview, tour, or speaker or to obtain
more general information on the Hurricane Hunters, call the
403rd Wing Public Affairs or write to:
403rd Wing Public Affairs
701 Fisher Street, Suite 103
Keesler AFB, MS 39534-2572
Phone: (228) 377-2056
Directory of Organizations
271

Fax: (228) 377-0755
URL: http://www.hurricanehunters.org
Members of the media can obtain permission to ﬂy on one of the
reconnaissance ﬂights into a hurricane. Please note that only
media members are allowed to accompany the Hurricane Hunters,
and all other requests will be turned down.
Educational Material and Publications 
The Hurricane Hunters’ website is the best source of information.
It contains a “Frequently Asked Questions” section, a cyberﬂight
into a hurricane with detailed descriptions of each phase of the
ﬂight, how to decipher reconnaissance weather data code such as
the “vortex” messages, historical information on the Hurricane
Hunters, and photos. They also publish a pamphlet titled 53rd
Weather Reconnaissance Squadron: Hurricane Hunters.
Hurricane Research Division
The Hurricane Research Division (HRD) is a part of the Atlantic
Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory (AOML) within the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) of the
U.S. Department of Commerce. The HRD is NOAA’s primary focus
for studies of tropical cyclones and tropical weather systems. A key
component of HRD activity is its annual ﬁeld program of ﬂights
aboard NOAA’s research aircraft (two WP-3D turboprops for
analysis up to 30,000 feet and a Gulfstream IV-SP jet for analysis
between 30,000 and 45,000 feet) ﬂown by NOAA’s Aircraft Opera-
tions Center (AOC) (see discussion later in this chapter).
The HRD is engaged in several hurricane research topics.
These investigations involve theoretical studies, computer model-
ing, and the collection and examination of measurements taken 
in actual hurricanes. The ultimate goal is to improve scientiﬁc
understanding of how and why hurricanes form, strengthen, and
dissipate, which will lead to improved forecasting of tropical
weather and mitigation of damage from the destructive power of
hurricanes.
The HRD’s main research topics are:
272
Directory of Organizations

1. The improvement of hurricane track forecasts, particu-
larly with the use of dropsondes, which measure the ver-
tical proﬁle of wind, temperature, and moisture around a
hurricane. The HRD is currently investigating the impact
of dropsondes on NCEP weather models and is also
exploring new techniques for better track prediction,
such as “targeted observations” and “ensemble forecast-
ing” (see chapter 2).
2. The improvement of hurricane intensity forecasts. By ana-
lyzing data acquired during the aircraft ﬁeld missions,
HRD scientists are studying air-sea interaction under hur-
ricanes and structural changes in the eyewall region. The
HRD considers transmitting the aircraft data real-time to
the NHC a top priority and is developing techniques to
transmit real-time Doppler radar winds and hurricane
surface winds. The HRD is also improving statistical
schemes and weather models used to predict hurricane
intensity. Finally, the HRD is investigating how mineral
dust, dry air, and wind surges from Africa affect Atlantic
tropical cyclone genesis and intensity change.
3. To conduct hurricane climate studies. The frequency with
which hurricanes occur varies across all timescales, from
weekly to centennial. HRD personnel are conducting stud-
ies to increase understanding of these variations. The HRD
also is developing schemes to improve the predictability of
hurricane occurrence and intensity over monthly, seasonal,
interannual, decadal, and longer timescales.
4. To address the impact of hurricanes at landfall. The HRD
is developing methodologies to improve FEMA’s emer-
gency preparedness software, how buildings and vegeta-
tion impact hurricane winds, the extratropical transition
of hurricanes, and the physics on why hurricanes weaken
inland. A major HRD research priority is to improve 
precipitation forecasting for tropical storms and hurri-
canes. Drowning from inland ﬂooding in land-falling
tropical storms and hurricanes is the leading cause of
death by these storms in the past thirty years in the
United States.
These are lofty goals, and therefore the HRD collaborates
with many organizations such as NASA and several universities
to attack these issues.
Directory of Organizations
273

HRD’s address is:
NOAA/AOML/HRD
4301 Rickenbacker Causeway
Miami, FL 33149
Phone: (305) 361-4400
Fax: (305) 361-4402
URL: http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd
Educational Material and Publications 
The HRD website is loaded with information about the organiza-
tion’s research activities and general hurricane information. The
website contains probably the most popular hurricane link on the
Internet, “Frequently Asked Questions” about hurricanes. Another
link gives detailed advice on storm shutters. The AOML produces
a bimonthly newsletter, AOML Keynotes, that can also be viewed
on the website in pdf format (go to http://www.aoml. noaa.gov
and look in the “Keynotes” link). HRD scientists have published
numerous articles in AMS journals and other publications; a list is
available on the website. See the section “National Weather Ser-
vice” for a detailed listing of other related NOAA pamphlets.
The HRD website also provides many unique data sets, all
of which are free to download. These include:
1. The historical HURricane DATabase (HURDAT). This
contains the best determination of positions and intensi-
ties for past Atlantic and East Paciﬁc tropical storms and
hurricanes and is therefore also sometimes called the
“best track” data set. The Atlantic best track data set is
quite extensive, going back to the year 1851, and is used
for analyzing past hurricane tracks as well as climate
studies.
2. The H*Wind data set. The HRD has developed a com-
puter program that integrates wind data in and around a
hurricane from a variety of platforms into a single wind
analysis reduced to the surface. This product is transmit-
ted real-time to the NHC and is also used in poststorm
analysis and research.
3. Dropsonde data from the hurricane research ﬂights.
4. Radar images and upper-level wind graphics during the
hurricane research ﬂights.
274
Directory of Organizations

5. Flight videos.
6. More technical data for scientists, such as cloud micro-
physics data, bathythermograph data, and stepped-
frequency microwave radiometer data.
The instruments used to derive these data sets are described
on the HRD website as well as on the AOC website. Please refer to
the AOC section below for more information. Chapter 4 chroni-
cles HRD’s history and ﬁeld programs in more detail.
Joint Typhoon Warning Center
The Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) provides tropical
cyclone forecasting support to the U.S. military and to allies within
the Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean basins under the auspices of the
Naval Paciﬁc Meteorology and Oceanography Center in Hawaii.
The JTWC was founded May 1, 1959, when the U.S. commander-
in-chief of Paciﬁc forces directed that a single tropical cyclone
warning center be established for the western North Paciﬁc
region. The JTWC is a combined U.S. Air Force/Navy organiza-
tion in which the air force provides forecasters and the navy pro-
vides the facility, equipment, and forecasters.
The mission of the JTWC includes:
1. Continuous monitoring of all tropical weather activity in
the Northern and Southern Hemispheres from the west
coast of the Americas to the east coast of Africa, the issuance
of Tropical Cyclone Formation Alerts when tropical cyclone
development is anticipated, and the issuance of warnings
for all signiﬁcant tropical cyclones in these regions. This
covers all tropical cyclone regions except the Atlantic.
2. Poststorm analysis of tropical cyclones occurring within
the western North Paciﬁc and North Indian Oceans.
3. Cooperation with the Naval Research Laboratory in
Monterey, California, on operational evaluation of tropi-
cal cyclone models and forecast aids and the develop-
ment of new techniques to support operational forecast
requirements.
For the ﬁrst forty years, the JTWC was located at Nimitz
Hill, Guam. Due to the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC)
Directory of Organizations
275

legislation of 1995, the JTWC moved from Guam to Hawaii in
1999. The address is:
Naval Paciﬁc Meteorology and Oceanography Center/
Joint Typhoon Warning Center
Box 113
Pearl Harbor, HI 96860-5050
Phone: (808) 474-5301
URL: http://www.npmoc.navy.mil
Forecasters at the Naval Paciﬁc Meteorology and Oceanography
Center use this information to help the navy prepare for hurricane
events, with particular attention on ship routing and whether to
deploy the ﬂeet (sortie) from naval bases. Deploying ships is expen-
sive and time-consuming, costing more than $1 million in fuel and
several hundreds of thousands of dollars in staff costs, so such deci-
sions are made meticulously. (Incidentally, the Naval Atlantic Mete-
orology and Oceanography command serves a similar function for
Atlantic hurricanes but uses guidance from the NHC.)
Educational Material and Publications 
Every year, the JTWC staff prepares an Annual Tropical Cyclone
Report summarizing tropical cyclone activity in the Paciﬁc and
Indian Ocean basins. These annual reports are available on their
website. In addition, a historical data set containing positions and
intensities for West Paciﬁc and Australian tropical cyclones (com-
monly called besttrack data sets) can be downloaded for free. The
JTWC’s website also contains current typhoon information and
forecasts. It also provides current satellite, radar, and weather
analysis data as well as model forecasts.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) was
established by Congress in the National Aeronautics and Space
Act of 1958 “to provide for research into problems of ﬂight within
and outside the earth’s atmosphere, and for other purposes.”
While NASA certainly contains a rich space ﬂight history, the
organization also conducts research on remote sensing, climate
topics, and weather topics (including hurricanes). Different
276
Directory of Organizations

NASA organizations, spread throughout the country, participate
in weather, hurricane, and satellite research. The most active
organizations include Goddard Space Flight Center, Langley
Research Center, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, but other
NASA afﬁliations also have weather-related projects. NASA also
participates in weather research ﬁeld programs. With regard to
hurricane research, the Convection And Moisture EXperiments
(CAMEX) are devoted to the study of hurricane tracking, struc-
ture, and cloud physics using NASA-funded aircraft remote-
sensing instrumentation.
NASA plays a major role in operational and research satellite
technology and has been the leading agency for conducting
research on cutting-edge satellite technology since TIROS in 1960
(see chapter 4). Generally, between ﬁfteen and twenty NASA
research satellites are orbiting the earth. This decade, NASA
deployed the next generation of satellite research through the con-
cept of the Earth Observing System (EOS), in which a constellation
of satellites (Aqua, Terra, and Aura) provide a near-simultaneous
view of the major earth components (land, oceans, atmosphere,
ice, and life) in unprecedented detail. Other notable satellites used
in hurricane research (see chapter 4 for more details) include the
Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), which is a “ﬂying
rain gauge” and contains several sensors for detecting moisture
and rainfall, and QuikSCAT, which measures surface winds over
the data-sparse ocean. This data is used experimentally by fore-
casters and for research by scientists. NASA also continues to
design, develop, and launch the nation’s civilian operational envi-
ronmental satellites, in both polar and geostationary orbits, by
agreement with NOAA. NOAA then assumes control of these
satellites after activation and provides the resulting data on a con-
tinuous basis for weather prediction and other services.
The address of NASA headquarters is:
NASA Headquarters
Washington, DC 20546-0001
Phone: (202) 358-0000
URL: http://www.nasa.gov
Educational Material and Publications 
There is no shortage of weather publications and satellite pictures at
NASA websites. The main NASA website contains links discussing
Directory of Organizations
277

all earth science activities. The reader is also referred to the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory, Goddard, and Langley websites for fur-
ther browsing.
National Centers for Environmental Prediction
The National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) was
established in 1958 as the National Meteorological Center. Since
the center’s beginning, operational weather forecasting has trans-
formed from an infant discipline into a mature science. Under the
auspices of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra-
tion’s National Weather Service, the NCEP provides operational
forecast products worldwide and is the starting point for nearly
all weather forecasts in the United States. It is comprised of nine
national forecast centers. Each center has a speciﬁc responsibility
for a portion of the NCEP products and services suite. Seven of
the centers provide direct products to users, while two of the cen-
ters provide essential support through developing and running
complex computer models of the atmosphere on supercomputers,
the world’s fastest computers. One of the centers providing direct
forecast products is the Tropical Prediction Center, which contains
the National Hurricane Center.
The NCEP’s address is:
National Centers for Environmental Prediction
5200 Auth Road
Camp Springs, MD 20746
To contact the NCEP, the website http://www.ncep.noaa.gov
provides a contact section. For phone calls, it is probably best to
call the NOAA Ofﬁce of Public Affairs (see NOAA section for
more details).
Educational Material and Publications 
A brochure titled National Centers for Environmental Prediction
describes the individual function of the nine centers. See the sec-
tion “National Weather Service” for a detailed listing of other
related NOAA pamphlets. The NCEP website provides links to all
nine forecast centers. In addition to the “Tropical Prediction Cen-
ter” link, valuable centers to review online during hurricane
threats are the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center (HPC) and
278
Directory of Organizations

the NCEP Central Operations (NCO). The HPC specializes in rain
forecasts and predicts heavy precipitation potential during hurri-
cane threats. The NCO link shows weather model products (see
chapter 2 for details). The National Hurricane Center analyzes the
suite of computer models (which typically show slightly different
hurricane track predictions) to make their best forecast judg-
ments. By looking at the NCO weather model graphics, you could
make your own hurricane forecast!
National Climatic Data Center
The National Climatic Data Center (NCDC) is one of several agen-
cies in the National Environmental Satellite and Data Information
Service (NESDIS). NESDIS administers the development and use
of all operational civilian satellite-based environmental remote
sensing systems and the national and international acquisition,
processing, dissemination, and exchange of environmental data.
The NCDC is one of the more popular NESDIS entities because it
contains the world’s largest archive of weather data and docu-
mentation (going back 150 years). NCDC receives a staggering
amount of weather data, over 200 gigabytes (the equivalent of 72
million pages) per day. Data sources include satellites, radar, air-
craft, ships, radiosonde, and other unique meteorology platforms
as well as National Weather Service products. The NCDC also
maintains one of the four World Data Centers in which data are
exchanged among countries by cooperative agreement. The
NCDC produces numerous publications involving weather data
of hourly, three-hourly, daily, and monthly time frames.
The NCDC provides a wide range of services including con-
sultations, subscriptions, publications, copies of original records,
certiﬁcations, specialized climate studies, and other climate-
related activities. Services are delivered on a variety of media,
including online (Internet) access, CD-ROMs, magnetic tape,
ﬂoppy disks, computer tabulations, maps, and publications.
There is a charge for most services, with a discount for online
access. However, some of the more popular data sets are available
at the website for free.
The address of NCDC is:
National Climatic Data Center
Federal Building
151 Patton Avenue
Directory of Organizations
279

Asheville, NC 28801-5001
Phone: (828) 271-4800
Fax: (828) 271-4876
Email: ncdc.info@noaa.gov
URL: http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov
Educational Material and Publications
Many data sets and products related to hurricanes are available
from the NCDC website. A valuable and popular book, Tropical
Cyclones of the North Atlantic Ocean, 1871–1992, provides historical
track information and statistical summaries. For information
about a speciﬁc hurricane, the publication Storm Data is highly rec-
ommended. Storm Data documents signiﬁcant U.S. storms (includ-
ing hurricanes) and contains statistics on property damage and
human casualties. In addition, special reports on some notable
hurricanes are available for free download. Graphics showing his-
torical land-falling hurricanes is on the website. A publication
titled Products and Services Guide contains detailed information
about all NCDC products, data sets, and publications.
National Oceanographic 
and Atmospheric Administration
The National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) heads the U.S. weather and ocean programs, coastal and
marine resource programs, and related research programs. NOAA
is subdivided into the following ﬁve branches: the National Weather
Service (NWS); the National Ocean Service; the National Marine
Fisheries Service; the National Environmental Satellite, Data and
Information Service (NESDIS); and NOAA Research. The NWS 
is actively involved in hurricane forecasting; NESDIS provides 
satellite information and archives weather data; and NOAA
Research (through the Ofﬁce of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research)
contains several laboratories where weather research is conducted,
including the Hurricane Research Division and the Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics Laboratory. Many of the organizations are de-
scribed in this chapter.
NOAA also participates in the Global Learning and Obser-
vations to Beneﬁt the Environment (GLOBE) program, which is a
280
Directory of Organizations

worldwide network of students, teachers, and scientists working
together to study and understand the environment. GLOBE stu-
dents make environmental observations at or near their schools
and report their data through the Internet to the scientists, who
provide feedback to the students about their data.
NOAA can be contacted at:
NOAA Public and Constituent Affairs
U.S. Department of Commerce
14th Street & Constitution Ave., N.W.
Room 6217
Washington, DC 20230
Phone: (202) 482-6090
Fax: (202) 482-3154
URL: http://www.noaa.gov
Educational Material and Publications 
There are numerous links related to weather education on
NOAA’s home page as well as links to its branches, which contain
more specialized information. As you browse this website, you
will ﬁnd satellite photos, graphics, tables, and news releases.
NOAA Public Affairs publishes a series of brochures known as
the NOAA Backgrounder that contain detailed information about
speciﬁc NOAA organizations, weather topics, and ocean topics.
See the section “National Weather Service” for a detailed listing of
other related NOAA publications (available for download in pdf
format).
National Weather Association
The mission of the National Weather Association (NWA) is to help,
support, and promote excellence in operational meteorology and
related activities. The NWA started as a nonproﬁt organization,
incorporated in Washington, D.C., in 1975 mainly to serve individ-
uals interested in operational meteorology and related activities. It
has grown to more than 2,800 members, 50 corporate members,
and more than 250 subscribers including many colleges, universi-
ties, and weather service agencies. There are no restrictions on
membership except age. Applicants should be 18 years old or
older. Members receive publications (see below), discounts on
Directory of Organizations
281

buying NWA publications, and discounted registration fees for
the NWA Annual Meeting. The NWA has an annual awards pro-
gram and offers the NWA Seal of Approval to be earned by radio
and television weathercasters to promote standards and quality
broadcasting.
To join the NWA, print out the application form available
from its website and send it to the NWA ofﬁce, or request an
application from the NWA ofﬁce at:
NWA Ofﬁce
1697 Capri Way
Charlottesville, VA 22911-3534
Phone or Fax: (434) 296-9966
Email: NatWeaAsoc@aol.com
URL: http://www.nwas.org
One can also join by simply sending into the NWA ofﬁce a short
letter of request with your full name, mailing address, and other
information that is helpful to the NWA: name of employment
organization or name of school attending, phone numbers for
home, ofﬁce, and fax, and email address. A check or money order
in U.S. funds is also required to cover the annual dues. As of this
writing, ﬁrst-year dues are $25 ($12.50 for full-time students). Fol-
low-on year dues are $28 ($14 for full-time students).
Educational Material and Publications 
Members receive the quarterly journal National Weather Digest and
a monthly newsletter. Nonmembers may also purchase these pub-
lications. While the NWA publications are not as technical as the
AMS publications, in general they are written for operational
meteorologists who have had at least a few meteorology classes
and some forecasting experience, and only those with a meteorol-
ogy degree will really appreciate the articles.
However, many of the books available from the NWA are
nontechnical and suitable for all people interested in a variety of
weather topics. A monograph on satellites contains sections on
hurricane imagery: Satellite Imagery Interpretation for Forecasters. A
25-mm slide show (with a script) titled Polar Orbiter Satellite
Imagery Interpretation provides examples of polar orbiter satellite
imagery of all weather phenomenon, including hurricanes.
The NWA also provides grants to K–12 teachers to help
improve the education of their students in meteorology.
282
Directory of Organizations

National Weather Service
The mission of the National Weather Service (NWS) is to provide
weather, hydrologic, and climate forecasts and warnings for the
United States, its territories, adjacent waters, and ocean areas for
the protection of life and property and the enhancement of the
national economy. TV weathercasters and private meteorology
companies prepare their forecasts using the basic forecast and
weather observation data the NWS issues continuously all day. In
addition, NWS data and products are used by private meteorolo-
gists for the provision of all specialized services, including con-
sultant work and environmental impact studies.
Another interesting component of the NWS is the Meteoro-
logical Development Laboratory (MDL), which develops and
implements scientiﬁc techniques into NWS operations. One aspect
of this branch is the development of storm surge forecasts. Another
aspect is the development of short-term forecasts of severe weather
events, including hurricanes, using Doppler radar, satellites, and
other state-of-the-art platforms. Their website is http://www.nws.
noaa.gov/mdl/.
The NWS Headquarters’ address is:
National Weather Service Headquarters
1325 East-West Highway
Silver Spring, MD 20910
URL: http://www.nws.noaa.gov (also called http://weather.gov)
The best method for contacting the NWS is through the NWS
website, which contains an interactive form (in the “Contact Us”
section) for general inquiries. You can also call the nearest NWS
ofﬁce for local information. The website shows your nearest NWS
ofﬁce and provides a contact phone number.
Educational Material and Publications 
Numerous pamphlets and brochures are available on the NWS
website. You can also order them through your local NWS ofﬁce,
the Red Cross, or the NOAA Outreach Unit at:
NOAA Ofﬁce of Public and Constituent Affairs
Outreach Unit
1305 East-West Highway
Directory of Organizations
283

Silver Spring, MD 20910
Phone: (202) 482-6090
Publications relevant to hurricanes include Floods . . . The Awesome
Power!; Flash Flood (wallet card); Hurricane Flooding: A Deadly
Inland Danger; Red Cross: Are You Ready for a Flood or Flash Flood?;
River and Flood Program (Hydrologic Services Program); The Hidden
Danger: Low Water Crossing; Survival in a Hurricane; Hawaiian Hur-
ricane Safety Measures with Central Paciﬁc Tracking Chart; Hurricanes
. . . Unleashing Nature’s Fury; Hurricane! A Familiarization Booklet;
Red Cross: Are You Ready for a Hurricane? A Mariner’s Guide to
Marine Weather Services: Coastal, Offshore, and High Seas; NOAA
Weather Radio Pamphlet; NOAA Weather Radio . . . The Voice of the
National Weather Service; Red Cross: Atlantic Hurricane Tracking
Map; Paciﬁc Hurricane Tracking Map; Atlantic Hurricane Names:
2003–2008; and Paciﬁc Hurricane Names: 2003–2008.
The website provides a comprehensive education section.
Available commercial videos, slides, books, posters, charts, soft-
ware are listed along with the vendors who sell them. Classroom
ideas and experiments are presented in an excellent manner.
Complete and detailed weather information is available at
the NWS-sponsored website http://weather.gov. Current weather
warnings, forecasts, weather maps, radar, river information, and
satellite imagery are shown. Animations of radar and satellite
images are also available. Links to specialized forecast services are
provided for aviation, hydrology, severe weather, weather impacts
on ﬁres, climate, and hurricanes. For instance, the link on hurri-
canes goes to the National Hurricane Center website. Another link
is provided to the National Centers for Environmental Prediction
to access weather model graphics.
The Meteorological Development Laboratory (MDL) pro-
duces an online monthly progress. The NOAA technical report
Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from Hurricanes contains documen-
tation about the MDL hurricane storm surge model called
SLOSH.
Naval Research Laboratory
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) conducts a broadly-based
multidisciplinary program of scientiﬁc research and advanced
technological development directed toward maritime applica-
284
Directory of Organizations

tions of new and improved materials, techniques, equipment, sys-
tems, and ocean, atmospheric, and space sciences and related
technologies. Congress commissioned the NRL in 1923 for the
Department of the Navy. Today it is a ﬁeld command under the
chief of naval research and has thousands of personnel (nearly
half of these PhDs) who address basic research issues concerning
the navy’s environment of sea, sky, and space. The NRL’s parent
organization is the Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR) in Arlington,
Virginia. The ONR coordinates, executes, and promotes the sci-
ence and technology programs of the U.S. Navy and Marine
Corps through universities, government laboratories, and non-
proﬁt and for-proﬁt organizations.
The NRL has a number of major sites and facilities. The
largest facility is located at the Stennis Space Center in Bay St.
Louis, Mississippi. Others include a facility at the Naval Post-
graduate School in Monterey, California, and the Chesapeake Bay
Detachment in Maryland. Additional sites are located in Mary-
land, Virginia, Alabama, and Florida. The unit responsible for
atmospheric research is the Marine Meteorology Division in 
Monterey.
The address of the Monterey facility is:
Naval Research Laboratory
Marine Meteorology Division
7 Grace Hopper Ave.
Monterey, CA 93943-5502
Phone: (408) 656-4721
Fax: (408) 656-4314
URL: http://www.nrlmry.navy.mil/
NRL also has a public affairs ofﬁcer who can be contacted at (202)
767-2541.
Educational Material and Publications 
A web page under the “Project Demonstration” link of http://
www.nrlmry.navy.mil is a popular site for hurricane enthusiasts.
It contains global real-time satellite images of hurricanes and
other weather phenomenon displayed in a variety of imagery for-
mats, some of which are experimental. Products include cloud-
motion winds, surface winds, rainfall estimates, microwave
images (which show storm structure better), and high-resolution
Directory of Organizations
285

visible, infrared, and water vapor imagery. Satellite animations of
these products are also online and are perhaps the best in the
world. A unique product is the merging of both geostationary and
polar orbiter products for composite pictures centered over a hur-
ricane. Warning and track forecasts relevant to the times of the
satellite data sets are shown for all storms. Hurricane forecasters
from around the world use this state-of-the-art website.
The NRL publishes an annual review that contains short
articles covering a variety of research areas. It also publishes The
NRL Fact Book every two years; this is primarily a reference source
for information on NRL’s organizational structure, capabilities,
and points of contact. An online publication titled Tropical Cyclone
Forecaster’s Reference Guide presents a technical but readable docu-
ment on all facets of tropical cyclones. A list of all books, technical
reports, and journal articles is available on the website.
A major concern of the U.S. Navy during hurricane threats is
whether vessels should remain at port or evade the storm at sea.
This decision is based on the circumstances of the hurricane, the
facilities of the port, and the capabilities of the vessel and crew.
Guidelines for all major ports are provided to the navy (and prob-
ably useful to all mariners) in the following publications, most of
which are online and also available by CD-ROM: Hurricane
Havens Handbook for the North Atlantic Ocean; Typhoon Havens
Handbook for the Western Paciﬁc and Indian Oceans; and Typhoon
Haven Evaluations for Brisbane, Cairns, Mackay, Townsville, Darwin,
Fremantle, Stirling, Geraldton, and Bunbury.
Copies of NRL reports and technical publications can be
obtained from:
Ruth H. Hooker Research Library
4555 Overlook Ave., S.W.
Washington, DC 20375
(202) 767-READ (7323)
URL: http://infoweb2.nrl.navy.mil/
NOAA Aircraft Operations Center
The NOAA Aircraft Operations Center (AOC) provides specially
equipped aircraft in support of NOAA’s research, including hur-
ricane research missions. The AOC was created in 1983 to con-
solidate the aviation assets operated by NOAA, including jet,
286
Directory of Organizations

propeller, helicopter, and amphibious aircraft. The aircraft: (1) col-
lect scientiﬁc data essential to NOAA’s weather research on hurri-
canes (by the Hurricane Research Division), tornadoes, winter
storms, air pollution, and other atmospheric and oceanographic
issues; (2) provide coastal and aeronautical charting and pho-
togrammetry; and (3) conduct mammal, ﬁsh, and marine sanctu-
ary surveys. The AOC supports all NOAA line ofﬁces and also
participates in joint projects with other government agencies such
as NASA, the Ofﬁce of Naval Research, the Naval Research Labo-
ratories, the U.S. Geological Survey, the U.S. Corps of Engineers,
and the National Science Foundation.
AOC pilots are members of the NOAACorps and are among
the few pilots in the world who are trained and qualiﬁed to ﬂy
into hurricanes at dangerously low altitudes. These ofﬁcers also
occupy a few of the key managerial and staff positions within the
AOC. The NOAA Corps makes up approximately 30 percent of
the personnel within AOC, with the remaining staff comprised of
civilian government employees whose background include ﬂight
engineer, aircraft maintenance technician, meteorologist, elec-
tronic engineer, electronic technician, computer specialist, and
administrative and support personnel.
The aircraft used for hurricane research, reconnaissance,
and surveillance include the Lockheed WP-3D 43 Orions and a 
G-IV Gulfstream Jet. The P-3s are the ﬂagship aircraft of the AOC
and are among the most advanced airborne environmental
research platforms ﬂying today. Built in 1975 and 1976, their cruis-
ing speed is 374 mph with a maximum range varying from 2,645
to 3,450 miles depending on their altitude. Since these are turbo-
prop aircraft, the maximum altitude they can attain is 27,000 feet.
They can carry up to twenty personnel, including up to ten scien-
tists or observers.
The planes are essentially ﬂying weather stations, each with
a variety of proven and experimental aircraft sensors, radar
instruments, and expendable probes. The following weather
ﬁelds are measured or inferred from instrumentation on one or
both aircraft: (1) rainfall and cloud distribution from the airborne
radars; (2) winds above 3,000 feet in three dimensions from the
airborne radars (requires two planes since one plane gives only
two-dimensional winds); (3) ﬂight-level temperature, dewpoint,
wind, and solar and terrestrial radiation; (4) atmospheric electriﬁ-
cation; (5) cloud particles and aerosols; (6) remotely sensed rain
rate and surface winds using a C-band SCATerometer (C-SCAT)
Directory of Organizations
287

and a Stepped Frequency Microwave Radiometer (SFMR); (7)
wind proﬁles below 3,000 feet using the Imaging Wind and Rain
Airborne Proﬁler (IWRAP), a C- and Ku-band conically scanning
Doppler radar; (8) camera and video equipment to capture the
atmosphere and ocean environment on ﬁlm; (9) ocean waves
using a Scanning Radar Altimeter (SRA); (10) wind and heat
ﬂuxes using the Best Atmospheric Turbulence (BAT) probe; (11)
moisture ﬂuxes from a humidiometer probe; (12) sea spray
droplet spectra from a Cloud Imaging Probe (CIP); and (13) sea-
surface temperature in clear regions from a downward-looking,
dual-frequency infrared radiometer. 
The following have also been measured from deployed
instruments in recent ﬁeld programs: (1) vertical proﬁles of tem-
perature, relative humidity, and wind using GPS dropsondes; (2)
surface pressure from dropsondes; (3) vertical proﬁles of ocean
temperature using Airborne Expendable BathyThermographs
(AXBTs); (4) vertical proﬁles of ocean currents using Airborne
Expendable Current Probes (AXCPs); (5) vertical proﬁles of ocean
salinity and temperature using Airborne Expendable Conductiv-
ity Temperature Depth (AXCTD) probes; and (6) air temperature,
ocean waves, sea surface temperature, and water temperature
proﬁles from drifting buoys or submergible ﬂoats.
In 1997, the Gulfstream IV was added to the AOC’s ﬂeet.
Since the Gulfstream is a jet, it can reach altitudes of 45,000 feet; it
is also faster than the P-3s (with a cruising speed of 506 mph) and
can ﬂy farther (with a maximum range of 4,700 miles). The jet’s
primary mission is hurricane surveillance and will complement
the work of the P-3s by ﬂying into the steering currents of hurri-
canes up to 45,000 feet. The objective is to release dropsondes at
multiple points around hurricanes from 40,000 feet and above. The
dropsondes measure atmospheric conditions that surround and
steer a hurricane. This data, which are ingested into hurricane fore-
cast computer models, improves hurricane track forecasts and pro-
vide a better scientiﬁc understanding of hurricane intensiﬁcation.
Amusingly, the planes are named after the Muppet charac-
ters (with the permission of Jim Henson Productions). Over a
decade ago, one P-3 had become such a maintenance problem that
it earned the nickname “The Pig” in the maintenance and opera-
tions departments. In 1987, a new crew chief and ﬂight engineer,
with some hard work, corrected many of the problems, cleaned
the plane to a sparkling ﬁnish, and then redubbed the plane “Miss
Piggy” because of that Muppet character’s fussy nature about her
appearance. Later, the second P-3 was renamed after Miss Piggy’s
288
Directory of Organizations

best friend, Kermit. From 1991 to 1992, Jim Henson Productions
worked with the AOC to develop the character art that now
adorns the fuselage of each P-3. When NOAApurchased the Gulf-
stream, it was designated “Gonzo” because of its large, nonstan-
dard nose radome. (Muppet characters are copyrighted by Jim
Henson Productions.)
The planes are ﬂown by members of the NOAA Corps, the
smallest of the seven uniformed services of the United States.
Originally founded for ship surveying missions in 1917 by Con-
gress, the NOAA Corps consists of 200–300 ofﬁcers, most of
whom have a bachelor of science in engineering, mathematics,
physics, computer science, meteorology, oceanography, biology,
or a related discipline. Some have degrees in business or adminis-
tration. Ofﬁcers operate NOAA ships, ﬂy NOAA aircraft, lead
mobile ﬁeld parties, conduct diving operations, manage research
projects, and serve in staff positions. Recruits experience no mili-
tary drill or stringent physical training but undergo demanding
ship-handling exercises with classroom instruction in leadership,
seamanship, navigation, and military protocol.
The AOC is located in Tampa, Florida. The address is:
NOAA/Aircraft Operations Center (AOC)
P.O. Box 6829
MacDill Air Force Base, FL 33608-0829
Phone: (813) 828-3310
Fax: (813) 828-3266
URL: http://www.aoc.noaa.gov
Individuals interested in a NOAA Corps career should contact:
NOAA Corps Commissioned Personnel Center
1315 East-West Highway, Room 12100
Silver Spring, MD 20910-3282
Phone: 1-800-299-6622
Email: NOAACorps.Recruiting@noaa.gov
URL: http://www.noaacorps.noaa.gov
Educational Material and Publications 
A variety of brochures are available from the AOC, including an
annual report, additional aircraft information, historical infor-
mation, and general AOC facts. Additional information about the
aircraft and its instrumentation can also be obtained from the
Directory of Organizations
289

Hurricane Research Division’s home page, http://www.aoml.
noaa.gov/hrd. More information about the GPS dropwindsonde
can be found at the University Corporation for Atmospheric
Research Atmospheric Technology Division’s website, http://
www.atd.ucar.edu. The brochure Commissioned Ofﬁcer Corps is
available from the NOAA Corps and provides more information
on the organization.
Tropical Prediction Center
The Tropical Prediction Center (TCP), where the National Hurri-
cane Center is located, is a branch of the National Centers for Envi-
ronmental Prediction (NCEP). The mission of the TPC is to save
lives, mitigate property loss, and improve economic efﬁciency by
issuing the best watches, warnings, forecasts and analyses of haz-
ardous tropical weather and by increasing understanding of these
hazards. Through international agreement, the TPC has responsi-
bility within the World Meteorological Organization to generate
and coordinate tropical cyclone analysis and forecast products for
twenty-four countries in the Americas and the Caribbean and for
the waters of the North Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea, Gulf of
Mexico, and the eastern North Paciﬁc Ocean. TPC products are
distributed through a close working relationship with the media
and emergency management communities.
To fulﬁll this mission, the TPC is comprised of three
branches: the National Hurricane Center (NHC), the Tropical
Analysis and Forecast Branch (TAFB), and the Technical Support
Branch (TSB).
National Hurricane Center
The NHC maintains a continuous watch on hurricanes over the
Atlantic, Caribbean, Gulf of Mexico, and the eastern Paciﬁc from
May 15 through November 30. The NHC prepares and issues
forecasts, watches, and warnings within text advisories and
graphical products. Although many countries issue their own
warnings, they generally base them on direct discussions with,
and guidance from, the NHC. During other parts of the year, the
NHC conducts an extensive outreach and education program,
training U.S. emergency managers and representatives from
many other countries affected by hurricanes. The NHC is also
actively involved in public awareness programs.
290
Directory of Organizations

Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch
The TAFB provides year-round marine weather analysis and fore-
cast products over the tropical and subtropical waters of the east-
ern North and South Paciﬁc and the North Atlantic basin. The
branch also produces satellite-based weather interpretation and
rainfall estimates for the international community. In addition,
the TAFB provides support to the NHC when additional forecast-
ers are necessary and also provides hurricane position and inten-
sity estimates from the Dvorak technique.
Technical Support Branch
The TSB provides support for TPC computer and communica-
tions systems, including the McIDAS satellite data processing sys-
tems. The TSB also maintains a small applied research unit that
develops tools for hurricane and tropical weather analysis and
prediction. In addition, the TSB has a storm surge group that pro-
vides information for developing evacuation procedures for
coastal areas.
The TPC is located on the campus of the Florida International
University in southwestern Dade County in Miami, Florida. The
address is:
Tropical Prediction Center
11691 S.W. 17th Street
Miami, FL 33165-2149
Phone: (305) 229-4470 
URL: http://www.nhc.noaa.gov
The TPC has a public affairs ofﬁcer who can be contacted at (305)
229-4404.
Educational Material and Publications 
Numerous hurricane topics are available either as direct links or
in pdf format in the brochure section of the website. Topics
include general hurricane information and hurricane prepared-
ness issues. A variety of technical reports have been published
(see website) and are available from NTIS (see chapter 8). A pop-
ular technical report written by three NHC forecasters is The Dead-
liest, Costliest, and Most Intense United States Hurricanes of this
Century (and Other Frequently Requested Hurricane Facts), and an
Directory of Organizations
291

abbreviated but updated version of this report is available on the
website. Each year NHC forecasters publish annual hurricane
summaries in Weatherwise, the Mariner’s Weather Log, WMO’s
Annual Global Tropical Cyclone Summary, and the Monthly Weather
Review (please see chapter 8 for details on ordering these publica-
tions). In addition, all Monthly Weather Review hurricane sum-
maries are available online in pdf format in the history archive
section. See the section “National Weather Service” for a detailed
listing of other related NOAA pamphlets. The publication
Mariner’s Guide for Hurricane Awareness is a very informative pub-
lication on hurricanes in general, with a focus on boating issues,
and is available online in pdf format.
The website itself contains TAFB weather products, NHC
advisories (see the glossary), abundant hurricane education mate-
rial, archives of previous years’ advisories, veriﬁcation of previous
NHC forecasts, and hurricane statistics (some are reproduced in
chapter 6). Previous tropical storm and hurricane track graphics
are online. The popular HURricane DATabase (HURDAT), which
contains six-hourly center locations and intensities of historical
tropical storms and hurricanes, can be downloaded from the NHC
website. Hurricane tracking charts can also be downloaded.
The Weather Channel
Started in 1982, the Weather Channel has been the only cable TV
media outlet providing twenty-four-hour weather coverage and
special weather programs seven days a week. The Weather Chan-
nel also provides weather forecasts to some newspapers and
radio stations. During the hurricane season, a Tropical Update is
provided about ten minutes before each hour. The Tropical
Update shows satellite photos of all tropical disturbances, tropical
storms, and hurricanes in the Atlantic and East Paciﬁc; the west-
ern North Paciﬁc also is sometimes shown. During hurricane
landfall situations, coverage expands, including frequent discus-
sions with the Weather Channel’s hurricane experts and live
reports from meteorologists near the expected area of landfall.
Current weather information and forecasts are available on its
website, http://weather.com. In addition, weather-related news
and seasonal features are online. During the U.S. hurricane sea-
son, the “Tropical Update” website link provides satellite pic-
tures, past storm track, forecast track, storm surge forecast, and
292
Directory of Organizations

wind distribution, as well as a summary from a Weather Channel
meteorologist.
The Weather Channel’s headquarters are in Atlanta, Geor-
gia. It does not want phone and address information released
publicly. However, its website http://weather.com contains an
interactive section for general inquiries, resume submission, etc.,
in the “Contact Us” link.
Educational Material and Publications 
The Weather Channel’s online bookstore sells general weather
books and videos. The Weather Channel: The Improbable Rise of a
Media Phenomenon is about the history of this cable network. The
Weather Channel also airs “The Weather Classroom” on Mondays
and Thursdays at 4:00 through 4:30 A.M. EST, appropriate for
grades 5–10. Each episode includes three separate weather-
related topics lasting eight minutes each. Educators can tape the
program and use it in their classrooms. The Weather Channel has
also set up an education website at http://www.weatherclass-
room.com. Students can issue their own weather forecasts and
record weather observations or obtain information on careers in
meteorology. An online weather encyclopedia and glossary are
also available. The Weather Channel presents two thirty-minute
shows every day between 8 P.M. and 9 P.M. EST called “Storm Sto-
ries,” and often the episode is on a particular hurricane.
World Meteorological Organization
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is the successor
to the International Meteorological Organization (IMO), founded
in 1873 to coordinate global research on weather and climate. In
1947, the IMO met in Washington, D.C., and decided to restruc-
ture as a specialized agency of the United Nations. This agency
was named the World Meteorological Organization and was
located with the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland. It began
operations in 1951.
The purposes of the WMO are to facilitate international
cooperation in the establishment of networks of stations for mak-
ing meteorological, hydrological, and other observations and to
promote the rapid exchange of meteorological information, the
standardization of meteorological observations, and the uniform
Directory of Organizations
293

publication of observations and statistics. It also furthers the
application of meteorology to aviation, shipping, water problems,
agriculture, and other human activities; promotes operational
hydrology; and encourages research and training in meteorology.
The 187-member organization, consisting of countries and territo-
ries, provides the authoritative scientiﬁc voice on the state and
behavior of the earth’s atmosphere and climate.
The WMO is structured in eight technical commissions cov-
ering atmospheric sciences, basic systems, climatology, hydrology,
instruments and methods of observations, aeronautical meteorol-
ogy, marine meteorology, and agricultural meteorology. Members
are grouped in six regional associations: Africa, Asia, South Amer-
ica, North and Central America, the Southwest Paciﬁc, and
Europe. The WMO’s governance consists of a congress of mem-
bers that meets every four years and an executive council, consist-
ing of a subset of thirty-seven members, that conducts business
yearly between congresses. Leadership consists of an elected pres-
ident, three vice presidents, and an appointed secretary-general.
The secretary-general directs a professional staff called the secre-
tariat. The leadership positions have a tradition of maintaining
balance between the developing and developed countries.
The WMO administers several programs, including the
important World Weather Watch (WWW). The mission of the
WWW is to coordinate and monitor observational and telecom-
munication facilities all over the world so that every country has
available the information it needs to provide weather services on
a day-to-day basis. The WWW implements standardization of
measuring methods and techniques, common telecommunication
procedures, and the presentation of observed data and processed
information in a manner that is understood by all, regardless of
language.
The WWW is also involved in long-term planning and
research. One component of the WWW is the Tropical Cyclone
Programme (TCP). The main purpose of the Tropical Cyclone Pro-
gramme is to assist WMO members, through an internationally
coordinated program, in their efforts to mitigate tropical cyclone
disasters. Under the coordination of the WWW, this program is
designed to assist more than ﬁfty countries in areas vulnerable to
tropical cyclones, to minimize destruction and loss of life by
improving forecasting and warning systems, and to encourage
members to establish national disaster prevention and prepared-
ness measures. Another contribution from this program has been
several important technical publications.
294
Directory of Organizations

For general information, the WMO address is:
World Meteorological Organization
7 bis Avenue de la Paix
SP 2300
1211 Geneva 2
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 730 8111
Fax: + 41 22 730 8181
Email: wmo@wmo.int
URL: http://www.wmo.int
Publication orders in the United States and Canada must be made
through the American Meteorological Society (see the AMS web-
site publication section for details). Other countries need to order
directly from the WMO.
Educational Material and Publications 
The WMO produces many publications. With respect to hurri-
canes, the technical reports “Global Perspectives on Tropical
Cyclones” and “Global Guide to Tropical Cyclone Forecasting”
are strongly recommended. The WMO issues an annual report as
well as an annual summary of global tropical cyclone activity for
all ﬁve WMO regions (see chapter 3 for details). A variety of
reports are available that cover workshops, conferences, forecast
manuals, regional WMO operational plans, training courses,
WMO observation code, telecommunications of weather data,
weather data management, and disaster prevention/prepared-
ness. Decadal progress reports have been prepared, such as
Twenty Years of Progress and Achievement of the WMO Tropical
Cyclone Programme (1980–1999) and A Decade of Progress: The World
Meteorological Organization in the 1990s and the New Century. Many
of these reports are available online in Microsoft Word or html for-
mat. In particular, the “Global Guide to Tropical Cyclone Fore-
casting” is a popular link. The WMO also provides a link to
websites of the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centres
(RSMCs) and the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centres (TCWCs).
Directory of Organizations
295


8
Print, Nonprint, 
and Internet Resources
T
his chapter describes a number of publications on hurricanes,
separated by topical sections. These books range from elemen-
tary to general to technical in nature and focus on topics such
as individual storms, hurricane preparedness, and societal impact
of hurricanes.
Almost all recent (after 1990) U.S. government publications
and technical reports can be ordered through the National Techni-
cal Information Service (see information at end of chapter). Should
your library not contain a particular book, try having your librar-
ian order it through an interlibrary loan from another library. A
good starting point is the NOAA library, which contains a user-
friendly interface for listing books by author, subject, title, or key-
word on its website (see http://www.lib.noaa.gov for details; click
on its “Library Catalog” link to begin the reference search). 
Updates of Internet links are provided on the author’s web-
site at http://www.drﬁtz.net.
Print Resources
Young Adult (Elementary) 
Books on Hurricanes
These books contain basic information about hurricanes supple-
mented with good pictures. They are ideal for students and other
297

readers looking for a short, easy to read book on hurricanes. The
author S. Lee also provides some science projects.
Sharon M. Carpenter and T. G. Carpenter. The Hurricane Handbook:
A Practical Guide for Residents of the Hurricane Belt. Tailored Tours
Publications, 1993. Inc. 128 pp. ISBN 0-96312-414-5.
S. Hood and J. Barkan. Hurricanes! Simon and Schuster Chil-
dren’s, 1998, 64 pp. ISBN 0-68982-017-8.
P. Lauber. Hurricanes: Earth’s Mightiest Storms. New York: Scholas-
tic, 1996, 64 pp. ISBN 0-59047-4065.
S. Lee. Hurricanes. New York: Franklin Watts, 1993, 63 pp. ISBN 0-
53115-665-6.
Mariner Books
S. Dashew and L. Dashew. Mariner’s Weather Handbook. Tucson,
AZ: Beowulf, 1998, 594 pp. ISBN 0-96580-282-5.
This book provides forecasting and boating tactics used by pro-
fessional routers and ocean-racing navigators. It includes tech-
niques for reading the ocean for weather changes as well as
analyzing weather maps. All facets of weather are covered. Quick
reference checklists and executive summaries are also provided in
the page margins. With regard to hurricanes (and the reason this
source is included in this chapter), this handbook gives one of the
best descriptions of using the Dvorak technique of estimating
hurricane intensity from satellite images. In addition, it provides
basic information on hurricane climatology, radio broadcast
schedules for hurricane forecasts worldwide, and how to navigate
around a hurricane.
E. J. Holweg. Mariner’s Guide for Hurricane Awareness in the North
Atlantic Basin. Miami, FL: National Hurricane Center, 2000, 72 pp.
Available at http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/marinersguide.pdf.
This electronic book, available from the National Hurricane Cen-
ter website, is a thorough source for mariners on navigating dur-
ing the hurricane season as well as an excellent reference for
general readers interested in hurricanes. Chapter 1 discusses hur-
ricane basics, including deﬁnitions, formation, structure, and
observations at sea. Chapter 2 is on hurricane motion, genesis
regions, and general tracks in different ocean basins. Chapter 3
298
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

discusses NHC products and methods for obtaining information
at sea by radio, radio fax, high frequency (HF) transmission,
medium frequency (MF) transmission, very high frequency
(VHF) transmission, and the National Weather Service weather
radio. Chapter 4 gives guidance on how to avoid hurricanes 
at sea.
General Books on Hurricanes
M. Allaby. A Chronology of Weather. New York: Facts on File, 1998,
154 pp. ISBN 0-81605-321-0.
The largest part of this book consists of two chronological
accounts. One lists some of the major weather disasters (i.e., hur-
ricanes, tornadoes, droughts, etc.) by the years in which they
occurred, from 3200 B.C. through 1997. The other chronological
account lists important developments in the understanding of
weather and improvements in forecasting. This book also con-
tains thirty simple weather experiments that can be done at home
to elucidate basic weather principles.
Peter R. Chaston. Hurricanes! Kearney, MO: Chaston Scientiﬁc,
1996, 182 pp. ISBN 0-96451-722-1.
This book, written by a meteorologist, covers many aspects of
hurricanes, including life cycles, structure, the Safﬁr-Simpson
scale, wind destruction and storm surge damage, and spectacular
hurricane stories from survivors. It also includes 100 photos from
reconnaissance ﬂights, weather satellites, and radars as well as
easy to understand graphics. The history of hurricanes is chroni-
cled from Columbus’s time through today. Maps detail the tracks
of hurricanes, and the naming of these storms and the hurricane
category scale of intensity are explained.
D. E. Fisher. The Scariest Place on Earth. New York: Random House,
1994, 250 pp. ISBN 0-679-42775-9.
Dr. David Fisher is a professor of cosmochemistry and director of
the Environmental Science Program at the University of Miami,
and he personally experienced Hurricane Andrew’s landfall. This
book is written in a three-topic fashion, jumping back and forth
from one topic to another. These three topics include historical
accounts and facts on hurricanes, a description of hurricanes, and
a chronological account of his Andrew experience. Fisher also
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
299

presents a reasonably balanced discussion on whether or not
global warming will increase the number and intensity of hurri-
canes. However, some readers may not appreciate his conclusion
that global warming is already occurring.
J. Fishman and R. Kalish. The Weather Revolution: Innovations and
Imminent Breakthroughs in Accurate Forecasting. New York: Plenum,
1994, 276 pp. ISBN 0-30644-764-9.
This excellent book discusses the history of weather-related tech-
nological advances, including computer models, satellites, hurri-
cane forecasting, severe weather forecasting, and long-term
weather prediction. The authors write about complex topics in a
thorough but understandable fashion.
R. Pielke Jr. and R. Pielke Sr., eds. Storms, vol. 1. London: Rout-
ledge, 2000, 563 pp. ISBN 0-41517-239-X.
This book summarizes the current state of knowledge of storms
and forecasting procedures, including their hazards from both a
scientiﬁc and social standpoint. Part 2 of this book is devoted to
hurricanes, with several articles written by experts on seasonal
predictions, the WMO Tropical Cyclone Programme, warning
and mitigation procedures, and the impact of these storms on
Australia, China, and India.
J. R. Fleming, ed. Historical Essays on Meteorology. Boston, MA:
American Meteorological Society, 1996, 617 pp. ISBN 1-87822-017-9.
This is a book on modern meteorology history. It chronicles
achievements in theoretical meteorology, computer models,
observation tools, cloud physics, hurricanes, convection, light-
ning, climatology, hydrology, the private sector, and education.
Dr. Mark DeMaria, a former researcher at the National Hurricane
Center and the Hurricane Research Division, presents in chapter 9
a history of hurricane forecasting from 1920 to the present.
D. M. Ludlum. Early American Hurricanes, 1492–1870. Boston, MA:
American Meteorological Society, 1989, 198 pp. ISBN 0-93387-616-5.
This book describes, in chronological order, the hurricanes prior
to 1870 that either closely approached or actually crossed the
Atlantic and Gulf coastlines of the United States. The book is
300
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

divided into two periods. The ﬁrst section starts with the voyages
of Christopher Columbus and extends through the years of explo-
ration and colonization to the end of 1814. The year 1814 makes a
convenient break, for the ﬁrst federal attempts to institute a
national weather observing service started during the War of
1812. With the cessation of hostilities in 1815, an era of worldwide
peace emerged with vigorous worldwide trading accompanied
by weather logs by merchant marines. The second section spans
this period, carries through the Civil War, and extends to 1870, the
year the U.S. Signal Corps established its storm warning system.
This book’s documentation is meticulous, with much detail, and
is a must for any weather historian.
B. Sheets and J. Williams. Hurricane Watch. New York: Vintage,
2001, 331 pp. ISBN 0-37570-390-X.
Written by a former director of the National Hurricane Center and
USA Today’s weather page editor, this book gives an excellent
overview on the growth of hurricane knowledge. It provides in
chronological order each major discovery and weather technology
breakthrough as well as many tragedies due to the early ignorance
of these storms. The book is written in a dramatic, journalistic style
woven with facts. The ﬁrst three chapters cover the ﬁrst few hun-
dred years through the early 1900s. Chapter 4 is about hurricane
reconnaissance and is followed by the evolving of hurricane fore-
casting and science in the 1950s (chapter 5) and the 1960s (chapter
6). Chapter 7 talks about weather modiﬁcation experiments in
Project STORMFURY, and chapter 8 covers the 1970s and 1980s.
Chapter 9 is devoted to how computer modeling has dramatically
improved hurricane track forecasts. The book ﬁnishes with a
chapter on Hurricane Andrew, which Bob Sheets experienced
ﬁrsthand. This book was recognized by the American Meteoro-
logical Society with the Louis J. Battan Award, which honors each
year’s best general public weather book.
R. Simpson, R. Anthes, M. Garstang, and J. M. Simpson, eds. Hur-
ricane! Coping with Disaster. Special Publication Vol. 55. Washing-
ton, D.C.: American Geophysical Union, 2002, 360 pp. ISBN
0-87590-298-7 (hardcover), ISBN 0-87590-297-9 (paper).
This book chronicles the century-long struggle to understand the
enormous power and devastating impact of hurricanes. Some
authors provide a look at recent advances and promising new
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
301

technologies for tracking and predicting the path of hurricanes.
Others examine what has been done and what still could be done
to reduce the vulnerability of people and property to this extreme
force of nature.
Stories from the men and women who pioneered the effort
to understand, track, and cope with hurricanes bring this volume
to life. The book has something to offer a wide range of readers
who may be interested in the history of scientiﬁc discovery, the
science and technology of hurricane research, or the societal and
economic challenges posed by major disasters.
P. Davies. Inside the Hurricane. New York: Henry Holt, 2000, 264
pp. ISBN 0-80506-574-1.
The author spent the 1999 hurricane season with the scientists of
the National Hurricane Center and the Hurricane Research Divi-
sion in Miami as they studied a series of fascinating and intense
hurricanes and struggled with budget limitations. Davies sup-
plies a vivid description of the devastation of Hurricane Mitch
and Hurricane Floyd and the experience of people in the midst of
the storm. Davies ﬂew missions with the NOAA’s P-3 hurricane
hunter aircraft and gives a good feel for the combination of raw
excitement, pure terror, and occasional boredom of these ﬂights.
Popular Weather Magazines
The Mariner’s Weather Log, a publication of the National Weather
Service (NWS), contains articles, news, and information about
marine weather events and phenomenon, storms at sea, weather
forecasting, the NWS Voluntary Observing Ship (VOS) program,
Port Meteorological Ofﬁcers (PMOs), cooperating ships ofﬁcers,
and their vessels. The magazine provides meteorological informa-
tion to the maritime community and contains a comprehensive
chronicle on marine weather. It also recognizes ships ofﬁcers for
their efforts as voluntary weather observers and allows NWS to
maintain contact with and communicate with more than 10,000
shipboard observers (ships ofﬁcers) in the merchant marine,
NOAA Corps, U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Navy, etc. In addition, the
magazine provides annual summaries of hurricane activity for all
ocean basins worldwide. The Mariner’s Weather Log is published
three times yearly (April, August, and December) and is distrib-
uted to mariners, marine institutions, the shipping industry, sci-
302
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

entists, educational and research facilities, educators, libraries,
government agencies, and the general public.
Weatherwise, available bimonthly, is a popular magazine
intended for weather enthusiasts in the general public. Articles
are written about a wide variety of weather-related issues, includ-
ing hurricanes, with compelling columns and color photographs.
In the February/March issue, the previous Atlantic and Paciﬁc
hurricane seasons are reviewed.
Hurricane Preparation
Staff of the Miami Herald. Hurricanes: How to Prepare and Recover.
Kansas City, MO: Andrews and McMeel, 1993, 125 pp. ISBN 
0-83621-718-7.
Based on the Hurricane Andrew experience, this book provides
in-depth instructions on how to prepare one’s home and family
for a hurricane onslaught. Instructions for recovery and repairs
are also included.
Societal Impact of Hurricanes
R. A. Cook and M. Soltani, eds. Hurricanes of 1992. New York: Amer-
ican Society of Civil Engineers, 1994, 808 pp. ISBN 0-78440-046-6.
The year 1992 was unusually costly due to three major hurricanes
that hit U.S. coasts or territories: Hurricane Andrew, Hurricane
Iniki, and Typhoon Omar, causing more than $35 billion in dam-
ages. This proceeding contains papers presented at a conference
in Miami, Florida, to disseminate information on wind hazards
and managing wind-related disasters based on experiences with
these three storms. Topics include (1) wind speeds and wind
loads; (2) risk assessment; (3) insurance; (4) damage assessment;
(5) building codes; (6) building code implementation and enforce-
ment; (7) coastal structures; (8) manufactured, residential, and
commercial structures; (9) essential facilities; and (10) lifelines.
Henry F. Diaz, ed. Hurricanes: Climate and Socioeconomic Impacts.
Verlag, Germany: Springer, 1997, 292 pp. ISBN 3-54062-078-8.
This book contains reports from a workshop titled “Atlantic Hur-
ricane Variability on Decadal Time Scales: Nature, Causes, and
Socioeconomic Impacts” held at the National Hurricane Center
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
303

during February 9–10, 1995. Climate change issues are discussed
along with socioeconomic issues such as private insurance losses
and the availability of insurance for coastal residents in the future.
This workshop assembled experts with different views on the
range and predictability of potential climatic changes and their
impact on tropical cyclone activity. The potential of massive eco-
nomic losses when Atlantic hurricane activity increases to the
level observed in the 1940s and 1950s is discussed.
James B. Elsner and A. Birol Kara. Hurricanes of the North Atlantic. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1999, 496 pp. ISBN 0-19512-508-8.
This book is intended for both hurricane climate researchers and
users of hurricane information. Topics include hurricane climatol-
ogy, a history of the major Atlantic hurricanes, forecasting meth-
ods, and methods for analyzing the social and economic impact of
hurricanes.
Roger A. Pielke Jr. and Roger A. Pielke Sr. Hurricanes: Their Nature
and Impacts on Society. Chichester, England: John Wiley, 1997, 279
pp. ISBN 0-47197-354-8.
This book discusses the increased vulnerability of the U.S. coast-
line to hurricanes due to population increases and property devel-
opment. It addresses both the scientiﬁc and societal impacts of
hurricanes and illustrates the economic beneﬁt of hurricane
research in an era where scientiﬁc research is under pressure to
demonstrate a better connection to societal needs. Suggestions for
policy implementation are included. A well-done description of
hurricanes is contained in the ﬁrst few chapters.
A good supplementary text, which includes a more basic
description of hurricanes, archives of annual Atlantic hurricane
tracks, and pictures of the ocean inside hurricanes of different
intensities, is:
Roger A. Pielke. The Hurricane. London: Routledge, 1990, 228 pp.
ISBN 0–41503-705–0.
Technical
R. A. Anthes. Tropical Cyclones: Their Evolution, Structure, and
Effects. Boston, MA: American Meteorological Society, 1982, 208
pp. ISBN 0-93387-654-8.
304
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

Although this book contains somewhat dated material, it presents
informative sections discussing the mathematical framework of
hurricanes as well as their structure and life cycle. One chapter
nicely summarizes the history of hurricane computer simulations.
The reader should be warned that this book is quite technical, but
it gives a ﬂavor of what true hurricane research is about.
R. L. Elsberry, W. M. Frank, G. J. Holland, J. D. Jarrell, and R. L.
Southern. A Global View of Tropical Cyclones. Montgomery, CA:
Naval Postgraduate School, 1987, 195 pp.
Eighty-three experts in tropical cyclone forecasting, research, and
warning strategies from twenty-eight different countries attended
the International Workshop on Tropical Cyclones held in
Bangkok, Thailand, from November 25 to December 5, 1986. This
was the ﬁrst truly worldwide gathering of tropical cyclone spe-
cialists. The result is this book, which, while dated, contains perti-
nent material that tropical experts still reference. Some parts are
technical, but most of the book is quite readable. Chapters are
included on tropical cyclone observations, structure, genesis,
motion, and their impacts. The ﬁnal chapter discusses warning
and mitigation strategies.
G. R. Foley, H. E. Willoughby, J. L. McBride, R. L. Elsberry, I. Ginis,
and L. Chen. Global Perspectives on Tropical Cyclones. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Meteorological Organization, Report No.
TCP-38, 1995, 289 pp.
In many respects, this book is a revision of the book A Global View
of Tropical Cyclones to reﬂect developments in tropical cyclone
research since 1987. Global Perspectives on Tropical Cyclones pro-
vides the state of hurricane science through 1994. A chapter on
ocean interactions with tropical cyclones has also been added.
This book compliments the World Meteorological Organiza-
tion’s operational forecasting publication A Global Guide to Tropical
Cyclone Forecasting, edited by Greg Holland (described in this 
section).
P. J. Hebert, J. D. Jarrell, and M. Mayﬁeld. The Deadliest, Costliest,
and Most Intense United States Hurricanes of this Century (and Other
Frequently Requested Hurricane Facts). NOAA Technical Memoran-
dum NWS TPC-1, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis-
tration, National Weather Service, National Hurricane Center,
Miami, Florida, 1997.
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
305

This technical report provides detailed data about the most destruc-
tive U.S. hurricanes of the twentieth century. Statistics are included
about the most expensive hurricanes, the most intense hurricanes,
U.S. landfalls by state and by decade, etc., plus other hurricane facts.
Updated versions of this report are contained on the National Hur-
ricane Center website http://www.nhc.noaa.gov.
G. J. Holland. Global Guide to Tropical Cyclone Forecasting. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Meteorological Organization, Report No.
TCP-31, 1993, 347 pp.
The purpose of this book is to complement the theoretical and
descriptive content of A Global View of Tropical Cyclones and Global
Perspectives on Tropical Cyclones (described elsewhere in this sec-
tion). This book is a practical guide to tropical cyclone forecasting.
Included are chapters on track forecasting, satellite interpretation,
storm surge forecasting, seasonal forecasting, forecast center
strategies, and warning procedures. An informative appendix of
tables, deﬁnitions, and tropical cyclone records is included at the
back of the book. This book is also available at the World Meteo-
rological Organization website http://www.wmo.int., as well as
http://www. bom.gov.au/brmc (look for additional links under
the mesoscale section to ﬁnd this book).
E. N. Rappaport and J. Fernandez-Partagas. The Deadliest Atlantic
Tropical Cyclones, 1492–1994. NOAA Technical Memorandum
NWS NHC 47, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admini-
stration, National Weather Service, National Hurricane Center,
Miami, Florida, 1995.
This technical report contains information on tropical cyclones
than have caused twenty-ﬁve or more deaths in any part of the
Atlantic basin. It also contains information on cyclones that may
have caused twenty-ﬁve or more deaths but where the total was
not quantiﬁed by sources. Updated versions of this report are con-
tained on the National Hurricane Center website http://www.
nhc.noaa.gov.
General Meteorology Books and Textbooks
Hurricanes embody almost all meteorological processes. For an
understanding of hurricanes, a solid background in all atmos-
306
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

pheric phenomena is required. Therefore, the interested reader is
urged to consult a good general meteorology textbook. A few of
the many possible choices are listed below:
C. D. Ahrens. Meteorology Today. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing,
1994, 591 pp. ISBN 0-31402-779-3.
E. W. Danielson, J. Levin, and E. Abrams. Meteorology. Boston,
MA: WCB/McGraw-Hill, 1998, 462 pp. ISBN 0-69721-711-6.
J. M. Nese and L. M. Grenci. A World of Weather: Fundamentals 
of Meteorology. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt, 1998, 539 pp. ISBN 
0-78723-578-4.
J. Williams. The Weather Book. Arlington, VA: USA Today, 1992, 212
pp. ISBN 0-67973-669-7.
Encyclopedias and Glossaries on Meteorology
D. Longshore. Encyclopedia of Hurricanes, Typhoons, and Cyclones. New
York: Checkmark Books, 2000, 372 pp. ISBN 0-81604-291-8.
Organized by topic in alphabetical order, this book discusses
famous U.S. hurricanes as well as some well-known international
typhoons and tropical cyclones. A discussion of all countries and
U.S. states impacted by these storms is provided. Biographies of
key ﬁgures in hurricane science are included. Meteorological
terms are also deﬁned.
S. H. Schneider. Encyclopedia of Climate and Weather. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1998, 929 pp. ISBN 0-19509-485-9.
In addition to a good general meteorology textbook, a meteorol-
ogy encyclopedia is useful because hundreds of topics are
arranged in alphabetical order with liberal cross-references. This
two-volume set is suitable for high school and above, with clear
explanations and abundant ﬁgures on a variety of climate and
weather topics. Each article is written by an authority on the sub-
ject. A glossary is provided in the back.
I. W. Geer, ed. Glossary of Weather and Climate. Boston, MA: Amer-
ican Meteorological Society, 1996, 272 pp. ISBN 1-87822-021-7.
Written for a general audience, this book contains a glossary of more
than 3,000 terms frequently used in discussions and descriptions of
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
307

meteorological and climatological phenomena. In addition, the glos-
sary includes deﬁnitions of related oceanic and hydrologic terms.
Todd S. Glickman, ed. Glossary of Meteorology. Boston, MA: Amer-
ican Meteorological Society, 2000, 855 pp. ISBN 1-87822-034-9.
This book attempts to deﬁne every important meteorological term
found in the literature today and is intended for meteorologists. It
presents deﬁnitions that are understandable to any meteorologist
yet palpable to the specialist. Most are terms from mainstream mete-
orology, but the book also draws from related disciplines in hydrol-
ogy, oceanography, geomagnetism, and astrophysics. Some terms
come from the basic sciences of physics and chemistry; some are
from applicable portions of mathematics, statistics, and electronics;
and others are from the folk language of weather lore through many
ages. Each deﬁnition represents the effort of three or more individu-
als, at least two of whom are specialists in the subject area. These
terms can also be viewed at http://amsglossary. allenpress.com. 
State Books
John M. Williams and Iver W. Duedall. Florida Hurricanes and Trop-
ical Storms, 1871–2001. Gainesville: University Press of Florida,
2002, 176 pp. ISBN 0-81302-494-3.
This book is a comprehensive chronological guide to hurricanes,
tropical storms, and near-misses that have impacted Florida since
1871. Additional features include statistics for each hurricane and
tropical storm, eyewitness accounts, photos, ten-year tracking
charts, and a hurricane preparedness checklist.
Jay Barnes. Florida’s Hurricane History. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1998, 384 pp. ISBN 0-80784-748-8.
This book provides a detailed record of more than 100 hurricanes
that have struck Florida in the last 450 years based on newspaper
reports, National Weather Service records, books, and eyewitness
accounts. Information on the basics of hurricane structure, forma-
tion, naming, and forecasting is included, and there are more than
200 photographs, maps, and illustrations.
Jay Barnes. North Carolina’s Hurricane History. Chapel Hill: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press, 1998, 206 pp. ISBN 0-80784-507-8.
308
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

This book provides a detailed record of more than ﬁfty hurricanes
that have struck North Carolina from 1526 to 1996 based on news-
paper reports, National Weather Service records, books, and eye-
witness accounts. A chapter is also included on Northeasters,
which are nontropical winter cyclones that are near hurricane
intensity and impact the U.S. East Coast each winter. Northeasters
inﬂict storm surge and wind damage similar to tropical storms
and category 1 hurricanes.
Individual Hurricanes
The Galveston Hurricane of 1900
J. E. Weems. A Weekend in September. College Station: Texas A&M
University Press, 1997, 192 pp. ISBN 0-89096-390-8.
Weems interviews survivors of the worst natural disaster in U.S.
history—the Galveston Hurricane of 1900 that inundated the
island with an 8–15-foot storm surge that killed at least 6,000 peo-
ple on the island and 2,000 farther inland. Efforts to protect Galve-
ston from future hurricanes are also discussed. A 6-mile-long
seawall was completed in 1905, and the elevation of the entire city
was raised 8 feet to a height of 17 feet. A storm in 1915 tested the
newly reshaped island, and although there was some damage, the
community survived. Based on this result, the length of the sea-
wall was expanded to 10.5 miles.
E. Larson. Isaac’s Storm. New York: Crown Publishers, Random
House, 1999, 323 pp. ISBN 0-60960-2330.
This book is a combined dramatization and factual account of the
1900 Galveston Hurricane, with the island’s chief meteorologist
Isaac Cline as the central character. The book delves into Cline’s
career and character and also exposes the ineptitude, corruption,
and arrogance of Weather Bureau administrators in Washington,
D.C., who ignored warnings from Cuban meteorologists that a
hurricane was in the Gulf of Mexico and instead stated that the
storm was headed into the Atlantic; no warning was ever issued
from Washington, D.C. This is probably the most factual book on
Isaac Cline and the Galveston Hurricane to date and exposes
many myths about this tragedy. Also included is brief historical
information of other Atlantic hurricanes before 1900.
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
309

P. B. Bixel and E. H. Turner. Galveston and the 1900 Storm. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 2001, 190 pp. ISBN 0-29270-884-X.
The authors draw on survivors’ accounts to vividly recreate the
storms and its aftermath. They describe how the work of local
relief agencies grew into lasting reforms. The book is full of illus-
trations and pictures to complement the text.
The 1926 Florida Hurricane
L. F. Reardon. The Florida Hurricane & Disaster, 1926. Coral Gables,
FL: Arva Parks, 1986, 112 pp. ISBN 0-91438-104-0.
This is a reproduction of a survivor’s diary, supplemented with
pictures, of the 1926 hurricane that hit Miami and killed 243 peo-
ple. An updated version also includes a description of Hurricane
Andrew (1992), which is uniquely appended upside down start-
ing on the back cover.
The 1928 Okeechobee Hurricane
L. W. Will. Okeechobee Hurricane: Killer Storms in the Everglades. St.
Petersburg, FL: Great Outdoors, 1971, 204 pp. No ISBN.
This book is an eyewitness account of the 1928 Okeechobee Hur-
ricane that killed and injured thousands of people. Most of the
deaths were by drowning, but some were due to snakebites as
people climbed into trees to escape the ﬂoodwaters, only to ﬁnd
hordes of venomous water mocassins also seeking shelter.
Although the lake is actually inland, the hurricane forced a storm
surge that broke the eastern earthen dike on the southern end of
Lake Okeechobee. This calamity occurred within a few miles 
of a large city and a world-famous resort, yet so isolated was 
the location that no one knew what had happened for three 
days afterward. The author also discusses a similar situation from
another hurricane that occurred two years earlier and killed about
200 at the Okeechobee town of Moore Haven. Pictures of the 
aftermath from both of these hurricanes are included. As a result
of these disasters, a levee (called the Herbert Hoover Dike in
honor of the president who supported its construction) that com-
pares in size to the Great Wall of China was built to prevent fur-
ther disasters.
R. Mykle. Killer ‘Cane: The Deadly Hurricane of 1928. Lanham, MD:
Cooper Square Press, 2002, 235 pp. ISBN 0-81541-207-X.
310
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

This book is a historical novel, written from an omnipresent point
of view. Most of the characters actually lived, and the story is built
on real-life experiences. Mykle’s description of the effects on the
residents of Lake Okeechobee from the failure of the dike and
subsequent ﬂooding are the climax and highlight of this book,
with vivid, horrifying descriptions of the storm and its aftermath.
Mykle also estimates the deaths at 3,000, higher than ofﬁcial esti-
mates, pointing out that the search for bodies ended early due to
a lack of funding and that many of those killed were migrant
African Americans with no available records who were buried in
mass graves. Such a death toll would be the second worst from a
hurricane after the 1900 Galveston hurricane.
The 1935 Labor Day Hurricane
W. Drye. Storm of the Century: The Labor Day Hurricane of 1935. Wash-
ington, D.C.: National Geographic, 2002, 326 pp. ISBN 0-79228-010-5.
The most powerful hurricane ever to hit the United States, this cate-
gory 5 storm with a storm surge possibly 30 feet high killed 400 peo-
ple, many of them veterans working on a New Deal construction
project in the Florida Keys. This book describes how administra-
tors ignored early warnings and were tardy in sending a train to
evacuate the workers, resulting in much controversy and political
acrimony. Congressional committees tried to assign blame to
inadequate forecasts (the prediction was south of the Keys), and
the president successfully diverted any blame from the executive
branch. This story is told from the viewpoint of storm survivors,
relief workers, and government ofﬁcials. It also describes the dif-
ﬁculties in communications in 1935, the ability of sea captains to
read the ocean, and how local people prepared for the storm.
The New England Hurricane (1938)
J. McCarthy. Hurricane! New York: American Heritage, 1969, 168
pp. ISBN 0-82810-020-9.
This book provides a detailed account of the 1938 New England
Hurricane that made landfall on the south shore of Long Island,
New York. This storm surprised New England residents, who were
unaccustomed to hurricanes (the last hurricane had hit New
England in 1815). Because the hurricane moved at a fast speed of 60
mph, and because the Weather Bureau had thought it would
recurve offshore and not hit the United States, there was little prepa-
ration time available. Even worse, the storm hit at the equinox when
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
311

tides are usually their highest. Ten-foot waves atop a 20-foot
storm surge killed 600 people and caused immense property
damage. Barrier islands were swept so bare that rescue workers
used phone company charts to determine where houses once
stood. This book includes detailed eyewitness accounts and pho-
tos of the storm’s aftermath.
E. S. Allen. A Wind to Shake the World: The Story of the 1938 Hurri-
cane. Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1976, 370 pp.
Allen had just started his ﬁrst job as a newspaper reporter when
the storm hit September 21, 1938. In addition to his own experi-
ence, the book tells the story of others caught by the storm.
W. E. Minsinger. The 1938 Hurricane. Boston, MA: American Mete-
orological Society, 1988, 128 pp. ISBN 9-99338-216-7.
To mark the ﬁftieth anniversary of this destructive hurricane, the
American Meteorological Society, in cooperation with the Blue
Hill Meteorological Observatory, published this detailed histori-
cal volume complete with more than 120 archival photographs
and weather charts.
R. A. Scotti. Sudden Sea: The Great Hurricane of 1938. New York: Lit-
tle, Brown, 2003, 288 pp. ISBN 0-31673-911-1.
This book provides an account of the storm drawn from news-
paper accounts, personal testimony of survivors, and archival
sources and is set within the stage of the times. However, it con-
tains a novelist’s touch. It also includes the recollections of
Katherine Hepburn, whose family had a summer home on the
Connecticut shore.
The Great American Hurricane (1944)
The North Atlantic Hurricane. Charleston, SC: Historical Publica-
tions, 64 pp.
This storm received its name because it traveled up the Atlantic
coast from North Carolina to the Northeast, making landfall in
Rhode Island. This publication chronicles the path and destruc-
tion of this storm that impacted the whole East Coast.
Hurricane Hazel (1954)
Hurricane Hazel Lashes North Carolina: The Great Storm in Pictures.
Charleston, SC: Historical Publications.
312
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

This publication shows the damage caused by Hurricane Hazel
on the North Carolina shoreline. Hazel is the most destructive
storm in North Carolina’s history, producing wind gusts of 150
mph and a high storm surge superimposed on the highest ocean
tide of the year.
Hurricane Camille (1969)
Miss Camille 1969. Charleston, SC: Historical Publications.
This publication contains photographs of Hurricane Camille’s
incredible destruction on the Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama,
and Florida Gulf Coast. This is only one of three U.S. hurricanes
that made landfall as category 5 storms.
P. D. Hearn. Miss Camille: Monster Storm of the Gulf Coast. Hattiesburg:
University Press of Mississippi, 2004, 176 pp. ISBN 1-57806-655-7.
This book provides a history of Hurricane Camille, weaving in
many historical accounts of those who experienced the storm. The
book was motivated by forty-one interviews originally conducted
by University of Southern Mississippi’s R. W. Pyle, who con-
ducted the survivor interviews a decade after Camille. The book
dramatically gives vivid accounts during and after the storm.
Some examples include: how a 73-year-old lady left her wheel-
chair, rode the waves, and survived; how two priests clung to stat-
ues of the Virgin Mary and St. Joseph at St. Michael’s Catholic
Church and survived; and how a man, who lost most of his fam-
ily, coped with his grief by helping rescue workers recover their
bodies and lay them side by side. Hundreds of domesticated ani-
mals were killed because no facilities or food existed for their care.
The book discusses the emotional trauma in the aftermath of the
storm. One woman stepped outside, surveyed the damage, and
shot herself. Divorces quadrupled. The book also contains a his-
tory of hurricanes and the settlement of the Gulf Coast.
Hurricane Frederic (1979)
Hurricane Frederic. Charleston, SC: Historical Publications. 88 pp.
This publication contains photographs of Hurricane Frederic’s
impact on southern Alabama. Interviews with those who experi-
enced Frederic’s landfall are included.
Hurricane Alicia (1983)
A. Kareem, ed. Hurricane Alicia: One Year Later. New York: Ameri-
can Society of Civil Engineers, 1985, 335 pp. ISBN 0-87262-466-8.
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
313

Due to its inland passage over downtown Houston, Hurricane Ali-
cia (1983) caused more than $1 billion in damage, providing 
a future glimpse of what hurricanes can do in heavily developed
coastal areas. This proceeding contains papers presented at a 
conference in Galveston, Texas, devoted to areas of meteorology,
structural behavior, hurricane-resistant design, and building codes.
Hurricane Hugo (1989)
Storm of the Century: Hurricane Hugo. Charleston, SC: Historical
Publications. 76 pp.
This publication contains photographs of Hurricane Hugo’s
impact on Charleston, South Carolina. Interviews with those who
experienced Hugo’s landfall are included. One interview vividly
describes a family’s struggle with Hugo’s storm surge as it broke
through their home, causing them to scamper to the attic.
William P. Fox. Lunatic Wind: Surviving the Storm of the Century.
Chapel Hill, SC: Algonquin, 1992, 197 pp. ISBN 0-94557-542-4.
Fox, who has experience writing ﬁction and ﬁlm scripts, docu-
ments in a dramatic style the landfall of Hurricane Hugo near
Charleston, South Carolina. Based on detailed research and inter-
views, Fox recreates the night of the storm and the people caught
in it. Mixing factual reporting with the storytelling of a novelist,
Fox’s docudrama recreates the experience of people who sur-
vived: two teenage surfers who had to swim for their lives as their
beachhouse is destroyed by the storm surge; a shrimp boat cap-
tain determined to ride out the storm in the town’s harbor; and
more than 1,000 people in an evacuation shelter (a high school
gym) that is ﬂooded by the storm surge because the shelter is at a
lower elevation than local charts had indicated. He also recounts
the aftermath of people surviving with no electricity, no phones,
and destroyed homes.
Hurricane Bob (1991)
New England’s Nightmare: Hurricane Bob. Charleston, SC: Histori-
cal Publications, 97 pp.
This publication contains photographs of Hurricane Bob’s impact
on the northeastern United States. Interviews with those who
experienced Bob’s landfall are included.
314
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

Hurricane Andrew (1992)
W. E. Bailey. Andrew’s Legacy: Winds of Change. West Palm Beach,
FL: Telshare, 1999, 197 pp. ISBN 0-91028-714-7.
Dr. William E. Bailey is an attorney and consultant specializing in
insurance industry issues and litigation. In October 1992, Bailey
was appointed codirector of the Hurricane Insurance Information
Center in Miami, Florida. The center, established right after Hur-
ricane Andrew wreaked its havoc on South Florida, was formed
by seven national insurance trade associations and twenty-two
major insurance companies, representing the largest segment of
property insurers in the state. Its one-year mission was to inform
and educate consumers and the media regarding insurance issues
in the aftermath of the costliest natural disaster in U.S. history.
One of the results of this experience is this book, which discusses
implications on possible future hurricane landfalls in metropoli-
tan regions.
Staff of the Miami Herald and El Nuevo Herald. Hurricane
Andrew: The Big One. Kansas City, MO: Andrews and McMeel,
1992, 160 pp. ISBN 0-83628-012-1.
A humbling, touching collection of photographs displaying the
incredible destruction of Hurricane Andrew and its impact on the
people of Dade County south of Miami. It is impossible to
describe these pictures in words. As one survivor says in the book,
“It’s something you can’t talk about. You just have to see it.” Also
included are eyewitness accounts and reports in a chronological
fashion.
Noorina Mirza and M. Quraishy. Before and After Hurricane
Andrew 1992. Miami, FL: Kenya Photo Mural, 1992, 96 pp. ISBN 
0-96349-620-4.
This is another picture collection of Hurricane Andrew’s damage.
Much of the book contains interesting comparative pictures of
what areas looked like before Andrew and what they looked like
immediately afterward.
Florida’s Path of Destruction: Hurricane Andrew. Charleston, SC:
Historical Publications. 97 pp.
This publication contains more than 300 photographs of Hurri-
cane Andrew’s impact on the Bahamas, Miami, and Louisiana.
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
315

Interviews with those who experienced its landfall and with
weather specialists are included, as are satellite photos.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Hurricane Andrew Assessment. Tal-
lahassee, FL: Post, Buckley, Schuh and Jernigan, 1993. No ISBN.
Hurricane Andrew provided the opportunity for the Federal
Management Agency’s and the Army Corps of Engineers to
investigate whether state and local ofﬁcials used their products,
whether their past studies were useful in preparing for Andrew,
and which of these past studies were most or least useful. This
report addresses these issues.
E. F. Provenzo and A. B. Provenzo. In the Eye of Hurricane Andrew
1992. Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 2002, 184 pp. ISBN
0-81302-566-4.
This publication is a collaboration of the authors and undergrad-
uate and graduate students at the University of Miami based on
ninety-two interviews. It was originally conceived as a way to
cope with the disaster and evolved into a book. This book is
divided chronologically, with chapters on the preparation period,
during the storm, the immediate aftermath, the weeks after the
storm (vividly describing the difﬁcult conditions), and the long-
term effects.
Hurricane Iniki (1992)
Hurricane Iniki. Charleston, SC: Historical Publications, 100 pp.
This publication contains photographs of Hurricane Iniki’s
impact on Kauai in the Hawaii Islands, including unique docu-
mentation of the landfall itself since Iniki hit during the day
(unlike many other hurricanes, such as Hugo and Andrew, that
hit at night).
Hurricane Alberto (1994)
Deadly Waters: Tropical Storm Alberto. Charleston, SC: Historical
Publications, 92 pp.
This publication contains photographs of Hurricane Alberto’s
impact, which produced record-breaking rainfall and ﬂoods that
took twenty-eight lives in Georgia and two in Alabama. Inter-
views with those who experienced Alberto are included.
316
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

Hurricane Georges (1998)
Hurricane Georges. Charleston, SC: Historical Publications, 52 pp. 
This publication contains photographs of Hurricane Georges’s
impact on the Florida Keys as documented through the Key West
Citizen and Free Press reporters who live on the Keys. Interviews
with those who experienced Georges’s landfall are included, such
as those who live on “houseboat row” and in the popular Duval
Street area.
Historical Hurricane Tracks
C. J. Neumann, B. R. Jarvinen, C. J. McAdie, and J. D. Elms. Tropi-
cal Cyclones of the North Atlantic Ocean, 1871–1992. Asheville, NC:
National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service,
National Climatic Data Center, 1993, 193 pp.
This valuable book presents annual tracks for tropical depres-
sions, tropical storms, and hurricanes for the Atlantic Ocean from
1871 to 1992. Also included in these tracks are an additional cate-
gory of tropical cyclones called “subtropical storms,” which are
hybrids of tropical and nontropical cyclones. Basic statistical sum-
maries are presented as well.
R. S. Lourensz. Tropical Cyclones in the Australian Region, July 1909
to June 1980. Maryborough, Victoria: Bureau of Meteorology,
Department of Science and Technology, Australian Government
Publishing Service, 1981, 94 pp. ISBN 0-64201-718-2.
This book presents annual tracks for cyclones in the oceanic
regions near Australia from 1909 to 1980. Basic statistical sum-
maries and graphics are also presented.
J. Maunder. 1995. An Historic Overview Regarding the Intensity,
Tracks, and Frequency of Tropical Cyclones in the South Paciﬁc during
the Last 100 Years, and an Analysis of any Changes in these Factors.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Meteorological Organization, Report
No. TCP-37, 1995, 48 pp.
As suggested by the title, this book presents annual tracks for
cyclones in the South Paciﬁc for the 1890s–1990s, as well as tabu-
lar and statistical information.
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
317

National Hurricane Center Annual Summaries
Approximately once a year, the publication Monthly Weather
Review has a summary of the previous year’s Atlantic and East
Paciﬁc hurricane activity authored by National Hurricane Center
forecasters. Summaries of Atlantic tropical wave activity are also
published every few years. The summaries include descriptions
of named storms along with pertinent meteorological data and
satellite imagery. The Monthly Weather Review reports hurricane
data back to 1881. Scanned images of all the Monthly Weather
Review reports are available in pdf format at http://www.nhc.
noaa.gov in the “NHC/TPC Archive of Past Hurricane Seasons”
link. Similar reviews are also published in the February/March
issue of Weatherwise; these are less technical and describe the
Atlantic and East Paciﬁc hurricane seasons from the preceding
year.
Articles in the Monthly Weather Review discussing each
Atlantic hurricane season since 1960 are as follows:
G. E. Dunn. 1961. The hurricane season of 1960. Mon. Wea. Rev., 89,
99–108.
G. E. Dunn and Staff. 1962. The hurricane season of 1961. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 90, 107–119.
G. E. Dunn and Staff. 1963. The hurricane season of 1962. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 91, 199–207.
G. E. Dunn and Staff. 1964. The hurricane season of 1963. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 92, 128–138.
G. E. Dunn and Staff. 1965. The hurricane season of 1964. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 93, 175–187.
A. L. Sugg. 1966. The hurricane season of 1965. Mon. Wea. Rev., 94,
183–191.
A. L. Sugg. 1967. The hurricane season of 1966. Mon. Wea. Rev., 95,
131–142.
A. L. Sugg and J. M. Pelissier. 1968. The hurricane season of 1967.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 96, 242–250.
A. L. Sugg and P. J. Hebert. 1969. The Atlantic hurricane season of
1968. Mon. Wea. Rev., 97, 225–239.
318
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

R. H. Simpson, A. L. Sugg, and Staff. 1970. The Atlantic hurricane
season of 1969. Mon. Wea. Rev., 98, 293–306.
R. H. Simpson and J. M. Pelissier. 1971. Atlantic hurricane season
of 1970. Mon. Wea. Rev., 99, 269–277.
R. H. Simpson and J. R. Hope. 1972. Atlantic hurricane season of
1971. Mon. Wea. Rev., 100, 256–267.
R. H. Simpson and P. J. Hebert. 1973. Atlantic hurricane season of
1972. Mon. Wea. Rev., 101, 323–333.
P. J. Hebert and N. L. Frank. 1974. Atlantic hurricane season of
1973. Mon. Wea. Rev., 102, 280–289.
J. R. Hope. 1975. Atlantic hurricane season of 1974. Mon. Wea. Rev.,
103, 285–293.
P. J. Hebert. 1976. Atlantic hurricane season of 1975. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 104, 453–465.
M. B. Lawrence. 1977. Atlantic hurricane season of 1976. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 105, 497–507.
M. B. Lawrence. 1978. Atlantic hurricane season of 1977. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 106, 534–545.
M. B. Lawrence. 1979. Atlantic hurricane season of 1978. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 107, 477–491.
P. J. Hebert. 1980. Atlantic hurricane season of 1979. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 108, 973–990.
M. B. Lawrence and J. M. Pelissier. 1981. Atlantic hurricane season
of 1980. Mon. Wea. Rev., 109, 1567–1582.
M. B. Lawrence. 1982. Atlantic season of 1981. Mon. Wea. Rev., 110,
852–866.
G. B. Clark. 1983. Atlantic season of 1982. Mon. Wea. Rev., 111,
1071–1079.
R. A. Case and H. P. Gerrish. 1984. Atlantic hurricane season of
1983. Mon. Wea. Rev., 112, 1083–1092.
M. B. Lawrence and G. B. Clark. 1985. Atlantic hurricane season of
1984. Mon. Wea. Rev., 113, 1228–1237.
R. A. Case. 1986. Atlantic hurricane season of 1985. Mon. Wea. Rev.,
114, 1390–1405.
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
319

M. B. Lawrence. 1988. Atlantic season of 1986. Mon. Wea. Rev., 116,
2155–2160.
R. A. Case and H. P. Gerrish. 1989. Atlantic hurricane season of
1987. Mon. Wea. Rev., 117, 939–949.
M. B. Lawrence and J. M. Gross. 1989. Atlantic hurricane season of
1988. Mon Wea. Rev., 117, 2248–2259.
B. Case and M. Mayﬁeld. 1990. Atlantic hurricane season of 1989.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 118, 1165–1177.
M. Mayﬁeld and M. B. Lawrence. 1991. Atlantic hurricane season
of 1990. Mon. Wea. Rev., 119, 2014–2026.
R. J. Pasch and L. A. Avila. 1992. Atlantic hurricane season of 1991.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 120, 2671–2687.
M. Mayﬁeld, L. A. Avila, and E. N. Rappaport. 1994. Atlantic hur-
ricane season of 1992. Mon. Wea. Rev., 122, 517–538.
R. J. Pasch and E. N. Rappaport. 1995. Atlantic hurricane season of
1993. Mon. Wea. Rev., 123, 871–886.
L. A. Avila and E. N. Rappaport. 1996. Atlantic hurricane season
of 1994. Mon. Wea. Rev., 124, 1558–1578.
M. B. Lawrence, B. M. Mayﬁeld, L. A. Avila, R. J. Pasch, and E. N.
Rappaport. 1998. Atlantic hurricane season of 1995. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 126, 1124–1151.
R. J. Pasch and L. A. Avila. 1999. Atlantic hurricane season of 1996.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 127, 581–610.
E. N. Rappaport. 1999. Atlantic hurricane season of 1997. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 127, 2012–2026.
R. J. Pasch, L. A. Avila, and J. L. Guiney. 2001. Atlantic hurricane
season of 1998. Mon. Wea. Rev., 129, 3085–3123.
M. B. Lawrence, L. A. Avila, J. L. Beven, J. L. Franklin, J. L. Guiney,
and R. J. Pasch. 2001. Atlantic hurricane season of 1999. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 129, 3057–3084.
J. L. Franklin, L. A. Avila, J. L. Beven, M. B. Lawrence, R. J. Pasch,
and S. R. Stewart. 2001. Atlantic hurricane season of 2000. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 129, 3037–3056.
320
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

J. L. Beven, S. R. Stewart, M. B. Lawrence, L. A. Avila, J. L.
Franklin, and R. J. Pasch. 2003. Atlantic hurricane season of 2001.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 131, 1454–1484.
R. J. Pasch, M. B. Lawrence, L. A. Avila, J. L. Beven, J. L. Franklin,
and S. R. Stewart. 2004. Atlantic hurricane season of 2002. Mon.
Wea. Rev. 132, 1829–1859.
M. B. Lawrence, L. A. Avila, J. L. Beven, J. L. Franklin, R. J. Pasch,
and S. R. Stewart. 2005. Atlantic hurricane season of 2003. Mon.
Wea. Rev. 133, 1744–1773.
Joint Typhoon Warning Center 
Annual Tropical Cyclone Summary
The Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) provides tropical
cyclone forecasting support to the U.S. military and to allies
within the Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean basins under the auspices of
the Naval Paciﬁc Meteorology and Oceanography Center in
Hawaii. The JTWC was founded on May 1, 1959, when the U.S.
commander-in-chief of the Paciﬁc forces directed that a single
tropical cyclone warning center be established for the western
North Paciﬁc region. This region stretches from 180°E longitude
westward across the western Paciﬁc and Indian Oceans in the
Northern Hemisphere and from the oceans near Australia west-
ward to the eastern coast of Africa in the Southern Hemisphere.
Every year, the JTWC staff prepares an annual report summa-
rizing tropical cyclone activity in the region. Included are storm
tracks, a history of each storm, and satellite pictures. Tables and
graphs present the JTWC’s intensity and track forecasts as well as
forecast errors. Ongoing research activities are summarized.
Summaries are printed for each year from 1959 to 1995. An
example reference for 1994 is:
Staff of the Joint Typhoon Warning Center, 1994 Annual Tropical
Cyclone Report, NAVPACMETOCCENWEST/JTWC, Guam, Mar-
iana Islands, 337 pp. No ISBN.
Starting in 1996, the JTWC stopped printing the annual issue
and made the summaries available only in electronic format. In
addition, the printed versions have been scanned into an elec-
tronic format. All electronic versions are available at http://www.
npmoc.navy.mil.
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
321

Annual Summary of Australian Cyclones
The Australian Meteorological Magazine has a thorough annual
summary of tropical cyclones that have occurred in the Australian
Southeast Indian and Southwest Paciﬁc basins. For more informa-
tion about the Australian Meteorological Magazine, see http://
www.bom.gov.au/amm.
Annual Summary of Cyclones 
in the North Indian Ocean
The Indian journal Mausam carries an annual summary of tropical
cyclone activity over the North Indian Ocean.
Annual Summary of Tropical Cyclones 
for All Ocean Basins
The Mariner’s Weather Log has articles from all of the global basins
in annual summaries. These are descriptive and nontechnical.
Natural Disaster Survey Reports
After every major natural disaster, the National Oceanographic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) sends a survey team to
determine how effectively its warning and detection system per-
formed and to identify systematic strengths and improvements so
that any necessary improvements can be developed and imple-
mented. These Natural Disaster Survey Reports contain useful
data, ﬁgures, and recommendations not easily found in other
publications. A sample of these reports is listed below. Natural
Disaster Survey Reports have been prepared for any recent major
hurricane affecting the United States, so please contact NOAA for
more details.
In addition, occasionally a Committee on Natural Disasters
will conduct on-site studies and prepare reports reﬂecting their
ﬁndings, as well as make recommendations on the mitigation of
natural disasters. Example references of these Natural Disaster
Studies for Hurricanes Hugo and Elena are listed below:
Natural Disaster Survey Report. Hurricane Iniki, September 6–13,
1992. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service, Silver
Spring, MD, 1993, 54 pp.
322
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

Natural Disaster Survey Report. Hurricane Andrew, August
23–26, 1992. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service, Silver
Spring, MD, 1993, 131 pp.
Natural Disaster Survey Report. Tropical Storm Alberto, July,
1994. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service, Silver
Spring, MD, 1995, 47 pp.
Natural Disaster Survey Report. Hurricane Gilbert, September
3–16, 1988. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service, Silver
Spring, MD, 1998. 35 pp.
Natural Disaster Survey Report. Hurricane Frederic, August
29–September 13, 1979. U.S. Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Ser-
vice, Silver Spring, MD, 1979. 27 pp.
National Research Council. Natural Disaster Studies: Hurricane
Elena, August 29–September 2, 1985. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press, 1991, 121 pp. ISBN 0-30904-434-0.
National Research Council. Natural Disaster Studies: Hurricane
Hugo; Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and Charleston, South Carolina,
September 17–22, 1989. Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press, 1994, 276 pp. ISBN 0-30904-475-8.
NCDC Storm Data Publication
Storm Data is a list of severe weather observations across the
United States and is published on a monthly basis by the National
Climatic Data Center. The reports are generated through (1)
National Weather Service (NWS) phone calls to damaged regions;
(2) reports volunteered to the NWS from emergency management
groups (such as the Army Corps of Engineer, the Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency, and the U.S. Geological Survey), law
enforcement agencies, the general public, and other credible
organization; and (3) information provided to NWS ofﬁces by
newspaper clippings. Caution is advised when using Storm Data,
since it is difﬁcult to verify the accuracy of some reports (i.e., gen-
eral public reports and newspaper clippings).
With regard to hurricanes, detailed documentation of meteor-
ological data, storm surge heights, general statistical information,
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
323

and storm history can be found when such a storm makes land-
fall. To ﬁnd out information about a particular hurricane, you
need to know the year and month when the hurricane impacted
the United States, then look up that particular monthly version of
Storm Data. NWS ofﬁces contain these books, as do some univer-
sities and libraries. The books can also be ordered from the
National Climatic Data Center (see http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov).
How to Order a U.S. Government 
Technical Report
Almost all recent (after 1990) U.S. government publications and
technical reports can be ordered through the National Technical
Information Service (NTIS). For example, you could order many
of the technical reports from the National Hurricane Center from
NTIS. NTIS is located at 5285 Port Royal Road, Springﬁeld, VA
22161. To order a document, call the NTIS sales desk at 1–800-
553–6847. For additional information, visit the NTIS website at
http://www.ntis.gov.
Nonprint Resources
Videos display the awesome power of hurricanes, augmented by
home video footage. This is a rapidly changing market, with cer-
tain videos quickly going out of print while others emerge with
new storms. Therefore, vendors that currently provide videos are
listed below with a brief discussion. Software is also listed,
including FEMA’s emergency preparedness package, HAZUS. 
Hurricane Videos
Individual Hurricane Videos
Richard Horodner’s Hurricane Videos is possibly the most complete
selection of hurricane videos. Richard Horodner is a hurricane
chaser, ﬁlming many land-falling hurricanes up close. This is pos-
sibly the best selection of videos, with individual storms starting
from the 1980s to today. As a bonus, he also offers hurricane chase
services! His address is private, with contact only available by
phone or email.
324
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

Richard Horodner’s Hurricane Videos
Phone: (772) 978-7673
Email: horodner@aol.com
URL: http://www.hurricanevideo.citymax.com/
General Hurricane Videos
There is a surprising dearth of general videos on hurricanes. In
general, only a few stand out as the best on the subject, and they
are not available from the original company. A search on the Inter-
net will yield many new and used videos.
One is the PBS NOVA video Nature’s Fury: Hurricanes. You
can also purchase this in a three-video package titled Nature’s
Fury, which not only includes the hurricane footage but other nat-
ural phenomenon such as lightning, tornadoes, and earthquakes.
This NOVA video contains excellent Hurricane Camille footage as
well as interviews of people who were in the storm. A general
description of hurricanes is included in this program. NOVA fol-
lows hurricane forecasters and researchers as they monitor Hurri-
cane Gilbert, which is the strongest Atlantic storm on record.
NOVA shows how NHC forecasters make their forecasts and tags
along with the Hurricane Research Division as they ﬂy into Hur-
ricane Gilbert. The aftermath of Hurricane Andrew is also shown.
Another is the Discovery Channel program Raging Planet:
Hurricane. It provides a general description of hurricanes and
footage of historical storms such as Hurricane Andrew, and the
1970 Bangladesh storm that killed 300,000 people is included. A
documentary of North Carolina residents and emergency pre-
paredness ofﬁcials is presented as they prepare for Hurricane
Bertha and Hurricane Fran in 1996. Footage of the Hurricane
Hunters as they ﬂy into these storms is shown.
A third documentary, Hurricane Andrew: Ground Zero, was
originally aired by the Learning Channel. It contains mostly
human interest stories on this hurricane but does include some
scientiﬁc background.
A ﬁnal recommended documentary is Savage Skies: Monster
of the Deep, which chronicles the events before, during, and after
the landfall of Hurricane Andrew on Miami in 1992. Compelling
interviews are conducted with National Hurricane Center fore-
casters and several people who experienced the wrath of the
storm as it destroyed their homes.
Good Internet sites for buying these programs include The
Weather Shop at http://www.weathershop.com/books-videos.
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
325

htm; My Weather Guide at http://shop.myweatherguide. com, an
afﬁliate of amazon.com, that offers weather products in the form of
books, instruments, and electronics in addition to videos; and The
Teacher’s Video Company at http://www.teachersvideo.com.
Educational Hurricane Videos
The Red Cross and FEMA (see chapter 7) provide several videos
for the general public, charging just shipping costs. Jason and
Robin’s Awesome Hurricane Adventure Companion Video is the com-
panion video for the twelve-page, four-color workbook titled Jason
and Robin’s Awesome Hurricane Adventure, for children in third to
ﬁfth grades, about hurricane facts, hazard avoidance, planning,
supplies, and what to do when watches and warnings are issued.
Against the Wind: Protecting Your Home From Hurricane Wind Dam-
age demonstrates how to inspect and make simple changes within
homes to mitigate the potential devastating effects of hurricane
wind damage. Home Preparedness for Hurricanes and Hurricane
Information Guide for Coastal Residents are similar videos. Before the
Wind Blows provides basic hurricane information, planning deci-
sions, evacuation information, and how the Red Cross responds to
hurricanes. An interactive CD-ROM, Hurricane Strike, is also avail-
able. It is designed for middle schoolers but is educational for all
ages and provides background information on hurricanes and mit-
igation approaches as well as games and worksheets that incorpo-
rates math, science, and geography. 
Insight Media, Inc., provides a variety of videos and CD-
ROMS on most meteorology and oceanography topics. A few of
the many include The Weather Edu-Tutor Bundle, four CD-ROMs on
forecasting, weather phenomena (including hurricanes), data col-
lection, and remote satellite sensing; Understanding the Weather,
which addresses air masses, fronts, clouds, storms, and predic-
tions, providing a basic understanding of weather phenomena and
featuring a blend of live action, animation, and graphics; and Pres-
sure and Winds: Weather, which explains what causes air pressure,
explores the measurement of air pressure, and shows the effects of
temperature and moisture content on air pressure. The address is:
Insight Media, Inc.
2162 Broadway
New York, NY 10024-0621
Phone: 800-233-9910
Fax: 212-799-5309
URL: http://www.insight-media.com
326
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

Films for the Humanities and Sciences offers the video Inside a
Hurricane. This video provides background on deadly Hurricane
Mitch (1998) and costly Hurricane Andrew (1992). It includes
footage from Mitch, Andrew, and other hurricanes and follows
scientists as they trace the growth of a tropical storm into a full-
blown hurricane. It also provides footage of a ﬂight into a hurri-
cane’s eye. The program documents the tragic story of the
schooner Fantome, which tried to outrun Mitch and failed, losing
all on board. This organization also offers a general meteorology
video called The World’s Weather. The address is:
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
P.O. Box 2053
Princeton, NJ 08543-2053
Phone: 800-257-5126
Fax: 609-671-0266
URL: http://www.ﬁlms.com
Software Tracking
A variety of free, shareware, and commercial packages are avail-
able for tracking hurricanes. A list, with detailed descriptions, is
available on Chris Landsea’s FAQ page at http://www.aoml.
noaa.gov/hrd/tcfaq/tcfaqHED.html. A few of the better pack-
ages include “Jstrack,” a freeware hurricane tracking program for
Unix and Windows 9x/ME/NT/2k/XP; “Eye of the Storm,” a
commercial package with 3D capabilities; “Global Tracks,” which
provides both historical and current hurricane tracks; and “Hurri-
cane Watch 2000,” which contains zooming capability.
Emergency Preparedness
The most popular emergency preparedness software is FEMA’s
(see chapter 7) HAZards U.S. MultiHazard (HAZUS-MH).
HAZUS-MH is a risk assessment software program for analyzing
potential losses from ﬂoods, hurricane winds, and earthquakes. It
is a direct result of natural disasters from the early 1990s, particu-
larly the Northridge earthquake (1994), Hurricane Andrew (1992),
and the Midwest ﬂoods (1993), when FEMA decided to include
prevention and risk assessment into emergency management.
Current scientiﬁc and engineering knowledge is coupled
with the latest Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technology
to produce estimates of hazard-related damage before, or after, a
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
327

disaster occurs. HAZUS-MH takes into account various impacts
of a hazard event such as:
• Physical damage to residential and commercial buildings,
schools, critical facilities, and infrastructure.
• Economic loss, such as lost jobs, business interruptions,
repair and reconstruction costs.
• Social impacts to people, including requirements for shel-
ters and medical aid.
HAZUS-MH is designed to produce loss estimates for use by
state, regional, and local governments in planning for earthquake
loss mitigation, emergency preparedness, and response and recov-
ery. HAZUS-MH helps states, communities, and businesses pre-
pare for, mitigate the effects of, respond to, and recover from a
hazard event. It has several interfaces for general, advanced, and
expert use.
Federal, state, and local government agencies and the pri-
vate sector can order HAZUS-MH free of charge from the FEMA
Distribution Center. Details are provided at http://www.fema.
gov/hazus/. Training courses are also listed on this website.
The Internet is also a ﬂuid environment, but over the years
certain websites have maintained a valuable and stable presence
in the hurricane community. These informative websites are
shown at the end of this section.
Hurricane and Weather Internet Resources
American Meteorological Society. Boston, Massachusetts. http://
www.ametsoc.org.
The American Meteorological Society (AMS) is a nonproﬁt,
professional society for meteorologists and related ﬁelds. This
sight contains career, educational, publications, and conferences
related to meteorology. Conference papers and presentations can
be downloaded, while journal articles are available online for a
fee (abstracts are free). 
American Red Cross. Washington, D.C. http://www.redcross.org.
The American Red Cross is a humanitarian organization, led by
volunteers, that provides relief to victims of disasters and helps
328
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

prevent, prepare for, and respond to emergencies. This website con-
tains information on hurricane preparedness and hurricane relief in
disaster areas. Many articles can be downloaded in pdf format.
Chris Landsea’s Hurricanes, Typhoons, and Tropical Cyclones
FAQ. NOAA/AOML/HRD, Miami, Florida. http://www.aoml.
noaa.gov/hrd/tcfaq/tcfaqHED.html. 
This up-to-date, informative website contains hurricane deﬁni-
tions, answers to speciﬁc hurricane questions, global statistics,
links to other hurricane websites, and references for more infor-
mation. Its is a popular and highly recommended website. One
can also read about the Hurricane Research Division (http://
www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd/) on this site.
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies, Tropi-
cal Cyclone Page. Madison, Wisconsin. http://cimss.ssec.wisc.
edu/tropic/tropic.html.
This Web page displays state-of-the-art satellite imagery of hurri-
canes and the tropics around the world, with a research focus on
winds derived from cloud motions. Archived hurricane imagery
for the past few years as well as NHC and JTWC forecasts are also
available on this website.
Federal Emergency Management Agency. Washington, D.C. http://
www.fema.gov.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is an inde-
pendent agency of the federal government. Its mission is to
reduce life and property losses through mitigation and prepared-
ness programs. FEMA is also called in to help when the president
declares a region a disaster area, such as coastal regions impacted
by a hurricane. This website provides extensive documentation
on hurricane preparedness and hurricane recovery issues. Cur-
rent weather statements are also available from the National Hur-
ricane Center.
Dr. William M. Gray, Atlantic Seasonal Hurricane Activity Fore-
casts. Colorado State University, Department of Atmospheric Sci-
ence, Fort Collins, Colorado. http://tropical.atmos.colostate.edu.
Every December, April, June, August, and September, Dr. Bill
Gray and colleagues issue forecasts on Atlantic hurricane activity
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
329

at this website. These highly anticipated statements discuss in
detail the forecast methodology and how different forecast
parameters (such as El Niño and African rainfall) are expected to
affect the upcoming hurricane season. Archives of previous fore-
casts as well as veriﬁcations are also available.
Hurricane Hunters. Keesler Air Force Base, Biloxi, Mississippi.
http://www.hurricanehunters.org.
The 53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron, also known as the
Hurricane Hunters, ﬂies into Atlantic tropical disturbances, tropi-
cal depressions, tropical storms, and hurricanes on a routine basis
and relays this information to the National Hurricane Center. This
website includes aircraft reports, pictures of ﬂights inside hurri-
canes, informative information about the Hurricane Hunters, and
educational links.
Intellicast. Billerica, Massachusetts. http://www.intellicast.com.
Intellicast is a product of Weather Service International and pro-
vides extensive specialized weather information to help plan all
outdoor and weather-sensitive activities. This site provides excel-
lent satellite and radar images. A tropical weather section is also
included.
Joint Typhoon Warning Center. Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. http://
www.npmoc.navy.mil/jtwc.html.
This website contains the latest JTWC forecast statements for
tropical cyclones around the world. You can also read the Annual
Tropical Cyclone Report (beginning in 1996) or download tropical
cyclone historical data sets containing positions and intensities
for western Paciﬁc and Australian storms.
National Data Buoy Center. Stennis Space Center, Mississippi.
http://www.ndbc.noaa.gov.
This is an excellent source for obtaining real-time surface weather
information over the ocean. It posts real-time measurements of
wind, air temperature, water temperature, pressure, wave, and
other data from all buoy and Coastal-Marine Automated Net-
work (CMAN) stations. Current buoy data can also be obtained
via a computer-generated voice by calling 228-688-1948 (it works
fastest if you remember the ﬁve-character code of the buoy of
330
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

interest) and from the National Data Buoy Center’s ftp site. Plots
of measurements for the last three days are available on the web-
site to ascertain trends and recent weather history. Monitoring a
buoy near a hurricane provides important information (although
some buoys do not survive hurricane conditions and stop trans-
mitting data). This site also provides archived buoy data.
National Hurricane Center. Miami, Florida. http://www.nhc.
noaa.gov.
This website contains the latest NHC forecast statements as well
as satellite imagery, reconnaissance reports, historical data, edu-
cational material, general information about the forecast proce-
dures, and a description of the forecast facilities.
National Ocean Service (NOS) Center for Operational Oceano-
graphic Products and Services (CO-OPS). Silver Spring, MD.
http://co-ops.nos. noaa.gov/.
CO-OPS collects and distributes observations and predictions of
water levels and currents. This website provides water level infor-
mation, predictions based on tides, and any inﬂuences from the
hurricane storm surge. A related website is the Tides Online at
http://tidesonline.nos.noaa.gov, which provides users with im-
mediate graphical and tabular water level and meteorological
data from NOS water level stations located along the projected
path of severe storms such as hurricanes.
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration. Wash-
ington, D.C. http://www.noaa.gov.
This website is a good starting point for obtaining extensive
weather facts, educational material, weather observations, and
forecasts. It contains many links to NOAA’s other branches, such
as the National Weather Service.
National Weather Service. Washington, D.C. http://weather.gov.
Contains links to all National Weather Service forecasts and
observations as well as current observations, radar, and satellite
images.
Naval Research Laboratory, Tropical Cyclone Page. Monterey, Cali-
fornia. http://www.nrlmry.navy.mil/tc_pages/tc_home.html.
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
331

This Web page displays state-of-the-art satellite imagery of hurri-
canes and the tropics around the world, including scatterometer
winds, winds derived from cloud motions, and estimated rainfall
rates.
NOAA Aircraft Operations Center. MacDill Air Force Base,
Tampa, Florida. http://www.nc.noaa.gov/aoc.html.
The Aircraft Operations Center (AOC) provides the aircraft
equipped with the scientiﬁc instruments required for hurricane
research ﬂights by the Hurricane Research Division. This site
describes in detail the aircraft speciﬁcations. It also discusses the
NOAA Corps, the smallest of the seven uniformed services of the
United States. The AOC pilots are members of the NOAA Corps.
NOAA’s Coastal Service Center’s Historical Hurricane Database.
Charleston, SC. http://hurricane.csc.noaa.gov/hurricanes/index.
htm.
This website allows the search and display of detailed tropical
storm and hurricane data and population trends. Searches can be
made using a storm name, zip code, state, country, latitude, or
longitude, back to 1851. This site also provides a searchable data-
base of population changes from 1900 to 2000 for U.S. coastal
counties. Reports of individual storms are also available.
Ofﬁcial U.S. Time. The National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST), U.S. Naval Observatory (USNO). http://www.
time.gov.
This site provides times accurate to 0.0000001 of a second for
each time zone. Most helpful to the user is conversion information
from local time to Coordinates Universal Time (UTC). UTC is the
standard global time to avoid time zone confusion, and is based
on local time in Greenwich, England, where 0° longitude passes
through. For this reason, UTC is also called Greenwich Mean
Time (GMT). GMT and UTC are also called Zulu (Z) time.
Unisys Weather. Kennett Square, Pennsylvania. http://weather.
unisys.com.
This weather site from Unisys Corporation provides a complete
source of graphical weather information. It is intended to satisfy
the needs of the weather professional but can be a tool for the
332
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources

casual user as well. The graphics and data are displayed as a
meteorologist would expect to see. There are detailed explanation
pages to guide the novice user through the various plots, charts,
and images. This site also includes a thorough archive of Atlantic,
East Paciﬁc, and West Paciﬁc hurricane track graphics, historical
track and intensity data, and some satellite imagery of well-
known Atlantic storms.
The Weather Channel. Atlanta, Georgia. http://www.weather.com.
This cable media outlet provides excellent, understandable
weather information and graphics on its website. In addition, the
Weather Channel’s meteorologists provide updated reports on
tropical activity. Hurricane graphics and satellite imagery of the
tropics are shown, and educational hurricane information is avail-
able. Short educational videos can also be downloaded.
The Weather Underground. Ann Arbor, Michigan. http://www.
wunderground.com.
An excellent source of quick, accessible National Weather Service
observations and forecasts, the Weather Underground also pro-
vides the latest information from the National Hurricane Center,
the Central Paciﬁc Hurricane Center, and the Joint Typhoon
Warning Center. A similar site is http://cirrus.sprl.umich.
edu/wxnet/, which is the University of Michigan Weather Web-
site. The latter site also contains a list of more than 300 other
weather-related websites and another list of vendors who sell
weather software.
Print, Nonprint, and Internet Resources
333


Epilogue
Hurricane Katrina
Probably the worst natural disaster in U.S. history, Hurricane Kat-
rina occurred near the end of the publication deadline and could
not be fully incorporated into the book. This epilogue provides
the latest information on Katrina as of September 2005.
Hurricane Katrina ﬁrst made landfall in south Florida on
August 25, 2005, as a category 1 hurricane. Landfall occurred
between Hallandale Beach and North Miami Beach, Florida, with
wind speeds of approximately 80 mph and gusts to 90 mph. As
the storm moved southwest across the tip of the Florida penin-
sula, Katrina's winds decreased slightly before regaining hurri-
cane strength in the Gulf of Mexico. The storm caused moderate
damage in the region and claimed eleven lives, providing a hint of
its devastating force. Given that Katrina spent only seven hours
over land, its strength was not signiﬁcantly diminished, and it
quickly reintensiﬁed shortly after moving over the warm waters
of the Gulf of Mexico.
Atmospheric and oceanic conditions were conducive to
rapid intensiﬁcation, which lead to Katrina attaining major hurri-
cane status on the afternoon of the August 26. Continuing to
strengthen and move northward during the next forty-eight
hours, Katrina reached maximum wind speeds of 172 mph (cate-
gory 5) on the morning of Sunday, August 28, and its minimum
central pressure dropped that afternoon to 902 mb--the fourth
lowest on record for an Atlantic storm. Although Katrina was
comparable to Hurricane Camille (1969), it was a signiﬁcantly
335

larger storm. Katrina's hurricane-force winds extended 120 miles
from the storm center, with tropical storm-force winds extending
230 miles outward. Katrina also maintained a large eye, thereby
providing large areal coverage of its most ﬁerce winds. Finally,
Katrina moved slower than Camille, thereby increasing the storm
surge potential and time of wind exposure. All these ingredients
resulted in catastrophic destruction and fatalities that dwarf the
previous benchmark hurricanes of Camille and Betsy (1965) in
southeast Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama.
Katrina made landfall on the morning of August 29 in Buras,
Louisiana, as a strong category 4 hurricane with sustained winds
of 140 mph and a central pressure of 923 mb--the fourth lowest on
record for a land-falling Atlantic storm in the United States and
the ﬁfth highest of land-falling hurricanes in U.S. history. But, the
size of the hurricane caused mass destruction. The resulting storm
surge is the worst in U.S. history, peaking at 35 feet near the east-
ern eye wall in Buras and later during its second landfall just west
of Waveland, Mississippi. However, 20-25 feet of water covered
much of southeast Louisiana, the entire Mississippi coast, and
parts of Alabama and penetrated an astounding 5 miles inland in
the eye wall's path. Structures near the coast become scoured
cement slabs, while inland all buildings suffered wind damage,
ﬂooding, or both.
New Orleans' levees, only built for a fast-moving category 3
hurricane, were toppled in the eastern section of the city, while
waters in Lake Pontchartrain and ﬂoating objects such as barges
precariously pounded the city's northern levees. Throughout
August 29 and 30, levee breaches began to occur, ﬂooding 80 per-
cent of the city with up to 20 feet of water in some places. Because
New Orleans is below sea level, water has to be removed from the
city by pumps, which stop working due to wind damage and
ﬂooding of power equipment. Although most New Orleans resi-
dents evacuate ahead of the storm, tens of thousands more are
stranded in the city, with some 20,000 in the Superdome sports
facility, 20,000 more in the city's convention center, and many
more in their homes. Local, state, and federal governments are
widely criticized for both their lack of preparation and generally
slow response in helping stranded citizens, while law and order
breaks down into massive looting throughout the city.
The damage to the region, covering an area greater than the
size of Britain, is truly mind-boggling. The national recovery
336
Epilogue

effort may cost taxpayers $150 billion to $200 billion, with another
$40–60 billion in insurance losses, obliterating the record damage
of $26.5 billion caused by Hurricane Andrew (1992). In Missis-
sippi, about 68,000 homes were destroyed, and another 65,000
suffered major damage. In Louisiana, about 250,000 homes were
damaged or destroyed. It is the largest permanent displacement
of people in history. The homeless are being sheltered in a variety
of ways, including in the Houston Astrodome and on cruise ships.
At this writing, the death toll is trending toward 1,500, with
about 70 percent of those deaths in Louisiana. This places Hurri-
cane Katrina third behind the Lake Okeechobee Hurricane (1928)
and the 1900 Galveston Hurricane. In Mississippi, the number of
fatalities has already exceeded Camille.
The economic impact is enormous. In southeast Louisiana,
the agriculture, oil, ﬁshing, and tourism industries have been dec-
imated, and commerce in New Orleans will be substantially
reduced for the next year. Offshore facilities seem to have fared
better, but oil pipelines have probably been broken and will take
months to repair. Mississippi's tourist, agriculture, timber, and
poultry industries also suffered immense losses. Mississippi's
thriving water-bound casino industry, which generates $500,000 a
day in tax revenue, has been heavily impacted, prompting law-
makers to consider moving them to land-based locations.
Environmental issues will also be of concern. The impact of
oil spills, chemical seepage, and sewage pollution, both in the soil
and in the surrounding proliﬁc wildlife estuaries, could be devas-
tating. The hurricane eroded more of the already rapidly vanish-
ing wetlands. These wetlands also serve as a buffer against storm
surge and hurricane intensity (which require water for their
energy).
With regard to chapter 6, Katrina ranks:
1. Number 3 in U.S. hurricane fatalities (see table 6.1). Num-
ber 2 is still possible as of this writing.
2. The costliest hurricane in U.S. history (see tables 6.2 and
6.3).
3. The fourth most intense at landfall (see table 6.6).
4. The sixteenth category 4 hurricane to make landfall (see
table 6.9).
5. The twenty-sixth category 5 hurricane (one day before
landfall) in U.S. history (table 6.10).
Epilogue
337

6. The most extreme storm surge in U.S. history (see chapter
6's "World Record" section).
Sadly, Katrina also sets another precedent. Hurricane storm surge
fatalities have not been a major issue since Hurricane Camille in
1969 (see tables 6.14–6.17). This catastrophe will focus renewed
efforts on evacuation, mitigation, and public education issues.
338
Epilogue

Glossary
Acronyms
AMS
American Meteorological Society—Boston, MA
AOC
NOAA Aircraft Operations Center—Tampa, FL
CIMSS
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite
Studies—University of Wisconsin-Madison
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency—
Washington, D.C.
GFDL
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory—
Princeton, NJ
HRD
Hurricane Research Division—Miami, FL
JTWC
Joint Typhoon Warning Center—Pearl Harbor,
HI
McIDAS
Man-computer Interactive Data Access System
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion—Washington, D.C.
NCDC
National Climatic Data Center—Asheville, NC
NCEP
National Centers for Environmental Prediction—
Silver Springs, MD
NESDIS
National Environmental Satellite, Data and
Information Service—Silver Spring, MD
NHC
National Hurricane Center—Miami, FL
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NOAA
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra-
tion—Silver Spring, MD
339

NWA
National Weather Association—Montgomery, AL
NWS
National Weather Service—Silver Spring, MD
QBO
Quasi-Biennial Oscillation
WMO
World Meteorological Organization
Abbreviations for Cited Journals
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.
Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences
Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society
Earth Obs. Mag.
Earth Observation Magazine
Geo. Res. Letters
Geophysical Research Letters
J. Appl. Meteor.
Journal of Applied Meteorology
J. Atmos. Sci.
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
J. Climate
Journal of Climate
J. Phys. Oceanogr.
Journal of Physical Oceanography
J. Meteor.
Journal of Meteorology
J. Meteor. Soc. Japan
Journal of Meteorological Research, Japan
Mar. Wea. Log
Mariner’s Weather Log
Mon. Wea. Rev.
Monthly Weather Review
Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteoro-
logical Society
Sci. Amer.
Scientiﬁc American
Wea. Forecasting
Weather and Forecasting
Terms
aerosonde
A small robotic aircraft that measures pressure, tem-
perature, moisture, and wind. It is a light aircraft that is
extremely fuel efﬁcient and capable of ﬂying long distances
but possibly sturdy enough to survive severe weather such as
hurricanes.
annular hurricane
A steady-state, intense hurricane with a cir-
cular eye surrounded by a nearly uniform ring of thunder-
storms. 
Arctic hurricane
See polar low.
340
Glossary

beta drift
A poleward and westward drift of a hurricane due 
to the vortex’s interaction with the earth’s rotation. Small
storms drift 1–2 mph, while large storms drift 3–4 mph.
centrifugal force
An outward-directed force in rotating ﬂow
that occurs because an object in motion wants to remain in a
straight line. The sharper the curvature of the ﬂow and/or
the faster the rotation, the stronger is the centrifugal force.
cloud seeding
The addition of agents that will alter the phase
and size distributions of cloud particles, with the intent of
inﬂuencing precipitation or cloud growth. These agents are
usually granulated carbon dioxide (dry ice) or silver iodide
with a molecular structure similar to ice nuclei. They are
dropped into supercooled clouds, thereby converting the
supercooled water to ice and promoting cloud development
through the release of latent heat or freezing.
computer model
A computer program that ingests current
weather observations and approximates solutions to compli-
cated equations so as to predict future atmospheric values
such as wind, temperature, and moisture. Based on the ﬁeld
of numerical weather prediction.
consensus forecast
The average of several different computer
model forecasts.
concentric eyewall cycle
A natural (but temporary) weakening
process in which a new eyewall forms outside the original
eyewall. The outer eyewall “chokes off” inﬂow to the inner
eyewall, causing it to dissipate. The outer eyewall then prop-
agates inward, replacing the original eyewall. This cycle typ-
ically takes one day to complete and is accompanied by
ﬂuctuations in central pressure and maximum wind speed.
convergence
A net inﬂow of air. When convergence occurs at
the surface, air must ascend.
Coriolis force
An apparent deﬂection of air motion due to the
earth’s rotation since the coordinate system is changing rela-
tive to the earth (known as a noninertial, or relative, coordi-
nate system). This effect becomes increasingly inﬂuential
away from the equator where the earth’s curvature increases.
To someone living on earth, it appears that the wind is
deﬂected to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the
left in the Southern Hemisphere.
Doppler effect
A shift in wavelength of radiation emitted or
reﬂected from an object moving toward or away from the
Glossary
341

observer. Doppler radar translates the motions of air parti-
cles, cloud droplets, and raindrops into wind speed and wind
direction measurements.
downburst
A strong downdraft that exits the base of a thunder-
storm and spreads out at the earth’s surface as strong and
gusty horizontal winds that can cause property damage.
Dvorak technique
A methodology use to estimate intensity of a
depression, tropical storm, or hurricane solely based on satel-
lite-observed cloud organization and cloud height.
dynamic instability
The breakdown of wind ﬂow into a tropical
wave under certain ﬂow conﬁgurations and/or temperature
patterns. This instability results because a perturbation
acquires kinetic energy (the energy of motion) from another
source and grows with time. This source may be from the
kinetic energy of the large-scale wind ﬂow or from potential
energy (stored energy) due to certain temperature patterns.
easterly wave
See tropical wave.
El Niño
A 12–18-month period during which anomalously
warm sea-surface temperatures occur in the eastern half of
the equatorial Paciﬁc Ocean. El Niño events occur irregularly,
about once every three to seven years. Atlantic hurricane
activity is usually suppressed during El Niño seasons. The
opposite condition is called a La Niña.
ensemble forecast
A set of different forecasts using the same
computer model, valid at the same time, based on slightly differ-
ent observation values. Generally, the mean of the ensemble
forecast represents the most accurate forecast. Furthermore,
the forecast spread indicates the possible forecast error and
forecast uncertainty.
equatorial trough
A trough that forms when air converges from
both hemispheres near the equator, often resulting in tower-
ing thunderstorms. Also called the InterTropical Convergence
Zone (ITCZ).
extratropical cyclone
Any low-pressure system that derives its
energy from horizontal temperature contrasts. Fifty percent
of hurricanes undergo an extratropical transition, losing their
tropical characteristics. Half of these will gradually decay,
but about half reintensify, with a few experiencing rapid
development with winds up to hurricane strength. In either
situation (decay or reintensiﬁcation), substantial rain can
occur in hurricanes undergoing extratropical transition,
resulting in severe ﬂooding.
342
Glossary

eye
A region in the center of a hurricane (and tropical storms
near hurricane strength) where the winds are light and skies
are clear to partly cloudy. The eye is either completely or par-
tially surrounded by the eyewall.
eyewall
A wall of dense thunderstorms that surrounds at least
half of the eye of a hurricane.
front
A boundary between two air masses of different tempera-
ture and/or moisture properties.
Fujiwhara effect
Interaction of two hurricanes (located less
than 850 miles from each other) that orbit cyclonically about
a midpoint between them; named after the pioneering exper-
iments of Fujiwhara in 1921.
geosynchronous satellites
A satellite that travels east at the
same speed as the rotating earth, enabling the satellite to
remain over the same location and provide continuous cov-
erage of that region.
global warming
A theoretical enhancement of the greenhouse
effect due to an increase in carbon dioxide by fossil fuel emis-
sions (such as the output from cars running on gasoline).
graupel
An ice particle that has experienced heavy riming and
no longer resembles the original ice crystal.
greenhouse effect
The warming of the atmosphere by its ab-
sorbing and reemitting infrared radiation emitted by the earth
(at electromagnetic wavelengths invisible to the human eye)
back to the surface while allowing solar radiation emitted by
the sun (including visible light) to pass through the atmos-
phere and reach the surface. The result is that the earth’s sur-
face is much warmer due to combined warming of shortwave
and reemitted infrared radiation than if there was no atmos-
phere. Infrared radiation is absorbed primarily by two gases:
water vapor and carbon dioxide. It’s important to realize that
the atmosphere’s greenhouse effect is a natural process, and
without it the earth would be a much colder, unlivable planet
with an average surface temperature of 0°F.
gust factor
The ratio of peak two-second winds to the sustained
wind. In general, the rougher the terrain, the lower the sus-
tained wind but the larger the gust factor due to turbulent
eddies. Engineers frequently use the gust factor to determine
wind-loading conditions.
hurricane
A large mass of organized, oceanic thunderstorms
with a complete cyclonic circulation and maximum sustained
winds of at least 74 mph somewhere in the storm. Also called
Glossary
343

typhoons in the Northwest Paciﬁc across 180°E, chubasco in
the Philippines, and very severe cyclonic storms in India.
hurricane warning
A warning given when it is likely that an
area will experience sustained surface winds of hurricane
force within twenty-four hours.
hurricane watch
A hurricane watch indicates that hurricane
conditions (sustained winds of 74 mph or greater) pose a
threat to an area within thirty-six hours, and residents of the
watch area should be prepared for hurricane conditions.
ice nuclei
A ﬂoating aerosol with a molecular structure similar
to ice.
infrared radiation
The portion of the electromagnetic spectrum
lying between visible radiation and microwave radiation,
with wavelengths between 720 and 1 millimeter. This is the
spectrum the earth typically emits radiation and is invisible
to the human eye (as is most radiation). 
intense hurricane
See major hurricane.
InterTropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
See equatorial trough.
inverted barometer effect
The uplift of water in the center of a
hurricane as an adjustment to the low air pressure there, cor-
responding to 3.9 inches sea level rise for every 10-mb drop in
sea-level pressure.
La Niña
A twelve- to eighteen-month period during which
anomalously cool sea-surface temperatures occur in the east-
ern half of the equatorial Paciﬁc Ocean. La Niña events occur
irregularly, about once every three to seven years. Atlantic
hurricane activity is usually enhanced during La Niña sea-
sons. The opposite condition is called an El Niño.
latent heat
Energy transfer conveyed through phase changes of
matter. For example, the latent heat of condensation is the
heat energy released when water vapor (a gaseous state) con-
denses to a liquid state; latent heat of evaporation is the heat
energy absorbed by water vapor during the evaporation
process; and latent heat of fusion is the heat energy released
when water freezes.
longshore current
An ocean current that develops when waves
strike a coast at an angle, resulting in a net ﬂow parallel to the
coast.
Madden-Julian Oscillation
A sinking/ascending undulation
that travels eastward from India to North America. This oscil-
lation, with a repeat time of thirty to sixty days, tends to favor
genesis when the ascending branch occurs in the presence of
344
Glossary

a monsoon trough or tropical wave. This phenomenon forms in
the near-equatorial Indian Ocean and propagates eastward.
Its inﬂuence is strongest in the Indian Ocean and western
Paciﬁc Ocean.
major hurricane
A hurricane that reaches a maximum sustained
wind of at least 111 mph. This constitutes a category 3 hurri-
cane or higher on the Safﬁr-Simpson Hurricane Scale. Also
called an intense hurricane.
mesoscale vortices
Whirling vortices that form at the boundary
of the eyewall and eye where there is a tremendous change in
wind speed. The updrafts in the eyewall stretch the vortices
vertically, making them spin faster with winds up to 200 mph
that are very destructive. Also called mesovortices.
midget
A small hurricane with gale-force winds (35 mph)
extending only 40 miles or less from the storm center.
monsoon depressions
Weak cyclonic disturbances that form in
the Bay of Bengal with no inner-core structure and track
northwestward into the Indian subcontinent, bringing mod-
erate winds and heavy rains.
monsoon gyre
A reconﬁguration of the monsoon trough into a
very large, nearly circular vortex in the western North Paciﬁc
that rotates counterclockwise for two weeks with a cloud
band rimming the southern and eastern periphery. A series of
small tropical cyclones may emerge from the leading edge of
the cloud band.
monsoon trough
A trough that forms when Southern Hemi-
sphere and Northern Hemisphere air converge at 10–20
degrees latitude. This type of trough occurs when air temper-
ature increases away from the equator. The Coriolis force
induces a partial cyclonic spin favorable for the genesis of
hurricanes or the formation of tropical waves through
dynamic instability. The vast majority of genesis cases are asso-
ciated with the monsoon trough.
multidecadal changes
Climate changes with ten-, twenty-, or
thirty-year cycles. Atlantic hurricane activity, especially major
hurricanes, tends to follow twenty- to thirty-year cycles with
busy decades followed by inactive decades.
numerical weather prediction (NWP)
Forecasting the weather
based upon the solutions of mathematical equations by high-
speed computers.
polar low
A cyclone that forms in the arctic region, poleward of
zones of strong temperature contrasts, ranges in sizes from 120
Glossary
345

to 700 miles and has winds near or above gale force. Polar lows
can have banding features with an eye similar to a hurricane,
so some refer to them as arctic hurricanes. However, polar lows
form over cold water, have a short life cycle less than thirty-six
hours, have weaker but still signiﬁcant winds, and are smaller
in size.
polar-orbiting satellites
A satellite following a north-south
orbit around the earth’s poles, providing pictures and data
centered on different longitudes each hour as the earth
rotates underneath them.
pressure
The force per unit area exerted by air molecules on a
surface. Conversely, the “weight” of the air above a given area
of the earth’s surface. Its standard unit of measurement is the
millibar (mb), although it is also popularly measured as the
height of a column of mercury supported by the atmosphere’s
weight using an instrument called a barometer. Sea-level pres-
sure is normally close to 1,016 mb, or 30 inches of mercury.
Project STORMFURY
A government-sponsored attempt in the
1960s to weaken hurricanes by cloud seeding just outside the
eyewall to stimulate cloud growth, thereby depriving inﬂow
to the eyewall.
Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO)
An oscillation of equatorial
winds between 13 and 15 miles aloft. These winds change
direction between westerly and easterly every twelve to six-
teen months. Westerly winds are associated with more
Atlantic hurricanes than easterly winds, especially when the
wind is westerly at both 13 and 15 miles aloft.
radiosonde
An instrument attached to a balloon that measures
the vertical proﬁle of temperature, moisture, pressure, and
wind up to 40,000 feet from the ground.
reconnaissance planes
Planes that ﬂy into a hurricane’s eye and
take critical meteorological measurements. During the hurri-
cane penetration, information about the horizontal wind and
temperature structure is transmitted to the NHC. Once the
plane enters the eye, a tube of instruments (called a drop-
sonde) is deployed that parachutes downward from ﬂight
level to the sea, sending valuable intensity measurements
back to the NHC.
reinsurance
The process whereby insurance companies buy
insurance for themselves. A reinsurance program is divided
into layers with different reinsurers assuming the risk of dif-
ferent layers.
346
Glossary

rime
A white or milky and opaque granular deposit of ice
formed by the rapid freezing of supercooled water as it
impinges on another object, typically another ice crystal in a
cloud. Crystals that exhibit frozen droplets on their surfaces
are referred to as rimed. Crystals that experience heavy rim-
ing are called graupel.
rip current
A “rip” in the longshore current causing a narrow and
strong offshore current, responsible for 80 percent of life-
guard rescues. Rip currents appear as a plume of dirty water
(from stirred-up sediment) moving away from shore—often
carrying foam, seaweed, or debris—with a break in incoming
waves. They are mistakenly called an undertow or riptide.
riptide
Another name for rip current, but misleading since there
is no tidal component.
Safﬁr-Simpson Hurricane Scale
A scale relating a hurricane’s
central pressure, maximum sustained winds, and storm
surge to the possible damage it is capable of inﬂicting. The
scale contains ﬁve categories increasing numerically with
damage, with a category 1 being a minimal hurricane and a
category 5 being a catastrophic hurricane.
silver iodide
A compound whose molecules consist of one atom
of silver and one atom of iodide. Its structure resembles ice
crystals, and therefore silver iodide is used in cloud seeding.
solar radiation
Radiation emitted by the sun, half of which is
visible to the human eye.
spiral
bands
Curved thunderstorm bands that propagate
around the hurricane circulation.
static instability
A condition in which saturated air forced
upward is less dense than surrounding unsaturated air that
accelerates upward, forming towering, puffy clouds.
steering current
Atmospheric current, generally somewhere
between 5,000 and 15,000 feet above the surface, whose direc-
tion best relates to the motion of a hurricane.
steric effect
A change in water level due to density changes,
caused either by reduced salinity or warmer temperatures, or
both.
storm surge
An abnormal rise of the sea along a shore due to a
meteorological inﬂuence, especially a hurricane. It is ofﬁ-
cially deﬁned as the difference between the actual water level
under the hurricane’s inﬂuence and the level due to the astro-
nomical tide and wave setup.
Glossary
347

storm tide
The actual sea level as inﬂuenced by the storm surge,
astronomical tide, and wave setup. In practice, water level obser-
vations during posthurricane surveys are always storm tides.
subtropical cyclone
A hybrid system that forms over the sub-
tropical waters in the Atlantic and Paciﬁc Oceans and contains
a mixture of tropical and polar characteristics. Subtropical
cyclones derive some of their energy from horizontal temper-
ature contrasts (whereas tropical storms and hurricanes do
not), as well as heat ﬂux from the sea (similar to tropical
storms and hurricanes).
supercooled water
Water that remains in the liquid phase at
temperatures colder than 32°F.
sustained winds
The average wind speed over a period of time
at roughly 30 feet above the ground. In the Atlantic and
northern Paciﬁc Oceans, this averaging is performed over a
one-minute period, and in other ocean basins it is performed
over a ten-minute period.
tornado
A rapidly rotating column of air that protrudes from a
cumulonimbus cloud in contact with the ground, often (but
not always) visible in the shape of a funnel or a rope. The
right front quadrant of a hurricane often produces tornadoes.
tornado warning
A warning issued by the National Weather
Service when a tornado has been observed by people trained
as weather spotters or inferred by an instrument called
Doppler radar. These warnings are issued with information
on the tornado’s current location and what communities are
in the anticipated path.
tornado watch
Issued by the Storm Prediction Center to alert
the public that conditions are favorable for tornado develop-
ment. These watches are issued with information on the loca-
tion of the watch area and the length of time it is in effect,
usually several hours.
trade winds
Persistent tropical winds having a prevailing direc-
tion from the northeast in the Northern Hemisphere and
from the southeast in the Southern Hemisphere. 
trochoidal motion
Short-term, oscillatory motion of a cyclone
center about a mean path.
tropical cyclone
The internationally designated general term
for all large, cyclonically rotating thunderstorm complexes
over tropical oceans. It includes depressions, tropical storms,
and hurricanes in addition to other large, tropical, cycloni-
348
Glossary

cally rotating thunderstorm complexes that contain distinctly
different temperature and organization characteristics, such
as monsoon depressions and subtropical cyclones.
tropical depression
A large mass of organized, oceanic thun-
derstorms with a complete cyclonic circulation and sustained
winds everywhere less than 39 mph.
tropical disturbance
A large mass of organized, oceanic thun-
derstorms originating in the tropics or subtropics generally
with a diameter of 100–300 miles and persisting for twenty-
four hours. Sometimes partial rotation is observed, but this 
is not required for a system to be designated a tropical dis-
turbance.
tropical storm
A large mass of organized, oceanic thunder-
storms with a complete cyclonic circulation and maximum
sustained winds between 39 and 73 mph somewhere in the
storm. A storm is ﬁrst given a name at this stage.
tropical waves
A westward moving trough, shaped like an
upside-down “V” and similar to a wave, embedded in north-
easterly winds in the tropics. About ﬁfty-ﬁve to seventy-ﬁve
tropical waves are observed in the Atlantic each year, and
10–25 percent develop into a tropical depression or beyond.
They are also called easterly waves.
trough
An elongated area of low pressure.
typhoon
A hurricane that forms over the western Paciﬁc Ocean
west of 180°E.
undertow
The seaward pull of receding waves after they break
on a shore. The deﬁnition is largely mythical, since the back-
wash will be replaced by another incoming wave and is
therefore periodic. Often mistakenly called a rip current.
upwelling
The ascending of subsurface water in association
with the net outﬂow of surface water.
vertical wind shear
The difference between wind speed and
direction at 40,000 feet and the earth’s surface. Hurricane for-
mation and intensiﬁcation are favored in regions where the
wind speed and direction remain the same with height (weak
vertical wind shear), thereby allowing the vertical orientation
of thunderstorms to remain intact.
vortex Rossby waves
A special class of wave solutions due to
the curved ﬂow and rapid variation in wind speed away
from the storm center, which explains hurricane spiral bands.
Glossary
349

vorticity
The rate an imaginary paddle wheel placed in ﬂuid
would rotate due to curved ﬂow and/or horizontally sheared
ﬂow. The radial variation of vorticity causes vortex Rossby
waves, which explains the presence of hurricane spiral bands.
wave setup
An increase in the water level on a beach due to the
effects of waves running up at the beach with excessive
incoming water not balanced by outgoing water, such as in
hurricane conditions. This effect is more pronounced when
deep water is near the beach.
wind gusts
A sudden, brief increase in speed of the wind.
According to U.S. weather-observing practices, gusts are
reported when the peak wind speed reaches at least 18 mph
and the variation in wind speed between the peaks and lulls
is at least 10 mph. The duration of a gust is usually less than
twenty seconds.
Conversion Tables
Adapted from Holland (1993b), Ahrens (1994), and author’s lec-
ture notes.
Length
1 kilometer (km) = 1000 m
= 3281 ft
= 0.621 mi
= 0.54 nm
1 statute mile (mi) = 5280 ft
= 1609 m
= 1.609 km
= 0.87 nm
1 nautical mile (nm) = 6080 ft
= 1853 m
= 1.853 km
= 1.15 mi
1 meter (m) = 100 cm
= 3.28 ft
= 39.37 in
350
Glossary

1 foot (ft) = 12 in
= 30.48 cm
= 0.305 m
1 centimeter (cm) = 0.39 in
= 0.01 m
= 10 mm
1 millimeter (mm) = 0.1 cm
= 0.001 m
= 0.039 in
1 inch (in) = 2.54 cm
= 0.08 ft
Approximate Conversion of Latitude, Longitude,
and Length (Use with Some Caution)
1 degree latitude ≈111.137 km
≈60 nm
≈69 mi
1 degree longitude ≈111.137 km × cosine (latitude)
≈60 nm × cosine (latitude)
≈69 mi × cosine (latitude)
More Precise Distance Calculations between 
Two Latitude and Two Longitude Points
Let point 1 be latitude φ1 and longitude θ1, and let point 2 be lati-
tude φ2 and longitude θ2. To accurately compute the distance
between these two locations, one computes the distance along a
“great circle” using the following steps:
Step 1: Compute C
C = sin φ1 × sin φ2 + cos φ1 × cos φ2 × cos (θ2 – θ1)
Step 2: Compute A (make sure the calculator is in radians mode)
A = cos-1 C
Glossary
351

Step 3: Compute distance
distance = 6378 km × A
distance = 3444 nm × A
distance = 3963 mi × A
These computations assume that the earth is a perfect sphere,
which introduces a small error of about 1 percent.
Area
1 square centimeter (cm2) = 0.15 in2
1 square inch (in2) = 6.45 cm2
1 square meter (m2) = 10.76 ft2
1 square foot (ft2) = 0.093 m2
Volume
1 cubic centimeter (cm3) = 0.06 in3
1 cubic inch (in3) = 16.39 cm3
1 liter (l) = 1000 cm3
= 0.264 gallons
Time
1 minute (min) = 60 s
1 hour (hr) = 60 min
= 3600 s
1 day (d) = 24 hr
= 1440 min
= 86400 s
Time Zone Conversions
Coordinates Universal Time (UTC) is the standard global time to
avoid time zone confusion and is based on local time in Green-
wich, England, where 0° longitude (the international date line)
passes through. For this reason, UTC is also called Greenwich
Mean Time (GMT). GMT and UTC are also sometimes called Zulu
(Z) time, universal time, and world time. The time notation ranges
from 0000 to 2359. For example, 1 A.M. in Greenwich is 0100, pro-
nounced “zero one hundred,” and 8:35 P.M. in Greenwich is 2035.
To compute local time, hours have to be added or subtracted from
352
Glossary

it based on the local time zone. Since the United States is west of
the date line, hours are subtracted.
Daylight Saving Time, enacted to reduce energy use during
the winter months, will also affect these conversions. Daylight
Saving Time currently begins on the ﬁrst Sunday of April at 2 A.M.
local time, when an hour is added (“spring forward”). Time
reverts to standard time on the last Sunday of October at 2 A.M.
local time, when an hour is subtracted (“fall back”). Daylight Sav-
ing Time is not observed in Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam,
Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, most of the Eastern Time Zone
portion of Indiana, and Arizona (except for the Navajo Indian
Reservation, which does observe it).  To further reduce energy
use, in August 2005 Congress passed an energy bill that extends
Daylight Saving Time by about a month. Beginning in 2007, Day-
light Savings Time will start on the second Sunday of March and
end the ﬁrst Sunday of November.
UTC conversions for the continental United States are
shown below:
Eastern Standard Time (EST) = UTC minus 5 hours
Central Standard Time (CST) = UTC minus 6 hours
Mountain Standard Time (MST) = UTC minus 7 hours
Paciﬁc Standard Time (PST) = UTC minus 6 hours
Eastern Daylight Time (EDT) = UTC minus 4 hours 
Central Daylight Time (CDT) = UTC minus 5 hours 
Mountain Daylight Time (MDT) = UTC minus 6 hours 
Paciﬁc Daylight Time (PDT) = UTC minus 7 hours
Speed
1 knot (kt) = 1 nautical mi/hr
= 1.15 statute mi/hr, also written as 1.15 mph
= 0.513 m/s
= 1.85 km/hr
1 mile per hour (mi/hr, or mph) = 0.87 kt
= 0.45 m/s
= 1.61 km/hr
1 kilometer per hour (km/hr) = 0.54 kt
= 0.62 mi/hr, or 0.62 mph
= 0.28 m/s
Glossary
353

1 meter per second (m/s) = 1.94 kt
= 2.24 mi/hr, or 2.24 mph
= 3.60 km/hr
Mass
1 gram (g) = 0.035 ounce
= 0.0022 lb
1 kilogram (kg) = 1000 g
= 2.2 lb
Pressure
1 millibar (mb) = 1000 dynes/cm2
= 0.75 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg)
= 0.02953 inch of mercury (in Hg)
= 0.01450 pound per square inch (lb/in2)
= 100 Pascals (Pa)
1 inch of mercury = 33.865 mb
1 millimeter of mercury = 1.3332 mb
1 Pascal = 0.01 mb
1 hectopascal (hPa) = 1 mb
1 kilopascal (kPa) = 10 mb
1 standard atmosphere = 1013.25 mb
= 760 mm Hg
= 29.92 in Hg
= 14.7 lb/in2
Converting °C to °F
°F = 9⁄5°C + 32
°C = 5⁄9(°F – 32)
If one can’t remember the equations, then memorize that
with each 10°C-temperature change there is an 18°F change. At
354
Glossary

freezing, 0°C = 32°F. Then, each time 10°C is added or subtracted,
add or subtract another 18°F. The result is the following table:
–10°C = 14°F
0°C = 32°F
10°C = 50°F
20°C = 68°F
30°C = 86°F
40°C = 104°F
After memorizing these key values, one can interpolate the values
in between.
Converting °K to °C
°C = °K – 273.15
°K = °C + 273.15
Computing Dewpoint from Relative Humidity
Relative humidity (RH), frequently cited in the newspaper and TV,
is the actual amount of water vapor in the air compared to the
maximum possible water vapor amount at which air would satu-
rate at that temperature. Expressed in percent, it indicates the
amount of evaporation possible. At RH = 100%, the air is saturated
and no evaporation can occur. Because RH will change with tem-
perature even though water vapor content is the same, it is not a
good moisture value. Dewpoint temperature is a better indication
of water vapor content. The dewpoint temperature (TD) is the tem-
perature air must be cooled to at constant pressure and constant
water vapor content in order for saturation to occur. However, TD
is complicated to compute. Two methods will now be shown.
If RH > 50%, TD decreases by about 1°C for every 5%
decrease in RH. When RH > 50%, the following simple equation
can be used to compute TD in °C (Lawrence 2005):
TD = T – 
(100
5
– RH)

Note that T must be in °C.
The following complicated equation works for all RH (Parry
1969). T must be in °C:
Glossary
355

a = 1 – 1
R
0
H
0

b = (14.55 + 0.114 × T) × a + ((2.5 + 0.007 × T) × a)3 + (15.9 + 0.117 
× T) × a14
TD = T – b
Converting One-Minute Maximum Sustained
Winds Speed to Central Pressure in a Tropical
Storm or Hurricane
Table G.1 gives empirical relationships that exist between the one-
minute maximum sustained wind speeds and central pressure in
tropical storms and hurricanes for four regions of the Atlantic and
the western North Paciﬁc. Atlantic hurricanes in the northern lat-
itudes tend to have weaker winds for the same central pressure
because they are moving over colder water and losing the thun-
derstorms that help maintain the tight wind structure. Note that
Paciﬁc storms have a lower central pressure for the same wind
speed, because the environmental pressure surrounding the
storms is also lower, and wind is the result of pressure differences
outside and inside the hurricane. “NA” indicates not applicable,
since tropical storms and hurricanes have never been observed
for a region in that central pressure category. Caution is advised
when using table G.1, as these relationships are only approximate.
One-Minute Sustained Winds 
to Ten-Minute Sustained Winds
In general, when averaging is applied over a longer period of
time, sustained wind speeds decrease since wind gusts occur in
short bursts. In other words, ten-minute sustained winds will be
less than one-minute sustained winds under the same weather
conditions. Since different countries use different deﬁnitions of
sustained winds, comparing hurricane intensity statistics be-
tween oceans can be problematic. For example, the Atlantic Ocean
and North Paciﬁc Ocean basins use a one-minute averaging
sequence, while other ocean basins use ten minutes.
The following conversion factors may be used to convert
from one-minute sustained wind speeds to ten-minute sustained
356
Glossary

wind speeds, although caution is advised when using this proce-
dure since it is only approximate, and because it is possible for
one-minute sustained winds to be less than ten-minute sustained
winds (Holland 1993b).
10-minute winds = 0.871 × 1-minute sustained winds
1-minute winds = 1.148 × 10-minute sustained winds
Computing Wind Gusts 
from Sustained Wind Speed
While computing sustained winds over a given time period, short
bursts of stronger winds known as wind gusts will occur. These
wind gusts can cause isolated pockets of damage worse than in
the surrounding area and therefore are useful to know. To 
compute these wind gusts, one can multiply by a gust factor,
deﬁned by the ratio of peak two-second winds to the sustained
wind. The gust factors in table G.2 can be used for various expo-
sures at 10-meter height (about 33 feet). In general, the rougher
Glossary
357
TABLE G.1
Relationship of central pressure to hurricane winds in Atlantic and Paciﬁc Oceans
1-minute maximum sustained wind speed (mph)
Central 
Western North 
pressure
Gulf of
Atlantic, south 
Atlantic, 
Atlantic, north
Paciﬁc over
(mb)
Mexico
of 25°N
25–35°N
of 35°N
warm water
1010
35
35
35
35
NA
1000
52
55
56
57
35
990
72
74
73
73
53
980
88
90
87
84
69
970
103
103
98
95
82
960
115
115
109
104
97
950
127
127
119
112
109
940
137
137
127
119
118
930
148
147
135
NA
129
920
158
156
143
NA
139
910
167
165
NA
NA
150
900
176
173
NA
NA
159
890
NA
181
NA
NA
170
880
NA
NA
NA
NA
179
870
NA
NA
NA
NA
187
Source: Adapted from Dvorak (1975) and Landsea et al. (2004).

the terrain, the lower the sustained wind but the larger the gust
factor due to turbulent eddies. Engineers frequently use the gust
factor to determine wind loading conditions.
The Modiﬁed Beaufort Scale
In 1831, Rear Admiral Sir Francis Beaufort developed a scale num-
bering from 0 to 12 based on the sea’s impact on a ship (Kinsman
1990, 1991). From this, a common name for wind strength was
assigned (i.e., “gentle breeze,” “fresh gale,” etc.). Since then, the
scale has been modiﬁed several times to estimate wind speed by
land or sea observations (table G.3). In addition, one can also use
the table to determine wave height offshore for a given wind
speed. The wind transfers some of its energy to the water through
friction between the air molecules and the water molecules. Light
wind generates ripples, and strong wind causes waves. Once ini-
tiated, waves can grow because the wind causes a pressure differ-
ence along the wave proﬁle. As a wave grows, the pressure
differences increase, which increases the wave height more,
enhancing the pressure difference even more, and a positive feed-
back occurs. The waves also begin to interact among themselves
to produce a spectrum of waves of different heights and lengths.
The longer waves will actually propagate faster than the local
wind that generated them, traveling far distances from the origi-
nation region. Eventually, these long-distance waves will reach an
equilibrium height with the wind, and the sea becomes less
chaotic, resulting in swells.
The typical time between successive passages of swell crests
(known as the wave period) is six to eight seconds. Hurricanes far
away produce very long waves, known as forerunners, with
longer periods. In fact, before weather observations were avail-
able, seeing forerunners with wave periods of nine to ﬁfteen sec-
358
Glossary
TABLE G.2
Gust factors for different surface types
Ocean
Flat Grassland
Woods/City
1-minute sustained winds
1.25
1.35
1.65
10-minute sustained winds
1.41
1.56
2.14
Source: Adapted from Holland (1993b).

359
TABLE G.3
The Modiﬁed Beaufort Scale
Possible wave 
height in deep
Wind 
Mean wind
water offshore 
Beaufort
speed in
pressure
Wind effects 
(use for rough
Wind effects 
number
Description
Mph
knots
Km/hr
(lb/ft2)
observed on land
estimate only)
observed at sea
0
Calm
Less than 1
Less than 1
Less than 2
0
Calm; smoke rises vertically
Less than 1⁄2 foot
Sea like mirror
1
Light air
1–3
1–3
2–6
0.01
Direction of wind shown by smoke drift but not 
Less than 1⁄2 foot
Slight ripples; no 
by vanes
foam crests
2
Light breeze
4–7
4–6
7–11
0.08
Wind felt on face; leaves rustle; vanes moved 
1⁄2 to 1 feet
Small wavelets, still 
by wind; ﬂags stir
short but more
pronounced; crests have
a glassy appearance
and do not break
3
Gentle 
8–12
7–10
12–19
0.28
Leaves, small twigs in constant motion; wind 
2–3 feet
Large wavelets; 
breeze
extends light ﬂag
crests breaking; foam
glassy; scattered
whitecaps
4
Moderate 
13–18
11–16
20–29
0.67
Raises dust, loose paper; small branches move;
31⁄2–5 feet
Small waves become 
breeze
ﬂags ﬂap
larger; fairly 
frequent whitecaps
5
Fresh breeze 19–24
17–21
30–39
1.3
Small trees with leaves begin to sway; ﬂags 
6–81⁄2 feet 
Moderate waves 
ripple; crested wavelets form on inland waters
form many whitecaps;
chance of some spray
(continues)

360
TABLE G.3
(Continued)
Possible wave 
height in deep
Wind 
Mean wind
water offshore 
Beaufort
speed in
pressure
Wind effects 
(use for rough
Wind effects 
number
Description
Mph
knots
Km/hr
(lb/ft2)
observed on land
estimate only)
observed at sea
6
Strong 
25–31
22–27
40–50
2.3
Large branches in motion; whistling heard in 
91⁄2–12 feet
Large waves form; 
breeze
utility wires; umbrellas used with difﬁculty
foam crests more
extensive; some spray
7
Near gale
32–38
28–33
51–61
3.6
Whole trees in motion; inconvenient walking 
131⁄2–19 feet
Sea heaps up; some 
against wind; ﬂags extend
foam from waves blows
in streaks
8
Gale
39–46
34–40
62–74
5.4
Twigs break off trees; walking is difﬁcult
18–25 feet
Moderately high waves of
greater length; well-
marked streaks of foam
9
Strong gale
47–54
41–47
75–87
7.7
Slight structural damage occurs; signs and 
23–32 feet
High waves; dense 
antennas blown down
foam streaks; crests of
waves begin to topple,
tumble, and roll over;
spray may affect visibility
10
Storm 
55–63
48–55
88–101
10.5
Trees uprooted; considerable structural damage 
29–41 feet
Very high waves with 
(whole gale)
occurs
long overhanging crests;
foam blown in white
dense streaks; on the 
(continues)

361
whole, the sea takes a
white appearance;
visibility affected
11
Violent 
64–73
56–63
102–119
14.0
Widespread damage
37–52 feet
Exceptionally high waves 
storm
(small and medium-sized
ships might be lost to
view behind the waves);
sea completely covered
with long white patches
of foam; edges of waves
blow into froth
everywhere; visibility
affected
12
Hurricane
74 and over
64 and over
120 
Over 
Extensive damage
45 feet or greater
Air ﬁlled with foam and 
and over
17.0
spray; sea completely
white with driving spray;
visibility very seriously
affected
Source: Adapted from Holland (1993b) and NWS (1991).

onds often was the only clue that a hurricane was brewing some-
where, and trained mariners watched for them!
Because wave generation is a complicated process, wave
heights in the modiﬁed Beaufort scale should be used for rough
estimates only. Wave height depends on the magnitude and dura-
tion of the wind speed, how large an area the wind is affecting, and
whether the waves have been generated locally or from some dis-
tant windy region. Typically, wave heights are reported as “signif-
icant wave height,” deﬁned as the average of the top one-third
wave heights. However, in reality a spectrum of waves exists with
different wave lengths and heights. Breaking waves will also
occur when the upper segment of the wave moves faster than the
lower segment. If waves are generated locally, the signiﬁcant
wave height (in feet) can be estimated based on wind speed (in
mph) from the equation: (0.45*wind)2/13.58. Wave heights propa-
gating into the area from a windy region far away can be com-
puted from complicated graphs based on wind speed, wind
duration, and how big this generation area is. The National Cen-
ters for Environmental Prediction also runs wave models to pre-
dict height.
Caution should also be shown using the Beaufort scale out-
side U.S. waters, since the U.S. uses one-minute average winds
and other countries use ten-minute averages; using ten-minute
averages will result in smaller wind speeds.
The Beaufort table cannot be used to estimate wave heights
near the coast in shallow water. As waves enter water less than 65
feet deep, they begin to “feel” the ocean bottom. In shallow water,
the top part moves faster than the lower part and breaks into
whitecaps. New waves—generally smaller—will form as they
propagate inland. However, as the water depth continues to
decrease, the wave slows down with a shorter wave length, and
the wave height will grow again to conserve its energy; this
process is called shoaling. When it reaches a height 75 percent of
the depth, it will break as rolling whitecaps. If the coast has a shal-
low slope, the white foam just slides down the front; this is known
as a spilling breaker. If the coast has a moderate slope, the break
curls over in a plunging breaker (the best for surﬁng). On very steep
coastlines, the wave may not break but just roll up the beach with-
out plunging; this is known as a surging breaker, and such a situa-
tion is dangerous in strong storms because these type of waves are
very powerful. Topography also plays a key role, as waves may be
diffracted or concentrated by points and inlets. In regions where
362
Glossary

sharp, vertical cliffs occur near deep water, waves do not break
but “reﬂect” off the cliff; when combined with the lifting mecha-
nism of a storm surge, the waves can overtop the cliff, causing
considerable destruction.
Tracking Hurricanes and Understanding
National Hurricane Center Forecasts
Tracking a hurricane is an interesting pastime for many people as
they plot where a hurricane has been and postulate where it
might go. It is also an educational exercise for many students
since it integrates geography, mapping skills, and science. When a
tropical depression, tropical storm, or hurricane exists in the
Atlantic or East Paciﬁc, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) will
issue forecast statements. You can plot the storm’s position with a
marker, following the storm’s path. You can also plot the storm’s
projected paths based on NHC forecasts. Hurricane tracking
charts can be ordered from the National Weather Service or down-
loaded from the FEMA, NOAA, National Weather Service, or
NHC websites. Usually, coastal residents can also ﬁnd tracking
charts, often associated with a regional TV station, at many local
stores.
The NHC issues numerous text products during the hurri-
cane season. All these products are available on the NHC website,
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov, or by automated email from the
NHC. In addition, some are also distributed by radiofax, teletype,
NOAA weather radio, and the Coast Guard using very high fre-
quency (VHF), high frequency (HF), and medium frequency (MB)
broadcasts.
The most useful to the general public is the “Tropical Weather
Outlook” issued every six hours at 5:30 A.M., 11:30 A.M., 5:30 P.M.,
and 11:30 P.M. EST. This outlook brieﬂy describes signiﬁcant areas of
disturbed weather and tropical disturbances. Additionally, this out-
look discusses the potential for future development of these fea-
tures out to forty-eight hours in the future. The outlook also lists
any currently active tropical depressions, tropical storms, or hurri-
canes. The outlook is a valuable aid in maintaining tropical weather
awareness and potential hurricane activity.
When a tropical depression, tropical storm, or hurricane
exists in the Atlantic basin, the NHC issues advisories every six
Glossary
363

hours at 5 A.M., 11 A.M., 5 P.M., and 11 P.M. EST. Hurricane center
positions are given by latitude (e.g., 28.4 degrees North) and by
longitude (e.g., 88.7 degrees West). The current intensity and the
predicted track and intensity are also issued. As a hurricane nears
landfall, intermediate advisories may also be issued in three-hour
increments between the forecast advisories. Special advisories are
also issued whenever unanticipated signiﬁcant changes occur or
when tropical storm or hurricane watches or warnings must be
issued immediately.
There are four kinds of advisory statements issued by the
NHC every six hours: (1) a forecast advisory, (2) a public advisory,
(3) discussion, and (4) strike probability. They include forecasts out
to ﬁve days. Examples for Hurricane Georges as it approached the
Louisiana and Mississippi coast are shown below (note that only
three-day forecasts were issued in 1998).
Forecast Advisory
Forecast advisories contain detailed information about the hurri-
cane’s current location, intensity, and wind distribution. The wind
distribution (in nautical miles) is given in “radius of 35 knot”
winds and “radius of 50 knot” winds. Mariners generally avoid
winds greater than 35 knots, and the U.S. Navy is required to
avoid winds of these magnitudes. Forecast advisories also predict
these parameters out to ﬁve days. When landfall is expected,
watches and warnings are also included in the forecast advisory.
HURRICANE GEORGES FORECAST/ADVISORY NUMBER 49
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE MIAMI FL AL0798
1500Z SUN SEP 27 1998
A HURRICANE WARNING IS IN EFFECT FROM MORGAN
CITY LOUISIANA TO PANAMA CITY FLORIDA. A
HURRICANE WARNING MEANS THAT HURRICANE
CONDITIONS ARE EXPECTED IN THE WARNED AREA
WITHIN 24 HOURS. PREPARATIONS TO PROTECT LIFE AND
PROPERTY SHOULD BE RUSHED TO COMPLETION.
A TROPICAL STORM WARNING AND A HURRICANE WATCH
ARE IN EFFECT FROM EAST OF PANAMA CITY FLORIDA TO
ST. MARKS FLORIDA. A HURRICANE WATCH IS IN EFFECT
FROM WEST OF MORGAN CITY TO INTRACOASTAL CITY
LOUISIANA.
364
Glossary

HURRICANE CENTER LOCATED NEAR 28.4N 88.0W AT
27/1500Z POSITION ACCURATE WITHIN 25 NM
PRESENT MOVEMENT TOWARD THE NORTHWEST OR 315
DEGREES AT 7 KT
ESTIMATED MINIMUM CENTRAL PRESSURE 963 MB MAX
SUSTAINED WINDS 95 KT WITH GUSTS TO 115 KT
64 KT . . . . . . . 80NE 40SE 20SW 60NW
50 KT . . . . . . . 100NE 90SE 30SW 75NW
34 KT . . . . . . . 130NE 150SE 90SW 100NW
12 FT SEAS.130NE 150SE 90SW 100NW
ALL QUADRANT RADII IN NAUTICAL MILES
REPEAT . . . CENTER LOCATED NEAR 28.4N 88.0W AT
27/1500Z 
AT 27/1200Z CENTER WAS LOCATED NEAR 28.2N 87.8W
FORECAST VALID 28/0000Z 28.9N 88.7W
MAX WIND 100 KT . . . GUSTS 120 KT
64 KT . . . 90NE 40SE 20SW 60NW
50 KT . . . 100NE 90SE 30SW 75NW
34 KT . . . 130NE 150SE 90SW 100NW
FORECAST VALID 28/1200Z 29.6N 89.5W
MAX WIND 100 KT . . . GUSTS 120 KT
64 KT . . . 80NE 40SE 20SW 60NW
50 KT . . . 100NE 90SE 30SW 75NW
34 KT . . . 130NE 150SE 90SW 100NW
FORECAST VALID 29/0000Z 30.3N 89.9W . . . INLAND
MAX WIND 80 KT . . . GUSTS 95 KT
64 KT . . . 80NE 40SE 20SW 60NW
50 KT . . . 100NE 90SE 30SW 75NW
34 KT . . . 130NE 150SE 90SW 100NW
STORM SURGE FLOODING OF 10 TO 15 FEET . . . LOCALLY UP
TO 17 FEET AT THE HEADS OF BAYS . . . ABOVE NORMAL
TIDE LEVELS IS POSSIBLE IN THE WARNED AREA AND WILL
BE ACCOMPANIED BY LARGE AND DANGEROUS
BATTERING WAVES.
SMALL CRAFT FROM INTRACOASTAL CITY LOUISIANA
WESTWARD AND SOUTHWARD ALONG THE COAST OF
TEXAS SHOULD REMAIN IN PORT. SMALL CRAFT ALONG
Glossary
365

THE WEST COAST OF THE FLORIDA PENINSULA SHOULD
REMAIN IN PORT UNTIL WINDS AND SEAS SUBSIDE.
REQUEST FOR 3 HOURLY SHIP REPORTS WITHIN 300 MILES
OF 28.4N 88.0W
EXTENDED OUTLOOK . . . USE FOR GUIDANCE ONLY . . .
ERRORS MAY BE LARGE
OUTLOOK VALID 29/1200Z 30.8N 89.9W . . . INLAND
MAX WIND 65 KT . . . GUSTS 80 KT
50 KT . . . 50NE 75SE 25SW 25NW
OUTLOOK VALID 30/1200Z 31.5N 89.5W . . . INLAND
MAX WIND 50 KT . . . GUSTS 60 KT
50 KT . . . 50NE 75SE 25SW 25NW
NEXT ADVISORY AT 27/2100Z
GUINEY
Public Advisory
A public advisory contains the hurricane’s current position and
intensity as well as general commentary regarding watches,
warnings, future track and intensity, wind distribution, torna-
does, potential storm surge, and potential rainfall when landfall is
possible or likely.
BULLETIN
HURRICANE GEORGES ADVISORY NUMBER 49
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE MIAMI FL
10 AM CDT SUN SEP 27 1998
. . . DANGEROUS HURRICANE GEORGES CLOSING IN ON
THE CENTRAL GULF COAST . . .
A HURRICANE WARNING IS IN EFFECT FROM MORGAN
CITY LOUISIANA TO PANAMA CITY FLORIDA. A
HURRICANE WARNING MEANS THAT HURRICANE
CONDITIONS ARE EXPECTED IN THE WARNED AREA
WITHIN 24 HOURS. PREPARATIONS TO PROTECT LIFE AND
366
Glossary

PROPERTY SHOULD BE RUSHED TO COMPLETION . . . AND
ADVICE FROM LOCAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
OFFICIALS SHOULD BE CLOSELY FOLLOWED.
A TROPICAL STORM WARNING AND A HURRICANE WATCH
ARE IN EFFECT FROM EAST OF PANAMA CITY FLORIDA TO
ST. MARKS FLORIDA. A HURRICANE WATCH IS IN EFFECT
FROM WEST OF MORGAN CITY TO INTRACOASTAL CITY
LOUISIANA.
AT 10 AM CDT . . . 1500Z . . . THE CENTER OF HURRICANE
GEORGES WAS LOCATED NEAR LATITUDE 28.4 NORTH . . .
LONGITUDE 88.0 WEST. THIS POSITION IS ABOUT 80 MILES
SOUTHEAST OF THE MOUTH OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER
AND ABOUT 175 MILES SOUTHEAST OF NEW ORLEANS
LOUISIANA.
GEORGES IS MOVING TOWARD THE NORTHWEST NEAR 8
MPH AND THIS GENERAL MOTION IS EXPECTED TO
CONTINUE WITH A GRADUAL DECREASE IN FORWARD
SPEED. THIS WOULD BRING THE CORE OF THE HURRICANE
NEAR THE MOUTH OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER LATER
TODAY. DO NOT FOCUS ON THE PRECISE LOCATION AND
TRACK OF THE CENTER. THE HURRICANES DESTRUCTIVE
WINDS . . . RAIN . . . AND STORM SURGE COVER A WIDE
SWATH.
MAXIMUM SUSTAINED WINDS ARE NEAR 110 MPH WITH
HIGHER GUSTS. GEORGES IS STRONG CATEGORY TWO
HURRICANE ON THE SAFFIR-SIMPSON HURRICANE SCALE
AND COULD REACH CATEGORY THREE STATUS BEFORE
LANDFALL.
HURRICANE FORCE WINDS EXTEND OUTWARD UP TO 90
MILES FROM THE CENTER . . . AND TROPICAL STORM
FORCE WINDS EXTEND OUTWARD UP TO 175 MILES.
RAINBANDS OF GEORGES ARE SPREADING ACROSS
PORTIONS OF THE WARNING AREA AND HURRICANE
FORCE WINDS SHOULD BEGIN TO AFFECT THE AREA
LATER TODAY.
AN AIR FORCE RESERVE UNIT HURRICANE HUNTER PLANE
Glossary
367

REPORTED A MINIMUM CENTRAL PRESSURE OF 963 MB . . .
28.44 INCHES.
STORM SURGE FLOODING OF 10 TO 15 FEET ABOVE
NORMAL TIDE LEVELS . . . AND UP TO 17 FEET AT THE
HEADS OF BAYS . . . IS POSSIBLE IN THE WARNED AREA
AND WILL BE ACCOMPANIED BY LARGE AND DANGEROUS
BATTERING WAVES.
FLOODING RAINS OF 15 TO 25 INCHES . . . WITH LOCALLY
HIGHER AMOUNTS . . . ARE LIKELY IN ASSOCIATION WITH
THIS SLOW-MOVING HURRICANE.
ISOLATED TORNADOES ARE POSSIBLE EAST AND
NORTHEAST OF THE TRACK OF GEORGES.
SMALL CRAFT FROM INTRACOASTAL CITY LOUISIANA
WESTWARD AND SOUTHWARD ALONG THE COAST OF
TEXAS SHOULD REMAIN IN PORT. SMALL CRAFT ALONG
THE WEST COAST OF THE FLORIDA PENINSULA SHOULD
REMAIN IN PORT UNTIL WINDS AND SEAS SUBSIDE.
REPEATING THE 10 AM CDT POSITION . . . 28.4 N . . . 88.0 W.
MOVEMENT TOWARD . . . NORTHWEST NEAR 8 MPH.
MAXIMUM SUSTAINED WINDS . . . 110 MPH.
MINIMUM CENTRAL PRESSURE . . . 963 MB.
AN INTERMEDIATE ADVISORY WILL BE ISSUED BY THE
NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER AT 1 PM CDT FOLLOWED
BY THE NEXT COMPLETE ADVISORY AT 4 PM CDT.
GUINEY
STRIKE PROBABILITIES ASSOCIATED WITH THIS ADVISORY
NUMBER CAN BE FOUND UNDER AFOS HEADER
MIASPFAT2 AND WMO HEADER WTNT72 KNHC.
Discussion
The discussion explains the hurricane specialist’s reasoning for the
predicted track and intensity (in this case, the hurricane specialist’s
last name is Guiney). Typically included are the forecaster’s inter-
pretations of the computer models; current oceanic observations
368
Glossary

from ships, buoys, oil rigs; and the reconnaissance ﬂights by the
Hurricane Hunters and the Hurricane Research Division.
HURRICANE GEORGES DISCUSSION NUMBER 49
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE MIAMI FL
11 AM EDT SUN SEP 27 1998
THE AIR FORCE RESERVE HURRICANE HUNTER AIRCRAFT
RECENTLY REPORTED A MINIMUM CENTRAL PRESSURE OF
963 MB FROM A GPS DROPSONDE WITH MAXIMUM FLIGHT-
LEVEL WINDS OF 86 KNOTS. BUOY 42040 REPORTED A 45 KT
8-MINUTE SUSTAINED WIND . . . APPROXIMATELY 55 KT 
1-MINUTE WIND SPEED . . . AND 33 FOOT SEAS AT 12Z
WHILE THE C-MAN BUOY NEAR THE MOUTH OF THE
MISSISSIPPI RIVER WAS 39 KT. THE INITIAL INTENSITY WILL
BE HELD AT 95 KNOTS. THIS KEEPS GEORGES ON THE HIGH
END OF CATEGORY TWO STATUS. THE FORECAST STILL
CALLS FOR GEORGES TO STRENGTHEN TO A CATEGORY
THREE BEFORE LANDFALL.
BASED ON THE WIND DATA ABOVE . . . RECON WIND PLOTS
AND HURRICANE RESEARCH DIVISION . . . HRD . . .
ANALYSES THE WIND RADII HAVE BEEN ADJUSTED. THE
PRIMARY CHANGE IS THE ADDITION OF HURRICANE-
FORCE WINDS IN THE SOUTHWEST QUADRANT.
FIXES FROM RECON AND NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
DOPPLER RADAR SUGGEST A SLIGHT SLOWING IN THE
FORWARD SPEED OVER THE LAST 6 HOURS. THE INITIAL
MOTION ESTIMATE IS 315/07. THE SYNOPTIC REASONING
REGARDING THE TRACK REMAINS UNCHANGED FROM
THE LAST SEVERAL ADVISORIES. A GRADUAL SLOWDOWN
IS FORECAST AS STEERING CURRENTS WEAKEN. THUS . . .
THE OFFICIAL FORECAST TRACK IS VERY SIMILAR TO THE
PREVIOUS ADVISORY. THIS MEANS THAT THE HURRICANE
COULD PRODUCE EXTREMELY LARGE RAINFALL
AMOUNTS COMBINED WITH A LONG PERIOD OF ONSHORE
WINDS AND STORM SURGE FLOODING. GEORGES IS A VERY
SERIOUS THREAT AND IT COULD BE EVEN WORSE IF THERE
IS FURTHER STRENGTHENING.
GUINEY
Glossary
369

FORECAST POSITIONS AND MAX WINDS
INITIAL
27/1500Z 
28.4N 
88.0W 
95 KTS
12HR VT 
28/0000Z 
28.9N 
88.7W 
100 KTS
24HR VT 
28/1200Z 
29.6N 
89.5W 
100 KTS
36HR VT 
29/0000Z 
30.3N 
89.9W 
80 KTS . . . INLAND
48HR VT 
29/1200Z 
30.8N 
89.9W 
65 KTS . . . INLAND
72HR VT 
30/1200Z 
31.5N 
89.5W 
50 KTS . . . INLAND
Strike Probability
As a means to quantify the likelihood of a hurricane passing near
a particular coastal location, the NHC issues a strike probability
discussion every six hours. The interpretation of these numbers
requires some detailed explanation, which will begin with an
example.
Suppose a hurricane is located in the central Gulf of Mexico
and is forecast to make landfall in southeast Louisiana in twenty-
four hours. Now suppose we could ﬁnd 100 past cases where a
storm was located near this position and was forecast to move
along the same track. Since most twenty-four-hour forecasts con-
tain some error, most twenty-four-hour positions will be different
than what was predicted. In some cases, the location may be near
southeast Louisiana, but in most other cases the actual twenty-
four-hour position may be in Texas, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida,
or some other location.
Now suppose that of these 100 past cases, southeast
Louisiana experienced landfall twelve times within twenty-four
hours. Then, the twenty-four-hour strike probability for this hur-
ricane (currently located in the central Gulf of Mexico) making
landfall in southeast Louisiana is 12 percent. Likewise, suppose
six previous hurricanes actually made landfall in Galveston,
Texas, within twenty-four hours; the strike probability for Galve-
ston is then 6 percent. In this manner, strike probabilities can be
issued for the entire threatened coastline. Similar probabilities can
be computed for later forecast times.
The procedure through which the NHC computes strike
probabilities is somewhat more complicated, but this example
conveys the general procedure. A strike probability is deﬁned by
the NHC as the chance of the hurricane center passing within 65
nautical miles of a particular marine location. These probabilities
370
Glossary

are based on NHC forecast error statistics since 1970 and are an
expression of forecast uncertainty. For example, if the NHC fore-
casts a hurricane to be 65 nautical miles from Galveston within
twenty-four hours, what is the probability of this actually hap-
pening based on past forecast performance of hurricanes located
at the same initial location?
The NHC issues strike probabilities for the following suc-
cessive time periods: (1) less than twenty-four hours, (2) twenty-
four to thirty-six hours, (3) thirty-six to forty-eight hours, and (4)
forty-eight to seventy-two hours. Since forecast errors increase for
longer-term forecasts, strike probabilities tend to “cluster” around
a particular region for forecasts less than twenty-four hours, then
tend to spread out with incrementally longer forecast time peri-
ods. These forecasts are issued in tabular form as shown below.
The ﬁrst column gives the strike probability within twenty-four
hours. The next column gives the added increment to the proba-
bility within thirty-six hours, the next column the added incre-
ment within forty-eight hours, etc. For example, the strike
probability below shows that Mobile’s strike probability within
twenty-four hours is 23 percent, within thirty-six hours is an
added increment of 2 percent (or 25 percent total probability
within thirty-six hours), within forty-eight hours is an added
increment of 1 percent (or 26 percent total probability within
forty-eight hours), and within seventy-two hours an added incre-
ment of 1 percent (or 27 percent total probability within seventy-
two hours). The last column shows the total strike probability
within seventy-two hours. It is important to remember that
columns 2 through 4 cannot be utilized alone but are added incre-
ments to previous columns.
ZCZC MIASPFAT2 ALL
TTAA00 KNHC DDHHMM
HURRICANE GEORGES PROBABILITIES NUMBER 49
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE MIAMI FL
10 AM CDT SUN SEP 27 1998
PROBABILITIES FOR GUIDANCE IN HURRICANE
PROTECTION PLANNING BY GOVERNMENT AND DISASTER
OFFICIALS
AT 10 AM CDT . . . 1500Z . . . THE CENTER OF GEORGES WAS
LOCATED NEAR LATITUDE 28.4 NORTH . . . LONGITUDE 88.0
Glossary
371

WEST
CHANCES OF CENTER OF THE HURRICANE PASSING
WITHIN 65 NAUTICAL MILES OF LISTED LOCATIONS
THROUGH 7AM CDT WED SEP 30 1998
LOCATION
A
B
C
D
E
29.6N 89.5W
42
X
X
X
42
30.3N 89.9W
31
1
1
X
33
30.8N 89.9W
24
3
1
1
29
MUAN 219N 850W
X
X
X
2
2
JACKSONVILLE FL
X
X
X
2
2
MARCO ISLAND FL
X
X
X
2
2
FT MYERS FL
X
X
X
2
2
VENICE FL
X
X
X
3
3
TAMPA FL
X
X
X
3
3
CEDAR KEY FL
X
X
1
3
4
ST MARKS FL
X
1
2
5
8
APALACHICOLA FL
3
2
2
5
12
PANAMA CITY FL
6
3
2
4
15
PENSACOLA FL
18
2
1
2
23
MOBILE AL
23
2
1
1
27
LOCATION
A
B
C
D
E
GULFPORT MS
31
1
X
1
33
BURAS LA
42
X
X
1
43
NEW ORLEANS LA
29
1
1
1
32
NEW IBERIA LA
13
5
2
3
23
PORT ARTHUR TX
1
3
4
5
13
GALVESTON TX
X
1
1
6
8
FREEPORT TX
X
X
1
5
6
PORT O CONNOR TX
X
X
X
3
3
GULF 29N 85W
3
1
3
5
12
GULF 29N 87W
65
X
X
X
65
GULF 28N 89W
99
X
X
X
99
GULF 28N 91W
5
3
3
5
16
GULF 28N 93W
X
1
2
7
10
GULF 28N 95W
X
X
X
5
5
GULF 27N 96W
X
X
X
2
2
372
Glossary

COLUMN DEFINITION—PROBABILITIES IN PERCENT
A IS PROBABILITY FROM NOW TO 7AM MON
FOLLOWING ARE ADDITIONAL PROBABILITIES
B FROM 7AM MON TO 7PM MON
C FROM 7PM MON TO 7AM TUE
D FROM 7AM TUE TO 7AM WED
E IS TOTAL PROBABILITY FROM NOW TO 7AM WED
X MEANS LESS THAN ONE PERCENT
GUINEY
So, how should these probabilities be used for coastal resi-
dents and emergency preparedness ofﬁcials? Ultimately, this is a
personal decision, but general guidelines follow. First, one must
decide the time window within which action must be initiated.
This depends on the time it will take to complete evacuation pro-
cedures and on the intensity of the storm, since gale-force winds
could arrive well before landfall in strong hurricanes. For popu-
lated coastal regions, decisions must be made with smaller proba-
bilities than for those who can afford to wait for more precise
forecasts. Second, the person has to decide on a probability
threshold value at which action must be taken. This threshold
value depends on the risk the decision-maker is willing to take for
a given probability. A key factor in this decision would be some
determination of the cost of not taking action and then being hit
by the storm. Obviously, the decision-maker should err on the
side of caution.
Final Comments on National 
Hurricane Center Statements
Because hurricanes change direction quickly, it is important to
focus on the predicted path and not extrapolate from the past
track. At the same time, you should realize that predicted paths
may contain large errors, and typically even average forecasts
beyond two days contain errors of several hundred miles. Fur-
thermore, you should not concentrate on the landfall of the center
alone, as strong winds, high surf, and torrential rains may extend
far from the center.
Glossary
373

Aircraft Reconnaissance Information
The National Hurricane Center website, http://www.nhc.noaa.
gov, contains current aircraft reconnaissance information. Four
products are available: the reconnaissance plan of the day, vortex
data messages, airplane observations, and dropsonde observations.
The reconnaissance plan of the day is a coded description of
planned reconnaissance ﬂights into Atlantic or Central Paciﬁc
tropical cyclones, subtropical cyclones, or suspect areas on a given
day. This includes operational missions by the U.S. Air Force
Reserve Hurricane Hunters and research missions by the Hurri-
cane Research Division. It also includes a second-day outlook of
potential ﬂights.
When ﬂights occur, the planes take a variety of observations.
Reconnaissance observations are coded reports detailing the pres-
sure, wind, temperature, and dew point along a reconnaissance
aircraft’s ﬂight track. The reconnaissance observations are trans-
mitted during passage to and from the storm and at turning
points. During these ﬂights, dropsondes are also ejected from the
plane to take vertical proﬁles of pressure, wind, temperature, and
dew point during the ﬂight and in the storm center.
The most anticipated observation is the vortex data message—
coded reports issued whenever a reconnaissance aircraft penetrates
the center of a tropical or subtropical cyclone. These reports give the
position of the cyclone as well as the time of the ﬁx. They include
information on winds, temperatures, pressure, and dew points
encountered during penetration. If an eye is present, they also
include information on its size, shape, and status. There are three
types of vortex messages. Detailed Vortex Data Messages are the
standard coded message issued when an aircraft penetrates a
cyclone. Abbreviated Vortex Data Messages use the same format as
the detailed messages, but they leave out some of the groups. Sup-
plementary Vortex Data Messages give wind, temperature, pressure,
and dew point data at 15-nm (nautical mile) intervals during the
penetration into the storm and subsequent departure. Usually four
detailed and four supplementary vortex messages are transmitted.
The ﬁrst line of the report gives the mission identiﬁer, which
consists of (1) agency, (2) aircraft number, (3) number of missions
in this storm system, (4) depression number, and (5) storm name.
“AF554 WX OB 03 KNHC” means this mission is ﬂown by the
U.S. Air Force, with aircraft number 554, observation number 3,
reported to NHC. The second line gives the name of the type of
374
Glossary

report, either ABBREVIATED VORTEX DATA MESSAGE or
DETAILED VORTEX DATA MESSAGE.
The rest of the message is decoded as:
A. Date and time of ﬁx: 06/1634Z means the report is from
the sixth day of the month, at 1634Z.
B. Latitude of the vortex ﬁx in degrees and minutes: for
example, 26 DEG 00 MIN N. Longitude of the vortex ﬁx
in degrees and minutes: for example, 88 DEG 00 MIN W.
C. Minimum height of a standard pressure level, given in
meters: for example, “700 MB 3150 M” means the lowest
height of the 700 mb level was found to be 3150 meters
above sea level.
D. Estimate of maximum surface wind observed in knots.
For example, “30 KT” means the highest estimated sur-
face wind is 30 knots with this particular storm system.
E. Bearing and range from center of the maximum surface
wind, given in degrees and nautical miles. For example,
“180 DEG 18 NM” means the 30-knot wind mentioned in
D above is 18 nm south of the center of the storm.
F. Maximum ﬂight level wind near storm center with direc-
tion from center given in degrees and speed in knots: for
example, “110 DEG 45 KT” means that the wind is from
110 degrees at 45 knots.
G. Bearing and range from center of maximum ﬂight level
wind, given in degrees and nautical miles from the storm
center: for example, “180 DEG 15 NM” means the maxi-
mum wind given in F above was found 15 nm south of
the storm center.
H. Minimum sea-level pressure computed from dropsonde
or extrapolation from within 1,500 feet of the sea surface,
given in millibars (mb): for example, “1005 MB DROP-
SONDE” means that the lowest pressure found was 1,005
mb and was determined from a dropsonde.
I. Maximum ﬂight-level temperature in Celsius/pressure
altitude in meters, outside the eye: for example, “09 C /
3082 M” means that at the ﬂight level of 700 mb, the high-
est temperature outside the eye is 9°C at a pressure alti-
tude of 3,082 meters.
J. Maximum ﬂight level temperature in Celsius/pressure
altitude in meters, inside the eye: for example, “10 C /
3040 M” means that at the ﬂight level of 700 mb, the high-
Glossary
375

est temperature inside the eye is 10°C at a pressure alti-
tude of 3,040 meters.
K. Dewpoint temperature in Celsius/sea-surface tempera-
ture in Celsius inside the eye. For example, “08 C / 26 C”
means that the dew point was 8°C inside the eye, and the
temperature of the sea surface was 26°C.
L. Eye character: brief verbal description such as poorly
deﬁned, closed wall, open to NW, etc.
M. Eye shape orientation and diameter. Eye shapes are
coded as follows: C (circular), CO (concentric), E (ellipti-
cal). Orientation of major axis of ellipse is transmitted in
tens of degrees, and all diameters are transmitted in nau-
tical miles. Examples: “E09/15/5” means elliptical eye
oriented with major axis thru 90 degrees (and also 270
degrees), with length of major axis 15 nm, and length of
minor axis 5 nm; “CO8-14” means concentric eye with
inner eye diameter 8 miles, and outer diameter 14 miles.
N. Conﬁrmation of latitude/longitude/time ﬁx with format
as in A and B above.
O. Fix determined and ﬁx level. There are ﬁve means of
determining ﬁxes and nine means of indicating ﬁx level.
The ﬁx determination will be a series of one to ﬁve num-
bers depending on how many items were used to deter-
mine the position of the storm center. The coding is as
follows: 1, penetration; 2, radar; 3, wind; 4, pressure; and
5, temperature. The ﬁx level will be either one or two
numbers, depending on whether or not the surface and
ﬂight level centers were the same. The surface center will
be given if visible; both the surface and ﬂight level cen-
ters will be indicated only when they’re the same. The
coding is as follows: 0-surface, 1–1500 ft, 8–850 mb, 7–700
mb, 5–500 mb, 4–400 mb, 3–300 mb, 2–200 mb, 9-Other.
For example, “1245/07” means that the ﬁx was deter-
mined by four means: penetration, radar, temperature,
and pressure. The ﬁx level was both at the surface and at
700 mb.
P. Navigation ﬁx accuracy in nautical miles and meteoro-
logical accuracy in nautical miles. For example, “5/10”
means that the center is located within 5 nm of the lati-
tude and longitude given for the center, with a meteoro-
logical accuracy to 10 nm.
Q. Remarks section.
376
Glossary

Sample Report
AF554 WX OB 03 KNHC
DETAILED VORTEX DATA MESSAGE
A. 06/1634Z
B. 26 DEG 00 MIN N
88 DEG 00 MIN W
C. 700 MB 3150 M
D. 30 KT
E. 180 DEG 18 NM
F. 110 DEG 45 KT
G. 180 DEG 15 NM
H. 1005 MB DROPSONDE
I. 09 C/ 3082 M
J. 10 C/ 3040 M
K. 8 C/ 26 C
L. POORLY DEFINED
M. C08–14
N. 26 DEG 00 MIN N
88 DEG 00 MIN W
O. 1245/07
P. 5/10
Q. NONE
Glossary
377


References
Abbey, R. F., Jr., L. M. Leslie, and G. J. Holland. 1995. Estimates of the
inherent and practical limits of mean forecast errors of tropical
cyclones. Preprints, 21st Conference on Hurricanes and Tropical
Meteorology.
Miami, FL, American Meteorological Society,
201–203.
Aberson, S. D. 2002. Two years of operational hurricane synoptic sur-
veillance. Wea. Forecasting, 17, 1101–1110.
———. 2003. Targeted observations to improve operational tropical
cyclone track forecast guidance. Mon. Wea. Rev., 131, 1613–1628.
Adler, C. 2001. Neither wind nor rain. Gambit Weekly, May 15.
Ahrens, C. D. 1994. Meteorology Today. West Publishing, 591 pp.
Allaby, M. 1998. A Chronology of Weather. Facts on File, 154 pp.
Allen, E. S. 1976. A Wind to Shake the World: The Story of the 1938 Hur-
ricane. Little, Brown, 370 pp.
Amato, I. 1997. Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years of High Stakes Sci-
ence and Technology at the Naval Research Laboratory. Naval Research
Laboratory, 409 pp. Also available at http:// www.nrl.navy.mil.
Anon. 1996. The HOT ZONE. Hurricanes, Floods, and Blizzards:
Blame Global Warming. Newsweek, January 21.
———. 2003. Hurricane Isabel recreational boat losses total over $150
million. Saltwater Sportsman, December, 38.
———. 2005. Record hurricane wave measured. Stennis News, March
31, pp. 24. (Available from Gulf Publishing Co., P.O. Box 4567,
Biloxi, MS, 39535-4567, Ph: 228-896-2345.)
Anthes, R. A. 1982. Tropical Cyclones: Their Evolution, Structure, and
Effects. American Meteorological Monographs, Vol. 19, American
Meteorological Society, Boston, MA, 208 pp.
379

Atkinson, B. W. 1981a. Dynamical meteorology: Some milestones. In
Dynamical Meteorology: An Introductory Selection, ed. B. W. Atkin-
son. Royal Meteorological Society, 116–129.
———. 1981b. Weather, meteorology, physics, mathematics. In
Dynamical Meteorology: An Introductory Selection, ed. B. W. Atkin-
son. Royal Meteorological Society, 1–7.
Avila, L. A., and E. N. Rappaport. 1996. Atlantic hurricane season of
1994. Mon. Wea. Rev., 124, 1558–1578.
BAMS. 2004. Anti-gouging after Isabel. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 85,
156.
Barnes, J. 1998. North Carolina’s Hurricane History. University of North
Carolina Press, 206 pp.
Bazile, K. T. 2004. Sinking suspicions: Land-elevation data getting
vital update. Times Picayune, May 14.
Bender, M. A., and I. Ginis. 2000. Real case simulations of hurricane-
ocean interaction using a high-resolution coupled model: Effects
on hurricane intensity. Mon. Wea. Rev., 128, 917–946.
Berdeklis, P., and R. List. 2001. The ice crystal-graupel charging 
mechanism of thunderstorm electriﬁcation. J. Atmos. Sci., 58,
2751–2770.
Bergeron, K. 1999. Hurricane Camille: 30 years later. Sun Herald,
August 15.
———. 2000. Camille survivors want the truth to be heard. Sun Her-
ald, August 17.
———. 2003. “Camille’s wrath” rediscovered. Sun Herald, June 12.
Beven, J. L., S. R. Stewart, M. B. Lawrence, L. A. Avila, J. L. Franklin,
and R. J. Pasch. 2003. Atlantic hurricane season of 2001. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 131, 1454–1484.
Bister, M., and K. A. Emanuel. 1997. The genesis of Hurricane
Guillermo: TEXMEX analyses and a modeling study. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 125, 2662–2682.
Black, M. L., J. F. Gamache, F. D. Marks, C. E. Samsury, and H. E.
Willoughby. 2002. Eastern Paciﬁc Hurricanes Jimena of 1991 and
Olivia of 1994: The effect of vertical shear on structure and inten-
sity. Mon. Wea. Rev., 130, 2291–2312.
Black, P. G. 1983. Ocean temperature changes induced by tropical
cyclones. Ph.D. dissertation, Pennsylvania State University, 278 pp.
———. 2004. An overview of CBLAST ﬂights into Hurricanes Fabian
and Isabel (2003). Preprints, 26th Conference on Hurricanes and Trop-
ical Meteorology. Miami, FL, American Meteorological Society.
Black, P. G., and F. D. Marks. 1991. The structure of an eyewall meso-
vortex in Hurricane Hugo (1989). Preprints, 19th Conference on
380
References

Hurricanes and Tropical Meteorology. Miami, FL, American Meteo-
rological Society, 579–582.
Black, R. A., and J. Hallett. 1986. Observations of the distribution of
ice in hurricanes. J. Atmos. Sci., 43, 802–822.
Bowie, E. H. 1922. Formulation and movement of West Indian hurri-
canes. Mon. Wea. Rev., 50, 173–179.
Brouwer, G. 2003. The creeping storm. Civil Engineering, 73, 46–55, 88.
Brown, S., and S. Cannizaro. 2002. Adios, Isidore: Soggy streets, cars,
homes leave plenty of cleaning up; water invades St. Bernard
homes. Times Picayune, September 27.
Browner, S. P., W. L. Woodley, and C. G. Grifﬁth. 1977. Diurnal oscil-
lation of the area of cloudiness associated with tropical storms.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 105, 856–864.
Brueske, K. F., and C. S. Velden. 2003. Satellite-based tropical cyclone
intensity estimation using the NOAA-KLM series Advanced
Microwave Sounding Unit (AMSU). Mon. Wea. Rev., 131,
687–697.
Bunnemeyer, B. 1909. Climatological data for July, 1909. District No.
8, Texas and Rio Grand Valley. Mon. Wea. Rev., 37, 351–355.
Burpee, R. W. 1988. Grady Norton: Hurricane forecaster and commu-
nicator extraordinaire. Wea. Forecasting, 3, 1050–1058.
———. 1995. Necrologies: Gordon E. Dunn. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.,
76, 260–261.
Burpee, R. W., J. L. Franklin, S. J. Lord, R. E. Tuleya, and S. D. Aber-
son. 1996. The impact of Omega dropwindsondes on operational
hurricane track forecast models. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 77,
925–933.
Byers, H. R. 1944. General Meteorology. McGraw-Hill, 645 pp.
———. 1960. Carl-Gustaf Arvid Rossby. National Academy of Sciences,
Biographical Memoirs, Vol. 34, 249–270.
———. 1974. History of weather modiﬁcation. In Weather and Climate
Modiﬁcation, ed. W. N. Hess, 3–44. John Wiley and Sons.
Cabbage, M. 1998. Hurricane man. Sun Sentinel, May 31.
Carr, L. E., and R. L. Elsberry. 1997. Models of tropical cyclone wind
distribution and Beta-effect propagation for application to tropi-
cal cyclone track forecasting. Mon. Wea. Rev., 125, 3190–3209.
Carter, T. M. 1983. Probability of Hurricane/Tropical Storm Conditions: A
User’s Guide for Local Decision Makers. National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service, 25 pp.
Case, B., and M. Mayﬁeld. 1990. Atlantic hurricane season of 1989.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 118, 1165–1177.
References
381

Case, R. A. 1986. Atlantic hurricane season of 1985. Mon. Wea. Rev.,
114, 1390–1405.
Case, R. A., and H. P. Gerrish. 1984. Atlantic hurricane season of 1983.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 112, 1083–1092.
Cecil, D. J., and E. J. Zipser. 2002. Reﬂectivity, ice scattering, and light-
ning characteristics of hurricane eyewalls and rainbands. Part II:
Intercomparison of observations. Mon. Wea. Rev., 130, 785–801.
Chabert, J.-L. 1999. A History of Algorithms from the Pebble to the
Microchip. Springer, 524 pp.
Chan, J. C. L. 2000. Tropical cyclone activity in the western North
Paciﬁc associated with El Niño and La Niña events. J. Climate, 13,
997–1004.
Chan, J. C. L., and K. S. Liu. 2004. Global warming and Western North
Paciﬁc activity from an observational perspective. J. Climate, 23,
4590–4602.
Chan, J. C. L., J. E. Shi, and K. S. Liu. 2001. Improvements in the sea-
sonal forecasting of tropical cyclone activity over the western
North Paciﬁc. Wea. Forecasting, 16, 491–498.
Chen, Y., G. Brunet, and M. K. Yau. 2003. Spiral bands in a simulated
hurricane. Part II: Wave activity diagnostics. J. Atmos. Sci., 60,
1239–1256.
Chisholm, D. 2003. AMS introduces the Vonnegut-Schaefer under-
graduate scholarship. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 77, 110–112.
Cione, J. J., and E. W. Uhlhorn. 2003. Sea surface temperature vari-
ability in hurricanes: Implications with respect to intensity
change. Mon. Wea. Rev., 131, 1783–1796.
Cline, I. M. 1915. The tropical hurricane of September 29, 1915, in
Louisiana. Mon. Wea. Rev., 43.
Colon, J. A. 1980. On the wind structure of the hurricane vortex.
Preprints, 13th Technical Conference on Hurricanes and Tropical Mete-
orology. American Meteorological Society, 30–42.
Corbosiero, K. L., and J. Molinari. 2002. The effects of vertical wind
shear on the distribution of convection in tropical cyclones. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 130, 2110–2123.
Cressman, G. P. 1996. The origin and rise of numerical weather pre-
diction. In Historical Essays on Meteorology, ed. J. R. Fleming.
American Meteorological Society, 21–39.
Daintith, J., S. Mitchell, E. Tootill, and D. Gjertsen. 1994. Biographical
Encyclopedia of Scientists, Vol. 2. Aylesbury, UK: Market House
Books.
Danielson, E. W., J. Levin, and E. Abrams. 1998. Meteorology. WCB/
McGraw-Hill, 462 pp.
382
References

Davis, W. R. 1954. Hurricanes of 1954. Mon. Wea. Rev., 82, 370–373.
DeAngelis, D. 1989. The hurricane priest. Weatherwise, 42, 256–257.
DeMaria, M. 1996. A history of hurricane forecasting for the Atlantic
Basin. In Historical Essays on Meteorology, ed. J. R. Fleming. Amer-
ican Meteorological Society, 263–305.
DeMaria, M., and J. Kaplan. 1994. Sea surface temperature and the
maximum intensity of Atlantic tropical cyclones. J. Climate, 7,
1324–1334.
DeMaria, M., J. A. Knaff, B. H. Connell. 2001. A tropical cyclone gen-
esis parameter for the tropical Atlantic. Wea. Forecasting, 16,
219–233.
Deppermann, C. E. 1946. Is there a ring of violent upward convection
in hurricanes and typhoon? Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 27, 6–8.
Dlugolecki, A. F., K. M. Clark, F. Knecht, D. McCauley, J. P. Palutikof,
and W. Yambi. 1996. Financial services. In Climate Change 1995:
Impacts, Adaptations, and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientiﬁc-
Technical Analyses, ed. R. T. Watson, M. C. Zinyowera, and R. H.
Moss. Cambridge University Press, 539–560.
Dong, K., and C. J. Neumann. 1986. The relationship between tropical
cyclone motion and environmental geostrophic ﬂows. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 114, 115–122.
Douglas, M. S. 1997. The Everglades: River of Grass. Pineapple Press,
480 pp.
Dunion, J. P., C. W. Landsea, S. H. Houston, and M. D. Powell. 2003.
A reanalysis of the surface winds for Hurricane Donna of 1960.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 131. 1992–2011.
Dunion, J. P., and C. S. Velden. 2002. Satellite applications for tropical
wave/tropical cyclone tracking. Preprints, 25th Conf. On Hurri-
canes and Tropical Meteorology, San Diego, CA, American Meteoro-
logical Society, 132–133.
———. 2004. The impact of the Saharan air layer on Atlantic tropical
cyclone activity. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 85, 353–365.
Dunn, G. E. 1940a. Aerology in the hurricane warning service. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 68, 303–315.
———. 1940b. Cyclogenesis in the tropical Atlantic. Bull. Amer.
Meteor. Soc., 21, 215–229.
———. 1961. The hurricane season of 1960. Mon. Wea. Rev., 89, 99–108.
Dunn, G. E., W. R. Davis, and P. L. Moore. 1955. Hurricanes of 1955.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 83, 315–326.
———. 1956. Hurricanes of 1956. Mon. Wea. Rev., 84, 436–443.
Dunn, G. E., and Staff. 1959. The hurricane season of 1959. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 87, 441–450.
References
383

———. 1962. The hurricane season of 1961. Mon. Wea. Rev., 90,
107–119.
———. 1965. The hurricane season of 1964. Mon. Wea. Rev., 93, 175–187.
Durran, D. R. 1999. Numerical Methods for Wave Equations in Geophysi-
cal Fluid Dynamics. Springer, 465 pp.
Dvorak, V. F. 1975. Tropical cyclone intensity analysis and forecasting
from satellite imagery. Mon. Wea. Rev., 103, 420–430.
———. 1984. Tropical Cyclone Intensity Analysis Using Satellite Data.
NOAA Tech. Rep. NESDIS 11, 47 pp.
Elsberry, R. L. 1990. International experiments to study tropical
cyclones in the western North Paciﬁc. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 71,
1305–1316.
———. 2005. Achievement of USWRP hurricane landfall research
goal. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 86, 643–645.
Emanuel, K. A. 1987. The dependence of hurricane intensity on cli-
mate. Nature, 326, 483–485.
———. 2000. A statistical analysis of tropical cyclone intensity. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 128, 1139–1152.
———. 2005. Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over the
past 30 years. Nature, 486, 686–688.
ESSA (Environmental Science Services Administration). 1969. Hurri-
cane Camille, August 14–22 (Preliminary Report). Weather Bureau,
U.S. Department of Commerce, 58 pp.
Fassig, O. L. 1913. Hurricanes of the West Indies. U.S. Weather Bureau.
Fernandez, D. E., S. Frasier, J. Carswell, P. Chang, P. G. Black, and F. D.
Marks Jr. 2004. 3-D atmospheric boundary layer wind ﬁelds from
Hurricanes Fabian and Isabel. 26th Conference on Hurricanes and
Tropical Meteorology. Miami, FL, American Meteorological Society.
Fincher, L., and B. Read. 1999. The 1943 “Surprise” Hurricane. Avail-
able from the City of Houston Ofﬁce of Emergency Management.
Fisher, S. M. 2003. From the archives. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 84, 942.
Fitzpatrick, P. J. 1997. Understanding and forecasting tropical cyclone
intensity change with the Typhoon Intensity Prediction Scheme
(TIPS). Wea. Forecasting, 12, 826–846.
Fleming, J. R. 1990. Meteorology in America, 1800–1870. John Hopkins
University Press, 264 pp.
Fletcher, R. D., J. R. Smith, and R. C. Bundgaard. 1961. Superior pho-
tographic reconnaissance of tropical cyclones. Weatherwise, 14,
102–109.
Fox, William P. 1992. Lunatic Wind: Surviving Out the Storm of the Cen-
tury. Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, 197 pp.
384
References

Frankenﬁeld, H. C. 1915. The tropical storm of August 10, 1915. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 43, 405–412.
Franklin, J. L., M. L. Black, and K. Valde. 2003. GPS dropwindsonde
wind proﬁles in hurricanes and their operational implications.
Wea. Forecasting, 18, 32–44.
Franklin, J. L., C. J. McAdie, and M. B. Lawrence. 2003. Trends in track
forecasting for tropical cyclones threatening the United States,
1970–2001. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 84, 1197–1203.
Frederick, W. J. 2003. The rapid intensiﬁcation and subsequent rapid
weakening of Hurricane Lili as compared with historical hurri-
canes. Wea. Forecasting, 18, 1295–1298.
Fujita, T. T. 1993. Wind ﬁelds of Andrew, Omar, and Iniki, 1992.
Preprint, 20th Conference on Hurricanes and Tropical Meteorology,
San Antonio, TX, American Meteorological Society, 46–49.
Garriot, E. B. 1900. West Indian Hurricanes, U.S. Weather Bureau.
———. 1909. Weather, forecasts, and warnings for the month. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 37, 538–539.
Gillispie, C. C. 1975. Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, Vol. 11. New
York: Charles Scriber’s Sons.
Goerss, J. S. 2000. Tropical cyclone forecasting using an ensemble of
dynamical model. Mon. Wea. Rev., 128, 1187–1193.
Goldenberg, S., and L. Shapiro. 1996. Physical mechanisms for the
association of El Niño and West African rainfall with Atlantic
major hurricane activity. J. Climate, 9, 1169–1187.
Gray, W. M. 1968. Global view of the origin of tropical disturbances
and storms. Mon. Wea. Rev., 96, 669–700.
———. 1979. Hurricanes: Their formation, structure and likely role in
the tropical circulation. In Meteorology over the Tropical Oceans, ed.
D. B. Shaw. Royal Meteorological Society, 155–218.
———. 1984a. Atlantic seasonal hurricane frequency. Part I: El Niño
and 30 mb quasi-biennial oscillation inﬂuences. Mon. Wea. Rev.,
112, 1649–1668.
———. 1984b. Atlantic seasonal hurricane frequency. Part II: Fore-
casting its variability. Mon. Wea. Rev., 112, 1669–1683.
———. 1993. Seasonal forecasting. In Global Guide to Tropical Cyclone
Forecasting, ed. G. J. Holland, chapter 5. World Meteorological
Organization Technical Document, WMO/TD No. 560, Tropical
Cyclone Programme, Report No. TCP-31, Geneva, Switzerland.
Also available at http://www.wmo.int and http://www.bom.
gov.au/bmrc (look for additional links under the mesoscale sec-
tion to ﬁnd this book)
References
385

Gray, W. M., and W. M. Frank. 1993. Hypothesis for hurricane inten-
sity reduction from carbon black seeding. Preprint, 20th Confer-
ence on Hurricanes and Tropical Meteorology, San Antonio, TX,
American Meteorological Society, 305–308.
Gray, W. M., and R. W. Jacobson Jr. 1977. Diurnal variation of deep
cumulus convection. Mon. Wea. Rev., 105, 1171–1188.
Gray, W. M., and P. J. Klotzbach. 2004. Summary of 2004 Atlantic Tropical
Cyclone Activity and Veriﬁcation of Author’s Seasonal and Monthly
Forecasts. Fort Collins: Department of Atmospheric Science, Col-
orado State University, 39 pp. Available at http://hurricane.
atmos.colostate.edu/Forecasts/2004/nov2004/.
Gray, W. M., C. W. Landsea, P. W. Mielke Jr., and K. J. Berry. 1998.
Extended range forecast of Atlantic seasonal hurricane activity
and U.S. landfall strike probability for 1999. Department of
Atmospheric Science Paper, Colorado State University (also
available at http://tropical.atmos.colostate.edu).
Gray, W. M., J. D. Sheaffer, and C. W. Landsea. 1996. Climate trends
associated with multi-decadal variability of intense Atlantic hur-
ricane activity. Chapter 2 in Hurricanes, Climatic Change and
Socioeconomical Impacts: A Current Perspective, ed. H. F. Diaz and
R. S. Pulwarty. Westview Press, 49 pp.
Guard, C., and M. A. Lander. 1993. A modiﬁed Safﬁr-Simpson hurri-
cane scale for the tropical western Paciﬁc Ocean. Preprints, AMS
20th Conference on Hurricanes and Tropical Meteorology, American
Meteorological Society.
Haas, I. S., and R. Shapiro. 1982. The Nimbus satellite system: Remote
sensing R&D platform of the 70’s. In Meteorological Satellites: Past,
Present, and Future. NASA Conference Publication 2227, 17–29.
Hall, J. D., A. J. Matthews, and D. J. Karoly. 2001. The modulation of
tropical cyclone activity in the Australian region by the Madden-
Julian Oscillation. Mon. Wea. Rev., 129, 2970–2982.
Harr, P. A., and R. L. Elsberry. 1996. Structure of a mesoscale convec-
tive system embedded in Typhoon Robyn during TCM-93. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 124, 634–652.
Hart, R. E., and J. L. Evans 2001. A climatology of the extratropical
transition of Atlantic tropical cyclones. J. Climate, 14, 546–564.
Haurwitz, B. 1935. The height of tropical cyclones and of the “eye” of
the storm. Mon. Wea. Rev., 63, 45–49.
Hawkins, J. D., T. F. Lee, J. Turk, C. Sampson, J. Kent, and K. Richard-
son. 2001. Real-time Internet distribution of satellite products 
for tropical cyclone reconnaissance. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 82,
567–578.
386
References

Hebert, P. J. 1976. Atlantic hurricane season of 1975. Mon. Wea. Rev.,
104, 453–465.
———. 1980. Atlantic season of 1979. Mon. Wea. Rev., 108, 973–990.
Hebert, P. J., J. D. Jarrell, and M. Mayﬁeld. 1997. The Deadliest, Costli-
est, and Most Intense United States Hurricanes of this Century (and
Other Frequently Requested Hurricane Facts). NOAA Technical
Memorandum NWS TPC-1, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, National Hurricane
Center, Miami, FL, 30 pp.; also available at http://www.nhc.
noaa.gov.
Hemingway, E. 1935. Who murdered the Vets? A ﬁrst-hand report on
the Florida hurricane. New Masses, September 17, 9–10.
Henderson-Sellers, A., H. Zhang, G. Berz, K. Emanuel, W. Gray, C.
Landsea, et al. 1998. Tropical cyclones and global climate change:
A post-IPCC assessment. Bull. Am. Meteor. Soc., 79, 19–38.
Hock, T. F., and J. L. Franklin. 1999. The NCAR GPS dropwindsonde.
Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 80, 407–420.
Hoffman, R. N. 2004. Controlling hurricanes: Can hurricanes and
other severe tropical storms be moderated or deﬂected? Sci.
Amer., 12, 68–75.
Hogan, W. L. 1961. Hurricane Carla: A Tribute to the News Media. Lea-
man-Hogan, 192 pp.
Hohertz, L., and Coauthors. 1983. Hurricane Alicia. Barron Publica-
tions, 80 pp.
Holland, G. J. 1993a. Global Guide to Tropical Cyclone Forecasting. World
Meteorological Organization Technical Document, WMO/TD
No. 560, Tropical Cyclone Programme, Report No. TCP-31,
Geneva, Switzerland. Also available at http://www.wmo.int
and http://www.bom.gov.au/bmrc (look for additional links
under the mesoscale section to ﬁnd this book).
———. 1993b. Ready Reckoner. In Global Guide to Tropical Cyclone
Forecasting, ed. G. J. Holland, chap. 9. World Meteorological
Organization Technical Document, WMO/TD No. 560, Tropical
Cyclone Programme, Report No. TCP-31, Geneva, Switzerland.
Also available at http://www.wmo.int and http://www.bom.
gov.au/bmrc (look for additional links under the mesoscale sec-
tion to ﬁnd this book).
———. 1995. Scale interaction in the western Paciﬁc monsoon.
Meteor. Atmos. Phys., 56, 57–80.
Hope, J. R. 1975. Atlantic season of 1974. Mon. Wea. Rev., 103, 285–293.
Houghton, J. T., L. G. Meira Filho, B. A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kat-
tenberg, and K. Maskell. 1996. Climate Change 1995: The Science 
References
387

of Climate Change; Contribution of Working Group I to the Second
Assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cam-
bridge University Press, 572 pp.
Huang, W., C. Wu, P. Lin, S. Aberson, and K. Hsu. 2004. The prelimi-
nary analysis of the dropsonde data from DOTSTAR and their
impact on the typhoon track forecasts. Preprints, 26th Conference
on Hurricanes and Tropical Meteorology. Miami, FL, American
Meteorological Society.
Hughes, P. 1976. American Weather Stories, U.S. Department of Com-
merce, Washington, D.C., 116 pp.
———. 1987. Hurricanes haunt our history, Weatherwise, 40, 134–140.
———. 1990. The Great Galveston Hurricane. Weatherwise, 43, 190–198.
Illingworth, A. J. 1985. Charge separation in thunderstorms: Small
scale processes. J. Geophys. Res., 90, 6026–6032.
Inoue, M., I. C. Handoh, and G. R. Bigg. 2002. Bimodal distribution of
tropical cyclogenesis in the Caribbean: Characteristics and envi-
ronmental factors. J. Climate, 15, 2897–2905.
Jennings, G. 1970. The Killer Storms: Hurricanes, Typhoons, and Torna-
does. J. B. Lippincott, 207 pp.
Jones, D., S. R. Scheider, P. Wilczynski, and C. Nelson. 2004. NPOESS
preparatory project: The bridge between research and opera-
tions. Earth Obs. Mag., 13, 12–22.
Jones, S. C., P. A. Harr, J. Abraham, L. F. Bosart, P. J. Bowyer, J. L.
Evans, et al. 2003. The extratropical transition of tropical
cyclones: Forecast challenges, current understanding, and future
directions. Wea. Forecasting, 18, 1052–1092.
JTWC (Joint Typhoon Warning Center). 1970. Annual Typhoon Report.
U.S. Fleet Weather Central/Joint Typhoon Warning Center. Avail-
able at http://www.npmoc.navy.mil/jtwc/atcr/atcr_archive.html.
Jury, M. R., B. Pathack, and B. Parker. 1999. Climatic determinants
and statistical prediction of tropical cyclone days in the South-
west Indian Ocean. Journal of Climate, 12, 1738–1746.
Kaplan, J., and M. DeMaria. 1995. A simple empirical model for pre-
dicting the decay of tropical cyclone winds after landfall. J. Appl.
Meteor., 34, 2499–2512.
Kareem, A., ed. 1985. Hurricane Alicia: One Year Later. American Soci-
ety of Civil Engineers, 335 pp.
Kessler, E. 2004. Historical overview of the National Severe Storm Labora-
tory. Fortieth Anniversary Celebration, October 15, 2004. Avail-
able from http://www.nssl.noaa.gov.
Kinney, J. J. R. 1955. Typhoon Forecasting Guide. Tokyo Weather Central.
388
References

Kinsman, B. 1990. Who put the wind speeds in Admiral Beaufort’s
force scale? Part 1: The original scale. Mar. Wea. Log, 34, 2–8.
———. 1991. Who put the wind speeds in Admiral Beaufort’s force
scale? Part 2: The new scale. Mar. Wea. Log, 35, 12–18.
Klein, R., and R. A. Pielke Jr. 2002. Bad weather? Then sue the weath-
erman! Part I: Legal liability for public sector forecasts. Bull.
Amer. Meteor. Soc., 83, 1791–1799.
Knaff, J. 1997. Implications of summertime sea level pressure anom-
alies in the tropical Atlantic region. Mon. Wea. Rev., 10, 789–804.
Knaff, J. A., J. P. Kossin, and M. DeMaria. 2003. Annular hurricanes.
Wea. Forecasting, 18, 204–223.
Knaff, J. A., S. A. Seseske, M. DeMaria, and J. L. Demuth. 2004. On the
inﬂuences of vertical wind shear on symmetric tropical cyclone
structure derived from AMSU. Mon. Wea. Rev., 132, 2503–2510.
Knox, J. L. 1955. The storm “Hazel”: Synoptic resume of its develop-
ment as it approached southern Ontario. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.,
36, 239–246.
Kossin, J. P., B. D. McNoldy, and W. H. Schubert. 2002. Vortical swirls
in hurricane eye clouds. Mon. Wea. Rev., 130, 3144–3149.
Kossin, J. P., and W. H. Schubert. 2004. Mesovortices in Hurricane
Isabel. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 85, 151–153.
Krupa, M. 2002. As ﬂoodwaters recede, the real work begins. Times
Picayune, September 28.
Krupa, M., S. Staley, and P. Bartels. 2002. Isidore’s tidal surge sucker
punches parish. Times Picayune, September 27.
Kuettner, J. P., and D. E. Parker. 1976. GATE: Report of the ﬁeld phase.
Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 57, 11–27.
Kummerow, C. J., J. Simpson, O. Thiele, W. Barnes, A. T. C. Chang, 
E. Stocker, et al. 2000. The status of the Tropical Rainfall Measur-
ing Mission (TRMM) after two years in orbit. J. Appl. Meteor., 39,
1965–1982.
Kurihara, Y. M., R. E. Tuleya, and M. A. Bender. 1998. The GFDL hur-
ricane prediction system and its performance in the 1995 hurri-
cane season. Mon. Wea. Rev., 126, 1306–1322.
Kutzbach, G. 1996. The Thermal Theory of Cyclones: A History of Meteo-
rological Thought in the Nineteenth Century. Boston: American
Meteorological Society, 272 pp.
Lander, M. A. 1993. Comments on a “GCM simulation of the relation-
ship between tropical storm formation and ENSO.” Mon. Wea.
Rev., 121, 2137–2143.
References
389

———. 1994. Description of a monsoon gyre and its effect on the trop-
ical cyclones in the Western North Paciﬁc during August 1991.
Wea. Forecasting, 9, 640–654.
———. 1999. A tropical cyclone with a very large eye. Mon. Wea. Rev.,
127, 137–142.
Lander, M. A., and G. J. Holland. 1993. On the interaction of tropical
cyclone-scale vortices. Part I: Observations. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor.
Soc., 119, 1347–1361.
Landsea, C. W. 2000. Climate variability of tropical cyclones: Past,
present, and future. In Storms, ed. R. A. Pielke Sr. and R. A. Pielke
Jr., Routledge, 220–241. 
———. 2005. Hurricanes, typhoons, and tropical cyclones: FAQ. Avail-
able at http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/hrd/tcfaq/tcfaqHED.html.
Landsea, C. W., C. Anderson, N. Charles, G. Clark, J. Dunion, J. Fer-
nandez-Partagas, et al. 2004. The Atlantic hurricane database
reanalysis project: Documentation for 1851–1910 alterations and
additions to the HURDAT Database. In Hurricanes and Typhoons:
Past, Present, and Future, ed. R. J. Murnane and K. Liu, chap. 7.
Columbia University Press, 464 pp.
Landsea, C. W., N. Nicholls, W. M. Gray, and L. A. Avila. 1996. Down-
ward trends in the frequency of intense Atlantic hurricanes dur-
ing the past ﬁve decades. Geo. Res. Letters, 23, 1697–1700.
Larson, E. 1999. Isaac’s Storm. Crown Publishers, 323 pp.
Lawrence, M. G. 2005. The relationship between relative humidity
and the dewpoint temperature in moist air. Bull. Amer. Meteor.
Soc., 86, 225–234.
Lawrence, M. B., L. A. Avila, J. L. Beven, J. L. Franklin, J. L. Guiney,
and R. J. Pasch. 2001. Atlantic hurricane season of 1999. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 129, 3057–3084.
Lawrence, M. B., and J. M. Gross. 1989. Atlantic hurricane season of
1988. Mon. Wea. Rev., 117, 2248–2259.
Lawrence, M. B., B. M. Mayﬁeld, L. A. Avila, R. J. Pasch, and E. N.
Rappaport. 1998. Atlantic hurricane season of 1995. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 126, 1124–1151.
Lawrence, M. B., and J. M. Pelissier. 1981. Atlantic hurricane season of
1980. Mon. Wea. Rev., 109, 1567–1582.
Lee, W.-C., F. D. Marks Jr., and R. E. Carbone. 1994. Velocity track dis-
play: A technique to extract real-time tropical cyclone circula-
tions using a single airborne Doppler radar. J. Atmos. Oceanic
Technol., 11, 572–578.
Lee, W.-C., F. D. Marks Jr., and C. Walther. 2003. Airborne Doppler radar
data analysis workshop. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 84, 1063–1075.
390
References

Leggett, J., ed. 1994. The Climate Time Bomb. Greenpeace International,
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 154 pp.
Leidner, M. S., L. Isaksen, and R. N. Hoffman. 2003. Impact of NSCAT
winds on tropical cyclones in the ECMWF 4DVAR assimilation
system. Mon. Wea. Rev., 131, 3–26.
LeMone, M. 1989. Interview with Joanne Simpson. National Center for At-
mospheric Research. Available from the National Center for Atmo-
spheric Research’s archive at http://www.ucar.edu/archives.
LePore, F. 1996. Interview with Earth and Sky Radio Show.
Leslie, L. M., R. F. Abbey Jr., and G. J. Holland. 1998. Tropical cyclone
track predictability. Meteor. Atmos. Phys., 65, 223–231.
Lewis, J. M. 2003. Ooishi’s observation: Viewed in context of jet
stream discovery. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 84, 357–369.
Lhermitte, R. M. 1971. Probing of atmospheric motion by airborne
pulse-Doppler radar techniques. J. Appl. Meteor., 10, 234–246.
Lianshou, C., Z. Mingyu, and X. Xiangde. 2004. A tropical cyclone
landfall research program (CLATEX) in China. Preprints, 26th
Conference on Hurricanes and Tropical Meteorology. Miami, FL,
American Meteorological Society.
List, R. 2004. Weather modiﬁcation: A scenario for the future. Bull.
Amer. Meteor. Soc., 85, 51–63.
Liu, K. S., and J. C. L. Chan. 1999. Size of tropical cyclones as inferred
from ERS-1 and ERS-2 data. Mon. Wea. Rev., 127, 2992–3001.
———. 2002. Synoptic ﬂow patterns associated with small and large
tropical cyclones over the Western North Paciﬁc. Mon. Wea. Rev.,
130, 2134–2142.
Lorenz, E. N. 1963. Deterministic nonperiodic ﬂow. J. Atmos. Sci., 20,
130–141.
Love, G. 1985. Cross-equatorial inﬂuence of winter hemisphere sub-
tropical cold surges. Mon. Wea. Rev., 113, 1487–1498.
Ludlum, D. M. 1963. Early American Hurricanes, 1492–1870. American
Meteorological Society, 198 pp.
———. 1989. Early American Hurricanes: 1492–1870. American Meteo-
rological Society, 198 pp.
Lynch, P. 2002. Weather Forecasting: From Woolly Art to Solid Sci-
ence. In Meteorology at the Millenium, ed. R. P. Pearce. Academic
Press, 106–119.
Maloney, E. D., and D. L. Hartmann. 2000a. Modulation of eastern
North Paciﬁc hurricanes by the Madden-Julian Oscillation. J. Cli-
mate, 13, 1451–1460.
———. 2000b. Modulation of hurricane activity in the Gulf of Mexico
by the Madden-Julian Oscillation. Science, 287, 2002–2004.
References
391

Marks, F. D., and P. G. Black. 1990. Close encounter with an intense
mesoscale vortex within Hurricane Hugo (September 15, 1989).
Preprints, 4th Conference on Mesoscale Processes. Boulder, CO,
American Meteorological Society, 114–115.
Martin, C., and G. Parker. 2002. The Spanish Armada: Revised Edition.
Manchester University Press, 320 pp.
Mattingly, G. 1974. The Armada, Mariners Books, 464 pp.
Mayﬁeld, M., L. A. Avila, and E. N. Rappaport. 1994. Atlantic hurri-
cane season of 1992. Mon. Wea. Rev., 122, 517–538.
McCarthy, J. 1969. Hurricane! American Heritage Publishing, 168 pp.
McDonald, W. F. 1935. The hurricane of August 31 to September 6,
1935. Mon. Wea. Rev., 63, 269–271.
McGeer, T., and J. Vagners. 1999. Historic crossing: An unmanned air-
craft’s Atlantic ﬂight. GPS World, 10, 24–30.
Merrill, R. T. 1984. A comparison of large and small tropical cyclones.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 112, 1408–1418.
Minsinger, W. E. 1988. The 1938 Hurricane. American Meteorological
Society, 128 pp.
Mitchell, C. L. 1924. West Indian hurricanes and other tropical cyclones
of the north Atlantic ocean. Mon. Wea. Rev., 52 (Suppl. 24), 47 pp.
———. 1926. The West Indian Hurricane of September 14–22, 1926.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 54, 409–414.
Molinari, J., D. Knight, M. Dickinson, D. Vollaro, and S. Skubis. 1997.
Potential vorticity, easterly waves, and tropical cyclogenesis.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 125, 2699–2708.
Molinari, J., P. Moore, and V. Idone. 1999. Convective structure of
hurricanes as revealed by lightning locations. Mon. Wea. Rev.,
127, 520–534.
Montgomery, M. T., and R. J. Kallenbach. 1997. A theory for vortex
Rossby waves and its application to spiral bands and intensity
changes in hurricanes. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 123, 435–465.
Moore, P. L., and Staff. 1958. The hurricane season of 1957. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 86, 401–408.
Morel, P., M. Desbois, and G. Szewach. 1978. A new insight into the
troposphere with the water vapor channel of Meteosat. Bull.
Amer. Meteor. Soc., 59, 711–714.
Murnane, R. J. 2004. Climate research and reinsurance. Bull. Amer.
Meteor. Soc., 85, 697–707.
Mykle, R. 2002. Killer ‘Cane: The Deadly Hurricane of 1928. Cooper
Square, 235 pp.
Nebeker, F. 1995. Calculating the Weather: Meteorology in the 20th Cen-
tury. Academic Press, 255 pp.
392
References

Nese, J. M., and L. M. Grenci. 1998. A World of Weather: Fundamentals
of Meteorology. Kendall/Hunt, 539 pp.
Neumann, J. N. 1993. Global overview. In Global Guide to Tropical
Cyclone Forecasting, ed. G. J. Holland, chapter 1. World Meteoro-
logical Organization Technical Document, WMO/TD No. 560,
Tropical Cyclone Programme, Report No. TCP-31, Geneva,
Switzerland. Also available at http://www.wmo.int and http://
www.bom.gov.au/bmrc (look for additional links under the
mesoscale section to ﬁnd this book).
Neumann, C. J., B. R. Jarvinen, C. J. McAdie, and J. D. Elms. 1993.
Tropical Cyclones of the North Atlantic Ocean, 1871–1992. National
Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service, National
Climatic Data Center, 193 pp.
Neumann, C. J., B. R. Jarvinen, C. J. McAdie, and G. R. Hammer. 1999.
Tropical Cyclones of the North Atlantic Ocean, 1871–1998. National
Climatic Data Center, 206 pp.
Newton, D. E. 1993. Global Warming. ABC-CLIO, 183 pp.
Newton, I., I. B. Cohen (trans.), and A. Whitman (trans.). 1999. The
Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. Preceded
by “A Guide to Newton’s Principia,” by I. B. Cohen. University
of California Press, 974 pp.
NHC. 2005. National Hurricane Center, http://www.nhc.noaa.gov
(see link for NHC/TPC Glossary).
Nicholls, N. 1992. Recent performance of a method for seasonal fore-
casting of seasonal tropical cyclone activity. Aust. Meteor. Mag.,
21, 105–110.
NOAA. 1982. Some Devastating North Atlantic Hurricanes of the 20th
Century. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, 16 pp.
———. 1991. Centennial of American Weather Services: Past, Present and
Future; U.S. History-making Weather, 1849–1990. NOAA/National
Weather Service, 12 pp.
———. 1993. Memorable Gulf Coast Hurricanes of the 20th Century.
National Hurricane Center, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, 11 pp.
———. 2001. Signal Service Years: 1870–1891. NOAA/National
Weather Service. Available at http://www.history.noaa.gov.
Nolan, L. E., and J. M. Murphy. 2000. Air Force Weather: A Brief History
1937–2000. Available from the Air Force Weather Agency History
Ofﬁce, 27 pp.
Norton, G. 1951. Hurricanes of the 1950 season. Mon. Wea. Rev., 79,
8–15.
References
393

NOWCAST. 2002. Hurricane Andrew steps up. Bull. Amer. Meteor.
Soc., 83, 1441.
NWS (National Weather Service). 1991. Marine Surface Weather Obser-
vations. National Weather Handbook, No. 1. U.S. Department of
Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
National Weather Service, Ofﬁce of Systems Operations, Observ-
ing Systems Branch, Silver Spring, MD.
NWSTM. 1982. Tropical Cyclones Report for the Central Paciﬁc, 1982.
NOAA Technical Memorandum NWSTM PR-24. Also available
at Central Paciﬁc Hurricane Center, http://www.prh.noaa.gov/
cphc/pages/hurrclimate.php.
———. 1992. Tropical Cyclones Report for the Central Paciﬁc, 1992.
NOAA Technical Memorandum NWSTM PR-34. Also available
at Central Paciﬁc Hurricane Center, http://www.prh.noaa.
gov/cphc/pages/hurrclimate.php.
Ooyama, K. V. 1969. Numerical simulation of the life cycle of tropical
cyclones. J. Atmos. Sci., 26, 3–40.
Owens, B. F., and C. W. Landsea. 2003. Assessing the skill of opera-
tional Atlantic seasonal tropical cyclone forecasts. Wea. Forecast-
ing, 18, 45–54.
Palmen, E. H. 1948. On the formation and structure of tropical
cyclones. Geophysica, University of Helsinki, 3, 26–38.
———. 1958. Vertical circulation and release of kinetic energy during
the development of Hurricane Hazel into an extratropical storm.
Tellus, 10, 1–23.
Panofsky, H. A. 1981. Atmospheric hydrodynamics. In Dynamical
Meteorology: An Introductory Selection, ed. B. W. Atkinson. Royal
Meteorological Society, 8–20.
Parry, H. D. 1969. The Semiautomatic Computation of Rawinsondes. Tech-
nical memorandum WBTM EDL 10, U.S. Department of Com-
merce, Environmental Science Services Administration, Weather
Bureau.
Pasch, R. J., and L. A. Avila. 1992. Atlantic hurricane season of 1991.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 120, 2671–2687.
———. 1999. Atlantic hurricane season of 1996. Mon. Wea. Rev., 127,
581–610.
Pasch, R. J., L. A. Avila, and J. L. Guiney. 2001. Atlantic hurricane sea-
son of 1998. Mon. Wea. Rev., 129, 3085–3123.
Pasch, R. J., M. B. Lawrence, L. A. Avila, J. L. Beven, J. L. Franklin, and
S. R. Stewart. 2004. Atlantic hurricane season of 2002. Mon. Wea.
Rev. 132, 1829–1859.
394
References

Pasch, R. J., and E. N. Rappaport. 1995. Atlantic hurricane season of
1993. Mon. Wea. Rev., 123, 871–886.
Penland, S., and Coauthors. 1999a. The impact of Hurricane Camille
on the Chandeleur Islands in Southeast Louisiana. Preprint, the
Impact of Hurricane Camille: A Storm Impact Symposium to Mark the
30th Anniversary. New Orleans, LA, August 17–18.
———. 1999b. The impact of Hurricane Georges on the Chandeleur
Islands in Southeast Louisiana: A comparison to Hurricane
Camille. Preprint, the Impact of Hurricane Camille: A Storm Impact
Symposium to Mark the 30th Anniversary. New Orleans, LA,
August 17–18.
Persson, A. 1998. How do we understand the Coriolis force? Bull.
Amer. Meteor. Soc., 79, 1373–1385.
Pfost, R. L. 2003. Reassessing the impact of two historical Florida hur-
ricanes. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 84, 1367–1372.
Pielke, R. A., Jr., and C. W. Landsea. 1998. Normalized Atlantic hurri-
cane damage: 1925–95. Wea. Forecasting, 13, 621–631.
———. 1999. La Niña, El Niño, and Atlantic hurricane damage in the
United States. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 80, 2027–2033.
Pielke, R. A., Jr., and R. A. Pielke Sr. 1997. Hurricanes: Their Nature and
Impacts on Society. John Wiley and Sons, 279 pp.
Pielke, R. A., J. Rubiera, C. Landsea, M. L. Fernandez, and R. Klein.
2003. Hurricane vulnerability in Latin America and the Carib-
bean: Normalized damage and loss potentials. National Hazards
Rev., 101–114.
Pielke, R. A., Jr., C. Simonpietri, and J. Oxelson. 1999. Thirty Years after
Hurricane Camille: Lessons Learned, Lessons Lost. Available from
Environmental and Societal Impacts Group, National Center for
Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO. Also available at http://sci-
encepolicy.colorado.edu.
Pierce, C. 1939. The meteorological history of the New England hur-
ricane of 1938. Mon. Wea. Rev., 67, 237–288.
Platzman, G. W. 1979. The ENIAC computations of 1950: Gateway 
to numerical weather prediction. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 60,
302–312.
Posey, C. 1994. Hurricanes: Reaping the whirlwind. Omni, 16, 34–47.
Purdom, J. F. W. 1995. Observations of thunderstorms and hurricanes
using one-minute interval GOES-8 imagery. Abtracts, Week B,
International Union of Geodosy and Geophysics, XXI General
Assembly, Boulder, CO, Amer. Geophys. Union, Washington,
D.C., B286.
References
395

Purdom, J. F. W., and W. P. Menzel. 1996. Evolution of satellite ob-
servations in the United States and their use in meteorology. In
Historical Essays on Meteorology, ed. J. R. Fleming. American Mete-
orological Society, 99–155.
Ralston, A., and E. D. Reilly, eds. 1993. Encyclopedia of Computer Sci-
ence. Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1558 pp.
Rappaport, E. N. 1999. Atlantic hurricane season of 1997. Mon. Wea.
Rev., 127, 2012–2026.
———. 2000. Loss of life in the United States associated with recent
Atlantic tropical cyclones. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 81, 2065–2073.
Rappaport, E. N., M. Fuchs, and M. Lorentson. 1998. The Threat to Life
in Inland Areas of the United States from Atlantic Tropical Cyclones.
Preprint from the 23rd Conference on Hurricanes and Tropical
Meteorology, American Meteorological Society, 339–342.
Rappaport, E., and J. Partagas. 1995. History’s deadly Atlantic hurri-
canes. Mar. Wea. Log, 39, 44–47.
Rasmussen, E. A., and J. Turner. 2003. Polar Lows: Mesoscale Weather
Systems in the Polar Regions. Cambridge University Press, 612 pp.
Reardon, L. F. 1986. The Florida Hurricane and Disaster. Lion and
Thorne, 112 pp.
Riehl, H., and R. J. Shafer. 1944. The recurvature of tropical storms. 
J. Meteor., 1, 42–54.
Ritchie, E. A., and G. J. Holland. 1999. Large-scale patterns associated
with tropical cyclogenesis in the western Paciﬁc. Mon. Wea. Rev.,
127, 2027–2043.
Roberts, N. 1969. Extreme Hurricane Camille: August 14th through 22nd,
1969. Nash Roberts Consultants, 135 pp.
Rogers, R. R., and P. L. Smith. 1996. A short history of radar meteor-
ology. In Historical Essays on Meteorology, ed. J. R. Fleming. Amer-
ican Meteorological Society, 57–98.
Rosenﬁeld, J. 1997. Storm surge! Hurricanes’ most powerful and
deadly force. Weatherwise, 50, 18–24.
Roux, F. and F. D. Marks Jr. 1996. Extended velocity track display
(EVTD): An improved processing method for Doppler radar
observations of tropical cyclones. J. Atmos. Oceanic Technol., 13,
875–899.
Ryan, B. F., I. G. Watterson, and J. L. Evans. 1992. Tropical cyclone 
frequencies inferred from Gray’s yearly genesis parameter: 
Validation of GCM tropical climates. Geo. Res. Letters, 24,
1255–1258.
Sallee, R. 1993. Alicia: Streets of oaks, glass. Houston Chronicle, August
15.
396
References

Sanford, T. B., P. G. Black, J. Haustein, J. W. Fenney, G. Z. Forristall,
and J. F. Price. 1987. Ocean response to hurricanes. Part I: Obser-
vations. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 17, 2065–2083.
Saunders, C. P. R. 1993. A review of thunderstorm electriﬁcation
processes. J. Appl. Meteor., 32, 642–655.
Schmetz, J., P. Pili, S. Tjemkes, D. Just, J. Kerkmann, S. Rota, and 
A. Ratier. 2002. An introduction to METEOSAT Second Genera-
tion (MSG). Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 83, 977–992.
Schnapf, A. 1982. The development of the TIROS global environmen-
tal satellite system. In Meteorological Satellites: Past, Present, and
Future. NASA Conference Publication 2227, 7–16.
Sharp, R. J., M. A. Bourassa, and J. J. O’Brien. 2002. Early detection of
tropical cyclones using seawinds-derived vorticity. Bull. Amer.
Meteor. Soc., 83, 879–889.
Shay, L. K., P. G. Black, A. J. Mariano, J. D. Hawkins, and R. L. Els-
berry. 1992. Upper ocean response to Hurricane Gilbert. J. Geo-
phys. Res., 97(12), 20, 227–220, 248.
Shay, L. K., A. J. Mariano, D. S. Jacob, and E. H. Ryan. 1998. Mean and
near-inertial ocean current response to Hurricane Gilbert. J. Phys.
Oceanogr., 28, 858–889.
Shea, E. L. 1987. A History of NOAA, Being a Compilation of Facts and
Figures regarding the Life and Times of the Original Whole Earth
Agency. NOAA, 44 pp. Also available in the history section at
http://www.noaa.gov.
Sheets, B., and J. Williams. 2001. Hurricane Watch. New York: Vintage,
331 pp.
Sheets, R. C. 1984. The National Weather Service Hurricane Probability
Program. NOAA Technical Report NWS 37, National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
National Hurricane Center, Miami, FL.
———. 1990. The National Hurricane Center: Past, present, and
future. Wea. Forecasting, 5, 185–232.
Sheets, R. C., and J. Williams. 2001. Hurricane Watch: Forecasting the
Deadliest Storms on Earth. Vintage, 331 pp.
Simpson, R. H. 1974. The hurricane disaster potential scale. Weather-
wise, 27, 169, 186.
Simpson, R. H., and P. J. Hebert. 1973. Atlantic hurricane season of
1972. Mon. Wea. Rev., 101, 323–333.
Simpson, R. H., and J. M. Pelissier. 1971. Atlantic season of 1970. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 99, 269–277.
Simpson, R. H., A. L. Sugg, and Staff. 1970. The Atlantic hurricane
season of 1969. Mon. Wea. Rev., 98, 293–306.
References
397

Singh, O. P., T. M. A. Khan, and M. S. Rahman. 2001. Tropical cyclone
frequency in the north Indian Ocean in relation to the southern
oscillation. Mausam, 52, 511–514.
Smith, R. K., W. Ulrich, and G. Dietachmayer. 1990. A numerical
study of tropical cyclone motion using a barotropic model. Part I:
The role of vortex asymmetry. Quart. J. Meteor. Soc., 116, 337–362.
Smith, T. J., M. B. Robblee, H. R. Wanless, and T. W. Doyle. 1994. Man-
groves, hurricanes, and lightning strikes: Assessment of Hurri-
cane Andrew suggests an interaction across two differing scales
of disturbance. Bioscience, 44, 256–262.
Soden, B. J., C. S. Velden, and R. E. Tuleya. 2001. The impact of satel-
lite winds on experimental GFDL hurricane model forecasts.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 129, 835–852.
Sorbjan, Z. 1996. Hands-on Meteorology: Stories, Theories, and Simple
Experiments. American Meteorological Society, 306 pp.
Stevenson, R. L. 1997. A Footnote to History: Eight Years of Trouble in
Samoa. The World Wide School; originally published in 1899.
Available at http://www.worldwideschool.org.
Stewart, G. R. 1941. Storm. Heyday Books, 352 pp.
Stull, R. B. 2000. Meteorology for Scientists and Engineers. Brooks/Cole,
502 pp.
Sugg, A. L. 1966. The hurricane season of 1965. Mon. Wea. Rev., 94,
183–191.
Sugg, A. L., and J. M. Pelissier. 1968. The hurricane season of 1967.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 96, 242–250.
Sullivan, C. L. 1987. Hurricanes of the Mississippi Gulf Coast, 1717 to
Present. Gulf Publishing, 139 pp.
Sumner, H. C. 1946. North Atlantic hurricanes and tropical distur-
bances of 1945. Mon. Wea. Rev., 47, 1–5.
———. 1947. North Atlantic hurricanes and tropical disturbances of
1947. Mon. Wea. Rev., 48, 251–256.
———. 1948. North Atlantic hurricanes and tropical disturbances of
1948. Mon. Wea. Rev., 49, 277–280.
Tannehill, I. R. 1955. The Hurricanes Hunters. Dodd, Mead, 271 pp.
———. 1956. Hurricanes: Their Nature and History. Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 308 pp.
Thorncroft, C. D., D. J. Parker, R. R. Burton, M. Diop, J. H. Ayers, H.
Barjat, et al. 2003. The JET2000 Project: Aircraft observations of
the African easterly jet and African easterly waves. Bull. Amer.
Meteor. Soc., 84, 337–351.
Tomas, R. A., and P. J. Webster. 1997. The role of inertial instability in
determining the location and strength of near-equatorial convec-
tion. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 123, 1445–1482.
398
References

Toth, Z., and E. Kalnay. 1993. Ensemble forecasting at NMC: The 
generation of perturbations. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 74, 2317–2330.
———. 1997. Ensemble forecasting at NCEP and the breeding
method. Mon. Wea. Rev., 125, 3297–3319.
Tuleya, R. E., and T. R. Knutson. 2002. Impact of climate change on
tropical cyclones. In Atmosphere-Ocean Interactions, Vol. 1. South-
ampton, UK: WIT Press, 293–312.
Turnipseed, P., G. L. Giese, J. L. Pearman, G. S. Farris, M. D. Krohn,
and A. H. Sallenger. 1998. Hurricane Georges: Headwater Flooding,
Storm Surge, Beach Erosion, and Habitat Destruction on the Central
Gulf Coast. USGS Water Resources Investigations Report 98-4231.
U.S. Senate Bipartisan Task Force on Funding Disaster Relief. 1995.
Federal Disaster Assistance, Document 104-4, 104th Congress, 1st
Session, 250 pp.
Vaughan, W. W. 1982. Meteorological satellites: Some early history. In
Meteorological Satellites: Past, Present, and Future. NASA Confer-
ence Publication 2227, 1–2.
Vaughan, W. W., and D. L. Johnson. 1994. Meteorological satellites:
The very early years, prior to launch of TIROS-1. Bull. Amer.
Meteor. Soc., 75, 2295–2302.
Velden, C., and L. M. Leslie. 1991. The basic relationship between
tropical cyclone intensity and the depth of the environmental
steering layer in the Australia region. Wea. Forecasting, 6, 244–253.
Velden, C. S., T. L. Olander, and R. M. Zehr. 1998. Development of an
objective scheme to estimate tropical cyclone intensity from dig-
ital geostationary satellite infrared imagery. Mon. Wea. Rev., 126,
1202–1218.
Vigh, J., S. Fulton, M. DeMaria, and W. H. Schubert. 2003. Evaluation
of a multigrid tropical cyclone track model. Mon. Wea. Rev., 131,
1629–1636.
Von Baeyer, H. C. 1999. Warmth Disperses and Time Passes: The History
of Heat. Modern Library, 240 pp.
Wakimoto, R. M., and P. G. Black. 1994. Damage survey of Hurricane
Andrew and its relationship to the eyewall. Bull. Amer. Meteor.
Soc., 75, 189–200.
Wang, Y., and G. J. Holland. 1996. The beta drift of baroclinic vortices.
Part 1: Adiabatic vortices. J. Atmos. Sci., 53, 411–427.
Weber, H. C. 2001. Hurricane track prediction with a new barotropic
model. Mon. Wea. Rev., 129, 1834–1858.
Weems, J. E. 1997. A Weekend in September. Texas A&M University
Press, 192 pp.
Weik, M. H. 1961. The ENIAC story. Ordnance, the Journal of the Amer-
ican Ordnance Association (January–February): 3–7. Also available
References
399

in Ballistic Research Laboratory Report, Department of the Army
Project No. 5B03-06-002.
Wexler, R. 1945. The structure of the September 1944 hurricane when
off Cape Henry, Virginia. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 26, 156–159.
———. 1947. Structure of hurricanes as determined by radar. Ann.
N.Y. Acad. Sci., 48, 821–844.
Wilemon, T. 1999. Information, money needed for memorial organiz-
ers seek to correct inaccuracies. Sun Herald, September 6.
Will, L. E. 1990. Okeechobee Hurricane and the Hoover Dike. Glades His-
torical Society, 204 pp.
Williams, J. 1992. The Weather Book. USA Today, 212 pp.
———. 1998. NASA chief kept her head in the clouds. USA Today,
December 3.
Willoughby, H. E., J. A. Clos, and M. G. Shoreibah. 1982. Concentric
eyewalls, secondary wind maxima, and the evolution of the hur-
ricane vortex. J. Atmos. Sci., 41, 1169–1186.
Willoughby, H. E. 1988. Linear motion of a shallow-water barotropic
vortex. J. Atmos. Sci., 45, 1906–1928.
Willoughby, H. E., and R. A. Black. 1996. Hurricane Andrew in
Florida: Dynamics of a disaster. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 77,
543–549.
Willoughby, H. E., D. P. Jorgensen, R. A. Black, and S. L. Rosenthal.
1985. Project STORMFURY: A scientiﬁc chronicle 1962–1983. Bull.
Amer. Meteor. Soc., 66, 505–514.
Willoughby, H. E., J. M. Masters, and C. W. Landsea. 1989. A record
minimum sea level pressure observed in Hurricane Gilbert. Mon.
Wea. Rev., 117, 2824–2828.
Wong, M. L. M., and J. C. L. Chan. 2004. Tropical cyclone intensity in
vertical wind shear. J. Atmos. Sci., 61, 1859–1876.
Yamasaki, M. 1968. Numerical simulation of tropical cyclone devel-
opment with the use of primitive equations. J. Meteor. Soc. Japan,
55, 11–31.
Zehr, R. M. 1992. Tropical cyclogenesis in the western North Paciﬁc.
NOAA Tech. Rep. NESDIS 61, 181 pp.
Zhang, D.-L., Y. Liu, and M. K. Yau. 2001. A multiscale numerical
study of Hurricane Andrew (1992). Part IV: Unbalanced ﬂows.
Mon. Wea. Rev., 129, 92–107.
Zhu, T., D. Zhang, and F. Weng. 2002. Impact of the Advanced
Microwave Sounding Unit measurements on hurricane predic-
tion. Mon. Wea. Rev., 130, 2416–2432.
400
References

Zipser, E. 1989. Interview with Robert H. Simpson, September 6 & 9,
1989. American Meteorological Society Tape Recorded Interview
Project (TRIP). Available from the National Center for Atmos-
pheric Research at http://www.ucar.edu/archives.
Zoch, R. T. 1949. North Atlantic hurricanes and tropical disturbances
of 1949. Mon. Wea. Rev., 50, 339–341.
References
401


Abbe, Cleveland, 111
Aberson, Sim, 193–194
Accumulated Cyclone Energy (ACI)
index, 53–54
Adem, Julian, 127
ADvanced CIRCulation (ADCIRC)
storm surge model, 37
Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit
(AMSU), 148, 265
Aerosonde, 147
Airborne eXpendable BathyThermo-
graphs (AXBTs), 143, 288
Airborne eXpendable Current Proﬁler
(AXCP), 141, 143, 288
Aircraft Satellite Data Link (ASDL),
143
American Meteorological Society
(AMS), 132, 200, 259–261
educational material and publica-
tions of, 261–262
journals of, 259–260
Anthes, Richard, 135, 194–196
Arabian Sea, the, 103
Army Signal Corps, 111, 112
Atlantic hurricane season, 13–14
Atlantic Hurricanes (Dunn and Miller),
202
Atlantic Multidecadal Mode (AMM),
209
Atlantic Oceanic and Meteorological
Laboratory (AOML), 272
Atmospheric pressure, 3
Australia, 85, 95
Bureau of Meteorology and
Research, 100
Automatic Picture Transmission
(APT), 129
Azores high-pressure systems, 51
Bangladesh, 30–31
Barbados, 218
Bartie, Whitney, 131
Bartie v. United States, 131
Bay of Bengal, 93, 103
Beaufort, Francis, 108, 358. See also
Modiﬁed Beaufort Scale
Bermuda, 189
Bjerknes, Vilhelm, 114, 220
Bowie, Edward H., 115
Brooks, Charles Franklin, 259
Burpee, Bob, 145, 148
Byers, Horace Robert, 120
Calculus, 105, 108
Caribbean Sea, 12–13, 43, 57, 117
surface pressure of, 50
and wind shear, 51
Centrifugal force, 18–19
Charney, Jules, 124
Cheng, Kenneth, 132
China, 31, 62, 84
China LAndfalling Typhoon
EXperiment (CLATEX), 150
Clapeyron, Emile, 109
403
Index

Clausius, Rudolf, 110
Cline, Isaac, 115–116, 196–199
Cline, Joseph, 197, 198
CLIPER (CLImatology and
PERsistence) statistical equation,
136, 139
Cloud seeding, 61
Convergence, 3, 6, 9
Cooperative Institute for Meteoro-
logical Satellite Studies ([CIMSS],
University of Wisconsin-
Madison), 226, 264–266
educational material and
publications of, 266
Coriolis, Gaspard-Gustave de, 107,
109–110
Coriolis force, the, 3–4, 91, 97, 109–110
Coupled Boundary Layer Air Sea
Transfer (CBLAST), 150, 151, 203
Cressman, George, 133
Cuba, 84, 191–192, 197
Currents, 34
longshore, 34
rip, 34
Cyclones, 110, 215, 217. See also Sub-
tropical cyclones; Tropical
cyclones
Cyclonic rotation, 1, 6, 8
DeMaria, Mark, 144, 199–201
Doppler, Christian, 140
Doppler effect, 140
Doppler radar, 140, 143, 145
WSR-88 (NEXRAD) Doppler radar,
145
Douglas, Marjory Stoneman, 
Downbursts, 25
Dropsonde Observations for Typhoon
Surveillance near the Taiwan
Region
(DOTSTAR), 151
Dropwindsondes, 137, 147, 149, 150
Duckworth, Joseph, 118–119
Dunn, Gordon, 117–118, 126, 134,
201–202
Dust storms, 7
Dvorak, V. F., 15–16, 136
Dvorak technique, 15–16, 42, 136, 226,
265
Dynamic instability, 5–6
Eckert, J. Presper, 120
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO),
49–50, 51, 52–53, 60, 100, 115,
141, 205, 252
Electronic Discrete Variable Auto-
matic Computer (EDVAC), 122
Electronic Numerical Integrator and
Computer (ENIAC), 120–122
use of in weather forecasting,
124–125
Elsberry, Russell, 202–204
Elsner, Jim, 53
Environmental Science Service
Administration (ESSA), 132,
133–134, 135
Everglades, The: River of Grass
(Stoneman), 19–20
Euler, Leonhard, 107–108
Extratropical cyclone, 12–13
Facusse, Carlos Flores, 28
Farrar, John, 108
Fassig, O. L., 114
Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), 64, 76–77, 80,
266–267, 273
educational materials and
publications of, 268
services provided by, 267–268
Ferrel, William, 109
Fleet Numerical Meteorological and
Oceanography Center
(FNMOC), 125, 151
Florida, danger of hurricanes to,
xvi–xvii
Fourth Convection and Moisture
EXperiment (CAMEX-4), 149
France, 188, 189
Frank, Neil, 137, 143, 204–205
Franklin, Benjamin, 107
404
Index

Front(s), 1–2
Fujiwhara effect, 40
Garriot, E. B., 113
Gay-Lussac, Joseph, 109
General Meteorology (Byers), 120
Geneva Convention (1864), 262–263
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory (GFDL), 42, 125,
145–146, 149, 208, 269–270
educational material and
publications of, 270
Germany, 190–191
Gibbs, Willard, 110
Global Atmospheric Research
Program (GARP), 137
Global Forecast System (GFS), 42
Global Learning and Observations to
Beneﬁt the Environment
(GLOBE), 280–281
Global Positioning System (GPS),
146–147, 150
Global warming, 54, 56, 58. See also
Greenhouse effect
and the number and strength of
hurricanes, 59–60
and the number and strength of
tropical storms, 56–59
Goddard, Robert, 116
Goldenberg, S., 50
Grant, Ulysses S., 111
Graupel, 23
Gray, William, xv—xvii, 49–53, 100,
141, 205–206, 209
Greenhouse effect, 54–56
Gulf of Mexico, 13–14, 38, 79, 190
Hadley, George, 106–107
Halley, Edmond, 105–106
Halsey, William (“Bull”), 119–120
Hamilton, Alexander, 253–254
Haurwitz, Bernhard, 117
Henry, Joseph, 110
Holland, Greg, 147, 206–207, 245
Home protection, 64–65. See also
Insurance
before hurricane season, 69–72
during evacuation, 74
during hurricane watch or
warning, 72–74
exterior doors and windows, 66–67
post-hurricane, 74–77
protecting pets, 77–78
roof, 65–66
storm shutters, 67–69
HURricane DATabase (HURDAT),
274, 292
Hurricane Hunters, the (53rd Weather
Reconnaissance Squadron),
43–44, 48, 137, 142, 147, 
270–272
educational material and
publications of, 272
Hurricane and Its Impact, The (R.
Simpson and H. Riehl), 225
Hurricane modiﬁcation attempts,
60–64
chemical, 64
hurricane seeding, 60–63
microwave, 64
nuclear, 63–64
Hurricane reconnaissance ﬂights,
42–44, 119, 122, 135–136, 138,
141–142, 143, 374–376. See also
Hurricane Hunters, the (53rd
Weather Reconnaissance
Squadron)
sample report of, 377
understanding reports of, 
374–376
Hurricanes, 217. See also Hurricane
modiﬁcation attempts;
Hurricane reconnaissance
ﬂights; Hurricanes, destruction
caused by; Hurricanes,
forecasting of; Hurricanes,
formation of; Hurricanes,
naming of; Hurricanes, structure
of; Speciﬁc hurricanes
annular, 21
arctic, 92
beneﬁts of, 34–35
Index
405

Hurricanes (continued)
categories of, 31, 32–33 (table),
51–52, 238–23 9(table), 242
(table), 247(table)
category 5, 31, 34, 57, 242 (table), 
243
worldwide, 93–97
deﬁnition of, 1
high-altitude detection of, 125–126,
129
international impact of, 83–92
and lightning, 22–24
motion of, factors controlling,
39–40
Fujiwhara effect, 40
trochoidal motion, 40
non-print resources concerning,
324–333
preparation for, 46–49, 303. See also
Home protection
and multidecadal changes, 46
and population increases, 46, 47
and the use of drones and 
aerosondes, 48–49
and rainfall amounts, 26, 244
size of, 21–22
major, 31
midgets, 22
worldwide naming conventions,
101–103
Hurricanes, destruction caused by,
25–26, 45–49, 46 (table), 83–84,
113, 237 (table). See also Safﬁr-
Simpson Hurricane Scale
deaths caused by, 232–233 (table),
240–241 (table), 248–249 (table)
expense of, 47–48, 234–235 (table),
236 (table)
eyewitness accounts of destruction,
255–258
ﬂooding, 26–28, 35–36
deaths from, 26, 27–28
international
Caribbean, 84
Latin America, 84
in less-developed countries,
84–85
ocean currents, 34
storm surges and storm tides,
28–31, 45–46, 243–244
deaths from, 31
uprooted tree problems, 36
waves, 29–30
Hurricanes, forecasting of, 35–37,
363–364. See also Hurricane
reconnaissance ﬂights; National
Hurricane Center,
understanding forecasts of;
Viñes, Benito
annual forecasting, 49–53
factors affecting annual 
hurricane activity, 49–51
and breeding cycles, 42
computer models, 40–42
numerical models, 135
Congressional support for, 116–117,
126, 201, 213, 225
consensus, 42
ensemble, 41–42
hurricane warnings, 44, 111,
112–113
hurricane watches, 44
observational platforms for, 42–44
summary of forecasting
procedures, 44
Hurricanes, formation of, 2. See also
Tropical waves; Troughs
extratropical transition, 2, 12–13
intensiﬁcation stage, 2, 8–10
genesis stage, 2, 3–8, 9
prerequisites for, 6–7
and water temperature, 6, 9–10, 11,
13–14, 51, 124
weakening stage, 10–12
Hurricanes, naming of, 14–15, 16
(table), 17 (table), 85
Hurricanes, structure of
and cloud patterns, 15–18
curved band, 16–17
spiral bands, 17–18
406
Index

and temperature, 20–21
types of patterns, 16
eye formation, 18–21
eyewall (s), 61, 62, 120
concentric eyewall cycle, 20
formation, 18–21
and temperature, 20–21
Hydrometeorological Prediction
Center (HPC), 36
Ice nuclei, 60, 123
Imaging Wind and Rain Airborne
Proﬁler (IWRAP), 151
Improved TIROS Operational System
(ITOS), 133, 136
Improved Weather Reconnaissance
System (IWRS), 142
India, 30, 31
Inducement, 23
Infrared spectrum, 55
Institute for Advanced Studies ([IAS]
Princeton University), 122. See
also Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory (GFDL)
Meteorology Group, 124
Insurance, 64, 78–82. See also National
Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP); Reinsurance
ﬂood, 79–80
hurricane, 78–79
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), report of,
251–252
International Workshop (s) on
Tropical Cyclones (IWTC), 204
InterTropical Convergence Zone
(ITCZ), 4, 106, 223
Jarrell, Jerry, 148
Jarvinen, Brian, 139
Jet stream, the, 123–124
JET2000, 149
Joint Numerical Weather Prediction
Group (JNWPG), 124–125
Joint Typhoon Warning Center
(JTWC), 95, 99, 127–128, 
275–276
annual tropical cyclone summaries
of, 321
educational material and
publications of, 276
Joules, James Prescott, 110
Kamikaze (“divine wind”), 188
Kaplan, John, 144, 200
Kinetic energy, 5
Kosco, George F., 119
Landsea, Chris, 102, 208–210
Last Island (Isle Derniere) disaster,
256–258
Law of the Storms, The (Reid), 218
Leibniz, Gottfried, 105
Lhermitte, Roger, 135
Lightning, 22–24
intercloud, 23
intracloud, 23
Lorenz, Edward, 129–130
Madden-Julian Oscillation, 7–8, 100
Marconi, Guglielmo, 113
Marks, Frank, 210–211
Mauchly, John, 120
Maximum Envelop of Water (MEOW)
maps, 37
McKinley, William, 112
Mesoscale vortices, 25
Mesovortices, 25, 129
Meteorograph. See radiosonde
Meteorological satellites, 127,
128–129. See also Television
InfraRed Observation Satellite-1
(TIROS-1); TIROS Operational
System (TOS)
Applications Technology Satellite
(ATS-1), 133–134
Defense Meteorological Satellite
Program (DMSP), 134
geostationary satellites, 133
Index
407

Meteorological satellites (continued)
Geostationary Meteorological 
Satellite (GMS), 139
Geostationary Operational 
Environmental Satellite 
(GOES), 138, 145
Meteosat, 138–139
Synchronous Meteorological
Satellite-1 (SMS-1), 137–138
Nimbus program, 132
polar-orbiting, 128–129, 134
Earth Observing System (EOS) 
satellites, 144–145, 148, 149
Special Sensor Microwave/ 
Imager (SSM/I), 142–143, 146
Seasat satellite, 139
Tropical Rainfall Measuring
Mission (TRMM) satellite, 146
Miami Weather Bureau, 126. See also
National Hurricane Center
(NHC)
Microwave Imager (MI), 146
Miller, Banner, 202
Mitchell, C. L., 115
Modiﬁed Beaufort Scale, 358, 359–361
(table), 362
Monsoon depressions, 93
Monsoon gyre, 104
Moore, William, 112, 197
Moore School of Electrical
Engineering (University of
Pennsylvania), 120, 121
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), 132,
144, 147–148, 149, 276–277
educational material and
publications of, 277–278
Goddard Space Flight Center, 129
National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR), 195–196
National Centers for Environmental
Prediction (NCEP), 42, 125, 278,
362
educational material and
publications of, 278–279
National Climate Data Center
(NCDC), 279–280
educational material and
publications of, 280, 323–324
National Data Buoy Center, 136
National Environmental Satellite and
Data Information Service
(NESDIS). See National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA)
National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP), 79, 80, 134
National Hurricane Center ([NHC],
formerly Miami Weather
Bureau), 15, 38, 43, 44, 48, 101,
126, 202, 214, 225, 226, 290
and the Man computer Interactive
Data Access System (McIDAS),
141
summary of forecasting
procedures, 44–45
understanding forecasts of,
363–364, 373
forecast advisory, 364–366
forecast discussion, 368–370
public advisory, 366–368
strike probability, 370–373
use of computer models for
forecasting, 40–42
National Hurricane Research
Laboratory (NHRL), 126–127
National Lightning Detection
Network, 24
National Oceanographic and
Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), 43, 132, 135, 138, 140,
143, 146, 147, 148, 149, 277,
280–281
Aircraft Operations Center (AOC),
43, 286–289
educational material and 
publications of, 289–290
Climate Prediction Center (CPC), 53
educational material and
publications of, 281
408
Index

Hurricane Research Division
(HRD), 127, 225, 272, 280
annual summaries of, 318–321
educational material and 
publications of, 274–275
research topics of, 272–273
National Environmental Satellite
and Data Information Service
(NESDIS), 132,
265, 279
National Weather Service (NWS),
35–36, 37, 134, 280, 283
educational material and 
publications of, 283–284, 
322–323
Spaceﬂight Meteorology Group,
211–212
National Weather Association (NWA),
281–282
educational material and
publications of, 282
Naval Research Laboratory (NRL),
284–285
educational material and
publications of, 285–286
Navier, Claude-Louis, 108–109
Navier-Stokes equations, 109
Neumann, Charles, 136, 139, 
211–212
Newton, Isaac, 105, 106
Norton, Grady, 126, 201, 212–214
“Numerical Simulation of the Life
Cycle of Tropical Cyclones”
(Ooyama), 214
Ooyama, Vic, 135, 200, 214–215
Parent, Robert, 128
Philippines, the, 28, 31, 102–103
Piddington, Henry, 110, 215–216, 
228
Pielke, R. A., 64, 84–85
Pielke, R.A., Sr., 64
Polar low, 92
Potential energy, 5
Project Cirrus, 61
Project STORMFURY, 62–64, 123, 129,
141, 225, 229
excerpts from report of, 249–251
Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO), 50,
100, 141
Racer’s Storm (1837), 190
RAdio Detection And Range
(RADAR), 118, 126. See also
Doppler radar
Radiometer, 128, 149. See also Stepped
Frequency Microwave
Radiometer (SFMR)
Radiosonde, 117
Rasmussen, NAME, 92
Red Crescent Society, 84, 262–263
educational material and
poublications, 264
Red Cross, the, 77, 262–263
educational material and
publications of, 264
Redﬁeld, William, 109, 216–217
Regional Specialized Meteorological
Centers (RSMCs), 98–100
Reid, William, 111, 190, 215, 217–218
Reinsurance, 53
Richardson, Lewis Fry, 108, 114–115,
218–219
Riehl, Herbert, 120, 127, 202, 205,
219–220, 222
Riming, 23
Rodney, George, 255
Rossby, Carl-Gustave Arvid, 18,
220–222, 260
Rossby wave motion, 18, 221–222
Safﬁr, Herbert, 31
Safﬁr-Simpson Hurricane Scale, 31,
32–33 (table), 34, 85
modiﬁed form of for tropical
Paciﬁc area, 86–90 (table)
Sailor’s Horn Book, The (Piddington),
215
Index
409

SANders’ BARotropic (SANBAR)
model, 135
Satellite imagery, 20
Satellites. See Meteorological satellites
Scatterometer, 139
Schafer, Robert, 120
Schaefer, Vincent, 123
Science reports, reliability of, 58–59
Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from
Hurricanes (SLOSH) computer
model, 37
Sea Venture, 189
Shapiro, L., 50
Sheets, Robert, 143, 145
SHIFOR (Statistical Hurricane
Intensity FORcast), 139–140
SHIPS (Statistical Hurricane Intensity
Prediction Scheme), 144, 200
Silver iodide, 123
Simpson, Joanne, 222–223
Simpson, Robert, 31, 126, 134, 137,
224–226
Solar radiation. See Greenhouse
effect
Spain, 188–189
Speciﬁc hurricanes
Alicia (1983), 54, 313–314
Allen (1980), 21, 54, 243
Andrew (1992), 22, 24, 25, 35, 54,
57–58, 64, 129, 245, 315–316
Audrey (1957), 131
Bob (1991), 24, 314
Bonnie (1998), 148
Camille (1969), 22, 30, 37, 43, 45,
137, 243, 313
Celia (1970), 129
Charley (2004), xv, 45, 148
Claudette (1979), 26, 34, 146, 151
Danny (1997), 27
Debbie (1969), 62
Dennis (1999), 26
Diana (1984), 24
Donna (1960), 187
Earl (1998), 148
Easy (1950), 15
Elena (1985), 24
Erin (2001), 149
Esther (1961), 61
Fiﬁ(1974), 27
Flora (1963), 27
Florence (1988), 24
Floyd (1999), 26
Frederic (1979), 313
Galveston Hurricane (1900), 196,
197, 309–310
Georges (1998), 31, 148, 187, 317,
369
Gilbert (1988), 21, 28, 143, 243
Ginger (1972), 62
Gloria (1995), 19
Gordon (1994), 28
Great Hurricane (1780), 189–190,
254–255
Hazel (1954), 126, 313–313
Hugo (1989), 25, 43–44, 314
Humberto (2001), 149
Iniki (1992), 316
Ivan, xvii
Jeanne (2004), xv
Katrina (2005), 335–338
King (1950), 15
Mitch (1998), 28, 84, 187
Opal (1995), 38, 43, 45
Pauline (1997), 28
Privy Hurricane (1898), 192
Roxanne (1995), 12
Speciﬁc supertyphoons
Forrest, 243
Tip (1979), 21, 103, 243, 244
Speciﬁc tropical cyclones
Bangladesh Cyclone (1970), 245
Tracy (1974), 22, 103, 244
Speciﬁc tropical storms
Alberto (1994), 151, 316
Allison (2001), 27, 151
Chantal (2001), 149
Debbie (1982), 140
Gabrielle (2001), 149, 151
Isabel (2003), 80
Thelma (1991), 27
410
Index

Speciﬁc typhoons
Carmen (1960), 245
Cobra (1944), 119
Herb (1996), 27
John (1944), 245
Kelly (1981), 27
Nina (1975), 27
Omar, 43
Peggy (1986), 28
Thelma (1987), 28
Static instability, 3
Stepped Frequency Microwave
Radiometer (SFMR), 148–149, 
151
Steric effect, 29
Stewart, George, 14–15
Stokes, George, 109
Storm (Stewart), 14
Storm Spotters, 142
Storm Trackers, 138
Storms, Floods, and Sunshine (I. Cline),
199
Subtropical cyclones, 15, 93
Suomi, Verner, 128
Supertyphoons, 95. See also Speciﬁc
supertyphoons
Synoptic Flow Experiment, 140
Taiwan, 150–151
Television InfraRed Observation
Satellite-1 (TIROS-1), 128–129,
132, 277
Thailand, 31
Thermodynamics, 110
Third Convection and Moisture
EXperiment (CAMEX-3),
147–148
TIROS Operational System (TOS), 
133
Tornadoes, 25
tornado warning, 35
tornado watch, 35
Tropical Cyclone Motion (TCM-90,
TCM-92, TCM-93) Experiments,
144, 203
Tropical Cyclone Warning Centers
(TCWCs), 98–99
Tropical cyclones, 83–84, 93–94. See
also Speciﬁc tropical cyclones
categories of, 86–90(table)
intensity of, 95, 97
naming of, 85, 95, 96(table),
101–103
occurrence of, 91–92
size variations of, 103–104
worldwide monitoring and
forecasting of, 97–100
Tropical Cyclones (I. Cline), 116
“Tropical Cyclones and Global
Climate Change: A Post-IPCC
Assessment” (Henderson-
Sellers et al.), 252–253
Tropical depression(s), 2, 7, 8
Tropical disturbance, 2
Tropical EXperiment in MEXico
(TEXMEX), 144
Tropical Prediction Center (TPC), 290.
See also National Hurricane
Center (NHC)
educational material and
publications of, 291–292
Technical Support Branch (TSB),
291
Tropical Analysis and Forecast
Branch (TAFB), 291
Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission
(TRMM), 146, 277
Tropical storms, 2, 9. See also Speciﬁc
tropical storms
Troughs, 3–4
equatorial, 4
frontal, 6
monsoon, 4–5
surface, 6
Turner, NAME, 92
United States, 190–191
University Corporation for
Atmospheric Research (UCAR),
195
Index
411

University of Hong Kong, 100, 102
Upwelling, 11
U.S. Air Force, 127, 138, 141–142
U.S. Air Force Reserve, 138, 142
U.S. Army Air Force, 118
U.S. Department of Defense (DOD),
99–100, 129
Defense Meteorological Satellite
Program (DMSP), 134
U.S. Navy, 127, 135, 138
U.S. Naval Western Oceanography
Center, 99, 275
U.S. Weather Bureau, 112
Velden, Chris, 226
VICBAR hurricane track forecast
model, 200
Viñes, Benito, 111–112, 227–228
von Mayer, Julius Robert, 110
von Neumann, John, 121, 122
Vonnegut, Bernard, 123
Vortex Rossby waves, 18
Vorticity, 221
Walker, Gilbert, 115
Wasaburo Ooishi, 124
water temperature, 9–10, 11, 13–14,
29, 51, 60, 124
Waves, 29–30, 244
tropical, 5–6, 117
wave setup, 29
Weather balloons, 117
Weather Channel, the, 292–293
educational material and
publications of, 293
Weather magazines, 302–303
Weather modiﬁcation, 122–123
Weather prediction, 129–131
errors in, 130
legal issues, 130–131
Weather Prediction by Numerical
Procedures (Richardson), 218–219
West Indian Hurricanes (Garriot), 113
West Indian Hurricanes and Other
Tropical Cyclones of the North
Atlantic Ocean
(Mitchell), 115
Wiggins, Allan, 119
Willoughby, Hugh E., 228–229
Wind(s), 25–26. See also Modiﬁed
Beaufort Scale; Wind shear
categories of, 96(table)
cyclonic, 9, 217
maximum, 2
sustained, 2
rotary (counterclockwise), 107, 109
speed, 217, 356–358, 357(table)
trade, 106
Wind shear, 6, 8, 9–10
Caribbean, 51
vertical, 10–11
Winthrop, John, 107
Wireless telegraphy, 113–114
World Bank, 84
World Meteorological Organization
(WMO), 83, 97, 98, 293–295
educational material and
publications of, 295
Tropical Cyclone Program (TCP)
of, 294
World Weather Watch (WWW),
97–100
Wragge, Clement, 14
WSR-88 (NEXRAD) Doppler radar,
145
Yoshio Kurihara, 207–208
412
Index

