Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        1 
 
 
The Secrets To Putting Cash In Your 
Pocket Running A Superb Stage 
Hypnosis Show Anytime, Anywhere 
With Any Audience 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        2 
Contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 
 
WELCOME 
3 
PHOTO & BIO OF PERSON   
3 
INTRODUCTION 
4 
INTERVIEW – PART 1 
5 
INTERVIEW – PART 2 
21 
SEMINAR 1 – PART 1 
35 
SEMINAR 1 – PART 2 
60 
SEMINAR 2 – PART 1 
85 
SEMINAR 2 – PART 2 
103 
END OF SEMINAR 
121 
MEET YOUR HOST 
121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        3 
Welcome 
 
Welcome To the Hypnosis Masters Series 
In this series you will be getting interviews and special seminars from some of the 
worlds best Masters of Hypnosis. Each Master Hypnotist is a specialist in one particular 
field and will be revealing his or her hypnosis secrets for you. 
 
Meet This Month’s Master: Don Spencer 
Don Spencer first induced hypnosis at the age 
of 12. His young "girlfriend" at the time was 
being hypnotized by her father who was in the 
military. She taught the young Spencer the art 
of stilling the mind. He would sit quietly with her 
head on his lap. Rubbing her temples and having 
her count backwards she quickly entered a deep 
somnambulistic state!  The astonished Spencer 
gave her directions. The teenage boy likened the 
experience to an exaggerated Simon says. 
 
TRAINING 
 
Spencer never forgot that experience and over 
the year’s, was drawn to books, classes, movies 
and people that hovered on the edge of the 
mysterious. His curiosity led him to formal 
educational studies in philosophy, psychology, 
physiology, abnormal behavior and comparative 
religion. Alternative studies that captivated his 
attention 
and 
lifestyle 
were 
shamanism, 
metaphysics, hypnotism, NLP, kinesiology, and 
theater. 
 
HYPNOTHERAPIST  
 
1986 - Spencer began his work as a Hypnotherapist. His most influential teachers at the 
time were Charles Tebbetts, Ormand McGill, Jim Russell, Al Krasner and other notables to 
numerous to mention. He began his associations with the leading certification bodies of the 
day. He developed the Hypnotism Training Institute of Idaho in 1989, Hypnotism Training 
International in Utah in 1991, the Personal Achievement Center for private consultations 
and morphed into Sleep Now Productions, Inc. Sleep Now went online in 1994 as a leader in 
hypnosis information and technology. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        4 
Introduction 
 
Welcome to StreetHypnosis.com. My name is Igor Ledochowski and what  you’re about 
to hear is a very special interview with Master Hypnotist Don Spencer, which was 
recorded for us at a Private Hypnosis Club as part of our interviews with the Hypnosis 
Masters Series. 
As you will hear, Don is not just a Master Hypnotist he’s also a Master Innovator in this 
field. Don’s interview and seminar will take us on a fascinating tour through advanced 
hypnotic principles, the secrets behind advanced covert hypnotic language patterns, as 
well as other hypnotic innovations and special insights that can turn almost anyone into 
a genuine master of hypnosis. 
Listen on at the end of the interview to discover how to get your hands on over five 
hours of seminars and interviews revealing his fascinating insights. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        5 
Interview – Part 1 
 
Igor: 
Welcome to StreetHypnosis.com. I’m here with Master Hypnotist Don Spencer, 
billed as the fastest hypnotist in the world from SleepNow.com. Don is probably 
one of the, shall we say, leading authorities in stage hypnosis, and if you ever 
get a chance to see his show, it is stunning. It is a real piece of art.  
First of all, Don, welcome aboard and thanks for coming to talk to us today. 
Don: 
Thank you. It’s great to be here.  
Igor: 
I spent a long time, believe it or not, sort of searching out for stage hypnotists 
that have something a little different. There are a lot of very good hypnotists out 
there and some very good stage shows, but there’s something that’s a little bit 
different about your show. It’s much more sort of … it’s thought out.  
It departs a little bit from the mainstream by going much more into sort of a 
performance character with the whole lights and show and all that sort of stuff, 
so it’s a really big spectacle. 
Tell me, how did you come up with the idea that you don’t want to be like a 
normal stage hypnotist that just does the same routines and does the same 
kind of show. Why did you decide to do your show differently? 
Don: 
I think for me it began by when I first started off in the profession I studied 
hypnosis and I went to stage hypnosis, a couple trainings, one with Ormond 
McGill and then I went to every stage hypnosis show in town that came through 
town or that was close by, and I watched them.  
It was at that time that I thought you know, I’m going to craft a show that’s 
unlike anything that’s ever been seen before, and so I had to look back into my 
experience on what got me excited about going to some kind of an event. I 
drew my show and crafted it after a rock and roll concert. 
Igor: 
Rock and roll definitely defines the whole spirit and ambience of what your 
stage hypnosis show is. It’s fast-paced. It’s furious– didn’t Ormond McGill even 
come to see your show one day calling you the fastest hypnotist in the world, at 
that point?  
Don: 
Yes, that was pretty good.  
I was in Salt Lake City at the time and I had been working a lot of nightclubs for 
a few years, fine-tuning my show before I went to the theater. But, the opening 
night when I began to do my shows that the Avalon theatre, Ormond happened 
to be in town that weekend for a training for another group of hypnotists and 
came by with a group of people to the show. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        6 
I have known Ormond for years, he came to the show and afterwards he said 
Spencer, he goes that’s the fastest hypnosis I’ve ever seen. I said can I quote 
you on that and he goes you sure can. That’s where that name came from.  
Igor: 
For those people who are not familiar with it, Ormond McGill is known as the 
Dean of American Hypnotists. He was one of the premiere stage hypnotists in 
the US and possibly in the world. Very old school, very elegant show he had, 
and was famous for being basically the person everyone looked up to, right? 
Don: 
He was. Ormond was the Dean of American Stage Hypnotists and of 
Hypnotists, actually. What few people realize is that Ormond actually started off 
as a magician, branched off into stage hypnosis and he was just fantastic. He 
was a very gentle soul and a pleasant man to be around, so he will be missed. 
Igor: 
You started to open up a couple of topics here which I think it would be 
important for us to explore later on; for example, the idea that everyone has 
their own flavor at the show.  
Ormond McGill, I think was unique again because his magical background 
made his shows a little bit more magical and other worldly, and of course, yours 
is the rock and roll version of stage hypnosis.  
Before we go into the middle of this whole stuff here, really the place to start, as 
usual, is right at the beginning, and most people will be interested in how you 
actually got involved.  
 How did you get started in hypnosis in the first place?  
We know where the show came from, but before that there must have been a 
passion and an interest as well.  
a. How did that all start? 
Don: 
Actually, my interest in hypnosis goes way back to when I was 12 years old. In 
fact, I was dating a girl back then, if you date at 12 years old, but I had a 
girlfriend back when I was 12 and her father, he was in the Navy. She would be 
hypnotized by her father and so she taught me this simple technique that her 
father would do with her.  
I would sit back on the ground, fold my legs, she would put her head on my lap, 
I would rub her temples and I would count backwards from 100 down, which is 
how she instructed me at the time which is what her father did with her, and 
after we got to about 90 she just quit talking. 
She instructed me what to do beforehand when she got to that point where she 
couldn’t talk, that I could just ask her to do anything that I wanted to and she 
would do it.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        7 
Lo and behold that’s what I did at 12 years old. She got to that place and I had 
her stand up, sit down, jump up, laugh and scream, whatever I wanted to. For 
me at 12 I had no idea what hypnosis was so it was kind of like an exaggerated 
Simon says. 
Igor: 
Right.  
Don: 
But, it locked into my mind that there was something very mystical, something 
very powerful and something very out of the ordinary going on and that 
experience, it never left me. That was my first introduction to hypnosis. 
Over the years I studied metaphysics and the mind sciences, psychology, 
philosophy and as we move up into the future from that point I was studying 
psychology down in San Diego. I was in my second year and I read an article in 
the paper that said learn hypnosis as a career – free demonstration.  
It piqued my interest and it reminded me of these experiences that I had years 
ago, and in psychology. For those out there who study psychology, you may 
read one or two paragraphs about hypnosis in the books, and I’m sure you’ve 
probably had that experience too.  
I went to this lecture done by a gentleman named Al Krasner, I watched him 
talk about hypnosis, he did a demonstration with a woman in the room, and 
there were maybe a couple hundred people there.  
I was absolutely fascinated with this lecture and with the demonstration. It was 
then and there after this lecture that I signed up immediately for one of his 
trainings, and that’s how I got into hypnosis. 
Igor: 
Actually, that demonstrates also the power of giving lecture demos. This is why 
stage hypnotists know one thing, which is that it's great PR.  
At the end of the show I know most stage hypnotists spend a couple extra days 
because they will fill their therapy room or whatever other things they’re doing 
just because people's imaginations captured the whole show. It’s one basically 
one to two hour long pitch for the power of hypnosis, right. 
Don: 
That’s exactly right, and that’s the same thing that I do. For a lot of people it’s 
their first exposure to hypnosis is going to a stage hypnosis show. So it is, it’s 
fascinating and when it’s presented correctly, for example, my show I talk to 
people about the mind and how powerful it is. 
I simply lead them to the end of the show which at that point it’s like look, ladies 
and gentleman, if these people are up here exhibiting this kind of behavior in 
hypnosis, what’s going on in your life that could possibly be transformed given 
the opportunity? 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        8 
At that point, you have the back room sales and you can do some great 
business and help a lot of people to achieve their goals and their dreams in life. 
It's really … it’s a lot of fun. 
Igor: 
There’s something which is tagged onto that, which is – I’d very much like your 
opinion – a lot of hypnotherapists dislike the idea of stage hypnotists. They 
think you should be banned it brings the profession down and so on.  
Clearly, you have mastered both sides of the fence. I’ve worked with you and 
we’ve had a great time. When we worked together with clients your skill set is 
right up there with the best of them, and when you do a stage show, of course, 
you’re a consummate performer as well.  
 How do you marry those two together?  
a. Do you think there’s a conflict or do you think they actually 
enhance other? 
Don: 
At the risk of stepping on people’s toes, I think the people who think that they 
don't go together or who are offended by individuals who do stage hypnosis– 
the traditional hypnotherapists– I think they need therapy. I think they need to 
loosen up, let that little inner child out maybe, maybe they were repressed, I 
don’t know. 
Igor: 
Right.  
Don: 
On the lighter side, but I think that they really go together very, very well and 
you’re right. After I took a class Al Krasner I took another class, because I 
realized after a weekend you cannot be a hypnotherapist in one weekend, 
which is what the class was he offered at the time back in 1986. 
So, I took another class in San Diego with a gentleman named Jim Russell. I 
studied with him for a year and a half in the Hypnotism Training Institute in San 
Diego and that was a fascinating class. I went three or four nights a week, I’m 
trying to remember, it’s been a while, and on weekends.  
I took my classes simultaneously. I took a hypnotism, Master Hypnotist, 
Advanced Hypnotherapy class and self-hypnosis classes on the weekend, 
which included also stage hypnosis, fire walking and metaphysics. We studied 
Freudian psychology. We studied all the basic psychologies and the general 
psychologies of the day.  
It was a very intensive course and I’ve never run into another school that has 
ever approached the teaching of hypnotherapy that he did at that time. 
Igor: 
Just to emphasize the point which is you really took the time out to learn your 
craft properly and this was before the days where you even thought about 
doing stage hypnosis. You were going to become a hypnotherapist, and you 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        9 
really decided to go for the top quality course you could find and invest your 
time and effort in it. 
This is something, this is a theme I’ve seen a lot of times, almost everyone I’ve 
interviewed so far who has really mastered their craft basically, at some point,  
decided I’m going to find the best person I can find and learn everything they’ve 
got to teach because that’s the fastest way to accelerate.  
I know people have taught themselves stuff as well, but the standard path to 
becoming a great hypnotist has been finding good quality hypnosis, not just 
cheap hypnosis or an okay hypnotist, but a really good one. There’s something 
that happens there where those skills sort of get transferred to you, isn't there? 
Don: 
It really is and I think it’s really important for people to know, and it was 
important for me, is when I began in my career I studied with everybody who 
was anybody at the time, whether they were good or not.  
I took a class with Charles Tebbetts. Back in the day, he was one of the 
premiere instructors. Ormond McGill. I took classes with Gil Boyne; he had a 
reputation at the time. I went to all the ACHE conventions and the NGH 
conventions.  
I studied with various shamans also outside of the scope of hypnotherapy but 
trying to understand what shamanism could teach me as a hypnotherapist. So I 
sought out everybody that I could possibly study with because I thought how 
important it is to have a powerful mentor who has been there, done that. 
Igor: 
That’s really important because sometimes it’s just getting a little nudge at the 
right time that can make the world of difference versus having spent year’s later 
undoing an error that’s like been ingrained over many years of work, right. 
Don: 
Exactly.   
I was just reminiscing, it was kind of funny, I remember I took a group of my 
students who had been through my first 50 hours of training. Back then I 
eventually went on and started the Hypnotism Training Institute of Idaho and 
Hypnotism International in Utah. My classes were at that time 300 hour, which 
was larger then any other certification body at the time.  
After my first 50 hours I took a group to one of the conventions and what 
amazed me is that my students came away from there telling me that they 
knew more about hypnosis and hypnotherapy then many people who had been 
practicing for 10 or 20 years. 
Igor: 
Right. 
Don: 
I’m not trying to toot my whistle, but it goes back to when you learn something 
and you study with the best of the best this all becomes a part of who you are 
that you can give to others and I can't overemphasize that.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        10 
When you’re in a mentoring position you have that unique rapport with one 
other human being that can really share all their life experiences with you at 
one time. It’s awesome. 
Igor: 
Definitely. It’s definitely showing in your skill set because you’ve absorbed I 
think the best of a lot of different worlds.  
You manage to straddle both the direct and indirect world and combine them in 
a unique model the way that you work. That’s pretty rare actually, because a lot 
of people either, go down one side or the other side of the fence. Very few 
people are willing to take both and have something that comes out of their 
personality then which is neither, but it’s not limited by either, either.  
Don: 
Part of my training too in the early days, I was also taking classes at San Diego 
State University with people like Michael Yapko, who was an early Ericksonian 
hypnotist who studied with Milton Erickson, so I had the good fortune of 
studying with these individuals at the University, and the reason I was in there 
was because I was studying psychology.  
These were classes that unless you were a psychology or medical student you 
were not able to take. I was fortunate to also have that aspect of training with 
me at the time. 
I was going to tell you that when we got together I was totally impressed with 
your skillset too. I really enjoyed watching you work. It was a treat. 
Igor: 
I was going to say it was always a lot of fun. Just for everyone listening there, 
when Don and I first sort of met up, one of the things that sometimes happen, 
people will check each other out just to see whether their skillset is.  
We ended up working with a bunch of clients and invariably we end up leading 
in some indirect version of an indirect double induction and you just see these 
… I wouldn’t say poor people, but really they’ve had big life issues settled in a 
matter of an hour or two and they had no idea what hit them.  
We had one lady who came I, if you recall, who had … I think we dealt with the 
equivalent of four, five, six sessions worth of work in one slightly extended 
session and she walked out of there and she was literally wobbling. She had no 
idea what happened but a big smile on her face. It was a lot of fun.  
Don: 
A zombie. 
Igor: 
Yes. 
Don: 
What was fun for me was working with somebody who had a fantastic skill level 
and how we could work off of each other without stepping on each other's toes. 
Igor: 
That’s such an important thing that you can blend the skills and you know 
where someone else is going. This goes back to I think your wide range of 
experience because you’ve mentioned some very different characters; Ormond 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        11 
McGill and Gil Boyne are a very different root to say Michael Yapko and even 
Charles Tebbetts, to certain extents. 
When you have that range, you can kind of predict where someone is going 
with it and you go oh, I know where he’s heading with this; then you can pick up 
the thread at someplace or just add a little bit of support on the other place, and 
it creates a much richer experience, but if we used the hypnotherapists and for 
the client as well, right. 
Don: 
Exactly. Then when you get to work and study with shamans then you get to 
bring the coyote into your practice also. 
Igor: 
Right. 
Don: 
The trickster; so it kind of all works and blends together. It’s great fun. 
Igor: 
You’ve obviously had a lot of very good clinical experience and I can vouch for 
that seeing you in action. What prompted the transition for me to go from 
clinical hypnotherapy sort of work into stage hypnosis work, which I think you 
spent many years just focusing on virtually exclusively. 
Don: 
I think there are two aspects of that. I started off clinically and at the time I had 
three children. I was a single parent. I had three kids that I was raising with the 
help of my parents, thank goodness at the time, so that really helped me out.  
I really wanted to be there, so I ran my clinic and at the same time I was 
running my clinic, I was also teaching at college for four years. I was teaching 
at college four nights a week teaching hypnosis and self-hypnosis, meditation, 
and all these other aspects of hypnotism and healing.  
I was really heavy into the therapy. I got into some heavy stuff which I don’t 
think a lot of therapists really deal with. A lot of people that came to me were 
referred to me from the local doctors and psychiatrists and psychologists 
because they didn’t have a clue on what to do, and I don’t know if I had a clue 
what to do, but whenever was happening it seemed to work out all right.  
I think there was a point where I started needing to have a little bit more fun in 
life and I started to look more towards the entertainment aspect because there 
was always a part of me that likes to entertain, so I began to watch these stage 
hypnotists. 
One day I got a call from I think it was a police association who wanted me to 
do a hypnosis show and asked me if I could do it. I said, of course, I can! 
Igor: 
It’s true. There’s nothing quite like having enough experience in hypnosis to go, 
even though I’ve never done something like this before I understand the 
principles enough that I can create something out of nothing relatively 
straightforwardly.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        12 
Don: 
I have to add, though, I had been teaching at the college for four years and the 
classes that I taught, I had rather large classes. I had 50 or 60 students a night 
and so I had a lot of demonstrational hypnosis in my background.  
I had never produced a full-blown show but I had demonstrated enough with 
individuals and groups that I felt like … I’d watched other hypnotists do it, and I 
thought you know what, if they can do it like that, I think I can do that. That 
doesn’t look like its too difficult so I went out there and just jumped into it. 
Then after that I got excited and I actually rented a club called the Turf Club for 
two nights and advertise it, sold it out for two nights and man, it was in my 
blood like fire. It was so hot I couldn’t turn back and that was it.  
Eventually I think I did the shows and doing the therapy for about a year, 
maybe two years, and I was in Salt Lake City and I told the gal in my practice 
named Diane Bradshaw, I told her that I didn’t want to do therapy anymore, that 
she could do it. She could have the business. I just wanted to go do stage work. 
That was it; I never turned back. 
Igor: 
Wow.  
Now, this is like at the moment we’ve got an idea of you doing the early days of 
staged hypnosis where you’re doing it part-time and so on. There are a lot of 
staged hypnotists out there who work and do work quite successfully part-time 
and the rest of the time they either just chill out or do some other work.  
At some point, that’s switched and you end up having what I believe is the 
longest running stage hypnosis show ever in recorded history. 
Don: 
It did. I was working in nightclubs there in Salt Lake for a number of years and I 
was approached to do a show at a theater. When they initially approached me I 
turned it down, because I was used to working in close quarters, nightclubs, 
more of a festive party type atmosphere.  
The theater was more for a general audience where I had to be more 
concerned about what I would say or what would happen in the show. It went 
from more of an R rated show to a PG-17 type of presentation. They were after 
me for a few months.  
Finally, I thought, you know what I’ll take the challenge because I need to 
stretch. I need to get out of this mindset that I can't do it and so I went back to 
the theater and said when do you want me to start?  
He said tonight; so I said okay and I stayed there for 320 weeks and it turned 
out to be the longest running comedy hypnosis show ever. 
Igor: 
That is a long time. That’s a lot of experience under your belt as well. Again, 
just to point out, many stage hypnotists do the tours, they go to county fairs, 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        13 
they do other police shows or balls and stuff like that and that’s a tremendous 
amount of work.  
It’s a great deal of work and it’s good fun and so on, but to actually have that 
kind of consistent venue with a consistent show so you can tinker with it and 
tweak it and build it up and there’s a audience that comes back every single 
time, first of all to keep it fresh, to keep it dynamic in that long a period of time, 
that’s just tremendous. 
Don: 
I have to tell you, it was one of the greatest times in my life. I thoroughly loved it 
each and every week. Every Saturday night I was live on stage and it was a 
blast. 
Now, in between, when I wasn’t working there on Saturday night I did a lot of 
corporate gigs in between. I was really busy, and in Salt Lake, I look back at it 
and there on the Wasatch Front I believe I hypnotized over 100,000 people 
during my shows, during that time period. 
Igor: 
That on its own is such a tremendous amount of experience. You must have 
drawn a lot of interesting shall we say insights into hypnosis and if nothing else 
just come across some pretty crazy situations just by doing that, because the 
sheer volume dictates that something mind-blowing unusual is going to happen 
at some point, right. 
Don: 
Yes, you get a lot of crazy things that happen.  
I think one of the big things that a lot of people don’t realize is that when you do 
a performance on that level every week for such a long period of time, 
everywhere you go, everybody knows you because everybody has heard about 
your show because you're right there on State Street, the main street where 
70,000 cars go by a day seeing your sign. You hypnotize all the high schools, 
the colleges, half the corporate people in the state. It gets wild. 
Igor: 
You become a rock star. You become the celebrity of town. 
Don: 
You really are. 
Igor: 
At the same time, of course, you still have the freedom that you can move to 
another town of somewhere else where you don’t get so shall we say bogged 
down by it. You have the best of both worlds.  
You can have a celebrity status in your local city district, but then you can go 
away on holiday and you won't be mobbed in the supermarket because let’s 
face it; we don’t want that to happen to us all the time, right. 
Don: 
No, we don’t. It gets obnoxious, but it’s fun to happen. It’s fun to be able to 
travel and get away from it where you’re completely unknown, nobody knows 
you, and nobody cares. It helps to keep you on a level playing field with your 
own self too. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        14 
Igor: 
Whilst you were like this local celebrity, for what must have been like six or 
maybe seven years I guess. 
 Did you also get to enjoy all the perks of celebrity, like going into 
restaurants without any cover charges or getting into nightclubs 
and bars without having to queue up and all that sort of stuff?  
I presume that’s all part and parcel of what it meant to be a celebrity in a city 
like Salt Lake. 
Don: 
Yes, in a city like Salt Lake that’s exactly what it was like and it’s kind of funny 
because Salt Lake, this year they just passed a new law where you no longer 
have to have a membership to go a nightclub, but before that you had to buy a 
membership to go into any nightclub to drink.  
One of the perks was I could go into any nightclub and I would be comped in; 
free food, free drinks, whatever I wanted. They took pretty good care of you. 
They were glad to have you around.  
Igor: 
That sounds like a pretty sweet deal for standing up on the stage one day a 
week and having fun basically with a  couple of hundred people, right? 
Don: 
Yes. It wasn’t too bad. There’s another side to it also. You get other hypnotists, 
and I had that experience while I was there that there were other hypnotists 
who wanted to take my place and so there's always the challenge of 
competition out there.  
Igor: 
That’s actually quite a good thing though because it keeps you on your toes 
and makes sure that your shoe stays fresh from being complacent and sort of 
tripping out and becoming boring. 
Don: 
It does. It keeps you from being too cocky. I have to say, I think there were four 
other shows that came into town that tried to do shows the same time I did and 
I’m fortunate that my show carried on.  
There was another man though, that he did a show down the street – and this 
is kind of interesting – he was actually at the theater that I was at before I went 
there. His name is Ben Vandermyde. He’s an excellent guy. He’s an old 
Vaudeville type performer but the guy was great.  
I loved him; even he didn’t like me because we were in competition. He moved 
to the theater down the street that was larger and so we had this dual of the 
hypnotists and between the two of us we’d bring in around 1,500 people every 
week to our shows. 
Igor: 
That’s a pretty significant number.  
Don: 
Yes. His show, after I started my show up, his show lasted for a couple of years 
and then the pace couldn’t keep up so he folded and I continued on until the 
day that I decided that I had had enough.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        15 
One of the reasons was that I didn’t want to do a show every Saturday night 
anymore. I was tired of doing that. It became like a job. I began getting a lot of 
out of state corporate gigs. I also began to get a lot of shows out of the country, 
and started getting some good national exposure through places like MTV and 
Playboy. I got to go around the world a few times. The benefits were awesome. 
Igor: 
For sure. You didn’t just take advantage of the benefits because you actually 
did a lot of good for your local community as well, in particular, local 
hypnotherapists thrived as a result of your shows without having to ever, 
without you ever getting a penny out of that side of things.  
 Can you tell us a little bit more about that and why you made a 
point out of basically helping other hypnotherapists fill their 
practices without asking for anything in return? 
Don: 
That’s one of the … yes, that’s a good point because I was not interested in 
doing private hypnotherapy at the time, but I encouraged people to visit their 
local hypnotherapists. 
So, a lot of the local hypnotherapists did get a lot of business just because of 
exposure that I gave to hypnotism in the community. I was very grateful that 
they were there in order to help those individuals who wanted to come to them.  
Igor: 
The reason I mentioned this; I think it was very important is as you know, I’ve 
traveled a lot, especially in shall we say non-first world countries; Asia and 
South America in particular, and what really struck me is there is a direct 
relationship between those countries that have a lot of stage hypnotists. 
For example, the UK and the USA have a lot of stage hypnosis, and the 
amount of people that make a good living or a decent living out of 
hypnotherapy, and those countries that have few or no stage hypnosis, and 
those countries that have no stage hypnosis at all or maybe one or something 
like that again, there is no hypnotherapy.  
It just does not exist. It’s virtually unheard of, and people still have attitudes 
about hypnosis that are literally in the stone about it being some magical power 
or some mystical thing.  
Don: 
Exactly. 
Igor: 
Those countries where there are stage hypnotists, they thrive, and people may 
still have some misconceptions about power and control and that sort of that 
stuff, but they are nothing, not even a glimmer compared to the misconceptions 
people have where stage hypnosis isn't in your face, people don’t see it as a 
reality and don’t even think of it as a possibility for helping themselves.  
It’s really a powerful force of good as far as I’m concerned. It’s the PR tool of 
our field. I laugh when people try to trash it and say oh, it’s no good, because 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        16 
they have no clue that they’re feeding themselves off the back of these throws 
existing. 
Don: 
Right. I think that some of the misconceptions actually do come from … there 
are some stage hypnotists out there, and I’m not trying to say that what they’re 
doing is wrong. I don’t care – they are just trying to make a living and that’s fine.  
For example, when I first started off in Salt Lake there was another guy there, 
and I can't think of his name right now and I wouldn’t mention it if I did, but he 
was doing hypnosis shows but he had a very dirty show where he would do a 
lot of very lewd things in the show, which I think I’m a pretty liberal guy but I 
was kind of offended by a lot of the stuff that he was doing.  
Those kinds of antics can give hypnosis a bad name. They can really cloud a 
person’s judgment if that’s their only experience with hypnosis is watching that 
type of a performance. If all they see is that aspect and they don’t see it as a 
force for good, it’s just the idea of somebody taking advantage of somebody 
and doing some pretty bizarre things with them.  
I think that can be detrimental if that’s their first experience and so when you 
have people like myself, you and others know who really have a liking for 
humanity and want to use hypnosis as you say as a force for good and do the 
right things and we all live in a better world because of it.  
Igor: 
I agree with that. In particular I think you put the finger on the button. People 
are making a classic logical mistake when they say look, this stage hypnotist is 
performing unsafely or with, shall we say, very low standards; therefore stage 
hypnosis should be banned, whereas the opposite is the case.  
Most stage hypnotists are actually very ethical performers and if we encourage 
ethical performances, for example like you did, this other person probably died 
pretty soon after you show came up. Why? Because everyone would come to 
yours. They have a choice now.  
It’s not a question of just see the hypnotist that is actually good and inspiring 
and makes me feel good when I leave and I feel like I’ve really learned 
something and improved my life in some way just from having witnessed his 
show, versus the one that when I leave I feel a little dirty and a little bit like 
something happened and I’m not sure it was necessarily a good thing.  
Don: 
Exactly. 
Igor: 
So by giving more choice and more ethical choice, it just polishes up the whole 
field in general, right? 
Don: 
Right. It’s kind of funny; I had a student a while back who was honing his show 
down in Las Vegas. He hired me to come down to Vegas and work with him for 
a while. He asked me about what he could do to have this good show. He was 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        17 
trying to pattern his show off of, there again, I’m not going to use any names, 
but off of somebody whose show was pretty dirty.  
 
I said to him, listen, if you want to be big in Vegas you don’t have … just 
because it’s Sin City doesn’t mean that you have to do a show that goes down 
deep into the dirt. I said the most … Mr. Las Vegas, Danny Gans at the time, 
and Lance Burton, the magician, did clean shows anybody could go to.  
They were inspired by it, as well as Siegfried and Roy. They were inspired by it, 
by their message, and they got a good performance of magic. A hypnosis show 
can be the same thing. You can get a good, decent uplifting show. It can be 
edgy, it can be racy, but keep it at a level that is still inspiring to people.  
Not only do you feel better as a human, but you lift up other people at the same 
time and I think that’s really a sign of a good performance is to lift up other 
human beings. 
Igor: 
I know we’ll be focusing on the whole performance aspect more for the other 
later today or in the more seminar portion in particular, but a single good point 
that comes to my mind when you say this is, a lot of people shall we say, do a 
dirtier show or a more extreme show than needs be, purely because they need 
that shock value because they’re making up for a lack of performance 
character.  
If they don’t have a performance that’s well thought out and well constructed, 
then they need something to make up for that, and they think it’s basically by 
doing stunts that are basically, something out of Jackass from the MTV show 
rather than saying hang on a second, I can have a very simple routine, 
something as simple as people watching TV, but I can build up the atmosphere.  
I can build up the whole thing around it in such a way that it’s the most people 
have ever seen and that’s the big difference, isn't it? 
Don: 
It really is, yes. You hit it right on the head. It’s a performance, so it’s how you 
present it that’s going to create the total ambience and the environment for the 
audience and for your subjects and for yourself.  
Igor: 
Now, before we get into the sort of meat and potatoes of what stage hypnosis is 
and your insights there, there’s something very important which I like to ask 
people at this stage, and I’d like to ask you as well just too give people some 
perspective.  
If anyone has seen your show or anyone goes to your show – by the way, if you 
ever see Don Spencer performing, The World’s Fastest Hypnotist he’ll be billed 
as, go watch the show. It is spectacular. It is so much fun, it’s fast paced, and 
you will learn a ton of things just by seeing him in action.  
However, there’s a danger with that which is people see a very polished 
performance, a very good performance and think hang on a second, he’s 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        18 
perfect, he’s always going to do this, he’s always getting the show perfectly; I’m 
nowhere near the same league yet, so I can't do what he does.  
What they don’t realize is that you, even now after all those years of 
experience, will still make mistakes and you’ve made some pretty big mistakes 
along the road, which is one of the reasons why you’re this good.  
It’s not whether or not you make mistakes its how you recover from them that 
that matters and what you learn from them, right? 
Don: 
Yes, that’s right. Are we talking about a mistake that I had recently? 
Igor: 
Well, you can if you want to.  
Don: 
Yes. I think that’s great. As I’m listening to you I’m sitting here going he’s 
leading me right into this, isn't he? 
Igor: 
Well, you know… 
Don: 
It’s great. You can have a polished show and I make it look easy because I’ve 
been doing it so it’s second nature to me. People watching think I can do that, 
but there’s a lot of work that goes into it. You can make mistakes.  
At a recent show, yours truly was there alongside me and there was a 
gentleman on the floor, I went down there to pick him up and I reached down 
there and grabbed his hand, and his hand slipped out of my hand and I fell 
backwards right on my butt.  
I just turned around, looked at the audience, looked at the subject and made it 
part of my act and then just got up and just carried on as if nothing really had 
happened.  
Igor: 
That is the sign of a consummate performer. It’s not that things don’t go wrong, 
because a lot of things went wrong.  
If I recall I had a pretty interesting experience on the same show with you with 
people trying to climb up on a piano, because they took their suggestion very 
literally and I just did not think of the consequence with that. You have to keep 
your eyes out sharp for anything like that.  
Whether you’re slipping and just make it part of your show or whether your 
subjects misinterpret or interpret your suggestions more widely then would 
normally be the case.   
You have to keep your eyes out for that, your wits about you, and the second 
something happens that’s even a little bit unsafe, put a stop to it right there and  
that’s another side of the stage show which is important. 
Don: 
The safety. 
Igor: 
Exactly, the safety aspect.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        19 
So, mistakes can happen in two forms, as the kind of egg on your face mistake 
which actually, if nothing else, just to emphasize this in terms of the audience 
which reaction happen there, they just laughed like they thought it was literally 
just a gag that you were doing on the show just to show that I’m not just a big 
hypnotist and a friendly guy as well.  
They took it as a sign of friendliness and approachability rather than of 
weakness and unprofessionalism, and actually it endeared them to you more, 
because you were willing to make a mistake and you have a big smile on your 
face and just carried on with the show.  
By the end of it they were just so blown away by the rest of the show I doubt 
anyone even remembered that it happened. All they had was that good feeling, 
the afterglow from the whole show. 
Don: 
Exactly. I’ll never forget the gal up on the piano, though that was classy. 
Igor: 
That was spectacular. 
Don: 
That was good. That was part of it. We weren’t really paying attention. We were 
just kind of doing this thing together and to watch that gal up on the piano, 
actually it was great, it worked out good, and it didn’t harm anything. It became 
part of the show.  
You’re right, at the end of the show people left there feeling good. They didn’t 
even notice any of that, and that’s part of being a professional is just going with 
the flow and integrating everything that happens into the show as it is.  
I had a guy once who thought he was Superman. He flew off the stage. He 
actually jumped off the stage, jumping up into the air like he was Superman 
flying. All’s we could hear– the audience is gasping– was this big thud on the 
ground. 
Igor: 
Oh man! 
Don: 
I walk over to the side of the stage, look down, looked at the guy, and I go you 
all right? He goes yeah… I was kind of nervous but he got back up on the stage 
and he was fine. He went down there, he hit the cement, but he broke his fall.  
I think I’m fortunate in that way that I’ve never had anybody have any serious 
accidents on my stage, ever. I’ve never had anybody get hurt except once, me, 
early in my career when I was.  
Actually, it was at one of the first shows I did, I mentioned earlier at the Turf 
Club, I did this show and I think it was a second night. I gave a suggestion that 
I’m trying to remember what it was, but it was something that when I said this 
trigger word, like maybe the Turf Club, this person who I sent back out of the 
audience with a post-hypnotic suggestion, whenever I said the words Turf Club, 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        20 
you didn’t like it you didn’t like it at all; you just were going to pick a fight with 
me.  
I didn’t think about my safety at the time and so  I had my back turned to the 
audience and this gentleman is out there hypnotized, I’m talking to the subjects 
and I’m saying I’m glad you’re all here in Twin Falls. I heard the audience 
screaming, I turned around and this guy is rushing me like a roaring raging bull.  
As I turn around this guy lunges at me and as soon as he grabs me we both go 
over the chairs and I say SLEEP – the guy falls down and sleeps, and I get up, 
brush myself off and the audience gasps and starts laughing. I said wow I didn’t 
see that one coming. I just made it part of the show. 
Igor: 
Again, it’s an extreme example of where you really need to keep your wits 
about you. In other words, always watch what the subjects are doing, especially 
the ones that are acting out the suggestions, and even the ones that aren’t 
because sometimes they will act out a suggestion as well because you never 
quite know how they’ll react and you always have that magic out.  
It happened with us with the girl trying to climb up on the piano. It happened 
with this guy trying to hit you and so on, which is the minute something starts 
going wrong what’s the default? You put them to sleep and you just reset the 
whole show or the whole scene or you change scenes to something else.  
If nothing else, it just proves the power of hypnosis to the audience at that point 
because they go wow this stuff’s really potent. This is unexpected. We didn’t 
know this was going to happen right. 
Don: 
Exactly. One of the things that I got from that early experience is that in all my 
shows I worked to kind of make myself the fall guy oftentimes because I’m the 
hypnotist up there messing with people, so I always set a scenario up at some 
point in the show where somebody’s giving me a hard time, which is fine 
because it gives the audience something to laugh at.  
It shows them that he can mess with people. But, look at him he’s a good guy, 
he can take it and he can let people mess with him too. 
Igor: 
That kind of balances things out and takes away from the I’m lording it over you 
but it’s a more kind of a respectful fun rather than putting someone else down 
which I think is a very important thing to keep in the back of your mind, that 
respect for the audience, that respect for the volunteers on stage as well, right? 
Don: 
Right. I agree totally. 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        21 
Interview – Part 2 
 
Igor: 
Now, let’s move on a little bit into kind of the mystery of the stage hypnosis 
show or uncovering the mystery because even to this day, I notice that a lot of 
experienced hypnotherapists will see a stage show and they themselves will 
just shake their head and go, how the hell does he do it? What the hell is 
happening there? Why are these people doing what they’re doing? 
 
There are all kinds of theories of social compliance yada- yada and whatnot. 
Let me ask you directly.  
 Is it really exactly what you see?  
a. When people are on the stage doing these things, responding within 
literally minutes of standing on the stage, is that exactly what’s going 
on or is there some kind of other background reality that people 
aren’t aware of? 
Don: 
No. What you see is what you get. When you give a person a suggestion and 
they’re in a deep hypnotic state, people will literally do just about anything. I say 
just about anything, but they’ll do just about anything that you ask them to do, 
within their normal boundaries of morality.  
 
For me, one of the fun things is not so much if I give a person a suggestion, 
what will they do? But it’s more of what won’t they do given the opportunity? 
Igor: 
Right. So it’s a question of creating the right context.  
Don: 
It is.  
Igor: 
That’s part of the skill. You’re creating the context that people will want to 
volunteer. Once you’ve got a volunteer, you’re maybe 89% of the way set.  
Don: 
Right. There again, even during the show there’s no guarantees. You may have 
10 or 20 people up on stage. You may be going through a number of routines 
and having a great show. Then all of the sudden, you give a suggestion and 
maybe one or two people decide, no, I’m done with this. I’m out of here. They 
just walk off the stage.  
Igor: 
Right. Now, this is important to realize because it is still a live environment. It’s 
not like you suddenly have everyone totally under your control and whatnot.  
It is literally that the show – part of the skillset is you’re searching for a bias for 
those people who… 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        22 
1. One, go into trance most quickly and most easily, with as little effort from 
you as possible because you don’t have the time to commit to actually 
creating the right conditions for every individual.  
2. Two, won’t just be there having a great time inside their head and are 
actually willing to behaviorally act it out so that other people can 
appreciate the demonstration. 
Because, there are some great deep trance subjects and all they do is sit rigidly 
in their chair and have a great time inside their head doing everything you want 
them to do inside their mind, but no one ever gets to see it.  
Don: 
Exactly. The whole hypnotic experience, I liken it basically as a moth drawn to a 
flame. Most of the people for the most part that come up on stage are pretty 
good subjects, they’re somnambulists, so they’re fairly easy to work with.  
 
There again, in my shows, I always create the ambience to begin with and 
make sure that the people that come up on stage are already good subjects 
before I even get them on stage, because I don’t waste a lot of time really 
working to get people hypnotized. I want people up on my stage and I want the 
show to begin immediately, so my show begins out there.  
 
Once I get people up there, of course, I’m always watching everybody very, 
very carefully because everybody is so different. They all come from a different 
background and if I give the suggestion say you’re all six years old, for 
example. I’m going to be careful because when I do a regression like that, I 
never know if one person might have an abreaction to a six-year old experience 
that could be negative.  
So, I’ve got to keep an eye on each and every individual monitoring their 
behavior at all times so that I don’t distress anybody, I want everybody to have 
a good, pleasant time.  
 
Now within that, I’m always aware, too, that that’s cool, so you’re having a bad 
experience. That gives me the opportunity to show off my skills as a 
hypnotherapist, because if somebody has an abreaction, I’m not going to just 
brush it off.  
I’m just going to say, excuse me for a minute, ladies and gentlemen. Let me 
just take care of this real quick. Then I’ll just do a quick mini hypnotherapy 
session that might last about 30 seconds and fix this person in a specific way 
very quickly. Then I turn it around, the show goes back on and everybody 
appreciates it. So you have to keep your eyes open, and your ears.  
Igor: 
I know we’ve talked about this before and I was very impressed by this point, 
which is – I’m not sure if you’ve actually ever had to do this–you said if that if 
that quick one or two-minute intervention on stage happens and it doesn’t do 
the job. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        23 
Then, you are perfectly willing to stop the show there and then, send everyone 
else off and do some important private work with that person there, because 
your number one concern is the safety and the well being of the people on 
stage.  
Don: 
Always.  
Igor: 
The people who have volunteered for this. So, if that means cancelling the 
show and taking even a financial hit out of that, so be it.  
Don: 
Yes, I have no problems with that. However, that said 99.9% of the time, I will 
have somebody with me who’s trained and if something like that happens, I can 
just send them off to the side of the stage so the show goes on. Then 
somebody who’s with me, who’s perfectly capable of handling the situation, can 
work with this individual for me.  
Igor: 
Right. That’s actually an important thing. 
Now, coming back on the topic here we talked a moment ago about how the 
things that happen on stage are totally real but, of course, the background to 
this is a self-selecting audience that, as you say the somnambulist moth drawn 
to a flame.  
But even then, you want to be able to look out for the ones that will really shine, 
rather than the ones that will just do okay or are just there because they think it 
might be interesting but their hearts aren’t in the right place.  
 How do you really know who is going to be a great subject?  
a. What’s the secret to that? 
Don: 
The way that I set it up, I’ll do some sort of suggestibility test with the entire 
audience. Then, the individuals who are the most responsive to that I’ll invite up 
to the stage. Once they get up to the stage, I’ll set them down in their chairs. 
Then I’ll do one or two more suggestibility tests with them to make sure that 
they’ve got what it takes at that moment. If they pass the test, I will keep them 
and the show begins.  
 
That’s how I know. I’ve honed it to that level where I can ascertain that very 
quickly. I see hypnotists do balloons, raising arms, lowering arms, things like 
that and you can do whatever you want, but I have developed something that’s 
a little bit quicker for me.  
 
I also look for signs as I’m working with them. Maybe their eyes will close down, 
maybe their head will fall down on their chest or their shoulder, maybe they’ll 
just flop over in their chair, on the laps or the person’s lap next to them, which 
will tell you that you’ve got a good subject.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        24 
 
Even if all those things seem to work, it’s still not going to tell you that you have 
a great subject for the show. You may get a person up there who’s just a 
flopper. They’re going to lie down, go to sleep and they’re not going to move at 
all during the entire show. You don’t want them up there, so you want to get 
them off also.  
Igor: 
So, it’s partly a question of experience and if you make a bad call, then you just 
move on to the next person and no one will ever know because you just moved 
along smoothly, right? 
Don: 
That’s right and there again, as I’ve said before, what happens on the stage, I 
just make it part of the show. Instead of being anxious about something that 
somebody with less experience might think something here is going wrong. 
What do I do? I just make it part of the show and move on.  
Igor: 
What would you say to someone who when they hear you say this, they think 
but if I do that then people might think that hypnosis is fake because I obviously 
skipped by a person that it “wasn’t working on” and then I haven’t done my job 
as a hypnotist to prove to them how well hypnosis works.  
 What would you say to someone who has that kind of thinking 
going on? 
Don: 
What I would say is that you probably need to get some good instruction, 
because if you have that kind of thinking, then you don’t have the background, 
the experience, the training or the mindset to be up on stage, so you better get 
yourself a good mentor that can help straighten out that faulty thinking.  
Igor: 
So in a nutshell… 
 What would be the mindset of a stage hypnotist? 
Don: 
Well, the mindset of the stage hypnotist, from the get go you’re in control. When 
you set your stage you are in control from the very moment a poster goes up 
and the promotion goes in. It’s all about you, the hypnotist, making people do 
whatever you want.  
So, when people come into my show, I present myself as the authority figure, 
and people are going to do what I tell them to do no matter what. I’m kind of like 
the President of the United States.  
Igor: 
The United States of that individual.  
Don 
So hopefully, people like me. But it’s like that, as a performer, listen, you’ve got 
a couple of audiences. You’ve got the audience out there that are coming to 
watch the show. Then you’ve got the people up on stage, the subjects so you’re 
doing two shows.  
You’re doing a show for the audience and one for the subjects and you have 
got to be in control the entire time. You’ve got to be like the alpha dog. If 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        25 
anybody senses a weakness in that then you’re going to lose your show, you’re 
going to lose the audience and you’re going to lose your subjects. I’ve seen it 
happen over and over again.  
Igor: 
So it comes back down to your performance character.  
How can you create a performance character that is first of all, congruent with 
your personality?  
So it’s just an aspect of your personality that you, shall we say, enhance for the 
purpose of the show. And, you’re just being comfortable on the stage and that 
you know this is my environment, you’re coming into my world here, rather than 
me trying to convince you that this is real, please believe me, or all the rest of it.  
You can make up your mind as you wish to. It’s just that whilst you’re here, it’s 
my world, my rules, and we’re going to have a great time.  
Don: 
I think that’s an important part of it, but I think that there’s another part of that 
also. Oftentimes, people will watch a stage hypnotist and they’re going to go 
oh, I want to be like Spencer, I want to be like Joe Blow or whoever the 
hypnotist is and that’s faulty thinking.  
When I work with people, my emphasis is on, okay, who are you? How can we 
make your personality a part of the show, because I don’t want you to be me, 
but how can this become uniquely you?  
 
Because, if you’re comfortable in your own skin, then we make the show 
revolve around you and your personality. As you project that, then you’re going 
to own the show, you’re going to own the audience and you’re going to own the 
subjects.  
 
I think that’s one of the things, when I talk to comedians and other performers, 
one of the things that we sense is that if you’re doing a show – for a lot of us it’s 
kind of like going fishing. You throw your line out there. You put a worm on 
there and you’re trying to catch something, right.  
You want to catch a good show, you want to catch a good subject, and you 
want to catch the audience applause. You want them to eat out of your hand, to 
laugh and to have a great time. So, you throw your line out there, you reel it in 
and you want to make sure that you’re snagging as many people as you 
possibly can. That’s what you want.  
If you sense something, the line dragging away, somebody catches it and they 
start to take it out the door then you’ve got to reel the audience back in. If 
you’re losing them, you’ve got to bring them back to you. If that means you’ve 
got to stop in the middle of your show and change the way you’re talking, 
change the way you’re thinking or even change the direction of your show, then 
you better do it.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        26 
Igor: 
That’s a very important point because really this is about entertaining people. If 
you’re not doing that then you’re not really doing your job.  
Don: 
You’re not doing your job, because you’re going to have different audiences.  
For example, if I’m working at a bar, my nightclub approach is going to be far 
different than if I’m working in a country fair, state fair, or especially if I’m doing 
a show for a corporate audience who are a little bit more stuffy, for lack of a 
better word, because they have a few more inhibitions. It’s not a negative thing, 
it’s just you have to work with the audience differently.  
 
So you work with different venues. You’re going to have something different, a 
different approach. You can still do your show exactly the same way, but it’s 
maybe just how you approach the audience that needs to shift. That’s part of 
being a performer and being aware of what’s happening.  
Igor: 
So, it seems the themes that are coming out here are that the most important 
element of a stage hypnosis show, aside from the stage craft, like safety and 
things like that are things that very few people talk about, which are: 
1. Your performance character and how you create that so that actually is 
something that’s in tune with you as a person rather than something you 
see out there and say I want to do that. You actually find it inside 
yourself, rather than outside yourself, although of course, the outside 
can become a spur or inspiration for what you have inside.  
2. On the other side is actually being able to understand the psychology of 
the audience that you’re in front of and understanding that different types 
of audiences will have different needs and different inhibitions that you 
need to take care of.  
Don: 
Exactly.  
Igor: 
That’s one of the reasons we’ll be exploring those particular aspects in more 
depth during the seminar portion, because that’s such an important part of the 
craft, so that you know that I’m walking into a nightclub, I’m going to have this 
kind of audience, I need to work with in this way and then walking into a 
corporate show, so this is the kind of things I can expect.  
These are the kind of things I have to take care of. I’m at a country fair or I’m 
with high school graduates. Each group thinks differently, needs different things 
and needs a different kind of show. You can run the same routines, it’s just 
they’ll be presented differently. The energy, the vibe of the interaction will be a 
little different.  
That’s something that actually makes you into a great stage hypnotist, rather 
than the person that has basically the same show, not just the content but 
presentation and everything else, no matter what the audience is. Sometimes it 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        27 
hits great and sometimes it misses, purely because he’s not adjusting it to fit 
the audience.  
Don: 
Right. I videotape all of my shows so that I can always go back and watch 
myself if I think I’m having an off night to see what went off.  
It’s interesting, you think about people like Jay Leno, who’s a comedian – 
everybody knows who Jay Leno is– people like him, Jerry Seinfeld and all the 
big stars, they still – even though they’ve got great routines and they may have 
this thing on TV that they do, they still will go off into the smaller nightclubs and 
work on material before they present it to a larger audience, just to work it out. 
Work the bugs out, so to speak.  
 
I do the same thing. Sometimes, I’ll come up with some new ideas that I want to 
do, but I don’t want to do them on a national stage yet. I want to go work the 
bugs out and see how it comes across on a smaller audience, so I’ll go work it 
out for a while.  
 
Then I’ll go okay, I like it, it feels good. I know what I want to do. Then, I’ll adjust 
it for the bigger stage. So instead of doing a show for maybe 100 or 200 
people, now I’m ready to do a presentation for 2,000 or 3,000 people.  
Igor: 
Right.  
Now, you have a lot of tips, tricks and secrets in terms of your grab bag 
because you have a ton of experience.  
 Could you share with us what you think at the moment are some of 
the biggest mistakes you’ve seen other stage hypnotists do?  
Don’t actually talk about the actual specific people. Just the kind of the 
mistakes people fall into, shall we say, routinely.  
 
So, if someone’s listening here and is aspiring for stage hypnosis or is even a 
stage hypnotist who wants to improve his show, then he can go oh yeah, I’m 
going to avoid these mistakes or yeah, I’ve done this, now I’m going to start 
changing this because I realize now that that’s not going to give me the kind of 
success I’m looking for.  
Don: 
Yes, and I’m going to be real brutal here, too. I think the biggest mistake that 
I’ve seen people make is… 
1. Number one biggest mistake of stage hypnotists is, being brutal, they 
shouldn’t be doing it to begin with.  
They have no business being on stage. They have no presence, no charisma 
and no style. It’s not a negative it’s just that we all have different gifts and 
different abilities. I’m not saying don’t try it if you love it. Sure, do it. But not 
everybody ought to do it.    

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        28 
2. The second mistake, putting that aside, is somebody who tries to be 
somebody that they are not.  
They want to be the other stage hypnotist. They’ve seen another stage 
hypnotist, and they want to do all the routines. They want to try to move like 
them, act like them, and sound like them. That’s the next mistake that people 
make.  
 
You’ve got to find your own soul in this. It’s just like music. You’ve got to find 
something that moves you that you can feel, because if you can’t feel it, you’re 
not going to project it. So those are the two big mistakes that I see go on.  
3. Then, of course, there are mistakes that may go on with just the way that 
a person dresses and their mannerisms with the audience.  
 
This all comes through performance, being able to perform. If you never spoke 
in front of an audience before, man, go to the Toastmasters. If you’re female, 
go to Toastmistress. Hone your speaking skills so that you don’t have those 
problems of talking to an audience. Learn your craft well.  
4. Another thing that I’ve seen is people who have absolutely no 
experience with hypnosis.  
They want to get up there and be a stage hypnotist. I’m not saying that they 
can’t. However, I’ve seen so many mistakes where they go up there – for 
example, I saw a guy once.  
He was doing a hypnosis show and he decided that he wanted to do the bridge, 
where you stand on top of somebody. You put them between two supports and 
you stand on top of him.  
This guy took this woman, he put her head on a chair, and he put her feet on 
another chair. I’m watching him and I’m going, you’re going to have a problem. I 
didn’t say anything. I was just sitting there going oh, my God this woman’s in 
trouble. She’s going to get hurt.  
 
This guy had never done this before – the human bridge, and he went to stand 
on top of her and she collapsed, right there on the stage and it hurt her back. It 
could have broken her neck, the way that he approached it.  
5. That’s another drawback that I see, is the individuals who do not take the 
time to study this craft properly.  
I can’t emphasize that enough. If you want to be good, find yourself somebody 
who’s been there and done that. Whatever it takes to get that person to help 
you, do it. I just can’t emphasize that enough, so those are the drawbacks that I 
see.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        29 
Igor: 
That makes a lot of sense. It comes back to basically, there seems to be a 
couple of big things you’re pulling out here. One is this idea of your character 
and your stage presence, so you can work on those separately. Your character 
comes from the inside, just the idea of going first. 
Your stage presence is the ability to speak in front of a group and the ability to 
protract. There’s a lot of training that can help you with those things: acting, 
training, drama, Toastmasters you mentioned and stuff like that. Those are the 
performance elements.  
 
On the other side is the idea of experience. I can’t agree with you more then to 
say, you need a lot of experience and more importantly, just so you know you 
have your head screwed on tight. You know you’re not going to do a risky 
routine, like the bridge, just because you’ve seen someone else do it, without 
understanding the ins and outs.  
 
Just take a step back and think; could this be dangerous? If it could, then put it 
to one side and think about it when you’re not on stage, because the last point 
in time when you have time to think things through clearly is in the middle of a 
performance. If you’re in doubt don’t do it or find somebody who can do it and 
figure out how they’re doing it.  
Don: 
It’s like even doing a rapid induction. I’ve seen people trying to do a rapid 
induction and they’ve never done it before. They say sleep and the person 
looks at them at goes what, what do you mean? 
And, because they don’t have the experience they’re just standing there 
twiddling their thumbs. I guess the other part, you know, there is another part to 
it too. It’s just the business savvy. A lot of people, they just don’t have the 
business acumen in order to go in there and make this profitable, because it is 
a business.  
The word show business – business is the most important aspect of it because 
it is a business. It’s not just about going up there and saying hey, I’m the star of 
the show. I’m a hypnotist. Everybody look at me. It’s a business, you’ve got to 
cross all the (t’s) and dot all the (i’s).  
You’ve got to do all the setup beforehand, make sure you have the contacts, 
the networking, the promotions and the press releases, everything you need to 
do to make yourself good. Then, everything that goes on after it is building a 
clientele base through the shows so that you can keep going back over and 
over again to the same location.  
Igor: 
Those are basically the three or four core things to being a great stage 
hypnotist, aren’t they? The idea of your character, the charm, the presence that 
you project, your experience and your ability to tell what’s good and what’s not 
good and what an audience needs.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        30 
Finally, the thing that few people talk about but is oh, so important, are the 
business elements. Otherwise, you could be a great stage hypnotist with no 
one to actually watch your show. That doesn’t help you very much either, does 
it? 
Don: 
Right.  
Igor: 
So, if someone just picks up a book and tries to teach themselves, which is fine 
in many respects, if they make sure they keep within the safety parameters. 
The one thing that can dash a lot of people’s dreams early on is when they’ve 
met with failure and they don’t know what to do with it.  
They either don’t know to expect it and to still keep going, where to adjust 
something and keep going or where there’s just no point in pushing on that 
thing and maybe switch your show to a different type, which would be more 
successful in your environment and so on.  
 
That’s all to do with business acumen that tells you okay, in my environment, I 
can’t do a corporate show because there are no corporates here or the 
corporations that are here really don’t like it. But, there are tons of colleges, so I 
might as well switch my whole business model into doing colleges because 
they love these kinds of shows.  
Don: 
Exactly.  
Here’s a good example. Just the other day, I had a gal give me a call. She’s not 
a student of mine now, but I think that she wishes that she would have been to 
begin with. She was doing this show, and actually, she bought some of my time 
just to talk to me.  
She called me and was asking me some questions about the stage hypnosis, 
her show and getting some feedback so I gave it to her. Then, she had another 
upcoming show at a military base. She called me afterwards and she goes, I 
failed miserably. I said oh, what happened? She goes well, I hypnotized – it 
seemed to work– everybody seemed to be hypnotized, but nobody would do 
what I said. Nobody would respond.  
She goes, what happened? I told her what the problem was and she goes oh, I 
wish I would have known that before.  
Igor: 
Right, which goes right back to the idea of experience and understanding the 
mindset of each audience? When you know where the problem spots lie with 
each different audience, you can just inoculate them so that no one ever sees 
it. It doesn’t even arise because you’ve set things up so that the situation can 
never occur.  
Don: 
Exactly. Because of that, she will probably not be invited back to the military 
base. She had the potential of getting a lot of business that she probably won’t 
get because of the failure of her experience.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        31 
Igor: 
It doesn’t mean that can’t succeed in time. It’s just she should get down and 
really study her craft properly so that opportunities like that, when they arise 
again in the future, she can take advantage of them, rather than missing out on 
them.  
Don: 
Yes, and once I explained to her what the problem was she goes oh, you’re 
right I didn’t even think about that. That’s exactly what happened. I go, that’s 
what I thought. So yeah, she’ll do better next time, if she gets an opportunity to 
go back there.  
Igor: 
Good.  
If there’s a newbie out there listening who wants to become a stage hypnotist or 
is just starting as a stage hypnotist.  
 What would be your advice to make it in this field – to really have a 
good living, do good shows and do something that they can be 
proud of? 
Don: 
Practice and persistence.  
One of the big things is practice. You have to practice your craft. You have to 
study. Study hypnosis. Understand hypnosis inside and out. Understand 
everything from stress management to smoking, to weight, to abreactions, to 
fears and phobias. Understand the psychology of the human mind. Know 
hypnosis. Practice- practice- practice makes perfect; I can’t overemphasize that 
aspect of it.  
 
The other thing for the newbie would be persistence. You’re going to have to 
get out there and knock on doors if you want it to work. You’re going to have to 
go out there, knock on doors, and talk to people. You have to be prepared for 
rejection because that goes along with the business also. For every one door 
that may open for you, you may have 50 or 60 doors that won’t open for you. It 
can be frustrating.  
Igor: 
Right. It’s important that people know to expect it so that if it happens, they 
don’t go I guess it’s just me it wasn’t meant to be. They just need to realize that 
this is part of the process, and as they get used to the process, then it gets 
easier with time. It just becomes more automatic to how they do things.  
Don: 
Exactly. That goes back to the business aspect of it also, I suppose. You have 
to some sort of presence when you approach businesses. Everybody wants a 
promo kit. They want to know who you are, where you’ve been and what you’ve 
done. If you have absolutely no experience, what are you going to tell 
somebody?  
 
One of the things that I create with individuals is how can we create the illusion 
of your being a great stage hypnotist with no experience, which is something 
that I teach people how to do in my training.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        32 
Igor: 
That’s very important because otherwise you’re stuck in a catch-22. You can’t 
get any experience unless you have experience enough to get a show and you 
can’t get a show unless you have enough experience. That makes sense. This 
is something which I believe you do in your stage hypnosis mentoring. You do 
one-to-one mentoring with people.  
 
You craft a whole, shall we say, training regime around the individual, helping 
them with all the things we’ve talked about from developing the character to 
developing the mechanics of a stage show. Understanding hypnosis, all the 
levels of hypnosis they’ll need for the show and the mechanics of how to apply 
it, all those things.  
 
Also, the background things and the things that normally you don’t see, but are 
just as important– the lighting, the music, the mood, the marketing and the 
safety procedures all these things that the audience will never actually 
appreciate are happening but are the reason why the show can be such a great 
success.  
So, there’s a whole bunch of things that all come into the same field to be able 
to be a successful, competent and decent stage hypnotist.   
Don: 
Exactly. One of the things that I really emphasize is to know – there will be a 
time when you can be able to walk into a large theater, and they have all the 
lighting, effects, and everything that you may need. But, if you as an individual 
don’t understand stage background, how to make the lights work, how to make 
effects work for you then you’re going to have a problem.  
 
What I like to do is walk a person through the whole stage production. How do 
we set the stage so that it makes you, as an individual, shine and your 
performance awesome? So that people walk in there and go oh, my God and 
when they leave they go, that was fantastic.  
Igor: 
Right.  
Don: 
That’s a very important part.  
Igor: 
In your mentoring program, of course, you have this one-to-one relationship 
with people so you can actually do it based on that person’s personality. You 
can watch them do their little skits or watch them do a little bit of a presentation, 
or sometimes you even come watch them do a show and you can give them 
feedback afterwards.  
 
Like, you’re going down this direction and you’ll probably find these things can 
help you. You can tweak these things or I’d drop these things here because 
they really aren’t you. That way it helps accelerate them to the point where they 
can actually be competent performers and run on their two feet without any real 
interference from the world.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        33 
Don: 
Right. That’s one of the things that I really enjoy doing. When I mentor 
somebody, my goal is to go to where they live. I’m not interested in them 
coming to me, that’s not what it’s about, I want to help them develop their craft, 
go to where they are, and develop a show. I do not leave until they’re on stage.  
Igor: 
That’s actually a really important thing. A lot of people would just sell you a 
DVD set or a book, and that has value I’m going to knock it because there’s a 
lot of value from being able to see different shows and other people’s opinions 
of the anatomy of show, and so on.  
But, the fact that you’ll stick with them through the whole build-up process 
literally to the day that they’re on stage doing their thing that’s actually a really 
big deal and that can be a great comfort for people who’ve never been on stage 
before to have that kind of expert guidance along the way.  
Don: 
It really is. It’s a lot of fun. It’s kind of funny. Oftentimes, I’ll get there and we’re 
backstage in the green room, and the audience has come in there. We’ve got 
the music playing, and every once in a while, I’ll get one of my students who will 
go Spencer, I can’t do it. You’ve got to go out there for me. I just can’t do it.  
I go I’m not going out there. You’re going to go out there. This is what you paid 
me for. This is your show, man. I go, you can do it. I said I’ve been here with 
you for a few days now, I’ve watched you and we’ve studied this. This is your 
defining moment. This is where you get to shine. I’m going to count to three get 
your butt up and go.   
Igor: 
Then, at that point, you’re basically adding that little bit of extra pressure they 
need to actually go through with it. Sometimes, as I’ve said before, it’s the 
nudge in the right direction at the right time that can save years of undoing 
beliefs and going down the wrong road.  
That’s one of the real values of one-to-one or a small group situation where you 
can really work with people according to what their needs are.  
Don: 
Yes. One-on-one is great. If you approach working with a group in a mentoring 
situation, that can be absolutely fantastic as well, but you have to make it tight.  
Igor: 
Before we finish up today, I just wanted to sort of let people know that you have 
very kindly agreed that in the seminar portion of these interviews, you’re going 
to basically try and give us as much of a crash course on your whole system 
method as possible, which means everything we’ve talked about.  
On the one side, the pure mechanics of a stage show, something which is very 
important.  
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        34 
- 
How to start the show.  
- 
How to run it.  
- 
How to make it successful.  
- 
How you make it fun and interesting and so on.  
 
Also, some of the elements we’ve talked about today, which sets the masters 
apart, which are the character, the way they can come across charmingly. The 
experience they’ll need to understand, different audiences and what the needs 
are of different audiences like corporate or military, what their fears are and 
how to handle them, so the problems that can arise for others, never arise for 
you.  
 
Also, some of the business elements so that you’ve basically got a whole 
package. It’s not all, of course, going to be the same as a full mentoring 
program. How can it be? But it gives you a crash course on the whole thing so 
people can really understand this is what it looks like, these are the things I 
need to address, and these are the things I need to know about.  
 
Believe me, there’s a lot of things that a stage hypnotist or a newbie should 
know that they didn’t even realize they should know about because they’re not 
immediately apparent. I think you’ll be sharing most of those ideas with us in 
the next seminar. That will make the key difference between success and 
abject failure.  
Don: 
It really will. It’s going to be a big help, and I look forward to it.  
Igor: 
Well, I’m looking forward to it. It’s always a pleasure to chat with you Spence. 
Of course, we’ll be talking about lots of examples of how this stuff works in 
action because you do have a wealth of experience. You have a way of 
bringing the material to life by demonstrating.  
You do this induction, but by actually saying, here’s some ways I’ve done it 
before. Just rounding off the experience with actual real life experiences, which 
I think is so important so I, for one, am really looking forward to it. I will be 
picking your brain ruthlessly.  
Don: 
Ruthlessly.  
Igor: 
Ruthlessly, without any Ruth. I look forward to hearing you in the next session.  
Don: 
Well, we’ll speak again soon at the next session and hopefully, we’ll cross 
paths next week too.  
Igor: 
Fantastic.  
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        35 
Seminar 1 – Part 1 
 
Igor: 
Welcome to StreetHypnosis.com. My name is Igor Ledochowski and I'm here 
with master hypnotist Don Spencer, billed as the fastest hypnotist in the world, 
welcome back Don. 
Don: 
Thank you for having me back it's good to talk to you again. 
Igor: 
I’m excited to have you here.  This is, of course, the first seminar in the two 
seminar interviews about stage hypnosis and the insider secrets for becoming 
a great stage hypnotist, not just an average common or garden variety. 
 
With your permission we would like to dive straight into the nitty-gritty. You did 
a great job in the other interview talking about the kinds of ideas and concepts 
people need to think about to become a great hypnotist. 
So, what I thought we'd do today is look at the actual nuts and bolts of a stage 
show so that anyone contemplating doing a stage show can look at that and 
say yes that's something I can really do, that's something I can actually see 
myself getting up and running through. 
 
Whilst there's a lot of skill involved, would it be fair to say that it's actually 
something that once you get your head around the different elements, as a 
procedural matter, that it's actually relatively straightforward and easy to do a 
stage show. And, of course, all the "difficulty" comes in creating a great stage 
show versus just a good one. 
Don: 
I think that would probably be correct, yes. 
Igor: 
Looking at the anatomy of a stage show in terms of beginning to end, how does 
a show begin?  
 What makes a good start to a stage hypnosis show? 
Don: 
I think a good start to the stage hypnosis show begins, first of all, in the mind of 
the performer. What I do and encourage others to do is, as soon as you have 
an idea - let's say for example, I wanted to develop a show three months down 
the road so I pick a location and then I make the contacts, get a room and then 
I go into promotion.  
 
It begins with promotion. You've got to have your press releases and you've got 
to have your posters up because the show begins with the mental expectancy 
of the people that you're working to attract to come to the show, which all 
begins with your advertisement. 
 
It all goes back to the rules of the mind what is expected tends to be realized. 
Once you have your show location, the venue you're going to do, you need to 
go into overdrive and begin doing your promotions right away. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        36 
 
I like to do my shows about three months out because that gives the public 
enough time to see your advertising over and over again and to get excited 
about it. It will create an excitement in their mind, they can go visit the website, 
see the various videos that I’ve done, and it creates this mental expectancy. 
 
They're already hypnotized before they come to the show thinking about; what 
is he going to do to me? It's a lot of fun. 
Igor: 
That's the magic key phrase you want to be thinking about putting in someone's 
mind, which is this positive curiosity of what's he going to make me do. What's 
he going to make someone else do? 
 
That gets the excitement going and a little bit of being unsure of what's going to 
happen is good, because that takes the conscious mind offline and when 
people are so much thinking I don't know what's going to happen but it's 
exciting and all these different things, it takes them into a mindset that almost 
builds the trance ahead of time. 
 
It's like Christmas. The closer you get to it the more excited you get and the 
less you're thinking straight, logically and analytically, which is where you want 
people to be because it's not an exercise in analytical, it's an exercise in the 
imaginative side of people, the other side of people. 
Don: 
Exactly, and that's the subconscious. You're right; I am Spencer Claus instead 
of Santa Claus. 
Igor: 
I bring gifts of the mind; I like that. 
Don: 
I'm bringing gifts of the mind. It's really true because whenever you engage 
somebody's imagination you've opened a doorway right into the unconscious 
mind. 
 
You've already accessed their belief systems, you're setting up a mindset and 
creating a framework for your show.  And, to have a really good dynamics 
show, because people are already there with you. You've begun the hypnosis 
months ahead of time before the show even begins, before the door even 
opens. 
Igor: 
Of course, it's very important that your advertising sets the tone or theme that's 
going to match the character you'll end up performing. For example, I came 
across in the UK a very interesting guy who basically has a hypnotic dog. 
 
He basically hypnotizes people with his dog and that's the whole gag of his 
show, he has a very well trained dog he brings on stage and he says I don't do 
any hypnosis, my dog does, and he'll basically sit there and say what does he 
say Rover? Rover says do this. 
 
It's just a gag but it's actually kind of funny and it fits him because he's got a 
wild, wacky and eccentric character. His advertising is wild, it is wacky, and it is 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        37 
kind of out there as opposed to yours which would be more of a rock star, you'd 
have the whole rock star look and flashing lights and maybe some fog machine 
going on. 
 
Another person might be more magical, transformational, so it would be more 
like a magician might do his posters or his advertising. You've got to make sure 
the advertising fits the character you're going to be portraying on stage. 
Don: 
Exactly. I take my model of course - we spoke of this before - from rock and roll 
shows because I'm a big rock and roll fan, at least I used to be, maybe not as 
much today, but that's what I modeled my shows after. 
 
When you look at bands, like the Rolling Stones, the Beatles or Bob Dylan, 
they all have fantastic music but their presentation is completely different. I've 
been to hundreds of rock concerts and it's all in the presentation. 
 
Not every band is going to attract every person and it's just the same thing with 
a hypnosis show. You may go to five different comedy hypnosis shows and you 
may find one individual that you really like their style but you can't stand the 
other people. 
 
They may be good performers to others but they just don't do it for you. It's the 
same thing take nothing personally. 
Igor: 
Exactly. That's an important point I think we'll come back to in the next session 
where we talk more about the behinds the scenes stuff like marketing and so 
on, it's the idea that you don't want to be pleasing everybody, you want 
everyone that will be pleased to come to your show to be pleased, not for 
everybody to come to your show. 
 
That's a really key distinction, especially for the newbie going out there to do 
his thing, right. 
Don: 
That's so true. I remember years ago when I started work at The Avalon, the 
owner at the time was always telling me Spencer, you've got to do this, this 
way, you've got to please everybody. Everybody has to be happy. 
 
I would say no, not everybody has to be happy and they're not all going to be 
happy. This is my show, I'm going to do it my way and people will come 
because they dig what I'm doing if for no other reason. I can't please everybody 
it doesn't work that way. 
Igor: 
To use the rock and pop analogy, it's the difference between a pop star and a 
rock star.  
A pop star is almost a manufactured thing that some media company has 
created, they'll sing great songs and things like that, but it's not until they make 
that transition to finding their own personality, putting their own personality into 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        38 
the songs and the show that they'll cross over into being a genuine rock star 
that has much more character and will also polarize people more. 
 
Some people just won't like them; won't like the star anymore, won't like their 
flavor, but on the flip side which is the one we're looking for, you'll have other 
people who will love them and be really excited by it. 
 
That's what you really want when people come to your stage show, which is 
people who say I love this, I want more of this versus people who say yes, I can 
take this, it's kind of interesting. 
Don: 
You hit it on the head, I would agree with that. 
Igor: 
Let's assume you've done everything you need to do for publicity stunts, you've 
got your posters up, maybe you do some funky publicity stunts like the good old 
days where they'd hypnotize someone and stick them in a chair in a window for 
24 hours before the show and all kinds of stuff like that, all that crazy stuff. 
 
Let's say the day of the show arrives and you're coming to the venue. 
 What's the first thing you would do when you come to the venue to 
let the show begin, basically? 
Don: 
The first thing that I do when I get to the venue, I normally arrive a couple of 
hours early and I just do a quick sound check and make sure that everything 
inside the venue is working. 
 
I want to make sure that my mics are working, that the sound comes through 
the speakers appropriately and the monitor up on stage is working correctly, in 
a perfect world. 
 
At that point when I'm satisfied I'll go back into the green room and I'll chill for 
awhile. When the doors are ready to open, and we normally open the doors 
about 30 minutes ahead of time, I'll have my sound tech playing music that sets 
the ambience for the entire evening. 
 
We'll have 30 minutes of whatever it is I determine I want to be playing to start 
bending minds towards the way I want them to respond during the show. I'll 
play different types of music that is out of the ordinary, probably something they 
normally are not aware of. 
Because, of course you know, when you introduce strange and exotic types of 
ambiences to people it takes them out of their comfort zone, they begin to 
search for meaning and you begin to develop a trance right away. 
Igor: 
You're already using unusual music patterns to shift people out of their normal 
reality, kind of like I recognize this, hang on a second, where is this going? 
Now, already they have that slight sense of unreality beginning, which is almost 
like a trance induction happening there without you having to say a word. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        39 
Don: 
Exactly. I also have some scores I have embedded in there with my voice 
where I begin to talk to the audience. I use it oftentimes as a pre-talk, and I'll 
embed my pre-talk in that. 
 
Maybe five minutes before the show begins, as everybody is all ready and 
they're seated, then I'll have already on my musical score a message that I 
begin to deliver to the audience which is again something that I've developed 
and really tweaked and fine tuned on my computer to make it sound other 
worldly, to get people to say oh man, what is he saying? What's he going to 
do? 
Igor: 
It's kind of like all those funky hypno-sounds like, you see with the echo effect, 
maybe the voice going lower or being more spacey. You're going to create that 
kind of atmosphere to fit whatever music has come before it. 
Don: 
I dig it. I sit here and spend hours on my computer just being creative and 
looking for new ways to create something new and unusual, not just for myself 
but before every performance I do. I'm always thinking; how can I make this 
better and different for this group of people? 
Igor: 
This is an interesting attitude that you have because this is something that I 
think is relatively rare amongst stage hypnotists. I know a lot of stage 
hypnotists who like to do their staple thing. 
 
They've worked out their show, they like it, and they pretty much run the same 
show. You've got this whole creativity angle where you're going to play with it, 
you're going to tweak this a little bit, you're going to change the ambience here, 
something maybe happens randomly on one night and you like it so you figure 
out how to do more of that feel or vibe. 
 
There's a constant creative involved thinking process, which is I guess one of 
the reasons why you became so good so quickly, because you are engaged in 
the process of your show, you're not just delivering it night after night after 
night, it's a living breathing thing that grows with you as your hypnosis grows 
and as your character develops. 
Don: 
Exactly. Sometimes it gets hard to separate you from the show and I've been 
accused of that, it's like; who are you? I'm just me. You're a hypnotist - I say 
yes, but I'm me, but it's like it's who I am. 
 
As a stage hypnotist, as opposed to going to another job and sitting in an office 
for eight hours or something and working for somebody, you're the product. 
You are the product. 
 
You have to think of yourself that way and what can you do to make yourself a 
better product. You're marketing yourself, you're not marketing really stage 
hypnosis per se, and you’re marketing yourself as a performer that's the 
business aspect of it. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        40 
Igor: 
Also, this reminds me of a principle I talk to a lot of my students about which is 
the idea that hypnosis is not something you do to people, it might be something 
you do with people, but really to get to the big stages of mastery and get to 
some interesting places you have to get to the point where hypnosis is 
something you become. 
 
All the other hypnotic stuff that surrounds you is just a byproduct of how you 
naturally communicate. That's the key thing. It's not a technique that you pull 
out of a grab bag and say let's try this one or that. It's just the way you track 
with people, that's just part of your character now and it sounds like the stage 
show definitely helps you in that process, because it forces you into that 
character more and more over time. 
Then, eventually, the two blend so that it affects who you are as a human being 
as much as who you are as a human being affects your show. It's kind of a 
symbiosis that develops there. 
Don: 
Yes. You become the show you are the show. It's good when you do a long run 
to get away from it so you can reconnect with yourself, go to an island for a 
month. 
Igor: 
For sure, just to chill out and figure out what the next steps for you as a person 
are, right. 
Don: 
Yes, of course. 
Igor: 
Coming back to the idea of the stage show, we've got this idea. Of course you 
like to do your intro talk, your pre-talk, embedded in the pre-show music, but 
other people will do it actually just live on stage. 
 What are the important elements of a pre-talk, whether you put it 
into your pre-show now or you get up on stage, start with a pre-
show and make it part of your act?  
a. What are some of the important things that people need to think 
about when doing a pre-show? 
Don: 
I think it's different for different people. For myself, so much of my pre-talk is 
embedded before the show even begins and I think the importance of the pre-
talk is for those individuals who have never been to a hypnosis show.  
It helps to explain to them what the show is about, what hypnosis is about, what 
they can expect, what they cannot expect, and it creates that - going back to 
the rules of the mind - what is expected tends to be realized. 
 
It creates that mental expectancy so that people can begin to have a general 
idea of what is going to occur during the evening. You're this grand master up 
on stage you're the conductor of this orchestra.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        41 
 
You've got to play the audience. You've got to play the subjects. Whether you 
stand up in front of the audience and talk to them for five or 10 minutes and talk 
to them about hypnosis and how the mind works and how we are all subjected 
to hypnosis every day, whether it's highway hypnosis or whether it's watching a 
movie or driving your car reading a book, and how we go into trances 
spontaneously every day, many times throughout the day. 
 
We're setting the stage for the people in the audience to come up and get 
hypnotized. Part of it is creating rapport to create the sense that this guy knows 
what he's talking about. 
 
I understand it. I feel safe. I guess I'm just going to let my mind go to him 
tonight. Let's see what happens. 
Igor: 
You just mentioned a couple of very important points, I hope you don't mind if 
we just go back and pick up on them.  
 
On the one side you're talking about the idea of mental expectation and of 
course it's important to introduce the idea of hypnosis so that you can counter 
things like for example; I heard every word he said, I can't be hypnotized. 
 
Let's face it; some subjects on the stage will have complete amnesia, some 
subjects on the stage will actually even zone out between suggestions until you 
call them back to do something else, but for the most part subjects will be 
there.  
They'll be hearing you, there will be a level of consciousness there, paying 
attention to what's going on, it's just that recedes to the back of their mind and 
it's less important. They're more willing to let themselves go into their 
imagination and it's important for them to understand that this is going to 
happen and that it's a natural thing to happen, so when it does happen… 
a. It's no surprise, and  
b. They don't think something different should be happening than what 
actually is happening. 
Don: 
Another aspect that I don't always do because I'm not concerned about it is that 
one of the other reasons for a pre-talk is to dispel myths about hypnosis. 
 
There again, that's how you present your show. I don't go into that because I'm 
not really interested in explaining to them about the myths of hypnosis like; can 
I control you? Will you get stuck in trance? From my perspective, I want them to 
think it's going to happen. I want to scare the hell out of people. 
Igor: 
In doing so and being more uncertain of course it brings their regular analytical 
thinking more offline which makes it even easier for the show to bite if you like. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        42 
 
If I understand you correctly, and I think you probably agree with this, the key 
thing is not whether you say to people look; hypnosis is safe, you'll be fine, I 
can't control you, I can't make you do things you don't want to do, I won't make 
you tell things that will embarrass you. 
 
These are basically attempts that hypnotists make at making the audience feel 
safe being on stage. I think that's the key thing you're saying; make the people 
feel safe. If you can do that with your attitude alone, there's no need to say 
anything else, right? 
 
They can be uncertain, but know that nothing bad is going to happen and that 
comes primarily from your attitude or your aura of authority. I've done this a 
million times and I'm going to assume that nothing bad is going to happen 
because it just doesn't. 
And, that confidence kind of flows into the audience and so you have to do less 
explaining why it's safe because that's already built into the whole expectation, 
ambience, and personality you're projecting. 
Don: 
Exactly. It also doesn't hurt to have a good resume too.  
For example, on my website when people - as far as my promotions on all my 
posters of course I have my website in there and so people have an opportunity 
for two or three months, however long, to go visit my website. 
 
They can read all about hypnosis, they can read about me, they can read about 
my stage shows and my clinical work and they can determine at that time if I'm 
a lunatic or if I have some sense of rationality about me also. 
 
Most people have already made up their minds anyway. 
Igor: 
This goes back to what we said before; the show begins with your advertising 
and this is why– and we'll come onto this when we get into the behind the 
scenes stuff in the next session– but why things like your website can be so 
important because it's part of your pre-show. 
It's part of you as a hypnotist, how you'll get perceived by the people coming to 
the show, what their expectations will be and it goes right back to what you said 
about mental expectancy; what people expect to happen will tend to happen. 
 
You want to make sure they expect the things you need them to expect, like 
hypnosis is going to be fun, it's going to be safe, that it's going to be a wild trip, 
they're going to do things they won't believe they would do but they're going to 
enjoy it anyway, and so on. 
 
With these ideas inside their mind they're primed and ready to go to be doing 
unusual things, to be behaving differently, and enjoy it. To basically be released 
from the tyranny of having to be the way that people expect them to be and to 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        43 
express some parts of themselves that are normally not allowed to come out 
and play. 
 
So, we've got the idea now of the whole buildup. You come in, you've prepared 
the environment, curtains are closed, your lights get dimmed, the pre-show 
music starts thrumming up to fill the room with a sudden ambience, and now 
you start letting people trickle in, they'll start coming towards their chairs and 
sitting down finding their places. 
 
Meanwhile, the music is going on, depending on your performance character or 
the kind of show that you'll have it might be eerie, it might be inspiring and it 
might be funny. 
 
I've seen some hypnotists with their pre-show stuff put on funny quotes and 
things like that or run little funny movie clips and so on. Basically, you're setting 
the emotional mood for the whole night. 
 
If you have the technical capacity for this and it's the venue and so on, you may 
want to embed a pre-talk towards the end of that pre-show thing, like a five to 
ten minute thing saying here's what hypnosis is, here's what to expect and so 
on, but in a way again that fits the mood of the thing. 
 
It could be like a deeply mysterious voice saying and now…remember the 
times you've had… 
Don: 
I think you should do one I like it. 
Igor: 
The other side, if you're going to be a more comic show it would be like hey, it's 
going to be crazy fun and just remember all the things that are going to happen 
tonight. 
 
You're moving with the mood of the piece and that's going to basically feed into 
how you present your pre-talk and the key things you're looking for is 
expectancy, a sense of safety, and a curiosity to find out. 
 What's it going to be like? 
 
If I understand you correctly those are the three key things, right? 
Don: 
Going back to the pre-talk, it all depends on the venue that I'm playing. If I'm 
doing it for a theater it's my show, I can hallucinate and create this entire show 
exactly how I want it. It's going to be much different than if I have to do a show 
for a corporate audience where they just want me to come in and do a down 
and dirty 60-minute show. 
 
It's very organized and orchestrated, they have somebody talking before me, 
and I have to get up there and do my thing and get off the stage, that's going to 
be a far different type of presentation. 
Igor: 
For sure. Let's move from the pre-talk now into the actual show. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        44 
 
Let's assume that you've either, come on and you've done a little pre-talk or 
that you've embedded a pre-talk in your show music and now the big moment 
of revelation comes. 
 
You have a DJ or maybe you just record a piece that gets put onto a tape that 
gets played before you come on stage, which hypes the audience up and says 
ladies and gentlemen please welcome the fastest hypnotist, the funniest 
hypnotist, the craziest hypnotist, the shortest hypnotist, the tallest hypnotist or 
the most hypnotic hypnotist - whatever your image requires, right. 
 
You come bouncing on stage, you slowly smoothly walk on stage, or you roll on 
stage in a wheelchair, whatever again fits your performance character. 
 
What happens now, because as far as I'm concerned we're now into the middle 
of show time, right? You've done pretty much all the warm ups in terms of 
preparing people and getting them to the place, now it's time to let the 
entertainment really begin and the interaction.  
 How do you start that?  
a. What is the first thing you like to do when you bounce on stage? 
b. In fact, how do you like to come on stage and why?  
c. How do you transform that into actually that moment of moving from 
pre-show now into the actual show? 
Don: 
For me I can talk specifically about what I do.  
As soon as I get introduced onto the stage, the pre-talk and everything has 
already been done, so as soon as I go onto the stage its like, ladies and 
gentlemen please put your hands together for the world's fastest hypnotist give 
him a warm round of applause for Don Spencer. 
 
Lights come on me. I bounce out there onto the stage, the audience applauds, I 
get out there, do a quick take and look at everybody out there then go right into 
the show. I just tell everybody sit back, put your hands above your head and I 
do a suggestibility test right away and get everybody involved from the get go. 
And so the show begins. 
Igor: 
Let me just pause you to point a couple of things out there to everyone which I 
think is very important. If you've seen a stage show before of course you'll 
realize that most people don't work at that pace, most people will come on, their 
standard routine is to come on stage, present a pre-talk, give reasons why it's 
all going to be good fun, warn people you need them to volunteer and so on. 
 
A good five sometimes even ten minutes can be spent just on that portion 
alone. What you're doing - and this really fits the theme of your show, you've 
got a rock and roll show, you're the rock star, and how do most rock stars or 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        45 
rock and roll shows begin? With a blitz and a bang and a heavy drum beat and 
people just go into the set, bang you're in the middle of the show and that's it. 
 
That's what you do. You come on stage, you'll say thank you very much, 
everyone go ahead and put your hands above your head and you're already 
making them do stuff without any explanations, without any please, possibly, 
maybe do this that or the other - it's just straight in- bam- done. 
 
They don't have any time to think, which is a great thing as far as hypnosis is 
concerned. You're going straight for active compliance, even if they don't come 
up on stage they're already putting their hands up in the air which means 
they're building a hypnotic rapport with you, and it's a fast and furious pace.  
 
You've set the pace right from the very second you hit the stage and I suspect it 
doesn't really - it'll shift in tempo but that urgency will still be underlying 
everything that you do and that's the whole part we were talking about in terms 
of the show, the feel, the character of a show. You have to live it the minute you 
come out, right? 
Don: 
Right.  
As soon as I'm out there the lights are on me, whether I have fog in the 
background and special ambient lights that are blaring around me like a rock 
and roll show. I'm out there and I've got the audience totally involved in 
everything I'm doing and I let them know that I'm in control, this is my show, 
and they're going to do what I say. 
 
I set the tone right away that I am in charge of the evening. This is my evening 
and you will do as I say. 
 
I do it in a way that makes it fun and not too overbearing so I go out there and 
have fun, recognizing too that in every show you have to watch the audience. 
Even in that moment somebody may make a remark or something out in the 
audience and I might have a little chuckle about it, but I come right back into 
controlling the audience to make sure they are compliance with how I want this 
show to go. 
Igor: 
Just to compare that to a different performance style, just so people get a 
sense that they don't have to come out and try to be Spencer the world's 
fastest hypnotist they can be themselves, let's say someone wants to have 
more of a stand up comedy kind of show rather than a rock and roll feel to it. 
 How might someone like that come on stage and do the opening 
sequence a little bit differently? 
Don: 
That's easy enough, I do that every once in a while. You can simply, when 
you're introduced I go out there on the stage or they can go out there on the 
stage and the audience applauds and it's simply - how are you doing folks it's 
good to have you here. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        46 
 
I would toss out two or three one-liners. Something for comedic value, get the 
audience to laugh, and then I would do a little talk about hypnosis and just 
make it a general conversation to the people, straight from my heart, to set 
them at ease.  
 
It's a different way to present it but it's the same thing a comedian does. You go 
out there, you hit them with a few one-liners, create some rapport, and then you 
just invite people up to the stage to be hypnotized if they would like to have an 
experiment in hypnosis for the evening. 
Igor: 
It's important that - it reminds me of another show I saw in Vegas which again 
has a different feel, it's a more edgy show, more of a Vegas - it's in a dark club, 
I think it maybe seats 120 people tops, it's a very small venue, very intimate. 
 
As soon as the hypnotist comes out in that one it's great; he has the more I 
don't give a hang for anything, I'm going to turn up half drunk - he always plays 
this thing that he's got a big bottle of Vodka next to him and he's drinking it 
through the show. 
 
He's not really drunk but he plays a drunk bad boy hypnotist, it's his 
performance style. What he does when he comes on stage, he just saunters on 
like he's been having a cigarette in the back of the bike sheds at school, looks 
at people with that sort of what am I doing here look.  
Then he'll start making a couple of edgy jokes with people in the audience. He 
teases some of the people, flirts with some of the people, stands in the middle 
of them and makes fun of a couple of things, but all the time he's doing what 
you're saying. 
 
He's taking control of the audience. He's making sure they're responsive and 
then by the time he gets to actually asking for volunteers people already know 
what they're expecting because there's a sense of - you know the dread people 
get sometimes when they go on a fairground ride or go to watch a horror film– 
it's kind of like you want to be shocked a little bit, that's the kind of show he has.  
Therefore, by the time they come on stage, they know that it's going to be a 
racier show. They know that they're going to be doing slightly crazier stuff, but 
he's set that scene right from the get go with his humor that's very edgy. 
 
It would go down very badly in most venues, it's just again, the way he's 
advertised it, the venue he's got and the way it’s laid out. The only people that 
come to that want that, and that's important to understand and that's why it's 
important to have your character ahead of time. 
Don: 
Exactly. When people go to Vegas, they generally assume that whatever 
performance they're going to, whether it's a hypnotist, magician or whoever, 
especially comics they know it's going to be a pretty raunchy show and that's 
what they expect, it's what they're looking for. That's Vegas. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        47 
Igor: 
It's also the venue it's a nightclub. A nightclub versus a theater, it's a nightclub 
venue which implies drinking, that whole sexual interplay and all these things 
have been somehow respected there. If you turn up in a nightclub and all of the 
sudden you have a squeaky clean show for 12 year olds where you make 
balloon animals people are going to go; why is this here, it doesn't fit the venue. 
Don: 
Unless you use the balloon animals for part of the show, right. 
Igor: 
Right of course, exactly. Moving on, before we have to discover what those 
balloon animals might be used for. So, you say you'll bounce on stage, you'll 
instantly take control of your audience, and you'll get them to go straight into 
suggestibility tests. 
 Is there a particular one you like to do? 
a. Do you vary them for interest?  
b. How do you like to operate? 
Don: 
When I get out there and talk to the people as soon as I get up on stage I like to 
do a hand clasp, if that's what you're referring to as far as a suggestibility test, 
because I want everybody to do the same thing. 
 
My job is to get everybody involved because the more people that get involved; 
it's just that mass hypnosis thing. If you get one person to do it, two people will 
do it. If you get two you're going to get five. If you get five you're going to get 
ten. If you get 10 you get the entire audience. 
 
If you have most of the people in the audience doing the same thing the one, 
two, three or four people who aren't doing it will begin to do it because they 
don't want to be left out. 
 
I'll do a hand clasp with the people in the audience as a suggestibility test and 
those people who are the most highly responsive to that, whose hands are 
stuck, I invite them up to the stage right away and those are the ones I'm going 
to work with. 
Igor: 
Before we get onto the idea of what you do with people on stage, let's see what 
happens. 
 What would you do in the following scenario? 
 
You get up on stage and you say okay everyone, put your hands above your 
head. People are like; what's going on? Let's say only half of the audience 
actually puts their hands above their heads and starts doing the test. 
 Would you, at that point, stop and make the others join in as well or 
would you accept that, run with half the audience doing it and hope 
you can pull the other half in later on? 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        48 
Don: 
There again it depends on the evening. I may just go with half the audience or I 
may just make an offhand remark that makes people laugh and sets them at 
ease and say something like - hey look around, everyone else has their hands 
up. If you don't put your hands up they may think you're doing something down 
below. 
 
You learn to read the audience. You throw out something there that gives 
people permission to go ahead and put their hands up so people don't think 
they're fidgeting somewhere else. 
Igor: 
So, you're basically making it less awkward to put their hands up and take part, 
less embarrassing to do that than something else. I'm not saying you single 
people out and embarrass them, it's just you're reading the audience and 
realizing that half of them are kind of lethargic because they don’t want to look 
like idiots doing this. 
But, by saying you can either look like an idiot not doing it or you can look like 
an idiot doing it, and believe me it'll be a lot more fun to look like an idiot doing 
it but not saying it outright, you're implying it with a bit of humor so the 
unconscious takes the hint and says we may as well go with the program a bit. 
Don: 
Exactly. It's the same thing you do with conversational hypnosis. You make it 
acceptable for somebody to do it unconsciously. It's easier to do it than not to 
do it. They don't really know why, but it seems like something we should be 
doing. 
Igor: 
Right. I guess over a period of time you'll build up and develop a repertoire of 
one liners, little jokes or anecdotes that will set the scene so that if something 
starts going a bit awry, out comes the 20 second anecdote, people get the hint 
and derail it to a much nicer place rather than the potential problems you might 
have had otherwise. 
Don: 
Exactly.  
You've got to spend your time before you even do a show - study other comics, 
study other hypnotists, read books on jokes, read books on stories. Learn 
anecdotes, learn metaphors, so that when you get up on stage you have an 
idea of how to lead the audience, how to pace the audience, because it's all 
about pacing and leading. 
 
If you go back to basic NLP type language patterns you've got to go up there, 
you've got to judge your audience you've got to pace your audience and see 
what they're doing, you pace that and then you turn that around and begin to 
lead them to where you want to go. 
 
It's basic trance work. You've got to just watch your audience, you have to 
know your audience, but in your mind you have to have a background. You 
need to study beforehand. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        49 
 
Other hypnotists need to study hypnotists; comedians need to study 
performance, the performance arts and to learn how to present yourself or your 
show in a timely manner. 
Igor: 
Let's look at that segment. I know we're spending a lot of time on the opening 
of the show but I have a sense that if you get the opening of the show right, the 
rest of the show just rolls beautifully. If you get the opening of a show wrong 
that's where nightmares can begin, so you're pretty much made or broken in 
your first 10-15 minutes, right? 
Don: 
You really are, yes. It happens right there. 
Igor: 
That's why if we look at the themes we've been pulling out, and this is 
something where you can go out into all different walks of life to get inspiration 
from, we're talking about– 
 Number one creating an expectation,  
 Number two creating a mood around that expectation,  
 Number three refining the expectation to be in line with the actual 
behavior or experience you're going to expect for people during the 
show, in other words the pre-talk type stuff, and  
 Number four you're hitting the show in the same vibe again but going 
straight for compliance. 
 
You're getting audience participation which is compliance by everyone, which 
brings everyone into the same space, the same reality, which is the show 
reality; rather than having people hang around the back chatting, and a drunk 
person eyeing the person up in front of them saying I'm not sure about this 
show, but I'd rather talk to her instead, and risk losing the flow of the show as a 
result. 
 
So, when people go out and they go to the movie theater, actually a theatrical 
performance, a musical or another stage hypnotist - magicians are great for this 
sort of stuff - they can actually watch for those things. 
• What are they doing to create the ambience before you walk in, the 
buzz in the room?  
• What are the different kinds of ambiences and buzzes you get in a 
room?  
• Is it in a theater or an opera house versus a grungy garage band? 
• How do they set the scene not just when people walk in, how do they 
build up to the moment where the act is actually going to walk on 
stage?  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        50 
As they build up, that happens along the way.  
• Then, when the actual act comes on stage how do they come on 
stage?  
• How do they feed off the energy they've created and begin the actual 
show?  
• What's the first moment of beginning? 
• How do they break down the natural audience inhibition to create some 
kind of audience interaction so that the audience is part of the show 
rather than being apart from the show and watching it? 
 
These are all the performance characteristics that really design an amazing 
show or a really poor one if you get them wrong.  
 Have I missed anything or is that a good summary for where we are 
so far? 
Don: 
I think you've done a very good job there. I like what I'm hearing. 
Igor: 
Thank you very much. 
Don: 
You're hired. 
Igor: 
I learned from the best. 
Don: 
Another thing I do at the shows too is I have a tri-fold brochure that I put on 
everybody's seat so that everybody that comes into the show also has an 
informational brochure about myself so they can sit there as they're waiting for 
the show and read it. 
 
It's kind of a what is hypnosis, who is Spencer, where does he come from, and 
all these questions and answers that are going through people's minds. I'm 
reading their minds and these are things that people will ask themselves so it's 
all answered. At the same time I don't have to waste my time. 
 
It's another way also to just promote yourself and your show and things that are 
going on after the show. 
Igor: 
It's another example of an accentuating idea of the pre-talk, with that little 
informational leaflet, and again just creating that general build up and so on. 
 
If you don’t mind, this is something that is first on my mind when I first started 
coming across stage hypnosis and trying to figure out the ins and outs of it, and 
I'm sure it'll be on a lot of other peoples' minds too; spending some time trouble 
shooting some of the things that might go wrong in these early stages. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        51 
For example, are there any tricks that you have - let's take the classic hand 
clasp suggestibility test that you can do with an entire audience, I know it's a 
favorite one of yours as well.  
 Are there any things you like to do to make sure it's a little bit more 
effective? 
 
I've seen some hand clasp versions which are to be honest with you - it was 
almost embarrassing to watch the whole routine being run, but then again I've 
seen some that are ingenious and it's like - how did he do that? How did he get 
so many people to respond so powerfully? 
 
There clearly are differences in presentation that can make a big difference, 
right? 
Don: 
There's always a risk of failure in that. One of the things I like to do as I go out 
there and talk to the people is when I first go out on stage I'll say listen I need a 
volunteer, I need someone to come up here for just a moment. 
 
The first person that jumps up there to volunteer - listen, it's called the 
somnambulist. When I call someone to come up and be a volunteer on stage 
for a moment it's usually a female and she'll come up there on stage. Then I’ll 
say okay everybody in the audience; I want you to watch this person here do 
everything they do. I take the onus off of me, you're not doing what I say but 
you're watching this person and doing what they do. 
 
I'll tell the girl put your hands above your head, interlock your fingers, squeeze 
your hands together, close your eyes, and imagine your hands are locked and 
glued, they will not come apart no matter how hard you try, they lock tighter and 
tighter. 
 
I'm watching the audience and saying doing what she does. They'll do the 
same thing, they're squeezing their hands together, they're watching her and as 
I say try to pull your hands apart and they're stuck, she can't pull them apart, 
and that transfers over to the audience. 
 
They're watching her saying oh, my gosh she can't get her hands apart, so 
they're doing the same thing as they're watching her. Their conscious mind is 
being suspended, we're going into their unconscious mind which is the yes 
mind that does whatever it's told and they begin to develop a spontaneous 
trance at that time. 
Igor: 
Let me just pause you there because I think you just came up with a very 
ingenious principle and I'd like to point it out to people. 
 
A lot of people listening to this might think wow, this is such a big risk because 
what if the girl that comes on stage, what if her hands come apart and then I've 
failed because I've failed publicly and everyone would do what she does, and 
it's all failed with them as well and I have no volunteers? 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        52 
 
Actually, the bigger risk is actually the reverse; you create a very interesting 
scenario number one. You've asked for a volunteer– and as you say I like your 
phrase what did you call it– the call of a somnambulist or something. 
Don: 
Exactly. 
Igor: 
It sounds like one of these Native American - the call of the wild it's calling you. 
Don: 
It is. That's what the hypnosis is like it's like a moth drawn to a flame. 
Whenever you do a show it's like these people who sleep walk and talk in their 
sleep, those types of individuals, it's like something in their mind just clicks. 
 
This key turns and something in their mind says I must go to the show. It's like 
zombies. The stage hypnosis show is actually very easy to do when you 
understand the nature of the mind and what impels people to come to your 
show to begin with. 
 
There's a bigger risk in not doing that. I've never had a problem with that, but 
you have to approach it with great confidence. If you lack confidence on any 
level of yourself you risk failure. I've seen it happen. 
 
You have to have a tremendous level of confidence in what you're doing. You 
have to look at the person and you have to tell them your hands are stuck 
together, they will not come apart. In your tonality and in your confidence and 
the way you approach it you will get the results you want. It takes great 
confidence. 
Igor: 
Just to emphasize something you're saying I've actually seen you do this which 
is great. People will often give up just at the point of success where it's looking 
a little bit dodgy. 
 
I've actually seen you work with some people for example with a rigid arm, like 
a stiff arm type thing or iron bar arm or whatever it is, who the first time you do 
it their arm gets stiff for a while and then it starts bending again. Then you'll just 
insist and say okay, the arm is straight, you'll straighten the arm again and say 
stiff and rigid, more then that and just when you're sure it can't bend anymore, 
try and bend it, and if it starts bending a little bit again you'll do it again. 
 
Literally, I've seen you do this with one guy who was a little bit of a weak 
responder three, four, five, or six times in a row. On the sixth time it's almost 
like you could see him surrender to the whole experience and say you know 
what I'm just going to go with this. 
 
His arm became totally rigid, from that point the whole thing just changed, and 
we could feel something clicking and shifting. Part of that confidence is the 
willingness to really go for it and not take no for an answer as far as the 
hypnotic phenomena is concerned. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        53 
Don: 
In the aspect in which you're referring to you have to realize too that people 
sometimes need to be trained. I don't mean to sound like we're a bunch of 
animals but in a way we are. 
 
Some people are very compliant - I don't even like to use that word, I like to use 
words like they're more highly responsive - other people just need a little more 
encouragement. 
 
I can encourage them by going it over and over again. You're exactly right; I will 
encourage a person to make sure that arm is stiff and rigid as a steel bar, it will 
not bend, and if they bend then no, listen very carefully - your arm is stiff and 
rigid. Listen very carefully to what I have to say, make that arm stiff and rigid. 
Your arm will not bend. 
 
Oftentimes, it comes back for people to their language patterns. There again 
you're using the law of reverse action where you respond to the strongest part 
of a suggestion or an idea if the alternative is weaker. 
 
When you say your arm is stiff and rigid, try to bend your arm it will not bend no 
matter how hard you try to bend it, it locks tighter and tighter. By saying it locks 
tighter and tighter at the end of it, it negates bend your arm. That's the last 
suggestion the mind hears. 
Igor: 
You created a mental picture which is very vivid. Lock your arm. It's also a 
possible double suggestion there.  
Are you saying that their arm is now stiff and rigid, or are you saying for them to 
lock their arm, which can be understood differently? 
 
It can create this sort of blend of consciousness where the conscious mind is 
confused on whether or not they should be locking it on purpose or whether 
they should just allow it to happen and in that moment of confusion of course, 
the magic can start taking place. 
Don: 
Exactly, because when the mind is confused it's looking for meaning, so 
whatever meaning you put in there, the mind will say okay. It doesn't matter 
what it is, the mind just says okay, because it's searching for meaning. 
Igor: 
The scenario you've created by inviting a volunteer that you are pretty much 
guaranteed is going to be a good subject to come on stage in the first place 
and inviting everyone to look. It looks like a great risk as far as the audience is 
concerned, like you're really confident because you'll take any old person that 
volunteers, but really they don't realize the dynamic is that you'll be getting a 
very good volunteer that way. 
 
The person that comes on stage, they're going to have massive amounts of 
social pressure to succeed with the hand clasp as well. They suddenly have 
100, 200, 500 maybe 1,000 eyes on them and they don’t want to fail in front of 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        54 
the hypnotist, they don't want to make the hypnotist look bad and ruin the show, 
so they're going to sit there and pray please let this work.  
 
It's true, right.  
Don: 
Maybe, not always, but I think more than that they don't want to fail. 
Igor: 
If they fail in front of everyone it's their failure and that's a lot of social 
compliance going on here that they don't want to look like a fool in front for the 
whole audience.  
 
If they succeed there is already an implication going on that the whole audience 
will be impressed and clap. If they fail, what the hell is the audience supposed 
to do? Do they sit there and clap at their failure? Do they get sent off the stage 
slinking their head in shame? 
 
That’s a thought that's going to be somewhere in the back of their mind which is 
a great motivator for the unconscious mind to say you know what conscious 
mind? Let me help you out here and we'll make this work. It's actually a nice 
little extra bit of like racing fuel, to make the suggestions more powerful just by 
using the context very wisely. 
 
The other thing of course is you have the idea that people are like little 
dynamos, they pick up on each other's states and experiences, so as soon as 
you have one person exhibiting deep trance phenomenon, everyone else 
around them gets infected by the whole attitude and so it starts spreading as a 
positive vibe through the audience and your show takes off with a flying start. 
Don: 
Exactly. You set the stage when you have one person who does it, and then 
everybody else just falls in line. 
Igor: 
So far we've gotten to the point where we're literally into the first minute or two 
of the "show". You come on stage and you've either, asked straight away for a 
volunteer or you tell everyone hands above your head, interlock fingers, clasp 
and so on and so forth. 
 
Let's assume you've done a successful initial suggestion test, let's use the hand 
clasp. Of course, you're going to invite the people that succeeded, everyone 
who's hands are locked right now, you may want to come up and join me on 
stage, I'll release you, and you'll be up here with me for the show. 
 What do you do if no one comes?  
a. 
How do you handle that? 
Don: 
What do I do if no one comes on stage?  
Igor: 
Yes. I'm sure it's happened to you once or twice in the past, and there's ways 
you get around it, right. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        55 
Don:  
I just say thank you all for coming tonight, I've already been paid, and have a 
good night. I'm going to go drink. 
 
You can do that, but you know I did have a night like that once. I was doing a 
show I believe it was for a high school reunion. I got hired to do this high school 
reunion, it was a 20-30 year reunion and it’s been a while back. 
 
I got there and they paid me a lot of money of course to come do the show. I 
got there and got up there on stage and talked to them for a minute and invited 
volunteers up there and no one wanted to come up to get hypnotized. 
 
I sat there for a second and thought okay; there are two thoughts in my mind.  
- 
Number one; this isn't good. 
- 
Number two, how do I turn this around?  
That for me is a juicy challenge because I really love the challenge of okay, so 
how do I turn this around? It stretches me as a human being because they've 
hired me to do something I've got to make it work no matter what.  
I simply talked to the audience for a few moments. I say listen, I've already 
been paid and if you don’t mind I'm going to go ahead and talk to you a little bit 
about hypnosis. I got their agreement and talk to them a little bit about 
hypnosis. 
Then I talk to them about inhibitions and what happens to people as we get 
older, how we begin to have fears about what we've done in our lives, how 
we're going to look in front of other people, how we repress our instinctual 
based nature of having fun and become stoogey as we get older. 
 
I talked to them for awhile and as I created that rapport I could see this calm 
coming over the audience. I said now let's have some fun, who would like to 
volunteer? I actually got a stage full of people, moved on, and had a good 
show. 
Igor: 
This is an important principle you bring out here, because as far as everyone is 
concerned you're just being a good guy and giving them a little bit of a talk 
about the power of the mind which is kind of what you're an expert in anyway. 
 
Actually what you were doing is you were using all kinds of tricks and principles 
of covert hypnosis in order to break down their inhibitions. You talk about 
inhibitions in order to create this calmness in the audience. 
 
You're giving examples of the benefits they'll be receiving and you're constantly 
checking the audience to feel where the vibe is at until you find it clicking, and 
you don’t ask for volunteers until you find a shift in that vibe developing. 
Don: 
Exactly right. It's like at this point I'm doing a seminar and doing basically a mini 
hypnotherapy session on people and they don't even know what's hit them. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        56 
Igor: 
This goes right back to what we talked about in the interview which is to be a 
consummate performer, a great stage hypnotist, it doesn't require you to just 
pick up a book and do a couple of things, you can of course learn by trial and 
error that way too I guess but really you want to be a good hypnotist first and 
foremost. 
 
You need to understand the mind, you need to understand the idea of therapy, 
and you need to understand these other techniques that aren't necessarily 
officially part of the stage show but happen in the background. 
 
In this case it's the idea of covert hypnosis, covert therapy on the audience and 
the therapy you're doing on them is basically on shyness or embarrassment. If 
you're doing that and treating the audience as one person that's come in with 
shyness issues and you're doing the same kind of cover techniques, then 
you're away. 
 
It just eases enough for something to begin and the trickle effect turns into a 
landslide and before you know it you'll have a fun show and everyone will be 
really grateful for having had the experience. 
 
Let's take it to the next step.  
We've got a good idea of what we can do if no one comes on stage, it's just 
being smart as conversational hypnotists and applying our skills under the 
guise of a simple lecture to basically hypnotize the audience onto stage and 
volunteering, which I think is a very good thing to do in a stage show anyone, 
it's all about hypnosis, right? 
 What if the other thing happens?  
a. What if the wrong kinds of people come on stage?  
b. What are typically the wrong kinds of people that could come on 
stage? 
c. How do you spot them, and how do you solve that?  
d. How do you make sure the people on stage are the people you want 
on stage? 
Don: 
I think about the only time you get the wrong kind of people on stage is if you're 
working in a nightclub and you get some drunks up there.  
If you get somebody up there who is obviously inebriated, you simply go over to 
them or have your assistant go over to them and you just very gently take them 
by the hand and guide them off the stage and say thank you, but I think you're 
going to have a better time out in the audience. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        57 
 
Probably the worst case scenario is that individual. You'll get an occasional 
person who comes up there, they have no intent on being hypnotized, they just 
want to come up there and see if you can make them do something. 
 
They'll sit there, they'll go through all the motions and they'll try to fake being 
hypnotized, but you the very clever, the very sharp, the professional stage 
hypnotist know that person is not hypnotized because you're watching 
everybody and you know all about hypnosis and so you just simply go over 
there, dismiss that individual also. 
 
You're going to get an individual if you're doing an induction or are going about 
your show and they don't seem to be responding very well, they're just sitting 
there looking at you, it's very obvious to you that they're not hypnotized and it's 
obvious to the audience and there again, it's just a matter of fact - I reach over 
there and grab them by their arm and dismiss them off to the side of the stage 
and continue with my show and make it part of the show. 
 
Normally, when I dismiss somebody that did not seem to be responding 
appropriately to make the show the way that I want to, is I'll do it during a 
routine. 
 
For example, if I'm doing a routine and I have my group up there doing the 
same thing, as they're acting out and as the audience is up there watching their 
friends and family and people doing crazy things, then I'll just walk up to a 
person who is not responding and dismiss them. 
 
It's misdirection. By misdirection they're watching somebody while I do 
something else and dismiss somebody and nobody thinks twice about it 
actually. 
Igor: 
So it does two things.  
 One the one side it's a very smooth and elegant way to get people off 
stage without needlessly causing them any type of embarrassment or 
anything like that. 
 Two, it takes any energy away from someone who might be up there 
for example if there is the odd person who wants to ruin the show, they 
require attention. 
 
If all the attention is somewhere else they might spend 10 seconds trying to act 
out and say I was fooled. Then you can smile and say well done now you can 
rejoin your friends in the audience. 
 
No one can hear them, no one can see them because their attention is 
somewhere else, and it steals their thunder. They kind of give up and say oh, it 
wasn't as much fun as I thought it would be, I may as well just slink off and let 
the show continue. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        58 
Don: 
Right. There's also another danger there too. If you don't do that you have a 
person up there who wants to be disruptive and the person sitting on either side 
of them or someone sitting a few chairs down, they're not zombies they hear 
what's going on in a different level and that may snap them out of trance. 
You may have an entire stage where you had good subjects but because you 
had one person up there being disruptive it may ruin the entire show. You want 
to get them off the stage as soon as possible. 
Igor: 
Just to emphasize it again though, having "bad" subjects, people who want to 
ruin the show or cause problems and so on - that's actually a relatively rare 
phenomenon unless you're working nightclubs regularly where the main thing 
you have to contend with are drunks who are either, belligerent and it's going to 
be pretty obvious to spot. 
 
This other type of person will be pretty much rare, and by the time you run 
across them you should have enough experience to be able to handle it in 
stride, especially now that they've heard you give your advice on how to handle 
that sort of situation. 
Don: 
I'll also set it up too at the beginning of the show. There are three types of 
people who cannot be hypnotized.  
1. Children can't be,  
2. Somebody who is drunk or stoned because they already think they're 
hypnotized, and 
3. Idiots 
 
I set it up that way so that people if they're not hypnotized, I'm putting this 
intentional but fun guilt trip on them. If they have any reservations to begin with 
maybe they shouldn't be on stage. 
Igor: 
If someone really wants to ruin the show and jump up and say ha-ha I'm not 
hypnotized you failed, then you say great I failed and you're an idiot, you can 
leave the stage, and you go on with the show. 
Don: 
I say ladies and gentlemen, here's an example of an idiot. He's not drunk or 
stoned, but he is an idiot, give him a round of applause. 
Igor: 
Just to emphasize, this would be a last ditch defense if someone is really 
messing with the show. You wouldn't necessarily do this if some poor little old 
lady comes up and says I'm sorry dear it didn't quite work out. 
 
You're not going to sit there and rant at her and say you're an idiot, get off my 
stage you idiot, because that's not really appropriate either. 
Don: 
I wouldn't do that to grandma, no. If it was a little old lady I'd just say you're 
awful sweet for coming up here, I think you're going to have a lot more fun out 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        59 
in the audience. Folks give her a round of applause for coming up and giving it 
her best shot tonight. 
Igor: 
That's a very polite and very pleasant way of letting people back into the 
audience. 
Don: 
Yes. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        60 
Seminar 1 – Part 2 
 
Igor: 
Let's move on to another thing which is something we've touched on both in the 
interview and a few times today as well, which is the idea of different groups 
and you need to be able to deal with different groups in different ways. 
 Could you run us through maybe the top five groups that a stage 
hypnotist is likely to come across?  
- 
And, tell us a little bit about each one's mindset, the kinds of 
things we should look out for, expect and the kind of special 
treatment they might need? 
Don: 
You're going to run into different types of groups out there. Probably the main 
group you're going to run into as a stage hypnotist would be the high 
school/college type crowd - those people don't really care about what you do, 
they're just there to have fun. You don't even have to educate them, they just 
want to party. 
 
They're still in that party mood so let's have fun. I don't want to hear anything 
else, let's just get to it and have a good time. 
 
You approach them as matter of fact, you have fun, you have a great time and 
it's the easiest audience you're ever going to work with. 
 
You have for example corporate. Corporate is a different ball of wax. These 
individuals are usually a bit more reserved, especially in front of their 
employees or bosses because they're dealing with their image control, they 
have to work with them, they have to go back to work with them, and they have 
to keep a certain composure. 
 
A corporate audience, you may approach them much differently, be a little 
gentler with them, set them at ease and let them know that they won't do 
anything out of the ordinary that would be held against them, it would be your 
fault because you are the hypnotist. You approach them differently. 
 
If you're at a county fair theater type of venue, it's different because you have a 
much larger audience you probably will have anywhere between 1,000 to 
5,000-10,000 people out there. 
 
That one you're going to approach differently because the county fair type 
scenarios, they normally give you 60 minutes, you're on and off stage in 60 
minutes because they want to move on to the next act. 
 
You approach that one a little bit differently, you're generally going to get up on 
stage - there again college, high school type individuals. You'll get a few older 
individuals, not to worry because the few older people that come up there are 
usually floppers. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        61 
 
I approach that oftentimes the same way as I do the college and high school 
market. Let's just have a lot of fun because face it, you go to a county fair and 
you're there to have fun, it's a festive atmosphere. It's a generally easy 
audience to work with. 
 
The toughest audience for people would be working with the military if you can 
work with the military at all, because they have rules to keep people like me off 
the bases because we're hypnotists and they have this fear that we're going to 
get state secrets out of them. 
 
When you're dealing with military you have to deal with the military mindset 
because first of all I'll use a word, the term brainwashed, because they are. 
When you go into the military you lose your identity, you're no longer Joe Blow 
but you're number 00591 Private Eggnog or whoever you are. 
 
You are taught compliance and so you have to approach military in that way. If 
you are working with military you need to put them at ease that no state secrets 
are going to be revealed and you have to break through a deeper trance that 
they're in. 
 
They're already in trance so you have to hypnotize them into a deeper trance 
and while in that deeper trance you have to convince their unconscious mind 
that they're going to have fun and that this is part of the show you're going to be 
doing with them, it's completely non-military. 
 
I just simply take one of the individuals who is a good subject and I turn them 
into the base commander and let them help me be part of the show by giving 
the orders to the people up on stage and it works just fine. 
Igor: 
I kind of like that because you're not using a pattern that's already ingrained in 
them, but you're also creating this pseudo reality where everyone knows he's 
not really the base commander. It's also one of their own who knows the rules 
and knows how to give the right orders. 
 
Now you'll have your co-hypnotist giving instructions and people in the 
audience will love it because it's funny that private so and so is now telling a 
two star general how to behave and at the same time the people up on stage 
will have this dynamic where they already understand the order compliance 
dynamic, which you're just feeding into. 
Don: 
If you can get a two star general up on stage, I don't think so. 
Igor: 
I was just using it as a dramatic example. Please don't kill me over this one. 
Don: 
I understand. When you work on the military base chances are you're going to 
get… 
Igor: 
You're going to get the cook. Look at me I'm the cook and I can do more then 
cook. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        62 
Don: 
You get a lot of privates and first officers and things like that, yes. You know, 
the military bases I've worked on, I tell you I've had a blast. I really enjoy 
working with the military and I've always had a great time with the men and 
women in uniform, they're a fun group. 
 
They've got a tough job and it's fun to work with them. 
Igor: 
The last group I'd appreciate your insight on is nightclubs. We've talked about 
nightclubs before about being a certain kind of venue… 
 Can you just give us a quick thumbnail sketch of what kinds of 
things to think about when you're thinking about doing a show in a 
nightclub as opposed to say a theater or county fair, just so we 
have a nice rounded picture of the venues? 
Don: 
First of all, I'll say this, the shows that I do, most of my routines I can do the 
same routine for every kind of venue, it's just that the approach is different. 
 
In a nightclub I approach it as a party. When I go into a nightclub and do a 
show, the people there - people go there to party, they go there to drink and 
have a good time. Of course they have interactions with other people and so I 
simply approach it that way. 
 
When I do the nightclubs it's a party. I'm very festive and nine times out of 10 I'll 
have a drink in my hand because I want to be one of them and let them know 
that I'm one of them. Whether it's a real drink or a fake drink is not the point, it's 
how they perceive me to be to them. 
 
I go in there to be one of them. I'll go up there and in my pre-talk if I do a pre-
talk I'll talk to them a little bit and shoot the bull and do some interactions with 
the audience. I'll say some jokes, pick on a few people in the audience, and let 
it fly from there. 
 
It's a festive atmosphere it's a party. 
Igor: 
Great. I really appreciate you taking the time to actually work through these 
different scenarios because all too often people think. 
 What is a stage show?  
They never think about where is a stage show going to be held and realizing 
that they tweak - they can have the same routines, but they still tweak the 
presentation style to fit the audience and the venue. 
Don: 
Exactly. 
Igor: 
Now, I think we've got a pretty good handle on what we're dealing with here. 
We've got the setup, we've got the pre-show buildup, we've got the first couple 
of minutes on stage, start taking control of the audience, getting some 
compliance, getting some suggestibility tests, getting your volunteers on stage - 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        63 
we know how to get volunteers on stage if for whatever reason it's a lackluster 
audience. 
 
We also know how to deal with different types of audiences so we can 
anticipate certain things happening.  
For example, if I go into a military base to do a show I'm not going to go straight 
into doing my routines with them because I know I've got extra work, a little 
more conversational hypnosis stuff to do ahead of time to make sure that I can 
get them to the point where they're willing to do a show with me. 
 Now, you have them on stage, you've picked the right kind of 
audience, you've picked the right kind of show for the right kind of 
audience what do you do with them?  
a. Now that you've got everyone on stage, what happens next? 
Don: 
That's really simple. Once I have everybody on stage then I take control of the 
stage. People will come up there - let's say I have 15 chairs up on the stage for 
example, and people will have a tendency if they have friends they'll want to sit 
down next to their friends or their spouses or whatever, and I begin separating 
everybody. 
 
I don't want the person sitting next to another person who knows them so I go 
in there and I pick people up, I'll sit them man woman, man woman, and make 
sure they don't know each other. I might even move them around two or three 
times. 
 
One of the reasons I do that, besides I don't want them to know somebody 
because they'll be too chatty, is because I want to show them that I'm in control 
of the stage. They're going to sit where I tell them. They're going to do what I 
tell them to do. It's all about controlling the stage. 
 
At that point when I get people where I want them I'll have them sit back in their 
chairs and I'll do a couple more suggestibility tests with them because I want to 
make sure that they're the people that I want. 
 
Even though they come up there it doesn't mean they're going to be a good 
subject, but I'll go through a couple more suggestibility tests and if they pass 
the test, they stay. If they don't pass the test I just dump them off the stage and 
move on. 
Igor: 
Excellent. Let's say they come up, you do a couple of suggestibility tests and 
you've maybe gotten rid of one or two extra people, so you've gone from say 20 
people on the stage down to 15, the chairs are filled, and you're ready to 
proceed.  
 What happens now? 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        64 
Don: 
I go straight into the show. I'll either do one of two things, and there again it's 
judging the audience. I may do an induction, some kind of progressive 
relaxation which I invite the entire audience to do, this simply helps me to 
deepen the trance. 
 
Once they're up there and they've passed the suggestibility test, as far as I'm 
concerned these guys are already hypnotized, I can control it however I want 
to. 
 
There is a danger in that however for a newbie who does not have that kind of 
experience because they may not have the confidence to know how to proceed 
to control that. 
 
In that case you may want to go on and do a progressive relaxation which 
simply deepens the hypnotic state. I'll invite the audience to do that at the same 
time. 
 
The reason I invite the audience is because there may be one or two people 
out there who were thinking about coming up, didn't do it, but once I do the 
relaxation that way they may go into trance and they may be a very good 
subject, and I'll go out into the audience and bring them up on stage. 
 
Also by doing a relaxation technique like that it's a whole different level of 
composure and ambience in the room. I'm now telling everyone in the audience 
sit back in your chairs, put your feet flat on the floor, close your eyes all the way 
and take a deep breath in. Breathe in and breathe out, listen very carefully to 
what I have to say and I'm talking to the subjects at the same time. 
 
Now I'm doing mass hypnosis not just with the subjects but also with everybody 
in the audience. It helps to move them into having more fun with the show and 
into following along and doing exactly what I say at the same time. Does that 
make sense? 
Igor: 
Absolutely, and it's kind of part of what people expect. They come to see a 
hypnotist you've got to give them the swinging watch. They've got to see 
someone being hypnotized. 
 
You and I both know that by the time they're up there and they've passed a 
couple of suggestibility tests they're pretty much gone but the audience doesn't 
necessarily know that, they just think some weird power has happened and 
they're still waiting to see the "hypnosis". 
 
Now, you do just a two or three minute quick induction and they'll say wow, 
look; how does he do that? I mean I hear the words but I didn't expect all these 
different things to happen as a result. 
Don: 
They're watching their friends getting hypnotized. They're saying look at them 
they're falling over, they're laughing and they're having a great time with it. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        65 
 
The induction part is not necessary but people like to see it, so that's just part of 
you as a performer, and it's how you make that work, how you approach the 
induction. 
 
When I do an induction like that I have a certain ambience that I create to make 
it more - not fun, but it's like mysterious and dramatic. I create this whole new 
scene like breathe in and breathe out. In just a moment I will begin to relax you 
step by step. 
 
I change my tonality, my talk slows down, and as I'm going through this the 
people on stage their eyes are closed and the people in the audience, they're 
looking at me and I'm looking at them and I'm saying relax this part of your 
body. 
 
I might say your stomach muscles relax and I'll take and spread my hands over 
my stomach, maybe look at one or two of the gals out there and they're going 
oh, yes.  
 
You can feed off the energy of the audience and play with them. Relax your 
face and your arms - you'll see guys and gals out there wriggling their hands, 
they're just shaking everything down. 
 
You're reading your audience and you're playing with them at the same time, 
you're giving them something also. 
Igor: 
Right. It also puts them in a more receptive state so the audience is more 
engaged in the show so they're going to have more fun because they're more a 
part of the show rather than like we said before, being apart from it. 
Don: 
It is an audience participation show. 
Igor: 
Sure it is. We're now through the induction sequence, I'm guessing we're into 
minute five or ten, something like that, depending on how much you do up front.  
 What happens next? 
 
You've had your mysterious music, you've done a two or three minute 
relaxation induction, everyone is just flopping or drooling on a chair and you've 
had a couple of people melt into puddles in the audience as well.  
 Do you leave them there or do you bring them back out of trance, 
what do you do? 
a. Do you switch the tempo of the music?  
b. How do you handle it once they're down there?  
c. What do you do?  
d. What do you say? 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        66 
Don: 
Once I get people where I want them I'm ready to rock and roll. I go right into 
my first routine. I'll say I'm going to count to three and at three sit up in your 
chairs and I go into my first routine. I just watch how people respond up on 
stage. 
 
That's how I do it. I just transition right into my first routine. I do two or three 
routines and I do them really fast, I do them really furious, I do it with everybody 
because I want to see who is the very best subject that I'm going to keep 
because I may weed some people out. 
 
If I don't have to weed anybody out that's just a bonus for me. I do the first few 
routines very fast, everybody is involved, and then when I'm done with that I 
might move into doing some individual routines with people. 
 
The show begins at that point with me. 
Igor: 
If I understand you correctly you want to deepen trance and now you're 
basically saying to the audience, okay, you can make some noise again if you 
want. I've seen a couple of charming things where hypnotists once the people 
on stage are deep in trance, they'll turn to the audience and say okay, now I'd 
like to give them a massive round of applause, so they can anticipate the kind 
of reaction they'll be getting from you throughout the rest of the show. 
 
That's kind of a nice little touch because it basically says to the guys on stage 
the more you act out today, the more love you'll be getting from the audience, 
and here's a taste of what it's like. I think that's a nice little thing going there as 
well. 
Don: 
That's what I do. 
Igor: 
I've seen you do it and it's a nice little touch. When you come onto the 
important element, which is the warm-up routines, the two or three as you said 
group routines, the keys are they're group routines and if I understand you 
correctly they're simple routines. 
Some simple activity they can engage in that involves everyone so you have an 
opportunity to watch them and figure out who is the most engaged, who is the 
most animated, who is going to be the star of the show and who do I need to 
put in the sidelines so it doesn't really disturb anyone else. 
Don: 
That's exactly why I do those first routines, so I can determine who I'm going to 
use to be the star of the show. 
Igor: 
Let me ask you this… 
 How do you choose a warm up routine?  
a. How do you know what makes for a good warm up routine?  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        67 
b. Can you give me an example of the things you might do or that 
you've seen other people do? 
Don: 
Listen, here's what I tell people. A good warm up routine, whether it's a warm 
up routine or whether it's any routine that you do, number one it's got to make 
sense to you. 
 
As a performer, don't pick something just because you've seen somebody else 
do it. Maybe you see somebody riding in cars or riding some horses or 
whatever they do as a group together, maybe they're going on a journey to the 
beach or flying in an airplane together, but do something that makes sense to 
you. 
 
You've got to feel it inside of yourself. If you can feel it inside of yourself, the 
routine that you're doing, then you can convey that to the subjects. If you're just 
doing lip service chances are they're not going to get it. They may get it, but 
your odds are going to be increased significantly if you approach your show 
from a sense of - the show has got to be your soul, you've got to feel it. 
 
If I'm for example doing a routine where everyone is sitting in a car, it's only 
because I get it. I put myself in the car; I'm in the car with these people. The 
music comes from a part of my life that makes a lot of sense that I can relate to. 
 
If I can relate to it and really get into it, I can convey this and it's going to be a 
much better presentation for my subjects and for the audience as well. 
Igor: 
This goes back to the fundamental principle for us as hypnotists, which is going 
first. You've got to be able to go first. You've got to be able to appreciate 
whatever scenario or scene you're creating for your volunteers so you can bring 
it to life properly for them and for the audience because that's part of the show. 
 
Although the audience doesn't realize it, they've got to be able to feel the same 
thing. Whether they're driving a car or whether they're riding a bike or 
something like that, they've got to be able to feel it and you're the one that's 
going to create that experience for them, right? 
Don: 
Exactly. You are the director, the conductor of the entire performance. 
Igor: 
Let's assume you've got this. You've got this idea of a filter for you to test things 
against. These are a dozen different ideas I have for a warm up, which one do I 
really get? I really get these three or four. 
 What other qualities are you looking for in a warm up routine 
besides the going first element that will make for ideal warm up 
routines, so you can really get the job done that you need to do? 
Don: 
With whatever elements I have I want to engage all the senses. I want people 
to hear it, to see it, to feel it, to taste it, to touch it as much as I can so I want to 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        68 
produce a hallucination through all this sensory apparatus that an individual 
has. 
 
If I say you're in a car I want them to put on some seat belts, I want them to put 
their foot on the gas pedal, and I want to see them strapping on that seat belt, I 
want to see that foot moving, I want to see their hand up on the steering wheel, 
I want to see their hand on the shifter. 
 
I want to make sure that these guys are extremely engaged in what I'm doing. If 
I'm saying it's hot I want to see sweat beads on their head or at least see them 
fan themselves off. 
 
If I say you're getting cold I want to see these people shivering. I want them 
fully engaged. When they're in that state you're going to have a dynamic show, 
you've got great subjects. 
Igor: 
Just to point out again something you did there, especially with the car routine; 
there's a big difference in you're in a car, drive your car, okay the car is driving, 
it's great and you're having a great time, which is really a bland way of creating 
it. 
 
You've actually created a lot of experiential reference points for them. For 
example it's a beautiful summer's day, you're sitting in your car - strap your 
seatbelt on. That's already a little bit of compliance but it also makes it more 
real because that's what real people do in real cars. 
 
Put the music on, turn it up loud - and you might even have your DJ turn the 
music up louder while you're doing it. Put your hands on the steering wheel - 
you're actually telling them a lot of the behaviors to engage in initially so that by 
the time you release their imagination they can actually run with more creative 
behaviors and they've got more of a sense of what you expect from them. 
 
Are there any other things? We've got the idea that you need all the senses 
engaged; you've got the idea of going first which is very important. You also 
mentioned something in the beginning about you wanting the whole group to be 
involved.  
 Can you tell me a little more about why that is or how you might 
use that group dynamic to assist the launch into the actual show? 
Don: 
The reason I use a group dynamic is because there again it goes back to the 
mass hypnosis thing. When one person does it then everybody follows along 
and nobody wants to be left sitting there by themselves not following along. 
 
What happens is let's say you have 15 people up on stage, 10 people are really 
good subjects and five are kind of not as good as they could be. Once they 
watch other people doing this - and they're lightly hypnotized - as they begin to 
get into it, it just deepens the trance. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        69 
 
That's the whole purpose is that whenever you give a person a suggestion and 
they participate in it, it deepens the hypnotic state, that's the bottom line. 
Igor: 
It just reminds me of something else that some other hypnotists do which is a 
lovely little touch. You'll get somebody to do something. 
For example, everybody is playing in an orchestra, drums or something like that 
so the whole group is doing this and from time to time he'll get someone, 
especially if he's sitting next to a really strong responder, he'll tap them on the 
shoulder and wake them up. 
Everyone else is still carrying on of course - and he'll put to the person on his 
left and say look at this guy, look what he's doing, isn't that crazy? What do you 
think of that? 
 
You can really see this guy, sitting in the middle of all these lunatics banging 
drums that aren't there, looking at them like they're crazy, and then he says 
sleep and he goes back into the drumming thing. 
 
Now every single time he does that the person who just opened their eyes and 
looked at the rest of the group and all their crazy antics, his antics double or 
triple in magnitude because he's now seen everyone else and says wow, these 
guys are really going for it, I need to step up the pace a little bit here. 
Don: 
Exactly, yes. There again those individuals are very good subjects and you can 
take a good subject at any routine and you can break them from that routine 
and talk to them about what's going on and they'll just jump right back into it at 
a faster and more furious pace. 
Igor: 
That's part of the stage craft, which I think we'll come onto in a second now. I 
think we've got a good handle now on how to do the whole initial setup. 
 
We've gone through the show build up, we've done the introduction to yourself, 
we've done the getting people involved, getting volunteers, hypnotizing them, 
and even the warm up routines. 
 
You're running right in the middle of the show now, you're doing the stuff people 
think they've come here for, which is all the little skits and so on, and you're 
doing this as a group right now. 
 What kinds of things do you have in your mind when you want to 
transition from the warm up section to your main routine, the sort 
of meat and potatoes of your show? 
Don: 
What goes through my mind? I don't know that anything really goes through my 
mind its all part of the show. I don't know if I can really differentiate between 
that because to me it's all part of the show. 
 
I just go from one routine to another routine to the next routine. After I do my 
first few routines then I stop the show for a second and I have music playing in 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        70 
the background and I go up and meet each individual and ask them what their 
name is and I'll usually shake their hand and do a quick rapid induction with 
them and throw them over the person next to them because the audience likes 
to see that, it's a lot of fun. 
 
After I do that I'll turn to the audience and say listen; these are the people I'm 
going to work with, do me a favor and give them a tremendous amount of 
applause because from this point forward the more applause you give them the 
more they're going to give to you, the more they act out, the more applause you 
need to make. 
 
I'll interact that way and the people on stage are listening to this and they know 
that from now on man, the show is all about them, and they've really got to give 
it 110% because the more they give out the more the audience is going to feed 
on them. 
Igor: 
That's a very nice feedback loop you create there, which is the more wild the 
audience gets with their approval the more wild the people volunteering do 
crazy stunts, the more the people in the audience will love it and the energy 
feeds on itself. 
 
The people on the stage feed off the vibe that the audience gives them, the 
audience, of course, feeds off the crazy antics and the vibe of the people on 
stage and it's a nice self reinforcing circle. 
Don: 
It's a reinforcing circle, it's a direct suggestion, everybody follows through and 
from that point the show just gets crazy. Whatever routines I choose at that 
point it just gets insane. 
 
I'm no longer trying to figure out if I've got good subjects or bad ones, the 
people I have there now they're the ones I'm going to work with, we're going to 
have a good time, the show goes on for the next 30 minutes or however long I 
have left and it's just one fast paced routine after another until the finale. 
Igor: 
Let me ask you this, it's something again that you mentioned and I want to 
spend a little more time on this if I may, which is you talk about once you go 
from the warm up which is a more general group activity, then the flow changes 
to meeting individuals and talking to them, getting a little about them, their 
names and so on, and you also mentioned in the middle of routines you like to 
break in and stop people and talk to them. 
 Can you tell me a little bit about what it is you're trying to achieve 
when you talk to them directly in comments out of trance, how that 
affects the show and how you handle that whole interplay? 
 
You're not just putting people into different situations is it? There's something 
else that happens as well. 
Don: 
I'm sorry; when I ask them to do what? 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        71 
Igor: 
When for example you introduce yourself, you introduce each individual person 
volunteering, ask them their name and talk to them a little bit, but then during 
the main show as well they might be doing a skit, for example, maybe an alien 
is talking to a priest or I don't know what, you'll interrupt them and you'll 
suddenly ask them out of trance.  
a. What's going on here?  
b. What are you doing here?  
 
You're basically interviewing the volunteers while they're still on stage so the 
audience can hear them. What's that interview about? That seems to be a 
really important performance element of a stage show. 
Don: 
Part of it for me is when I ask them who they are and what they're about, it 
gives me a little information about them, because it might be something I can 
use on a specific routine that I can utilize that individual for which I think they're 
going to be really good in this routine. 
 
It helps me to know who they are as an individual does that make sense? 
Igor: 
Exactly. That's the initial introduction, then later on in the show, and I've seen a 
lot of hypnotists do this and you like to do this a lot as well, there's a lot of 
interaction with the subjects. 
 
You don't just say okay here's the scene, you're such and such person and 
you're such and such person - go for it; you'll start the scene off but in the 
middle of the scene you'll interfere. 
 
You'll either, pause proceeding and ask them; what are you guys doing? You'll 
go in and you'll keep people in character but you'll still ask them what's going 
on and have them explain some kind of conflict they're having - how do you 
handle those conversations? 
 
It seems to me that a lot of the show's value comes from you becoming the 
audience's mouthpiece and interacting with the people on stage. 
Don: 
The reason I do that is there again, it's just for show value. Let's say for 
example maybe I have two guys up there dancing together for example, 
depending on the venue - it doesn't matter but for most places its fun to watch 
two guys dance together. 
 
They're up there dancing together, and I may stop and say hey - wide awake - 
what are you guys doing? What are you thinking? They'll look at each other and 
say oh my God, I can't believe I'm dancing with this guy I don't do this kind of 
stuff. 
 
It gives me some fodder for throwing in - for interjecting what the audience 
might be thinking. I can use it for comedic value and so much of the show is 
improvisation. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        72 
 
You as a performer, you never know what's going to happen so you've got to 
be quick on your toes, quick on your wit, and determine what you're going to 
say.  
 
It's like; what are you guys doing? Would you do that normally? No. How about 
you? Of course I wouldn't. Listen you guys; it's really my fault, I'm the hypnotist, 
I hypnotized you guys, they look at me and they're like what a creep. 
 
I know you guys would never really do this if you weren't hypnotized, right? 
They say yes, of course I would not. I say okay cool. I tell you what; we're just 
doing a show, we're having a good time, shake hands, make up and we'll go 
on. 
 
They'll go shake hands and I'll just say something like don't you really want to 
dance again? They'll get in there and start dancing, hugging, and stuff, and it 
just adds to the comedic value of the show that shows you that my God, there's 
something going on with these guys. 
 
I thought maybe they weren't hypnotized, but look at them this is crazy. 
Igor: 
This is something important that you're bringing out here. You're creating 
frames. Go back to the idea of conversational hypnosis; you've created 
interesting frameworks that contrast. 
 
On the one side they're giving a social statement saying I wouldn't dance with a 
guy, I don't know where that came from and it's not going to happen again. As 
soon as they made the social contract - it's not going to happen again - you turn 
around and make them do it again. 
 
That creates that same dynamic of like wow; something really must be going on 
because people don't normally say I'm not going to do this anymore. Then 
literally, the second they've said that turn around and do exactly what they said 
they wouldn't do. 
Don: 
That's right. 
Igor: 
It seems to me you've talked about the idea of improvisation and this, I guess, 
is why you talk about going out there and studying other hypnotists. It's not just 
their routines that they have it's the labels, how they handle the routines that's 
the important thing, the little interjections, the little jokes and those setups. 
 
You just gave a good example of a setup.  
What are you guys doing?  
Why are you doing this?  
Would you normally do this? There are all these denials.  
Would you do this again? No, and then, of course, they do it again. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        73 
 
After all these classic denials they go off and do it anyway again. That's kind of 
a little bit of a handling, how to present the routine, and each hypnotist will have 
their own way of doing it. 
 
The more you see people do this the more you'll get a flavor of how you'd like 
to do it as well, right? 
Don: 
Exactly. That's what's so important about studying theater, studying other 
performers and really honing your style down to who you are as an individual. 
Igor: 
Next question. 
 What's like the litmus test, the acid test, for whether this routine is 
good for you as a performer versus if some other hypnotist can pull 
it off well and it's interesting for that audience? 
Don: 
The litmus test for me is just; does it make me laugh? I like to laugh and have a 
good time. It's got to make perfect sense to me. All those elements are there for 
me. 
 
The biggest element - can I feel it - do I just crack up at this? If I can't laugh at 
something I'm doing myself then I'll find something else I can do. It might be 
different for somebody else but for me does it make sense? 
Igor: 
Right, so again it's the idea of can you get your own mind into it, can you go 
first with the routine itself. Does it entertain you? Then you can pull it off and 
understand it and your instinct will be more attuned to how to present that 
particular routine, right? 
Don: 
I work on presenting scenarios and routines that people see in real life but 
maybe they just don't talk about it. If I can produce an effect on stage that 
people see in real life but they maybe don't talk about but they're kind of curious 
about it then it becomes a broad general interest type of routine that everyone 
can learn from so it becomes interesting in that respect also. 
Igor: 
Right, so you take little slices of your normal life and suddenly you get 
inspiration everywhere. You could be standing in a supermarket queue, the 
person in front of you is a little smelly and you can start wondering hey, how 
could I use this in the show? 
 
I'm sitting here and I'm feeling a little bit awkward, but you're trying not to show 
that the other person is a little but unhygienic, but in a stage show of course 
you can really bring the dilemma out.  
This person really stinks but you can't show it, but they really stink. The less 
you try to show it the more powerful they stink. There's this inner battle that you 
can then very dramatically exploit and show to people and they'll recognize it 
because everyone has been through that situation. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        74 
Whether it's in a supermarket queue or on a bus or if it's at a party or whatever 
it is, that's why it's more entertaining to them because it's sort of their life that's 
being presented as a caricature while at the same time demonstrating the 
power of hypnosis. 
Don: 
Well put. 
Igor: 
Let's move the pace a little bit if we may because we keep coming back to this 
idea of your character, your performance character, what's your performance 
going to be like and everyone should have their own performance character 
rather than mimicking other people and so on. 
 Could you spend a little time talking to us about what you mean by 
character?  
a. Can you give us some examples of different characters?  
b. What is a "bad" or a "good" character?  
c. How do you tell the difference? 
Don: 
I don't know that there's a good or a bad character, a character is something 
you utilize. You use your character. For example I had a person that he looked 
like a rat. His show wasn't very good so it didn't work because he looked like a 
rat. 
 
We had to take those character flaws that this individual had and turn them 
around to make it positive. One of the things I noticed he would do in his show 
was he would want to shake hands with a lady and give them an orgasm. 
 
It made the women uncomfortable, it made the men uncomfortable, and of 
course because he looked like a rat it made everybody uncomfortable. You 
have to turn these things around and maybe use a third party to do some of 
these things instead of you doing it yourself as a performer, so it becomes more 
palatable to the subjects and the audience, if that makes sense to you. 
Igor: 
Sure. So, rather than him being a slimy person that's saying look at the creepy 
powers I have, it becomes more like hey, I'm going to turn this shy guy here in 
the corner into a stud and, of course, everyone starts rooting for the shy guy, so 
he gets people on his side rather than his original angle, which clashed with his 
character rather than accentuating it, right? 
Don: 
Right. A routine like that all it does is make him look like an even worse person 
then he probably is. Maybe he is that way internally. 
Igor: 
It's the perception of it, right. If you're going to be perceived as a slimy 
character, that would be a very interesting performance character, but then 
you've got to be able to play that role without abusing that role. 
 What do people want?  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        75 
If there's a slimy character they want to be able to hate him, they want him to 
fail. You could be the slimy hypnotist for whom everything goes wrong. Of 
course, the audience will love you for allowing them to have their fantasy 
fulfilled of having a slimy hypnotist being punished by life, but then he still has 
all these strange powers, but they end up backfiring anyway. 
Don: 
Oftentimes, I look at myself. If you look at Hollywood, in a Hollywood movie if 
you've ever done a Hollywood movie and I've had the opportunity to do movies 
in the past, before you do a movie you have to go in front of a casting director 
which casts you. 
 
They look at you and they kind of get an eye for well, what kind of character 
can we put you in? They kind of get a feel for you and then you develop the 
character in their script around you and your personality. 
 
It's the same thing when I'm working with individuals. I look at a person and I 
have to make a judgment like okay, so you look like a rat, how can we make 
this work for you in this role as a stage hypnotist? 
 
I had another guy in Oregon, for example, very nice guy, very demure and his 
thing was he wanted to be a lot like this controlling demanding kind of hypnotist. 
But, you know what; he just didn't have that kind of personality. He didn't even 
look that way he looked kind of like a goofy guy. 
 
I encouraged him to go for the goofy hypnotist approach which worked very 
well for him, where the other thing failed for him. There again we have to cast 
ourselves the way - we have to sometimes step aside from the way we want 
ourselves to be and look at ourselves for the way that we are. 
 
Maybe we need to ask some people we know, people like friends or family. 
When you look at me, what do you think of? Be prepared for the answer. 
Igor: 
So, an important principle in terms of developing your character appears to be - 
performance character shall we say - is to look at what is natural to you, your 
natural everyday character anyway, and you pick out like a caricature of that 
character and with that caricature you make more of it for the show, and it just 
becomes a more extreme version of it. 
 
A shy guy might be an ultra shy hypnotist, which can have a great keynote 
comedic value. As a result they're basically, just accentuating something that's 
already there, emphasizing something that's already there, rather than trying to 
mimic something they don't have yet and as a result are incongruent in 
presenting. 
Don: 
Exactly. Be congruent with who you are. 
Igor: 
Is that the only way you can do this or is there something you can do - I mean, 
it strikes me that there might be a possibility to do the opposite also, which is to 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        76 
have something that is so contrasting with your character that itself can be 
dramatic if done the right way.  
 Is that something you've done with people as well? 
Don: 
Of course, you can definitely do that. You can completely contrast your 
character and it goes into you have to study you have to work at it. Being a 
contrarian can certainly work to your advantage. 
 
I had a guy, he was up in Canada, he wanted the show to be funny - a really 
nice guy, but he was afraid to be funny because he was in his home town. He 
grew up and people looked at him in one way, like he was this tough guy. 
 
He used to get in a lot of fights in his family, and he was just the town ruffian. In 
order to bypass that aspect we developed a friendly personality so we could 
reverse the context so he became the punching bag in the show instead of 
being a punching bag to the community.  
 
He became an object of ridicule in a fun way that allowed him to be a performer 
and it came off very well for him. 
Igor: 
Again, this is an important principle you bring out. We're going with a character 
that's already there. He is perceived as being a ruffian, a fighter, and this time 
rather than caricaturing and emphasizing that character, you're actually still 
honoring it and you're still using that as your lynchpin. 
But, you're actually reversing it and saying hey how about instead of being the 
ruffian, the rest of the town becomes the ruffians and he gets to be the one that 
gets constantly at the effect of it. 
 
Again, it still takes the same thing that's already there, the same dynamic that 
everyone knows and can instantly or intuitively recognize, and it plays off that 
although this time it's playing off it in a contrasted way rather than in an 
enhancing sort of way. 
Don: 
Right, that's exactly what you can do. So much of it is just for me - I have the 
years of experience of working with myself and working with other people, and 
also part of my background is theater. 
 
I've had the opportunity to work on developing different characters with myself, 
in my early days of studying drama and doing a few movies you'll never see on 
TV, my life took a change as I was going into that profession which is okay and 
I'm happy with what I've done, but I have that wonderful background in stage 
production and character development and reading scripts and drama, it's a lot 
of fun. 
 
I encourage people, go to your local community college, take some classes in 
drama, and learn character development. It'll do nothing but enhance your life 
and your showmanship. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        77 
Igor: 
That's actually an important thing because it goes right back to what we talked 
about in the interview which is that it is an art of showmanship. You go to 
Toastmaster to learn the basics of standing in front of crowds or you go to a 
drama workshop to understand the basics of character, theater, contrast and 
stuff like that. 
 
The point is you're going out there and you're educating yourself in the different 
ways that you can influence an audience to have a good time, not just to have a 
good time but to have a good time that actually speaks to them rather than 
something they'll remember 50 years from now rather than something they'll 
forget within 50 minutes of leaving. 
Don: 
It's the same way a person would come take one of your workshops in the near 
future because they will learn things from you specifically that they're not going 
to get in any other way because you're not only teaching them the principles of 
covert hypnosis, but you're doing it in a mentoring fashion that they're not going 
to be able to get just by reading a book. 
 
They need that hands-on in order to be able to put that into their psyche. 
Igor: 
I've got to tell you I agree. I view any seminar, any training in fact, I think 
schools should take a hint from a lot of the performance arts and say this is not 
just education this is edutainment. 
 
You have to work with the whole personality, which means you've got to make 
it a delight for them as well as informing them so that the whole aspect of their 
personality can be part of it. That's an important thing as well. 
 
Stage hypnosis can then end up having interesting after effects in the rest of 
your life. You become more charismatic in your day to day life just because 
you've had to learn to be that way on stage. It can't help but enhance the whole 
of your life, right? 
Don: 
Exactly.  
For example, I have a son in Montessori. In Montessori, their approach is 
working with the creativity of the individual as opposed to a public school where 
you're going and everybody is learning a group thing and it's very rigid. 
 
The Montessori aspect, I see how my son is getting creative and they're 
working to bring out all these good points with him and to work with his 
character development in ways he can't get in public school. 
 
It's the same way in the creative arts schools, junior high, high school or 
younger and you take these classes and whether you go to New York or L.A. 
and enroll in one of these schools that work with you on developing your music 
ability, your acting ability, your speaking ability; your entire character which is 
very positive. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        78 
 
In the same way in mentoring, whether it's in my program or yours, we do the 
same thing with individuals. We work on highlighting these aspects of a person. 
Igor: 
Absolutely. Beyond just highlighting an individual's character and using that as 
the pillar on which the whole show is built around, what kind of things should 
people pay attention to in order to let the show itself have a character, to build 
the drama or the flow or the humor of a show as it progresses from start to 
finish? 
 What kind of ideas and thoughts should people have to allow their 
show to really evolve naturally and be a powerful entertaining 
show? 
Don: 
Part of that is just music. Music sets the tone for everything that you do in your 
show. For example I always have music playing in the background to fill in the 
gaps. 
 
There's nothing worse to me than going to a performance with a stage 
hypnotist and they do a routine and then all of the sudden it goes blank while 
he's scrambling to think of what to do next, or she, and there's kind of a dead 
silence in the background. 
 
I like to have music in the background that creates this nice segue that will go 
from one routine to the next routine so there's always something flowing in the 
back of the mind. 
 
It keeps the tempo, it keeps the audience engaged, it keeps the subjects 
engaged, and that helps to either build it up dramatically or humor, depending 
on which music you choose to use. 
 
It's the same thing with your routines. If you have a certain music or tempo 
playing in between routines then on your next set you do you simply use a 
different musical score in the background to set the pace for the routine that 
you're doing. 
 
You have to do that because that creates the mood. 
Igor: 
Music is a very important part of the show, not just for the actual routines to pull 
people more into the routine, but also to fill the gaps in between and to set the 
scene for something to happen or that's going to happen in a moment's time, 
right? 
Don: 
Exactly. Always be prepared. I may go into a venue with my show down, I'll 
have maybe 20-30 routines that I'll do, but I'm always ready to shift it if what I'm 
doing or the audience is different, I may have to switch my routines on a 
moment's notice. 
Igor: 
Right. We'll be talking more in the next session when we talk about the 
background behind the scenes sort of stuff how you set things up with the DJ or 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        79 
whoever is running your sound, or if you run your own color how to do that so 
you can switch your music to follow the routine at a moment's notice and so on. 
 
Coming back to the idea of the importance of music; are you suggesting then 
that as a rule people should have some kind of theme music that they play 
between most of the skits and then that theme music gives way to the next skit 
music and the skit actually unfolds around that.  
Then, when the skit comes to the end again the theme music comes back as a 
general sit down and go into trance music. 
 
That creates a sort of anchor as well for everyone, not just the people on the 
stage being told oh, here's my trance music again, best go back in trance - but 
the audience also recognizes oh, he's doing some weird magic juju stuff again. 
 
They get to be experiencing a little bit of that as well. It wouldn't be unusual for 
an audience to develop increasing trancelike phenomenon as the show 
continues because they're being entranced just by watching people do this 
stuff. 
Don: 
I do have the same thing that goes on between each routine. 
Igor: 
Right, and at that point you just take a leaf out of a skit or short I saw on TV 
where the stage hypnotist puts the entire audience in trance, then sits down 
and reads a book for an hour, at the end of which he stands up and says you've 
all had a great time, it's the most amazing show you've ever seen, you'll tell all 
your friends how amazing it was and you'll be back next week for the next 
show.  
Thank you very much and goodnight. 
Don: 
You could do that too. You could put everybody in hypnosis, put some music on 
in the background, go into the green room, have a couple cocktails, have some 
shrimp and salad, come back, and say thank you. 
Igor: 
Everyone has had a great time and you will remember this as the best show 
you've ever seen but next week when you come back again with all your friends 
you'll realize you'll have an even better time. Until next week - I'll see you then. 
Don: 
I'm going to have to do that one night that sounds like fun. 
Igor: 
That will be fun. We're coming to the end of this interview and there's no more 
appropriate way of ending this interview or this seminar portion than with the 
big question which is… 
 How do you end a show with a big bang rather than with a 
whimper? 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        80 
Don: 
It's like when you start your show you want to start it with a big bang and when 
you're done you want to end it just as spectacularly. When I do my shows I like 
to do the human bridge. It's something I've done for 20 years or so. 
 
There again you have to make it dramatic. You can't just say I'm going to stand 
on this person, watch this everybody this is going to be great. I make it very 
dramatic. I make it very intense. I put on music that's so loud that it just blows 
everybody's eardrums out. I turn down the lights.  
I create an ambience and then when I'm done - I'll create these dramatic 
passes over a person and make it look like something mystical and magical 
and then I'll stand on the person and the lights come up and everybody claps 
and they're going oh my God, how did he do that, it looked so awesome. 
 
At that point, I'll say a few words to the audience and end it on that note, on 
something that makes them say wow. 
Igor: 
It sounds like you're taking the idea - the image that comes to my mind is 
watching a magician who is levitating a woman who makes big hoo-ha about 
putting her in some kind of a trance. 
Then she lies on the table, he waves some more magic passes and she starts 
lifting a little bit - it's a real drama that's built up around it rather than just saying 
get on the table love, oh look she's up in the air, isn't that cool? Now get back 
down and we'll finish the show. 
Don: 
It's all about showmanship. It's not what you do it's how you do it. 
Igor: 
Another point we need to address, I know you like to do the bridge, but also the 
human bridge is a - shall we say - very risqué act to do purely because of the 
biomechanics involved. 
 Can you tell us a little bit about the safety elements?  
a. How do you make sure you take care of people?  
And also, of course, emphasizing everyone who is listening to this, if you're 
starting a show, do not start with a human bridge. 
 
You're going to need to go find someone who can do it well so you can put all 
the safety tips into the right place at the right time so you don’t end up hurting 
people. 
 
Much as you mentioned in the interview section there are people out there who 
see it, misunderstand it, do it wrong, and as a result can end up doing a lot of 
damage to people. This is a very dangerous thing to do unless you understand 
how to do it safely, right? 
Don: 
Exactly. The way that I approach it of course is that during the course of the 
evening I'm watching each and every one of my subjects, determining who I am 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        81 
going to pick out for the finale, and I always go for the smallest female that I 
possibly can unless there's no females and then I'll use a guy. 
 
I always try to pick the smallest female and as I get ready to move into the 
human bridge there again I'll turn out the lights and turn on some fog and turn 
the music up really loud and turn off my microphone and then I'll simply talk to 
somebody and I'll ask them first off if they've ever had a neck or back problem. 
 
If the answer is yes, I will pass on them. If they say no and I say is it okay if I 
stand on you and they say yes, that's the person I'm going to work with. My 
microphone goes back on, I'll grab their hand, I'll bring them in front of the stage 
and then the drama begins. 
 
That's how I create my safety for myself. There again, it's how I position them 
before I stand on them. I think I spoke earlier where I watched a person put 
their head and their feet on a chair and then of course they collapsed. 
 
There's a proper way to do the human bridge and if you do it incorrectly you 
can hurt a person, so it's very important to know how to position a person 
exactly over two supports so that they don't have any injuries and so they don't 
collapse, and so you have a wonderful spectacular finale that everybody is just 
in awe of. 
Igor: 
Just to emphasize the point here, if anyone is thinking of going out and doing 
something like this avoid the human bridge. There's a lot of other fun stuff.  
There's a lot of scope in stage hypnosis that you can do and if you absolutely 
want to do something dramatic like something physical like the human bridge 
and then make sure you find someone like Don Spencer here who really knows 
how to do it. 
Understand all the safety angles, knows all the things that could go wrong, and 
knows how to make sure that doesn't happen, and learn those things 
thoroughly.  We're in the business here of charming people, not ruining their 
lives. 
Don: 
Right. Just because you can do it doesn't mean you ought to do it. You don't 
want to be a 250 pound guy standing on a 110 pound woman, no matter how 
good of a hypnotist you may be, you're going to break somebody's back. 
Igor: 
Just to point out Don, you're a relatively small built person which means you 
don't have the weight of the Governor of California, Arnold-sized person, which 
would be a much bigger endeavor to put through anybody's body, let alone a 
small woman's body. 
Don: 
Exactly, and if I was I'd pick a bigger woman, or just pick a guy who is well built, 
who can take it. 
Igor: 
Exactly. We've got this big dramatic finish. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        82 
 How do you then end the show?  
The lights come on, you're standing there, you say a few words to the 
audience, you bring the person who is now stuck between two chairs back to 
standing.  
What’s a nice way to finish a show, to have people walking out buzzing and 
talking about you, so that you're guaranteed they'll be talking about you to their 
friends for years to come? 
Don: 
One of the things I like to do after I do that finale is I'll have the person sit back 
in their chairs and I'll do one more powerful induction with everybody on the 
stage. 
 
What I do is when I invite people to the stage to begin with I tell everybody that 
comes up that before they leave they're going to get suggestions of their very 
own. 
 
When I'm done standing on the person and I have everyone sit back in their 
chairs I have them close their eyes, I give them all a suggestion of their very 
own, a very quick one or two-minute hypnotherapy session that's empowering 
for them.  
Then, of course, I'll give them each separate suggestions that when they go 
back into the audience they are going to respond to maybe somebody that 
they're with in a crazy way, they're going to hug them, kiss them or maybe 
they're all going to walk out there and start shaking everybody's hands or doing 
something that's just a little bit odd. 
 
When I'm done with the show I dismiss them and they go back into the 
audience and the audience is waiting for them to come out there to see what 
they're gong to do. 
 
Are they going to do it? Are they going to kiss me? Are they going to sit on my 
lap? Are they going to say something to me? What's going to happen? 
 
I end it that way and people are out there in the audience, the hypnotized 
people are going back out there and the audience is watching them, these 
people are obviously still hypnotized because they're doing something crazy. 
 
What I like to do is I like to go out into the audience and wake each one of 
these people up individually. Here's the reason why I do it - people want to be 
close to you the performer, and they want to see the person next to them being 
woken up really close so it's a twofold purpose. 
Igor: 
It really brings the whole show into the audience, makes them able to feel and 
touch it so they'll know wow, it's happened right next to me and it's someone I 
know. This is crazy there can't be any tricks here because I was sitting right 
next to him when it happened. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        83 
 
You've gone into the audience now, you've cleared them all up, you come back 
on stage, you say your final farewell, the finale music comes up, everyone 
gives a wild crazy foot stomping round of applause, a standing ovation, and 
they file out and that's the end of the show, right? 
Don: 
They file out and then at the very end then my DJ, my sound tech, will say 
ladies and gentlemen thank you for coming out to the show, please do me a 
favor and give Spencer another powerful round of applause. 
 
You get that last applause, you bow, and then you bow out of the theater. 
Igor: 
Depending on what kind of venue you have, sometimes you'll also go and 
mingle with the crowd afterwards. You can't do that in a theater, you're less 
likely to mingle, but you might shake their hands at the end of the performance 
as they're walking out. 
 
In a nightclub you can join them, have a drink, let people come up to you at the 
bar and talk to you n private. I think that's a nice elegant touch at the end of a 
show to be approachable. 
 
As you say they like to be part of the performer, to be able to touch them and 
see them close up. It's a chance for them to connect with you on that level 
which I think is always a very charming thing. I know you do this and it makes 
for that nice rounded feel good ending. 
Don: 
Yes. Just because the show is over doesn’t mean it's over. I like to go out there 
and mingle with people. If it's in a theater I'll go stand by the door and shake 
people's hands on the way out. 
 
If it's in a nightclub I'll go around and mingle. People will be sitting around in 
little groups, especially those who were hypnotized are just chatting about it like 
- what happened? 
 
I'll go talk with them and thank them. One of the fun things that happens quite 
often too is you're going out there and the people who were hypnotized are out 
there with their friends and they're going man; I can't remember anything, I 
don't know what I did. 
 
I'll take it upon myself I'll say you don't remember anything? Watch this. The 
people are watching me and it's like; what's he going to do? I'll do this quick 
trance induction on the person and say listen; when I tap your head or tap your 
hand or something, you're going to remember everything that you've done, 
have a great time remembering everything right now. 
 
They'll open their eyes and say oh man - you can see their face turns red and 
they just start going oh, I can't believe it. It just makes for a good after show 
effect. 
Igor: 
The show continues long after the show is over. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        84 
Don: 
The show continues. You have the opportunity, maybe people will have 
questions for you or they want to get a hold of you, they want a business card, 
they want a private consultation so yes, it continues. 
Igor: 
That's a great place to mention that this seminar is going to continue in the next 
session where we'll be talking about all the behind the scenes work that is 
actually really important to make a show work. 
 
I think we've done a very good job and I want to thank you for this Don. You’ve 
really dissected a stage hypnosis show and looked at all the pieces, how they 
work, as well as how to really make them work. 
 
In the next session we're going to look at the background, the technical 
requirements. How do you actually get yourself on the stage in the first place, 
safety requirements, all these different things that the audience never really 
sees and they should never really see because to the extent they don't see it 
you've done your job right. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        85 
Seminar 2 – Part 1 
 
Igor: 
Welcome to StreetHypnosis.com. My name is Igor Ledochowski and I'm here 
with master hypnotist Don Spencer. Welcome back Don. 
Don: 
Thank you Igor, it's good to be back. 
Igor: 
Don is the world's fastest hypnotist. He is one of the most consummate stage 
hypnosis performers as well as actually having immense skills in hypnotherapy 
and other things as well. 
 
In the last session Don you gave us the insights as to how to structure, run and 
have a basically compelling powerful stage hypnosis show. We went through 
everything from how the anatomy of it runs, what you do, when you do it and 
how you do it. 
 
The ideas you have to have in the back of your head in order to do a good job 
with it, there's something else that makes a great stage hypnotist, isn't there? 
There's all the stuff that people don't see, the kind of behind the scene sort of 
stuff. 
 Can you tell us a little about why the, behind the scenes stuff is as 
important as all the stuff we talked about in the last session and all 
you do on stage? 
Don: 
As important or even more important. Some of the thing's you do need to have 
behind you which is very important is your equipment. Your equipment consists 
of a sound system which has speakers, a mixer, an amp, microphones and 
special effects, all these things that make you shine on stage. 
 
One thing you don't want to do is go to a venue and rely on their sound system, 
because if you do you might as well just cut your throat and walk out the door 
because chances are you're going to have a very bad show unless in you're in 
a giant theater that has a $500,000 overhead lighting system, projectors and 
everything else. 
Igor: 
So, it's really important that people understand the ambience created, the 
sound sphere if you like, is as important as the visual demonstration stuff that's 
going on, and that's why having a good sound system helps. 
 
You mentioned a whole bunch of different things there. 
 Could you give us an idea of how much the different bits - the speakers, 
the mixers and all these things - might cost someone, just so they can 
get a sense of what range or price range they should be budgeting for 
and paying in?  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        86 
Otherwise, they'll end up getting cheap equipment that will break or won't do 
the job they want. 
Don: 
Let’s start at the top. 
1. To start you're going to need some good speakers.  
For a good speaker system you're going to need at least two - depending on 
the size of the room - 15-17 inch speakers that go out to the audience and 
you're going to spend around $2,500 for those, maybe $3,000 because you're 
going to include a couple of speakers that come back as monitors on the stage 
so subjects have a clear sound so they can understand what you're saying. 
2. You're going to need a mixer.  
A mixer is a board where you input all of your microphone and whether you're 
using a laptop, a CD player, or a minidisk player, so you need a mixer to mix 
your sound. There again you're going to spend anywhere between $300 and 
$500, depending on how big your show is and how many inputs you need. 
3. An amplifier to run the mixer and the speakers. 
You’ll spend roughly $400 on a good amp. In an amplifier you're going to need 
at least 900 watts to run the mixer and the speakers.  
4. Then, of course, you need mics.  
A good mic is going to cost you around $700 and you can of course get lesser 
mics at like Radio Shack if you're in a jam financially, but if you want a good 
headset microphone or handheld you're going to spend upwards of $700 for a 
good microphone. 
5. Along with that you're going to want to have a hardwire mic, which is 
simply a microphone that is attached to a wire that goes into the mixer 
itself.   
You'll want that in case you run into a situation where your wireless signals are 
being interfered with by anything on the outside like police sirens or something 
that might happen, so you need a good hardwire microphone also. 
Igor: 
That's quite a technical list. If someone is very serious about creating a great 
show and touring with it and so on I'm sure it's worth the investment. If 
someone is just starting off and hasn't got the cash - because that's like almost 
$5,000 just in equipment alone… 
 What can someone do if they just want to start and dip their toes in 
the waters of stage hypnosis who don’t have that kind of budget to 
work with yet? 
Don: 
Get a boom box. No, I'm just kidding on that one. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        87 
 
Here's something that's really inexpensive and it's effective if you don't have the 
budget to lay down $10,000 on a sound system.  
6. Hire a good DJ.  
They'll come in and they'll work for you for a show, and you can get a good DJ 
that will charge you anywhere from $100-$300 to come in and do a show and 
they'll bring in all the equipment you need. You can even teach them how to run 
the show in about 30 minutes. A good DJ is worth their money because they 
can follow all your leads and you can pace them throughout the entire event. 
 
That's a good way to start also. 
Igor: 
If you do want to go down the DJ route… 
 How can you recognize what's a good DJ versus a bad DJ? 
Don: 
It's going to be different for everybody. My first question when I talk to a DJ, first 
I look at their website, I make sure they have some good credentials, then I all 
them and I talk to them. 
 
My first question is, are you familiar with Macs or an iPod? I'm a Mac guy. 
Being a Mac guy, I run everything off my computer which is a Mac and if they're 
going to be running the show they're going to be running it off my computer, so 
I want to make sure they're familiar with that because I don't have the time to 
teach somebody how to do that even though it's not that difficult. 
 
A good DJ will have a laptop computer, whether it's a Mac or a PC. That's 
important to me. That's the first question. If they have that and they've been 
doing this for five or ten years, then I feel comfortable with them. 
Igor: 
So, it's really this. 
 Number one, can they handle the technology you're bringing which in 
this case is a Mac laptop? 
 Number two, time served in the industry, if they've been around for a 
few years and they're making a decent living you figure they know what 
they're doing. 
Don: 
Yes, and of course I ask them what equipment they have. They have to have 
the right equipment. They've got to have the speakers, mixers and amps. I ask 
them all those important questions and of course they're going to come set up 
the sound and they're going to break it down. That's one thing you don't have to 
do which makes it really nice. 
 
At some point as a person gets further into this career they'll have their own 
sound equipment, they'll have their own DJ that works with them that can travel 
with them. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        88 
Igor: 
This suggests that even if you're not going to be able to afford the $4,000 or 
$5,000 to buy a decent sound set right away you still want to do your research 
and find out what different speakers are, what the qualities are, how they work 
and so on, purely so that when you actually work with a DJ you can quiz them, 
find out what equipment they have, and if they know how to use it. 
Don: 
One of the things you don't want - a lot of DJs work with powered speakers. 
Personally I don’t' like using powered speakers, those are the kind that don't 
have amps, they're pre-amped so they have an amp inside of them, which 
sometimes causes distortion in sound. 
 What's really important when doing a show is that your voice is 
very crisp and very clear and you're going to have different 
channels?  
Usually when you have powered speakers everything comes out the same 
channel and it becomes distorted. You want to make sure you have one 
channel for your voice, one channel for your computer, one channel for your 
speakers and one channel for the sub woofers, whatever you're using. 
Igor: 
It sounds like the whole sound department is a very important thing for people 
to pay attention to. We've got a nice list of the equipment they need and the 
things they need to pay attention to, beyond that it might even be worthwhile 
someone doing a basic sound course somewhere to get them used to it or if 
they've got a friend who is a DJ to learn the ropes. 
 
The more you understand about the sound, how it's created, what's good and 
what's bad the more you'll be able to judge what equipment you buy yourself 
and how to use it, or if you want to hire someone in how good they are and how 
good their equipment is. 
Don: 
Exactly. 
Igor: 
I have a few more DJ questions. 
 In terms of training the DJ, how do you do that?  
a. Do you just run him through the show and act out little bits and 
pieces so he roughly knows when skits come?  
b. Do you have a list for him saying what music in what order?  
c. How do you deal with that side of things? 
Don: 
What I'll do is I'll meet the DJ if I hire a DJ and meet them at the venue a couple 
hours ahead of time. We'll get set up, I'll just open up my computer and 
everything is listed on there.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        89 
I'll run through the entire show in about 15-20 minutes, so he's familiar with the 
various tunes that I use in the background, the musical scores, and so he has a 
sense of how I operate so we can go back and forth. 
 
A good DJ, really in 20-30 minutes they will get it really quick and you'll have a 
flawless show. 
Igor: 
We've got the whole idea of developing the sound under our belts now; what if 
someone wants to go for a more spectacular show, like I know you have the 
rock and roll theme. That's the one that comes strongly in your show. 
 What would someone do if they wanted to create special effects 
and those sorts of things? 
Don: 
When you get into special effects you're talking about maybe strobe lights, 
smoke and mirrors, different types of lighting that you can put on the sides or 
behind and above you. There's many different ways you can go with lighting. 
 
There again, if you have absolutely no experience with lighting find somebody 
to help you with that because you can ruin a complete show having your lights 
set up improperly, especially if you're using strobe lights. 
 
You want to be careful using strobe lights because if you have people up on 
stage or in the audience and you have strobe lights; a person can have an 
epileptic seizure. You have to be very careful when you're using lighting of any 
kind. 
 
If you're going to be using strobe lights I always have a little sign outside the 
door saying strobe lights in use, if you are epileptic you may want to just close 
your eyes or wait 20 minutes before you come into the showroom. 
 
American DJ, they're a company on the Internet that you can go and look at the 
various lights that they have online and get an idea of what makes sense to you 
because everybody would be different on what attracts you. 
 
There again it goes back to when you do a show, what floats your boat? If you 
can afford it maybe you want to talk to somebody in stage production and get 
some feedback from them, go over a complete show and get some creative 
input from somebody who is a real professional in the business. 
 
Not specifically do they have to be a stage hypnotist, but just somebody who is 
experienced in stage production. 
Igor: 
That makes a lot of sense because you're now basically getting all of the 
expertise on a stage production rather than their expertise on stage hypnosis. 
They're making the atmosphere not necessarily the show. 
Don: 
Exactly right. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        90 
Igor: 
If you're going to buy your own special effects equipment, just give people a 
ballpark figure.  
 What kind of ballpark would they be in, in terms of how much 
money they'd have to budget for? 
Don: 
I would probably budget, for all of the equipment including the sound system, 
maybe $20,000-$30,000. The lights are going to cost you anywhere from $500-
$1,000 apiece so depending on how many lights you want. 
 
If you get into a good venue they're going to have a lot of the lights for you, but 
leave nothing to chance because you'll be doing a lot of corporate gigs, more 
than likely you'll go out, rent a ballroom or something and you want the 
ambience to be correct so you want to set it up so the show looks the way you 
want. 
 
That's who you are. You are the product, you are the show, and you don't want 
to do a half assed show, but you want to do a show that really is going to define 
who you are and what your show is about, that’s what people are going to 
come back to and what they're going to buy. It's worth the money. 
Igor: 
Again, if someone is starting off they're not going to be able to afford the 
$30,000 for the special effects plus the $5,000 for the audio equipment and the 
rest of it. 
 Is there a shoestring version that you would recommend people 
start out with? 
Don: 
Back to the DJ, a good DJ will have a whole garage full of lighting, light trees, 
special effect lighting, gels and everything you need. A good DJ will have 
everything you need and they may charge you a little bit more for it or they may 
not. 
 
If you're in a venue and you think you're going to be there awhile a lot of DJs 
will jump at the opportunity to work with you more than once and give you a 
good price if you're going to use them again. 
 
Once again, a DJ is a good way to go. Some venues as I said earlier have 
some lights but I wouldn't count on it. 
Igor: 
So, it's always worth investigating the venue out first and doing your 
groundwork properly, and if you're going to be in a place several times build a 
relationship because it sounds like that's really where you make your life easier. 
 
Have a good relationship with the DJ and you'll get a better price, you'll get a 
better show because he knows your show, and at that point everything just rolls 
more smoothly, right? 
 
Don, tell us, we've got the equipment set up, we know how to create the 
atmosphere now, if we're going for a bigger type show we may even have hired 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        91 
a show producer to either impart their wisdom to us or to even stage mange the 
whole event for us, depending on what size show we're going for at this point. 
 
We still haven't dealt with something very important which is, although we know 
how to do a show and all the things we have to look at, how to develop a 
character and all these things for it which are all important. 
I'm just thinking about the novice, the person who has never been on stage 
before, never done a stage hypnosis show, hasn't even done a training or 
maybe a little training, who wants to go out there and become a stage hypnotist 
but hasn't got the experience. 
 
It's a catch 22 isn't it? It's difficult to sell yourself to a venue without the 
experience and it's difficult to get the experience without getting a venue to do 
in. 
 How can you break that catch 22 situation? 
Don: 
Final Cut Pro. Of course, I'm joking there but you can do anything with a good 
software editing system. The reality is if you don't have the experience you fake 
it until you make it. You just have to get out there and present yourself as if 
you've done shows. 
 
You can also just go around to every club or community hall and offer to do a 
lecture demonstration, don't take any money. You're going to have to get some 
exposure somewhere you're going to have to get a promo tape at some time in 
order to get into the big leagues, to get the big money. 
 
You're not going to go into any comedy club or large theater. They're not going 
to take the risk on you if you don't have some sort of background, so you have 
to develop that. 
 
Even if you have to go to a club for example and learn how to speak through 
Toastmasters or any of the other organizational clubs, film everything you do. 
Take a camera and film it. 
 
You can take these examples and you can splice them together on a good 
software editing program and build a demo tape that you can give to a venue 
that will open the door for you. 
 
Oftentimes too, it's not what you know it's who you know. I think that's very 
important. It's not always what you know, it's sometimes who you know to get in 
the door, but you've got to be persistent and keep knocking on the doors. 
Igor: 
Just to put a little structure on what you've been suggesting, I think some very 
good ideas have come out there. 
1. One, if you haven't got any experience on a stage or speaking like that, 
just get some experience.  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        92 
It doesn’t even have to be stage hypnosis experience. In other words, things 
like Toastmasters which are just about public speaking is enough to get you out 
in front of people and getting used to people looking at you and understanding 
that whole dynamic.  
 
That's a good starting point for someone with no experience at all to get used to 
the pressure of what it feels like to be on stage. 
2. The next step you're suggesting is that now that you're comfortable in 
front of people, be comfortable doing hypnosis in front of people. 
Getting a couple of simple hypnotic phenomenon like you go to some kind of a 
lecture demo, you go to a Rotary Club, an Eagles or Lions Club or something 
like that and offer a free lecture of some sort. 
3. Then, during the lecture you hypnotize the audience, you pick the best 
volunteers and you do a couple of phenomenon. 
 
It's good for you because you'll get your confidence up. It's good for you 
because you'll get exposure because everyone will say wow, look at the 
hypnotist who can do this.  
Now people are talking about you, and it's also good for you because if you 
videotape those lectures you can pull out the bits where you're doing some 
crazy hypnotic phenomena, put them together into a video package and use 
that as your initial promo until you have a proper show you can record. 
 
You can show people look; I've done all these things, so I can do this. Again it 
allows you to really pull yourself up by your bootstraps, right. 
Don: 
Right, that's exactly the way to approach it. 
Igor: 
That leaves one big question open.  
 How do you do a lecture demo?  
a. What would you recommend people start with?  
If I was, for example, to go to a Rotary Club and say hey, I'm going to do a free 
lecture demo for you on hypnosis. 
 What do I offer them?  
 How do I approach them, so that I can actually get in there and 
actually get that experience? 
b. In fact, what do I do once I get there? 
Don: 
That's the easy part because most organizations are always looking for 
somebody to come in and be a guest speaker. They don't really care who you 
are, so that's the easy thing. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        93 
 
As a hypnotist what you have to offer is to give a lecture on the mind and how 
the mind works, along with stress management and then as you're doing this 
simple demonstration which is maybe 10-20 minutes or whatever they allow, 
you can do a group demonstration, do a basic induction, do some group 
suggestibility tests. 
 
From there you get the best subjects to do some individual demonstrations, do 
this one-on-one stuff and you know what, you're going to have an amazing 
feedback from the people in the audience.  
 
They're going to watch you and they're going to say how did he do this? You 
might even wonder how you did this but the dynamic in that type of lecture is 
really not much different then doing a stage show. 
 
So, you have an entire group, you do a basic induction maybe with everybody, 
do some group suggestibility tests, you get the best subjects out of there, you 
bring them up on stage and you do a show. 
Igor: 
You basically do everything we talked about in the last seminar we just had, but 
you cut it down to fit. If you've got 20 minutes you make it fit 20 minutes. If 
you've got half an hour you make it fit half an hour. If you've got a whole hour 
you may as well do the whole show and make sure you tweak it every now and 
again so you talk a little bit about how the mind helps people in different ways. 
 
It wouldn’t be surprising by the way if people would end up picking up a hell of a 
lot of business just if they have a therapy practice as well, it's a great way to fill 
your practice even if you never want to do stage hypnosis, right? 
Don: 
It is a great way to pick up a hypnotherapy practice because the people will be 
so amazed at what you've done that they will definitely want a business card 
from you to call you later. 
Igor: 
So, a tip from the top is when you go to do one of these lecture demos bring 
stacks of business cards. Better still, bring your appointment book and get them 
to actually write their names in the appointments right away. Better still get 
them to pay for it straight away because then you know they're definitely 
coming. 
Don: 
That's right. I'm so busy that I don't know - if you want to make an appointment 
I'm sure you'll enjoy going ahead and signing up here right now and I do accept 
deposits right now to ensure your space. 
Igor: 
It's part of salesmanship and we'll be coming onto the idea of salesmanship in 
terms of selling your show a little bit more later on as well. 
 
Before we do that we've got a good idea, in terms of, here's the equipment you 
need and where you can get a cheap shoestring budget version of it. We've 
even got an idea of how to start getting exposure, how to start getting 
experience, so the young novice stage hypnotist can cut his teeth and get some 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        94 
very important experiences without the pressure of having to perform on a full 
live show or without getting stuck in the catch 22 loop. 
 
The next question I have now as we're getting in towards the show itself, we've 
got all of our equipment set up, we've got some experience and stuff as well, 
and we kept talking about this point of how important show music is.  
 Can you tell us a little bit about the technical aspects of show 
music in terms of how you deliver it? 
a. Also, how do you choose the music that you want? 
Don: 
Well, that's interesting. Here's what I used to do and I don't do so much of it 
now because we have the internet, but I used to go - I'm a music guy. I love 
music. So, whenever I listen to music, whether it's to the radio or watching 
something on TV, as I began to develop my stage show I would always ask 
myself. 
How can I make that music work in a routine?  
How can I turn that into a routine? 
 
I've got a feeling and if it's something that moves me its like, how can I use 
that? I really love this song, how can I make that work in a routine? That's how I 
went about creating my hypnosis show, by listening to music. 
Igor: 
You'd start off with hearing a song, you really like the feel of it, the sound of it, 
the rhythm, something somehow moves you and gives you an experience, and 
you start thinking to yourself. 
 How could this be used in a show?  
a. How could I use this music to build some kind of a scene around it, 
so when the audience sees it they feel and see the whole experience 
rising up in front of them?  
b. Is that right? 
Don: 
That's a very good mind model, yes. I like that. That's exactly what I do. Also I 
do the same thing by watching TV. If I watch TV and I see a TV show or if I go 
to the movies and I watch a movie and there's something on there that strikes 
me as this is kind of cool, how can I use that in my show? 
 
I can also work on a musical score to fit that also. 
Igor: 
You're basically looking outside anywhere in life where you have experiences 
to get inspiration. We've talked already at length in the other interviews about 
going to other stage hypnosis shows will give you some rough ideas of where 
to start and just give you the experience of seeing other people performing, but 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        95 
then you go beyond that into watching comedians, watching TV, watching 
people in everyday life. 
 
If something catches you as an interesting situation you do the reverse. You 
start with a situation and ask. 
 How can I put this situation on stage and what music would fit the 
situation to create the right kind of atmosphere? 
Don: 
Right. I get inspired from my son. I have a six-year old son, Dakota, and I watch 
him a lot. I'll see things that he does and say now I can use that in a show. I 
can regress everybody and they're going to be five or six years old and I'll set 
up some scenarios that remind me of things my son does because it just cracks 
me up. I can utilize that. 
Igor: 
You mentioned something really important which is the idea of regression in a 
show. A lot of people just to warn people in terms of using this, regression is an 
important thing to do right or handle well in a show because it has got the risk 
of abreaction. 
 
I know that when you do regressions you do it in a specific way to basically cut 
out the possibility or at least limit the possibility of someone abreacting.  
 Can you tell us a little bit about that so people understand that 
you're doing this again, within a safety parameter, you're not just 
randomly regressing people and if they happen to have trauma in 
the past, that's their problem? 
Don: 
The way that I'll frame it is I'll say in a moment I'm going to count to three, for 
example, and we're going to go back in time. We're going to go back to a time 
when you were just five or six years old, a happy time and a place where you 
feel comfortable. That's how I approach it. 
 
I just frame it to let them know that we're going to go back to a time when you 
were five or six, a happy time only, where you're safe and comfortable. We're 
going to have fun with that. 
 
That suggestion will help to put their minds at ease when you're doing a 
regression. Can someone have an abreaction? Of course, they can, no matter 
what I say or do it can certainly happen; it has happened. 
 
Being a trained hypnotherapist for many years those are simple things to 
overcome in a matter of seconds if you happen to see somebody having a 
problem. 
 
For example you may be working with a group of adults, they’re six years old, 
and you may notice that there's somebody sitting over there and they're crying. 
If you don't know what to think about that in your mind you may think oh, my 
God they're crying what have I done? I don't know what to do. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        96 
 
I just go over to them and I'll ask them what's the matter? What's wrong little 
boy or little girl? They'll tell me, then I'll say okay, maybe they have to go to the 
bathroom and they're afraid to ask. I'll say here; just touch my finger, you don’t 
have to go anymore. 
 
I'll use it as part of the show in what you would say is a covert type of way to 
bypass a potentially bad situation.  
Igor: 
It requires that you again keep a hawk like eye on your subjects that if there's 
any sign that things might start going wrong, even on the way towards a 
regression, you can step straight in there and start detouring it before it goes 
into any really nasty territory, right. 
Don: 
Exactly. You must watch your subjects at all time. 
Igor: 
Which once again goes back to the idea that first and foremost you really need 
to understand hypnosis and then you become a stage hypnotist on top of that 
so that if things do occur, you know how to deal with them, right? 
Don: 
Right. 
Igor: 
We've got the idea of developing routines. We can either, start with the music 
and build a scene around it or we can start with an event and develop a music 
that fits it. 
 
We talked a lot about the anatomy of a stage show, especially in the last show 
where we start with the intro, the test, the induction, the warm ups and the main 
routines and the big climax. 
 What I'm wondering now is how many routines or skits should 
someone aim to have or develop for a show, for one night of 
shows? 
Don: 
I think that for most people they're going to run into between 15-20 different 
routines they're going to do in one night, and that includes any type of warm up 
routines they do. 
 
In my shows, I have a set of about 75 different routines that I can break into 
because even though I have a very strict set of routines that I want to do, you 
may have a different kind of an audience where what you thought you were 
going to do may not be what you can do. 
 
I always have a large repertoire of other routines I can break into at any given 
time. You want to go there figuring you're going to do 15-20 routines, but be 
ready with at least 50. 
Igor: 
Especially for a new hypnotist it's useful for them to have their 20 or so routines 
and have maybe another 10 back-up ones that they can run into and as time 
goes by you rotate them so that your repertoire grows naturally. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        97 
 
There's no good having a routine as a backup that you've never done, right? 
Don: 
Exactly. You want to play with all of them so you can see what works and what 
doesn't. 
Igor: 
Right, you need to know exactly how to run it otherwise okay my favorite 
routine, the one I know how to work really well isn't working today, I know what 
I'll do, I'll start a routine that I've never done in my life before but don't really 
know how it works, I don't even know if I can pull it off. That'll work in this 
situation. 
Don: 
Let's see if we can get people jumping on pianos, right. That's the thing to do. 
Igor: 
For everyone who is wondering about the piano reference let me just enlighten 
you a little bit. The last time Don and I were together we ended up doing a 
stage hypnosis show together for a set of high school graduates it was a 
fantastic and fun evening. 
 
During one of my sections of the show we were doing a slightly scary thing with 
like a puppet that came to life and of course what we failed to realize is that in 
doing the whole setup, which was just an eerie sort of setup, I had accidentally 
regressed them - which of course we figured within about two minutes - 
because the following thing happened. 
 
The doll starts animating, and everyone runs offstage. I thought, man I forgot 
the first rule of stage hypnosis. We stopped them all, it's all over now, come 
back on stage, and then of course we restart the whole scene again and 
meanwhile the audience is laughing hysterically. 
 
We make the conditions you'll be staying on the stage at all times, making sure 
you're well clear of the borders and the edges and so on. They can hide behind 
chairs and the natural obstacles in the room and so on. 
 
The next thing I know, the doll starts coming back to life again, they're all 
rushing to the corner, one girl is actually climbing the piano that's been stored 
in the corner and there are these sounds of disjointed keys going bing-bang-
bong. At which point, I look at Don and say okay, I think this is probably where 
we have to cap this one. 
 
The audience, of course, is laughing hysterically. We're laughing hysterically, 
and there's a beautiful moment where the girl that's actually racing up the piano 
- we just put everyone to sleep straight away, and she just sort of drapes over 
the piano like a lounge picture that hangs in the corner of a bar somewhere. 
That's pretty much the climax of that particular scene. 
 
It was totally unplanned. The reaction was a lot more vigorous than I had 
imagined it would be but it was a lot of fun. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        98 
Don: 
I think I have that somewhere on video and if I can find that maybe I'll put that 
on You Tube. 
Igor: 
That would be really funny. Pianos aside now, we've got the idea of the skits 
and the importance of actually having tested your skits, for example, that was a 
new skit that I made up that day, so now we have a much better understanding 
of how to run something like that, the potential consequences. 
 
It's important that you do that with all your skits, that you rotate them through, 
so you're familiar with every single one of your routines, what it does, how it 
works, and what the potential misunderstandings within it can be so you can 
clean it up.  
 
In time you'll build your way up to 50 routines, 60 routines, 70-75, so you'll 
always have backups you can go to if a particular thing doesn't quite work the 
way you want it to, doesn't have the impact you want it to or just runs flat and 
you need to move on to something else. 
 
Let's move onto the next sequence. We've got the behind the scenes stuff of 
the show nicely laid out. We know where to get the equipment, how to work the 
equipment and we know how to prepare some of the performance elements of 
the show. 
 Looking now, at how to get the work in the first place, what's the 
most important thing?  
a. You mentioned promotional material; what kinds of things are 
included in promotional material?  
b. What can people expect and how might someone go about preparing 
something like that? 
Don: 
Nowadays your promotional material consists of your website and a DVD. A 
DVD is something that's a 15-30 minute bit of your show. Promotional agents, 
they want to see what you're doing. 
 
For example on my website I have tons of different video clips and I have 
complete hypnosis shows available on my website also for promotional 
individuals to go and watch so I don't have to send anything to them, but you do 
need a website, you do need a DVD to promote yourself. 
 
If you're doing a show yourself you want to send out press releases to TV, 
radio, newspapers, that's part of the press kit. You need a headshot of yourself 
or a body shot of yourself in some kind of hypnotic pose, however you're trying 
to fashion your specific look. 
 
If you want to put your hands in front of you or behind your back, if you want to 
smile or look kind of goofy or dramatic; however you want to look that's part of 
you, you need that picture. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        99 
 
We go back to what we talked about earlier. Do a few shows, tape it, and then 
you can make your demo out of that and just show it to people. Go around to 
the venues and knock on the door. 
 
What I do - I don't really need to do this anymore but I used to go around with 
my iPod or with my computer and I had my show on there. I could walk into a 
venue, open up my computer and say look; here's my show.  
 
This is what I can do for you, this is how we can promote it, and this is how 
much money you can make. When do we start? 
Igor: 
Let me just break into what you just said there, I think it's a really fascinating 
thing. You've got the idea of the promo video; we know some tricks around how 
to create a promo video if you haven't got the experience yet for the free lecture 
demo and so on. 
 
I like the idea of you showing them the stuff so they can actually see you doing 
it. One of the things you mentioned there is here's the earning potential this 
kind of show has.  
 Could you tell us a little bit about the numbers that different kinds 
of venues, in terms of cash, can generate for different people so 
people know what to say? 
 
If you go to a nightclub you can make them one particular offer, if you go to a 
theater it'll be a different kind of offer in terms of what their upside is.  
 Can you give us a rough idea of the financials behind a show like 
that? 
Don: 
Yes. It's going to be different from town to town, city to city, state to state and 
country to country. Roughly if you go into a nightclub, night clubbers aren't big 
spenders. 
 
If you're new at this, if they offer you $300-$500 you'll do well. Take that now as 
you're building experience, you need it so wherever you can get the work do it, 
$300 is better then nothing but $500 is better still. 
 
If you go to a theater chances are they're not going to hire you if you're new. In 
a larger theater you're going to have to firewall that which means you pay for 
the theater, you pay for the space, you pay for all the advertising and you do all 
the promotions yourself. The greater the risk the greater the reward. It's that 
simple. 
 
In a nightclub you can also approach them if they just want to pay you a small 
amount you can also approach them with a door split. Say listen let's sell the 
tickets for $10 each.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        100 
We'll get 200 people in there, that's $2,000. Split the door with me, I'll keep 
$1,000, you keep $1,000 and you keep all the bar money I don't want anything. 
If you have $200 people in there they're going to average maybe $20 apiece so 
that's another $4,000 at the bar for the bar, so they're happy with that, making 
an extra $5,000. 
Igor: 
Juts to repeat this, this is something that someone trying to sell a stage show, 
especially in a nightclub scene, really needs to understand. First of all the 
nightclub needs to know what's their upside? 
 
Their upside is they'll sell more drinks they'll have 200 people in the room which 
probably will stay on for partying afterwards anyway. They'll be doing the pre-
show and after show, they'll be spending at least $20 a head so that's about 
$4,000 for a small intimate venue of like 200 people. 
 
There are 200 people and an extra $4,000 plus the door money if you're doing 
a split like the one we suggested there, that's a grand to the venue so they've 
made $5,000 for your night; you've made $1,000 for your night maybe, plus 
another $100-$200 as a basic thing they've given you. 
 
That way everyone knows exactly what the upside is, everyone knows what 
they stand to gain which makes a much more persuasive sell than just saying 
hey, let's just have some fun and entertain people and it'll be good. 
 
It is a business and you have to show them the business bottom line as part of 
your pitch. 
Don: 
That's all they care about. They just want to know what's in it for them. They 
don't care who you are, they just want to know what's in it for them. It doesn't 
matter if you're a brand new hypnotist or if you're somebody who has been 
around for years, or if you're somebody famous or infamous - they just want to 
know am I going to make money on this deal? 
 
They don't mind spending money on promotions and stuff if they think they're 
going to make money on it, but it's going to be up to you to persuade them that 
you're worth the risk, even when there's no risk and you're doing a door split.  
It's really no risk to them, especially if they don't spend any money, because 
usually in a bar they'll put up posters all over, maybe do a mailing to their email 
list if they have one and they'll promote it for a month or two. The people that 
come to the show are going to be their regulars over a two month period, the 
regulars will go out, tell other people and bring other people to the venue. 
 
When you approach them you want a couple month leeway to do your show, 
you're not going to walk into a club and say I want to do a show next week, it 
just isn't realistic. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        101 
 
They're not going to have time to promote it, you’re not going to have enough 
people, nobody is going to be happy, and you won't be going back to that place 
ever again. 
Igor: 
The thing to bear in mind is, if you’re doing a show and you manage to 
relatively pack the house, because it's been promoted properly, even an 
average stage hypnosis show for most parts of the country and most parts of 
the world really, it's such a new and different thing that what might seem like an 
average show to you, like an okay show to you, maybe even a slightly poor 
show to you will still be a highlight for a lot of people's entertainment 
experience. 
Don: 
Exactly, and that's a very important point you make. I can walk into a venue, I 
can look around, and a guy that used to work with me, Dave, would walk into 
the venue and I'd look at him and say okay - we used to have this scale from 
one to 10 and I'd say this is going to be a 10 or it's going to be a 15. 
 
Sometimes I'd say this is going to be a two. The interesting thing is that even if 
it turned out to be a two, and that's for me as far as how I feel doing a show 
because if I leave a show and say man that was a 10 or a 15 I feel good, but 
the audience may not have the same feeling that I do only because I'm a really 
fussy picky perfectionist when I do my shows. 
 
You're right; if it's a two the audience has never seen it and even though you 
may not feel like it was your best show to them it was fantastic. You'll be 
surprised that the remarks you get from these people coming up to you and 
saying that was awesome, you were so much fun I dig it. Come back again 
soon. 
Igor: 
This is again part of the standards. We've spent a lot of time talking about how 
to have this amazing stage show and really be a cut above the rest and that's 
really important, but it's also important to realize that when you're first starting 
your shows do not have to be great. 
 
They can be totally mundane and average and whilst you're building the 
experience you'll still be providing real value, real entertainment to people so 
it's okay to start at the bottom and work your way up.  
 
It's good to have the ambition to get to the top but don't kill yourself along the 
way because you're not "good enough". That will come with experience, 
practice, and thinking about these things we've been talking about. 
Don: 
Exactly right. It's interesting; along with the people who are newbie’s at this, 
that will be their experience, and I mean I've had the fortune of training people 
who just happen to have a lot of money, they happen to own a comedy club or 
they own a bar and so they take my training and they just go back to their own 
venue and do their own thing. That's not going to be for everybody though. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        102 
Igor: 
I'm going to start a comedy club just so I can do my own show. That's kind of 
how you started though, isn't it? You basically went to nightclubs, you hired the 
venue to do your own thing - so as you called it you fore walled it - and you took 
all the risk, you paid for the space, but you end up making much more on the 
other side. 
 
Even in a small venue, $10 per person with 20 people in the venue, that's 
$2,000 paid for an evening and a couple hours of work. It can have its upside. If 
you're now talking about a theater with like 1,000 seats in, in a theater you can 
probably put the price up so the money potential starts escalating. 
Don: 
You can but you have to consider though also, even on the smaller venue, if I 
fore wall something like that and you get 200 people and say you charge them 
$10 and get them $2,000, it may cost me $1,000 to promote it. 
Igor: 
Right, which is why you would rather start off by doing a door split with an 
existing venue, because it's a lot easier to kind of get to the grips with the whole 
marketing and understanding how it all works type thing. 
Don: 
There's nothing worse than fore walling a place just to feed your own ego. You 
hire a room and pay all the expenses, it costs you $2,000, you get 200 people 
in there, they pay the overhead and you make nothing. That's always an 
unpleasant experience also. 
Igor: 
That's a fancy show, not very good as a business model. 
Don: 
No, it's not. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        103 
Seminar 2 – Part 2 
 
Igor: 
Looking at some other ways to pick up work then; we talked about going into 
venues and making a pitch, saying look this is what you stand to gain, this is 
what I can offer you. 
 
We've talked a little bit about the risks and the potential rewards of basically 
hiring a venue for yourself and taking all the risk but then all the money on the 
backside as well. 
 What other ways are there for people to actually pick up work if 
they don't want to take those kinds of risks? 
Don: 
They can go around to their community and talk to business to business 
networking groups that would potentially hire you, and then when you get a little 
bit more experience you can work on getting onto the fair circuit and getting 
onto the college circuit, getting onto the high school circuit. 
 
There again they have associations that you can go to once a year where 
you're actually hired to work these circuits. That's another way to approach the 
market. 
 
When you get into that level where you're working with an international 
association of fairs or a national organization for colleges you better have a 
promo ready. If you don't have a promo ready you don't have a chance in hell 
of getting in the door because they want to see what you've got. 
 
You're not going to be the only hypnotist there trying to sell yourself. 
Igor: 
Looking at these trade fairs again, just to repeat the names so people can 
make a note of them - for the fair circuits in the US, it's called the International 
Association of Fairs is that correct? 
Don: 
It's the International Association of Fairs and Expos. They hire the talent for the 
counties and the state fairs, and then they have regional ones as well. There 
again, no promo package don't even go. 
Igor: 
In terms of college and high school kinds of areas that's the National 
Association of Colleges, NACA or something. 
 
Is that correct? 
Don: 
NACA is the abbreviation for that yes. You can Google that and get more 
information on that for sure. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        104 
Igor: 
If I was to go to one of these fairs, I've got my promo tape ready in my hand 
maybe I even have my laptop in my pocket. 
 How do these things work?  
a. Do I just wander around and do something or is there like an 
appointment system?  
b. How does it work that you can actually get your information out 
there? 
Don: 
For example, if you do the fair circuit, they have a thing down in Las Vegas 
every November. You go down there and you sit for three days, you have a 
little booth and you drink a lot because the booze is free. 
 
I tell you, there's a lot of people running around or crawling around during those 
three days. You rent your little booth and you set it up. 
 
For example, when I go there I just put a big monitor up there and have my 
show going in a continuous spin for three days so people can watch the promo 
and then I'm available to talk to people. 
 
All these buyers, they walk by your booth and if they're interested they stop, 
they talk to you. If they like what you do they hire you on the spot. The other 
thing I do is I'll have somebody there and I'll walk around to all the booths and 
I'll meet everyone in the tradeshow. It's a lot of work. 
Igor: 
You still have to hustle, it's just the benefit is all the work is contained in one 
space and a short period of time, but you still have to do the legwork, you still 
walk around, you still have to shake hands, smile, talk, meet people and tell 
them about what you do and so on. 
 
Your interpersonal skills are pretty important at this point, right? 
Don: 
Yes, they are important. You have to be prepared to spend a lot of money. 
When you're on that level you're going to have to pay to rent a booth, you're 
going to have to pay to stay in Vegas, wherever the venue is. 
 
You have food, lodging and everything on top of that, so you can easily spend 
$5,000 on a tradeshow just to promote yourself in the hopes that you're going 
to be bought. 
 
The competition there is very fierce and there are people there, new hypnotists 
that come in there all the time that will undercut you, and they will work for 
almost nothing just to get their feet in the door. 
Igor: 
That's something to be aware of. The upside, of course, is you could almost fill 
a year of your diary if you find the right people and the right sponsors and 
whatever for that investment. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        105 
 
Again it's a different kind of risk that you take. It has a lot of potential but of 
course there's a different risk you take in terms of just hiring the booth and all 
the expenses you mentioned already. 
Don: 
Exactly. Along with that there's tradeshows for like the cruise lines and the 
airlines and hotels, there's so many different avenues. It's all about networking. 
YOU have to get out there and knock on doors and let your fingers do the 
searching and get out there and network. 
 
It's not what you know it's who you know. If you get out there and build rapport 
with individuals and you're a nice person and you're not really pushy you can 
open some doors and get some really good business. You can make a lot of 
money in this business by being a nice person, getting out there, and meeting 
people. 
Igor: 
That's kind of a theme that's coming up over and over again. Go out there, 
meet people, show them what you do, go out there meet people, show them 
what you do. Don't take rejection personally, go out there, meet people, and 
show them what you do. 
 
Keep going and eventually it's just like the law of numbers will work in your 
favor, especially if you are personable enough and think about how you 
approach people, so you change your approach to make it more seductive as 
you go along. 
Don: 
Some people choose to go out there and hire an agent to do the work for them. 
Not a lot of hypnotists use agents but if you get a good agent a good agent will 
charge you anywhere from 20% or probably closer to 30% for your show, but if 
they charge you 30% to get you a show that's 70% you didn't have to begin 
with. It's not a bad deal. 
 
When I first started I had three different agents that worked for me and they got 
me a lot of business. 
Igor: 
Have a couple questions. 
 How do you get in with an agent?  
a. How do you get them to accept you so you can sit back and let their 
work roll in as far as hopefully you're concerned? 
Don: 
You've got to be a pest. It's like anything. They're dodgy people. Honest to God 
man, they get stacks of promotional material from people every day. Everybody 
wants to be represented.  
 
You go to an agency office and you look at their desk and they'll have 20, 30, 
40 or 50 stacks of promotional DVDs, not just from hypnotists but magicians, 
bands, impressionists, clowns - whatever. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        106 
 
That doesn't even include all the email they get from people trying to get work 
from them. It goes back to have a good personality, take the time, go meet 
these people in person, be personable, and find out a little bit about the person.  
 
Take them a gift, make them feel special, wine and dine them. 
Igor: 
It goes back to classic salesmanship. Learn some sales strategies. If you 
haven't got that type of personality what can you do? There are sales trainings 
of course which will help you you've got to sell yourself at that point, so you 
need to understand the whole sales process to some degree anyway. 
 What else can people do to develop the right kind of personality for 
the business side of this? 
Don: 
For the business side? There are a lot of courses you can take. They can 
certainly take any number of courses that you offer or that I offer as far as 
developing business acumen for this profession but it's a show business and 
the biggest part of this is the business. The show is not the big part it's the 
business. 
 
Even the show is a business that you have to put together. You getting up there 
and doing the show is very miniscule compared to the business aspect of it. I 
would say if you need help go find a therapist. 
Igor: 
That's more for the people side of things. If you don't like people and you can't 
speak to them or you're too shy, well we're hypnosis folks, this is what we do. If 
you can't do it yourself, which is fine it happens, then find someone who is 
competent to help you with that side of things. 
 
I think the key thing here is to say there are a lot of resources out there that will 
help you in the next steps, whether it's to learn how to run a business, how to 
market a business, how to sell yourself and sell your services or if it's a 
question of working your personality. 
So, you can go out there and take rejection, so you can go out there and 
present yourself well, so you can go out there and be a people person and just 
have the energy to keep knocking on those doors until enough start opening 
that you can actually make a living from it. 
Don: 
Take a class in self hypnosis, see your local hypnotherapist, take a course from 
Dale Carnegie– How to Win Friends and Influence People– take some 
marketing classes, go to the (SBA) Small Business Association; there are tons 
of resources out there for people. 
Igor: 
It's important to emphasize this because a lot of people go in with these starry 
eyed dreams like I'm going to be a stage hypnotist now and they don't realize 
that just having the skill which is very important, and having good skill will 
definitely take you to a level that's above a lot of other people - but even then 
there's a business aspect. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        107 
 
Work won't just come rolling in, you've got to go out and find it. You've got to 
make it happen. 
Don: 
You have to. It's really interesting when people hire me as a mentor on a one 
on one basis, they don't know what they're getting themselves into. We cover 
all of these aspects with a person. 
 
We go from ground zero with most people teaching these concepts in a short 
period of time, but the people that go through and make it are highly successful, 
have a lot of fun and are a better person for it. There are no shortcuts in this. 
Igor: 
There are a lot of successful husband and wife teams or friends where basically 
one person does the work and one person does all the business side of things.  
 Do you have any advice or tips on how that can work and how to 
set that sort of dynamic up? 
Don: 
Sure. If you're a husband and wife, it can go two ways. For example, I'm not 
married but let's say I had a wife, she would do the business aspect, she would 
make all the calls, all the contacts, and I would just tend to doing the show.  
That would be my part, I would do the show and she would do all the 
paperwork, the bookkeeping and everything else so I could just focus on the 
creative aspect of the performance. That's how I would handle that as a 
husband and wife. 
 
If she's working with me in the show I would pick up some of the slack on the 
business part of it and she could be my assistant in the show itself. I've seen a 
number of hypnotists who do that quite successfully around the country, where 
you have a husband and wife team who are both out there performing together. 
Igor: 
That's another interesting dynamic or another interesting approach people can 
take. There's lots of choices people have, lots of different ways of doing it, it 
really then comes down to figuring out what they want, what niche they want to 
go to, where their strengths are and what audiences they like. 
 
If you recall we spoke a little bit about the different types of audience the Vegas 
type, the corporate type, the high schools, the colleges, having regular gigs - all 
these different places we've already mentioned to a certain extent. 
 
Wherever your main pool is, your main niches are, whatever your personal 
circumstances are, that starts to define what approach you take to marketing, 
what approach you take to business structure, what approach you take to how 
you develop the show and how you present the show. 
 
It all has to happen around you. There's no one template that says do steps 
one through ten and you'll be a successful stage hypnotist guaranteed, 
because it doesn't take your whole life into account. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        108 
Don: 
It's called teamwork. If you're working with a partner its teamwork and you do 
have to find your strengths and weaknesses for each individual on the team. 
Igor: 
Let's leave the idea of the business aspects on the side for a little bit and focus 
back on the show time behind the scenes sort of stuff. We talked about arriving 
at the venue a few hours early and setting things up.  
 Can you talk us a little bit more through the actual process that you 
go through when you actually arrive at the scene? 
 
Let's say you're going to a high school event or a corporate event. You turn up 
a couple of hours before the show is supposed to start. 
 What do you do?  
a. What have you brought with you?  
b. How do you arrange it?  
c. How do you put it together?  
d. What are the technical bits that you run through?  
e. Do you have a checklist of things you go through to make sure 
everything is in place and you don't forget anything? 
Don: 
Yes, you can have a checklist on a sheet of paper as you begin, but to go over 
that really quickly I'll go a couple hours early or at least at some point when 
there's nobody there. 
 
I'll set up the speakers, make sure the light works, hook up the computer and 
hook up the entire sound system, and then I'll do a sound check and make sure 
the microphone is working. Go into the back of the room; talk into the 
microphone, say check - check, testing one, two, three… 
 
Make sure you have equal sound coming out of your speakers so you can hear 
it clearly anywhere in the room. That's what I do. If I'm working with a DJ or 
even with my sound tech we'll go through the show very quickly and just make 
sure we're on the same page. 
 
That's it, that's all I do. That's my checklist of everything I do pre-show. 
Igor: 
Let me ask you more questions regarding this subject. 
 What about the chairs for the delegates?  
a. Do you wait until before the show starts or bring them up as the 
volunteers come up?  
b. Do you have them on the stage already?  

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        109 
c. How does that work? 
Don: 
The chairs are already there. I didn't mention that. I make sure the chairs are all 
set up, anywhere from 10-50 to 20-40 chairs, depending on the venue you're 
doing. I have all the chairs set up across the stage. 
 
There again it's a preference for hypnotists. I have mine in a straight line. I've 
seen other guys that put them in a circular fashion or maybe have two or three 
different rows of chairs it depends on the venue you're in and what you're 
familiar and comfortable with doing. 
 
There's no real hard rule for how to set up the chairs except have the chairs 
together and don't have any arms on the chairs. 
Igor: 
That's actually a very important point, the lack of arms, especially because 
you're going to expect people to move and you don't want to have arms 
inhibiting them.  
It could even be dangerous because if someone tries to get up and gets stuck 
in the chair, don't even notice it then they can do themselves or someone else 
harm when the chair picks up with them and they actually go whacking into 
someone. 
 That's actually quite a big point isn't it? 
Don: 
It is, yes. I don't want arms because the people up on stage, they're going to be 
leaning across each other all the time. They're going to be flopping back and 
flopping forth, they're going to be everywhere and I don't want them going over 
some arm and ripping into their rib cage or something like that. That might 
cause damage. 
Igor: 
People might think it's good to have the arm rests to prevent people from falling 
out of their chairs, especially if they're going to be flopping around the place.  
 How do you deal with the safety element of people falling out of 
their chairs during the show? 
Don: 
There's a couple ways to approach it. One way is that as you begin the show, 
as people are being hypnotized, you can simply tell them you are stuck to your 
chair. Your back is stuck to the back or your butt is stuck to the seat of the 
chair. If you try to get up you'll find you can't get up. If you try hard to get up out 
of your chair you're stuck and you can't move. 
 
You watch them, they're stuck you're in good shape. You can have them put on 
an imaginary seat belt. Put this seat belt on right now, this seat belt will keep 
you safe at all times. At no time will you ever fall out of your chair, because you 
are strapped safely in your chair for the entire time of the show unless I specify 
or release you from that chair. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        110 
 
That's another thing you can possibly do to keep people safe and in their 
chairs. Even if you do that it's no guarantee that a person isn't going to fall out 
of their chair if there's a real flopper. 
Igor: 
So there's no excuse for not paying attention to your volunteers. 
Don: 
You've got to pay attention no matter what. 
Igor: 
You've gone through your whole checklist. You've set your sound up, you've 
gone to the back of the room to hear the bounce of the sound, you've mixed it 
around a bit; everything is working well. I presume then you just go home and 
you relax for a big, right? 
Don: 
Depending on how much time I'll either, go home or if time is short and if the 
venue has a green room I'll go back in the green room and flip on the TV and 
have a little meal before show time. 
Igor: 
When would you go and typically get the pre-show stuff we talked about in the 
last session going?  
 When would you start that whole thing going? 
Don: 
That would start when we opened the doors. For example, if the show starts at 
eight and the doors open at 7:30, I would have the music queued to start at 
7:30 when the doors opened. That's how I'd approach that quite simply. 
 
The music begins when the doors open. 
Igor: 
So that when people walk in they're not walking into a quiet empty room, they're 
walking into a place that's already buzzing, to kind of build on the anticipation 
that's already there. 
Don: 
I want people to walk into my party. This is my party. This is my thing. We're 
going to have a good time, so let's get down. I want to create a festive mood or 
whatever. 
 
The doors open, the music is already playing, and people are be-bopping down 
the floor to their chairs. 
Igor: 
Let's say we're getting close to show time.  
 What kinds of behind the scenes stuff do you have on your mind to 
make sure the show goes well and the business element is taken 
care of as well? 
Don: 
Actually, at that point, I don't have anything going on in my mind. I've already 
fully prepared because I know that the lights are good, the chairs are set, the 
sound is good and the music is playing. I've already prepared in the back of the 
room a table set up where I can sell CDs, DVDs, t-shirts, posters, or whatever. I 
might bring with me to sell in the back of the room to generate more income. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        111 
 
Everything is already done so that I don't have to think about anything except 
ladies and gentlemen, please put your hands together for the world's fastest 
hypnotist - and that's when I go. 
Igor: 
Let's go back... I think you just mentioned a very important point there. Having 
a table in the back with CDs and DVDs where you can basically make extra 
cash, even if you're just being paid $1,000 for a show, you've taken the door 
money at a nightclub, the same way a nightclub sells their booze and makes 
their money from that you can also make extra cash on your show by selling 
products. 
Don: 
Right, you can, and I encourage you to do that. If you don't have something 
make it. People will buy stop smoking CDs, weight loss CDs, pain control, 
stress management, insomnia type CDs - these are things that are hot sellers 
at the hypnosis show. 
 
You have to remember, you have a whole audience of people who are 
hypnogogic. Just because the people on the stage are the best subjects, 
everybody who is in that room has been mesmerized. 
 
Whenever you activate the unconscious mind and people begin to fall into your 
trance by watching the show and laughing and crying or whatever they're 
doing, they've entered their emotional unconscious mind. That is a trance state. 
 
Throughout the show I always remind people that we do have CD's, DVD's and 
other material available at the end of the show. 
Igor: 
You'll actually literally mention it mid show, you'll just make a side comment and 
then carry on with the show and then have another side comment and carry on 
with the show, just to seed the idea so they can start thinking about it before 
they leave; otherwise, it might be a bit too last minute and they'll say it's too 
much to think about now. 
 
It's percolating inside them as they watch your show so that by the time they 
leave they say you know what? I have a problem with sleeping; I'm getting that 
insomnia tape so I can sort that out once and for all.  
 Is that kind of the thing you do? 
Don: 
Exactly. It's not unusual for me to pick up an extra $200, $300 or $400 after I do 
a show, in a small venue with maybe 200 people. 
Igor: 
Wow, that's not bad going. 
Don: 
No that's not chump change. It's not bad. That will pay for lodging and buy you 
a good meal. 
Igor: 
Definitely worthwhile. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        112 
Don: 
It's a good selling point also if you're approaching a nightclub because I always 
tell the nightclubs I say listen; you're going to have a couple hundred people out 
there hypnotized - do you know how much more booze I can sell?  
 
In fact, let's make some special hypnotic drinks for the evening. I can sell them. 
Igor: 
Special hypno-cocktails. 
Don: 
Yes, special cocktails at a special price. I do that at every bar that I go to, we 
always have a special hypnotic drink. 
Igor: 
When you drink the hypnotic drink ladies and gentlemen you might find your 
night becomes twice as much fun, so you can buy your normal drinks or you 
can go have a special hypno-juice. 
 
Let's move on again. We've got the idea of the show set up in the background. 
We've even got the idea of preparing the back of the room with some products 
so we can make a little extra cash. 
 
Now, let's turn to the behind the scenes stuff you might do during the show.  
 What kind of things do we have to keep in our minds during the 
show that the audience won't necessarily see, and hopefully, will 
never get to see, especially when it comes to things like safety? 
Don: 
Some of the things that are going to go on that you need to be aware of 
besides keeping the subjects safe. When you give a suggestion to the people 
you want to make sure your voice is very clear. 
 
They need to hear what you say and each individual, for example if you're 
giving a suggestion to one or two individuals and not everybody, you need to 
make sure it's just those two individuals who are going to respond and not 
everybody who is up on stage. 
 
You have to be very clear and very concise with what you're doing when you're 
giving suggestions because in a hypnotic state everybody will want to respond 
to the suggestion. You've got to be very clear with that. 
Igor: 
How might you single an individual out over the others so that person 
only responds and the other ones stay put? 
Don: 
Very simply what I do is I just go over and I say the individual I'm now touching, 
in a moment I'm going to count to three and on the number three your eyes 
open and this is what you're going to do. 
 
The person I'm touching right now and only the person I'm touching right now 
will act upon this suggestion on the count of three. That's an example of how I 
frame that so everybody else knows if they're not being touched - unless of 
course they're having some sort of kinesthetic hallucination - oh, he's touching 
me. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        113 
Igor: 
That's possible as well. 
Don: 
It is, I've had it happen quite often and it will happen again in the future. 
Igor: 
Let me ask you about this. 
 Is it possible that whilst someone is actually acting out the 
suggestion you've prepared only for them and you set all that stuff 
up?  
a. Is it possible that someone in the seated volunteers watching them 
suddenly gets inspired by something random that no one really 
knows about why or when to jump up and do their own thing with it? 
b. Is that something that happens and how do you take care of it? 
Don: 
Oh yes, I've had that happen a lot. When you're doing a show, all of the sudden 
you give a suggestion and somebody out there in the audience who has been 
sitting there for 30-45 minutes all of the sudden they get up and start acting out.  
 
I'm going oh my God, this person is hypnotized and I didn't even know it. It's 
actually kind of funny the people around them will start busting up. If I don't 
catch them right away the audience will start screaming hey Spencer over here. 
 
I'll look over there. Normally, if you're on stage you have lights in your eyes and 
if you have a lot of lights in your eyes you can't see that well out into the 
audience. In fact, sometimes you play a venue and it's just dark. 
 
That's why oftentimes on a stage I'll wear sunglasses because the lights are so 
bright and you can't see out there. 
 
I'll go out to the audience and simply grab the person and have them come up 
on stage really quickly and just make them part of the show or I'll look at them 
from the stage and say look at me now and do not look away. I am going to 
count to three and at three your eyes will close, your body will go loose, limp 
and relaxed, you will fall to the floor gently now - one, two, and three - sleep. 
 
They'll just kind of slowly melt down to the floor and I'll always say if there's 
somebody next to them, please make sure they go down gently. I'll always 
have that safety in mind because a person can fall and smack their head. 
Igor: 
I can also see it being very dramatic when somebody in the audience who 
wasn't even "part of the show", suddenly just is hypnotized and passes out 
because the hypnotist says sleep right in front of them. 
 Can you imagine you're sitting in the chair and the person next to 
you stands up and you think; this is a bit weird, and the hypnotist 
says sleep and the person just sort of drools and slowly just 
collapses over your lap? 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        114 
 
I had not seen that one coming at all. That could be a real highlight for 
someone as well, couldn't it? 
Don: 
It could be. I've had that happen and you make it part of the show. I'll go out 
into the audience and I'll look at this person and I'll say wow - I don't know what 
to say, ladies and gentlemen just give me a moment here, let me find out 
what's going on with this individual. 
 
I'll make it very dramatic. I know they're hypnotized but the people out there 
might be thinking wow, did someone get hurt? What's happening? I may 
change the whole tone of the show for a moment, just to bring it down, take 
everybody down, and then I'll do something crazy and the whole audience will 
just bust out laughing. 
 
You can tweak peoples' emotions that way also in a show if you have that 
happen. 
Igor: 
Taking the next step from that though, something that might be of concern to 
some people, is what if you have a heckler? Especially I can imagine if you're in 
a nightclub or a bar you might have a couple of people who are really drunk in 
the back and they start coming up with comments. 
 How do you deal with that sort of situation? 
Don: 
A couple ways to do that. One way is to have a bouncer ahead of time be 
aware that if anybody gets up and heckles they just go grab them by the scrap 
of the neck and throw them out. 
 
Another way to approach that is I have a few one liners to toss back at the 
individual to belittle them and put them in their place that works also. Study 
some one-liners from comedians or get a book on how to deal with idiots. 
Igor: 
Here’s a question. 
 Can you give me an example of a situation you've been through, 
where you had to deal with a heckler; someone that was going to 
interfere with the show but you dealt with it in one of these different 
ways? 
Don: 
To keep it clean, one of the things that I use often is kind of like - you know 
what? If you're such a great showman, here's the mic, come up here and get it 
and you can finish the show for me. 
 
Of course, the person is not going to come up there and they're going to feel 
really bad, they're going to sit down embarrassed and the bouncer is just going 
to get them out there. 
 
If they're just a drunk people don't want a drunk messing with the show. They 
are very generous and if a person is drunk and being obnoxious I've seen 
people grab a drunk and throw him out of the bar. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        115 
Igor: 
Just because he's interfering with their show and they actually like the show. It's 
important to remember if you have a heckler, if you've done your job right up 
until this point, the rest of the audience is actually on your side not the heckler's 
side. 
Don: 
They are on your side. 
Igor: 
That’s a lot of power. That gives you a lot of authority to do things which makes 
your life a lot easier. This also means heckling is a lot less likely to happen as a 
result unless you pecifically only go to venues like bars and nightclubs where 
alcohol can mix in with that and make that more likely to happen. 
Don: 
In all the years that I've done shows I think I've had - you know I've done a few 
thousand shows and I can honestly say I've maybe five or six hecklers in all 
that time. 
Igor: 
That's pretty low odds. That's good to keep that in perspective. 
Don: 
When you go out there, you do your show, one of the things that you need to 
do is you go out there and you command the stage, you command the 
audience, and you command the subjects. 
 
If you go out there full of confidence with this charismatic outlook and you have 
this great command of the stage and the sound and everything nobody is going 
to mess with you, nobody wants to mess with you. 
 
I always tell people you know what, say it one more time, I have 20 people here 
hypnotized that will come down there and kick the living crap our of you. 
Igor: 
You're actually turning the whole situation into a joke, taking the thunder or 
stealing the energy of whatever the heckler is doing, so usually they'll pipe 
down and sit back down again. 
 
Again just to emphasize having a heckler in your show is a really unlikely thing 
to happen unless you're doing a really poor job, in other words you're 
volunteers disrespectfully which I've seen happen a few times or you're treating 
your audience disrespectfully. 
 
Keep the audience on your side. Treat them like a welcomed guest and 
hecklers…  
a. won't arise, and  
b. if they do arise usually the audience will take care of them for you 
through social pressure and all kinds of other things. 
 
Let's turn our attention in the last few minutes to some other things that I think 
will be of real importance to people. The one thing we haven't handled yet in 
terms of the actual show so far is this idea of the microphone itself. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        116 
 
You've mentioned different kinds of mics, wireless and headsets and mics with 
cords and so on, but there's actually an artistry to using the microphone as well 
so it's an invisible part of the show rather than something clunky that keeps 
getting in the way. 
 Can you give us some tips around how to do that? 
Don: 
Yes. There again microphones become something that is a matter of 
preference. Some guys like to have a hand held mic, some people like a 
headset mic, it just depends. 
 
One of the things that I do with the mic, whether it's the headset or a handheld, 
there are instances where I do need to speak directly to an individual that I 
don't want the entire audience to hear, so I will just flip the mic off, put it on 
mute, whether it's on a handheld mic or there's a switch on the pack that's on 
my back on the transmitter so I can reduce that and talk to somebody outside 
the ears of the audience or the other subjects. 
 
For example, if somebody needs to be dismissed I can turn down my mic and 
dismiss them quietly or if I'm getting ready to do a routine and I need to talk to 
them and frame something or make sure they are going to be appropriate for 
the routine because it's a very serious one, then I'll turn down the mic and after 
I get their okay I can turn the mic up and go on with the show. 
Igor: 
Right. For example, something we mentioned in the last interview was the idea 
of the human bridge. This would be an example where you turn the mic off, 
check the person thoroughly to make sure they are physically and otherwise 
capable to do that stunt safely.  
You do that all offline, so that when you actually do the demonstration it looks 
much more serious, much more dramatic to the audience because they are not 
aware of the setup you created to make sure it's actually very safe. 
Don: 
Right. 
Igor: 
I'm just going to move on from that point towards some of the final things we've 
alluded to but haven't really looked at in more detail. The idea of how people 
dress to present themselves, that's something that the character has to do with, 
but also how do they refine their character? 
 
I can't imagine that a newbie stage hypnotist or even someone who has been 
up there for a while will instantly know what the character is they want to 
portray and have it. 
 
It seems to me that it's more of a thing that evolves over time, you grow into it 
with thought and polish and feedback and experience and so on. 
Don: 
If people had a voice like yours, that's the big part of it right there.  
Igor: 
Why, thank you sir. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        117 
Don: 
If they don't have an Igor voice that just instantly induces trances with people 
the dress is very important because you want to create a mood and the clothes 
are the perfect way to do that. 
 
You want to dress better then your audience or you want to dress eclectically. 
You want to look different. You're not going to go there and dress - for lack of a 
better term - like the common folks out there, because you're a common guy off 
stage but you want to be flashy, you want to get up there and give a 
performance. 
 
There again go to the stage. Look at musicians, look at comics, except some of 
the red neck comedy guys who go out there with short sleeves on. You don't 
want to dress like that. 
 
You can, you might be able to get away with that in the Deep South people 
probably won't take you too seriously. I've seen hypnotists get up there dressed 
like slobs and their show actually reflects it. 
 
If you get up there and you dress really sharp then that's going to set the mood 
right off for the audience. They're going to look at you and think this guy is a 
professional, I mean look at the way he dresses. That is awesome. 
 
That really sets the mood. They think you're a serious person. You can dress to 
be very serious or you can dress to be comedic, it depends on how you want to 
pace your show, how you want to frame it. 
 
For example, I'm getting ready to do some shows overseas, I've been putting 
some thought into this and thinking- am I going to wear my leather pants to this 
show? 
 
I could, but then again, I think maybe I'm just going to wear shorts and put on a 
really sharp jacket on top of that and a pair of tennis shoes. I'll dress down in 
one way, but be eclectic in the way that I dress so it still comes off as very 
flashy. 
Igor: 
I understand. A place to kind of get some inspiration for that would of course be 
to watch other performers as you say, comedians and entertainers and people 
like that, because then you'll get some ideas like oh, that's an interesting 
combination he's got there, I don’t like what he's done there. 
 
You have to think about what makes it interesting and what makes it not work 
so that you can develop your sense of attire. 
Don: 
If you just watch the comedy channel you'll see the different comedians that get 
up there and do their presentations. Some of the guys dress really sharp, other 
guys just dress like the guy next door, and others dress really dumpy. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        118 
 
It's kind of how you want to project yourself. If your show is going to be very 
dramatic then you're going to want to look very slick. If it's more of a comedic 
type of presentation then you can let things fly a little bit easier. 
 
Study other people. 
Igor: 
Here are a couple more questions for you. 
 What about the study of character now?  
a. How do you evolve your character so you really have a compelling 
character on stage for your whole stage hypnosis show? 
 
Really it comes down to you, doesn't it? It comes down to your character, how 
you present it, how you frame it, how you speak - the whole shebang is the 
show really. 
Don: 
I get feedback. I like to have forms out there at the end of the show for people 
to fill out and part of that is; what did you like about the show? What did you not 
like? 
 
That probably would be considered a bad thing to ask but I like to know what 
people are really digging and what it is they didn't like about the show. I get that 
feedback from a form at the end of the show. 
 
Also, at the end of the show, I'll just go out and begin to mingle with the 
audience, let them meet me and listen to what they have to say about the 
show, what they have to say about me. 
 
This is my feedback. This helps me to develop my own character and, of 
course, I videotape each and every show so that I can go back and watch the 
way I presented my show. I have done this since day one. I have a whole 
garage full of thousands of tapes of my shows that I've done. 
 
I started doing this before I even began doing hypnosis shows, just to see the 
style of presentation that I gave to the audience. If I look at myself on stage and 
I cringe then I probably can assume that a lot of people in the audience may be 
cringing also. 
 
If I look at myself and laugh then I'm thinking well, that's not too bad. It gives 
me the opportunity to also tweak different parts of my presentation style. Maybe 
I'm talking too quickly, I’m moving too quickly, or I need to do something a little 
bit differently. 
 
I'll have friends attend the shows or give me feedback. I'm never afraid to get 
feedback from individuals about how I appear, how I come across on stage. 
This helps to define and refine that character which is me on stage, which will 
be you. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        119 
Igor: 
I can imagine sometimes it'll also help because you might find yourself being 
surprised by the audience picking up on a particular point of yours that you 
didn't like particularly or weren't even particularly aware of, but it keeps coming 
up over and over again. 
 
You think you know what. Since it's coming up again and again I might as well 
feature it and make it part of the show, make it part of the character, because 
people are spotting it anyway so obviously, there's something going on there. 
Don: 
Right. You can use it for whatever feedback is worth. It might be something you 
can accentuate it may be something you want to eliminate. It's all good. 
Igor: 
Of course, when you work with people as a stage hypnosis mentor you're 
basically going to cover everything we've talked about today, but in very 
specific detail. 
 
Not necessarily in terms of bringing more categories and more ideas than 
we've discussed, but more a question of refining those and saying okay for you 
as an individual, here are some character points you may want to play with. Try 
these out. 
 
Okay, let's define it this way so you can short circuit that whole process of 
growth or rather you can accelerate it so you can get to that final point much 
quicker in terms of their character, their dress, the type of show, you can help 
them develop routines, you can help them to actually put their routines together 
and say look, I've done these kinds of routines before. 
You may want to try tweaking it this way or that way because what you're doing 
right now is probably going to lead to these kinds of problems because you've 
got the experience to do that. 
 
You also help them with the whole business side of things, as well to get a 
venue to say okay… 
 Where are you?  
a. What's your environment look like?  
b. Do you have nightclubs? Try there.  
c. Do you have lots of colleges? That's a good place to go to as well. 
 
The whole grab bag of stuff we've been talking about over the last few sessions 
here is something you really focus on in detail with people isn't it. 
Don: 
Yes, we go very deep. I start off with having a person hallucinate where they 
want to be. Not where they are but where they want to be, and that's the place 
we work on going to. 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        120 
 
It's just like I take a person who is like a piece of clay and we just begin to mold 
them, mold their character, mold their show, everything about them just 
becomes different. 
 
It's a wonderful fantasy and that's what I encourage people to do. Let's 
fantasize, let's hallucinate. If you could do or be whatever you wanted to be or 
do, what would it be? 
 
If there were no restrictions at all, what would it be? That's where I'd like to 
begin. From that point we cover everything we've talked about in these 
seminars and it becomes very personal, very one on one, and the good thing 
for individuals I work with is because I've been there, I've done that over the 
last 20 years, hypnotizing over a million people. 
 
I get excited when I have the opportunity to work with new people. There's 
nothing for me right now that's better. 
Igor: 
Honestly, I've had a pleasure working with you as well, and it really does make 
a difference I've got to say having someone there.  
On the one side we talked about mixers and sound boards and things like that, 
but having someone there, even on the technical level alone saying plug this 
thing in here and slide it up and down and see what happens - slide it up 
higher, slide it down lower - having that physical experience and someone with 
experience talking you through it is really valuable. 
 
That's not even touching on all the performance secrets we've talked about or 
the routines we've created and so on. I, for one, am very excited and very 
happy that you've taken the time to really lay out all the things that people need 
to think about if they want to be a great stage hypnotist. 
 
We've got the idea of the business elements, we've got the technical elements, 
we've got the actual procedure, the process you do for your show and the 
biggest understanding of all which is that this is not a cookie cutter template, 
you've got to find it inside you to be a unique person and that's I guess where 
mentoring really helps. 
Don: 
We've just scratched the tip of the iceberg here. There's so much more but it's 
been a pleasure being able to talk to you about this and going into the level of 
discussions that we have on this topic. 
Igor: 
Thank you so much Don for coming and sharing your insights and experiences 
with us.  
Anyone who wants to get a hold of Don go to SleepNow.com, that's his 
website, you'll find all the details you need about everything about Don on 
there. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Don Spencer  
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        121 
 
End of Seminar 
 
On that final note, everyone, as much as I hate to say this, this is the end of this 
particular session. We will be back again with another master next month.  
Until then, I’m Igor Ledochowski with StreetHypnosis.com and I’ve been talking 
to the fastest hypnotist in the world, Don Spencer from SleepNow.com.  
 
If you’re interested in finding out more about our hypnosis training programs, 
just go to StreetHypnosis.com. We have over 30 different programs on all 
aspects of hypnosis and self-hypnosis. If you want to listen to Spencer’s 
seminar, where he gives away his hard-earned and inspiring stage hypnosis 
insights, then go to StreetHypnosis.com/spence.  
 
Meet Your Host 
 
Each month’s Interview with a Master will be hosted by Igor Ledochowski, a 
master hypnotist of international acclaim. He is regarded as one of the world's 
foremost experts and trainers in conversational or covert hypnosis. 
Igor created the Private Hypnosis Club, the world’s first community for master 
hypnotists. 
He was the first ever hypnotist to release a full audio course on Conversational 
Hypnosis, the latest version of which is 'The Power Of Conversational Hypnosis' 
and is the No.1 best selling hypnosis course in the world. 
Igor is also the creator of over 30 other advanced hypnosis Program. All his 
programs are available from: 
 
www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
 

