www.allitebooks.com

IBM Cognos Business 
Intelligence
Discover the practical approach to BI with 
IBM Cognos Business Intelligence
Dustin Adkison
   BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

IBM Cognos Business Intelligence
Copyright © 2013 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: May 2013
Production Reference: 1250413
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84968-356-2
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Neha Rajappan (neha.rajappan1@gmail.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Dustin Adkison
Reviewers
Brian Green
Andy Rachmiel
Ramin Rahmani
Jeff Wade
Kirk Wiseman
Darshan Donni
Sameer Sheth
Acquisition Editors
Erol Staveley
Edward Gordon
Lead Technical Editor
Mayur Hule
Technical Editors
Sayali Mirajkar
Kaustubh S. Mayekar
Ankita R. Meshram
Copy Editors
Brandt D'Mello
Insiya Morbiwala
Aditya Nair
Alfida Paiva
Project Coordinator
Kranti Berde
Proofreader
Lindsey Thomas
Indexer
Rekha Nair
Production Coordinator 
Manu Joseph
Cover Work
Manu Joseph
www.allitebooks.com

Foreword
Analytics is proving to be the key for surfacing important insights into business 
performance and driving improved business outcomes. Organizations that leverage 
analytics have been shown to significantly outperform their peers. In 2012, when the 
IBM Institute for Business Value studied the real-world use of big data, 63 percent 
of those surveyed indicated that the use of information and analytics is creating a 
competitive advantage for their organizations. What's more interesting is that this 
figure reflects a 70 percent increase in just the past two years.
Here's a great example of how one company leveraged analytics to transform 
their business and improve their bottom line. The Cincinnati Zoo & Botanical 
Garden wanted to optimize the customer experience for their 1.3 million annual 
visitors, increase attendance, boost sales, and streamline some of their operational 
processes. With the IBM Business Analytics software and with expertize of IBM 
Business Partner BrightStar, they were able to create a more accurate 360-degree 
view of customer behavior that helped increase new visits by 50,000, save the 
Zoo over $100,000 per year by optimizing promotions and discounts, and increase 
food revenues by 25 percent over the previous year. These are impressive results 
driven by greater insight into their data.
For those organizations looking to embed analytics into the fabric of their business, 
the question becomes: where do I start? The simple answer is by building your 
skills. That's where the knowledge from books like this one will help.
This book will help new users of IBM Cognos Business Intelligence to quickly learn 
the analytics skills—from basic usage to advanced authoring—to communicate 
analytics to people across the organization. Those individuals who are upgrading 
from IBM Cognos Business Intelligence Version 8 will learn more about the new 
features in this release. This technology is putting more power in the hands of users 
throughout the organization to create their own reports and do their own analysis—
which greatly reduces the reliance on IT departments.
www.allitebooks.com

Additionally, in this book you will get step-by-step how-to information for the 
different components of IBM Cognos Business Intelligence, and how end users, 
business users, and developers/administrators would use these features. This 
book will help you learn how to use BI tools to deliver business intelligence to 
users wherever they are—in their office, on mobile devices, or offline.
Improving your organization's Analytics Quotient (AQ) will complement 
the technical skills in your analytics journey. Evaluating your AQ will help you 
understand how well you're using analytics now and guide you to that next step 
in analytics growth. Assess your Analytics Quotient now by taking IBM's AQ quiz.
There's no question that the speed of business continues to accelerate. What's good 
to see is that the power of technology is not only keeping pace but also providing 
the tools to steer the business towards better results. In the analytics space, the even 
better news is that users throughout an organization are in the driver's seat—having 
the tools at their fingertips to gain insight from information.
Gene Villeneuve
Director, Product Management, Interactive Analytics & BI
Business Analytics
IBM
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Dustin Adkison is an active member of the IBM Cognos community. 
He began his career in Business Intelligence at one of the premier Cognos 
customers, BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee. After a short period, he became 
one of the Cognos administrators of a very large Cognos implementation as well 
as the training coordinator for all Cognos needs. While at BCBST, Dustin began 
to shape his skills in Cognos Report, which later became IBM Cognos 8 and IBM 
Cognos 10.
Dustin soon joined the Cognos consulting industry with Market Street Solutions 
(a Tennessee-based IBM Premier Partner that focuses on IBM Cognos). There 
he worked as both a consultant and a sales and presales resource. Dustin was 
an active member of the Atlanta and Tennessee Cognos User Groups during 
this time. He also further developed his skills around IBM Cognos and began 
presenting to various user communities.
For the last 5 years, Dustin has worked for BrightStar Partners and BSP Software, 
which are now owned by Avnet. He manages a team of sales resources, provides 
sales and technical sales support, and sets the direction for the sales team. Dustin 
is currently an active member of the Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, St. Louis, and 
Michigan User Groups. He has been a speaker at each of these User Groups in 
the past. In addition, he has presented at the Chattanooga, Nashville, Cincinnati, 
Columbus, Victoria, Toronto, and Vancouver User Groups as a guest.
As one of the leaders of the adoption of Cognos Express, Dustin was asked to 
present both on a panel and as an individual at IBM Information on Demand 
(IOD) and on a cfo.com webcast. Dustin has written about the importance of 
soft skills in the BI industry and has had his writings featured on various forums.
For the past two years, Dustin has been honored as an IBM Champion, an award 
that is given to the information leaders within the IBM space.
www.allitebooks.com

Acknowledgement
I would like to thank my content editors/reviewers: Brian Green, 
Andy Rachmiel, Ramin Rahmani, Jeff Wade, and Kirk Wiseman. 
I appreciate each of you for not being afraid to call out my mistakes 
and, in doing so, helping me to learn and grow. For all of you, that 
is true not only in this writing, but in my career and the growth of 
it that you have each helped to shape.

I would like to thank my co-workers who have helped me to learn 
much of what I have shared in this book. Many of you helped 
mentor me at BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee and at Market 
Street Solutions. Many of you have taught me new techniques at 
BSP. It is through teaming together that we can each hope to grow 
our skills the most.

Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends for supporting 
me while I was writing this book. You have all been a huge emotional 
support with the constant encouragement. I especially would like to 
thank my loving wife, Amanda. I know that this has required almost 
as much sacrifice from you as it has from me. Thank you for all of 
the weekends, where you have taken care of things that I would 
normally help with so that I could have time to write. I could not 
do anything without you. I love you.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Brian Green is the manager of Business Intelligence and Performance 
Management at BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee. He has over 30 years 
of experience in Information Management and has co-authored two books 
about developing successful Business Intelligence and Analytics programs.
Andy Rachmiel is the VP of Software Solutions, Business Analytics at BSP 
Software, an Avnet Services company.  He's a high octane, laser-focused, and highly 
entrepreneurial individual that exudes passion and integrity in all aspects of his life. 
Andy leads by example and lives for the challenge. Over the past decade Andy built 
and ran very successful consulting and software companies. Both BrightStar Partners 
and BSP Software were acquired in 2012 by Avnet, Inc.
Ramin Rahmani focuses on delivering end-to-end Data warehouse, analysis, 
and reporting solutions that meet business needs. Ramin builds strong relationships 
through trust and workable business/technical strategies, which shape many 
successful IBM Cognos BI and BSP Software clients in Australia. Ramin specializes 
in IBM Cognos and WhereScape data warehouse and business intelligence tools. 
He has managed multiple successful consultancies and has over a decade of 
experience as a highly-sought-after consultant covering Australia.
www.allitebooks.com

Jeff Wade is the CEO and president of Market Street Solutions, a Business Analytics 
solutions firm based in Chattanooga, Tennessee. He has over 30 years of experience 
helping enterprise clients leverage technology to improve their business performance. 
Jeff's company, Market Street Solutions, has been recognized multiple times on the Inc. 
5000 list of fastest growing companies, Business TN's Fast 50, and as an IBM Premier 
Business Partner.
Kirk Wiseman is the president of PerformanceG2, an IBM Premier partner 
that specializes in Business Analytics. Kirk has over 15 years experience in the 
information technology industry with an emphasis in Business Analytics, specifically 
with Cognos, where he spent over eight years of his career supporting the North and 
South American Cognos user base as a trainer, consultant, and architect. Kirk came 
to PerformanceG2 from Merador, where he was the Director of Training Services. 
Prior to Merador, Kirk was a trainer and consultant at Cognos Corporation, where 
he was recognized with awards including North American trainer of the year and 
Eclipse Outstanding Performance. In addition, Kirk was a Program Director at ITI, 
a private post-graduate school located throughout Canada. Kirk holds a Bachelor 
of Science degree from Memorial University of Newfoundland and a Post Graduate 
diploma in Applied Information Technology from ITI.
Kirk contributes Business Analytics videos to YouTube on a regular basis 
that can be viewed at http://www.youtube.com/PerformanceG2 and blogs 
at http://www.performanceg2.com/blog. You can contact Kirk at kirk.
wiseman@performanceg2.com.
I would like to thank Dustin for putting together this book and Packt 
for giving me the opportunity to review. I hope my feedback proved 
helpful. Much love and thanks for my wife, Mireille, and our three 
children: Aiden, Zachary and Kaelyn.
www.allitebooks.com

Darshan Donni has worked with the Cognos BI third-level support team in the 
IBM India Software Labs. Prior to this, he worked with the Cognos BI second-level 
support team. He blogged actively on http://cognoscommentary.blogspot.com. 
He has participated in numerous customer engagements for IBM clients.
Sameer Sheth has been practicing as a Business Intelligence and Data Warehousing 
consultant since the year 2004. His primary focus is on architectural design and 
development and implementation of Enterprise Performance Management, Business 
Intelligence and Data Warehousing solutions across various domains, such as oil and 
gas, the education sector, retail, financial spectrum, health care, and airline industries.
Overall he has more than 13 years of relevant experience in the IT industry blended 
with proven project management skills. His key roles have been that of a Senior 
Implementation Lead, a Senior Solution Architect, and a Project Manager. He has 
also spent time as a Technical Mentor.
Sameer is certified in Global Business Leadership from Harvard Business School 
Publishing, USA. Along with it, he is certified in Managerial Excellence from 
Duke University Fuqua School of Business, USA. He has earned numerous IBM 
certifications including IBM Certified Solution Designer—Cognos 10 Planning, 
IBM Certified Solution Expert—Cognos 8 Planning, and IBM Certified Solution 
Designer—Cognos 8 Planning.
Sameer has been the technical reviewer for few books published by Packt 
Publishing, such as IBM Cognos TM1 Developer's Certification Guide and IBM 
Cognos Business Intelligence 10.1 Dashboarding Cookbook. This book was developed 
for users to successfully understand, implement, and obtain the best ROI on 
their Business Intelligence solution.
Heartfelt thanks to my wife Shruthi for a lifetime of endless patience, 
love, and support.

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to 
your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and 
ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and 
as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch 
with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up 
for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books 
and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books.
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials 
for immediate access.
Instant Updates on New Packt Books
Get notified! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise 
on Twitter, or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.


Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: IBM Cognos Connection	
7
Web-based reporting	
8
The welcome page	
8
Folder structures	
11
My Area	
13
Searching	
17
Running reports	
17
Scheduling reports	
21
Cutting, copying, pasting, and deleting objects	
22
Creating URLs, jobs, and report views	
22
The business case for Cognos	
23
Summary	
24
Chapter 2: Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace	
25
The self-service dashboard	
25
Adding content and content types	
29
Filtering	
34
Changing the formatting	
37
Sharing the dashboard	
41
The business case for Cognos Workspace	
42
Summary	
43
Chapter 3: IBM Cognos Active Reports	
45
What MHT files are	
46
How MHT files can be read	
46
Pros and cons	
46
Pros	
46
Cons	
47

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
The business case for Cognos Active Reports	
48
Interacting with Cognos Active Reports	
49
Opening Cognos Active Reports	
49
Navigating through Cognos Active Reports	
52
Summary	
54
Chapter 4: IBM Cognos Mobile	
55
Cognos Mobile on BlackBerry phones	
55
New features of IBM Cognos Mobile	
56
Interacting with Cognos Active Reports on mobile devices	
61
The future of IBM Cognos Mobile	
63
The business case for IBM Cognos Mobile	
64
Summary	
64
Chapter 5: IBM Cognos Query Studio	
67
Who should use Cognos Query Studio?	
67
Accessing Cognos Query Studio	
68
An introduction to metadata	
70
The drag-and-drop interface and the right-click menu	
72
Inserting content in a report	
72
Adding filters	
76
Creating a calculation	
77
Formatting your report	
79
Incorporating charts	
83
Understanding your other buttons	
85
Saving and sharing reports	
87
The business case for Cognos Query Studio	
88
Summary	
88
Chapter 6: IBM Cognos Analysis Studio	
89
Who should use Cognos Analysis Studio?	
89
Accessing Cognos Analysis Studio	
90
An introduction to multidimensional data	
91
Exploring the drag-and-drop interface and the right-click menu	
93
Inserting dimensions and measures	
93
Adding context filters	
94
Drilling down and expanding data	
96
Replacing the existing dimension	
102
Nesting within the existing dimension	
102
Nesting below an existing dimension	
104
Creating calculations	
105

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Incorporating charts	
108
Choosing a chart type	
108
Understanding the other buttons	
111
Saving and sharing Cognos Analysis Studio reports	
113
The business case for Cognos Analysis Studio	
114
Summary	
115
Chapter 7: IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced	
117
Who should use Cognos Workspace Advanced?	
117
Comparing to Cognos Query Studio and Cognos Analysis Studio	
118
Accessing Cognos Workspace Advanced	
119
Exploring the drag-and-drop interface and the right-click menu	
124
Adding objects to your report	
124
Adding data to your reports	
130
Drilling down	
137
Creating calculations	
139
Understanding the other buttons	
140
Using external data	
142
The business case for Cognos Workspace Advanced	
146
Summary	
147
Chapter 8: IBM Cognos Report Studio	
149
Who should use Cognos Report Studio	
149
Accessing Cognos Report Studio	
150
Cognos Report Studio report types	
152
The drag-and-drop interface and the right-click menu	
153
Understanding the different areas in Cognos Report Studio	
154
Adding objects to your report	
156
Adding data to your reports and formatting	
164
Exploring your queries with Query Explorer	
171
Setting up conditions	
172
Adding a prompt to filter results	
173
Understanding the other buttons	
174
Building Active Reports	
176
Designing your Active Report	
176
Choosing the Active Report component to use	
177
The business case for Cognos Report Studio	
183
Reporting inside of the organization	
184
Reporting outside of the organization	
184
Summary	
185

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Chapter 9: IBM Cognos Framework Manager	
187
Introduction to metadata	
187
Managing the model design project	
188
Rule 1 – gather information	
188
Rule 2 – learn to dance	
189
Rule 3 – take baby steps	
190
Rule 4 – know your audience	
190
Rule 5 – get buy-in and sign off	
191
Three-tier approach to model design	
191
Designing a database view of your data	
192
Designing a business view of your data	
205
Designing an end user view of your data	
215
Publishing a package	
220
The business case for Cognos Framework Manager	
223
Understanding the problem	
223
Understanding the solution	
223
Summary	
224
Chapter 10: Administration and Performance Tuning	
225
Deciding who should be an administrator	
226
Navigating the administration interface	
226
Monitoring the system in the Status tab	
228
Performance tuning the system	
229
Designing your security model	
231
The CAF	
232
External security	
232
Cognos BI security	
233
Capabilities	
234
How it all works together	
234
What people can do	
234
What people can see	
235
Adding data source connections	
237
Importing and exporting content	
238
Routing your requests using routing sets	
243
The business case for performance tuning	
246
The business case for administration	
247
Summary	
247

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Chapter 11: Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks	
249
Bulk updating Framework Manager models	
250
Validating report objects	
254
Bulk updating reports	
257
Applying screen tips to report outputs	
260
Managing security	
261
Distributing portal tabs	
263
Standardizing headers and footers	
264
Backing up, restoring, and deploying content	
264
Documenting content, security, and models	
269
Content Documentation	
269
Security Documentation	
270
Model documentation	
272
Versioning content	
274
Archiving content outputs	
276
Retrieving deleted content	
276
The business case for add-on tools	
277
Summary	
278
Chapter 12: User Adoption	
279
The beginning – executive sponsorship	
280
Building an internal user community	
281
The right development team matters	
283
How to partner with IBM and the partner community	
284
Feedback and its role in the development process	
286
Training is the key to success	
287
The business case user adoption	
288
Summary	
289
Index	
291


Preface
IBM Cognos Business Intelligence is a reporting and analytics product that enables 
end users to develop robust reports and analyses through a web interface. This book 
will look at the latest version of IBM Cognos BI, IBM Cognos BI V10. With the release 
of IBM Cognos BI V10, we find many new features, such as:
•	
IBM Cognos Workspace—a self-service dashboard and collaboration area
•	
IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced—a tool for creating ad hoc reports and 
analyses that are of a high quality and are flexible
•	
Native support for more mobile devices
•	
Active Reports—IBM Cognos BI reports that store data for offline 
consumption of information
•	
Many more new features within the existing framework
In this book we will look at the new features that come with IBM Cognos BI V10, and 
we will also revisit the features that were available in earlier versions of Cognos BI.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, IBM Cognos Connection, covers the IBM Cognos Business Intelligence Cognos 
Connection interface that is accessed by end users and developers. Cognos Connection 
is the default web interface for navigating IBM Cognos Business Intelligence V10. This 
chapter covers in detail some of the common ways in which end users interact with 
this web interface.
Chapter 2, Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace, covers the new self-service dashboard 
tool in IBM Cognos Business Intelligence that allows end users to create their own 
interactive dashboards. This chapter covers in detail how to add content to Cognos 
Workspace, how to filter that content, and how to change the way content is viewed.
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 3, IBM Cognos Active Reports, covers how end users interact with Cognos 
Active Reports. Cognos Active reports are MHT files that contain data and formatting 
information in a single file. As such, they are easy to take with you on your laptop or 
a mobile device.
Chapter 4, IBM Cognos Mobile, covers how to interact with IBM Cognos Business 
Intelligence on a mobile device. This chapter covers in detail how to access mobile 
content and interact with it on an Apple iPad.
Chapter 5, IBM Cognos Query Studio, covers the legacy product, Cognos Query Studio. 
Although IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced is the preferred product for creating ad 
hoc reports, many environments will still have Cognos Query Studio installed. This 
chapter shows in detail how to create a simple report using Cognos Query Studio.
Chapter 6, IBM Cognos Analysis Studio, covers the legacy product, Cognos Analysis 
Studio. Although IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced is the preferred product for 
performing basic analysis, many environments will still have Cognos Analysis Studio 
installed. This chapter shows in detail how to create a simple analysis using Cognos 
Analysis Studio.
Chapter 7, IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced, covers the new tool, Cognos Workspace 
Advanced. Cognos Workspace Advanced allows basic developers to create high-
quality reports and analyses in one interface. It also interacts directly with Cognos 
Workspace for a seamless, single interface. This chapter covers in detail how to 
create new reports and analyses using Cognos Workspace Advanced.
Chapter 8, IBM Cognos Report Studio, covers how to create complex reports using 
Cognos Report Studio. Cognos Report Studio is the most powerful and complex 
development tool within IBM Cognos Business Intelligence. This chapter shows 
in detail how to create reports using this incredibly powerful tool.
Chapter 9, IBM Cognos Framework Manager, covers the metadata design tool for 
IBM Cognos Business Intelligence. This tool allows you to change how data is 
displayed, how to create custom calculation and model table relationships, and 
so much more. This chapter shows in detail how to create a simple model using 
Cognos Framework Manager.
Chapter 10, Administration and Performance Tuning, covers the basics of how 
to administer IBM Cognos Business Intelligence and some common tips on 
performance tuning for your environment.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Chapter 11, Common Administrator Tasks – Streamlined, covers Avnet's BSP Software 
product offerings. These offerings are add-ons to IBM Cognos Business Intelligence 
that help to enhance the product.
Chapter 12, User Adoption, covers ideas for how to increase user adoption. 
The greatest product in the world will still need users to make it successful. 
This chapter shows in detail, tips and tricks for creating your user community 
into IBM Cognos Business Intelligence.
What you need for this book
In order to make the most of this book, you need to have an environment set up 
with IBM Cognos Business Intelligence V10. This book does not cover installation 
and configuration; however, Cognos Business Intelligence does ship with a detailed 
installation and configuration guide that can be used for assistance.
Who this book is for
This book is designed for administrators, developers, end users, and other stakeholders 
working with IBM Cognos Business Intelligence V10.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"For instance, a set of folders structured this way may be named Financial Data, 
Sales Information, or Marketing Results."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Report 
views, on the other hand, are created from within the Actions area for the report 
for which you are creating a view".

Preface
[ 4 ]
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for 
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, 
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of 
existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed 
by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring 
you valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.


IBM Cognos Connection
IBM Cognos Connection is the out-of-the-box interface that IBM provides with 
IBM Cognos Business Intelligence. It is the primary interface for finding reports, 
opening development studios, and collaborating with other users within your 
business intelligence environment. IBM Cognos Connection was first introduced 
with Cognos ReportNet (CRN), but it is worth revisiting here in order to set the 
stage for the rest of the book.
In this chapter, we will look at the concept of web-based reporting, talk about the 
customizations that are available, and explore the interface, that is, IBM Cognos 
Connection. Some of the areas that we will look at are:
•	
Web-based reporting
•	
The welcome page
•	
Folder structures
•	
My Area
•	
Searching
•	
Running reports
•	
Scheduling reports
•	
Cutting, copying, pasting, and deleting objects
•	
Creating URLs, jobs, and report views
•	
The business case for IBM Cognos Connection

IBM Cognos Connection
[ 8 ]
Web-based reporting
If you were to follow the evolution of reporting, you would find a logical transition 
that shows companies uncovering as much information as they could in as meaningful 
a way as possible while using the best technology available.
In the 1980s, the key concepts of reporting were defined and enhanced. Companies 
were learning how to use computers to make decisions based on their data. Reports 
were built from software tools that resided on end user computers. The tools would 
connect to company databases for reporting purposes. Later, the data would be 
consolidated into OLAP (or cube) data sources for reporting. OLAP stands for Online 
Analytics Processing and is a standard term to used describe data that is formatted 
for multidimensional analysis. With OLAP, data is preconsolidated with multiple 
cross-sections of data. This allows for faster reporting.  
In the late 1990s, during the dot-com boom, software was developed to bring 
reporting into the Web. Cognos ReportNet was one of the first tools to do so. 
Much of the technology introduced by this tool remains as the backbone of 
Cognos BI today.
With the introduction of web-based reporting, users around the world could share 
one centralized version of their data. All data and reports began to be stored in a single 
location, which made it easier to manage the information that was being dispersed 
within and outside an organization.
A few key benefits of web-based reporting are:
•	
Centralization of information
•	
Ease of management, maintenance, and administration
•	
Minimization of IT overhead
•	
Improved data security
IBM Cognos Business Intelligence v10.x continues to use the web-based platform 
that was developed for Cognos ReportNet. Let's start by taking a look at the welcome 
screen that many users see when they first log on to IBM Cognos BI v10.x via the Web.
The welcome page
The welcome screen is designed to help steer new users towards the tool that will 
meet their need for reporting or analytics. Most users will eventually choose to not 
show the welcome screen at start-up, simply because it can slow you down from 
getting to the report or report design tool that you are interested in accessing.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
This is how the welcome screen appears:
 
You can see from the preceding screenshot that there are a variety of options available. 
The options shown on the screen will be determined by the access rights that are 
defined for each user and the options that have been installed by the administrator. 
For the purpose of this book, we will have administrator access, which will allow us 
to see every available option.
The available options are as follows:
•	
My Content options:
°°
My home: This option will take a user to their defined home page, 
which they can set by setting any area as their default.
°°
My dashboards: This option will load Cognos Workspace along 
with options to load saved dashboard views.

IBM Cognos Connection
[ 10 ]
°°
IBM Cognos content: This option will take you to the Public 
Folders area. Public Folders is a place where shared content 
is stored.
°°
My Inbox: This option will take a user to the My Inbox area. 
The My Inbox area allows users to set and assign tasks related 
to reporting and analysis.
•	
My Actions options:
°°
Create my dashboards: This option will take you to Cognos 
Workspace and will allow you to create a new Cognos 
Workspace dashboard.
°°
Author business reports: This option will take you to Cognos 
Workspace Advanced, which will allow you to create business 
reports and analyses. 
°°
Manage my metrics: This option will take you to Cognos Metric 
Studio. In Cognos Metric Studio, you can manage and track Key 
Performance Indicators (KPI) for your business. Cognos Metric 
Studio is outside the scope of this book.
°°
Query my data: This option will take you to Cognos Query Studio. 
Cognos Query Studio allows you to create standard report queries.
°°
Explore my data: This option will launch Cognos PowerPlay Studio. 
Cognos PowerPlay Studio is a legacy tool that was carried over from 
IBM Cognos Series 7 PowerPlay web. Cognos PowerPlay Studio is 
outside the scope of this book.
°°
Analyze my business: This option will launch Cognos Analysis 
Studio. Cognos Analysis Studio is an interface that allows you to 
perform data discovery with OLAP: preaggregated data.
°°
Author advanced reports: This option will launch Cognos Report 
Studio. Cognos Report Studio is the primary report development 
interface in IBM Cognos BI. Cognos Report Studio allows you to 
create very advanced reports.
°°
Manage my events: This option will launch Cognos Event Studio. 
Cognos Event Studio allows monitoring of data based on data 
triggers. You can set up data-based triggers that can do anything 
from starting a process to sending an e-mail.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
•	
The Administration option:
°°
Administer IBM Cognos content: This option will launch the IBM 
Cognos Administration interface. This is where you can do everything 
from tracking the status of your IBM Cognos BI environment to setting 
up data source connections to manage security. 
•	
The Quick tour option:
°°
The Quick tour area has overviews for IBM Cognos Connection and 
each of the studios. These are useful, high-level overviews for end 
users who are new to IBM Cognos BI v10.x.
Folder structures
The default folder structure will have two primary folders that can be viewed within 
the two default tabs in IBM Cognos Connection (Public Folders and My Folders). 
Public Folders is where shared content is stored, whereas My Folders is more for 
personal content. The default screen that can be seen is as follows:
www.allitebooks.com

IBM Cognos Connection
[ 12 ]
In the preceding screenshot, you can also see two types of folders. The yellow folders 
(the first two in the screenshot) represent purely structural folders that hold content. 
The blue folders (third folder onwards in this example) represent packages.
A package is a set of metadata that defines how IBM Cognos BI will query a data 
source. The metadata may define things such as formatting of data from the database, 
or it could have more advanced calculations for data from the database before it is 
presented to the end users in IBM Cognos BI. 
The way that you choose to structure these folders will depend on your environment. 
Many businesses choose to structure the folders based on the data that is contained 
within them. For instance, a set of folders structured this way may be named 
Financial Data, Sales Information, or Marketing Results. A second alternative 
would be to structure the folders by functional areas of the business. In this scenario, 
you may use folder names such as Human Resources, Marketing, or Accounting. 
For the purpose of this section, a third and final way of structuring the folders would 
be by cost center or team. This tends to be the most granular way of structuring the 
folders and will often require replication of packages into multiple folders. You can 
use this folder-structure model in conjunction with the functional-areas model and 
have subfolders named after each group or team within a department. Examples of 
this naming convention may include folders such as Bob's Team, Web Support, or 
Cost Center 1234.
The key takeaway is that, when you first install IBM Cognos Business Intelligence 
v10.x, you will have a blank slate. It is easy to simply begin creating packages and 
folders without a clear picture of how you want to organize your content. However, 
if you plan ahead, you can have a much cleaner and easier way to navigate the 
content environment for your end users.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
My Area
IBM Cognos BI allows the end users to separate out their personal items and 
preferences from the shared ones. This is done through My Folders, as discussed 
in the previous section, but it can also be done in My Area. The My Area option 
is shown as a little avatar icon that will allow users to interact with areas and set 
preferences that are unique to them.
From within My Area, you can access My Inbox. My Inbox is new with IBM Cognos 
Business Intelligence v10.x and is an interface for setting and managing tasks related 
to Cognos development. 
My Watch Items will allow users to interact with alerts and rules that they have 
set on specific data points within different reports. Watch items are data points on 
reports that users want to track. This can be done by right-clicking on a data point 
within a report and choosing to watch for changes. As an end user, you can then 
set thresholds to alert you of changes made. In the My Watch Items area, you can 
edit and remove these alerts and rules.

IBM Cognos Connection
[ 14 ]
An end user can customize the look and feel of their Cognos BI environment through 
the My Preferences area under My Area as well. The My Preference area looks like 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
Within this My Preferences area, you can set a number of variables:
•	
Number of entries in list view: This field will tell IBM Cognos BI how many 
items to show when navigating folders. The default is 15, but that will often 
cause users to have to scroll between the pages of content. I recommend 
setting this to a higher number. 
•	
Report format: This field will allow you to choose the default report format 
when a report is run. The options available are HTML, PDF, Excel 2007, 
Excel 2007 data, Excel 2002, Delimited text (CSV), and XML.
•	
Separators in list view: This field will allow you to set line separators. The 
options available are Grid lines, alternating backgrounds, and no gridlines.
•	
Style: This field will determine the IBM Cognos BI style that is used for the 
entire interface. There are a number of default styles available, but custom 
styles can be set here as well. These styles can change the color schemes, 
images, and formatting of the Cognos Connection environment.
•	
The check box options:
°°
Show the Welcome page at startup: This option will let you choose 
whether or not to start on the welcome page when logging in.
°°
Show a summary of the run options: This option will show 
a summary of the run options selected for reports that are run 
in batches.
°°
Enable accessibility support for reports I run or schedule: 
This option will allow separate text for users with special needs.
°°
Show hidden entries: This is a feature that administrators can 
choose to not give to all users. It will allow users to see a faded 
icon for items that have been marked as hidden.
•	
Portal options include:
°°
The Default view options are:
List: This option will provide a list of objects without details
Details: This option will allow you to see more details about 
each object
°°
Number of columns in details view: The more columns you choose, 
the more details you will see in the Cognos Connection portal

IBM Cognos Connection
[ 16 ]
•	
Regional options include:
°°
Product language: This will let you choose the language that the 
IBM Cognos BI interface uses.
°°
Content language: This will allow you to choose a default language 
for the content within your reports. This feature requires a locale to 
be set for the language chosen for the report content. 
°°
Time zone: This will allow you to select your default time zone.
My Activities and Schedules will allow you to view and manage all of your scheduled 
reports and activities through one interface.
My Recycle Bin is an add-on product from BSP Software that allows users to recover 
deleted content. Administrators can control how long to keep items in the recycle 
bin and can restore any user's content from the Administration area. The end user 
interface looks like the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Searching
Searching has evolved since it was first introduced in ReportNet. The searching 
capability that is available in IBM Cognos BI v10.x is the equivalent of the Go! 
Search functionality that was available in IBM Cognos BI v8.x. The way it works 
is pretty simple. From the Administration area, you can create a search index for 
your content. With this new search, you can search the report content as well as 
the metadata for the reports. Previously, searching would only search names and 
descriptions of the content.
Running reports
Running existing reports can be done in a couple of different ways. For reports that 
do not have saved output, you can run the report to the default output format by 
simply clicking on it. The more advanced way to run a report would be to use Run 
with options by clicking the blue play icon highlighted in the following screenshot:

IBM Cognos Connection
[ 18 ]
Once within the Run with options area, you will see a variety of options that relate 
to the formatting, accessibility, language, delivery method, and prompt entry for 
the report.

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
The Format, Accessibility, and Language options are the same options that can be 
set as defaults within the My Preferences area. The Delivery option allows a user 
to determine how they will receive the report. The most commonly available options 
(not all shown here) are:
•	
View the report now: This option will bring the report to the end user once 
it is done running. It will run live against the underlying data source.
•	
Save the report: This option will save the report output to be viewed later. 
If this option is selected and advanced options is also selected, you can 
choose multiple report outputs and delivery methods for the report that 
is run. You can then open the saved report outputs without having to 
reaccess the data source. 
•	
Print the report: This option will allow you to print to any printer on the 
network that has been set up within IBM Cognos BI.
•	
Save to file system (not shown): This option will allow you to save the report 
output to a file system as defined within IBM Cognos Configuration.
•	
Deliver to a mobile device (not shown): This option will allow you to push 
the report to a mobile device.
•	
Send the report by email (not shown): This option will allow you to e-mail 
the report to a recipient.

IBM Cognos Connection
[ 20 ]
The advanced options interface, as seen in the following screenshot, allows an end 
user to select multiple outputs and delivery methods. It also allows for scheduling 
a one-time run of a report for a future time.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
The interface is very similar for scheduling; however, Run with options is designed 
for a one-time run of a report.  The scheduling interface is designed for repeated 
report runs.
Scheduling reports
Reports are often scheduled in situations where data is changing at specific 
intervals. Scheduled reports can be delivered via the same mechanisms as that for 
the Run with options reports. The only difference is that, with scheduled reports, 
IBM Cognos BI provides frequency options that can be set. You can access the 
scheduling interface via the icon that looks like a calendar (highlighted with a 
square in the following screenshot):
The additional section for setting frequency can be seen in the following screenshot:
This interface let's you set the priority for a schedule in case it is competing with 
other schedules. It will also let you set a frequency for your report to run. You can 
run the report within the day (down to the minute), by week (for certain days during 
the week), by month (for certain days of the month or on certain days of the week in 
specific weeks of the month), by year, or by triggers that are taking place within your 
data. You can also set the start and end times for the report to run. 

IBM Cognos Connection
[ 22 ]
Cutting, copying, pasting, and deleting 
objects
Within IBM Cognos Connection, there are options for copying, cutting, and pasting 
content between folders. This can be useful if you want to reorganize the structure 
of your environment, create duplicates of the content in additional folders or in your 
My Folders area, or if you want to clean up an environment. These three icons are 
depicted in the following screenshot:
The scissors are for cutting, the two pieces of paper are for copying, the clipboard is 
for pasting, and X is for deleting.
Creating URLs, jobs, and report views
Most true end users do not build reports or analyses but simply consume prebuilt 
content. However, as an end user you are able to create new content. The content 
that you can create will typically be URLs, jobs, or report views.
•	
URLs: These will allow you to link to any web address from within 
IBM Cognos Connection.
•	
Jobs: A job is a group of reports that are all scheduled to run together. 
These can be run with the same run options or you can set individual 
run options for each report. You can also choose whether to run these 
in sequence or all at once.
•	
Report views: These are views of the prompted reports that have the 
prompt values already set. This keeps you from having to re-enter the 
prompt values each time you re-run a report.
URLs and jobs are both created from the menu bar in IBM Cognos Connection. 
The icons for the tasks are shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
As shown in the preceding screenshot, the icon with the two gears is the job icon, 
and the icon with the globe and a link symbol is the URL icon.
Report views on the other hand are created from within the Actions area of the 
report for which you are creating a view. You can create a new report view by 
clicking on the icon highlighted in the following screenshot:
The business case for Cognos
After understanding all of the technical details behind IBM Cognos Connection, 
you have to ask yourself why your business users will want this. There are really 
a few key reasons.
The first is that, by having IBM Cognos Connection as a central source of data and 
information, your business users do not risk having different Business Intelligence 
interfaces providing dissimilar information. This is one version of the truth. The 
benefit really lies in the ability of the business to trust their numbers.
The second benefit is the ease of use. By having all of your reporting, analysis, and 
planning tools in one centralized location, business users can more easily complete 
their work. Because the interfaces are similar between each of the tools, there is also 
a shared learning experience that would not exist if the tools were all spread between 
distinct systems.
The third and final benefit that we will discuss here is the ease of support. While it 
is easy to see this as an IT benefit, and not a business benefit, it is actually a benefit 
to both groups. For the business, having one interface that is maintained means that 
support issues can all go to one place. With IBM Cognos BI v10.x, you typically see 
one group owning the product in its entirety. This means one throat to choke, so 
to speak.
In reality, there are thousands of business cases that can be drawn around a centralized 
interface for business analytics. However, these are just a few of the key ones that can 
help IT better understand why business users should be all for Cognos Connection.

IBM Cognos Connection
[ 24 ]
Summary
So far, we have looked at the IBM Cognos Connection interface that an end user would 
interact with. This interface is geared toward navigating and finding prebuilt content 
that consists of reports, analyses, and other useful information. As an end user, you can 
customize the look and feel of your Cognos Connection experience, run and schedule 
reports, and create new objects such as URLs and report views. We also took a look at 
the business case for using Cognos Connection.
In the next chapter, we will look at an interface designed for more advanced end user 
consumption through dashboards called Cognos Workspace.

Introducing IBM Cognos 
Workspace
Cognos Workspace is a self-service dashboard tool that was developed and first 
released with IBM Cognos Business Intelligence v10.2. Cognos Workspace is 
web-based and can be accessed through IBM Cognos Connection. It is designed 
to allow the end users to build their own dashboards without the help of IT.
In this chapter, we will discuss how to add content to the dashboard, filter the 
content, change the formatting of the content, add comments to the content, and 
share the content. We will also look at the types of end users that are most likely 
to use Cognos Workspace and what the business benefits of this tool include.
The topics covered in this chapter include:
•	
The Self-service dashboard
•	
Adding content and content types
•	
Filtering
•	
Changing the formatting
•	
Sharing the dashboard
•	
The business case for Cognos Workspace
The self-service dashboard
A self-service dashboard is a tool that puts the power into the hands of the end users 
and allows them to bring data, which is most important for their business needs, into 
one centralized location. To fully understand what a self-service dashboard is, we 
need to start with the understanding of what a dashboard is.

Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace
[ 26 ]
A standard dashboard is a collection of graphical and numeric information all brought 
together on one screen or page. With IBM Cognos Business Intelligence, the idea has 
always been that it needs to be interactive data, or otherwise a dashboard loses some 
of its power. You may be asking yourself, how to interact with data? There are a few 
typically used ways of making a dashboard interactive. Drill-down, drill-through, links 
to the metrics, links to the other systems, hover-over, or comment capabilities are a few 
of the most commonly used techniques. The following is a brief overview of each:
•	
Drill-down is a mechanism of clicking on a piece of information and seeing the 
next level below that information in some sort of a hierarchy (for example, click 
on a country and see a list of states within the country). Drill-down is useful 
for information having multiple levels of data that need to be compared to one 
another only within the context of their group within a level. For instance, if 
I continued to drill from a country down to a state, down to a city, I will only 
be seeing cities for the state that I click on. If it makes sense to compare those 
cities to the cities in other states, then drill-down is likely not the mechanism 
that you will want to use.
•	
Drill-through is a mechanism for going from one view of the information 
to another view of the information that is either at a lower level within 
the hierarchy or contains additional information about the object selected. 
Similar to the drill down mechanism, you are moving to the next level 
of the hierarchy, but you are changing how the information is presented. 
A good example of a drill-through would be clicking on something that is 
summarized, in a chart for instance, and having a new window open with 
details regarding what you clicked on. The drill-through mechanisms are 
most useful when you are done reviewing the summarized information, 
and you are ready to get down to the specifics.
•	
Metric is a single measuring point by which a company or a group of people 
within a company choose to measure success over time. Metrics are typically 
presented as goals and actuals and are very commonly shown as red, yellow, 
or green indicators of success. A dashboard will often contain metrics without 
any details. Within Cognos Business Intelligence, by clicking on a metric, you 
can launch Metric Studio and begin understanding how metrics relate to one 
another, and in turn begin to understand the areas of your business that are 
driving your results.

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
•	
A link is the same thing that you would see anywhere on the Web. Since 
Cognos Business Intelligence v10.x is web-based, links can be embedded 
within reports to make them more interactive. What's really cool is that you 
can even pass information from Cognos Business Intelligence into your links 
in order to dynamically determine where your links take you. A good example 
of this would be if you were reporting on the call-center information and you 
wanted to link to the call-center support ticket in a separate ticketing system. 
With Cognos Business Intelligence, you could display details on a report and 
provide dynamic links that would automatically pass the ticket number as a 
parameter to the ticket system. The end result will be that when you click the 
link, it opens up the ticket that you clicked on.
•	
Hover-over is a mechanism for providing additional information when a 
user rests the mouse pointer over a set of data. This is commonly used on 
charts where you do not want to display all numbers on the chart, but you 
still want users to be able to see the exact numbers if they choose to. The 
hover-over mechanism will typically contain details that are not essential for 
understanding the information presented. In some cases, a chart that simply 
makes it clear that the numbers have changed and relatively how much 
they have changed is enough. However, it never hurts to provide a quick 
mechanism for viewing the details behind the charts.
•	
A comment is a user-annotated piece of information. Comments are essentially 
used for fully understanding the information. A good example would be if you 
are looking at a chart of sales numbers, and you see that a division of your sales 
team had sold 25 percent less than the previous quarter. If a manager of that 
sales team has the ability to comment, they can add a comment (typically using 
the hover-over style) that explains why the sales were down. As an executive, 
this is helpful to have the holistic view of the information (both, captured 
quantitative data and entered qualitative data) in one centralized place.
With that brief background and overview of some of the techniques used in 
dashboards, we can now look at what a self-service dashboard is. A self-service 
dashboard is a collection of graphical and numeric information that you build 
for yourself. In Cognos Business Intelligence, you build the dashboard from the 
queries that already exist somewhere on a report. You, as the end user, can take 
the elements from the existing reports and drag them onto your dashboard. You 
can also add filters, change formatting, add comments, and share the final version 
of your dashboard.

Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace
[ 28 ]
By taking the developed dashboard and pushing it out to the end user, an organization 
can save the time of their developers, allow their end users greater flexibility, and 
create a faster transfer of information.
We will now look at the Cognos Workspace interface and some of the most common 
activities that you and your end users will need to learn to perform.
In order to access Cognos Workspace and begin building a new dashboard right 
from the welcome screen, click on Create my dashboards as shown in the 
following screenshot:
This will bring you to the Cognos Workspace splash screen as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
The splash screen is new to IBM Cognos Business Intelligence v10.x, but you will 
notice that each of the Studios now has a user-friendly welcome screen. With Cognos 
Workspace, you can choose from the following few options when beginning for the 
first time:
•	
Create New: This option will let you start with a blank canvas from which 
you build your dashboard
•	
Open Existing: This option will provide you with the ability to open an 
existing Cognos Workspace dashboard that you have access to
•	
Favorites: This section will show a sample of one of your favorite dashboards 
if you have added any favorites
•	
How-to Videos: This section provides videos with overviews on how to use 
Cognos Workspace
We will now show you how to create a new dashboard.
Adding content and content types
The first thing to consider when creating a new dashboard is what data you want 
to have represented. At the end of the day, a dashboard is only as valuable as the 
information that it provides. So the first step is to determine what data is most relevant 
to the business question I am trying to answer. For the purposes of this book, I will be 
using the sample data of IBM Cognos, and I will be creating a sales dashboard.

Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace
[ 30 ]
When you first click on Create New, you will see a blank canvas that will show Drag 
objects from the content pane to the canvas to create a dashboard. You can also 
right-click an object to insert it at the center, as shown in the following screenshot:
The right-hand side of this screen contains the insertable content. There are a few 
areas to consider. The  search area will allow you to search for content that may be 
relevant for your dashboard. You can also navigate the content. If you choose the 
drop-down arrow next to All Content, you will have options for My Favorites, My 
Folders, or All Content. You will also be provided with a tree view of the available 
content in the area below the drop-down menu. To expand the tree, simply click on 
the folders that you would like to explore.

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
You can further expand the tree by clicking on a report. This will show you the content 
that is within the report. This is also where our dashboard building begins.
www.allitebooks.com

Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace
[ 32 ]
If you are working with reports that do not have named objects, you will simply see 
content that displays the type of object and a number (for example, Chart1, Chart2, 
List1, Crosstab1, and so on). The best practice during report development is to provide 
meaningful names to the objects. This is recommended so that the users of Cognos 
Workspace or IBM Cognos Office will have a better understanding of the content they 
are accessing from within the  reports. The following screenshot shows an example of 
a naming convention in practice:
In the example shown in the previous screenshot, it is clearly seen that within the first 
report there is a pie chart that shows quantities for product lines and years, within the 
second report there is a combination chart that shows revenue and profit margin for 
product lines, and within the third report there is a combination chart that shows the 
revenue and quantity by product line.
Since I am interested in building a sales dashboard, I am going to drag each of these 
content objects onto my dashboard.

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
While dragging, the tool will provide an outline for you to gauge where you want to 
put the object, as shown in the following screenshot:

Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace
[ 34 ]
Once you drop the object, it will run the report and render the content that you 
are using from the report.  The following screenshot is that of my dashboard after 
I have brought in all three of the content items from the three separate reports:
It is that simple to add basic content to a dashboard. Next, we will look at some of 
the things that we can do with our content now that it has been added.
Filtering
Filtering is a mechanism for limiting the data that is rendered in a report or a 
dashboard. A filter is going to remove the information that we do not need on 
our reports and only leave the information that is most relevant to us. Creating 
filters in Cognos Workspace is a straightforward process. The first step is to 
toggle from our Content pane to our Toolbox.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
The Cognos Workspace toolbox contains additional objects that can be added to 
a dashboard besides the content. They are:
•	
Web Page: This object will allow you to embed a web page directly 
into your dashboard.
•	
Image: This object will add an image to your dashboard (that is, 
a company logo).
•	
My Inbox: This object will insert your IBM Cognos Inbox onto your 
dashboard so that you can manage Cognos Inbox tasks from within 
Cognos Workspace.
•	
Text: This object will allow you to add text to the dashboard. This is 
most often used for titles or instructions on the dashboard.
•	
RSS Feed: This object will allow you to add an RSS feed to the dashboard. 
This can be used to provide external data to your dashboard users (such as 
industry news).
•	
Select Value Filter: This object allows you to filter based on selected values 
from a list.
•	
Slider Filter: This object allows you to filter based on a slider. This filter is 
typically used with sequential data, such as time information or numerical 
data. A good example of a slider would be one that lets you say, only show 
me sales that were between 1 million and 5 million dollars.

Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace
[ 36 ]
On our dashboard, I am going to insert Select Value Filter by dragging it onto my 
dashboard. When I do so, a filter Properties window pops up.
This Properties window is dynamically populated based on the data available on 
your dashboard. For my dashboard, it is letting me choose one of my two data items 
to filter on (Product line or Year), and it is letting me choose which values to display 
in the filter. It also allows me to determine if the filter is multiselect or singleselect, 
the style of the filter, and the label for the filter. If I select OK and accept all defaults, 
my filter will appear on my dashboard looking like the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
Now, if we deselect any of the product lines and hit Apply, we will see every chart 
on the page update to reflect the new filter. This is a very powerful capability for an 
end user, especially considering that the objects on our dashboard are all coming from 
different reports. This is possible because Cognos Workspace recognizes the shared 
dimensions by the name and common elements. For an administrator, there is no 
extra preparation work that is required.
Changing the formatting
Next, we will look at changing the formatting of our content. There are two common 
formatting changes that we can make: color schemes and chart types. Each of our 
charts have similar color schemes, but these might not be the color schemes that we 
want to use. If we hover over one of our charts, we will see the following toolbar 
appear above it:

Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace
[ 38 ]
As you will notice, some of the options are grayed out for charts. These options are 
available when working with lists. The following are the options that you will have 
for working with your content:
•	
Options: This section has a list of widget actions that can be performed on 
your content widget. They include removing the widget, printing the widget 
to PDF, exporting to a number of formats, viewing different versions of the 
widget, refreshing the widget, reprompting the widget, resetting the widget to 
its original state, listening options (what filters the widget listens to), automatic 
resizing, moving behind other objects, doing more, and properties.
•	
Undo: This option will undo changes that you make to a list report.
•	
Redo: This option will redo changes that you have undone previously.
•	
Filter: This option will allow you to provide data filters on a list object.
•	
Sort: This option will allow you to sort your list of data by whichever 
column is selected at the time this option is clicked.
•	
Calculate: This option will allow you to insert new calculated columns. 
You would first need to select the columns on which you want to perform 
a calculation.
•	
Group/Ungroup: This option will allow you to group your data columns. 
A group will create summaries at every change in the column that is selected.
•	
Change Chart: This option will allow you to change your chart type to a 
different chart type.
•	
Change Color: This option will allow you to change the color scheme for 
the chart.
•	
Add Comment: This option only works if a report has been saved. It will allow 
you to add a note to a widget. This is a key component for collaborating in 
Cognos Business Intelligence.
•	
Do more: This option will allow you to edit the object in Cognos Workspace 
Advanced. This is a securable feature that will only be available to the users 
who can develop their own queries.
•	
Full Screen: This option will make the widget expand to a full screen.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
If we select the option to change the color, we will see a complete list of all the color 
schemes defined, as shown in the following screenshot. These can be customized if 
your company has a color scheme that they would like to use for all the dashboards.

Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace
[ 40 ]
By making all of your objects share one color scheme, you can make a more 
standardized-looking dashboard.
We can also change the chart type for one of our reports to better represent the 
data. I will change our pie chart into a line chart so that I can see more clearly 
how each product line has changed over time. In the drop-down box, we will 
select Line Chart as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
Now after making many formatting changes, our final dashboard will look like 
the following screenshot:
Next we will look at how we can share these dashboards with others in 
our organization.
Sharing the dashboard
The first and most important step for sharing a dashboard is creating it and making 
it fit a common business need. So far, we have looked at creating the content and 
customizing our dashboard. Now we can look at adding comments and saving our 
dashboard to a shared location for others to access it. We can finish a dashboard 
by saving it to a public location and adding comments to any of the objects that we 
think need an explanation. I will save our report and put a comment on the edited 
chart to explain why I changed it. This comment can contain whatever information 
we think is pertinent for sharing with the other users. 

Introducing IBM Cognos Workspace
[ 42 ]
The comment is shown in the following screenshot:
Then, when a future user opens this dashboard, they can hover over the chart and 
see my note. By saving the dashboard in public folders, you are able to allow others 
to access it and share the information that you created.
In addition to having the ability of being saved, the dashboard can be e-mailed to 
the other users from within Cognos Workspace by clicking on the envelope icon 
within Cognos Workspace.
The business case for Cognos 
Workspace
This section sounds like a catchy name of a webinar or a clever marketing campaign. 
However, there really is a strong business case for Cognos Workspace. This product 
was purpose-built for the business users and relies on the business users to drive the 
acceptance of it.
As we have discussed, Cognos Workspace is all about empowering the business 
user. The simplest business case for this product is the ability of someone in the 
business to now design and build their own dashboard without IT support. This 
alone is a pretty powerful capability. What I would like to do though is move 
beyond the business case to how you and I can drive user adoption.
The easiest way to drive user adoption is from the top down, and with Cognos 
Workspace it is easy to gain attention from the top. When you think of dashboards, 
the most common type of dashboard in businesses is the executive dashboard. What 
I would propose as the best way to drive user adoption through an organization is 
to design a dashboard for one of your key executives. 

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Once an executive has a meaningful, useful dashboard, he would want the people 
who report to him to have the same information. Then those people will want their 
employees to have some degree of the same information. Then so on and so forth, 
until you are truly touching all the levels of the organization.
However, keep in mind that the strategic benefit of Cognos Workspace is the 
self-service nature of it. If the IT department was tasked with building dashboards 
for every area of the business, it could become a maintenance nightmare. So after 
getting your executive involved, be prepared to have other groups within the 
organization designing and building their own dashboards.
Summary
Cognos Workspace is a new tool for Cognos Business Intelligence that allows the 
end users to develop and share their dashboards. The product is designed to make 
it easy for the end users to choose the data that is most important to them and to 
consolidate it in one location. In Cognos Workspace, you can customize the color 
schemes of your objects and change the chart type of your charts. You can also add 
comments and share the reports. Cognos Workspace makes it easy for the users 
to access the information on their own without having to create their own queries. 
In short, it is the perfect tool for power-end users that know the information they 
want but do not have an understanding of the underlying data.
In the next chapter, we will look at another end-user interface called IBM Cognos 
Active Reports for interacting with IBM Cognos Business Intelligence data.


IBM Cognos Active Reports
Cognos Active Report is an MHT file that can be opened in a web browser. Multiple 
levels of the data can be embedded within Cognos Active Reports and rendered 
based on how an end user interacts with the report. Cognos Active Reports are new 
with IBM Cognos Business Intelligence v10 and are a part of a new mobile initiative 
(as they can be easily viewed on an iPad).
In this chapter, we will look at IBM's new offering in IBM Cognos Business 
Intelligence, Cognos Active Reports. We will approach Cognos Active Reports 
from the perspective of an end user and dive deeper into what MHT files are and 
how to open them. I will show you how to interact with Cognos Active Reports, 
and finally, we will analyze the pros and cons of using Cognos Active Reports.
In this chapter, we will cover:
•	
What are MHT files
•	
How can MHT files be read
•	
Pros and cons
•	
The business case for Cognos Active Reports
•	
Interacting with Cognos Active Reports

IBM Cognos Active Reports
[ 46 ]
What MHT files are
An MHT file is short for MHTML or MIME HTML. MIME is the technology that 
allows e-mails to contain images without having to attach the images as separate 
files. HTML is a standard language for the web pages. Combined, MHTML allows 
the combination of items that would typically be accessed via links (that is, images, 
audio files, embedded web pages, and so on) into a single file. This file can then be 
accessed without a web connection. This is extremely important for use as these 
files do not need to have access back to the source server in order to be opened 
and consumed.
How MHT files can be read
An MHT file can be opened in most browsers from your PC or laptop. Microsoft 
Internet Explorer has supported MHT files since Version 5.0 was released in 1999. 
In addition, MHT files can be opened and consumed via Firefox (with an extension), 
Safari, Google Chrome, Konqueror, and ACCESS NetFront.
While accessing Cognos Active Reports from within a web browser on your PC 
or laptop is possible, it is not the true use that Cognos Active Reports were built 
for. The primary intention in creating Cognos Active Reports was to provide the 
executives the access to Cognos BI reports from their iPads while away from 
the office. The Apple iPad fully supports utilization of MHT files, and are the 
preferred medium for consumption.
Pros and cons
Now that we understand MHT files, it is important to understand the pros and 
cons of using an MHT file to share information.
Pros
The advantages of using the MHT files are as follows:
•	
Cognos Active Reports are transportable
°°
They can be e-mailed
°°
They can be stored on jump drives
°°
They can be saved to shared areas of a filesystem

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
•	
Cognos Active Reports are great for offline consumption
°°
You can execute them while away from the office
°°
Field employees can access data without an Internet connection
°°
Users can work in remote locations, such as airplanes
•	
Cognos Active Reports work with iPads
°°
Executives want this
°°
iPad usage is often synonymous as ease-of-use
•	
Cognos Active Reports can be flashy
°°
Flashy information is more likely to be consumed than 
basic information
°°
The wow factor is likely to bring positive attention to 
your business intelligence group
Cons
The disadvantages of using the MHT files are as follows:
•	
Cognos Active Reports files can become very large
°°
Large files will bog your e-mail servers down
°°
Large files will eventually become a storage issue for IT
•	
Cognos Active Reports are very difficult to secure
°°
Similar to PDF reports, Cognos Active Reports contain a lot 
of information and can be effortlessly transferred
°°
This also means that information can get into the wrong hands 
more easily
°°
BSP Mail Plus is a third-party product from BSP Software that 
can help as it allows e-mailed content from within Cognos BI 
to be encrypted

IBM Cognos Active Reports
[ 48 ]
The business case for Cognos Active 
Reports
We have already looked at one use case for Cognos Active Reports, which is the 
fact that executives can access data in an interactive way while away from the office. 
What are the other use cases for these reports? To best understand our business uses, 
let's revisit the benefits of Cognos Active Reports and align those to users that are 
most likely to need them.
•	
Cognos Active Reports are transportable
°°
Users that are away from the office
°°
Users that do not access Cognos BI directly
°°
Users that travel
•	
Cognos Active Reports are great for offline consumption
°°
Users that fly often
°°
Users that are away from a desk
•	
Cognos Active Reports work with iPads
°°
Users that are more strategic than functional (executives)
°°
Users that are on the field
•	
Cognos Active Reports can be flashy
°°
Executives
°°
External users
When looking through the benefits of Cognos Active Reports, a few user groups 
come to mind. The first and possibly the most important are the executives. The 
executives often travel and work from their iPads. The executives will also often 
be interested in the flashy features of new products. Finally, your executives can 
drive this new technology to the other areas of your business. Therefore, creation 
of Cognos Active Reports should begin with keeping the executives in mind. The 
executives can consume high-level information in Cognos Active Reports, and 
thanks to MHT, detailed information can be available as well with the click of a 
button or a tap of the finger on an iPad.

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
Another user group that comes to mind is any field-based sales group. Often, the 
sales people in the field are disconnected from the data that they need in order to be 
most effective at their jobs. With the advent of Cognos Active Reports, sales people 
in the field can bring that information with them in the form of an MHT file. Then, 
while on-site with a client, they can bring up that client's information even if they 
are not connected to your company's intranet.
The final group of users that should be addressed are other field employees. At one 
point in my career, I consulted an electricity company that needed to provide outage 
information to their field employees. Each morning, a report with outage information 
was e-mailed to their employees, and they would use their e-mail-ready phones to 
interact with it. Now, with Cognos Active Reports, that report can be consumed via 
a device such as an iPad, and it can be more than just a static report. In this specific 
example, the field employees could drill down on an outage report to see information 
about when it went out, which breaker it was associated with, and when it was last 
serviced. This additional information could then convert into less effort and higher 
efficiency on the job.
In general, there are countless business users that could benefit from using Cognos 
Active Reports. The key is to find the ones that are going to add the most value to 
your business by using Cognos Active Reports.
Interacting with Cognos Active Reports
Cognos Active Reports are great in theory, but how do we actually interact with 
them in practice? That is what this section is for. We will walk through everything 
from opening Cognos Active Reports to understanding the different types of 
interactions available within one.
Opening Cognos Active Reports
As simple as it sounds, this is not always straightforward. When I was first 
introduced to Cognos Active Reports, I tried double-clicking to open, and it 
did not work. For my computer, the default action for an MHT file was to 
open it in Microsoft Word. This could be the case on your machine as well.

IBM Cognos Active Reports
[ 50 ]
As a result, we have a couple of options. First, we can right-click on our MHT file and 
choose Open with and then choose one of our web browsers to open the file as shown 
in the following screenshot:
This technique will work fine if you are only opening an MHT file occasionally to 
consume it, but are primarily interacting with the MHT files in order to create them.
However, if your primary use of the MHT files is as a consumer, you should set a 
default program for opening these files and have it use one of your web browsers. 
This can be accomplished by right-clicking on any MHT file and choosing Properties. 
Within Properties of the MHT file, you will see the words Opens with in the middle 
section, and the default program for opening the MHT files.

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
In order to set a new default, choose the button that says Change..., and navigate 
to your favorite web browser to set it as your new default program to use with 
MHT files.

IBM Cognos Active Reports
[ 52 ]
Navigating through Cognos Active Reports
When you first open Cognos Active Reports, you will see a number of different 
preloaders describing what is happening in the background. The first is Initializing 
Image Cache..., which translates to loading any and all images to render on the report.
Next, you will see Loading Application Data..., which translates to bringing up the 
underlying data from the MHT file. It is worth noting that all the data loads when 
the report is first opened, which makes navigation within the report very fast.
Once the application data is loaded, you will see a notice Loading Resources.... 
This essentially means that all embedded information that is neither data nor 
images is being loaded.
After that, you will see a preloader indicating Initializing View..., which translates 
to bringing up the starting view that is defined in Cognos Active Reports.
Finally, before Cognos Active Reports renders, you will see the last preloader 
that states Rendering Controls.... This means that all the interactive components 
are being loaded to the page and that the HTML component of the MHTML is 
being displayed.

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
Each report will look different. Cognos Active Report is like a web page, in the 
sense that it can be designed to best communicate with your end users and can 
be navigated in any number of different ways. The following is a screenshot of 
a highly interactive Cognos Active Report:
In this example, you can click on virtually any area of the report to see more 
information. The Overview, Market Analysis, and Distribution tabs each take you 
to separate reports. Clicking between the product groups Alpha, Charger, and Nova 
will trigger an animation that brings in the information for only the group clicked. 
In addition, clicking on any of the charts in the middle will update the other charts 
to only show the information that was clicked. Finally, the information at the bottom 
of the report scrolls as a scrolling marquee.
This is just one example of a Cognos Active Report. Countless examples can exist, 
and Cognos Active Reports can be as limitless as your imagination.

IBM Cognos Active Reports
[ 54 ]
Summary
In brief, Cognos Active Reports is an MHT file that contains multiple levels of data 
and various types of content, all stored in a single file. There are many pros of using 
Cognos Active Reports to share information with your user community, the greatest 
perhaps being the ability to share information on the go. We looked at the various 
users that could benefit from using Cognos Active Reports, including but not limited 
to the executives, sales people, and on-the-field employees. Finally, we explored how 
to interact with Cognos Active Reports as an end user of the reports.
In the next chapter, we will look at interacting with Cognos BI via mobile devices. 
We will explore the history of mobile BI and take a deep dive into the new IBM 
Cognos Business Intelligence v10.2 Mobile and its support for iPad devices.

IBM Cognos Mobile
IBM Cognos Mobile was originally launched under the name Cognos Go! Mobile 
as a part of Cognos BI v8.x for delivering reports on BlackBerry, Symbian, and 
WinMobile phones. With the new release of IBM Cognos BI v10.1.1, the mobile 
offering supports immobile devices in new ways. The interface has become much 
more robust, and the native application for the iPad is now available in the Apple 
App Store. Other platforms such as those for the iPhone or Android devices are 
supported through a web-app-based solution. In this chapter, we will look at:
•	
Cognos Mobile on smartphones
•	
New features of Cognos Mobile
•	
Interacting with Cognos Active Reports on mobile devices
•	
The future of Cognos Mobile
•	
The business case for Cognos Mobile
Cognos Mobile on BlackBerry phones
Cognos Mobile has been around for about five years under the name Go! Mobile. Go! 
Mobile supported Windows smartphones first and then eventually also supported 
Symbian and BlackBerry phones. This was accomplished through an application that 
was installed on the device and also a server component on the Cognos BI server. 
The reports that came to the phone would automatically scale for ease of use and 
interaction on the phone, but were far from being interactive due to the lack of a 
touch interface, which we see in modern phones today.

IBM Cognos Mobile
[ 56 ]
New features of IBM Cognos Mobile
With Cognos BI v10.1.1 and beyond, IBM now supports the mobile solutions in new 
ways. Most notably, there is now a native application for the iPad.
The advancements around the use with the iPad are all geared toward addressing a 
market need within the Cognos BI community. In the iPad interface, for instance, a 
user can now navigate their content store and have reports delivered to their device, 
or they can schedule reports to be delivered to their device from within Cognos BI. 
The big push for the use with the iPad is to use it for interacting with Cognos Active 
Reports and regular reports in a connected or disconnected fashion. The largest 
advantage is the intuitive way that the iPad is designed to be used and the way IBM 
has interfaced with that. You can use sliders for filtering or finger swipes for zooming 
or scrolling. If the report supports it, you have the ability to easily drill down into 
objects or drill through to other reports. Cognos Active Reports also provides an 
easy and compelling way to navigate your data in a disconnected fashion.
To access the new iPad application, you can download it for free from the Apple App 
Store. Once downloaded, locate it on your device as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 57 ]
When you open the application, you will see four sections. The first tab, IBM 
Cognos Mobile, is a welcome screen with scrolling marketing material about the 
Cognos Mobile application, displayed on the right-hand side of the screen. The 
second tab, Reports on My iPad, contains a list of reports that are already saved on 
the device. The third tab, Get More Reports, will allow you to connect to a Cognos 
BI environment via the gateway. The last one, Get More Samples, connects to a 
sample server and provides additional samples for downloading. These tabs are 
shown in the following screenshot:

IBM Cognos Mobile
[ 58 ]
If we tap on the Reports on My iPad section, we will see that the application comes 
preloaded with one Cognos Active Report sample. More samples can be obtained 
by tapping on the Get More Samples section, as seen in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 59 ]
If we tap on any of the sample reports, we can see a preview of what the report 
looks like, with additional information about the creation date and a description 
of the report.
We can interact with the report once we open it.

IBM Cognos Mobile
[ 60 ]
If we tap on the Get More Reports section, we are prompted for a gateway and 
login credentials. Once logged in, we are shown Public Folders and/or My Folders, 
according to our access rights assigned by the administrator. We can begin navigating 
our content store to find additional reports.
If we navigate through the folder structure, we eventually get to a level with 
the reports that can be run and delivered back to our device, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 61 ]
Interacting with Cognos Active Reports 
on mobile devices
As we discussed in Chapter 3, IBM Cognos Active Reports, Cognos Active Reports is 
a new way of interacting with Cognos BI content, offline. Cognos Active Reports are 
supported on iPad through the IBM Cognos Mobile native application. In addition, 
Cognos Active Reports can be opened with third-party tools such as AndReport on 
the Android devices.

IBM Cognos Mobile
[ 62 ]
Similar to how we interact with Cognos Active Reports in a web browser, Cognos 
Active Reports on a mobile device can be opened and interacted with in order to 
provide more detailed information. The iPad's additional touch screen capabilities 
make the interaction with Cognos Active Reports seem even more engaging. One 
great example is the 2012 Pro Football Statistics report that is available in the Get 
More Samples section, as shown in the following screenshot:
If you open this report, you are able to interact with American professional football 
data in a user-friendly interface.

Chapter 4
[ 63 ]
The future of IBM Cognos Mobile
In the last two years, IBM has grown their Research and Development (R&D) group 
for IBM Cognos Mobile from a small team to a larger, well-staffed team. They are now 
planning quarterly releases of new versions of IBM Cognos Mobile so that they can 
quickly release new enhancements to the market to meet their customers' increased 
focus on mobile devices. This additional investment in R&D is bound to mean quick 
advancements in the Cognos Mobile technology.
I do not feel that the goal of IBM is to replicate what competitors are doing, but rather 
to capitalize on their own strengths. Many people see third-party tools such as Roambi 
as competitors to IBM Cognos Mobile. I think that IBM will continue to allow Roambi 
to perform the functionality that it does well (allowing users to reauthor reports from 
Cognos BI data). IBM seems more focused on extending their own strengths, one of 
which is the ability to author once and consume anywhere.

IBM Cognos Mobile
[ 64 ]
The business case for IBM Cognos 
Mobile
As workforces become more mobile, so must our technology. Many businesses are 
replacing traditional desktop or laptop computers with iPads or other tablet devices 
that allow their employees to not be tied to a desk.
IBM Cognos Mobile is staying on top of this trend. When your workforce moves away 
from the conventional office setting to a more modern, working-on-the-go approach 
to business, your business analytics need to keep up. The nice thing about the recent 
support received from iPad is that it is flashy and can be an easy sell.
The business user that will benefit from IBM Cognos Mobile is someone who does 
not spend hours sitting at a desk every week. Sales people are a perfect example of 
a group within your organization that would benefit from a mobile solution because 
of its disconnected capabilities. The executives appreciate the highly visual and 
interactive dashboards provided by Cognos Active Reports. Imagine being able to 
provide your executives with Cognos Active Report, which tells them exactly how 
the business is doing right before they get on a plane. They can access it from their 
iPad during the flight, and thanks to the data and visualizations that are embedded 
within Cognos Active Report, they can interact with the information that you have 
provided them without requiring access to the BI server.
Similar to dashboards, the propagation of a mobile-reporting solution through an 
organization should start at the top. The executives have tablet devices and they 
need information. Why not provide them with the information they need on the 
devices that they are most likely to want to interact with it?
Summary
In summary, IBM Cognos Mobile has come a long way since its beginning as Cognos 
Go! Mobile, in supporting Windows Mobile phones. The product is growing, and 
with that growth we are seeing new ways to interact with information on the go. 
IBM Cognos Mobile today is an excellent tool for interacting with and running 
Cognos BI reports on your mobile device. The addition of Cognos Active Reports 
makes this offering even more valuable to an organization that is looking to enable 
their mobile workforce.

Chapter 4
[ 65 ]
In the next chapter, we will look at the business-user interfaces for Cognos BI. We 
will start off with exploring IBM Cognos Query Studio, which is a tool designed for 
ad hoc reporting. Cognos Query Studio was introduced with IBM Cognos ReportNet 
and allows users to create basic reports very quickly. Chapter 5, IBM Cognos Query 
Studio, explores the interface and also explores how to create a basic report using 
Query Studio.


IBM Cognos Query Studio
In this chapter, we will look at Cognos Query Studio. Cognos Query Studio is a tool 
designed for creating ad hoc reports. Cognos Query Studio was added to the Cognos 
BI suite of products with the release of IBM Cognos ReportNet. The interface is 
designed for ease of use and provides many different drag-and-drop and right-click 
options for developing basic reports. In this chapter we will look at:
•	
Who should use Cognos Query Studio
•	
Accessing Cognos Query Studio
•	
An introduction to metadata
•	
The drag-and-drop interface and the right-click menu
•	
Saving and sharing reports
•	
The business case for Cognos Query Studio
Who should use Cognos Query Studio?
Cognos Query Studio is designed for the user that understands the data from which 
they are collecting information but will likely have a number of different, unique 
report requirements. The reason that this is an ideal user is because, if the user 
does not understand the underlying data, they are likely to be lost when trying to 
create their own report. In addition, if the user has only a few report requirements, 
they could ask IT to develop those reports for them. Therefore, with Cognos Query 
Studio, a business user can create their reports without having to rely on IT.

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 68 ]
A typical user of Cognos Query Studio may be a business analyst or line-of-business 
user that understands their data. The understanding of the data is essential because 
it is very difficult to make the metadata that IT will provide simple enough for a 
user that does not understand what it is that they are looking at. There are ways of 
adding additional details to the metadata (for instance, by using the screen-tip option 
in Framework Manager); however, the user will still need to have at least a basic 
understanding of their data.
Accessing Cognos Query Studio
Accessing Cognos Query Studio is really quite simple. There are a couple of ways to do 
so. The first option for accessing Cognos Query Studio is from the welcome screen. On 
the welcome screen, you will see an option that says Query my data, which will launch 
Cognos Query Studio and allow you to select a package to build a report from.

Chapter 5
[ 69 ]
Alternatively, if you want to first navigate through Public Folders to the package that 
you are most interested in, you can choose Query Studio from the Launch menu. This 
is shown in the following screenshot:
Cognos Query Studio is going to open in the same browser window that you were 
using for navigation. This is a key feature to note as you will need to use the back 
navigation from Cognos Query Studio if you want to get back to Cognos Connection.

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 70 ]
Once in Cognos Query Studio, you will see a blank area in the center where you 
can create your new query. Think of this blank area as your canvas and the menu 
on the left as your palette. In addition, you have ways of manipulating the objects 
that you insert by using any of the options at the top of the blank area as shown 
in the following screenshot:
An introduction to metadata
When you first enter Cognos Query Studio, the default menu is the Insert Data 
menu. This menu will show the metadata of the package that you are in. You may 
be wondering what metadata is. Metadata is data that describes other data. In this 
case, the metadata that is displayed will be logical names for the data that is shown. 
This metadata is defined in Framework Manager during package design.
Look at the following example; each group of metadata (Orders, Products, Sales 
reps, and so on) is called a query subject. Within each query subject, there are a 
number of query items.

Chapter 5
[ 71 ]
Query subjects are collections of data that are all related in some way. These 
collections of data can all come from one table or multiple tables. The beauty of 
Cognos BI is that when the query subject is presented to the end user (as seen 
previously), it doesn't matter where the data is coming from. On the backend, 
a Framework Manager modeler has taken care of all of the necessary work by 
designing a model to bring the data together into one view. This can be from 
multiple sources or a single source.
Query items are made up of information from the underlying tables that can 
be brought into reports as single columns of information. When we think of 
these query items, we often think of individual table columns from a data source. 
However, these facts can be made up of information from a single column or 
multiple columns of information brought together into one query item through 
a calculation. This again is done by a Framework Manager modeler behind 
the scenes.
www.allitebooks.com

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 72 ]
Both query subjects and query items are often given logical, business names that do 
not necessarily correspond to the column names from which the data comes. We can 
consider a good example of this by using the example of a fact column in a table that 
is named f_qty_sld. This column is likely to represent the quantity sold for a specific 
item or set of items. With metadata, we can present this column to our end users as 
Quantity. In this way, we are presenting a column title that makes more sense when 
viewed on a report but are not changing the underlying data. In addition, we could 
format Quantity by setting the tool to automatically add a comma as the thousand 
separators and remove decimals. This does not have to correspond with how the data 
is stored in the database because Cognos BI will transform the data before presenting 
it to the end user based on our metadata settings.
In short, metadata allows us to present data in a more readily useable way. We are 
not changing the underlying data but are simply changing how it is presented to an 
end user.
The drag-and-drop interface and the 
right-click menu
Cognos Query Studio was designed with ease of use in mind. The tool uses a 
drag-and-drop interface and a right-click menu to accomplish most objectives 
of report development. In this section, we will review that interface and explore 
how to insert content, add filters, create calculations, format your report, 
incorporate charts, and understand the other buttons.
Inserting content in a report
With Cognos Query Studio, we begin with a blank canvas. The first step to designing 
an ad hoc report is determining what question you are attempting to answer. If you 
are in HR, you may want to know the average sick days per employee by office. If 
you are in finance, you may want to build a complete profit-and-loss statement or a 
balance sheet from your financial data. If you are in sales, you may want to explore 
sales for each branch or sales representative. Knowing what you want to present on 
the report is the first step to developing a good report.

Chapter 5
[ 73 ]
Once you know what you want to build, you can start to explore your metadata to 
determine what content needs to be added.
Let's look at an example. In our example, we will assume that we are a sales manager 
for Boston and that we want to know how well our sales team is doing against their 
targets. The first thing that we would want to do is bring in sales representatives, 
branch locations, sales, and target sales (as these are the items that we are going to 
be reporting on).
The palette actually tells us of a few ways in which to insert these items from our 
metadata as can be seen in the following screenshot:
As you can see, we can drag-and-drop items onto the palette to begin creating our 
report. We can also double-click on an item to add it to the palette.

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 74 ]
With our example, we want to start by adding the First name and Last name query 
items from the Sales reps query subject. We will do this by simultaneously pressing 
Ctrl and clicking on both items and dragging them to the palette as shown in the 
following screenshot:
We will continue to add City from Sales branch address, Revenue from Orders and 
Planned revenue from Orders. When we are done, we will have a base report that 
looks like this:

Chapter 5
[ 75 ]
Next, we want to filter this report to limit the amount of data that we are looking at 
to only show the group that we care about (our Boston sales team).

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 76 ]
Adding filters
Adding a filter can be accomplished in one of two ways. The first way is by selecting 
the item that you want to filter on and then clicking on the filter icon in the toolbar 
area at the top:
The second way to accomplish this is through your right-click menu. You can click 
on the column that you want to filter, right-click, and then choose Filter... from the 
right-click menu:
Within the filter screen, we have a few options. The first option is Show only the 
following and Do not show the following (NOT). We can then choose to search 
for the values we want to filter by selecting Search for values or type in values 
by selecting Type in values. We can also choose to have the report prompt every 
time it runs by checking the Prompt every time the report runs box.

Chapter 5
[ 77 ]
For our example, we will choose Show only the following, and we will choose 
Boston from the checklist and click on OK:
Performing this action will filter our data substantially to only show the four 
employees that work on our sales team out of the Boston office.
Next, we will create calculations to merge First name and Last name together 
and to determine how well our sales team is doing against their targets.
Creating a calculation
Creating a calculation, like most things in Cognos Query Studio, can be accomplished 
from both the navigation at the top and the right-click menu. To create a calculation, 
we can select the query items that we want in the calculation. Let's start by looking at 
joining First name and Last name together. To do this, we will simultaneously hit 
Ctrl and click on both of those columns. Then we can click on either the Calculate 
icon on the top or the Calculate... option on the right-click menu as seen in the 
following screenshots:

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 78 ]
This is where things get a little interesting. The product is actually smart enough to 
tell the type of data that we are looking at. Therefore, for our example, we will see a 
set of calculations related to character-based data, that being the nature of our data.
We will choose Concatenation as the operation that we want to perform, as seen 
in our previous screenshot. We will also rename our item to Full Name and select 
Space from the Separator between report items option.
Next, we want to look at creating a calculation on numeric columns. Since we can 
currently see our revenue and our planned revenue by the sales representatives, 
we now want to determine how close each sales representative is to their target. 
The way we will do that is by creating a calculation to show us each person's 
variance from their target.

Chapter 5
[ 79 ]
Using the same technique discussed previously, we can select Revenue and 
Planned Revenue and then click on calculation icon or choose Calculate... 
from the right-click menu.
The difference is that we will now see a set of calculations based on these 
numeric data items:
In this example, we will choose Percentage from the Operation type option and % 
difference (growth) from the Operation option. We will also change our new query 
item name to Variance. Once we have our options selected correctly, we will click 
on Insert to add this new calculated column.
At this point, we have all of the content that we need on our report, and we can 
begin looking at how we can change the formatting of this report to make it more 
meaningful.
Formatting your report
The first step to formatting our report in a more meaningful way is to clean up the 
unnecessary columns. With all of the information that we want added to our list, 
we now want to remove unnecessary columns by simultaneously holding down 
Ctrl and clicking on the columns no longer being used to select them. The columns 
that we are no longer using are First name, Last name, and City. 

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 80 ]
Once we have selected them, we can either hit the Delete key on our keyboard or 
click on the Delete icon in Cognos Query Studio.
In this scenario, because we have a filter on City, we will be prompted to determine 
whether we want to delete the filter as well. We should uncheck the filter to make sure 
that it is not deleted. Now your report should look like the following screenshot:
To make the information in this report stand out even more, we can add conditional 
formatting. Conditional formatting is formatting that is based on the data. In our 
example, we are going to assume that is it ok to miss your target by up to 5 percent 
but that anything more than that is considered poor performance. In order to invoke 
this conditional formatting, we will revisit our right-click menu by right-clicking on 
our new column, Variance, and clicking on Define Conditional Styles...:

Chapter 5
[ 81 ]
On the conditional styles menu, you can set thresholds for different formatting. In 
our example, we will assume that we want to be within 5 percent of our targets and 
will set a threshold of -.05 (or negative 5 percent) and have our number formatted 
with the predefined format for poor performance. The following screenshot shows 
an example of this:
We can also change the background color and font color of our headers by highlighting 
all of the headers and simultaneously pressing Shift and clicking on Full Name and 
Variance. We can then click on the icons for font color.
Choose the White color for the font color. Next, select the paint bucket to set the 
background color. Here, we will choose Navy.
We will also click on the bold button to make the headers stand out more.

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 82 ]
We can now double-click on the Title area to add our own custom title. We can make 
the title of our report Sales Variance Report and use a subtitle of Boston. Since 
we are using Boston in the subtitle, we can uncheck the Show filters option to show 
the filters (as well as the other options if we want) and click on OK:
After we have completed our formatting by adding a conditional format for the 
Variance column, changing the formatting of our headers, and adding a title to 
the report, it should look like the following screenshot:
Next, we will look at enhancing this report with a chart.

Chapter 5
[ 83 ]
Incorporating charts
Choosing the right chart type is an art. Despite popular belief, all charts are not created 
equal for all scenarios. For instance, with our previous example, if we were to choose a 
column, bar, or line chart, it would be next to impossible to see changes in our variance 
by the sales representative. Since variance is only a fraction of revenue and planned 
revenue, we have to use a chart that shows variance on a separate scale.
We can add a chart from either the Change Layout menu on the left of the studio or 
through the chart icon in the top navigation.
For this chart, we are going to use a pie chart, because it will create multiple pies 
and allow us to compare by measuring columns to see how each representative is 
performing. As you can see from the following list of chart types, there are a variety 
that we can choose from and a few options are available within each type. We will 
choose a Standard with 3-D Visual Effect pie chart. For other scenarios, we could 
also have chosen a Column, Bar, Line, Column-Line (a combination chart), Area, 
or Radar chart.

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 84 ]
Our final report with our formatted list report and an added chart will look like the 
following screenshot:
With this, we can clearly see from the chart that Pierre is our largest revenue 
generator; however, he also had the largest target and missed that target by the 
highest percentage than any sales representative. Next, we can look at what all 
of the other buttons do.

Chapter 5
[ 85 ]
Understanding your other buttons
All of the other buttons at the top are divided into sections, and these sections 
correspond to menus on the left menu area. Let's walk through the buttons in 
each section and discuss how each button is used.
The Edit Data menu is what we have spent a decent amount of time in so far. 
This menu can be found on the left of the navigation, but the options within it 
are also available at the top of the screen as seen in the following screenshot:
•	
Cut: This option will allow you to move an item in conjunction with the 
Paste option.
•	
Paste: This option will drop an item that you have previously cut.
•	
Delete: This option will remove the selected item from the report.
•	
Undo: This action will undo whatever last action or actions you performed.
•	
Redo: This action allows you to redo an action that you have undone.
•	
Run: This option will allow you to run the report with the data.
•	
Filter: This option will allow you to select a smaller set of data based on a 
specific column's data.
•	
Suppress: This option will allow you to suppress zeroes in the crosstabs.
•	
Sort: This option will allow you to sort your dataset based on a specific column.
•	
Summarize: This option will allow you to create totals, averages, and other 
summaries of columns of data.
•	
Calculate: This option can be used to create custom calculated fields.
•	
Drill-down: This option will allow you to navigate to the next level within 
hierarchical data.
•	
Drill-up: This option will allow you to navigate up a level in hierarchical data.
•	
Goto: This option will allow you to link to a separate report while passing 
the contents of the row of data that is highlighted as a parameter to the 
new report. This functionality is set up in Cognos PowerCubes or through 
drill-through definitions in the report.

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 86 ]
The next section in the top navigation corresponds to the Change Layout menu on 
the left. This section allows you to customize the layout of the page. The buttons 
available here can be seen in the following screenshot:
The buttons in this section are:
•	
Chart: This button allows you at add a chart to your report
•	
Group: This option will group common items in a column
•	
Pivot: This option will create a crosstab and move the selected column 
to the column section and leave the other columns as rows
•	
Ungroup: This option will ungroup a previously grouped column
•	
Sections: This option will create breaks at each change in data for the 
column selected
•	
Swap: This option will switch your rows and columns in a crosstab
•	
Collapse: This option will collapse an expanded, hierarchical data set
•	
Expand: This option will expand a hierarchical data set
The style toolbar is also located at the top of the screen. This toolbar deals with font 
and table formatting.
On the style toolbar, shown in the previous screenshot, we have the following options:
•	
Font: This option allows you to choose a font style
•	
Size: This option allows you to set the size of your font
•	
Font color: This option allows you to choose a color for your font
•	
Bold: This option makes the font thicker
•	
Italic: This option makes the font italic

Chapter 5
[ 87 ]
•	
Underline: This option underlines the font
•	
BG color: This option allows you to choose a background color for your font
•	
Text align: This option allows you to select the alignment of a cell
•	
Font style: This option provides the same options as those provided by the 
Font option plus the option of a strikethrough style
•	
Borders: This option allows you to change the formatting of your table borders
We have now covered all of the formatting options for the report that are available in 
the toolbars. We can next look at the saving options that allow us to share our newly 
created report with other users.
Saving and sharing reports
Sharing reports and all other created content is done by saving the content to a 
location that can be accessed by the users that you want to share the data with. 
We will look at how we save to a public folder and how we access reports that 
others have created, as sharing goes both ways after all.
If we look at our final section of the toolbar, we see the four icons shown in the 
following screenshot:
These icons are all geared toward report creation, accessing, and saving. Here's what 
they do: 
•	
New: This allows you to create a new report from scratch
•	
Open: This allows you to open a report that has previously been saved
•	
Save: This will save the report that you are in
•	
Save as: This allows you to save a report to a new location
Best practices would have a report developer saving a report to their My Folders 
location during development. Once a report is complete and ready for sharing, 
they can use the Save as... option and put the report into a Public Folders location 
that can be accessed by others.

IBM Cognos Query Studio
[ 88 ]
The business case for Cognos Query 
Studio
Cognos Query Studio was designed for business users that have questions about their 
data but do not have time to wait for IT to create reports for them. It is designed to put 
the power back in the hands of the end user for creating and sharing ad hoc reports.
The simplest business case for this tool is that it is an easy-to-use option for accessing 
data that has not already been provided to you in an IT-built report. Many business 
users understand their data well enough to find the information that they need. 
They just need a safe, controlled means for accessing that data. While IT is often 
responsible for creating many production reports that are sent out to clients or are 
part of a reporting project, there are often scenarios where users need additional 
information and do not have time to wait for it. Cognos Query Studio bridges that 
gap between the business and IT that cannot always be filled with professionally 
designed reports.
The end result of providing key business users with Cognos Query Studio will be 
fewer report creation requests for IT and happier end users. End users want to feel 
enabled. If you are walking into a meeting with your boss and are the manager of 
the Boston branch of your company (as in our previous example), it is incredibly 
impressive to be able to go into Cognos BI and create a report that allows you to 
show exactly how each member of your team is performing. Since the business 
often drives the purchasing of a business intelligence tool, showing them this 
tool and allowing them to play with it could lead to a farther reaching Cognos 
BI deployment, and in turn, more success for the BI team at your organization.
Summary
Cognos Query Studio is a tool that allows end users to create ad hoc reports. 
No technical know-how is needed to use this tool as it is designed to be incredibly 
user friendly and intuitive.
In this chapter, we looked at the typical user of Cognos Query Studio. We also 
looked at how to access the tool and create ad hoc reports using it. We explored 
the various functionalities available in the toolbars, and finally, we looked at 
why a business would want a tool like this.
In the next chapter, we will move on from ad hoc reporting and explore the 
ad hoc analysis that is made available through Analysis Studio.

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
Cognos Analysis Studio is a tool designed for end users that ask detailed analytical 
questions of their data. The tool was designed for ad hoc analyses of data by business 
users. In this chapter, we will cover:
•	
Who should use Cognos Analysis Studio?
•	
Accessing Cognos Analysis Studio.
•	
An introduction to multidimensional data.
•	
The drag-and-drop interface and the right-click menu.
•	
Saving and sharing Cognos Analysis Studio reports.
•	
The business case for Cognos Analysis Studio.
Who should use Cognos Analysis Studio?
Cognos Analysis Studio is intended for business users and was designed to be an 
easy-to-use tool for analyzing data.
A straightforward way to identify a user that would benefit from Cognos Analysis 
Studio is to determine what kind of questions they will ask. If they ask questions 
with the word by in them, they are likely to benefit from using Cognos Analysis 
Studio. For instance, a typical Cognos Analysis Studio user might ask the question, 
"What are our sales by year?". Another more complex question they may ask could 
be, "What was our margin last year by territory, by product?". These questions imply 
the need for examining data in a multidimensional format. That is exactly what 
Cognos Analysis Studio was built to do. If your business users ask questions using 
a combination of what, when, where, and who, it's probably an analysis.

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 90 ]
Accessing Cognos Analysis Studio
Before we can start using Cognos Analysis Studio to analyze our data, we need to 
look at how to access the tool. Much like Query Studio, there are a couple of ways 
to access it.
The first way to access Cognos Analysis Studio is from the welcome screen by 
choosing the Analyze my business option:
The other way to access Cognos Analysis Studio is through the Launch menu, 
choosing Analysis Studio:

Chapter 6
[ 91 ]
You will then be prompted to choose a package from which you want to perform 
your analysis. For the sake of an example, I will use the Cognos BI sample package, 
great_outdoors_8. This is built with Cognos Great Outdoors Cognos PowerCube.
When the tool is first launched, you will be asked to start with either of the options: 
Blank Analysis or Default Analysis. The default analysis can be set up by an 
administrator; it is a starting analysis from which to begin creating new analysis. 
You can also choose whether or not to be prompted again in the future.
For our purposes, lets start with the Blank Analysis option.
An introduction to multidimensional data
When you first open the package in Cognos Analysis Studio, you will notice that the 
Insertable Objects area has a list of dimensions, hierarchies, and measures that can 
be added to the analysis report. The following are a couple of quick definitions for 
dimension, hierarchy, and measure:
•	
Dimension: A dimension is a grouping of data that describes other data. 
Dimensions contain different levels with members that roll up to one or 
more hierarchies. For example, a sales representative can be a dimension 
because you could say that a sales representative has sold a certain amount 
or has certain accounts roll up to them.

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 92 ]
•	
Hierarchy: A hierarchy is the way that different dimensions roll up to one 
another. An easy example of a hierarchy would be time. In a time hierarchy, 
you can have the various days (dimensions) roll up to a month dimension. 
From there, the various months (dimensions) roll up to a year dimension. 
These rollups are levels. A level is a part of the hierarchy that allows rollup 
and/or drilldown. This will allow you to see the data at the previous or the 
next level.
•	
Measure: A measure is any numerical value (or attribute that can be counted) 
that an organization is interested in measuring over multiple dimensions to 
help run its business. A great example of a measure would be something like 
revenue, sales, or quantity. These are all data items that can be tracked and 
assigned to a dimension.
In the following example from the great_outdoors_8 package, you can see examples 
of dimensions, hierarchies, and measures:

Chapter 6
[ 93 ]
The Products item is an example of a dimension. Camping Equipment, Golf 
Equipment, Mountaineering Equipment, Outdoor Protection, and Personal 
Accessories are all examples of levels. Revenue, Product cost, Product plan, 
Branch expense plan, Quantity Sold, Profit margin %, and Revenue/Employee 
are all examples of measures.
Exploring the drag-and-drop interface 
and the right-click menu
Let's now look at actually creating an analysis by using the drag-and-drop 
functionality and the right-click menu. Just like we saw with Query Studio, 
the goal of creating Cognos Analysis Studio was to make the user interface 
as simple as possible. Let's explore it!
Inserting dimensions and measures
We will start by adding dimensions and measures to our analysis. If we look at 
the drop zones of the analysis, we can see that they clearly label where you should 
drag-and-drop each element with labels that say Rows, Columns, and Measure:

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 94 ]
For the purpose of our example, we will drag in Years to Columns, Products to Rows, 
and Revenue to Measure.
Once complete, our analysis looks like the following screenshot:
The real value of this analysis is that you are able to identify cross-points for two 
dimensions at once. For example, we can see revenue by both Products and Years 
at the same time, as seen in the preceding screenshot. We will now look at filtering 
this data by an additional dimension. 
Adding context filters
Next, we will look at adding filters to our analysis. In Cognos Analysis Studio, this 
is a very simple task. All that is required to add a filter is to drag-and-drop the item 
that you want to filter into the Context filter area. We will now drag in Americas 
from Sales regions to the Context filter area. This will filter the data to only show 
the numbers that match the Americas dimension.
Once the filter is in, if we click on the down arrow to the right, we will see a list 
of the levels within Americas and hover over each of the countries to see a list of 
cities and then each city to see a list of sales representatives in that city.

Chapter 6
[ 95 ]
With this context filter in, we can also choose to change the filter to a different region 
or add additional filters in order to further limit the data.
We also have the option of bringing in additional filters and continuing to limit 
our data.
The filter option is often used when you are trying to answer a question with the 
word for in it. For example, if I wanted to know our company's revenue by year for 
Americas, that is an example of the analysis from the previous example. In addition, 
if you wanted to know sales revenue by Year for Americas and for a Margin range 
dimension set between 0 and 20 percent, we could continue to limit the data by 
dragging in the Margin range dimension as another filter.

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 96 ]
Drilling down and expanding data
One of the key capabilities of Cognos Analysis Studio is the ability to navigate through 
the different levels of your data. Working within our existing data, I am going to drill 
down into 2006 in order to see the quarters below 2006 and the data associated with 
each quarter. In order to perform this drill-down mechanism, we either click on 2006 
or right-click and choose Drill Down from the right-click menu:
This is an excellent feature if you want to drill down on one dimension. However, 
what do you do if you are interested in drilling down on all levels? With Cognos 
Analysis Studio, we have a couple of options. Let's look at these for our other 
hierarchy, Products.
If I right-click on the thin bar above my list of products on my rows, I can see 
a complete menu of capabilities including the ability to expand or drill down 
a level on all of the items at once:

Chapter 6
[ 97 ]
One neat thing to note is that the right-click menu is customized to the dimension 
you are clicking on. In this case, it says that we can expand products. When we 
choose the Expand Products option, we will see the next level beneath the items 
that are part of the base level under the Products dimension. 

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 98 ]
This next level is going to show up nested to the right of the starting level:
Nesting is a useful way to see another level of information without losing the level 
that we started with. Nesting is taking one level from the same or a different dimension 
and placing it beneath or alongside your original level. It is a very powerful tool in the 
arsenal of a Cognos Analysis Studio user. 

Chapter 6
[ 99 ]
Another option for seeing the next layer of detail in a hierarchy is the Down a 
Level option:
This other drill option on the right-click menu will allow us to go down a level without 
keeping the original level. This is useful when you want to see a complete list from 
that level without necessarily needing to know how each parent item rolls up in the 
hierarchy. A great example of using this would be if you wanted to see a complete 
list of your product names without the parent levels being displayed. Conveniently 
enough, the lowest level in our Products dimension has a list of products. Therefore, 
if we choose the Down a Level option twice in a row, we should see a complete list 
of our products as rows in our analysis. 

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 100 ]
What we notice, however, is that our list is truncated with the More option to show 
more and to keep as much information as possible on the screen for analysis:
If we click the More option, we are prompted for how many items we would like 
to display in the rows so that we can bring in the entire list.
The final option that we will look at for expanding our data analysis is the ability 
to nest levels from different dimensions. We mentioned a moment ago that nesting 
items which are not alike can help us to better understand our data and is often 
one of the best friends of a Cognos Analysis Studio user. Let's look at how nesting 
works. Nesting is the action of inserting a level inside or below another level. It is 
accomplished through drag-and-drop and is very simple to do. We will first nest 
a level inside our Products dimension. If you are following along, we have used 
the Up a Level option to bring the view back up to the first level within the 
Products hierarchy:

Chapter 6
[ 101 ]
We have also deleted the filter on Americas from the Context filter area.
What we can do now is drag-and-drop our Sales regions dimension onto our palette 
along with our Products dimension. During this drag-and-drop, you will notice that 
there are a few different places that you can drop the dimension, and each will perform 
a different task. Also, Cognos Analysis Studio gives you different visual cues about 
where you are about to drop the new dimension. This is called nesting nodes.

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 102 ]
Replacing the existing dimension
To replace the existing dimension, drag the new dimension on top of it. You will know 
that you are in the correct spot because the existing dimension will be highlighted in 
black as shown in the following screenshot:
Once you release the mouse, you will see the new dimension appear where the 
original dimension was as seen in the following screenshot:
Nesting within the existing dimension
To nest within the existing dimension, drag the new dimension slightly to the right 
of the existing one. You will know that you are in the correct spot when you see a 
black line with a white box around it showing up to the right of your existing node 
as seen in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 103 ]
Doing this will nest the new dimension inside the existing one so that you can see 
within each product line how much revenue there was for each sales region. This 
is a very useful tool for answering the more complex questions where the word by 
is used multiple times. The end result will be a very robust analysis as seen in the 
following screenshot:

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 104 ]
Nesting below an existing dimension
To nest a new dimension below an existing dimension, drag the new dimension 
slightly below the existing one. For this example, you will know that you are in 
the correct spot when you see a black line with a white box around it showing 
up below your existing row dimension as seen in the following screenshot:
This mechanism for nesting dimensions allows you to answer questions that have 
the word by in them as well as the word and. For instance, if you were asked, "What 
are our Revenue numbers by Year, by Product and Sales region?", you could answer 
that question with the analysis we just created, which is known as a discontinuous 
crosstab and is shown here:
While this looks like a very simple report, it actually contains a wealth of information 
and would allow us to answer a variety of questions from one screen.

Chapter 6
[ 105 ]
With all of these options, how do we know what to nest where and when to use a 
specific type of nesting? It still comes back to the question you are asking. Here is 
a bit of a guide:
•	
If you are asked to show information based on an existing analysis, but 
with a different dimension being used, you can drag-and-drop to replace 
a dimension
•	
When you are asked to provide an analysis that shows many different 
dimensions (or many bys in the question), use the "nest within" option
•	
On the occasions that you want to have a filter that is not part of the 
crosstab, you can use the context filter to limit your analysis
Finally, when you are asking a question that uses by as well as and (for instance 
Revenue by Year, by Product and Sales region), you can use the "nest beneath" 
or "nest beside" option.
Creating calculations
Let's now look at expanding the analysis that we have with calculations. We have 
made it pretty clear that using Cognos Analysis Studio is all about answering 
questions. So, what do we do when we are asked a question and we don't have 
the data already available to us in the package we are exploring? We essentially 
have two options. We can either ask the people in our organization that manage 
our package creation to update PowerCube, OLAP data source, or dimensionally-
modeled relational data source to include the data we need, or we can try to create 
it from the data that is available to us. Why don't we try an example?
We will assume that we have been asked to provide information on what our 
average revenue was from 2004 to 2007 by product and region. If we start with 
our analysis that has Revenue for Products by Years and Sales region, all we 
need to do in order to answer this question is create a calculation to show the 
average for the entire year and then clean up the formatting a bit.
To create a calculation on the four years 2004 to 2007, start by selecting all of them. 
This can be accomplished by pressing Ctrl and clicking on each or by simultaneously 
pressing Shift and clicking on the first and last items (2004 and 2007 respectively). 

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 106 ]
Once all items are selected, you can right-click to see your right-click menu and then 
hover over Calculate to see a list of your calculation options:
You will notice immediately that, like our other right-click menus, our calculation 
options are automatically showing options based on the data type that we have 
selected and dynamically populating a few popular options for that data type with 
the dimensions selected. For our purposes, our calculation is available on this menu. 
However, if it were not, we could choose the Custom... option to see a complete list 
of calculations or to build out a more complex calculation. For this scenario, let's go 
ahead and select Average (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007), and in doing so, we will see a new 
column created that shows the average for those four years.
Next, for the sake of cleaning up the report, we will once again highlight 2004, 2005, 
2006, and 2007, as well as Years and right-click again to hide these columns using the 
Hide option. In doing this, we replace all five of those columns with a single column 
that says, More & hidden. We can actually right-click on it as well and choose Hide 
once again to remove it:

Chapter 6
[ 107 ]
 
We now have the information that we need. The last thing that we will do, for 
purely cosmetic reasons, is right-click on Average (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007) and 
choose Rename... so that we have an easier-to-read column title:

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 108 ]
I will rename the column to Average – 2004 to 2007, and with that, we have 
created our first Cognos Analysis Studio calculation and in turn answered a question 
that we could not answer from the data that was already available to us. Now let's 
look at making this crosstab a little prettier.
Incorporating charts
A great way to jazz up any report is by adding charts. Within Cognos Analysis 
Studio, we have a variety of chart types available to us. The hardest part of adding 
a chart is always determining what chart type to use. The action of adding a chart 
is actually quite simple.
Choosing a chart type
Choosing a chart type can be as simple as reading it from a requirements document 
or as complex as needing to understand the data visualization principles that govern 
what charts to use and when. If you are not familiar with data visualization, it 
essentially covers the entire spectrum of how data is presented in a meaningful way. 
In a modern context, data visualization tends to refer to the presentation of data in 
some format of charting, and more specifically, to the different schools of thought 
around how to determine the best physical representation for different types of data.
To simplify this process, ask yourself the question, "How would I want to see this 
information?", and present it in that manner.
With the example that we used previously, if we add Years back to the columns to 
the left of Average – 2004 to 2007, we have a pretty unique report for conversion to a 
chart. So, we have to ask ourselves how this information would be best represented 
to provide the most information in the simplest format. Before we can do that, we 
should take a look at the chart types that are available to us under the chart button:

Chapter 6
[ 109 ]
The chart types available are:
•	
Column Chart: A column chart is great for presenting various dimensions 
of data across time or for comparing dimensions side by side.
•	
Bar Chart: A bar chart is similar to a column chart; however, you typically 
see it used for dimensions other than the time dimension. Since time is 
thought of as linear, it is harder to picture it moving upward as opposed 
to from left to right.
•	
Pie Chart: A pie chart represents data as sections of a pie. This is an excellent 
charting type to show how various dimensions make up different portions of 
the whole.
•	
Line Chart: A line chart is great for showing changes over time. A line chart 
can be used to compare how data changes over time in the same way that a 
column chart is used.
•	
Pareto Chart: A Pareto chart is a way of showing data over time as well as 
a running total at the same time. You typically see Pareto charts used when 
you want to represent incremental time (like quarters) and still show a 
running total for those increments.
•	
Area Chart: An area chart is typically used to represent volumes. You 
can think of this as a combination of a line chart (where you can clearly 
see fluctuations across dimensions) and a bar chart (where you see the 
filled-in area below the data points).
•	
Radar Chart: A radar chart (also sometimes called a web chart) is a way of 
seeing one or more measure points depicted inside of a chart that looks like 
a radar. You can easily see how far objects are from the center point. You 
typically see this used when the center point is the goal. For instance, if you 
wanted to depict defects in your products on a chart, this would be a good 
option, because you could see which products are the furthest from the goal 
of zero.
•	
Point Chart: A point chart is like a line chart; however, it does not have the 
lines connecting the dots between the data points. You typically see this chart 
type used when the data is not meant to be viewed in a linear format. You 
see this used most often in conjunction with two equally important measures 
where the higher you are on the measures, the better. That way, when you see 
data points that are far to the upper-right, you know that those items are doing 
well. Conversely, items that are in the far lower-left quadrant are performing 
poorly. You often see these charts divided into four quadrants in order to 
acknowledge the fact that being strong in only one of the measures (and in 
turn being in the upper-left or lower-right quadrants) can still be acceptable.

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 110 ]
With most of these charts, you also have the option of creating them as Stacked or 
100% Stacked charts.
•	
Stacked: A stacked chart is a chart that has measure for multiple items 
within a dimension placed together in one graphical item. For instance, 
a stacked bar chart would have multiple divisions for each bar to depict 
what amount of that bar was made up of each item. The following example 
shows a stacked bar chart:
•	
100% Stacked: A 100 percent stacked chart is very similar to a stacked chart, 
with only one exception; in a 100 percent stacked chart, each section represents 
the percentage of the whole as opposed to the exact value. Therefore, all 
columns, bars, lines, and so on will add up to 100 percent on the chart as 
seen in the following example:

Chapter 6
[ 111 ]
After some review, it is clear that some of these options would simply not work 
with the data that we have. Because we have two separate groupings adding up to 
the total, it is very difficult to determine what the best way to represent it might be. 
In reality, the best way to determine what chart will share the most in the simplest 
format is through trial and error. In our example, (after a bit of trial and error) you 
should be able to see that the best way to show the information that we have is 
through a stacked column chart. Since a business person would most likely care 
about changes over time as well as what percentage of the whole each area makes 
up, this is the best solution for showing these two completely separate things. In 
addition, thanks to the hover feature that is natively available on charts in Cognos 
Analysis Studio, the details for any specific section is available as well.
Understanding the other buttons
Now that we have reviewed how to build an analysis, learned the ways of creating 
calculations, and explored the world of charting, let's see what our other buttons do.

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 112 ]
The buttons are as follows:
•	
New: This button will allow you to create a new analysis from scratch.
•	
Open: This button will allow you to open an existing Cognos Analysis 
Studio report.
•	
Save: This button will allow you to save your Cognos Analysis Studio report.
•	
Save as: This button will allow you to save your Cognos Analysis Studio 
report with a different name or to a different location.
•	
Delete: This item will delete the object or objects that are selected when it 
is clicked. Note that not all objects can be deleted (for instance, if you have a 
calculation built off an object, you will have to hide it rather than delete it).
•	
Undo: This object will reverse the last action that was performed.
•	
Redo: This button will redo the last action that was undone.
•	
Search: This button will allow you to search for a data item within 
a hierarchy.
•	
Run: This button will allow you to run the report. It also has a drop-down 
menu available for running different file outputs.
•	
Go To: This button works in conjunction with drill-throughs that have been 
created in the OLAP data source or with drill-through definitions. These 
drills-throughs allow you to link from the cube to a different report. If they 
exist, you will be able to find them in the Related Links... list when you 
choose this option.
•	
Filter: This button will allow you to create a filter on the items that are 
selected when it is clicked. You can also choose this option to remove a 
filter that already exists.
•	
Top/Bottom: This button will allow you to limit your dataset to only show 
the top X or bottom X items within a dimension based on the measure that 
is being used. This is very useful when you have large sets of data but want 
to only show the high or low performers.
•	
Suppress: This button will allow you to hide zeros or blanks based on zeros 
in either rows or columns.
•	
Sort: This button will allow you to sort a column or row based on the data 
from highest to lowest or lowest to highest.
•	
Subtotal: This button will allow you to add subtotals at breaks in your data.

Chapter 6
[ 113 ]
•	
Total: This button will allow you to create custom totals at the end of each 
of your dimensions.
•	
Calculate: This button will allow you to create a calculation based on the 
columns or rows selected.
•	
Display: This button will allow you to change what is displayed between 
the crosstab, chart, or crosstab and chart.
•	
Chart: This button will allow you to select a chart type to add to the report 
based on the analysis that has been created.
•	
Swap: This button will switch your rows and your columns on your crosstab.
•	
Custom Set: This button will allow you to save a grouping of dimensions 
as a custom set of dimensions for future use with other Cognos Analysis 
Studio reports.
Saving and sharing Cognos Analysis 
Studio reports
Now that we have fully explored how to create Cognos Analysis Studio reports, 
we need to understand how we can share these with other individuals within our 
organization. In the last section, we reviewed the buttons that are used to save reports. 
In order to share a report, you will need to save it to a place that the person or people 
you want to share with can access it. To do this, first click on the Save As button:

IBM Cognos Analysis Studio
[ 114 ]
You are then prompted at the bottom to choose a location to save to and a name 
for your new report. Be sure to save to a place in which the other users that need 
the report can access it.
You have just shared your newly created report!
The business case for Cognos Analysis 
Studio
Now that we have covered all of the technical stuff, it makes sense to examine why 
a business would want this functionality. The major reason to want Cognos Analysis 
Studio in your business is that the ability to analyze your data in a self-service, easy-
to-use manner will in turn make your business more agile and your decisions more 
rapid. How does Cognos Analysis Studio do that? As questions arise that require a 
multidimensional view of data in order for them to be answered, Cognos Analysis 
Studio gives business users the ability to answer those questions without having to 
involve IT. By having an interface that allows business users that need information 
to access that data instantly, those business questions that come up can be answered 
more quickly, and the decisions that need to be made based on that information can 
be made more rapidly.
Think of a scenario where a client manager receives a call from the client requesting 
support. Perhaps during that call, the client manager needs to clearly understand 
what the profitability is of this client across different areas of the business and across 
time. Without Cognos Analysis Studio, this is information that the client manager may 
never have. With Cognos Analysis Studio and a well-designed data source, the client 
manager could bring up Cognos Analysis Studio to build a report of profitability by 
department, by years, for this specific client. They can then use of that information to 
make decisions based on past experiences.

Chapter 6
[ 115 ]
Summary
We have looked at Cognos Analysis Studio in this chapter, focusing first on who 
should use the product and how they can access it. We then took a deeper dive 
into understanding how to use the tool while exploring everything from simple 
drag-and-drop analysis creation to the data visualization concepts of charting. 
We wrapped up the chapter by looking at why a business would want a tool like 
Cognos Analysis Studio.
In the next chapter, we will explore the newest business user reporting and 
analysis interface, Business Insight Advanced. In Cognos Workspace Advanced, 
we will be able to create ad hoc reports and analyses with a simple-to-use, yet 
very powerful interface.


IBM Cognos Workspace 
Advanced
Cognos Workspace Advanced is changing the game for business-level users in 
IBM Cognos BI. The product is designed to allow querying and analysis from a 
single interface. It interacts with and enhances Cognos Workspace and is part of 
the shared workspace concept within IBM Cognos Business Intelligence v10.x. 
In this chapter, we will look at:
•	
Who should use Cognos Workspace Advanced?
•	
Comparing Cognos Workspace Advanced to Cognos Query Studio 
and Cognos Analysis Studio.
•	
Accessing Cognos Workspace Advanced.
•	
Exploring the drag-and-drop interface and the right-click menu
•	
Using external data.
•	
The business case for Cognos Workspace Advanced.
Who should use Cognos Workspace 
Advanced?
In the last two chapters, we have looked at Cognos Query Studio and Cognos 
Analysis Studio. We discussed how Cognos Query Studio is designed for business 
users who want to create ad hoc reports. We also discussed how Cognos Analysis 
Studio is designed for business users who want to perform ad hoc analyses. Cognos 
Workspace Advanced is designed for business users that want to do both.

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 118 ]
With Cognos Workspace Advanced, business users have one tool for creating 
advanced analyses and reports. The tool, like Query Studio and Analysis Studio, 
is designed for ease of use and is built on the same platform as the other report 
development tools in Cognos. Business Insight Advanced/Cognos Workspace 
Advanced is actually so powerful that it is being positioned more as a light 
Cognos Report Studio than as a powerful Cognos Query Studio and Cognos 
Analysis Studio.
Comparing to Cognos Query Studio and 
Cognos Analysis Studio
With so many options for business users, how do we know which tool to use? 
The best approach for making this decision is to consider the similarities and 
differences between the options available. In order to help us do so, we can 
use the following table:
Feature
Query Studio
Analysis Studio
Cognos 
Workspace 
Advanced
Ad hoc reporting
X
X
Ad hoc analysis
X
X
Basic charting
X
X
X
Advanced charting
X
Basic filtering
X
X
X
Advanced filtering
X
Basic calculations
X
X
X
Advanced calculations
X
Properties pane
X
External data
X
Freeform design
X

Chapter 7
[ 119 ]
As you can see from the table, all three products have basic charting, basic filtering, 
and basic calculation features. Also, we can see that Cognos Query Studio and Cognos 
Workspace Advanced both have ad hoc reporting capabilities, while Cognos Analysis 
Studio and Cognos Workspace Advanced both have ad hoc analysis capabilities. In 
addition to those shared capabilities, Cognos Workspace Advanced also has advanced 
charting, filtering, and calculation features. 
Cognos Workspace Advanced also has a limited properties pane (similar to what you 
would see in Cognos Report Studio). Furthermore, Cognos Workspace Advanced 
allows end users to bring in external data from a flat file and merge it with the data 
from Cognos Connection. Finally, Cognos Workspace Advanced has free-form 
design capabilities. In other words, you are not limited in where you can add charts 
or crosstabs in the way that Cognos Query Studio and Cognos Analysis Studio limit 
you to the standard templates.
The simple conclusion after performing this comparison is that you should always 
use Cognos Workspace Advanced. While that will be true for some users, it is not 
true for all. With the additional capabilities come additional complexities. For your 
most basic business users, you may want to keep them using Cognos Query Studio 
or Cognos Analysis Studio for their ad hoc reporting and ad hoc analysis simply 
because they are easier tools to understand and use. However, for those business 
users with basic technical acumen, Cognos Workspace Advanced is clearly the 
superior option.
Accessing Cognos Workspace Advanced
I would assume now that, after reviewing the capabilities Cognos Workspace 
Advanced brings to the table, you are anxious to start using it. We will start off 
by looking at how to access the product.

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 120 ]
The first way to access Cognos Workspace Advanced is through the welcome page. 
On the welcome page, you can get to Cognos Workspace Advanced by clicking on 
the option Author business reports:
This will bring you to a screen where you can select your package. In Cognos Query 
Studio or Cognos Analysis Studio, you will only be able to select non-dimensional 
and dimensional packages based on the tool you are using. With Cognos Workspace 
Advanced, because the tool can use both dimensional and non-dimensional 
packages, you will be prompted with packages for both.
The next way to access Cognos Workspace Advanced is through the Launch menu 
in Cognos Connection. Within the menu, you can simply choose Cognos Workspace 
Advanced to be taken to the same options for choosing a package.
Note, however, that if you have already navigated into a 
package, it will automatically launch Cognos Workspace 
Advanced using the very same package.

Chapter 7
[ 121 ]
The third way to access Cognos Workspace Advanced is by far the most functional 
way. You can actually access Cognos Workspace Advanced from within Cognos 
Workspace by clicking on the Do More... option on a component of the dashboard:
When you select this option, the object will expand out and open for editing inside 
Cognos Workspace Advanced.

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 122 ]
Then, once you are done editing, you can simply choose the Done button in 
the upper right-hand corner to return to Cognos Workspace with your newly 
updated object.
For the sake of showing as many features as possible in this chapter, we will 
launch Cognos Workspace Advanced from the welcome page or from the 
Launch menu and select a package that has an OLAP data source. For the 
purpose of following along, we will be using the Cognos BI sample package
 great_outdoors_8 (or Great Outdoors).
When we first access it, we are prompted to choose a package. For these examples, 
we will choose great_outdoors_8:

Chapter 7
[ 123 ]
We are then brought to a splash screen where we can choose Create new or Open 
existing. We will choose Create new.
We are then prompted to pick the type of chart we want to create. As we will see 
from the following screenshot, our options are:
•	
Blank: It starts us off with a completely blank slate
•	
List: It starts us off with a list report
•	
Crosstab: It starts us off with a crosstab
•	
Chart: It starts us off with a chart and loads the chart wizard
•	
Financial: It starts us off with a crosstab formatted like a financial report

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 124 ]
•	
Existing...: It allows us to open an existing report
We will choose Blank because we can still add as many of the other objects as we 
want to later on.
Exploring the drag-and-drop interface 
and the right-click menu
Now that we have a blank template to start with, let's explore how to build a 
complex report and analysis using the drag-and-drop interface. With Cognos 
Report Studio, there is a concept of objects that can be brought onto your palette. 
Here, we will explore how to add these objects by clicking, holding, and moving 
them to the location that we want to place them in.
Adding objects to your report
The tool has a few main components. Each is listed and shown in the 
subsequent screenshot.
•	
Toolbars: These toolbars provide additional options for controlling 
your report.

Chapter 7
[ 125 ]
•	
Palette: This is what will show up on your report. By default, the palette 
will load with data.
•	
Insertable Objects: These are the objects that can be added to your report.
We should start by looking at the objects that we can add to our report. The Insertable 
Objects pane has two main tabs, Source and Toolbox. Source is the package that you 
are working on, and toolbox is a list of objects that can be added to the palette.

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 126 ]
We will start off by building our report from the Toolbox area. Here we can see the 
list of insertable objects as seen in the following screenshot:
•	
Text Item: A tool with which you can define the text that is used.
•	
Block: This object is used for spacing and controlling where items appear 
on the report. A block is an area where other items can be inserted.
•	
Table: A table can be used to separate items in the report or for inserting 
your own text.
•	
Query Calculation: This item can be used to create a calculation based on 
data after it is aggregated in the query.
•	
Intersection (Tuple): This allows you to add a single point of data based 
on dimensions and measures that you add through a wizard.
•	
Image: This allows you to add an image to your report.
•	
Crosstab Space: This option will add a blank row or column into an 
existing crosstab.
•	
Crosstab Space (with fact cells): This option will add a column or row 
into an existing crosstab with fact cells to allow you to add additional 
information.

Chapter 7
[ 127 ]
•	
List: This option will insert a list data holder for adding levels, properties, 
or measures (similar to what you see when using Cognos Query Studio).
•	
Crosstab: This option will insert a crosstab data holder for adding 
dimensions and measures (similar to what you see when using 
Analysis Studio).
•	
Chart: This will allow you to add one of the new chart types to the report. 
Data will still need to be added to it, but this gives you a wizard for selecting 
the chart type that you want.
•	
Hyperlink: This will allow you to create a link to another location on the 
Web or within your internal environment. You often see these used to link 
to a common area on your intranet.
•	
Date: This will allow you to add a dynamic date to the report. Each time 
the report is run, it will be updated with the current system date.
•	
Time: This will allow you to add a dynamic time to the report. Each time 
the report is run, it will be updated with the current system time.
•	
Page Number: This will allow you to add a page number to your report. 
If you have multiple pages, they will be automatically updated with the 
correct page numbers.
For the purpose of this book, we will start by adding a table to the palette and 
choosing two columns and two rows. We will also check the Maximize width 
option to maximize the width so that the table takes up the entire screen:

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 128 ]
We will now proceed to add additional objects into each quadrant of our table. In the 
upper-left quadrant, we will add a chart. This will give us our first look at the new 
charts that are available for inserting. To do this, drag-and-drop a chart object into 
the upper-left quadrant of the table. You will then be prompted to choose what chart 
type to insert:
The options that are available within the Insert Chart window are:
•	
Column: This option allows you to choose between various column 
chart options, including standard column charts, cylinder column charts, 
and cone column charts
•	
Line: This option allows you to choose between various clustered line charts
•	
Pie, Donut: This option allows you to choose between various pie and 
donut chart options

Chapter 7
[ 129 ]
•	
Bar: This option allows you to choose between various bar chart options, 
including standard bar charts, cylinder bar charts, and cone bar charts
•	
Area: This option allows you to choose a chart that is similar to a 
line chart; however, the area under the line is filled in
•	
Point: This option allows you to create charts with data points only 
(no connecting lines)
•	
Combination: This option allows you to create charts that have columns 
and lines
•	
Scatter, Bubble: This option allows you to create reports with points that 
are dynamic in size based on a second measure
•	
Bullet: This option allows you to create charts that reflect a measure 
compared to a target
•	
Gauge: This option allows you to create various forms of gauge charts
•	
Pareto: This option allows you to create Pareto charts for tracking individual 
data points and running totals
•	
Progressive: This option is a column or bar chart and a running total as well
•	
Advanced: This option contains 3D charts, radar charts, and heat map charts
For our purposes, we are going to start off by adding Clustered Cylinder with 3-D 
Effects from within the Column chart options to the upper-left quadrant. We will 
then drag in a second chart to the upper right-hand quadrant. For this chart, we will 
choose a Horizontal Bullet chart.

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 130 ]
Let's continue by dragging a List to the lower-left quadrant and a Crosstab to the 
lower right-hand quadrant. When we are done dragging in our objects, our palette 
should look like:
At this point, we have all of the objects that we want in our report. We need to start 
adding the data that we need to make this report meaningful.
Adding data to your reports
In order to add data to the report, we need to toggle back to the Source tab in the 
Insertable Objects area. When we do so, we will see a member tree for the package 
that we are working with by default. This is because the package is built from a 
multidimensional source; however, we could have used a relational source as well.

Chapter 7
[ 131 ]
We can choose to change between views using the options at the top. These options are:
•	
View Members Tree: This option will show the metadata as members that 
can be added for multidimensional analysis
www.allitebooks.com

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 132 ]
•	
View Metadata Tree: This option will show you the metadata and properties 
that can be added to the objects meant for reporting
•	
Create Sets for Members (currently inserting individual members): 
This option will allow you to toggle between inserting sets and individual 
members from a members tree
•	
Insert Single Member / Insert Children / Insert Member with Children: 
This option allows you to choose what parts of an object to insert when 
inserting a member
For our purposes, let's start by inserting members to the areas where we want 
to perform analysis. We will use members for the cylinder chart and the crosstab. 
We can begin by clicking on the cylinder chart (in the upper left-hand corner) in 
order to see our available drop points.

Chapter 7
[ 133 ]
Here we have drop areas for Categories (x-axis), Default measure (y-axis), and 
Series (primary axis):
We will drag in the Years dimension from Years | Years to Categories (x-axis). 
We will also drag in the Products dimension from Products | Products to Series 
(primary axis). Finally, we will drag in Revenue from Measures | Revenue to 
Default measure (y-axis). Note that once we drag in our measure, the chart is 
populated with data. 

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 134 ]
Our final chart in the upper left-hand quadrant should look like the 
following screenshot:
We can now begin populating our crosstab. We want to depict the same information 
in our crosstab. Therefore, we will drag in Years from Years | Years to Columns, 
Products from Products | Products to Rows, and Revenue from Measures | Revenue 
to Measures. The end result in our lower left-hand quadrant will look like:

Chapter 7
[ 135 ]
Now, we will toggle over to View Metadata Tree so that we can build our 
reporting objects:
We will start by adding data to the bullet chart. If we select the bullet chart, we can 
see what data can be added:
The options available are as follows:
•	
Bullet Measure: This is the measure that we are tracking and are interested in.
•	
Target Measure: This is a measure that represents what our goal is for the 
bullet measure.
•	
Default: This is the default measure.
•	
Series (matrix rows): This represents rows of bullet charts that can be 
shown. This will do the same thing as Categories until there are items 
dropped into both areas.
•	
Categories (matrix columns): This represents columns of data that can 
be shown. This will do the same thing as Series until there are items 
dropped into both areas.

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 136 ]
We are going to drag in Revenue from Measures | Revenue to Bullet Measure 
and Sales target from Measures | Sales target to Target Measure. When we are 
done with this, we will see data. To finalize our view, we drag in Product line 
from Products | Products | Product line to Categories (matrix columns). Our 
end result for the chart in the upper right-hand quadrant will look like:
Finally, we will build out our list report by dragging in Product line, Revenue, and 
Sales target as columns in the lower left-hand quadrant. Our list will look like this 
with the new items added:
We have now added to our report the data that we want to report on and analyze.

Chapter 7
[ 137 ]
Drilling down
The key feature needed in order to perform an analysis is a drill down. Luckily, the 
hard work is done on the backend during the creation of the multidimensional data 
source. All we have to do is let the tool know that it is ok to allow drilling. This is 
accomplished from the Data menu under Drill Options....:
We are given two basic drilling options from this menu. We can choose Allow drill-up 
and drill-down, which we will be sure to check now for our reporting purposes. We 
can also choose Allow this report to be a package-based drill-through source. This 
means that, if there are drill-throughs defined in the package, we can access them.
With our drill-down enabled, let's go ahead and run the report for the first time by 
choosing the blue play button 
 at the top:

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 138 ]
Our end result will look like:
This now looks like a report. However, because we have drill-up and drill-down 
enabled, we can click on any component of the report and drill to the next level of 
detail. We can also right-click to be taken to a menu that allows us to choose Drill 
Down, Drill Up, or Go To (drill through):
As you can see, this menu also allows us to download the chart (saves the chart as 
an image), read the glossary (provides definitions for some items), or view lineage 
(traces the item selected back to the source).

Chapter 7
[ 139 ]
Creating calculations
We can now begin further enhancing our report and analysis with calculations. 
We are going to start off by adding a calculation to our list report that is in the 
lower left-hand quadrant.
1.	 First, we will highlight Revenue and Sales target.
2.	 Then, we will right-click to bring up our right-click menu and choose 
Calculate and then Custom. From there, we can choose % Difference 
from the drop-down list.
3.	 We can then choose % Difference (Sales target, Revenue). This will 
essentially give us a variance calculation.
We can choose to provide a different name for the default name as well. We will 
go ahead and name this one Variance. Once that is complete, you will see in the 
following screenshot, that it automatically formats the new column as a percentage:
In order to create a more complex calculation, you have to right-click on your new 
calculated query item and choose Edit Query Expression... from the list of available 
options. From this menu, you can freeform most calculations that Cognos BI supports. 

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 140 ]
In addition, the Functions tab will provide common functions, and each will show a 
tip if you click on it:
This is sort of a trick for getting the most out of Cognos Workspace Advanced. 
The default calculation menu will show only basic calculations; however, you 
are able to create more advanced calculations by editing the query in this way.
Understanding the other buttons
Now that we have covered the basics, it is important to understand our other 
options on the toolbar. Let's go from left to right. The first few buttons are all 
geared toward saving, opening, cutting, copying, pasting, and report-wide 
undo and redo functionality.

Chapter 7
[ 141 ]
The buttons in the previous screenshot are:
•	
New: This option will allow you to create a new report.
•	
Open: This option will allow you to open an existing report.
•	
Save: This option will allow you to save the report for future use or to 
be shared.
•	
Cut: This option allows you to copy an item and move it to another place. 
It also erases the item from the original location.
•	
Copy: This option allows you copy an item and create a duplicate for it 
in a new location.
•	
Paste: This option is used to finalize the copy or cut actions with the 
creation of the new version of the item that was copied or cut.
•	
Delete: This option will remove an item that is selected.
•	
Undo: This option will reverse an action that was done.
•	
Redo: This option will redo an action that was undone.
The next option is to run with different run options:
The next section has all the standard options that we have seen in the other two 
business-user studios:

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 142 ]
The options are listed as follows:
•	
Filter: This option will allow you to create a filter that limits the data 
being retrieved
•	
Suppress: This option will allow you to remove rows or columns with zeros
•	
Explore: This option allows you to perform analysis actions on your data
•	
Sort: This option allows you to choose sorting options for your data
•	
Summarize: This option will allow you to create summary aggregations for 
your various measures
•	
Calculate: This option will allow you to create a calculation on any of 
your items
•	
Group: This option will allow you to bundle within a data item
•	
Pivot: This option will allow you to toggle from a list to a crosstab
•	
Section: This option will allow you to create sections based on the contents 
of a data item or dimension
•	
Swap: This option will allow you to swap columns and rows on a crosstab
•	
Chart: This option will allow you to create a chart on your report
•	
Layout: This option will allow you to choose a standard layout template for 
your report
In addition to these toolbars, there is a wealth of capabilities available in the menu 
bar and the formatting bar that can be explored for further enhancing your Cognos 
Workspace Advanced reports and analyses.
Using external data
Another way to expand the capabilities of this product is to bring in external data. 
External data is data that is not already included in the Cognos BI package that 
is being used. External data is typically some form of flat file (such as a CSV file). 
The ability to incorporate external data is a new feature in IBM Cognos Business 
Intelligence v10.x that is available only in Cognos Workspace Advanced and 
Cognos Report Studio.
In order to incorporate external data into your report, you will need to select the 
 
icon in the Insertable Objects area that represents the external data option.
Once you click on the icon, you will be prompted with the External Data wizard:

Chapter 7
[ 143 ]
This wizard will walk you through the process of creating a connection between 
data that is outside of Cognos BI and data that is within a package. The first step is to 
select the data that you want to bring in. This is done very simply by clicking on the 
Browse... button and finding the file with the information that you want to bring in:

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 144 ]
You can then choose which columns from the file to bring in and what to name 
the new namespace that you are adding.
After you click on Next>, you will be able to choose how to perform your 
data mapping.
You can choose an existing report (this is typically the report that you are working 
on; however, that is not required) to map to the external data.
For our purposes, we will choose Product Revenue from the Go Sales and Retailers 
folder. Here we will create a new link between the external data and the existing 
report by clicking on the New Link button. We will then click on Next> again:
In the next section of the wizard, we are prompted to select the data attributes for the 
data that we have. This is possibly the most important part of this entire process.

Chapter 7
[ 145 ]
Unfortunately, if we select the wrong data type for an item that is being linked to 
while on this screen, it can affect our ability to create the relationship, and we will 
get errors when trying to pull data from both locations at once. Once we have all the 
data type options set correctly, we can click on Next> and move on to the final step:

IBM Cognos Workspace Advanced
[ 146 ]
In the final step, we can choose the cardinality that we want for the relationship that 
ties in our external data. When we are done, we can click on Finish, and it will take 
us to a place where we can name our new package and publish it to a location of 
our choice:
We have now officially created a new package with external data.
The business case for Cognos 
Workspace Advanced
Cognos Workspace Advanced was designed for business users that want it all. So, 
if you have users that need both query creation capabilities and analysis capabilities, 
this is the tool for them. Cognos Workspace Advanced adds a tool that provides 
flashy graphics and an easy-to-use interface to make these tasks easier than ever 
before. This tool also gives the IT group the ability to better enable their business 
users to do the things that they have historically done for them. For the world of 
business intelligence, this tool changes the game for those users.
As an IT group, the best way to convince the business of the value of this tool is 
to simply show it to them and then allow them to use it. As they find themselves 
more empowered to create their own reports and develop their own analysis, they 
will realize that this product decreases the time from question to answer for your 
business users.

Chapter 7
[ 147 ]
Summary
Business Cognos Workspace Advanced adds the ability to perform queries and 
create analyses from one central location. It also further enhances the new Cognos 
Workspace product by allowing users to take an object from Cognos Workspace 
and further enhance it within this development product. In this chapter, we have 
compared Cognos Workspace Advanced to Query Studio and Analysis Studio. We 
have also looked at how to use the tool both from a basic and advanced perspective. 
With Cognos Workspace Advanced, you now have a one-stop shop for reporting 
and analysis for business users.
In the next chapter, we will look at the interfaces for developers and administrators 
within Cognos BI. We will begin by exploring Cognos Report Studio and discovering 
the most advanced report development tool for IBM Cognos BI.


IBM Cognos Report Studio
If Cognos Query Studio, Cognos Analysis Studio, and Cognos Workspace Advanced 
are the corner bakery, the meat store, and the cheese shop of business intelligence, 
then Cognos Report Studio is the super store (fill in the blank with your favorite). 
While Cognos Query Studio, Cognos Analysis Studio, and Cognos Workspace 
Advanced all have the necessary tools to accomplish the goals of the specific 
processes, they don't have a complete, pixel-perfect reporting capability. Cognos 
Report Studio has it all; advanced query writing, the ability to create pixel-perfect 
reports, complete customization, and so much more. In this chapter we will look at:
•	
Who should use Cognos Report Studio
•	
Accessing Cognos Report Studio
•	
Cognos Report Studio report types
•	
The drag-and-drop interface and the right-click menu
•	
The properties pane
•	
Building Active Reports
•	
The business case for Cognos Report Studio
Who should use Cognos Report Studio
Cognos Report Studio is designed for professional report developers. These are 
the people that make reports that can be published in quarterly reports, sent to 
stock holders, or used for published reports. The product can accommodate the 
creation of simpler, non-professional report development as well. Professional 
report development is both a highly technical and a highly business-minded 
activity. The ideal candidate for performing this type of task will be able to 
quickly grasp new technology as well as understand business needs.

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 150 ]
Despite the need for a strong business understanding, developers will often sit in 
an IT group. Many organizations have entire Business Intelligence (BI) teams that 
roll up under IT, and it is these groups that perform the report development task.
In addition to a core BI team, many larger organizations also have a Business 
Intelligence Competency Center (BICC) or Business Intelligence Center of 
Excellence (BICOE) groups. These groups are made up of all stakeholders, 
which will typically include a BI team as well as power users within the business 
departments. In these situations, you will usually have one or more Cognos 
Report Studio users within the specific business units.
Accessing Cognos Report Studio
You can access Cognos Report Studio in the same ways that we have accessed 
the other studios; from the Welcome page or from the Launch menu.
To access it from the Welcome page, we can choose the option Author 
advanced reports:

Chapter 8
[ 151 ]
The other way to access Cognos Report Studio is through Launch | Report Studio:
You will then be prompted to choose a package from which you will develop your 
advanced report. For the sake of an example, we will select the same Cognos sample 
package Go Sales and Retailers, that we used for Analysis Studio. This is built from 
the Cognos Great Outdoors PowerCube.
When the tool is first launched, you will be greeted with a splash screen that has 
two buttons: Create new and Open existing. You can choose either of these buttons 
accordingly to start working with your reports.
We will create a new report, which will bring us to a list of the standard report types.

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 152 ]
Cognos Report Studio report types
When you first start a new report, you will be presented with a list of report types. 
The reports types available are:
Report type
Description
Blank
This report type will allow you to start from scratch with a 
completely blank slate.
List
This report type will provide a header and footer section 
plus a single List object in your body.
Crosstab
This report type will provide a header and footer section 
plus a single Crosstab object in your body.
Chart
This report type will provide a header and footer section 
plus a single Chart object in your body. This will also 
launch the Insert Chart dialogue.
Map
This report type will provide a header and footer section 
plus a single Map object in your body. This will also 
launch the Choose Map dialogue.
Financial
This report type will provide a header and footer section 
plus a single Financial Crosstab object in your body. This 
allows you to build financial style reports with default 
standard formatting.

Chapter 8
[ 153 ]
Report type
Description
Statistical 
(not shown)
This report type will provide a header and footer section 
plus a single Statistical object in your body. This will also 
launch the Statistical Chart Creation dialog.
Repeater 
Table
This report type will provide a header and footer section 
plus a Repeater Table object in your body. A repeater table 
allows you to repeat the table for each row of data from 
one of your query items. This works great for things where 
you want to repeat what you are showing on each page of 
a report (for instance, showing a full page of information 
for each month in your data).
Blank Active 
Report
This report type will provide a header and footer section 
with a blank area for creating Active Report. Choosing 
this option opens up additional insertable objects that are 
specific to Active Reports.
Active Report
This report type will provide a header and footer section 
with a template for creating an Active Report. Choosing 
this option opens up additional insertable objects that are 
specific to Active Reports.
Report 
Template
This report type will provide a header and footer section 
plus a single List object in your body. It will also add a 
filter icon to the report at the top. This tool is used for 
creating query studio templates.
Existing
This option will allow you to open an existing report.
For the sake of example, we will select Blank and begin building our report 
from scratch.
The drag-and-drop interface and the 
right-click menu
Cognos Report Studio has the most advanced drag-and-drop interface and right-click 
menu of all of the studios. As a result, it is also the most powerful studio.

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 154 ]
Understanding the different areas in Cognos 
Report Studio
Cognos Report Studio is broken up into different sections for different tasks. In the 
following screenshot we can see those at a high level:
The top-most section is the toolbars section. This is where many of your insert and 
edit tasks are. It is also where you can go to open or save a report, lock certain report 
objects, change views, and carry out a number of other actions on your report.
The left-most section at the top is the Insertable Objects pane. This is where you 
can drag items from your package into the report for the first time, drag existing 
items from queries into your report, or drag in other page objects that make up 
the different parts of your report.
Below the Insertable Objects pane is your Properties pane. The Properties pane 
is one of the major differentiators between Cognos Report Studio and the other 
Studios. This section allows you to make changes to how objects look and behave 
on the page down to the pixel level.

Chapter 8
[ 155 ]
The large, lower-right section is the palette. Think of this as your canvas, where you 
will construct your report from blank slate to masterpiece.
The area between the left-hand panes and the palette is your explorer bar. Within 
this bar are the Page Explorer, Query Explorer, and Condition Explorer panes.
The Page Explorer pane allows you to move between report and prompt pages:
The Query Explorer pane allows you to move directly to the underlying Queries 
section and edit them. This is also where you can go to add queries with custom 
SQL or MDX:

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 156 ]
The Condition Explorer pane allows you to create report variables that will change 
the behavior of the report based on variable conditions:
We will explore each of these sections in more detail later in the chapter.
Adding objects to your report
With Cognos Report Studio, we have a section known as the Insertable Objects 
pane. The Insertable Objects pane contains objects that can be dragged to your 
palette. These objects include objects from your package, objects from an existing 
query, and objects from the toolbox. It is a good idea to create the outline of your 
report by dragging objects to the palette from the toolbox. There are many objects 
available within the toolbox, and they are as follows:
•	
Text item: This object allows you to add static or dynamic text to a page. 
Static text would be anything that the developer writes. Dynamic text 
would be based on the data or a selected variable from within the report.
•	
Block: This object allows you to create sections or groups within your 
report. Because blocks can be formatted or set to conditionally change, 
this is a very useful object for organizing the layout of your page.
•	
Table: This object allows you to add a table to your page. Tables are most 
often used for organizing your page. Tables can contain any other type of 
object within them.
•	
Field set: This object is very similar to a block object, but it also allows you 
to add text at the top of the object that shows on the report. These can also 
be very useful in organizing your page.

Chapter 8
[ 157 ]
•	
Query calculation: This object is used to add a new item to your query that 
is based on a calculation. A new data item will be created automatically in 
the query.
•	
Layout calculation: This object allows you to add a calculated item based on 
report functions. Report functions will allow you to create a calculation based 
on when the report is run. Page number or run time are examples of report 
functions. You may use this object to create a calculation to show yesterday's 
date by choosing the report expression Today() and subtracting 1.
•	
Intersection (tuple): This object allows you to display the point at which 
multiple dimensions and measures meet. This intersection of data is also 
called a tuple.
•	
Image: This object allows you to insert an image. The image must be 
accessible from the web at the time the report is run or must be installed 
within the designated image folder of your IBM Cognos BI v10 installation 
(typically <install location>/IBM/webcontent/samples/images/).
•	
Crosstab space: This object allows you to add a spacer into a crosstab.
•	
Crosstab space (with fact cells): This object allows you to add a spacer 
with text or data information into a crosstab.
•	
List: This object allows you to add a list to your report. A list is simply 
a list of information from your data in a table format.
•	
Crosstab: This object allows you to add a crosstab to your report. 
A crosstab is an object that shows data points for multiple dimensions 
at once (typically two).
•	
Chart: This object allows you to add a chart to your report. There are many 
chart options that will be displayed when this object is dragged to the palette.
•	
Map: This object allows you to add a map to your report. There are many 
maps available natively in IBM Cognos BI v10. In addition, you can purchase 
additional maps from the supplier of the mapping capabilities (MapInfo). 
IBM Cognos BI v10 also ships with a tool for creating your own maps called 
Map Manager.
•	
Repeater table: This object allows you to repeat items on a page in a table 
structure using the information from your data. This is typically used for 
mailing labels or anything that you would want to repeat.
•	
Repeater: This object allows you to repeat items on a page, without a 
particular structure, using the information from your data. This is typically 
used for mailing labels or anything that you would want to repeat.

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 158 ]
•	
Singleton: This object allows you to add a single piece of information 
to a report from your data. It will run a query to pull back the first row 
of information when a query is executed. You typically see this used in 
conjunction with filters to bring back relevant information for a report. 
A good example would be if you wanted to show a transaction date at the 
top of an invoice report, you could bring in a singleton using that data item.
•	
Conditional blocks: This object allows you to create different report objects 
based on a variable condition. First, a variable is set on your conditional 
blocks. Then, you can choose what to show within the block when each 
option from that variable is true.
•	
HTML item: This object allows you to insert HTML into your report that is 
executed when the report is run in HTML or MHT format. HTML items can 
include JavaScript for determining how a report runs or just basic HTML for 
adding additional formatting to a report. This is a very powerful object that 
allows you to truly customize the report interaction experience.
•	
Rich text item: This object allows you to display some HTML in a report. 
The power of this item is that it works with HTML, MHT, and PDF. 
The text can be dynamic or static.
•	
Hyperlink: This object allows you to display a link within your report.
•	
Hyperlink button: This object allows you to display a link within your 
report that is accessed by clicking on a button object.
•	
Date: This object allows you to insert the runtime date into the report.
•	
Time: This object allows you to insert the runtime into the report.
•	
As of time expression: This object allows you to create a new expression 
for what the date and time objects will display. For instance, if you change 
this expression to _add_Days(ReportDate(), -1), you will display the 
runtime date as one day prior to the actual date the report was run on. 
This can be useful in scheduled reporting that has to wait for data to load.
•	
Page number: This object allows you to add a page number to any or all 
pages in a report.
•	
Row number: This object allows you to add row numbers to the list or 
crosstab objects.
•	
Layout component reference: This object allows you to add an object or 
group of objects that have been created in the same report or another report 
by using the name given to those objects within the Properties pane.

Chapter 8
[ 159 ]
•	
Metric studio diagram: This object allows you to add a metric studio 
diagram to your report as an image. You can set this to be static, based 
on the point it was created, or dynamic and update it with each run. 
These are often used to link Metric Studio KPIs back to a report.
The following items are available only in Active Reports:
•	
Variable text item: This object allows you to display the value of an Active 
Report variable on a report.
•	
Deck: This object allows you to create a custom set of cards that will be 
displayed based on a changing variable. The variable labels are defined 
by the developer.
•	
Data deck: This object allows you to create a custom set of cards that will 
be displayed based on a changing variable. The variable labels are defined 
by the data.
•	
Tab control: This object allows the end user to tab through different sets 
of information on tabs that are defined by the developer. Tab control also 
includes an area where objects are inserted.
•	
Data tab control: This object allows the end user to tab through different 
sets of information on tabs that are defined by the data. Tab control also 
includes an area where objects are inserted.
•	
Button bar: This object allows the end user to click between different sets 
of information on buttons that are defined by the developer. A button does 
not include an area where objects are inserted.
•	
Data button bar: This object allows the end user to click between different 
sets of information on buttons that are defined by the data. A button does 
not include an area where objects are inserted.
•	
Toggle button bar: This object allows the end user to click between different 
sets of information on buttons that are defined by the developer. A button 
does not include an area where objects are inserted. A toggle button bar 
item differs from a button bar item in that it allows the selection of multiple 
buttons at once.
•	
Data toggle button bar: This object allows the end user to click between 
different sets of information on buttons that are defined by the data. A button 
does not include an area where objects are inserted. A data toggle button bar 
item differs from a button bar item in that it allows the selection of multiple 
buttons at once.

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 160 ]
•	
Radio button group: This object allows the use of radio button selection 
within Active Report. The radio button selection can then be used to filter 
your report. The options are defined by the developer.
•	
Data radio button group: This object allows the use of a radio button 
selection within Active Report. The radio button selection can then be used 
to filter your report. The options are defined by the data.
•	
Check box group: This object allows the use of a checkbox option for 
selecting multiple items at once. The options in the checkbox are defined by 
the developer.
•	
Data check box group: This object allows the use of a checkbox option for 
selecting multiple items at once. The options in the checkbox are defined by 
the data.
•	
Drop-down list: This object allows the use of a drop-down list option for 
selecting an option from a drop-down menu. The options in the drop-down 
menu are defined by the developer.
•	
Data drop-down list: This object allows the use of a drop-down list option 
for selecting an option from a drop-down menu. The options in the drop-
down menu are defined by the data.
•	
List box: This object allows the use of a list box for selecting multiple items 
to filter on. The options in the list box are defined by the developer.
•	
Data list box: This object allows the use of a list box for selecting multiple 
items to filter on. The options in the list box are defined by the data.
•	
Button: This option allows you to add a button to your page. The button can 
then interact with various variables in Active Report.
When adding objects to your palette, it is important to consider the layout first. We 
can do this by asking ourselves, "What needs to be included in this report and how 
can I best represent it?". Best practice should be to then add a series of tables and/or 
blocks to break up your page into the different sections that you would like to have 
depicted on the report.
For the sake of an example, we will create a report for a U.S. sales manager. This 
manager wants to see how his sales are compared to other countries' sales . He would 
also like to see the details of how he is doing in each state. To accomplish this, we will 
develop a report that has four separate report objects. We will include a list object, a 
combination chart, a map, and a drill-based list report that is fed from the map. Our 
first step with this example will be to break up our palette into four equal parts by 
dragging in a two-by-two table:

Chapter 8
[ 161 ]
We can now populate each section with the objects that we intend to use in the report. 
We will drag a list object to the upper-left quadrant, a column chart to the upper-right 
quadrant, a map object to the lower-left quadrant (when we are prompted, we can 
choose a map of the Continental U.S.), and an additional list object to the lower-right 
quadrant.
We now have the basic outline of what will become of our report:

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 162 ]
Before we move to adding data into our report, it is important to always name all of 
our objects in Cognos Report Studio. As we begin working with Active Reports later 
in this chapter, or as end users begin interacting with our reports in other tools such 
as Cognos Office or Business Insight, the names of these objects are used to determine 
what objects should be utilized in those tools. Therefore, we need to name our objects 
and queries. To do this, highlight an entire object by selecting the three grey dots in 
the upper-left corner. Then, in the Properties pane, scroll to the bottom where you 
see the property Name. Here you can set the name to anything that you like.
For the sake of future users, it is best to provide a descriptive name for your objects. 
We will select our first list and rename it from List1 to Country Sales Information List:
This is also a good opportunity to call out the importance of planning before 
developing. If you know what you will be designing and putting into your report 
prior to building it, you will have an easier time naming your objects and queries.
Our next step will be to go to the corresponding query for the list that we have 
renamed. Hover over the Query Explorer pane and choose Query1:

Chapter 8
[ 163 ]
Again, we will scroll to the bottom of the Properties pane to find the Name property 
and we will change it from Query1 to CountrySalesQuery:
Note that we are using a different naming convention here by leaving out spaces. 
It is best to adopt a naming convention that will make it easier for you to understand 
what each object does during your development process. I have always used spaces 
for page objects and removed spaces on queries. You may choose to adopt this naming 
convention or use a different one that will be easier for you to adopt.
Next, we will repoint the chart in the upper-right corner to the Query table that 
we have just renamed. We can do this by selecting the chart in the upper-right 
hand corner and then changing the drop-down menu to repoint from Query2 
to CountrySalesQuery:

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 164 ]
We will now proceed to change the names of each of our additional objects and 
corresponding queries. In doing so, we will use the naming conventions as 
shown in the following table:
Object
Original 
name
New name
Original 
query 
New query
Upper-left list
List1
Country 
Sales 
Information 
List
Query1
CountrySalesQuery
Upper-right 
chart
Chart1
Country 
Sales 
Information 
Chart
Query2
Re-point the chart to 
CountrySalesQuery
Lower-left map
Map1
US Sales Map
Query3
USSalesMapQuery
Lower-left list
List2
State Sales 
List
Query4
StateSalesQuery
In the next section we will add data to our report within each report object.
Adding data to your reports and formatting
The next step is to add data to each of our report objects. We will start with the list 
in the upper-left hand corner. Drag in the following items:
•	
Countries | Country
•	
Orders | Revenue
•	
Orders | Planned revenue
•	
Orders | Quantity
Next, select Revenue and Planned revenue and right-click on it. Now, go to 
Calculate | % Difference (Revenue, Planned revenue):

Chapter 8
[ 165 ]
We will now go to the Name property in the Properties pane, and change the Name 
field to Revenue Variance.
When this has been done, our list will look like this:
When we run the report, we see that Revenue and Planned Revenue are both 
formatted as currency with two decimal places. Select Revenue and Planned 
Revenue. We can change the formatting by pressing Ctrl and clicking on the List 
Column Body section below each of those items. We can then update formatting 
by either going to the Properties pane and selecting Data Format or by clicking 
on the Data Format icon in the toolbar area:

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 166 ]
Once the Data Format dialog comes up, we will choose Currency for our Format 
type field and 0 for our No. of Decimal Places field:
In order to limit the amount of data that is pulled back, let's add a rank and a filter to 
our query. Right-click on the list and choose Go to Query. Select Revenue, and in the 
Properties area, change the Pre-Sort property to Sort descending.
Drag a filter in and type Rank([Revenue]) <= 5. With the filter still selected, change 
the Application property to After Auto Aggregation:

Chapter 8
[ 167 ]
This will limit our report to only return the top five companies by revenue.
We will now set up the chart in the upper-right corner to reflect the same 
information. Since we have already changed Query1 to CountrySalesQuery, 
we can pull from that query and add it to the chart object. We will drag Country 
to Categories (on the x axis), Revenue to Series, and Quantity to Series (below 
Revenue). We will then select Quantity from the chart. In the Properties area, 
set the Axis Assignment field to Y2 Axis and the Chart Type field to Line:
This will create a separate axis for our two different measures. We will now select 
the legend image within our chart and set our Position field to Bottom:

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 168 ]
Now that we have set up our report to include worldwide information, we can focus 
the lower two sections just on the U.S.. For the map, we will drag Orders | Quantity 
to our Color field and Retailers | Region to our Location field:
Select the entire chart, and in the Properties area, set the Ignore Data with No 
Features property to Yes. This will hide information from our data that cannot 
be added to the chart.
If we run our report, we will see that we have our top-five countries at the top 
and that we have our map in the lower-left corner. Unfortunately, the palette 
is off, so our map looks almost entirely red:

Chapter 8
[ 169 ]
Back in Cognos Report Studio, select the area that says Region layer: States by clicking 
on it. In the Properties area, there is a blank area to the right of the Palette field. Click 
on the white space to the right of that and then click on the ellipsis that appears:
In the Palette dialogue, leave Discrete Colors selected, uncheck Percentage, change 
66.66% to 10000, and change 33.33% to 1000:

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 170 ]
Our map report will now look more balanced.
Finally, let's focus on the list in the lower-right corner. In this list, we want to focus 
on our top ranked cities in the U.S.. We also want to link back to the map so that we 
can filter to a state that is clicked on.
To do so, perform the following steps:
1.	 To start, let's drag in the following:
°°
Retailers | City
°°
Orders | Revenue
°°
Orders | Planned revenue
°°
Orders | Quantity
2.	 Right-click on the list and choose Go to Query. Choose Revenue and set 
Pre-Sort to Sort descending.
3.	 Drag in a new filter and add gosales_goretailers].[Countries].[Country] = 
'United States'. Also, drag in a new filter and add Rank([Revenue]) <= 5.
4.	 Set the Application property to After Auto Aggregation on your new filter. 
Finally, we need to set the query up to filter whether a state is selected in 
the map.
5.	 Drag Retailers | Region to the Detail Filters area. Edit the filter to say 
[gosales_goretailers].[Retailers].[Region] = ?Region?. Set the Usage field 
on this filter in the Properties area to Optional.
Now that we have our report built, let's save the report to My Folders as 
Example Report. This will allow us to perform our next step.
6.	 Select the map in the lower-left corner and set up a drill-through.
7.	 Choose the ellipsis next to the Drill-Through Definitions property in the 
Properties pane.
8.	 Click on the New Drill-Through Definition button to add a drill-through 
to the report:

Chapter 8
[ 171 ]
9.	 Choose the report that we just saved as our drill-through report. Then, click 
on the Edit option under Parameters.
10.	 In the Parameters dialogue we can choose a Method item of Pass data item 
value and a Value item of Region. Click on OK twice and save your report. 
If you want to run the report now and click on a few states, you can see how 
the report is updated with the cities for the states that you click on.
Exploring your queries with Query Explorer
We can now explore our underlying queries by selecting Query Explorer in the 
explorer pane and then selecting Queries:
Our Insertable Objects options in our Query Explorer pane are:
•	
Query: This will create a new query for us
•	
Join: This will create a join between two different queries
•	
Union: This will bring two queries together that have commonly 
named data items
•	
Intersect: This option will show the common rows of data between 
two queries
•	
Except: This option will allow us to either remove or identify duplicates 
between two queries
•	
SQL: This option will allow us to create a new query from 
custom-written SQL
•	
MDX: This option will allow us to create a new query from 
custom-written MDX

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 172 ]
Setting up conditions
We can set up variables by selecting Condition Explorer | Variables:
We will see three types of variables available:
•	
Report language variable: This variable will allow you to set up a variable 
that contains different languages. It will prompt you to choose which 
languages to include in the variable.
•	
String variable: This variable will allow you to write an expression and 
manually define the possible values for that expression.
•	
Boolean variable: This variable will allow you to write an expression 
whose values can only be Yes or No.
For our purposes, we can drag in a new Boolean variable and type in 
ParamCount('Region')>0 to create a Yes or No variable that tells us whether a 
state has been clicked on. Just to keep up with the practice of naming our objects, 
we will change our Name property to StateSelected? from Boolean1.
We now go back to our page, select our entire list in the lower-right corner, and 
click on the ellipsis next to the Render Variable property. We will then choose 
StateSelected? from the drop-down menu. We need to make sure that Yes is 
selected and then click on OK.
Now, if we save and re-run, you will see that the list does not show up until a 
state is selected. This is a very common way of using conditional variables.

Chapter 8
[ 173 ]
Adding a prompt to filter results
Prompts are very useful tools that allow us to filter our data based on a user-selected 
parameter. For our report, we are going to add a prompt that will filter our results 
based on which sales reps are associated with our sales numbers. The easiest way to 
do this is by selecting what we would like to add the parameter to and then clicking 
on the filter icon at the top. We can select our map and then click on the drop-down 
arrow on the filter icon. We will then choose Edit Filters...:
Within the filter editor, click on the icon in the lower left-hand corner to add a filter, 
and then select Advanced and click on OK:
Next, drag in Sales reps | Staff name and then type in ?Staff?. Your total filter 
should read as [gosales_goretailers].[Sales reps].[Staff name] in ?Staff?. 
By putting Staff within question marks, you are creating a parameter named Staff. 
By using the operator in, you are saying that this is a multi-select parameter. Now, if 
we run the report, IBM Cognos BI will automatically generate a prompt that allows 
us to select multiple members of the sales staff. It will then filter our query behind the 
map to only include data for those members of the sales staff.

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 174 ]
Understanding the other buttons
Now that we understand how to create a basic report with drill-through, let's look at 
our other buttons. We will look at them in groups.
In our first section we have the following buttons:
•	
New: This will create a new report
•	
Open: This option will open an existing report
•	
Save: This option will allow you to save your report
•	
Cut: This option will allow you to cut an object or series of objects
•	
Copy: This option will allow you to create a copy of an object or a series 
of objects
•	
Paste: This option will allow you to paste the objects that are cut or copied
•	
Delete: This option will allow you to delete an object or series of objects
•	
Undo: This option will allow you to undo a previous action
•	
Redo: This option will allow you to redo a previously undone action
Here is a view of the next section:
In this section we have the following buttons:
•	
Validate: This button will validate the report specifications for your report
•	
XML: This report will show the XML specifications for your report
•	
Play: This option will run your report
•	
Lock: This option will lock or unlock your report objects so that you can 
edit within report objects
•	
Visual Aids: This option will allow you to see or hide visual aids on your 
report that help you design your report

Chapter 8
[ 175 ]
•	
Back: This option takes you to the previous area of Cognos Report Studio 
that was open
•	
Forward: This option takes you forward after using the back button
•	
Up: This option takes you up a level from the area of Cognos Report Studio 
you are in
•	
Filter: This option allows you to add a filter to a report
•	
Suppress: This option allows you to suppress zeros on columns or rows
•	
Sort: This option allows you to sort a column either in ascending or 
descending order
•	
Summary: This option allows you to create a summary row within a list 
or crosstab
•	
Calculate: This option allows you to create a new calculation on multiple 
list or crosstab options
Here is a view of the next section:
In this section we have the following buttons:
•	
Group: This option will allow you to group data by column
•	
Pivot: This option will allow you to pivot from a list to a crosstab moving 
the items selected to the top of the crosstab
•	
Section: This option will create sections based on the data item selected
•	
Swap: This option will switch columns and rows out with each other in a 
crosstab
•	
Headers/Footers: This option will allow you to create headers and footers 
on the report or in a list
•	
Chart: This option will allow you to add a chart to the report
•	
Prompt: This option will allow you to create a prompt page automatically 
based on filter parameters
•	
Drill: This option will allow you to create a drill-through to another report
•	
Table: This option will allow you to add a table to a report

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 176 ]
•	
Merge: This option will allow you to merge two or more cells into one
•	
Split: This option will allow you to split merged cells back into multiple cells
•	
Help: This option will launch the Cognos Report Studio User Guide
Building Active Reports
An Active Report is a report that can be consumed offline. We looked at how end users 
can interact with Active Reports in Chapter 3, IBM Cognos Active Reports. Here, we will 
look at how these reports are created using Cognos Report Studio.
Designing your Active Report
The first step to a successful Active Report is determining what information you 
want to display and how you will display it. The design phase of Active Report 
development is the most important as it will create our roadmap for when we get 
to the technical aspects of development.
A few questions that you may want to ask are as follows:
•	
What information will my end users want to see offline?
•	
How can I best display that information?
•	
Are there logical ways to break up this information?
•	
If my information is hierarchical, what is a typical drillpath?
•	
Who will be using this information?
•	
How often will it need to be refreshed?
These questions can go on and on. The important thing is to fully understand your 
end goal before you get started.
What I recommend doing as an exercise, is drawing out on a piece of paper or 
in a designing tool, such as Visio, exactly how you want your report to look and 
what interactivity you would like to add. You can then work with your end users 
to determine whether the information that you are planning to make available is 
relevant to their needs and whether it would be valuable to have the information 
available to them while disconnected. Remember that too much information can 
be a bad thing with Active Reports. The more information that you store in the 
report, the larger the file becomes, and the more difficult it becomes to distribute.

Chapter 8
[ 177 ]
As an example, let us assume that our end users have asked for a report that shows 
the percentage returns by state. We will later learn that they would also like to be 
able to drill into a state to see the percentage of returns per store.
If we were to begin drawing out how this would look, we would want to start with 
an easy to follow way of displaying return percentage by state. We could argue that 
a map object would be the best option here.
We would then begin considering how to graphically display return percentages. 
It is best to work with your end users at this phase to determine what the typical 
return percentages are, what their targets are, and what return percentages are 
considered too high. We will use these thresholds as our color indicators. For the 
sake of our example, let's assume that 1 percent or less is our goal return percentage 
and less than 5 percent is acceptable.
Choosing the Active Report component to use
After deciding how to display our information, we should decide which components 
to use on the report. All Active Report components are used to make a report 
interactive during offline use. We can start by dragging in a Map object to the report. 
Select the Continental 48 US map option. Since we will be passing information from 
the map to a List object, we need to set up an Active Report component to hold our 
List object. Below our Map object, drag in a Data Deck item from the Insertable 
Objects area:

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 178 ]
Finally, drag a List object into the Data Deck item to complete the layout of 
our new Active Report, as shown in the following screenshot, and perform 
the following steps:
1.	 We can populate our Map object by dragging in Retailers | Region as our 
Location field.
2.	 We will then drag in a new Query Calculation item from Insertable Objects 
and give it the name e Return Percent.
3.	 We will use the expression [gosales_goretailers].[Orders].[Return 
quantity]/[gosales_goretailers].[Orders].[Quantity]. We will 
then change the Aggregate Function and Rollup Aggregate Function 
fields to Calculated.

Chapter 8
[ 179 ]
4.	 We then need to update our palette. To do this, we will select the area of 
the Map object that says Region layer: States.
5.	 Next, choose the ellipsis next to the Palette property. Then, choose the 
Three Color Reversed palette from the Palette drop-down menu:
6.	 We will then change Palette Type to Discrete Colors and uncheck Percentage. 
We will then change our numeric boundary for the first threshold to 0.01 and 
the second threshold to 0.05:

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 180 ]
7.	 Back on our main page, we need to do a bit of cleaning up and renaming. 
We will rename our Map object to ReturnPercentMap. We will also set 
Ignore Data with No Features to Yes.
Let's focus next on our Data Deck item and perform the following steps:
1.	 Drag Retailers | Region as our Data Deck Values item. Select the entire 
Data Deck item by choosing the dots in the upper-left corner.
2.	 Set the Name property to RegionDetails_DataDeck.
3.	 Now, click on Interactive Behavior to bring up a dialog for creating our 
connection from our map to our data deck.
4.	 In the dialog, select Create a New Connection... to build a connection 
between our two objects.
5.	 Build the connection from ReturnPercentMap to RegionDetails_DataDeck 
with Region for the Data Item field on both objects. Also, name the new 
variable that we are creating RegionVariable:
Finally, we will populate and connect our list to the map. Populate the List object with:
•	
Retailers | Region
•	
Retailers | City

Chapter 8
[ 181 ]
•	
For Query Calculation enter the following data in the corresponding fields:
°°
Name: Return Percent
°°
Expression Definition: [gosales_goretailers].[Orders].[Return 
quantity]/[gosales_goretailers].[Orders].[Quantity]
°°
Aggregate Function: Calculated
°°
Rollup Aggregate Function: Calculated
Next, we will format Return Percent in both the Map and List objects to Percent:

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 182 ]
Select the entire list and choose the ellipsis to the right-hand side of the Master 
Detail Relationships property. Create a new link between Region and Region:
Now, select Region in the list and choose the Group option. Finally, select the 
entire data deck and set the Default Card field to Yes. We now have completed 
our Active Report:

Chapter 8
[ 183 ]
When we run the report, we will see that our map has a nice variety of colors, and if 
we click on a state, we can see the return percent for each city.
The business case for Cognos Report 
Studio
Cognos Report Studio is a tool that is designed for building advanced, complicated, 
and production-worthy reports. Any business that has a need for this type of report 
will need access to Cognos Report Studio. You can often think of these as reports that 
are going to be shared outside of your organization or that have been developed for 
internal end users. Cognos Report Studio is also used many times for developing 
advanced reports that are used within an organization. In the following sections we 
will discuss how each of these two areas might use Cognos Report Studio.

IBM Cognos Report Studio
[ 184 ]
Reporting inside of the organization
We often see Cognos Report Studio used to report inside the organization. 
Unfortunately, this audience is often overlooked. Most reporting groups inside of 
an organization have their primary customers as internal customers (meaning other 
employees within different groups of their organization). In order to be an effective 
report developer, it is important to understand who your customers are and what 
information would be most important to them.
Cognos Report Studio is an advanced reporting tool. Therefore, it is not something 
that you typically see in the hands of business users. The Cognos Report Studio 
developer's role is to bridge the gap between the business user, who understands 
the business and the information that is relevant to them, and the technology that 
has been designed to present this information in a meaningful way. In order to be 
effective at that, you need to understand what types of reports present certain 
data well.
By working with Cognos Report Studio often, you begin to realize what types of 
information will be better presented in one form or another. For instance, if I want 
to show sales growth or loss by region year-over-year, I know that a line chart or a 
column chart would be effective, because of their ability to depict time visually. 
Your internal clients will look up to you to understand the reporting technology. 
You will need to utilize their expertise to understand their data and what they 
want to see from it.
Reporting outside of the organization
We often see Cognos Report Studio used to develop reports that are going outside of 
an organization as well. With Cognos being a web-based application, it makes perfect 
sense to be able to place reports on a web server outside of a company firewall and 
provide reports to external clients or stakeholders. I personally have seen this type of 
reporting provided in the following ways. This list is by no means all-inclusive:
•	
Insurance companies providing reports to individuals on their 
insurance usage as well as to companies on their group activity
•	
Banks providing reports on account activity through their online 
banking system
•	
Publicly-traded companies using Cognos Report Studio to design 
their monthly, quarterly, and annual reports
•	
Electric companies using Cognos Report Studio to design distributed 
reports that show electricity usage

Chapter 8
[ 185 ]
•	
Direct sales companies using Cognos Report Studio to design invoices
•	
Healthcare companies using Cognos Report Studio to send out 
regulatory reports
In addition to these ways, there are hundreds of other uses for Cognos Report Studio 
that we could not possibly touch on in one chapter. The more you use it, the more 
you will begin to see your own use cases.
Summary
In this chapter we have looked at Cognos Report Studio and how to create reports 
within it. We explored which users are best suited for Cognos Report Studio and 
how to access it. We looked at the different types of reports that can be created and 
how to create them. We explored the power of the Properties pane and even built 
an Active Report. We wrapped up the chapter by looking at the business case for 
Cognos Report Studio.
In the next chapter we will look at building models in Framework Manager. 
We will explore Metadata Wizard and look at best practices for creating and 
maintaining metadata.


IBM Cognos 
Framework Manager
This chapter will take a deeper dive into the concept of metadata. In it, we will look 
at the best practices of designs for Cognos Framework Manager models and what 
type of user would be best suited for model design:
•	
Introduction to metadata
•	
Managing the model design project
•	
3-tier approach to model design
•	
Designing a database view of data
•	
Designing a business view of data
•	
Designing an end user view of data
•	
The business case for Cognos Framework Manager
Introduction to metadata
We looked at metadata from an end user perspective when we were first introduced 
to our studios. In this chapter, we will look at it from the design side.
To recap, metadata is the data that tells you about your other data. Metadata 
can include descriptions of your data, information on how to transform your 
data, or formatting information for your data. There are three basic types of 
metadata, namely, technical, business, and process.
•	
Technical metadata: Metadata of this type is used to describe the technical 
aspects of the data or data containers. Examples of this type of metadata would 
include things such as the original data formatting, database expression, or 
data type.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 188 ]
•	
Business metadata: Metadata of this type is used to describe the business 
aspects of the data or data containers. Examples of this type of metadata 
would include things such as the logical name of a data item, a description 
of the data item, or a screen tip that could be displayed while interacting 
with a data item.
•	
Process metadata: Metadata of this type is used to describe the processing 
aspects of the data or data containers. Examples of this type of metadata 
would include things such as calculations that are performed on the data 
before displaying it, reformatting of data that takes place, and relationships 
that tie multiple tables of data together.
With Cognos Framework Manager, you create and manage each of these types 
of metadata. Each type serves a different purpose; however, each type is very 
important to the overall functionality of your final Cognos package.
A package is the end result of designing a Cognos Framework Manager model. 
Once all of the metadata is defined, a package is published to Cognos Connection, 
and that package contains all of the metadata within it. Then, when a developer or 
an end user interacts with that package, the metadata tells Cognos how to display 
the data, where to pull it from, and how to transform it.
Managing the model design project
In order to design an effective model, you need to first understand the business 
case for the model. Once you understand the business case, you should be able 
to determine where the necessary data is coming from and successfully complete 
your project if you follow a few basic rules.
Rule 1 – gather information
We should know where to gather business information and where to gather technical 
information.
During the information-gathering phase of a new project, it can be very easy to choose 
one person or group of people within the business community or technical community 
and only focus on them. In reality, every project will have different stakeholders and 
each stakeholder will be able to provide a different type of information. If you work 
with multiple areas of the business to gather the information, it will become logical 
who you should contact for different information. 

Chapter 9
[ 189 ]
For example, if we are working on a project to design a model on top of an 
accounting system and if I only work with the accountants; it is very likely that they 
will not understand where the underlying data is being stored. They will most likely 
only understand the frontend of the accounting system. Conversely, if I were to go 
to the database administrator that manages the backend of that same accounting 
application; it is very likely that they would not understand the business case for 
the data they are managing.
This is why it is very important to understand that business information and technical 
information about your model design project will come from different places. Once you 
know where to go for each set of information, we can move on to rule number two.
Rule 2 – learn to dance
While working with the two different sides of the project, it is important to remember 
that they will often not understand each other. It is your job to be the liaison between 
them. The business side (in our case, the accountants) is not likely to understand 
the underlying table structure or the ways in which their data is being stored. In the 
same vein, the technical side (in our case, the database administrator) is not likely to 
understand the business case for how to display the data to an end user. Your job 
is to understand both sides and to gather the information that you need from each 
in order to design your model. This can be a balancing act or a dance between the 
two sides.
So, how do you dance? The first step is to make sure both sides are aware of the end 
goal of the project. In our example, the end goal is to develop a reporting system 
for the accountants. Many people would then assume that the accountants are the 
only customers for this model. In reality, that may not be the case, and they will 
definitely not be the only stakeholders. For the reporting system to work, the database 
administrator is going to have to maintain the data in a certain way. If at some point 
in the future they want or need to change databases, they will need to understand and 
mitigate the effects on this new reporting system. Also, in addition to the accountants 
that will be using this new model for creating ad hoc reports, there may be additional 
end users that are interested in the data. The upper-level management may decide at 
some point in the future that they would like to use this same model to put together 
financial reports. Sales may want to be able to report off of this in order to know when 
to pay commissions. Marketing may want to use parts of the information to tie back to 
campaign effectiveness. So, what is the goal of the project then? 

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 190 ]
One could argue that it is to meet the needs of the immediate customer (the 
accountants) while also creating a model that is flexible enough that it could be used 
by future groups as well. By stating this goal early, you can avoid potential conflict 
when you are asking the database administrator where information is that may 
not relate to the current project. Or if you are asking the accountants to help you 
understand what additional information might be relevant outside of their group.
Rule 3 – take baby steps
When working on a large project, it is easy to think that it makes the most sense 
to design your entire model at once, build the entire model at once, then publish the 
model and test. In reality, there are so many variables at play that at any point in the 
process you could run into a road block that would scrap all of your previous work. 
That is why it is best to take baby steps.
1.	 Start by identifying a handful of data items that will be needed from one table.
2.	 Create a connection to that one table and test your connection.
3.	 Publish a package with just that information and test it to see how it is 
formatted and how quickly it comes back.
4.	 Assuming that there are no performance issues, move on to connecting a 
second table and joining the two together and testing again.
By taking baby steps with the project, you can identify potential issues early and 
reduce repetitive work.
Rule 4 – know your audience
This rule was alluded to earlier, but it cannot be emphasized enough. If you 
understand who is going to be using your package once it is published, you can 
understand and anticipate some of their needs. For instance, if you are building 
your package for the accountants as mentioned previously, they are going to 
want to eventually see reports about things such as passed due accounts, aging 
receivables, accounts payable, and accounts that need updated contact information. 
By anticipating ahead of time what information they will need, you can design an 
effective model that includes that information in a meaningful way.
So, how do you get to know your audience? Interview them. Set up interviews 
with your future end users and ask them what kind of things they are interested in 
reporting off of. This is going to give you your best insight into the type of reports 
that will eventually be built and what data needs to be included in the model. 

Chapter 9
[ 191 ]
As a warning, however, you should be careful to make it clear in these interviews 
that all the information requested may not be available. You will be surprised at 
how often end users ask for reporting on data that is either not collected or has no 
way of being tied together. The goal of a model designer is not to end up having 
a full-blown data warehouse project on your hands. It is to allow end users easier 
access to data by creating simple metadata on the backend.
Rule 5 – get buy-in and sign off
Before starting your actual design, you should have gathered a ton of information on 
the model you will be designing. There is no reason to keep this information a secret. 
Share it. Go back to your technical team and let them know what information is being 
requested and verify that they can help you access all of it. Once that is verified, go 
back to your end users and let them know what information you are able to include. 
Share with them your vision of how this will be used and what reports can be created 
from it. Confirm that the information you are planning to give them is the information 
that they need. Then, finally, get them to sign off on the end deliverable. In doing this, 
you set yourself up for success in your model design project before you even touch 
Cognos Framework Manager.
Three-tier approach to model design
When designing a model in IBM Cognos Framework Manager, the recommended 
approach is to use a tiered design. The most common is a three-tier design. In a three-
tier design, you will include a database layer, a business layer, and a presentation 
layer. There is some debate within the Cognos community as to whether or not 
the third tier is really necessary or if it is better to combine the business layer and 
presentation layer into one to make it a total of a two-tier model. While this can be 
done and works great in most scenarios, there are reasons for creating the habit of 
using a three-tier approach.
One major reason for using the database view layer is that it allows you to import 
your table structures exactly as they exist in the underlying database. By not changing 
anything here, you protect yourself against potential issues in case the underlying 
database tables change. In the database layer, some purists will not even import 
relationships because of the possibility of those changing at the database level. 
For our purposes, I will use the metadata wizard to import our relationships.
The business view layer is where relationships are created, calculations are made, 
formatting is set, and snowflakes are compressed down to stars.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 192 ]
The presentation view layer is where the objects being used by the end users 
are placed into logical groupings to be presented to them.
When these three layers or views are put together, we have a well-designed, 
three-tier Cognos Framework Manager model.
Designing a database view of your data
In Cognos Framework Manager, the database view should be an exact replica of the 
underlying database. This makes the design pretty easy.
When you first start Cognos Framework Manager, you will be prompted to select 
either Create a new project..., Open a project, or Create a new project using Model 
Design Accelerator.
For this example, we are going to create a new project. However, here is what each 
option will give us:
•	
Create a new project...: This will allow you to start a new Cognos Framework 
Manager model from scratch
•	
Open a project: This will allow you to open an existing Cognos Framework 
Manager model to continue development
•	
Create a new project using Model Design Accelerator: This will allow you to 
create a new Cognos Framework Manager model while using Model Design 
Accelerator to aid in the design process
For this example, we will start from scratch by selecting Create a new project….

Chapter 9
[ 193 ]
When we create a new project, we are prompted to provide a project name and a 
location. For this example, we are going to name our project Cognos 10 and save 
it to C:\IBM_Cognos\FM\Cognos10.cpf. For this example, we are not checking the 
Use Dynamic Query Mode checkbox. Dynamic Query Mode is a new capability in 
IBM Cognos Business Intelligence V10. It will create more efficient SQL and MDX 
based on the data source used. It also allows for an in-memory caching without 
compromising security. Refer to the following screenshot:
We can now select OK.
Now, depending on your security, you may be prompted to log in. Log in using an 
ID that has access to use Cognos Framework Manager.
We can now run the metadata wizard to pull in the underlying database structure for 
our data source. We will first create a new namespace for this metadata. A namespace 
is a container for metadata. The namespaces can be used to divide different groups of 
metadata. In our example, we are going to create three separate namespaces:
•	
For the database view
•	
For the business view
•	
For the presentation view

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 194 ]
To do so, follow these steps:
1.	 We can start by right-clicking on the namespace named Model, 
beneath Project.
2.	 We will then go to Create | Namespace.
3.	 If we now click on the highlighted New Namespace namespace, we can 
rename it to Database view.
4.	 We will now import our database view of metadata. We can do this by 
right-clicking on the new namespace called Database view and selecting 
Run Metadata Wizard....

Chapter 9
[ 195 ]
5.	 The first screen of the metadata wizard is Metadata Wizard - Select 
Metadata Source:

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 196 ]
The options for metadata sources are:
•	
Data Sources: This is by far the most common metadata source. This can 
be any Cognos-supported data source. With this option selected, you are 
prompted to select or create a data source connection; the metadata wizard 
will then attempt to pull metadata from the database or OLAP source that 
is being referenced.
•	
IBM Cognos Model: This option will let you use an existing Cognos 
Framework Manager model as a reference for your new model.
•	
IBM Cognos Architect (*.xml): This option allows you to use an existing 
IBM Cognos Architect metadata model as a source for your new Cognos 
Framework Manager model. Architect is a repository for metadata that was 
designed for sharing metadata between multiple Cognos applications. This 
product stopped being supported after Cognos 7.4 Maintenance Release 3.
•	
IBM Cognos Impromptu (*.xml): This option will allow you to point to an 
Impromptu Catalog to import metadata.
•	
IBM Cognos DecisionStream (*.xml): This is one of two Extract Transact 
Load (ETL) tools used within the Cognos suite of products.
•	
IBM Cognos Data Manager (*.xml): This is the second of two ETL tools 
used within the Cognos suite of products.
•	
IBM Metadata Sources: This option will allow you to select from other 
IBM metadata sources used in tools such as InfoSphere and Rational.
•	
Third Party Metadata Sources: This option will allow you to select from 
a number of other metadata sources from tools outside of IBM, such as 
Oracle, SAP, and Sybase.
For the purpose of our example, we will use a data source to import our metadata. 
With Data Sources selected, click on Next.
We are now presented with a list of all existing data sources. If you have not yet set 
up any data sources, please move ahead to the administration section of this book 
to learn how to do so. For this example, we are going to use an existing data source 
to design our model by following these steps:

Chapter 9
[ 197 ]
1.	 We will select the gosales data source, which is part of the IBM Cognos BI 
samples. Then, click on Next.
2.	 On our next screen, we are prompted to choose which objects we would like 
to import from our data source.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 198 ]
3.	 With this data source, we are looking at the SQL Server tables that are 
each in different schemas. We will import the following from the gosl 
schema: ORDER_DETAILS, ORDER_HEADER, ORDER_METHOD, PRODUCT, 
and PRODUCT_TYPE.
4.	 We can now click on Next to be taken to the last screen of the wizard. On 
this screen, we are prompted to select how to generate relationships from the 
underlying table structures. This screen has four main selections that have to 
be made. The following are the names of these sections and a brief description: 
°°
Select at least one criteria to detect and generate relationships: 
In this section, you tell the tool how to detect relationships. The most 
common way is to use primary and foreign keys, which will look at the 
underlying tables and determine what keys are present between each.

Chapter 9
[ 199 ]
°°
Select between which set of objects you want to detect and generate 
relationships: In this section, you can select if you want to detect 
relationships for the query subjects being imported only, between the 
imported query subjects and the existing ones, or between both. The 
option selected here will be determined by whether or not there are 
query subjects already existing in the model. 
°°
Indicate how you want to generate relationships between the 
imported Query Subjects: In this section, you tell the tool how to 
handle outer joins (whether or not to convert them to inner joins) and 
whether or not to attempt to detect the granularity of a relationship.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 200 ]
5.	 For our example, we will use all of the defaults and click on Import.
On the final screen of the import wizard, we will be shown a summary of 
what was created through the import process. For this example, we have 
created five new query subjects and four new relationships, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
6.	 We will now select Finish and examine our newly imported database view.

Chapter 9
[ 201 ]
Before we can start exploring our newly imported 
metadata, we should take a step back and review 
the different areas of Cognos Framework Manager.
The upper area of Cognos Framework Manager is the toolbar. In this area, you can 
perform many of the same actions that are available in the summary areas below it.
To the left of Cognos Framework Manager is Project Viewer. Project Viewer allows 
you to see all of the metadata that has been developed. In our current example, we 
can see that we have one namespace with five query subjects below it. If we expand 
Data Sources, we will also see that we have one data source (gosales). We have not 
created any Parameter Maps or Packages at this point.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 202 ]
To the right-hand side of Project Viewer are other ways of viewing the project. 
Here we can see that we have three view options for viewing our gosales namespace:
•	
Explorer: This allows you to see a list of the objects in your model
•	
Diagram: This allows us to see each query subject along with the 
relationships between them in a database diagram view
•	
Dimension Map: This allows us to begin designing relational OLAP 
dimensions from our data
Below this area is the Properties area. These properties will change depending on 
what object is selected in Project Viewer or the main Project area. Some properties 
will allow editing to affect how the object is formatted or if additional metadata 
should be added to it. Others are imported from the data and cannot be changed.
On the right-hand side of the screen, we see Tools. Refer to the following screenshot:
The Tools area includes the Summary page that summarizes our project and 
allows us to perform tasks such as reopening the metadata wizard, discovering 
dependencies, and editing object definitions (dynamically appears when an object 
is selected). The Tools area also includes the Search area and the Dependencies 
(object) viewer.
Now, returning to the middle viewer area, we have two options as to how we can 
view our newly imported database view. The first is the Explorer area that gives us 
an icon listing of our nine objects (five query subjects and four relationships). Refer 
to the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 203 ]
Alternatively, we can view this in the Diagram view, which is preferred; it shows us 
the different relationships between the various query subjects in a more visual and 
meaningful way.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 204 ]
In the diagram, we can see that the ORDER_DETAILS query subject is our primary fact 
table, with the PRODUCT and ORDER_HEADER query subjects as the first limb dimension 
tables and the PRODUCT_TYPE and ORDER_METHOD query subjects as the second limb 
dimension tables. What I mean by this is that the information in PRODUCT relates 
directly to ORDER_DETAILS, whereas the information in PRODUCT_TYPE relates to 
PRODUCT directly but relates to the ORDER_DETAILS query subject indirectly.
Now that we have reviewed our imported database view, we need to prepare to 
create our physical view by better organizing our model. Follow these steps:
1.	 We will start by renaming our base namespace from gosales to Product 
Orders by clicking on the namespace twice so the name highlights and 
typing in the new name.
2.	 We will now right-click on the newly renamed namespace and go to 
Create | Namespace.
3.	 Name your new namespace as Database View. Next, while simultaneously 
pressing Shift, click on ORDER_DETAILS and PRODUCT_TYPE to select all five 
query subjects.
4.	 Then click-and-drag those over the new namespace until it highlights. Once 
the name of the new namespace Database View is highlighted, release and 
you will have moved all of the database query subjects into the Database 
View namespace.

Chapter 9
[ 205 ]
We have now completed creating our database view of metadata.
Designing a business view of your data
In our business view layer, we will look to define additional relationships if needed, 
create calculated items, format our data, rename the database objects to logical names, 
and compress our snowflake design down to a simple star design. To do so, follow 
these steps:
1.	 We will start by creating a new namespace to hold the Business 
View namespace.
2.	 We will again right-click on the base Product Orders namespace and go 
to Create | Namespace. We will name this namespace Business View.
We will next look at consolidating our query subjects in order to have 
a star design with only one level from the fact table. We want to start 
by creating our fact table from the data available in our underlying 
table, ORDER_DETAILS.
3.	 To create a new query subject under your newly created Business View 
namespace, right-click on Business View and go to Create | Query Subject.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 206 ]
4.	 We're going to name this new query subject Order Details and choose 
the first option, Build the query based on the data that exists in the model, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Click on OK.
6.	 On the next screen, expand Database View and ORDER_DETAILS and drag in 
all of the query items from under ORDER_DETAILS. Then click on OK.

Chapter 9
[ 207 ]
We will now proceed to create a consolidated query subject to hold 
information from both the PRODUCT and PRODUCT_TYPE query subjects.
7.	 Again, right-click on Business View and go to Create | Query Subject. 
This time, we will name our query subject as Product and keep the 
option to build based on existing data in the model, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 208 ]
8.	 On the next screen, we will drag in all of the query items from PRODUCT and 
the first three query items from PRODUCT_TYPE.
9.	 Click on OK.
We will now proceed to create our final consolidated query subject to hold 
information from both the ORDER_HEADER and ORDER_METHOD query subjects.
10.	 Again, right-click on Business View and go to Create | Query Subject. This 
time, we will name our query subject as Order Header and select the Model 
(Query Subjects and Query Items) option to build our query subject based 
on the existing data in the model, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 209 ]
11.	 On the next screen, we will drag in all of the query items from ORDER_HEADER 
and the first two query items from ORDER_METHOD.
12.	 Click on OK.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 210 ]
We have now consolidated our query subjects down to what can be seen as a star 
schema. Next, we will rename the query items to logical names instead of database 
names. We will start in our Order Details query subject. We can go through query 
item by query item, clicking each twice to rename them. We will make the following 
changes:
•	
ORDER_DETAIL_CODE to Order Detail Code
•	
ORDER_NUMBER to Order Number
•	
SHIP_DATE to Ship Date
•	
PRODUCT_NUMBER to Product Number
•	
QUANTITY to Quantity
•	
UNIT_COST to Cost
•	
UNIT_PRICE to Price
•	
UNIT_SALE_PRICE to Sale Price
The following is the screenshot of the Business View namespace:
We will not proceed to change the remaining names in Product and Order Header.
For the Product query subject, we'll make the following changes:
•	
PRODUCT_NUMBER to Product Number
•	
INTRODUCTION_DATE to Intro Date
•	
PRODUCT_TYPE_CODE to Product Type Code
•	
PRODUCTION_COST to Production Cost
•	
MARGIN to Margin
•	
PRODUCT_IMAGE to Image

Chapter 9
[ 211 ]
•	
PRODUCT_TYPE_CODE1 is a repeat of PRODUCT_TYPE_CODE; delete it
•	
PRODUCT_LINE_CODE to Product Line Code
•	
PRODUCT_TYPE_EN to Product Type
For the Order Header query subject, we'll make the following changes:
•	
ORDER_NUMBER to Order Number
•	
RETAILER_NAME to Retailer Name
•	
RETAILER_NAME_MB, RETAILER_SITE_CODE, and RETAILER_CONTACT_CODE 
do not need to change; delete them
•	
SALES_STAFF_CODE to Sales Person
•	
SALES_BRANCH_CODE to Branch
•	
ORDER_DATE to Order Date
•	
ORDER_CLOSE_DATE to Order Close Date
•	
ORDER_METHOD_CODE to Order Method Code
•	
ORDER_METHOD_CODE1 is a repeat of ORDER_METHOD_CODE; delete it
•	
ORDER_METHOD_EN to Order Method
The following is the screenshot of the Business View namespace:

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 212 ]
We will now go through each of our query subjects and update the formatting. 
The first method we will use is updating the Usage property for any items that 
were imported with incorrect usage. There are three types of Usage:
•	
Identifier: This Usage type is for query items that are used to point to 
a specific row of data in another table. These are almost always unique or 
primary keys for those tables. An example would be an order number that is 
unique to a specific order. It is used to identify what order is being referenced.
•	
Fact: This Usage type is for query items that are used as measures or can be 
aggregated. An example of this would be a query item for the quantity sold. 
This can be aggregated to multiple dimensions.
•	
Attribute: This Usage type is for query items that describe other query 
items. These do not have to always go hand in hand with an identifier, 
but they typically do. An example of this would be a product name. 
A product name is an attribute of a product number.
Each of these Usage types also has a corresponding query item icon, as shown here:
In our first query subject, Order Details, all of our usage seems to have imported 
correctly. In our second query subject, Product, it looks like Cognos Framework 
Manager has mistakenly set the Usage option of Product Line Code to Fact. In 
reality, it should be set to Identifier. To change this, we will select the query item 
in Project Viewer and in the drop-down under Properties, beside Usage, we will 
select Identifier as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 213 ]
Under the Order Header namespace, we see that Sales Person and Branch have the 
same issue and need to be changed as well. We can change those now by following 
these steps:
1.	 The last thing that we will do in terms of updating Properties is to go 
through each of our facts and set a default format. Here we can look at a 
shortcut for setting these in bulk. We are going to select the query items 
from Order Details, such as Cost, Price, and Sale Price, by clicking on 
each while keeping Ctrl pressed.
2.	 We will also select the query items from Product, such as Production Cost 
and Margin.
Note that now each of our query items will be listed in the 
Properties area with all properties showing as columns.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 214 ]
3.	 Scroll to the right-hand side until you see the column for Format and 
click where it says <Click to edit.> on the first item.
4.	 Within the Data Format pop-up window, select Currency from the 
drop-down for Format Type and click on OK.
Now, notice the black downward-pointing arrow that appears beneath 
the highlighted <Click to edit.> area.
5.	 Click-and-drag all the five highlighted query items. This will copy the 
currency formatting that we just set to all items.
6.	 You will then receive a pop-up confirming that the properties have all 
been successfully updated. Click on OK.
We can now update Quantity from the Order Details query subject in 
the same way.

Chapter 9
[ 215 ]
7.	 Click on Quantity. Next, scroll down in the Properties area until you 
find Format and click where it says <Click to edit.> in order to open 
the formatting pop-up.
8.	 Select Number as Format type: and click on OK as shown in the 
following screenshot:
We have now completed the design of our business view layer.
Designing an end user view of your data
Designing an end user view should be the easiest step of the modeling process. 
By this point, we have already defined all relationships, usage, and formatting 
of the underlying data. Now, we just have to decide how best to present it to 
the end users. For our example, we will be best served if we provide two simple 
query subjects. One will include order information and the other will include 
product information.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 216 ]
To start things off, we will once again create a new namespace under Product Orders. 
This time we will name it Presentation View.
With our new namespace created, right-click on Presentation View and go to Create 
| Query Subject. We will name this first query subject Order Information and 
then choose the option to be imported from the model.
When deciding what to include, it is important to remember to only add items that 
may be useful to your end users. To do so, follow these steps:
1.	 From Business View, we will drag in all items from Order Header; and 
from Order Details, we will drag Ship Date, Quantity, Cost, Price, and 
Sale Price as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 217 ]
2.	 Click on OK. We will now create a new query subject for Product Information 
as well.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 218 ]
3.	 For this query subject, we will drag in all items from the Product query 
subject in the Business View namespace.
4.	 Click on OK.
5.	 The last thing we will do is organize our presentation layer query subjects. 
I like to organize mine by having all identifiers first (in the order of relevance), 
then the attributes, and finally all measure in a query item folder together. 
We will start by reordering the query items in the Order Information query 
subject. This can be done by simply dragging-and-dropping the query items 
to the position you want. For the Order Information query subject, we will 
set the items in this order:
°°
Order Number
°°
Branch
°°
Sales Person
°°
Order Date
°°
Order Close Date
°°
Ship Date
°°
Order Method Code
°°
Order Method
°°
Retailer Name

Chapter 9
[ 219 ]
°°
Quantity
°°
Cost
°°
Price
°°
Sale Price
6.	 We will now right-click on Order Information and go to Create | Query 
Item Folder.
7.	 We will name the new Folder query item Measures and drag in Quantity, 
Cost, Price, and Sale Price as shown in the following screenshot:
Next, we will reorder the Product Information query subject and organize Product 
Cost and Margin into the Measures folder as well. We will order this query subject 
as follows:
•	
Product Number
•	
Product Line Code
•	
Intro Date
•	
Product Type Code
•	
Product Type
•	
Image
•	
Measures

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 220 ]
•	
Production Cost
•	
Margin
The following screenshot shows the order of query subjects:
We have now completed the design of our presentation view layer.
Publishing a package
All that is left to do is publishing our package for the end users to see. Publishing a 
package is very simple. To do so, follow these steps:
1.	 We will right-click on Packages in Project Viewer and go to Create | Package.

Chapter 9
[ 221 ]
2.	 We will now name our package with the name we want our end users to be 
able to find it by. For our package, we will choose the name Product Orders 
and select Next. The next window will ask us what we want to publish.
3.	 We are going to choose to only publish Presentation View. Click on Database 
View and Business View until they have red "X" marks beside them as shown 
in the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Next.
5.	 On our next screen, we are prompted for what the underlying database is, 
so that Cognos can include function sets for it. Keep only the database type 
that you are using. In our example, we are using SQLServer.
6.	 Click on Finish.
7.	 Once you have created your package, you will see a window confirming the 
creation of it and asking if you want to open Publish Wizard. Publishing is 
what gets our newly created package in front of the end user, so select Yes.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 222 ]
8.	 The first screen of Publish Wizard will ask you where you want to publish. 
Best practice is to create a secured folder to hold all packages, but for the sake 
of ease we will move forward with the default location of Public Folders. 
Then, click on Next as shown in the following screenshot:
On the next screen, you will be asked if you want to add security. In some 
environments, it is important to set security before a package is published, 
instead of setting it after it is published.
9.	 For our example, we will just choose Next; in a live environment, consider 
setting security if you are publishing a package with sensitive information.
10.	 On our last screen, we are asked if we want to generate the files for 
externalized query subjects, if we want to verify the model before 
publishing, and if we want to use Dynamic Query Mode. Keep the 
defaults and select Publish.
You have now published your first model!

Chapter 9
[ 223 ]
The business case for Cognos 
Framework Manager
Cognos Framework Manager is a necessary step in separating the end user from the 
data. Most end users are not going to be technically savvy enough to understand the 
underlying database structures that contain the information that they need. For that 
reason, it is important to have a layer between the database and the end user. That 
layer is designed by Cognos Framework Manager.
Understanding the problem
End users want information presented in a meaningful way. However, the data 
that is stored in most databases is not presented in a meaningful way. The column 
names rarely represent the business name of the data. In a database, the business 
information "Product" may be represented as PROD_NAME. However, end users want 
to see "Product". Another common problem is that information that may all be 
presented in one shared screen in an application is often stored in multiple, non-
joined tables on the underlying system. The end users want to see this information 
presented in business terms, with all data relating to all other data. This is where 
Cognos Framework Manager comes in.
Understanding the solution
With Cognos Framework Manager, you can bring in the database view of data 
and transform it into something meaningful using metadata. This is the real 
power of modeling data before presenting it to end users. The other value in 
this is that developers within Cognos Connection are not required to recreate 
common calculations if they are created once at the metadata layer. This allows 
the developers of the metadata to control what data is presented with filters, 
security, and calculations. The end result should be an error-proof reporting 
engine for your business.

IBM Cognos Framework Manager
[ 224 ]
Summary
In conclusion, we have reviewed IBM Cognos Framework Manager and how to use 
this robust tool to build a basic metadata model. We have looked at best practices 
for designing that model using a multitier approach, and we have walked through 
basic examples of what actions are performed at each level in the model. We have 
also looked at how to publish an existing model for end user consumption, and 
what the business case is for having a metadata modeling tool such as Cognos 
Framework Manager.
In the next chapter, we will look at administering and performance-tuning our 
Cognos BI environment.

Administration and 
Performance Tuning
This chapter will help us better understand the role and function of an administrator 
as well as show us how to use the Status tab of IBM Cognos BI to performance tune 
our Cognos BI environment. We will also look at basic performance-tuning rules of 
thumb. In this chapter, we will cover:
•	
Deciding who should be an administrator
•	
Navigating the administration interface
•	
Monitoring the system in the Status tab
•	
Performance tuning the system
•	
Designing your security model
•	
Adding data source connections
•	
Importing and exporting content
•	
Routing your requests using routing sets
•	
The business case for performance tuning
•	
The business case for administration

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 226 ]
Deciding who should be an administrator
Administrators need to be technical. For a new Cognos BI environment, you should 
look at selecting administrators that are very technical and can manage a large-scale 
enterprise application. In addition, administrators need to be able to understand the 
needs of the business. Typically, in smaller Cognos BI environments, you will see the 
administrator wearing multiple hats, namely designing models and reports as well 
as gathering requirements. In these types of scenarios, the same administrator may 
be setting security one minute, and the next minute could be gathering reporting 
requirements from a business user. Every environment should have at least one 
Cognos administrator that has  experience being a Cognos administrator. If not, you 
should seek support from IBM or an IBM Business Partner to train an administrator 
from your internal staff.
Ultimately, anyone with a strong technical background and the ability to understand 
business needs could be trained to be an administrator.
Navigating the administration interface
The Cognos administration interface is integrated into Cognos Connection and can 
be accessed in two ways—similar to how each studio can be accessed in two ways. 
The first option is to choose Administer IBM Cognos content from the Welcome 
page as shown in the following screenshot:
The second option is to select IBM Cognos Administration from the bottom of the 
Launch menu as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 227 ]
Both of these options will take you to the IBM Cognos administration interface where 
you can begin managing and administering the various aspects of Cognos BI.
You will notice inside the IBM Cognos Administration area that the environment 
is organized by tabs in the same way that that the end user interface of Cognos 
Connection is organized. The first three tabs are the primary tabs for managing your 
Cognos BI environment. They are Status, Security, and Configuration, and they each 
can be used for different key elements of administration as shown in the following 
screenshot:
The description of these three tabs is as follows:
•	
Status: This tab allows you to monitor activities, processes, and schedules 
in your Cognos BI environment.
•	
Security: This tab allows you to define security groups and roles, 
map security profiles to capabilities within Cognos BI, and manage 
user interface profiles.
•	
Configuration: This tab allows you to set up data sources, distributions, 
printers, and portlets. It also allows you to manage content deployments 
and styles. Finally, it allows you to configure each of the various services 
and processes running in your Cognos BI environment.

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 228 ]
Monitoring the system in the Status tab
If you select the Status tab, you will notice that there are a few sections within it. 
The first three sections (Current Activities, Past Activities, and Upcoming Activities) 
are all related to activities running on the system. These are great for understanding 
what your users are actively, or through scheduling, running on the system. The final 
option allows you to see all the reports with the schedules. If you are setting up your 
environment, this will allow you to identify any peaks in usage that could potentially 
hurt performance. For the purpose of monitoring, we are going to focus on the System 
section. When you select System, you will notice that the monitoring screen provided 
is set up like a Metric Studio scoreboard:
For the purpose of this book, let's assume that we have not yet set the values that we 
want to strive for. To be honest, it takes time to understand what you should set each 
of those values to, for your environment. Once you have tweaked your system for a 
few weeks or months, you will begin to understand what values to strive for within 
each of these metrics. When you are ready to set your metrics, you can click on the 
+ button to the right-hand side of the process that you would like to set up. Then set 
your high and low watermarks by choosing the pencil icon at the side of each option. 
This will begin to give you a picture of how your metrics look. The services that are 
most important to the performance of your system are:
•	
Report service: This service manages interactive requests to have reports 
run, and it provides live, interactive output. This is used for live report runs 
either from Cognos Connection or from within one of the various studios in 
Cognos BI. 

Chapter 10
[ 229 ]
•	
Batch report service: This service manages behind-the-scenes requests to 
have reports run. These are typically scheduled requests that will run on 
the backend. It also provides the output to be stored in the content store 
and saved for interactive viewing.
•	
Content manager service: This service talks to and writes back to the content 
store. This is the service that will add a new record to the content store 
database when activities are performed. Also, it is used during deployments 
from within Cognos BI.
•	
Report data service: This service is very important if you implement a mobile 
reporting solution, as it manages the transfer of the data from your Cognos 
BI environment to the mobile platform. Since you typically have executives 
running and utilizing mobile BI, you want to make sure that this is tuned 
appropriately so that reports are delivered quickly to mobile devices.
Performance tuning the system
The real goal of monitoring is so that you can understand what good performance 
metrics are and begin to tune your system to hit those. One of the biggest roles of 
a Cognos administrator is keeping the environment running, and running quickly. 
This can be a challenge for a number of reasons. Some of the most common causes 
of performance issues are there not being enough RAM, there not being enough 
CPUs, a misconfigured environment, too many users, too large a Cognos Content 
Store, and many more. So the challenge when you encounter performance issues 
is determining what is causing those issues. Natively in Cognos BI, this leads to 
a game of trial and error. For the sake of those of you who are about to start this 
game, we will provide an overview of how best to performance tune. Remember 
that each environment will be different and that there is no magic configuration 
that will work with all environments. This is by no means an all-encompassing 
guide to performance tuning, but these are some of the most common things that 
administrators will see.

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 230 ]
A good place to start is to adjust your memory usage configuration in IBM Cognos 
Configuration. By default, this will be set to 768 MB. Depending on your server 
platform, you may want to adjust this upwards or downwards. For instance, if you 
are using a Windows operating system with multiple dispatchers on the same server, 
it is recommended that you tune this down to 512 MB. If your machine has enough 
RAM to handle more, you can then begin tuning this up to see when performance 
begins to be impacted. In general, you probably do not want to go below 512 MB or 
over 1536 MB.
For Linux or Unix environments, you can likely leave this to be the same or even 
tune this up to 1024 MB to see if it improves performance. Keep in mind that the 
higher you set this, the longer that garbage collection will take once the process 
is no longer in use by Cognos BI.

Chapter 10
[ 231 ]
I would like to share a few tips for keeping Cognos BI performing well. The first 
relates to setting the maximum number of processes that different services can use. 
The two main services that actually take up a high-memory process are Batch report 
service and Report service. Between these two processes, you want to have your 
total maximum number of processes equal to the number of threads available from 
your machine minus one. So if you have a basic system with two quad-core CPUs, 
you would have eight total threads available. In this scenario, you would want to 
limit your maximum processes to seven.
When setting the maxes for these, it is important to understand how your 
environment is most often used. If most of the reports in your environment are 
scheduled, then you would want to lean more heavily toward Batch report service 
and less toward Report service. With the earlier configuration, you may want to 
set the maxes to five and two respectively, or four and three if you think it is more 
evenly balanced.
With regards to RAM, it depends on the type of Cognos BI server you are running. If 
you are running a 32-bit Cognos Business Intelligence Server, it is recommended that 
you have 1.5 GB of RAM for each core, that is, up to 1 GB of RAM for the Java.exe 
file that runs with Cognos BI and 2 GB of RAM for your operating system. So with 
the eight core machines referenced earlier, you would need at least 15 GB of RAM. 
If you are running on a 64-bit machine with a 64-bit Cognos Business Intelligence 
Server installed, you will need to increase to 2 GB of RAM for each core. With the 
same example, you would need at least 19 GB of RAM. These are only estimates, 
and it is best to contact IBM for a complete sizing discussion that will incorporate 
user counts, types of reports, peak periods, and many other variables.
Designing your security model
Understanding how Cognos BI security works and setting up the proper security is 
essential in any reporting environment for information that needs to be protected. The 
need to protect data can be based on how sensitive the data is to your stakeholders, 
or it could be governed by laws and regulations such as we see with healthcare and 
financial information. To understand how Cognos BI security all ties together, we will 
start by looking at an overview of the various pieces of Cognos BI security.

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 232 ]
The CAF
The Cognos Application Firewall (CAF) can be turned on inside of Cognos 
Configuration. You simply set Enable CAF validation? to True and restart 
your environment:
The CAF will protect your environment from outside attacks. It is a very good idea 
to leave the CAF turned on with outward-facing environments that are not secured 
heavily by other means.
The only major drawback of the CAF being turned on is that it limits use by external 
applications to Cognos BI. Because the CAF does not recognize applications as safe 
and approved, what happens is that each computer that wants to connect to Cognos 
BI using an external application would need to be set up as a valid domain or host 
in Cognos Configuration. In addition, CAF only applies to the gateway and it can be 
bypassed by pointing directly to a dispatcher.
External security
External security can be whatever security provider you use to maintain security 
within your environment. It is considered external because it is not the standard 
Cognos BI security that comes within Cognos BI. Most environments choose 
to add their Active Directory or LDAP security to Cognos BI in order to make 
authentication and maintenance easier. Typical external security options are 
Active Directory, LDAP, custom Java providers, SiteMinder, and SAP.

Chapter 10
[ 233 ]
When you utilize an external security and set it up as a Cognos BI namespace, you 
are allowing Cognos BI to read from that security provider and confirm if a user 
is authenticated to that security provider. Then, you can use the other aspects in 
Cognos BI security to identify what that authenticated user is able to do within 
Cognos BI.
Cognos BI security
So that brings us to Cognos BI security. When Cognos BI is installed, there is a security 
setup that has roles defined within the Cognos namespace. A role is a collection of 
authenticated users that can all be secured together. Predefined Cognos BI roles are set 
up based on the capabilities within Cognos BI. An example of a role is Query users. 
This role is then added to the permissions for the capability to use Query Studio. With 
this scenario, any user added to Query users would then have access to Query Studio 
and vice versa. You can also create groups here. Many administrators struggle with the 
difference between a group and a role as these are distinct options within Cognos BI.
A group is detailed by the icon of two people standing together:
A group should be used to combine people that should have access to the same sets 
of data. You may have a group that is called Human Resources and add members 
of the Human Resources team to it, then secure your Human Resources data so that 
only that group has access to it.
A role is detailed by the icon of two people standing together with hats on, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
It is hard to believe that anyone would get these two confused, right?
A role should be used to combine people that should have the same Cognos BI 
capabilities. Think of this as their role within the Cognos BI environment. So, you 
can have roles called Report Developers for people that will be developing reports.

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 234 ]
In some environments, you see groups and roles combined. In a scenario like this, 
you might see a group or role called Human Resources Report Developers. In such 
a role, you would only have those report developers that should have access to 
Human Resources data. While this is widely used, it is not the best practice and 
can lead to confusion while securing an environment.
Capabilities
Capabilities allow users to do things within Cognos BI. Capabilities can be set for 
accessing areas both at high levels (access to Report Studio) and low levels (being 
able to define your own SQL in Report Studio). Essentially, capabilities define who 
can do what within Cognos BI.
How it all works together
Using the descriptions given later, let's walk through how to set up security effectively. 
You must first decide if you want to keep the Cognos BI native security turned on. The 
advantage of the Cognos BI native security is that you as an administrator can create 
your own groups and roles within Cognos BI and map the external groups to them. 
This gives you more flexibility to manage access rights.
The next decision is whether or not you want to use external security. It is highly 
recommended that you do utilize this since your organization is likely to already 
have some type of security in place that would be supported.
Now you have to consider how to model your security. For modeling your security, 
you must consider two key questions:
•	
What do you want people to be able to do?
•	
What do you want people to be able to see?
What people can do
We secure what people can do using the capabilities part of Cognos BI. Depending 
on the size of your organization, you may not want to manually add each individual 
user to a capability. So what is typically done is that, within Cognos BI security, 
roles are set up that are based on functional capabilities. You may utilize the existing 
roles that do an adequate job of defining Cognos BI access rights, or you can create 
your own.

Chapter 10
[ 235 ]
What people can see
To secure what people can see, you must go to each individual item in your 
environment and set the security. Imagine doing this for each user as well; it would 
become an administration nightmare. This is why groups and roles are utilized. In 
addition to this, you can set objects to inherit security from the objects above them 
in the folder structure of Cognos Connection, and this limits the need to secure 
every single object. To set the security on an object, you are given a few options. 
Let's see how to secure the GO Sales and Retailers package so that only Report 
Administrators have access to the package. To do so, follow these steps:
1.	 First, we will select the Set properties - GO Sales and Retailers icon 
to the right of the GO Sales and Retailers package as shown in the 
following screenshot:
2.	 In the properties menu, go to the Permissions tab. You will notice that 
there is a default security already set for this object.
3.	 Select the Override the access permissions acquired from the parent entry 
option. Then, select all items by selecting the check mark in the upper-left 
corner of your permissions list as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 At the bottom of the inherited permissions list, click on Remove to clear all of 
the selected permissions. The Permissions area should now say No entries.
5.	 Select the Add... option to add the report administrators.

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 236 ]
6.	 Next, select the Cognos namespace. Find Report Administrators in the list 
and select the checkbox beside that role.
7.	 While selected, you can click on the green add arrow to move the role into 
the Selected entries area:
8.	 Click on OK.
9.	 Select the checkbox beside the newly added role, and to the right-hand side 
note that you have the ability to update the permissions to either grant access 
or deny access.
The permissions available are:
°°
Read: This will allow the user, group, or role to read all properties 
of an object or create a shortcut to an object.
°°
Write: This will allow the user, group, or role to modify or create 
new objects within a location or edit an existing object. This option 
essentially allows users to update.
°°
Execute: This will allow the user, group, or role to run a report or 
retrieve data from a data source.
°°
Set Policy: This will allow the user, group, or role to update the 
security permissions for an object, as we are doing in this section 
now for Go Sales and Retailers.
°°
Traverse: This will allow the user, group, or role to view what is 
inside a folder or package without having additional access to it. 
With this permission, you can see basic properties of the object, 
such as its name and description.
10.	 Grant all and select OK to complete the security change.

Chapter 10
[ 237 ]
Adding data source connections
After the installation, the first thing that you will need to do, in order to take 
advantage of your new Cognos BI environment, is to add a data source. A data 
source is a connection used to connect a set of data. In this case, it is a connection 
to connect data that you want to use for building reports. Cognos BI can connect to 
virtually any data source. There are native connections available for most major data 
source types, including but not limited to, DB2, SQL Server, Oracle, Neteeza, and 
so on. In addition to this, you can create ODBC data source connections to any data 
source that is supported through ODBC, and you can connect to nontraditional data 
sources through a tool that is delivered free of charge with Cognos BI called IBM 
Virtual View Manager. With the addition of Dynamic Query Mode, it is best practice 
to use JDBC drivers to connect to data sources so that Dynamic Query Mode can be 
fully utilized.
Let's walk through creating a data source connection from scratch. You will first need 
to navigate to the Configuration tab in Cognos administration page. Note that the 
first option will be Data Source Connections. To create a new data source connection, 
select the icon that looks like a database icon as shown in the following screenshot:
Follow these steps:
1.	 On the next screen, you will be asked to provide a name, description, and 
screen tip. Only the name is required.
2.	 We will name ours Data Source Example and leave the Description: and 
Screen tip: options blank. Once you have entered your data source name, 
click on Next as shown in the following screenshot:

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 238 ]
3.	 On the next screen, you are prompted to select your database Type.
The corresponding list of database options has over 30 potential choices. 
These include IBM data sources, such as DB2, Informix, Neteeza, Red Brick, 
and Cognos cubes, as well as all of the other major database options, such as 
Microsoft SQL Server, Oracle, Sybase, SAP, and Teradata. Depending on the 
data source that you select, the next screen will be customized for entering 
parameters that relate to that connection type.
4.	 We will choose Microsoft SQL Server (SQL 2008 Native Client) for our 
example and then click on the Next button.
5.	 For SQL Server, you are required to enter information in the Server name, 
Database name, and Sign on options.
6.	 You can then select the Test the connection option at the bottom of the 
page; this will bring you to a page with the Connection string and 
Dispatcher information.
7.	 Click on the Test button to see if you have made a valid connection to your 
newly set up data source as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Once you have verified that your connection is valid, you can click on Next 
again at the bottom of the screen.
9.	 You can now choose Finish to complete the data source creation process.
Importing and exporting content
We can now look at adding content to our environment. Content maintenance is 
important for a number of reasons. In IBM Cognos BI, you can use the Content 
Administration section under the Configuration tab in Cognos Administration 
to manage this, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 239 ]
There are only a few purposes of using the Content Administration option that make 
sense for a Cognos administrator:
•	
Exporting for backup purposes: The content in Cognos Connection 
can be exported periodically as a form of backing up your system. This 
allows complete content store recovery if your entire system were to ever 
become compromised.
•	
Exporting for deployment purposes: The content in Cognos Connection 
can also be exported for the sole purpose of moving it to another Cognos BI 
environment. This is often used for deploying content from a development 
environment to a production environment that is used by the external 
customers of stakeholders.
•	
Importing for deployment purposes: This is done on the new server after 
content that was designed to be deployed has been exported. This content 
has to be physically moved to a location that can be accessed from the 
importing server.  
•	
Exporting during migrations between Cognos BI versions: This is done 
when you have parallel environments that you are moving content between. 
I do not recommend this approach to migration because creating a copy of 
the Content Store is a much more efficient way to move content between 
Cognos BI versions.
•	
Importing during migrations between Cognos BI versions: This is also done 
when you have parallel environments that you are moving content between. 
Again, I do not recommend this approach of migrating content between 
Cognos BI versions.
In order to begin a new export, choose the New Export icon at the top of the screen 
that looks like an arrow pointing from a database into an open box, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 240 ]
Follow these steps:
1.	 On the next screen, you will be asked to provide a name, description, and 
screen tip. Only the name is required.
2.	 We will name ours Export Example and leave the Description and Screen 
tip options blank. Once you have your export package name entered, click 
on Next as shown in the following screenshot:
We are then given an option to select Deployment method. Here we can 
decide if we want to export by selecting either The entire content store or 
Select public folders and directory content.
3.	 We will choose Select the entire content store and click on Next.
4.	 We are now prompted to give the exported deployment package a 
deployment archive name. We will leave ours as Export Example 
and click on Next as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 241 ]
5.	 You will also require the Set the encryption password... option for your 
exported deployment archives.
6.	 When you click on Next, you will be shown a summary.
7.	 Click on Next again, and you will be asked to choose between the Save and 
run once, Save and schedule, and Save only options.
8.	 We will choose Save and run once and click on Finish. Select Now and then 
click on Run, as shown in the following screenshot:

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 242 ]
So, where did that actually go? The setting for where archive packages are stored 
is set within the Cognos configuration. In the Environment section, the deployment 
location is set where it says Deployment files location, and the default location is 
../deployment:
So, what does that actually mean? If we look into the installation location for Cognos 
BI, there will be a folder called deployment that will now have our newly created 
export as a ZIP file:
A common best practice is to redirect this archive location to a shared folder on 
a mapped drive that can be accessed from all of your Cognos BI environments. 
This will eliminate the need to physically move the export ZIP files between 
servers during deployments.
We will now look at the process of an import. To import, you will need to select 
the New Import icon that looks like an open box with an arrow pointing from 
inside of it to a database, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 243 ]
We will be shown a list of the ZIP files that are located in the archive location that we 
just looked at. In our example, we have two from Cognos BI samples plus our newly 
created Export Example, as shown in the following screenshot:
Let's carry out these steps:
1.	 We will select Export Example and then click on Next. We are then prompted 
to enter our password and click on Next until we get to the screen that asks 
us to choose between the Save and run once, Save and schedule, and Save 
only options.
2.	 We will choose Save and run once and click on Finish. Select Now and then 
click on Run. For our example, we will also need to rename the import. We 
will call it Import Example since the Export Example import already exists. 
We have now successfully exported and imported content from Cognos BI while also 
understanding where it is physically stored and some best practices for minimizing 
efforts during deployments.
Routing your requests using routing sets
A routing set is a tool in Cognos BI that allows you to route requests to specific 
folders based on either the user sending the request or the package on which 
the request was sent. Routing sets are often used to ensure that key users and 
key reporting requirements have the best possible performance. Imagine if your 
executives have reports that they like to run periodically that run in a server-
intensive way. If you put them on the same server as all of the users, they could 
experience performance issues, as could the other users on that same server.

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 244 ]
Now imagine that every request from an executive is routed to a specific server, 
maybe a beefier, more powerful server. In this scenario, the executives have better 
performance and the other end users are not affected. This is the real purpose behind 
the use of routing sets.
Routing sets can only be used in environments with multiple dispatchers.
In order to set up routing rules, we have to perform three major steps:
1.	 Step one is to put each of your servers into a Server group. A Server group 
is a single or multiple servers that will load balance requests. You can 
create any name that you would like for your various groups, but you must 
remember them so that you can put multiple servers into the same group. 
We will add one of my dispatchers to Example Group. To do this, follow 
these steps:
i.	
Open the System section from the Status tab and click on the 
server to see the dispatcher beneath it.
ii.	 We'll then choose the downward pointing arrow beside the 
dispatcher and select Set properties.
iii.	 Once we are in the properties section, we can choose the Settings 
tab and then Tuning from the Category drop-down list:
2.	 The second step is to set up named routing sets for users (groups or roles) 
and packages. To set the routing sets on a group or role, navigate to the 
group or role in your security area of the Administration area. We can work 
with system administrators by following these steps:
i.	
Select the Set properties option to the right-hand side of the 
System Administrators option in our list of roles under Cognos 
BI. At the bottom, we see an Advanced routing option. Then, 
click on Edit...:

Chapter 10
[ 245 ]
ii.	 The default naming option is for System Administrators. 
So leave that and choose the green add arrow to add it to 
the list of sets. Then click on OK, and click on OK again.
iii.	 We can now go back to the Set properties area of the Go Sales 
and Retailers package, and at the bottom you will see a similar 
option for the Advanced routing option.
iv.	 Check the Overwrite the routing sets acquired from the parent 
entry checkbox, and then click on the Set... link to define the 
routing sets as shown in the following screenshot:
v.	 We can name our new set Example Package Set and add it 
to the sets list using the green arrow. Then click on OK twice.

Administration and Performance Tuning
[ 246 ]
3.	 Our third and final step is to set up the routing:
i.	
We do this from within the Configuration tab in the Dispatchers 
and Services section. At the top right, there is the Specify routing 
rules option that looks like a small gear next to a server. Within 
here, we can set up any combination of routing options that we 
would like using the routing sets that we created and the server 
groups that have been defined. Refer to the following screenshot:
ii.	 We will choose Add a rule twice to add one rule for routing the 
system administrators role and one rule for routing the Go Sales 
and Retailers requests:
We have not set up both user-role and package-based routing sets. Give this a try 
in a large environment to see how routing can really improve performance for key 
users and on key data.
The business case for performance 
tuning
Any Cognos BI environment will only be of value if people are using it. Too often, 
I have seen companies make major investments in an enterprise-level reporting 
environment only to see it underutilized due to poor performance. Ultimately, 
this can be avoided. If you are with a client, or if you are a client, that is constantly 
dealing with complaints about how poor the performance is in Cognos BI, there is 
hope. Cognos BI is not a slow running system. Cognos BI is a worldwide enterprise 
reporting tool that is used by some of the largest companies in the world. So, how do 
you change that mindset? You performance tune your environment. The executives 
and key stakeholders in the business want reporting and analytics. However, let's 
face it; they don't want to wait on it. That is why, from a business perspective, 
performance tuning is essential.

Chapter 10
[ 247 ]
To put it simply, the business case for performance tuning is that the tool will not 
be utilized without good performance. The only way to ensure good performance 
is through constant monitoring and tuning of the environment, to make sure that 
everything is running smoothly.
The business case for administration
Administration is the glue that holds all of the pieces together. While the businesses 
likely does not understand all of the integrated details of what makes Cognos BI run, 
they are the ones that are utilizing the end results. Without administration, Cognos 
BI doesn't work. There would be no reports or dashboards. There would be no 
studios from which to design reports. Administration is crucial to all of it.
If you find yourself in a situation where you need to help justify an additional 
administrator to a business that may not want to spend money, talk about all of 
the things that have to happen in order to make sure that reports are delivered and 
systems run smoothly. You can use the process of setting security, adding data, and 
monitoring the performance of the system within your business. At the end of the 
day, any Cognos BI environment will only be as good as its administrator.
Summary
In this chapter, we have covered a ton of information for administrators, but there is 
still a ton more we can learn. We have reviewed how to select the right administrator 
as well as how to be administered.
From a technical perspective, we reviewed the Cognos Administration interface. We 
looked at performance monitoring and performance tuning using the Status tab in 
conjunction with the Configuration tab. We looked at how to set up security and 
data sources. We looked at content maintenance and the different uses for it as well 
as some best practices for it. We also looked at how to use advanced routing sets to 
improve performance and better load-balance server requests.
From a business perspective, we addressed the business cases for both performance 
tuning and performance administration.
In the next chapter, we will focus on the best practices for Cognos BI. We will look 
at some tools that are available, to make managing a Cognos BI environment easier, 
and we'll take a deeper look at increasing user adoption and the role that user 
adoption plays in a successful implementation.


Streamlining Common 
Administrator Tasks
This chapter will go into detail about the tools that my current company has 
developed to improve the lives of Cognos administrators, and fulfill regulatory 
requirements around source control within your reporting environment.
In this chapter, the tools we'll talk about are tools that every Cognos administrator 
I have ever spoken with wants. Each and every tool makes sense and makes Cognos 
BI a better product. With that said, they are not free. If you are one of the many 
customers out there that already have these tools in conjunction with your IBM 
Cognos BI installation, then congratulations. This will be a great chapter for you to 
better understand what you have. If you are one of the customers out there that does 
not yet have these tools, I encourage you to prepare yourself to be amazed by how 
much better it can be.
In this chapter, we will look at common Cognos administrator tasks and how they 
can be streamlined or automated using third-party BSP software tools. The BSP 
software's MetaManager has seven logical sections and over 28 modules:
•	
Update: This validates whether reports are working or not, makes bulk 
changes to reports, edits object information, edits prompt information, edits 
report specifications, and more
•	
Blast: This distributes pagelets to end users, distributes standard headers 
and footers to reports, updates preferences in bulk, updates sign-ons in bulk, 
updates schedules in bulk, and more
•	
Secure: This replicates security on objects, users, groups, or roles; edits 
security through a drag-and-drop interface; audits security and access 
permissions; migrates security between namespaces; and more

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 250 ]
•	
Deploy: This backs up content, restores content, moves content directly 
between environments, extracts content from the content store, and more
•	
Document: This searches reports, documents reports, documents the 
environment, documents a model, pushes metadata to reports as screen 
tips, manages Content Store size, and more
•	
Extend: This performs bulk updates on Cognos Framework Manager 
models, connects cubes to Cognos BI in bulk, edits cubes in bulk, runs 
Cognos BI Jobs from the command line, and more
•	
License Auditor: This audits your Cognos BI license usage for free
We will also look at how you can integrate version control into your Cognos BI 
environment to reduce regulatory risks that arise from not maintaining proper 
source control over your IBM Cognos BI reporting and analytics environment. 
Some of the many tasks we will review include:
•	
Bulk updating Framework Manager models
•	
Validating report objects
•	
Bulk updating reports
•	
Applying screen tips to report outputs
•	
Managing security
•	
Distributing portal tabs
•	
Standardizing headers and footers
•	
Backing up, restoring, and deploying content
•	
Documenting content, security, and models
•	
Versioning content
•	
Archiving content outputs
•	
Retrieving deleted content
•	
The business case for add-on tools
Bulk updating Framework Manager 
models
Within BSP Software's MetaManager product, you have the ability to bulk update 
Framework Manager models. Natively in Cognos BI, when you want to make a 
change to a model, it can be cumbersome. Meta Editor was designed to allow for 
quick searching in and updating of these models. To access this module, click on 
the Meta Editor tab of the navigation area as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 251 ]
The first thing that we must do is open a Framework Manager model for editing. We 
can do that by selecting the open icon at the top of the screen next to where it says 
Meta Editor, as shown in the following screenshot:
For the purpose of this example, we will open gosales_goretailers.cpf from the 
Cognos BI samples.
The most powerful features of Meta Editor are the ability to search and the ability to 
perform mass edits. Therefore, we will review both of these abilities here.
First, we will look at the search ability. We can use either the Quick Filter or 
Advanced Filter option as shown in the following screenshot:
We will start by looking at the options available in Quick Filter as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 252 ]
•	
Show Project: This will select the project from the model and allow it to be 
edited in the grid view
•	
Show Namespaces: This will select all the namespaces from the model and 
allow them to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Query Subjects: This will select all the query subjects from the model 
and allow them to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Query Items: This will select all the query items from the model and 
allow them to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Calculations: This will select all the calculations from the model and 
allow them to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Relationships: This will select all the relationships from the model and 
allow them to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Folders: This will select all the folders from the model and allow them 
to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Shortcuts: This will select all the shortcuts from the model and allow 
them to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Dimensions: This will select all the dimensions from the model and 
allow their editing in the grid view
•	
Show Hierarchies: This will select all the hierarchies from the model and 
allow them to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Levels: This will select all the levels from the model and allow them 
to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Measures: This will select all the measures from the model and allow 
them to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Measure Folders: This will select all the measure folders from the 
model and allow them to be edited in the grid view
•	
Show Packages: This will select all the packages from the model and allow 
them to be edited in the grid view
We will walk through an example using query items by following these steps:
1.	 We will first select Show Query Items. 
This will select all the query items in the model and load them into the grid. 
All of the available properties will now be loaded into the grid as well. The 
grayed out properties cannot be edited. The white properties can be edited 
and even edited in bulk. As an example, we can select multiple rows of the 
Description column and copy and paste these descriptions into the Screen 
Tip column. Refer to the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 253 ]
2.	 After copying the descriptions and highlighting the first cell under Screen 
Tip, right-click and choose Paste as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 From within Meta Editor, you can also copy items from the grid out to Excel, 
make mass edits, and then paste them back into Meta Editor.
4.	 To save your Framework Manager model, click on the save icon at the top, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Next, we will look at Advanced Filter options. With Advanced Filter options, 
you can filter within various parts of the model. As an example, we will filter 
within Query Item where the name of the query item contains the product.

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 254 ]
6.	 We will then click on Apply to apply the filter as shown in the 
following screenshot:
With this, we will bring up all the query items that contain the word product. 
We can then proceed to perform mass edits as needed.
Validating report objects
We will now look at validating report objects using the Report Validator option. It is 
a tool that has been designed to allow bulk validations and individual report repairs. 
To access the Report Validator option, select it from Update | Report Validator in 
the navigation section of MetaManager as shown in the following screenshot:
Here you can select one or multiple reports to perform individual or bulk validations. 
For our example, we know that a new Framework Manager model was recently 
published, but we do not know if it has impacted any reports. Therefore, we want to 
begin by validating just a few reports to see if they were affected by the model change. 
To do this, we must first log in to the environment where the model was published. I 
have already set up my environment for the purpose of this book, but if you have not, 
there are details on how to do so within the documentation of MetaManager.
For our example, we will assume that we have made changes to the GO Sales and 
Retailers package. Let's begin by navigating to that package's folder that contains 
Report Studio reports. Follow these steps:
1.	 We will select the first 10 reports by simultaneously pressing Shift and 
clicking on the first report Actual Sales Against Target Sales and tenth 
report Global Sales. This will highlight all 10 reports.

Chapter 11
[ 255 ]
2.	 We will then click-and-drag the 10 reports onto the section that says Drag 
items from the portal tree to this area, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 We can now click on the Validate button at the bottom to see which reports 
are valid and which are not.
4.	 With the changes that we made, we have 9 of our 10 reports showing as 
invalid. If we right-click on one, we can then choose Fix Report to bring up 
a dialog to update the broken reports as shown in the following screenshot:

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 256 ]
The Fix Report dialog will allow you to simply drag-and-drop the new query 
items over the broken expressions for the old ones.
5.	 With our example, we will drag Product lines, Product types, and Product 
names from Products to replace the broken corresponding expressions. 
As we do so, we will see the Xs turn into check marks as shown in the 
following screenshot:
6.	 We can now click on Fix Report to apply the updates to the report.
7.	 Alternatively, we can click on Send to Find/Replace to make these changes 
to the Find/Replace module and apply them across multiple objects.
8.	 To complete the one-time change, we will click on Fix Report. On the Report 
Validator screen, right-click on Banded Report again and choose revalidate. 
Refer to the following screenshot:
We should see that we now have a working report.

Chapter 11
[ 257 ]
Bulk updating reports
In the Find/Replace module, we can perform these same fix options but in bulk. 
The first way that we can do this is through the option that says Load Framework 
Manager Project, as shown in the following screenshot:
By selecting this option, we are prompted to select a Framework Manager model. 
We will select the one where I made changes previously, which is gosales_
goretailers.cpf as shown in the following screenshot:

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 258 ]
In the next screen, Global Name Changer will allow us to select which changes 
from our model we would like to import. We will leave them all and select Import 
as shown in the following screenshot:
As we do so, what happens on the backend is that MetaManager will run an 
advanced search path to find all the objects built off the packages in the Available 
Packages area. It will also load the changes as search and replace strings in the 
bottom section of the module. Refer to the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 259 ]
Now we have the option to either press Preview or Update. Preview will allow us to 
see the impact of our proposed changes before we make them. We can hit Preview 
now to see how making these changes will affect the reports. As you can see, the 
impacted column will say either Yes or No; the Original Status and New Status 
columns will show up on the impacted reports. The status options are OK, Prompt, 
Errors, Warnings, or Exception. Refer to the following screenshot:
The description of each status option is as follows:
•	
OK: This status shows that the report is valid and working.
•	
Prompt: This status shows that the report specifications are valid, but there is 
at least one prompt on the report. If a prompt value is entered that does not 
meet the criteria of the prompt, the report could still fail.
•	
Errors: This status shows that the report specifications are not valid. If you 
click on a report and go to the Details tab at the bottom, you will see why 
the report is not a valid report.
•	
Warnings: This status allows the report to show a warning when the 
validation is run. This may not stop a report from running, but it could 
deliver unexpected results.
•	
Exception: This is a rare status code that will typically show only if none 
of the other statuses are true. When Integrated Control Suite is installed 
in conjunction with MetaManager, this status will show when a report is 
locked or checked out.
In addition to the automatically populated changes, we can also manually enter 
search and replace strings in a variety of places within a report. The options for 
the dropdown on the right-hand side of the search and replace areas include 
many different available search options; they are as follows:
•	
None: This will not perform the replace function. This option can be used 
to see an impact analysis.
•	
DataItem: This will search and replace on DataItem objects within the 
reports only.

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 260 ]
•	
Drill-Through Item: This will search and replace on drill-through items 
within the reports only. This is often used after an environment migration 
is performed.
•	
HTML Item: This will search and replace on HTML items within the reports 
only. This is exceptionally helpful during migrations if Javascript is used in 
the report and if the Cognos BI naming conventions have changed between 
versions.
•	
Image Path: This will search and replace on the image path within the 
reports only.
•	
Package / Cube Reference: This will search and replace on package or cube 
references within the reports. This is very helpful for repointing models to 
a different package after a migration between environments takes place.
•	
Report Expression: This will search and replace on report expressions within 
the reports only.
•	
Text: This will search and replace on text items within the reports only.
•	
Entire Specification: This will search and replace on the entire specification 
of a report.
Applying screen tips to report outputs
If you are using screen tips in your framework manager models and want to 
populate these onto the actual reports, you can do so using the Screen Tip Generator 
module. This is actually a very simple module. All you do is drag the report that you 
want to add screen tips to from the navigation tree on the left-hand side to the area 
on the right-hand side that says Drag items from the portal tree to this area. Then 
you can click on Preview or Update to either see if the report has query items with 
screen tips associated with them or to populate those screen tips to the report.

Chapter 11
[ 261 ]
Managing security
There are a few options to update security with MetaManager. The first option 
is using the Security Painter module. This module allows you to update security 
in bulk on objects, such as reports, report views, packages, folders, or any other 
Cognos Connection object.
To set the security on a set of objects, we will start by dragging-and-dropping the 
objects that we want to secure to the bottom section that says Objects to secure.
 

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 262 ]
We next need to set the security that we want at the top. The reason they call it 
Security Painter is because we can take the security from one object and paint it 
onto other objects. We should start with the existing security of another object by 
dragging that object to the top area. For our example, we are going to drag the GO 
Sales and Retailers package to the top where it says Security to apply. When we 
do so, it will load the security from that GO Sales and Retailers model at the top. 
Refer to the following screenshot:
You can then select and remove security objects and drag in additional security 
items. You can also click once to allow access or twice to deny access for Read(R), 
Write(W), Execute(X), Set Policy(P), and Traverse options(T).
If we then hit Update, it will apply the security at the top to all of the objects at 
the bottom.

Chapter 11
[ 263 ]
In addition to object-level security, we can update capability, group, and role 
security using the Security Editor extended module that allows for a freeform 
drag-and-drop of the security into other security objects. We could also replicate 
security among users or between environments using the Security Replicator 
extended module.
Distributing portal tabs
Portal tab distribution is a key feature of MetaManager. In Cognos BI, portal tabs 
act as dashboards. The greatest dashboard may have been designed and built, but 
Cognos BI does not have an easy way to distribute portal tabs to existing customers. 
That is where the Pagelet Blasters module comes into play. Again, this is a very 
simple module. You can drag users or groups to the bottom. We are going to drag 
Administrator to the bottom from the Directory area. We are then going to perform 
one of the built-in searches. From the Misc folder, we shall select All pagelets in the 
content store. This will perform an advanced search path that will bring back all the 
pagelets that are available in the content store.
You can then select one or more pagelets to drag to the top section and hit Update to 
push the pagelets to the users at the bottom.

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 264 ]
Standardizing headers and footers
Another very simple module is the Template Blasters module. This module is used 
to standardize headers and footers across multiple reports. To do so, find a report 
that has the headers and footers that you like and drag it to the section that says 
Drag & drop source report to this area... on the right-hand side. For the purpose of 
our example, we will drag in the GO Chart report from the GO Sales and Retailers 
package under the GO Template Samples folder. Next, we will drag in the first two 
reports from the Report Studio Report Samples folder and press Update. Refer 
to the following screenshot:
Backing up, restoring, and deploying 
content
The Backup / Restore / Deploy module is designed for content recovery and content 
deployment. The concepts are simple. As a best practice, you should back up content 
periodically. Natively in Cognos BI, this is done through the content export section 
of Cognos administration. The problem with this approach is that it only allows full 
content restoration. With the MetaManager Backup / Restore / Deploy module, you 
can do complete backups or partial backups. You can also do complete or partial 
restores and complete or partial deployments.

Chapter 11
[ 265 ]
You can get into the Backup / Restore / Deploy module from any of the other 
modules by clicking on the Create a backup button at the top of each module, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Once in the module, we will start by creating a backup of some content. While on 
the Backup tab, we will drag in the first 10 reports from the Report Studio Report 
Samples folder. We will then name our backup location and give the file the name 
Backup.mmz. We can add comments to the backup as well and then select the option 
that we want to back up. Refer to the following screenshot:
With this module, it is often scheduled so that backups can happen at set times 
periodically. To schedule the backup, select the save icon in the top-left corner. You 
will be able to give your saved set of parameters a name with the extension .mmz. 
You can then use the command line to run the parameters through MetaManager. 
In addition to this, you can utilize a .bat file to schedule as many .mmz files to run 
as makes sense in your environment.

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 266 ]
For our purposes, we will click on Backup to perform the backup now. You will see 
the names of each object that is being backed up appear in the lower-right section. 
You will also see the status change for each object being backed up until it reaches 
a status called Complete. Refer to the following screenshot:
We will next look at restoring objects that have been changed or deleted. To begin 
with, we will move to the restore section by clicking on the tab at the bottom that 
says Restore.
On this Restore tab, we will need to open a backup to begin restoring. To do so, 
click on the Open a backup button on the right-hand side of the Archive location: 
section as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 267 ]
We can then navigate to the backup that we just created to see the contents that were 
backed up.
Note that the backup will have a date and timestamp appended to the 
end if you left that option checked on the Backup tab. 
To restore an item, simply drag it from the Archive Content section to the lower-
right drop zone and click on Restore as shown in the following screenshot:
One nice feature that is available here in the Restore tab is the ability to deploy 
archived content to another location. To do so, toggle the drop-down list in the 
upper-right corner to another environment. For my example, we will toggle from 
Development to Production. You can now drag any archived content directly into 
the environment navigation tree on the far left-hand side and restore the objects to 
the location you drag to. This will work across environments as well, which is why 
this is the first deployment capability.

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 268 ]
Finally, we will move to the Deploy tab where we can perform true deployments. 
We will re-authenticate to our Development environment by selecting it in the 
drop-down list in the upper-right corner. We will then select the Production 
environment in the drop-down list that is in the middle, to authenticate to it 
simultaneously as shown in the following screenshot:
We can now drag any object from our content store to the section in the middle that 
says Drag objects from the portal tree to this area. For the purpose of illustration, 
we will drag in a report from the GO Sales and Retailers package, a pagelet/
portal tab, a job, and two datasource connections. When we hit Deploy, we will see 
each object status cycle, from Adding, to Retrieving, to Checking, to Auditing, to 
Complete. Refer to the following screenshot:
We have now completed a direct deployment. Direct deployments are not possible 
using IBM Cognos BI natively. Therefore, this is a very worthwhile feature of 
MetaManager if there is a need to move content between different environments 
with any sort of frequency. 

Chapter 11
[ 269 ]
Documenting content, security, and 
models
Documentation is valuable in any environment, but there are environments where 
it is mandatory. Typically, in highly regulated industries such as healthcare or 
financial industries, there are regulations that require a frequent documentation 
of mechanisms that are in place for delivering data. MetaManager incorporates 
documentation around content, security, and models.
Content Documentation
Content documentation is the documentation of anything that lives within 
your content store. This can be packages, folder structures, reports, security, 
or datasource connections. It is often critical that this information is captured. 
MetaManager makes documenting each of these objects very simple using the 
Content Store Documenter module.
Within Content Store Documenter, we can drag objects from our content store 
and drop them in the section that says Drag objects from the portal tree to this 
area. For this example, we can drag in the GO Sales and Retailers package. Next, 
we will need to choose what our output will be. We do this by selecting the folder 
icon to the right-hand side of where it says Specify an output file. Note that we can 
document to HTML, PDF, XML, or text. If you choose XML, you can also provide an 
XSL transform file for transforming the XML file after it is rendered. In the middle 
section, we are able to choose which properties to document and set options for 
documenting security. The attributes list that is available for documentation includes 
all attributes stored in the content store. It is freeform to allow you to select the 
attributes that are most relevant, or you can select all, or select from built-in groups 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 270 ]
We can now select the document to create our content store documentation. When 
we document the GO Sales and Retailers package to PDF with all attributes 
selected, we will see a document that is formatted as PDF and shows each attribute 
beneath each content store object. Refer to the following screenshot:
Security Documentation
Most users who utilize Content Store Documenter end up using it simply to 
look at security and access rights. As a result, an additional module was added to 
MetaManager called Security Auditor. Security Auditor takes only the security 
information from the content store and allows you to dump that information to either 
a delimited text file, Microsoft SQL server, or Oracle, by selecting Delimited Text File, 
Microsoft SQL Server, or Oracle respectively as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 271 ]
MetaManager ships with a Framework Manager model that you can then point to 
the newly created datasource, and a set of reports that allow you to report on your 
security environment. The reports included show things such as who has access to 
what objects and which users are in which groups. Refer to the following screenshot:

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 272 ]
With this module, companies that require strict regulations around access rights 
can begin to identify who in their organization has access to different reports. The 
documentation of this security information to a reportable format can be done on 
a scheduled basis, and by incorporating IBM Cognos BI scheduling, you can have 
reports automatically send out updates with security information on a periodic basis.
Model documentation
The final piece of documentation that we will look at is model documentation. 
MetaManager's Model Documenter allows us to document all attributes of a 
Framework Manager model to HTML, PDF, Excel, or text. With this module, 
we will first open a model by clicking on the folder icon beside where it says 
Select a model file as shown in the following screenshot:
We can now navigate and open the gosales_goretailers.cpf model file.
Note that when we do, all objects in the model start off checked, and all 
languages or other locales available in the model will automatically load 
and highlight to the right-hand side under Filter Locales.
We can choose Select None from the bottom below the locales and then reselect only 
en (English). We can then choose Select All to select all of the options under Filter 
Attributes so that we can document all the attributes of the model. Finally, we can 
name our documentation file by selecting the folder icon to the right-hand side of 
the area that says Specify an output file. Refer to the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 273 ]
We can now select the document to capture all of the attributes and locales selected 
for all of the objects to the file format chosen. Since this is traversing an XML file, 
this documentation is extremely fast and easy to do live. However, it can also be 
scheduled using the save icon at the top.

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 274 ]
Versioning content
Version control is often a requirement within both highly regulated industries and 
companies that want to incorporate best practices for maintaining their reporting 
systems. Unfortunately, IBM Cognos BI does not have a way of versioning content 
out of the box. Integrated Control Suite is a product that was designed for versioning 
content both inside and outside of IBM Cognos BI. This is a patented solution that is 
owned and distributed by Avnet (IBM's largest distributor worldwide). Integrated 
Version Control is a product within this suite that allows the versioning of all objects 
in the content store, and it has been fully integrated into Cognos Connection. It does 
so by seamlessly adding additional icons to the IBM Cognos BI studios. Refer to the 
following screenshot:
Each new icon or button serves a specific purpose. The key thing to note here is 
that the buttons look like part of IBM Cognos BI and therefore can be implemented 
seamlessly for end users.
Image
Icon
Details
Save with 
comments
By clicking on this button, you will be 
prompted to enter information about the 
version you are saving. You can write 
comments, add a change control number, 
or flag the version for deployment to 
another environment.
Lock Report
By clicking on this button, you will lock 
the report you are editing so that no one 
else can save the report until you complete 
your updates and unlock the report. This 
icon will toggle to a locked image once 
selected. In addition to this, if anyone 
opens a locked report, Integrated Control 
Suite broadcast messaging feature will 
alert the user that the report is locked.

Chapter 11
[ 275 ]
Image
Icon
Details
View Revision 
History
By clicking on this button, you will be 
brought to a list of all saved versions. 
You can read or update version comments, 
compare various versions, promote 
versions, or compare versions to those 
that are available in other environments. 
Toggle Sticky 
Notes
By clicking on this button, you will 
open a sticky note that will allow you to 
add a comment on the report for other 
developers. This note cannot be seen 
when the report is rendered. It is only 
viewable within the studio.
Document 
Report
By clicking on this button, you will 
create a PDF documentation of the 
report. This documentation will capture 
prompt, query, and object information 
from the report.
Watch the ICS 
Video Tutorial
By clicking on this button, you will 
launch Integrated Control Suite 
tutorial videos.
In addition to the capabilities available within the studios, there are tons of features 
that are added to the administration area for maintaining Integrated Control Suite. 
Each feature available can be secured so that only certain users will have access to 
any given feature. You can also customize the labels and design of how the tool is 
implemented into your environment. A complete documentation from BSP Software is 
available with this tool. You can read more about it at http://www.BSPSoftware.com.

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 276 ]
Archiving content outputs
Archiving is also available within Integrated Control Suite as a tool called Integrated 
Archive Service. This is a tool that runs on the backend so that end users are oblivious 
to its existence. It is used to shrink the size of growing content stores.
The problem is that IBM Cognos BI is designed in a way that utilizes the same 
database for storing both outputs (that is, Excel or PDF outputs from saved report 
runs) and application settings (that is, what objects are rendered on each screen, 
what objects are in which folders, and which services to use for each part of the 
application to run). A more logical solution would have been to separate these two 
functions. What happens is that as the content store grows with report outputs, 
activities such as folder navigation start to slow down because the database that 
is being used is just too big.
With Integrated Archive Service, stored outputs are moved to a separate database. 
The end result is that the content store size shrinks substantially and IBM Cognos 
BI's performance improves drastically. This feature can be scheduled to search for 
new content and to synchronize completely at regular intervals. You can also select 
what content to archive if you do not want to archive all the content. Additionally, 
you can force an archive to be generated manually.
Retrieving deleted content
We looked at using MetaManager for retrieving deleted content with the Backup 
/ Restore / Deploy module. Within Integrated Control Suite, there is also a tool for 
retrieving deleted content. It is called Integrated Recycle Bin. Much like a recycle bin 
that is utilized in many operating systems, Integrated Recycle Bin allows an end user 
to restore deleted content from the My Recycle Bin area of Cognos Connection. We 
looked briefly at the end user interface for this in Chapter 1, IBM Cognos Connection. 
With Integrated Recycle Bin, the Cognos administrator will also have an interface 
where they can restore content globally. As an administrator, one can say where to 
store deleted content, how often to purge deleted content, and view deleted content 
globally for all users or on an individual user basis.

Chapter 11
[ 277 ]
Within the administration area of Integrated Recycle Bin, an administrator can restore 
deleted content or empty the recycle bin.
The business case for add-on tools
Add-on tools are typically developed to fill gaps that were left during the original 
development of a product. The tools discussed in this chapter are no different. IBM 
Cognos BI is one of the leading tools in the industry for business intelligence, but no 
tool is perfect. One of the common concerns brought up by customers has always 
been around the administration interfaces. MetaManager addresses that concern 
by creating a single interface for performing administration tasks across multiple 
environments. It was purpose-built based on feedback from a variety of large and 
small IBM Cognos customers. Additionally, Integrated Control Suite was designed 
to meet governance, risk, and compliance requirements that exist in many industries 
and within publicly traded companies.
So, why should you consider spending more than you already have? MetaManager 
is going to decrease the time that it takes for Cognos administrators to do their 
jobs. It will also allow your administrators to do things that they are not able to do 
natively within Cognos BI. The end result will be more time for administrators to 
repurpose on more value-adding activities. You will also find that you are able to 
do things that you could not have otherwise done. Documentation, for instance, is 
something that is often overlooked or done halfway. Because documentation takes 
so long, it can be a huge time drain, and in turn, a huge cost that gets added to a 
Cognos BI project. With MetaManager, documentation can be performed more 
frequently with little to no user interaction. In essence, MetaManager allows you 
to automate much of your administration tasks and guarantees accuracy through 
programmatically performing these tasks.

Streamlining Common Administrator Tasks
[ 278 ]
Integrated Control Suite tends to be a more difficult tool to show a return on 
investment on, unless there is a project already underway to improve source 
control within your reporting environment. When you start to compare having 
a fully integrated, automatic source control option to having to manually version 
everything, it is very easy to show a return on investment. If that project does 
not yet exist, it is very likely that it will, as more regulations develop among 
each industry.
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at add-on tools that have been designed for streamlining 
and automating the administration of IBM Cognos BI. We also looked at a suite of 
tools designed to meet regulatory requirements around the versioning of reporting 
systems. We explored the interfaces for each product so that we could better 
understand how to use each once they have been implemented. We addressed all 
the needs of administrators, from content validation to documentation. We also 
looked at how utilizing such tools could be beneficial to the business.
In the next chapter, we are going to take a step back from technical requirements 
and look at practical ones around implementing a reporting system. We will begin to 
explore how to create better user adoption of the technology that we have invested in 
to enable us to make the most of that investment.

User Adoption
This chapter will cover the most important step to a successful implementation, 
that is, user adoption. In the movie The Field of Dreams, Kevin Costner's character 
continued to see the aberration of a baseball player who would say, "If you build 
it, they will come". The reality is, that may only be true in the movies. Adapting a 
new technology is really quite simple, but that is only until the users get involved. 
If only we could build out our perfect Cognos BI environment like the one that we 
see in all of the demos, magically all of the users would flock to it. Unfortunately, in 
reality, user adoption is never that simple. Unlike technology, there is no manual or 
guide to user adoption. Most of us work in an environment where IT and business 
are quite separate. In these types of environments, there is a huge disconnect. This 
can manifest itself as simple issues such as who pays for this technology?, or more 
complex issues such as who owns this technology and who is responsible for its 
success? I want to address practical ways for an IT group implementing Cognos 
BI to increase user adoption and gain business buy-in.
In the Cognos BI world, you can build the greatest reporting system ever, but 
without taking the proper steps, user adoption will never take place. That is why 
we are going to spend an entire chapter just looking at how to encourage user 
adoption. The technical aspects of IBM Cognos BI can be perfect, but without 
the users buying in to the new implementation, your new business intelligence 
initiative will fail.
In this chapter, we will look at:
•	
The first step – executive sponsorship
•	
How to build an internal user community (BICC, BICoE)
•	
Why the right development team matters
•	
How to partner with IBM and the partner community

User Adoption
[ 280 ]
•	
Feedback and its role in the development process
•	
How training is the key to success
•	
The business case for user adoption
The beginning – executive sponsorship
Everyone knows that direction for an organization comes from the top. It is no 
different when implementing a new reporting system. Therefore, the first step to 
success is always going to be to find an executive sponsor.
You may be wondering how to identify the right executive. You could be afraid about 
how you would approach an executive and ask about something like this. You could 
even be concerned that business intelligence is not something that your executives are 
thinking about. The truth is that these are all valid concerns. My best advice is simply 
to listen. According to recent research, most executives are concerned with being able 
to make faster, better-informed decisions. What they may not know is that business 
intelligence is the solution that allows them to do so.
By listening within your organization, you will start to hear these things come up. 
If you do hear something related to data not translating to information well enough, 
that is your cue. You can begin to explain that business intelligence is the way that 
an organization can take the data it collects and convert it into information for 
making decisions.
You should also not be afraid to ask for an executive sponsor. If your company has 
decided that a business intelligence initiative is going to take place, you should ask 
the executives which one of them has the most pressing need for more, accurate 
information. Chances are good that you will have a few volunteers.
Once you identify the right executive sponsor, you should start to develop a plan 
for how you can bring more information to their fingertips. Most executives have 
at least heard of the concept of an executive dashboard. An executive dashboard is 
a summarized view of information that is relevant to an executive. This may be the 
high-level financials per region for a CFO or it could be something more extensive, 
such as top customers and top suppliers for a COO. As a consultant, I always liked to 
start a new initiative with an executive dashboard. Why? Because once an executive 
has meaningful information, they start to want more. Once they have more, they 
want the people that report to them to have more. Once they have more, they want 
their employees to have more. And so on, and so forth until business intelligence 
permeates throughout an organization. 

Chapter 12
[ 281 ]
The reality is that a top-down approach like this leads to a better-implemented 
solution. The numbers that are put together at each level have to roll up to the 
numbers at the top, and suddenly we see organizations making decisions from 
concrete information at each and every level, rather than making decisions based 
on gut instincts or assumptions that are often not true.
In addition to being able to push the business intelligence initiative down the ladder 
from the top, executives also hold the purse strings and are able to cover the costs 
of a new initiative. If you start developing business intelligence in silos within your 
organization, some of the valuable outputs may make their way to the management, 
but possibly not enough to justify the spend in their eyes. For example, if an executive 
has approved a spend of $1,000 to develop an executive dashboard, and they see tons 
of new information as a result, which helps them to perform their jobs better, it is 
easy to justify that spend. On the other hand, if an executive approves spending that 
same $1,000 for a department to develop a report that makes that department more 
efficient, it is much more difficult for the monetary results of that spend to be visible 
to the executive. As a result, you risk losing the funding to continue development.
So, in summary, not only should you find the executive that is willing to sponsor the 
business intelligence project, but you should make them your first internal customer 
as well.
Building an internal user community
Before we dive into building an internal user community, we should look at defining 
what an internal user community is. Within the IBM Cognos BI community, there are 
external user groups. These are typically groups of IBM Cognos BI users from different 
companies that are geographically based and meet periodically to discuss how each 
company is using IBM Cognos BI. An internal user community is very similar, but they 
are all from the same company, and they often contain full-time roles that are designed 
for supporting the overall business intelligence initiative. These groups are often called 
Business Intelligence Competency Centers (BICCs) or Business Intelligence Centers 
of Excellence (BICoEs).
A common misperception is that BICCs and BICoEs are only needed in extremely 
large companies with thousands of IBM Cognos BI users. The reality is that a BICC 
or BICoE would add value to any environment.

User Adoption
[ 282 ]
So, why are these internal user communities so important? There are a few reasons. 
One main reason is that they allow users in the forum to discuss what is going well 
and what is not going well. They also facilitate and encourage new thoughts and 
new innovations within the space. They provide a way for end users to share what 
they are looking for in future development with the business intelligence teams that 
are doing the development. They also allow end users to feel that they have a voice. 
I have found that simply giving end users a voice to share how they feel and what 
they want is one of the biggest steps toward user adoption. The interesting thing is 
that you do not even have to give them what they want in order for it to help. All 
you have to do is allow them to share and show that you are sympathetic to their 
wishes. I'll share an example. I was working for a large insurance company, and we 
were rolling out a new version of Cognos BI company-wide to thousands of users. 
Many of these users had been using the old version of Cognos BI for over 10 years. 
When we announced that we would be taking away their old versions of Cognos 
BI, they simply were not happy. So, we set up a series of meetings with each group, 
as we were leading them through the transition. In almost every session, someone 
from each group would ask if they could stay on the old version and explain why 
it would be better for them if they could. That left us with only a few choices. 
We could let them stay on a version of Cognos BI that was soon not going to be 
supported any longer. Alternatively, we could tell them that we did not care about 
their concerns and they had to move, or we could show them that we did care and 
help them through the transition. We chose the third option. The end result was that 
we were able to identify the reports that many users were afraid of losing, migrate 
those reports to the new system, and teach our users how to access them in the new 
system. In our scenario, staying on the old system was not an option. However, we 
still had a choice on how we would treat our user community. By providing them a 
forum to voice their concerns and addressing rather than ignoring their concerns, 
we were able to create happy end users.
Another approach that we took during that same implementation was to start 
with a pilot group. I am a huge advocate for this approach, because it gives you an 
opportunity to learn through the entire implementation process but on a smaller scale. 
We saw already that the first project should be with executives. The second project 
should be with a group of known users. In general, it is a good idea to start small 
when bringing in a new technology, and that stands true for introducing those new 
technologies to user communities as well. You may have a grand vision of rolling out 
Cognos BI company-wide to 5,000 users, but if you try to push it out to all 5,000 at 
once, you are dooming yourself to fail. 

Chapter 12
[ 283 ]
However, if you start with a small group of your users (and I recommend starting 
with an easy group of known users) and roll Cognos BI out to them, you are doing a 
few very important things such as building internal advocates, developing processes 
for rolling out on a larger scale, and increasing the likelihood of user adoption. Once 
your initial pilot group is successful, their excitement about their new technology 
will start to spread and permeate through the rest of the organization.
To build an internal user community, you also need a means of bringing them 
together. An idea that I have seen in some of the larger implementations I have 
worked on is the development of an internal web page with information about the 
new technology being rolled out. While we are specifically speaking about Cognos 
BI here, an internal site could be effective in the unveiling of any new technology. 
At one of my clients, we provided a very basic website that had a simple calendar, 
a frequently asked questions page, and a contact form for questions or concerns. 
Because the site I was working at had a very large user base, we determined that it 
was best to implement the new Cognos BI technology in phases, and provided key 
dates for each group of users and their rollouts. If you are working in an established 
Cognos BI environment, a site like this could be used to provide a forum for asking 
and answering questions about Cognos BI and for coordinating your internal user 
group meetings.
The right development team matters
Somewhat related to the creation of a BICC or BICoE is the need to choose the right 
team to lead your internal business intelligence initiative. What often happens is 
organizations take purely technical people and put them on business intelligence.
In reality, business intelligence is more than just technical. You absolutely need 
technical skills to be an effective member of a business intelligence team, but you 
also need a business aptitude and a personality that works well in front of others. 
The best members of a business intelligence team will be able to walk the thin line 
between the technology groups and the business groups. What often happens in 
any organization is that business groups do not really understand all of the effort 
and energy that goes into keeping technology running. You will see business 
managers asking for information that simply is not available in the data or that 
is very difficult to get to within the data. Similarly, technology teams will not 
understand the business well enough to know what information is really relevant 
and will make people's jobs easier. That is where the business intelligence team 
should come in. We should be able to bridge that gap and understand both the 
needs of the business as well as the technical requirements to meet those needs.

User Adoption
[ 284 ]
Sadly, what we see in most organizations is that business intelligence is lumped in 
with technology, and as such, technical people are added to the teams, and the gap 
is never bridged. In these types of scenarios, you typically see very project-based 
implementations where a business will want a certain report and the business 
intelligence team will simply be developers of the technology. Unfortunately, 
this is not making the most of Cognos BI.
To make the most of Cognos BI, you want to have a team of people who can be 
thoughtful leaders on how to present the most meaningful information. The business 
intelligence team should be experts in your business, in data visualization, and in 
the Cognos BI technology. New dashboards and reports should be born from within 
the team and not based on project-based requirements. When projects are necessary, 
the business intelligence team should be helping to define the scopes, not simply 
implementing. This is how a well-formed business intelligence team will work. We 
should be business analysts and not only developers.
How to partner with IBM and the partner 
community
So, what happens when your business intelligence team does not look the way 
I just described? That is where partners and IBM consultants come in. Within 
the consulting community, we all aspire to be the kind of resource that I have 
just described. The reality is that very few organizations have more than one 
or two people who are able to understand the business and the technology. 
Thus, enter consultants.
There are a few reasons why you would want to consider partnering with IBM or a 
consulting firm. The first is for very focused projects. Perhaps you are interested in 
rolling out a new executive dashboard using IBM Cognos Workspace (formerly IBM 
Cognos Business Insight). Since the technology is so new, you would have to send 
a team of your internal users for training, just to give them a basic understanding. 
Alternatively, you could bring in a group of consultants to create the new dashboard 
and provide your internal team with hands-on training in the process. From a cost 
and time perspective, this is a far better approach. A further reason you would want 
to partner on focused projects is because they distract your internal team from their 
normal jobs. Most organizations do not have teams of developers sitting around 
waiting for new projects to come in. That is why you partner with consultants. 
Having a consulting company work for 16 weeks a year, instead of paying a full-time 
employee for around 52 weeks but who works for those same 16 weeks is more 
cost-effective.

Chapter 12
[ 285 ]
A second reason to partner is for license purchases. This relates more to partnering 
with a company that resells the vendors' software. Partners are often able to better 
negotiate discounts for clients, because they negotiate with any given vendor more 
frequently. They are also able to further provide discounts by reducing the price 
from within their margin. In addition, they can help clients to better understand the 
complexities of licensing. A key thing to note here is that all partners are not created 
equally. There is a strong tendency for partners to collaborate with the company whose 
products are being sold. This can come across as a way of strong-arming clients during 
negotiations. You want to find a partner that is clearly not getting along with vendor 
during the pricing discussions on your behalf. If they are getting along too well, then 
they are probably collaborating to get the best deal for themselves and the vendor, 
and not for you and your company. At the same time, the partner is not going to do 
anything to hurt their long-term relationship with the vendor. A good partner should 
be a good partner to both the client and the vendor. They should be the dealmaker that 
helps to find the right price that the client can afford and that the vendor can accept.
So, how do you find the right partner? The right partner will be honest. They will tell 
you how things are even if it is not easy. The right partner will be someone that you 
trust when you talk to them. The right partner will be your trusted advisor. You will 
know that you are working with a good partner, because they will answer the tough 
questions. They will be your advocates during discussions with the vendor and they 
will help you accomplish your business goals as if they were their business goals. So, 
the same question again, how do you find the right partner? Talk to other companies 
that are using Cognos BI in your area. There is a good chance that they have one 
that they like or one that they do not like. You can also ask your IBM representative. 
Despite the fact that a good partner will have tension with any given vendor, they 
should also be clearly respected by that same vendor.
So, how do you know if you are not working with the right partner? You should be 
concerned if you do not trust your partner. You should be even more concerned if 
your partner does not trust you. A good partner will give you all of the information 
they have. I have seen many partners play both sides of a negotiation. They will 
hear a vendor representative say that they can discount to X, but then they will tell 
their client a higher number, or they will hear from a client that they want to get to 
a certain price and then they will tell the vendor that exact price. A good partner 
will keep your interests during negotiations and will not try to only increase a deal 
size so that they or their company will make more money or get more recognition. 
In regards to user adoption, you need a partner with an experience of driving user 
adoption in similar environments to your own. A good partner will be able to help 
you address user concerns before they arise. A good partner should also be able to 
have meaningful conversations with the business users that the key people on your 
team should be able to have as well.

User Adoption
[ 286 ]
So, why partner, when you can hire? I think there is a time for using a consultant 
and a time for hiring. The reality is that many of the best resources in the Cognos 
BI space have moved to being consultants, because there is more money in it. 
There are still many very capable Cognos BI people within the business, but they 
are much more few and far between. That is why you should utilize consultants 
for high-value projects. When you get ready to roll out a big, key initiative, use a 
consulting company that has done it before. It will be worth the money, and you 
are likely to deliver a better solution in less time. Conversely, you should not use a 
consulting company for low-value projects. Often, we see large organizations using 
our consultants for staff augmentation. As a consultant, I hate to say this, but it is 
not the best use of your company's money. If you are going to do staff augmentation 
for report development, you should look for people at a much lower rate than most 
IBM Cognos BI consulting companies demand. On the other hand, if you need 
someone that has a lot of experience and who can drive requirements, use a trusted 
consulting company.
Feedback and its role in the development 
process
End users need to have a voice throughout development. The first and possibly 
most important requirement in gaining user adoption is to give your end users a 
voice. Many businesses have embraced an approach where the business pays for 
new technology, thus giving them the ultimate voice, the yay or nay decision. 
While this is an effective way to increase user adoption from the onset, it also 
adds additional issues preventing what may be a best fit for the company and 
often creates a void where enterprise-wide solutions would best reside.
A more sensible way then to give your users a voice might be to provide a weekly vent 
session. When working at the large health insurance company, we provided weekly 
user meetings while undergoing our migration. As I mentioned, many of the people 
we were migrating had been working with the old technology for over 10 years, and 
needless to say, were very reluctant to give it up. By providing them an outlet to voice 
their concerns, we prevented the negative grapevine effect and were able to smoothly 
walk people through the migration process. As a result, we had advocates spreading 
a positive message through the grapevine rather than opposition spreading the 
negative. Essentially, by creating an internal user group, we accomplished two goals; 
we provided the end users a voice and we, as the IT organization, gained a better 
insight into the concerns and goals of our user community.

Chapter 12
[ 287 ]
An important thing to note is that these feedback sessions should be productive, 
but they should not extend projects beyond their original scope. In the consulting 
world, we call this scope creep. It is very common for a project to grow as it is being 
delivered, and this often causes projects to go over budget. Therefore, it is important 
to sit down with your end users and define exactly what will be delivered during 
any particular project or phase of a project. You should then set up weekly status 
meetings where you review where you, as the developer, are in the process. You can 
also review specific deliverables and try to get a sign off. It is crucially important 
that if any new requirement comes up, it is identified as a new requirement and 
an additional budget is allocated for providing it. Alternatively, new requirements 
should be sidelined for future phases of a project. Not calling these out as they arise 
result in projects that run long or over budget. Remember that feedback is a two-way 
communication. While your end users should be providing feedback to you on how 
your development efforts are going, you should also be providing open and honest 
feedback as issues arise.
One area that many development teams struggle with is addressing issues head on. 
It is very common for a project to come to a planned end only to find out that there 
are many undelivered deliverables. Most of the time, these are not issues that have 
suddenly come up but are issues that came up throughout the project. In the weekly 
status meetings, you should identify issues that have come up during the week and 
either work towards a solution or remove the effected deliverables. The last thing 
that any project should have is surprise. Everything will not go perfectly in every 
implementation, but that does not give anyone an excuse to not communicate the 
issues to the business users that are sponsoring the project.
Training is the key to success
The last area of user adoption that we shall discuss is training. A well-trained 
end user is a happy end user. Many companies spend thousands and thousands 
of dollars on IBM Cognos BI software, then thousands and thousands more 
on implementing the software, and then they turn it over to an untrained user 
community. The sad reality is that they wonder why their newest software solution 
is not being utilized. People need to be trained. IBM Cognos BI is a very user-friendly 
piece of business intelligence software. However, businesses still need to take 
the time and invest the money in training their users. Not doing so would be like 
building a multi-million dollar professional football field and then sending a group 
of untrained junior high football players to play on it. It would not make sense. 

User Adoption
[ 288 ]
If you are going to invest the money in the software and the implementation, you 
should invest the money in your people as well. That is what training is and why 
it is key to user adoption. It is investment in people. The people that you want to 
have using your IBM Cognos BI software want to see that you are willing to help 
them to be successful in doing so.
I recommend coming up with a custom training plan to fit your environment. At 
the minimum, you want to train your administrators to implement best practice 
administration methods. You should also spend the money to provide Report Studio 
training to your developers. When you get to end users, it is debatable whether or not 
training is required. Many companies choose not to train end users due to the high 
cost of doing so. In most environments, around 90 percent of your users are Cognos 
consumers or enhanced consumers that only run reports or may schedule reports to 
run or interact with a Workspace dashboard. These users should be trained or your 
company is wasting the investment they have made in their licenses.
The question then comes up, are there less-expensive ways to train a large user 
base? The answer is yes. The default way to provide training is to send your 
administrators, developers, and end users for training at an IBM facility. These 
training classes are great, but they can be very expensive. I recommend that it 
is best to provide classroom -based training for your administrators and your 
developers, but that you utilize computer-based training (CBT) for your end 
users. In addition, you can organize for a training class to be conducted onsite 
at your facility either through IBM or through a partner for a fraction of the cost 
of sending your developers and administrators to the other training classes that 
are available. The end result is that you will be better utilizing your investment 
in the software by investing in your people, and by doing so in a smart way, 
you can be more cost-effective.
The business case user adoption
It feels kind of weird to write a business case for user adoption, because the users are 
typically the business people. With that said, it is actually a pretty easy business case to 
write. If we were running a line of business, and we had just shared in the investment 
to add a business intelligence tool, we would want to be trained. Chances are good that 
we have seen the marketing for IBM Cognos BI and seen some demos of how great the 
final reports or dashboards can look, but we want to understand how do we get to that 
information. If we are going to be developing basic reports, how do we do so? More 
importantly, we want the people on our team to be excited about this new investment. 

Chapter 12
[ 289 ]
We have made this investment, because we think it is going to improve the way 
that we do business. We think that it is going to make it easier for employees to 
make decisions that improve our business. So, we want those people to be excited 
about using the software. With that in mind, we think business leaders want to see 
technology that they have invested in to be adopted.
The difficulty in justifying some of the investments in user adoption is that the 
results are much less tangible. How do you measure user adoption? There are a 
few ways to do so. One example is through taking end user satisfaction surveys. 
Alternatively, asking end users questions about how easy the software is to use 
could help us prove the value of user adoption. Unfortunately, you will never be 
able to tie user adoption to the bottom line. What you will be able to do, however, 
is show a better return on your investment in the software by seeing the software 
more widely used. That alone makes it worth the investment to drive user adoption.
Summary
Finally and in reiteration, we are being provided a lot of information. Each of the 
points we discussed earlier hits on this position, but the premise is simple; the 
more we know, the more empowered we feel. After all, knowledge is power, right? 
Therefore, look for more ways to empower your end users with knowledge. This 
may manifest itself as a demo or training for the software, the website idea we 
discussed already, or through internal user group meetings. Regardless of which 
mechanism you choose, the more your end users are informed, the more likely 
they are to conform to the new standard you have put in place.
In this book, we have covered both the technical and the business side of IBM 
Cognos Business Intelligence V10. We have walked through the user interfaces 
and the development interfaces, as well as reviewed some third-party solutions 
and the user adoption. Now you are equipped to start utilizing IBM Cognos 
Business Intelligence V10 fully.


Index
A
Actions area  23
Active Reports
building  176, 177
components, choosing  177-183
items  159, 160
add-on tools
business case  277
administration
business case  247
administration interface
navigating  226, 227
Administration option  11
administrator
requirements  226
advanced options interface  20
Area Chart  109
B
Back button  175
Backup / Restore / Deploy module  265, 276
Bar Chart  109
BICC  150
BICCs  281
BICOE  150
BICoEs  281
BlackBerry phones
Cognos Mobile  55
Blast  249
block, object  156
Browse... button  143
business case, Cognos Framework Manager
problem  223
solution  223
Business Intelligence (BI)  150
Business Intelligence Center of Excellence. 
See  BICOE
Business Intelligence Centers of Excellence. 
See  BICoEs
Business Intelligence Competency Center. 
See  BICC
Business Intelligence Competency Centers. 
See  BICCs
C
CAF  232
Calculate button  113
CBT  288
Chart button  113, 175
chart, object  157
Cognos Active Reports
business case  48
interacting with  49, 61, 62
navigating through  52, 53
opening  49-51
Cognos Analysis Studio
accessing  90, 91
business case  114
need for  89
Cognos Analysis Studio reports
saving  113
sharing  113
Cognos Application Firewall. See  CAF
Cognos Framework Manager
business case  223
Cognos Mobile
about  55
business case  64
features  56-60

[ 292 ]
future  63
on BlackBerry phones  55
Cognos Query Studio
accessing  68, 69
business case  88
need for  67
Cognos ReportNet. See  CRN
Cognos Report Studio
about  149
accessing  150, 151
business case  183-185
need for  149, 150
report types  152, 153
Cognos Workspace
about  25
business case  42, 43
option  29
Cognos Workspace Advanced
accessing  119-124
business case  146
comparing, with Cognos Analysis 
Studio  118, 119
comparing, with Cognos Query 
Studio  118, 119
need for  117, 118
Cognos Workspace splash screen  28
Cognos Workspace toolbox
image  35
my inbox  35
RSS Feed  35
Select Value Filter  35
Slider Filter  35
Text  35
Web Page  35
Column Chart  109
computer-based training. See  CBT
conditional blocks, object  158
Condition Explorer pane  156
Configuration tab  227
content
adding  29-34
backing up  264-268
deploying  264-268
exporting  238-243
importing  238-243
restoring  264-268
versioning  274, 275
content documentation  269
content outputs
archiving  276
Content pane  34
content types
adding  29-34
CRN  7
crosstab, object  157
crosstab space, object  157
Custom Set button  113
D
dashboard
sharing  41, 42
data business view
designing  205-215
data database view
designing  192-194
metadata sources, options  196-205
data end user view
designing  215-220
Data Format icon  165
data source connections
adding  237, 238
Default Card field  182
Delete button  112
deleted content
retrieving  276, 277
Delete icon  80
Delete key  80
Delivery option  19
Deploy  250
Deploy tab  268
Diagram view  203
dimension  91
Display button  113
Document  250
drag-and-drop interface
calculate option  85
calculation, creating  77-79
Chart button  86
charts, incorporating  83, 84
collapse button  86
content, inserting in report  72-75
cut option  85
delete option  85

[ 293 ]
drill-down option  85
drill-up option  85
expand button  86
filter option  85
filters, adding  76, 77
Goto option  85
Group button  86
paste option  85
pivot button  86
redo option  85
report, formatting  79-82
run option  85
sections button  86
sort option  85
style toolbar options  86
summarize option  85
suppress option  85
swap button  86
undo option  85
ungroup button  86
drag-and-drop interface, 
Cognos Report Studio
about  153
buttons  174, 175
Condition Explorer pane  156
conditions, setting up  172
data, adding to report  164-170
Insertable Objects pane  154
objects, adding to report  156-164
Page Explorer pane  155
prompt, adding  173
Properties pane  154
Query Explorer pane  155
Query Explorer, using  171
drag-and-drop interface, Cognos 
Workspace Advanced
calculations, creating  139, 140
data, adding to report  130-136
drill down feature  137, 138
exploring  124
insertable objects  125
objects, adding to report  124-130
other buttons  140-142
Palette  125
toolbars  124
drag-and-drop interface, of Cognos Analysis 
Studio
about  93
calculations, creating  105-108
chart type, choosing  108-111
context filters, adding  94, 95
data, expanding  96-101
data, navigating through  96-101
dimensions, inserting  93, 94
existing dimension, nesting below  104, 105
existing dimension, nesting with  102, 103
existing dimension, replacing  102
measures, inserting  93, 94
other buttons  112, 113
Drill button  175
drill-down  26
drill-through  26
dynamic text   156
E
executive
identifying  280, 281
Extend  250
external data
using  142-146
F
feedback  286
field set, object  156
Filter button  112, 175
filtering
adding  34, 37
Cognos Workspace toolbox  35
Filter Locales  272
Fix Report dialog  256
folder structures  11, 12
footers
standardizing  264
format
options  38
formatting
changing  37-41
Forward button  175
Framework Manager models
bulk updating  250-253

[ 294 ]
G
Go To button  112
Group button  175
H
headers
standardizing  264
Headers/Footers button  175
hierarchy  92
hover-over  27
HTML items, object  158
I
IBM
partnering with  284, 285
IBM Cognos Connection
about  7
business case  23
folder structures  11, 12
my area  13-16
reports, running  17-21
reports, scheduling  21
searching  17
web-based reporting  8
welcome page  8-11
image, object  157
Initializing View  52
Insertable Objects pane  154
internal user community
building  281, 282
J
jobs
creating  22
K
Key Performance Indicators (KPI)  10
L
layout calculation, object  157
License Auditor  250
Line Chart  40, 109
Loading Resources....  52
Lock button  174
M
map, object  157
measure  92
Merge button  176
metadata
about  70-72, 187
business metadata  188
process metadata  188
query items  71, 72
query subject  70, 71
technical metadata  187
metric  26
MHT files
about  46
cons  47
pros  46
reading  46
model design project
audience  190
design model  191
information, gathering  188, 189
link, building  189, 190
managing  188
slow start  190
three-tier approach  191
model documentation  272, 273
multidimensional data
about  91, 93
dimension  91
hierarchy  92
measure  92
My Actions options  10
my area  13-16
My Content options  9
My Watch Items  13
N
New button  112
New Export icon  239
New Import icon  242

[ 295 ]
O
objects
copying  22
cutting  22
deleting  22
pasting  22
Open button  112
Order Information query  218
P
package
about  12
publishing  220-222
Page Explorer pane  155
Pagelet Blasters module  263
Palette property  179
Pareto Chart  109
performance tuning
business case  246
permissions  236
Pie Chart  109
Pivot button  175
Play button  174
Point Chart  109
portal tabs
distributing  263
Position field  167
Presentation View  221
Prompt button  175
Properties window  36
Public Folders location  87
Publish Wizard  221
Q
Query calculation, object  157
Query Explorer pane  155
query items  72
query subjects  71
Quick Filter
options  251, 252
Quick tour option  11
R
Radar Chart  109
R&D  63
Redo button  112
repeater table, object  157
report objects
validating  254-256
reports
bulk updating  257-259
running  17, 19, 21
saving  87
scheduling  21
sharing  87
reports outputs
screen tips, applying  260
report types, Cognos Report Studio
Active Report  153
blank  152
Blank Active Report  153
chart  152
crosstab  152
financial  152
list  152
map  152
Repeater Table  153
report views
creating  22, 23
request routing
routing sets, using  243-245
Research and Development. See  R&D
Restore tab  266
Rich text item, object  158
right-click menu. See  drag-and-drop 
interface
right team
selecting  283
Run button  112
S
Save as button  112
Save button  112
Search button  112

[ 296 ]
searching  17
search options  259
Section button  175
Secure  249
security
managing  261-263
security documentation  270-272
security model
CAF  232
capabilities  234
Cognos BI security  233, 234
designing  231
external security  232
working  234-236
Security Painter module  261
Security tab  227
self-service dashboard
about  25
drill-down  26
drill through  26
hover-over  27
metric  26
singleton, object  158
Sort button  112, 175
Split button  176
Stacked charts  110
static text   156
Status tab
about  227
Batch report service  229
Content manager service  229
Report data service  229
report service  228
system, monitoring  228
Subtotal button  112
Summary button  175
Suppress button  112, 175
Swap button  113, 175
system
performance tuning  229-231
T
Table button  175
table, object  156
text item, object  156
Top/Bottom button  112
Total button  113
training  287
U
Undo button  112
Up button  175
Update  249
URLs
creating  22
Usage, types
attribute  212
fact  212
Identifier  212
user adoption
about  279
business case  288, 289
executive  280, 281
feedback  286
internal user community  281, 282
right team selection  283
training  287, 288
V
Validate button  255
Visual Aids button  174
W
web-based reporting  8
welcome page  8-11
X
XML button  174


Thank you for buying 
IBM Cognos Business Intelligence
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give 
you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get 
the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in 
the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving 
you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. 
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order 
to continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home 
to books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including 
(but not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles 
will offer information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, 
developers, architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like 
to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning 
editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

IBM Cognos Insight
ISBN: 978-1-849688-46-8             Paperback: 142 pages
Take a deep dive into IBM Cognos Insight and learn 
how this personal analytics tool can be integrated 
with other IBM Business Analytics products
1.	
Step-by-step, how to guide, for installing and 
configuring IBM Cognos Insight for your needs 
2.	
Learn how to build Financial, Marketing and 
Sales workspaces in Cognos Insight 
3.	
Learn how to integrate and collaborate with 
IBM Cognos Business Intelligence
IBM Websphere Portal 8: Web 
Experience Factory and the Cloud
ISBN: 978-1-849684-04-0             Paperback: 474 pages
Build a comprehensive web portal for your company 
with a complete coverage of all the project lifecycle 
stages
1.	
The only book that explains the various phases 
in a complete portal project life cycle 
2.	
Full of illustrations, diagrams, and tips with 
clear step-by-step instructions and real time 
examples 
3.	
Take a deep dive into Portal architectural 
analysis, design and deployment 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

IBM Cognos Business 
Intelligence 10.1 Dashboarding 
Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-849685-82-5             Paperback: 206 pages
Working with dashboards in IBM Cognos BI 10.1: 
Design, distribute, and collaborate
1.	
Exploring and interacting with IBM Cognos 
Business Insight and Business Insight Advanced 
2.	
Creating dashboards in IBM Cognos Business 
Insight and Business Insight Advanced 
3.	
Sharing and Collaborating on Dashboards 
using portlets 
IBM DB2 9.7 Advanced 
Administration Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-849683-32-6            Paperback: 480  pages
Over 100 recipes focused on advanced administration 
tasks to build and confi gure powerful databases with 
IBM DB2
1.	
Master all the important aspects of 
administration from instances to IBM’s 
newest High Availability technology 
pureScale with this book and e-book. 
2.	
Learn to implement key security features 
to harden your database's security against 
hackers and intruders. 
3.	
Empower your databases by building 
efficient data configuration using MDC 
and clustered tables.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

