www.allitebooks.com

IBM Lotus Notes and  
Domino 8.5.3: Upgrader's Guide
Upgrade your system and embrace the exciting  
new features of the IBM Lotus Notes and  
Domino 8.5.3 platform
Tim Speed
Barry Rosen
Scott O'Keefe
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
 
www.allitebooks.com

IBM Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3: Upgrader's Guide
Copyright © 2012 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: January 2010
Second published: January 2012
Production Reference: 1190112
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
Livery Place 
35 Livery Street 
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84968-394-4
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Tina Negus (tina_manthorpe@sky.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Warning and disclaimer
Every effort has been made to make this book as complete and accurate as possible, 
but no warranty or itness is implied regarding any information and/or products 
referenced in this book. The authors, at the time of publishing, are employees of IBM. 
The IBM Corporation provides a set of rules regarding publishing that applies to 
each employee. The IBM employees followed each of these rules as stated by IBM. 
Based on those rules the following statements are listed:
• 
This book is not directly sponsored by IBM/Lotus or ISSL
• 
The IBM employees received IBM legal permission to publish this book using 
an outside IBM Press publisher
• 
The products referenced or mentioned in this book are listed for 
informational purposes only
The publisher and authors do not recommend any product, software, or hardware. 
You, the owner of your hardware, software, and data are responsible to make 
a determination of what is best for you and your company. The authors advise 
that you take careful consideration in determining your software; security and 
infrastructure needs.
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Authors
Tim Speed
Barry Rosen
Scott O'Keefe
Reviewers
Vic Ross
Stephen Silk
Acquisition Editor
Kerry George
Development Editor
Susmita Panda
Technical Editor
Vrinda Amberkar
Copy Editors
Brandt D'Mello
Neha Shetty
Project Coordinator
Vishal Bodwani
Proofreaders
Bernadette Watkins
Linda Morris
Indexer
Tejal Daruwale
Graphics
Valentina D'Silva
Manu Joseph
Production Coordinator 
Melwyn D'sa
Cover Work
Melwyn D'sa
www.allitebooks.com

Foreword
It's hard to believe that it has been over 22 years since the irst release of Lotus 
Notes was shipped! In an era where software technology continues to evolve at 
unprecedented speed, and software companies, products, and standards come and 
go, it is a signiicant accomplishment that Lotus Notes is just as relevant today as it 
was back in 1989.
Over the years, Lotus Notes has continued to embrace new technologies and open 
standards, all the while providing compatibility for previous releases. Backed 
by a strong and vibrant community of business partners and developers, Lotus 
Notes social and real-time collaboration features allow you to build relationships, 
and leverage your current investments, to create new opportunities for growth, 
innovation, and productivity.
The latest release of IBM Lotus Notes and Lotus Domino continues to expand its  
rich client ecosystem with forward-thinking, out-of-the-box features that are both 
cost-effective and innovative, provides integrated collaboration on multiple devices, 
and allows for rapid application development, while maintaining the highest quality 
in the industry.
New to Notes/Domino 8.5.3 is a companion product entitlement via Notes Client 
Access License (CAL). This allows entitlement to Lotus Connections Files and 
Proiles for Lotus Notes which exposes customers to new technology that allows 
them to become a social business.
This book will cover the following enhancements to IBM Lotus Notes and Domino 
8.5.3 in the following areas:
Mail, Calendaring, Contacts, iNotes, and Designer.
www.allitebooks.com

Written by some of the senior architects and specialists of IBM Software Services 
for Lotus, this book will provide you with an excellent guide to help you realize 
the value of your investment in Lotus Notes 8.5.3. You will learn how to leverage 
the full capabilities of Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and how to quickly move from your 
existing technology base to this new, feature-rich platform. The authors explore the 
enhanced productivity tools available with this release, integrating word processing, 
presentations, and spreadsheets into a seamless unit with your messaging and 
collaboration solution.
Developers are not forgotten, as new features and tools are revealed. You will delve 
into the world of SOA, as the authors show you how Lotus Notes can be part of an 
SOA strategy that can accelerate your business integration and generate value. The 
book inishes with a few words about other Lotus products, such as Lotus Sametime, 
Lotus Quickr, Lotus Connections, and IBM WebSphere Portal—such as IBM Lotus 
Notes, all built on the open standards-based Eclipse Rich Client Platform (RCP) 
technology. These products are all converging to become the next generation of 
people productivity solutions.
Over the years, Lotus Notes has come to signify the essence of electronic business 
communications. With Lotus Notes 8.5.3, IBM has once again provided the user 
with an intuitive, fully integrated platform to enhance each user's experience with 
business communications. It is no longer just an e-mail tool, but a basis to extend 
business communications to a new level.
I hope you ind this book valuable as you continue your journey with IBM Lotus 
Notes and Lotus Domino 8.5.3.
Brent A. Peters
Vice President of Product development for Notes/Domino/iNotes/LotusLive 
Notes/Expeditor/Symphony
IBM Lotus Software Development
www.allitebooks.com

About the Authors
Tim Speed is an IBM Certiied Systems Architect with IBM Software Services 
for Lotus. In that capacity, he is responsible for designing, implementing, and 
supporting various engagements with its clients. Mr. Speed lives in Texas and has 
been an IBM/Lotus employee for over 16 years in a variety of networking, technical, 
hardware, and software support and consulting positions. He has been working with 
Notes for over 20 years focusing on administration roles and infrastructure. He also 
has international experience with working on infrastructure engagements in Spain, 
Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, the UK, and Indonesia.
Knowledge is based on many different facets—what you know, 
knowing where information can be found, and who you know. The 
information in this book is a combination of all these facets. Data 
sources have been referenced in this book; these include references 
to people, URLs, and other books. But much of the knowledge that is 
in this book comes from very smart people. Not all the people listed 
in this acknowledgment participated in the writing of this book, but 
have inluenced and guided me in my life that has culminated in 
this work. First and foremost, I need to thank my wife for helping 
me with the book and providing some of the editing throughout the 
various chapters. Next, I want to thank Johnny and Katherine for 
tolerating me during the months that I worked on this book. Next, 
I want to thank my mother, Lillian Speed, for teaching me to "think 
big". Thanks to Ed Speed for the inspiration to keep publishing. 
Thanks to Packt, in particular Kerry George, for their hard work in 
getting this book published.
www.allitebooks.com

Thanks to all the co-authors – you ALL did a great job! 
 
Special thanks to Lotus/IBM (and ISSL), Martin Crotty, Mark J. 
Guerinot, Larry Berthelsen, Chris Cotton, Steven Stansel, Mark 
Steinborn, and Bob McDonald for their assistance in getting this 
book published. Special thanks to Victor Ross for his review. 
Many thanks to Brent Peters for writing the foreword to this book. 
Special thanks to the following: Gail Pilgrim, Jason Erickson, Jeff 
Jablonowski, John Allessio, Boris Vishnevsky, Adam Hanna, Brad 
Schauf, Scott Souder, David Byrd, Paul Raymond, David Little, Craig 
Levine, Mark Harper, Jeff Pinkston, Jordi Riera, Dave Erickson, 
David Bell, Mark Leaser, Dr. Fred Dahm, Gary Wood, John Kistler, 
Luc Groleau, Michael Dennehy, Robert Thietje, Francois Nasser, 
Kim Artlip, Marlene Botter, Mike Dudding, Stephen Cooke, Don 
Nadel, Tom Agoston, Carl Baumann, the very brilliant Dr Seshagiri 
Rao, Alistair Rennie, Tim Cardwell, Andrea Waugh Metzger, Barry 
Rosen, Bennie Gibson, Beth Anne Collopy, Keith Attenborough, 
Bill Hume, Brent A. Peters, Ivan Dell'Era, Carlos Gonzale, Charles 
K. DeLone, Don Bunch, the great Chuck Stauber, David R. Hinkle, 
Doug Parham, Kelly Ryan, the very smart Frederic Dahm, Gary 
Ernst, Gary Desmarais, Hissan C Waheed, Ian Reid,  Jay Cousineau, 
Jayasree Gautam, Anthony (Joey) Bernal, Cynthia Oehmig, Dr. 
John Lamb, and special thanks to another very smart dude – "John 
Norton"; also thanks to Steve Mark, Joseph Anderson, Joyce 
Cymerman, Katherine Holden, Kathleen Kulkoski, Kevin Lynch, 
Michael Dudding, Lauri Jones, Marc Galeazza, Marco M.Noel, Mark 
Leaser, Marlene Botter, Mary Ellen Zurko, Naemi Engler, John 
Munnel,  Paul Raymond, Peter Burkhardt,  Robert Thietje, Sherry 
Price, Stephen Hardison, Tony Cusato, Steve Matrullo, Steven J 
Amadril, Terry Fouchey, Victor Ross, and William Destache.
www.allitebooks.com

Barry Rosen is an IBM IT Certiied Managing Consultant with IBM Software 
Services for Lotus. During the last six years, he has worked on several global 
messaging and migration projects as well as performed Domino upgrades, 
messaging assessments, and client deployments. Currently, Mr. Rosen has been 
heavily involved in LotusLive Notes cloud migrations and hybrid deployments. 
Prior to IBM Software Services for Lotus, he was a Software Engineer in Lotus 
Support for over ive years. While in support, Mr. Rosen was on several teams 
specializing in mail routing, Lotus Notes Client, calendaring and scheduling, and 
server core. Mr. Rosen is an SME on clustering, Lotus Notes for the Macintosh, and 
rooms and resources. Mr. Rosen is also a published author with several articles and 
books written on Lotus products.
There are so many people that I want to thank for their help. First, 
I would like to thank Packt Publishing, for publishing this book. 
Thank you to my wonderful family. Thanks to IBM where I have 
been allowed to grow personally and professionally. My manager, 
Martin Crotty, and John Kistler for approving this book, and all of 
their support. My co-authors who have poured countless hours and 
energy into making this book a reality. Tim Speed, without whom 
this book would not exist. Tim, it seems like yesterday we were 
eating lunch in Rockefeller Plaza brainstorming on this book. Thanks 
for your patience and gentle nudging, you have helped me grow 
personally and professionally beyond my own expectations. My 
Mother, Father, brother, and grandparents. To all of my colleagues 
and friends: Mark Guerinot, Chris Cotton, David Bell, Andrea 
Waugh-Metzger, Sherry Price, Doug Parham, Bob Thietje, Larry 
Berthelson, John Norton, Marc Hendricks, Jim Price, Yasmin Al-
Shibib, Marc Allan, Matt Stien, Michael Granit, Stephen Rafoul,  
Seth Berk, Rob Buchwald, Aaron Greenberg, and Scott Sapire.  
Stella you too.
www.allitebooks.com

Scott O'Keefe is an IBM Advisory Software Engineer and the project lead for the 
Domino Coniguration Tuner. He joined IBM via Iris Associates in 1999 and has 
been a part of the Domino Administration team since 2001. In addition to DCT, Scott 
works on Domino monitoring, system administration template development and 
LotusLive Notes.
I'd like to thank Tim Speed and Barry Rosen for the opportunity 
to work on this book.  I'd also like to thank all of my Domino 
Administration buddies past and present for being great colleagues, 
mentors, friends, and inspirations. 
 
My portion of this book is dedicated to my wife Tricia, and my 
children Kasey, Matthew and Molly. The best part of my day – every 
day – is the part that I get to spend with you.
 

About the Reviewers
Victor Ross is a senior. IT Specialist with IBM Software Services for Lotus (ISSL). 
In that position, Vic is responsible for assessing, designing, building, testing, and 
implementing collaborative solutions for customers. Vic has been an IBM employee 
for three and a half years. He has been working with Lotus Notes/Domino for over 
17 years including application design/development, messaging and collaboration 
systems management, and technology upgrade, replacement, and migration.
Stephen Silk lives in Australia, where he started his IT career as a mainframe 
operator, taught himself to code using Clipper, and ended up working in OS/2 
support for IBM where he discovered Notes/Domino and has been working  
with it ever since.
He has worked as an administrator, developer, and trainer for such companies 
as IBM, Barclays Bank, Orica, Dimension Data, Dialog and more government 
departments than he wants to remember.
He likes cats and wants to move to Canada (preferably British Columbia) at  
some point. He is happy to travel and is available for consulting work worldwide.

www.PacktPub.com
Support iles, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support iles and downloads related to  
your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub iles 
available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print book 
customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at service@
packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range 
of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com 
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book library. 
Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
• 
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• 
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
• 
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib 
today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for immediate access.
Instant Updates on New Packt Books
Get notiied! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on 
Twitter, or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.



To Linda Speed - my loving split apart 
- Tim Speed
I would like to dedicate this book to my family who has offered their incredible  
support and patience to me. My wife Micol, and my daughter Samantha you are  
my world and I love you both dearly. 
- Barry Rosen


Table of Contents
Preface 
1
Chapter 1: Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA 
7
What is an SOA? 
7
The characteristics of an SOA 
8
Perspectives on SOAs 
9
Why SOAs now? 
9
The SOA lifecycle 
10
The Model phase 
11
The Assemble phase 
11
The Deploy phase 
12
The Manage phase 
12
How Lotus Notes 8.5.3 works with SOAs 
12
Composite applications 
13
Lotus Notes (version 8 and 8.5.3) and web services 
21
Lotus Notes 8.5.x and open technologies 
22
OASIS/ODF 
22
Eclipse 
23
Summary 
23
Chapter 2: Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features 
25
Lotus Notes 8.0 
25
User interface enhancements 
26
Open list menu 
27
Toolbars 
28
Uniied preferences 
28
Windows management and tabs 
29
Advanced menus 
30
Ofline applications 
32
Search center 
32
Mail features 
34
Action bar 
34

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Horizontal and vertical preview panes 
34
Mail threads 
35
Conversations view 
36
Mail header options 
37
Improved Out-of-Ofice functionality 
42
Calendar features 
42
View navigation 
42
Action bar 
43
All-day events 
44
Managing new invitations from your Calendar view 
44
Showing cancelled invitations in your calendar 
45
Checking schedule 
46
Locating free time for a subset of invitees 
46
Contacts 
47
Contact form 
47
Business Card view 
50
Recent Contacts view 
50
Lotus Notes 8.5 
51
User interface enhancements 
51
Mail features 
54
Calendar features 
56
Calendar federation 
56
Repair calendar 
58
Contacts 
58
Importing 
59
Exporting 
59
Forwarding 
59
Key software changes 
59
Notes Shared Login 
60
Notebook 
60
Lotus Notes 8.5.1 
61
Mail features 
61
Calendar features 
65
Rich Text Editor 
68
Replication and synchronization 
69
Widgets and Live Text 
70
General changes 
72
Lotus Notes 8.5.2 
73
Network optimization 
73
Fail over/fail back 
74
Serviceability 
74
Mail features 
74
Contacts 
75
Calendar and to-do enhancements 
76
Replication and synchronization 
77

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Managed Replica 
77
Lotus Notes 8.5.3 
78
Mail features 
78
Sorting by Subject 
78
Signature option 
79
Search functionality 
79
New mail notiication 
80
Type-ahead 
81
Contacts 
81
Calendar and to-do enhancements 
81
iCal functionality 
82
Countered Meetings 
82
Auto-processing 
83
Deployment enhancements 
84
Single-user to multiuser migration tool 
84
Widgets and Xpages 
85
General changes 
85
Embedded components 
86
Exchange Migration Tool 
86
LotusLive Notes 
86
LotusLive Notes enhancements 
86
Summary 
87
Chapter 3: Productivity Tools 
89
Productivity tools integration with Lotus Notes 8.5.3 
90
Symphony and Domino policies 
91
Lotus Symphony Documents 
92
Lotus Symphony Presentations 
93
Lotus Symphony Spreadsheets 
93
Lotus Symphony 3.0 
94
New features 
95
Enhancements 
95
Summary 
95
Chapter 4: Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features 
97
End user and messaging enhancements 
98
Message recall 
98
"Out-of-Ofice" messages 
99
Enhanced support for the mail thread feature 
100
Automated inbox cleanup 
101
Reverse-path setting for forwarded messages 
102
Rejecting ambiguous names and denying mail to groups 
103
Administration enhancements 
104
The end user renaming process 
105
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
The Administration Process (AdminP) 
105
The AdminP statistics 
106
Domino Domain Monitoring (DDM) 
106
Domino Coniguration Tuner (DCT) 
106
WebSphere Services probe 
106
LDAP search reporting 
107
The Common Actions quick access feature 
108
The By Database view 
108
Performance enhancements 
109
Streaming cluster replication 
109
New ODS 
109
Design note compression 
110
On-demand collation 
111
Managing simple searches effectively 
111
Domino Directory and security enhancements 
113
IBM Tivoli Directory Integrator 
113
DirLint Directory Tool 
116
Authentication through Directory Assistance 
117
Directory Assistance LDAP Coniguration Wizards 
118
People view by Lotus Notes version 
119
Internet password lockout 
119
Enhanced local database encryption 
121
Certiier Key Rollover 
122
Single Sign-On (SSO) for LTPAToken2 
122
Certiicate revocation checking through the Online Certiicate  
Status Protocol 
123
Enhanced integration with IBM servers and tools 
123
IBM WebSphere Portal integration wizard 
124
IBM Tivoli Enterprise Console integration  
125
Lotus Domino 8.5.3 new server enhancements 
126
8.5.3 generic error clariication 
126
8.5.3 error collection enhancements 
126
8.5.3 replication enhancements 
126
8.5.3 AdminP enhancements 
128
Summary 
128
Chapter 5: Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 
129
Client provisioning 
130
Server-managed provisioning 
130
Smart Upgrade 
131
Eclipse-based provisioning 
131
Policies 
132
The How to apply this setting feature 
133

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Activities policy settings document 
133
Productivity tools settings document 
134
Desktop policy settings document (and setup policy settings document) 
134
Replication settings through the desktop and setup policy documents 
135
Security policy settings document 
137
Lotus Domino 8.5 and 8.5.3 policies 
137
Dynamic policy settings 
138
Roaming policy settings 
139
Enabling provider IDs for the Widgets policy 
140
Machine-speciic policies 
140
iNotes policies 
141
Mail quota support in Lite mode 
142
Database redirect 
144
Redirecting when databases are moved  
144
Redirecting when databases are deleted  
145
Pushing trusted certiicates to Notes clients 
148
Summary 
148
Chapter 6: Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements 
149
Domino Attachment and Object Service 
150
Advantages of DAOS 
152
Setting up DAOS 
153
Document Body Compression 
156
Lotus Notes Shared Login  
158
ID Vault 
161
Auto-populated groups 
166
GNU Zip 
168
Performance enhancements 
169
iNotes and Quickr integration 
170
iNotes and Notes client similarities 
170
User Interface  
171
Preferences 
173
The All Documents and Sent views 
173
Sidebar 
174
iNotes and Notes client differences 
174
Switching 
174
Re-ordering tabs 
175
Calendar overlay 
175
iNotes modes—features that are the same 
177
Preferences 
177
The right-click menu 
178
Domino Web Access console 
179
Calendar 
179
iNotes modes—features that are different 
179
iNotes 8.5.1 new features 
182

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
New user interface enhancements 
182
ID Vault synchronization with iNotes 
183
iNotes INI settings 
184
Other features 
184
iNotes 8.5.2—new features 
185
Mail 
185
Calendar 
186
Other features 
186
iNotes 8.5.3—new features 
187
Mail 
188
Calendar 
188
Contacts 
189
Supported browsers 
189
Quickr integration 
190
The future road map (Project Vulcan) 
190
Summary 
191
Chapter 7: Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3 
193
The Lotus Notes and Domino upgrade process 
194
Vision and direction 
194
High-level architecture analysis 
195
Use cases 
195
Requirements 
196
Agreements 
197
Final target architecture 
197
Creating the design and upgrade plans 
197
Creating a test plan 
197
Testing 
198
Creating upgrade process documents and plans 
199
Executing logistics plans and schedules 
199
Creating pilots 
199
Updating and inal change 
200
Transformation Management 
200
The Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3 upgrade process 
203
Reviewing the current infrastructure (The health check) 
203
The upgrade process 
210
Systemic normalization 
210
Upgrade the Domino Administrator clients 
210
Upgrade the Domino Directory 
210
Upgrade the administration server 
210
Carefully evaluate your administration server 
211
Upgrade utility servers 
211
Upgrade hub servers 
211
Upgrade spoke/messaging servers 
211
Upgrade specialized servers 
211

Table of Contents
[ vii ]
Upgrade the application servers 
211
Upgrade Notes clients 
212
Implement new Lotus Domino 8.5.3 features 
212
Upgrade applications 
212
Special feature upgrade considerations 
213
A use case document example 
213
Summary 
214
Chapter 8: Coexistence between Notes/Domino Releases 
215
Notes client coexistence 
215
Basic Notes 8.5.3 client 
217
Standard Notes 8.5.3 client 
217
Calendaring and scheduling 
218
Calendar delegation 
218
Domino server coexistence 
218
Domino Directory 
218
On-Disk Structure (ODS) 
219
Administration Requests and events databases 
219
Rooms and Resource Reservations database 
219
Domino Domain Monitoring 
220
Policies 
220
Message recall 
220
Cluster coexistence 
221
Out-of-Ofice 
221
Domino Web Access 
222
ID iles 
222
LotusLive hybrid 
223
Supported Server Versions 
223
Summary 
224
Chapter 9: New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development 
225
Composite applications 
226
Application design 
228
Programming 
228
Properties 
229
Actions 
230
Wires 
231
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.0 client features 
232
Composite applications support 
232
Property Broker Editor 
232
Composite Application Editor 
234
Web Service Consumers 
235
View enhancements 
240
New column number format 
240

Table of Contents
[ viii ]
Extending columns to use available window width 
241
Deferring index creation until irst use 
242
Show default items in the right-mouse menu 
242
Form enhancements 
243
Agent enhancements 
245
Formula language and LotusScript additions 
247
Formula language additions 
247
LotusScript additions 
247
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5 client features 
255
Domino Designer on Eclipse 
255
The new Eclipse-based GUI 
256
XPages 
258
Improvements to Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) support 
260
Enhancements to HTML generation 
260
JavaScript controls 
261
New methods related to ID Vault—ResetUserPassword 
262
Changes to web services 
264
What's ahead? 
265
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.1 client features 
266
XPages updates 
267
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.2 client features 
267
Lotus Domino Designer enhancements 
267
Lotus Domino Designer Eclipse framework enhancements 
268
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.3 client features 
269
Lotus Domino Designer enhancements 
270
Lotus Component Designer 
273
Migration tool 
274
Help and enhanced welcome page 
274
Accessibility 
275
Composite application support 
275
Controls and pages 
275
Data connections 
275
Scripting 
276
Deployment 
276
New Web 2.0 features 
276
RSS and ATOM 
276
Blog template 
280
AJAX support 
281
Lotus Expeditor 
281
Summary 
282

Table of Contents
[ ix ]
Chapter 10: Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products 
283
Lotus Quickr 
284
Quickr with services for Domino 
284
Installing and coniguring Lotus Domino Server 
285
Coniguring Multi-server Single Sign-on (MSSO) authentication 
291
Coniguring Quickr Domino Server settings 
295
Directory integration 
296
Application development 
296
Quickr with services for WebSphere Portal 
297
Installing Lotus Quickr services 
297
Integrating Sametime for Quickr WebSphere Portal 
297
Lotus Quickr Connectors 
298
Lotus Sametime 
301
Installing Lotus Sametime 
301
Directory integration 
302
Application integration 
302
Lotus Connections 
303
IBM Learning Widget 
304
IBM Multimedia Library 
304
New integration features in Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3 
305
Domino Designer moves to Eclipse 
305
XPages 
305
Themes in XPages 
305
Components based on XPages 
306
Composite Application Editor 
306
Drag-and-drop enhancements 
306
Summary  
307
Chapter 11: Domino Coniguration Tuner 
309
Obtaining and setting up the DCT 
309
Navigating and using DCT 
311
Run New Scan 
311
View Results 
313
Checking for Updates 
316
Preferences 
317
Help 
318
Life cycle and participation 
318
Usage patterns and practices 
319
Troubleshooting 
319
Summary 
320
Index 
321
 


Preface
If you're reading this book, you're probably already familiar with Lotus Notes and 
the Domino server. You know about the powerful productivity features offered by 
this product and you know how much your company relies on it to communicate, 
collaborate, and manage its collective store of corporate knowledge. This book is 
intended to show you the new features of Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3. These 
incredible products keep evolving and growing with each release. This exciting 
new release will help your end users with new features; but it will also help the 
administrator with new management features. This book has been written by Notes/
Domino "insiders". Collectively, we possess decades of Notes/Domino experience; 
we've been with the product since Notes 1.0, and since then have worked directly with 
customers to help them with their Notes/Domino upgrade and deployment issues.
This practical tutorial walks through the new features of the Lotus Notes/Domino 
8.5.3 suite and documents technical features in a descriptive way, with examples  
and useful screenshots. The book also discusses likely problems you might face  
while upgrading, and shows you how to get the most out of the exciting  
new features.
What this book covers
This book will help you understand the new features in Notes client user interface, 
Domino 8.5.3, and the concepts of a Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) and how 
Lotus Notes 8.5.3 its into SOA.
Chapter 1, Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA, gives a high-level understanding of SOA,  
what it is, its value, and its characteristics. You will also learn how Lotus Notes  
8.5.3 includes many of the characteristics of SOA components, and how it can help 
you assemble applications that can play a role in an SOA.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 2, Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features, includes a deeper dive 
into the new Lotus Notes 8.5.3 components and some of the new LotusLive features 
that have been included in this release (actually, the LotusLive features were 
included in 8.5.2)
Chapter 3, Productivity Tools, provides an overview of three productivity  
tools—Lotus Symphony Documents, Lotus Symphony Presentations, and Lotus 
Symphony Spreadsheets. You will see how these tools are integrated with Notes 
8.5.3, and how they can now be controlled by Domino policy documents.
Chapter 4, Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features, reviews the major new and enhanced 
feature areas in Domino Server 8.5.3. This includes end user and messaging 
enhancements, administrator enhancements, performance enhancements, directory 
and security enhancements, and better integration with other IBM technologies.
In Chapter 5, Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3, we examine important 
Notes/Domino 8.5.3 features that can make rolling out your new deployment 
signiicantly easier. We discuss client provisioning, including Eclipse-based client 
and server provisioning functionality. We also look at policy enhancements and the 
new database redirect feature.
Chapter 6, Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements, looks at Domino 8.5.3 core features such as 
Domino Attachment and Object Service, or DAOS, ID Vault, Notes Shared Login, 
and auto-populated groups. We also cover iNotes up to 8.5.3. The differences and 
similarities between web and full Lotus Notes clients are reviewed.
Chapter 7, Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3, is divided into two main 
sections. The irst takes a look at the Notes/Domino upgrade process in general, 
discussing concepts and steps that should be considered whenever you upgrade to 
any major release of Notes/Domino. The second section covers upgrade issues that 
are speciic to Notes/Domino 8.5.3.
In Chapter 8, Coexistence between Notes/Domino Releases, we examine coexistence 
issues involved with running Notes/Domino 8.5.3 in a mixed environment with 
one or more previous releases. Also provides a discussion of Domino 8.5.3 server 
coexistence, including features such as Domino Directory, ODS, Domino Web 
Access, DDM, and ID iles. LotusLive Notes hybrid requirements are also discussed.
In Chapter 9, New features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development, we review some of the 
major new features and enhancements that affect Notes/Domino 8.5.3 application 
development. These include enhancements related to composite applications, 
Domino Designer 8.5.3, formula language and LotusScript, Lotus Component 
Designer, Web 2.0, and Lotus Expeditor.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Chapter 10, Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products, discusses add-on products for  
a typical Notes/Domino infrastructure. The speciic products covered in this chapter 
are the most common that you might encounter, including Lotus Quickr, Lotus 
Sametime, and Lotus Connections. Also, this chapter includes a short introduction  
to some of the IBM learning tools.
Chapter 11, Domino Coniguration Tuner, gives you a special treat. Several years ago 
IBM released a tool known as Domino Coniguration Tuner (DCT). When this tool 
was irst released, it only included a small set of "testing" rules and server checks. 
The DCT tool is now a full enterprise tool that will help you analyze your Domino 
server environment.
What you need for this book
Some familiarity is needed with Lotus Notes and Domino. This book will cover the 
advances from Lotus Notes and Domino release 8 through 8.5.3. Basic knowledge of 
messaging and collaboration technologies is helpful.
Who this book is for
This book is for Lotus Notes power users, administrators, and developers working 
with any version of Lotus Notes/Domino, who want to upgrade to Lotus Notes/
Domino 8.5.3. Additionally, it can be leveraged by management to gain a high-level 
understanding of the new features and capabilities offered within the products.
Conventions
In this book, you will ind a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Click  
the New Web Service button to create a new web service."
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
[ 4 ]
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title through the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things  
to help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you ind a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you ind any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are veriied, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring  
you valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem  
with any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.


Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA
Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) provides for a set of resources that are linked 
together on demand. This demand access can be from other systems, and/or users, 
or even applications that link resources together via a set of standards. Lotus Notes 
8.5.3 is built on IBM's release of the Eclipse Rich Client Platform (RCP). As Lotus 
Notes 8.5 was built based on a set of standard components, it was a part of an SOA. 
This provides a more extensible server-managed client.
In this chapter, we will introduce the concept of SOA and how Lotus Notes 8.5.3 
its into one such architecture. We will explain what an SOA is, its value, and its 
characteristics. We will also cover how Lotus Notes 8.5.3 has many characteristics of 
SOA components, and how it can help you assemble applications that can play a role 
in SOA.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• 
What is an SOA?
• 
Why SOAs now?
• 
The SOA lifecycle
• 
How Lotus Notes 8.5.3 works with SOAs
What is an SOA?
Although the concept of SOA is simple, the components that make up SOA can be 
complex. Additionally, the value and perception of SOA varies with the perspective 
and role of organizations and people considering SOA. In this chapter, we will start 
with the basic deinition of SOA and then examine speciic aspects of SOAs.
The deinition of SOA can often be taken further by adding the word "business",  
as the inherent value comes from business orientation and enablement.

Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA
[ 8 ]
In computing, the term SOA expresses a software architectural concept that  
deines the use of services to support the requirements of software users. In an  
SOA environment, nodes in a network make resources available to other participants 
in the network as independent services which they access in a standardized way. 
Most deinitions of SOA identify the use of web services (using SOAP and WSDL)  
in its implementation.
SOAs can be used to:
• 
Build distributed systems that deliver application functionality as services  
to either end-user applications or other users
• 
Design and implement distributed systems that allow a tight correlation 
between the business model and its IT implementation
• 
Manage services made available by different software packages for re-use 
and reconiguration
These uses of SOA highlight the fact that they encompass a wide range of interests.
There are many ways to implement and view an SOA. The speciic approach 
and value proposition depends on the needs of the business and the role of the 
organization or person considering the SOA. In this chapter, we will focus on  
how businesses can re-use existing Lotus Notes-based functions, and how to take 
existing Eclipse and WebSphere Portal services and incorporate them into new  
Lotus Notes functions.
The characteristics of an SOA
There are some commonly understood characteristics of an SOA. These include  
the following:
• 
Services are re-usable and called by many applications
• 
Service access is with communication protocols rather than direct calls
• 
Services are loosely coupled so that they are autonomous
• 
Interfaces are deined in a platform-independent manner
• 
Services are encapsulated so that the interface doesn't reveal how the service 
was implemented (this is called abstraction)
• 
Services share a formal contract
• 
Services are composable (able to be assembled into composite applications)
• 
Services are stateless
• 
Services are discoverable

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
The following screenshot shows how to add an assembled composite application into 
Lotus Notes Designer 8.5.3:
Later in this chapter, we will examine some of these characteristics and see how 
Lotus Notes 8.5.3 can interact with an SOA.
Perspectives on SOAs
From a business perspective, SOA is about identifying, surfacing, and integrating 
business services to meet business needs.
From an IT perspective, SOA is about responding quickly to changing business 
needs. IT organizations must determine what style, patterns, or principles provide 
architecture capable of responding in a timely fashion. These questions must be 
answered with the understanding that existing applications and systems have been 
built over time and are hardwired together.
Why SOAs now?
One key factor in the emergence and success of SOAs is the evolution of standards. 
Standardization has made SOAs more useful now than ever before. In the past, 
companies have made numerous attempts to develop a standard to support some 
versions of SOAs. Standards such as CORBA and DCOM have existed for a while, 
but have not been widely adopted to allow true interconnection of companies  
and people.

Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA
[ 10 ]
Thanks to the Internet and standards such as HTML and HTTP, companies and 
customers are linked together as never before. This linkage is the key to the 
interconnection and combination of services that distinguish an SOA. As the Internet 
has matured, web service standards have emerged; they now have a common 
set of standards across vendors and businesses. Major vendors have agreed on 
standardization of web services and have incorporated these standardized services 
into products, providing an unprecedented breadth of tools for supporting an SOA. 
Standards for interoperability that have been widely adopted include the following:
• 
Hypertext Transfer protocol (HTTP)
• 
Extensible Markup Language (XML)
• 
Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP)
• 
Web Services Description Language (WSDL)
• 
Universal Description, Discovery, and Integration (UDDI)
• 
OASIS standards, such as Open Document Format (ODF) 
ODF is an open XML-based document ile format for ofice applications, which  
can be used for documents that include spreadsheets, text, and rich text, along  
with chart types.
This particular standard was developed by the Organization for the 
Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) 
consortium and based on the XML format originally created and 
implemented by the OpenOfice.org ofice suite.
Other factors play key roles in the adoption of SOAs. For example, mature software 
and software frameworks are now available across a breadth of vendors, including 
Eclipse and OSGi. SOA-related governance models and best practices are deined 
and proven. With the development of the Internet, implementation is now practical, 
and business/IT collaboration is receiving renewed focus.
The SOA lifecycle
There are four distinct phases to the lifecycle of an SOA. These are as follows:
• 
The Model phase
• 
The Assemble phase
• 
The Deploy phase
• 
The Manage phase

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
This lifecycle provides a framework within which an SOA can be built. However, 
businesses and IT organizations can choose the place within the lifecycle  from  
where to begin the SOA implementation. (One of the key values of SOA is the  
ability to get quick beneits by assembling and deploying services without waiting 
for a full-blown SOA deinition.)
The Model phase
The Model phase of the SOA lifecycle starts with discovering which program assets 
can be re-used in new applications. You can discover these hidden assets and 
determine which programs are good candidates for re-use in web applications  
with a number of tools already in the market.
As we stated earlier, the key value of an SOA is the surfacing of business services. 
So, to properly identify the business services and understand how they it into 
the business, SOA modeling establishes a common understanding of the business 
processes, objectives, and outcomes between business and IT. The SOA model helps 
to make sure that any IT application meets the needs of the business and provides a 
baseline for business service performance.
At the end of the Model phase, you should have a clear inventory of assets showing 
where they can be used in the business processes that you have modeled.
The Assemble phase
The Assemble phase is where programs are wrapped as services and used to create 
composite applications, which bring together core assets that often span multiple 
platforms. If you use legacy host transactional environments, the tools simplify the 
development of new web user interfaces, traditional terminal interfaces, and backend 
business logic.
During the Assemble phase, you can create services out of existing assets such as 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) and inancial systems, legacy host applications, 
and other solutions that are currently running your business. If no functionality 
exists, you can create and test a service to deliver the functionality required for your 
business process. Once the required services are available, you can orchestrate them 
so as to implement your business process.
Lotus Notes 8.5.3 includes features to support the Assemble phase of SOA 
development. We will review those capabilities later in this chapter.

Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA
[ 12 ]
The Deploy phase
During the Deploy phase, you can conigure and scale the runtime environment 
to meet the service levels required by your business process. You can optimize 
the services environment to reliably run mission-critical business processes while 
providing the lexibility to make updates dynamically in response to changing 
business requirements.
Once it is conigured, you can deploy your business process into a robust, scalable, 
and secure services environment. This service-oriented approach can reduce the cost 
and complexity associated with maintaining numerous point-to-point integrations.
The Manage phase
The Manage phase involves managing the underlying service assets, and establishing 
and maintaining service availability and response times, along with managing and 
maintaining version control over the services that make up your business processes. 
The management phase ultimately enables you to make better business decisions 
sooner than previously possible.
You can monitor key performance indicators in real time to get the information 
required to prevent, isolate, diagnose, and ix problems, enabling you to provide 
feedback to the business process model to enable continuous improvement.
Once the SOA has been deployed, you'll need to continue to secure, manage, and 
monitor the composite applications and underlying resources, from both an IT and 
a business perspective, so as to get full value from the SOA. Information gathered 
during the Manage phase on key SOA indicators can provide real-time insight into 
business processes, enabling you to make better business decisions, and feeding 
information back into the SOA lifecycle for continuous process improvement.
How Lotus Notes 8.5.3 works with SOAs
Now that we've covered the basics of SOAs, it is time to examine how Lotus Notes 
8.5.3 its in. Lotus Notes can help an organization achieve target architecture 
requirements with SOA characteristics by:
• 
Supporting service re-use. Lotus Notes 8.5.3 does this by providing a 
composite application development capability, and by providing web  
service consumer and producer capability.
• 
Enabling further extension of Lotus Notes to work with SOAs through an 
open technologies framework.
 

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
Composite applications
Lotus Notes 8.5.3 has the ability to assemble composite applications. This ability is 
useful in the Assemble phase of the SOA lifecycle.
A composite application is a loosely coupled collection of user-facing components 
brought together for a speciic business purpose. Composite applications provide 
the frontend of an SOA. The ability to create and edit composite applications lets 
you easily combine and re-use different services, providing a tremendous platform 
for service re-use—a key characteristic of an SOA. With Lotus Notes 8.5.3, server-
managed, NSF-based composite applications can be created or edited. An NSF-based 
composite application can consist of NSF, Eclipse, and WebSphere Portal components.
Elimination of information and service "silos" is a key beneit of composite 
applications for end users. With composite applications, the services are loosely 
coupled and independent (not hardwired into the infrastructure), so they can be 
easily re-used or extended, as business needs change. This is an important element in 
enabling a business to respond lexibly to business changes and to alter application 
interactions as needs dictate. Available online or ofline, composite applications 
can facilitate self-service activities. Using the Composite Application Editor within 
the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 software, end users and LOB managers can create composite 
applications. IT staff can use their current development skills to build and modify 
reusable components, helping to reduce IT and development costs. Organizations 
can re-use previously developed Eclipse technology-based components within the 
composite applications experienced by Lotus Notes and Domino 8 software, helping 
to increase return on investment in application development tools and skills. 
The Composite Application Editor is an install-time option of the Lotus Notes  
8.5.3 client. Composite applications can be built with minimal or no NSF design 
changes to re-use existing Lotus Notes applications as components of the  
composite application.
Development responsibilities for building composite applications can be distributed 
across several types of application development and administration team members. 
The process does not have to be restricted to a highly skilled component developer. 
The roles in composite application development typically include the following:
• 
A component developer who designs and creates NSF and  
Eclipse components
• 
An application assembler who deines and assembles the composite 
application, and who may be a business user
• 
An application administrator who deploys portlets onto the WebSphere portal 
and maintains NSF-based composite applications on the Domino server
www.allitebooks.com

Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA
[ 14 ]
The following section provides an example of how Lotus Notes 8.5.3  
enables composite application assembly. The documentation and  
iles necessary to build this example can be found by visiting  
http://www-03.ibm.com/developerworks/blogs/page/CompApps?entry=more_
sophisticated_tutorial_of_composite.
The irst component of this example is Lotus Notes contacts.
The following screenshot shows the Contacts view of Lotus Notes. On its own, this 
component shows a list of contacts and has a preview pane showing the details for 
the currently selected contact. Certainly, this is a valuable service by itself. But our 
example shows how you can re-use this service, combine it with other services, and 
extend the value of this component:

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
The second component of this example is a Lotus Notes discussion application that  
is shown in the following screenshot. This component allows users to discuss topics 
(in this case, Lotus Notes Designer) in a user discussion forum setting. Again, this  
on its own is a useful component, but our example will combine this component  
with Lotus Notes contacts to create a new, more useful service by loosely coupling 
these components:

Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA
[ 16 ]
In the irst step in this example, the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Designer uses Web Services 
Description Language (WSDL) to expose properties and actions needed to navigate 
within the Lotus Notes forum application. The following screenshot is from the Lotus 
Notes 8.5.3 Designer where the inal step of the WSDL creation is being completed:
In addition to using WSDL, the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Designer also allows you to create 
actions to be implemented during the assembly of a composite application. In this 
case, the action is called SelectPerson, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
This action will select the forum entry for the current selection in the Lotus Notes 
contacts component, as shown in the following screenshot:

Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA
[ 18 ]
With the appropriate WSDL action associated with the Lotus Notes Forum 
application, the prerequisites for assembling the composite application are in place. 
In the following screenshot, the Composite Application Editor is used to wire the 
Lotus Notes Contacts view and the Notes forum application:
The result is a composite application in which the Notes Forum entry is displayed 
based on the selected Lotus Notes contact. As you can see in the following screenshot, 
Betty Zechman of ZetaBank is the currently selected Lotus Notes contact and the 
Lotus Notes Forum has been advanced to show the threads for Betty Zechman.

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
Next, the Composite Application Editor is used to include an Eclipse tag cloud in  
the composite application. This component displays tag data about the current 
contact. This is accomplished by linking the Eclipse component to the Lotus Notes 
Forum application.

Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA
[ 20 ]
In the following screenshot, the current Lotus Notes contact selection is Betty 
Zechman and the interest selected is Applications Development. The result is 
a view of the Notes forum positioned in a thread by Betty Zechman related to 
Applications Development:
This simple example shows the power of Lotus Notes 8 Composite Application 
Editor. Minimal Lotus Notes designer effort, combined with use of the Lotus Notes 8 
client Composite Application Editor, can produce a new business function re-using 
existing heterogeneous services.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
Lotus Notes (version 8 and 8.5.3) and web 
services
Web service producer and consumer capability is not new to Lotus Notes 8 and 
Notes 8.5.3. However, the ability to produce and consume web services is a key 
characteristic of SOA. This section provides an overview of how Lotus Notes 
supports web service production and consumption.
A web service provider makes available a WSDL document that deines the service 
interface. The WSDL document is in XML format. What happens behind the interface 
is up to the provider, but most providers map the interface to procedure calls in a 
supported programming language. Incoming requests from a consumer are passed 
to the underlying code, and results are passed back to the consumer.
Lotus Domino maps the WSDL interface to an agent-like web service design  
element that can be coded in LotusScript or Java. The web service must be on a 
Domino server with HTTP enabled. (We can test the web service through an HTTP 
session in the Notes client preview.) Access is through one of the following Domino 
URL commands:
• 
OpenWebService: This invokes the web service in response to a  
SOAP-encoded message, sent through an HTTP POST request.  
An HTTP GET request (for example, a browser query) returns the 
name of the service and its operations.
• 
WSDL: This returns the WSDL document in response to an HTTP GET request.
Several approaches can be used to create a web service design element in Domino 
Designer. One approach is to code the service entirely in LotusScript or Java. In 
this case, saving the design element generates a WSDL document that relects 
the LotusScript or Java code. Alternatively, an existing WSDL document can be 
imported. In this case, the LotusScript or Java code relects the operations in the 
imported WSDL document. The web service design element saves the WSDL 
document as well as the code. If the public interface has not changed, the WSDL 
document stays as it is. If anything in the coding that affects the public interface  
is changed, a new WSDL document is generated.

Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and SOA
[ 22 ]
In Domino Designer, the web service design element resides below Agents under the 
Shared Code element, as shown in the following screenshot:
The Web Services design window looks a lot like the Agent design window. Clicking 
on the New Web Service button creates a new web service. Double-clicking on the 
name of an existing web service opens it for editing.
An example of a web service to access Domino databases can be found by visiting 
the following URL:
http://www-10.lotus.com/ldd/pfwiki.nsf/dx/ibm-using-web-services-to-
access-a-domino-discussion-database
Lotus Notes 8.5.x and open technologies
Lotus Notes 8.5.x supports both OASIS/ODF and Eclipse open formats.
OASIS/ODF
Lotus Notes 8.5.3 supports both OASIS/ODF and Eclipse open formats. Word 
processing, spreadsheet, and presentation applications are basic, standard tools 
that many business users need and use on a daily basis. The Lotus Notes 8 and 8.5.3 
product suite includes a suite of ofice productivity tools that allows end users to 
create, edit, and collaborate on a wide variety of ile types. The Lotus Notes 8.x product 
suite is packaged with IBM productivity tools that support OASIS. Open Document 
Format (ODF) is an international standard for saving and sharing editable documents 
such as word processing documents, spreadsheets, and presentations.

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
Eclipse
At the core of the Lotus Notes 8.x software (and the higher versions), is IBM's version 
of Eclipse Rich Client Platform (RCP) technology, which introduces a new, open, 
standards-based SOA that makes the Lotus Notes 8 software more extensible. In fact, 
a number of the new features of Lotus Notes 8 are a direct result of this extensibility 
(for instance, Sametime integration and RSS feed integration).
IBM has built a common client platform named Lotus Expeditor (previously called 
WebSphere Everyplace Deployment or WED) that packages the Eclipse Rich Client 
Platform with some extra services such as security, synchronization, data, deployment, 
and more, which can be used across the IBM software product set. The Lotus Notes 
8 client is a consumer of this Lotus Expeditor common platform. This provides 
additional functionality while ensuring forward compatibility for existing Lotus  
Notes and Domino applications.
Lotus Notes 8 and 8.5.x software supports nearly all custom Lotus Notes applications 
built for prior versions and incorporates the open standards of the Eclipse 
application development framework, allowing the use of a componentized SOA. 
This provides help in making it easy to aggregate, access, and deploy functionality 
from a mix of software programs and systems. It enables developers to build 
applications more quickly and to re-use existing assets as business needs arise.
Summary
In this chapter, we introduced Service-Oriented Architectures (SOAs) and covered 
how Lotus Notes 8 and 8.5.3 support it. We then looked at several Lotus Notes 
features and capabilities that can help you implement SOA-based architectures 
within your own organization.
We then discussed that with a foundation in open technologies such as Eclipse and 
with the introduction of the Composite Application Editor, Lotus Notes can be a key 
part of SOA.
We also saw that currently Lotus Notes 8 only participates directly in the Assemble 
phase of an SOA lifecycle. However, the open framework on which Lotus Notes 8 
is based provides a highly lexible platform, and we can expect to see a signiicant 
growth of Lotus Notes as a key factor in the growth and adoption of SOAs.
In the next chapter, we will examine the new features in the Lotus Notes client,  
from version 8 continuing through the latest version, Lotus Notes 8.5.3.
 
www.allitebooks.com


Overview of New Lotus Notes 
8.5.3 Client Features
This chapter will cover the new client features of Lotus Notes 8, 8.5 and 8.5.3. The 
irst sections will cover the 8.0 client and the latter sections, 8.5 through 8.5.3 client. 
In this chapter, we will look at the major new features offered in the following:
• 
Lotus Notes 8
• 
Lotus Notes 8.5
• 
Lotus Notes 8.5.1 
• 
Lotus Notes 8.5.2
• 
Lotus Notes 8.5.3
Lotus Notes 8.0
This section will examine some of the new features introduced in the Lotus Notes 
8.0 client. In addition to the "user visible" features, the Lotus Notes 8 client is built 
upon an open standards Eclipse-based architecture. This architecture allows greater 
lexibility of the client for customization and its better into an SOA than previous 
releases do.
Lotus Notes 8 also provided a more consistent experience across a greater variety 
of operating system platforms. The Lotus Notes 8 client also offers a consistent 
installation process for both the Microsoft Windows operating system users and 
Linux desktop users.
Enhancements in Lotus Notes 8 for Linux included integrated instant messaging  
and presence awareness, the Lotus Notes SmartIcons toolbar, and support for  
color printing.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 26 ]
This section of the chapter will highlight the following areas:
• 
User interface enhancements
• 
Mail features
• 
Calendar features
• 
Contacts
User interface enhancements
Long-time Lotus Notes users will notice that the Lotus Notes 8 user interface 
looks signiicantly different from previous releases. These changes are the result 
of carefully considering and incorporating user feedback and suggestions. The 
following screenshot shows the Inbox view:
Upgrading from a previous release of the Lotus Notes client 
will retain your existing welcome page.

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
Open list menu
In previous releases of Lotus Notes, the various data stores were known as 
databases. Lotus Notes databases are now called Applications (as shown in the 
following screenshot) starting in the Lotus Notes 8.0 client. There is also a new 
method to access them. To-do this, click on a new menu button called Open.  
This button is located in the upper left-hand corner of the client interface,  
as shown in the following screenshot:
From this menu, you can access the same links as from your default home page,  
as well as some additional links.
Bookmarks from previous releases will be migrated if the client is 
upgraded to Lotus Notes 8.0 and 8.5.x from a previous release. The 
workspace page is also available.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 28 ]
A feature that is very helpful is the search feature in the Open menu. When entering 
text in this search, the Open menu will contextually adjust to show only the contents 
of your search, as shown in the following screenshot:
Toolbars
Lotus Notes 8 features contextual toolbars. Toolbars are now related to the tab of 
the application that is being used. Contextual toolbars allow only the tools that are 
necessary to be displayed, as shown in the following screenshot:
Uniied preferences
With all these new features come associated new preference settings. In Lotus  
Notes 8, the preferences are all in a single location. This makes the management  
of this feature-rich client simpler, because you can ind the preferences for mail, 
activities, instant messaging, and productivity tools under one location (see the 
following screenshot):

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
In Preferences, you can contextually search for preference settings.
If you are used to using the preferences in the same manner as the 
previous releases, you can do so in the Lotus Notes 8 client as well.
Windows management and tabs
To provide a less cluttered window, Lotus Notes 8 has enhanced the functionality  
of its windows and tabs.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 30 ]
Group document tabs
Lotus Notes 8 introduced the ability to group document tabs via the Group 
documents from each application on a tab option, as shown in the following 
screenshot. With this option enabled, documents or views opened from within  
one application are grouped under the originating application tab:
Advanced menus
By default, the Advanced Menus option is disabled. If you need to use an advanced 
menu, you will need to enable this option, as shown in the following screenshot. 
There is an old rule in the software business that states that 80 percent of the users 
only use 20 percent of the features. If you are not a power user, and would rather not 
see all of the advanced menu options, just turn them off. In the Lotus Notes 8 client, 
if you fall into the 80 percent group, you never need to see these options:

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
We can now see how the menus look with the Advanced Menus option enabled  
and disabled. The following screenshot is with the Advanced Menus option enabled:

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 32 ]
The following screenshot is with the Advanced Menus option disabled:
Ofline applications
Ever wish there were a simple way to create a local replica of an application? That  
is exactly what the new Make Available Ofline feature does. Just select this option, 
enter the necessary information (as shown in the following screenshot), and voila!  
A local replica of your application is created:
Search center
The ability to search mail, calendar, contacts, and even the web from a single 
location is now a feature of the Lotus Notes 8 client. As you can see in the following 
screenshot, both Google Web Search and Yahoo! Web Search options can be 
selected from within the client:

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
Searches can be saved as well. Using the search preferences, you can disable the 
search history, clear the search history, and choose which web search you want  
to set as your default.
www.allitebooks.com

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 34 ]
Mail features
The new mail functionality in the Lotus Notes 8 client was designed with the end 
user in mind. The enhancements were designed to simplify and update the interface, 
as well as increase productivity.
Action bar
The appearance of the Action bar has been modiied from previous versions.  
If the new look confuses you, hover over the icon for a tooltip that describes  
the icon's functionality, as shown in the following screenshot:
For basic functions (such as creating a new memo or replying to a message), you can 
click once on the New icon. In the following screenshot, notice the arrows next to the 
Action bar items. Clicking on the arrows allows you to choose more options such as 
Reply without history or Create a new meeting:
Horizontal and vertical preview panes
You can choose how to display the preview pane. The two options allow you to 
preview on the right or on the bottom. This its into the philosophy of being able  
to customize the users' experience. The following screenshot shows a vertical 
preview pane:

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
If you choose to display the preview pane on the right, the text of your messages 
will resize so that they it in the preview pane. This allows you to view the same 
information regardless of the preview pane selection. The other option is to remove 
the preview pane altogether.
Mail threads
Lotus Notes 7 allowed you to view the mail thread in the header of the e-mail.  
Lotus Notes 8 builds upon this mail thread functionality. There are now two new 
options for mail threads when viewing directly from the inbox. By default, when  
you highlight a message in the inbox, it will display a twisty next to the subject if  
the message is in a thread:
To see the contents of the entire mail thread, click this twisty, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
 

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 36 ]
In most cases, replies to an e-mail contain the original subject line preceded by Re:. 
The mail thread functionality in Lotus Notes 8 displays the irst line of the e-mail 
rather than the subject. This allows the user to scan the thread for useful information 
without having to open a memo to see the contents.
The mail thread will display all messages in a thread, regardless of the location of 
the actual message. If you move a message in the thread to any folder other than the 
inbox, the thread will display the name of the folder containing the message.
By making the mail threads resilient, the Lotus Notes 8 client will still display 
messages in the thread even if one of them is deleted. It also displays messages  
that originated outside your Lotus Domino environment. If someone sends  
messages to you from the Internet, those messages are displayed in the thread.
The mail ile must be hosted on a Lotus Domino 8 server in order for 
the mail threads to be resilient.
Conversations view
Lotus Notes 8 allows you to display your messages in a conversations view. This 
compacts e-mails to one message per conversation. This view provides a less cluttered 
inbox. The e-mails in a topic will be grouped together by the latest entry in your inbox. 
To switch between the conversations view and the individual messages view, use the 
Display menu, as shown in the following screenshot:
In the conversations view, you will see the number of e-mails in the conversation 
in parentheses at the end of the subject. Clicking on the twisty will display the 
messages in the conversation, just as it does in the default mail view.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
Another time-saving feature in this view is the ability to perform actions on the 
entire conversation. These actions include iling into a folder or deleting the entire 
conversation. To prevent accidental deletion of an entire conversation, a dialog box 
will appear when someone deletes a conversation, as in the following screenshot:
The dialog box in the preceding screenshot can be suppressed by checking the  
In the future, do not perform this check feature checkbox.
Mail header options
If you only want to display the header options that are pertinent to you, now you can 
do so. Starting in Lotus Notes 8 you can choose what Mail header options you want 
to be displayed in your mail ile. These options are seen in the following screenshot:
The following screenshot displays all of the controls to limit the header options, 
click on the Display button in the memo. This will allow you to choose what options 
to limit. You can hide everything except the To, Cc, and Subject ields (see the 
following screenshot):

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 38 ]
Sending conidential messages is easier in Lotus Notes 8. There is a checkbox named 
Mark Subject Conidential. When you check this option, the text *Conidential is 
added to the beginning of your subject.
The Multilevel undo functionality for text editing in Lotus Notes 8 is now up to 50 
levels. This applies to any text ield in Lotus Notes 8, not just e-mail text ields.
Inline spell checking
Inline spell checking can now be enabled. When this is enabled, a red squiggle 
will appear underneath any misspelled word (or more precisely a word that does 
not appear in the dictionary) in a rich-text ield. This option can be enabled in the 
Preferences interface, as shown in the following screenshot:
Right-clicking the word with the red squiggle will display a list of suggested spellings 
(see the following screenshot). Clicking on one of the suggested spellings will replace a 
misspelled word with this word. You can also add the word to the dictionary. This will 
prevent the word from being marked as misspelled in the future:

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
When inline spell checking is enabled, it is available 
in any Lotus Notes document.
Document selection
Lotus Notes 8 has changed the way in which documents are selected. In previous 
Lotus Notes releases, a check mark was placed next to a document's name. Lotus 
Notes 8 now supports common operating system commands and mouse clicks. 
To select multiple contiguous documents, hold down the Shift key and select the 
documents. To select multiple individual documents, hold down the Ctrl key and 
click on the document. This will highlight the selected documents and allow you to 
work with them in a group.
Common operating system commands and mouse clicks work in the Calendar and 
Contact views as well.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 40 ]
Recent collaborations
Have you ever wanted to view your conversations with a speciic person, from 
multiple tools such as instant messaging, e-mail, activities, and calendaring? Lotus 
Notes 8 contains a right-click option that will allow you to view all of your dealings 
with that person. A window titled Collaboration History will display a list from 
which you can select and open any recent collaboration.
The right-click option to view recent collaborations will work in the Calendar  
and Contact views as well.
Message recall
Sometimes users accidentally send a message before inishing it, or send it to 
unintended recipients. Message recall can now help you in these sticky situations.  
To recall the message, just select it in your Sent view and click on the Recall 
Message button. You will see a view as shown in the following screenshot:
After you click on the Recall Message button, a dialog box will appear with options 
(see the following screenshot). You can select which recipients from whom to recall 
the message. You also have the option to recall a message even if it was already read:

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
If you would like to receive a recall status report, check the Send me a recall status 
report for each recipient checkbox:
You will only be able to use this feature from the Sent view of your mail ile. The  
sent message must be available for the information about the recipients to be used  
to recall the message. If the message was not saved when sent, you cannot recall it.
Message recall will only work if the user is on Lotus Domino 8 server 
and the feature is enabled. The user must also be conigured for use in 
a mail policy.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 42 ]
Improved Out-of-Ofice functionality
The Out-of-Ofice functionality has been enhanced in the Lotus Notes client,  
as well as on the server. The settings are now more granular, allowing you to set  
the hour that you are leaving and returning. You can also choose to only have the 
Out-of-Ofice message sent in reply to the irst message that someone sends or in 
reply to all messages that they send.
Manually disabling the Out-of-Ofice feature is a thing of the past. The feature 
disables itself when the Out-of-Ofice time expires. This saves time by requiring 
fewer administrative tasks upon your return. A person who is delegated to your 
calendar cannot enable and disable the Out-of-Ofice for you. These settings are 
shown in the following screenshot:
Calendar features
The Calendar view has been updated in Lotus Notes 8.
View navigation
To keep the view navigation consistent, the calendar can be navigated from  
the Views navigator pane on the left-hand side of the Lotus Notes 8 interface.

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Action bar
As in the Mail view, the Action bar is designed to offer single-click functionality. 
More options can be accessed with the Respond button, as shown in the  
following screenshot:
www.allitebooks.com

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 44 ]
All-day events
Now, all-day events are displayed for the entire day (see the following screenshot). 
To save you the bother of scrolling up, the title of the all-day event will appear at 
the top of the page regardless of what time of the day you are viewing the calendar. 
Anniversaries behave in the same manner as all-day events:
Managing new invitations from your Calendar view
A new feature in Lotus Notes 8 is the ability to display unprocessed events on your 
calendar, next to processed events. (Unprocessed events are calendar events that 
have been received, but not yet accepted or declined.) This allows you to see your 
calendar with all events before deciding to accept or decline.
By default, this feature is not enabled. You must enable this feature in your 
calendar preferences:

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
When enabled, your unprocessed items will appear in a different color from the 
accepted items. They will appear in white with an envelope icon in the upper  
right-hand corner. Accepted invitations appear in blue with a person icon in the 
upper right-hand corner.
Showing cancelled invitations in your calendar
Now, you can choose to keep cancelled invitations in your calendar. (In previous 
releases, you could auto-process cancellations so as to have them removed from 
your calendar.) The beneit of this new functionality is to keep a record of cancelled 
meetings etc in your calendar, rather than just a cancellation notice in your inbox.
This can be enabled in your calendar preferences.
A cancelled meeting will be displayed in brown without an icon in your calendar. 
When you open the meeting from your calendar, it will be removed from this view.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 46 ]
Checking schedule
You can now check your schedule when you are creating a new meeting by clicking 
the Check Calendar button. This will bring up a window with the Day view 
showing how the new meeting will it into the schedule. (An alternative method to 
check your schedule is to use the sidebar.)
Locating free time for a subset of invitees
When inviting a large number of people to a meeting, it is often dificult to determine 
when everyone will be available. Now, you can select certain invitees and get free 
time information for them. For example, you can search only the required attendees:

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
Contacts
In Lotus Notes 8, the Contacts user interface has been changed signiicantly. In 
particular, new features have been introduced. The application ile that contains all 
local contacts has been renamed to Contacts instead of Name and Address Book.
Contact form
The newly renamed Contacts application has additional forms, which add lexibility 
to how you store your contacts.
There are more ields available when illing out the Contact form. You can see these 
new ields when placing a contact form in edit mode as in the following screenshot:

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 48 ]
The preceding screenshot shows the form in edit mode. The following screenshot 
shows a saved contact. If the ield is not illed in, it will not be displayed when 
viewing the saved contact:
There are several formats in which the contact can be displayed, and you can choose 
which format is most appropriate:
 

Chapter 2
[ 49 ]
To make the forms more customizable, you can now change the titles of the ields to 
relect your individual needs:
You can now store a photograph of your contact in the record by clicking on the 
Insert Contact Photo button in the top-left corner of the Contact form:

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 50 ]
Business Card view
A new view, called Business Card, has been added to the Contacts application. This 
displays all your contacts in a business card format, making it easier to ind contacts 
at a glance. To open the contact from this view, simply double-click it. This view is 
shown in the following screenshot:
Recent Contacts view
Another new view in the Contacts application is the Recent Contacts view. This 
view will display all of the people with whom you have recently collaborated. This 
makes it easier for you to address frequently used contacts. It is from this view that 
the client gets the addresses that populate the pull-down menu that appears when 
you send a memo or an invitation. This allows you to pull up any e-mail address that 
you have sent messages to. You can also pull up any addresses that have copied you, 
and add them to an e-mail that you are addressing:

Chapter 2
[ 51 ]
From the Replication (see the following screenshot) page you can choose to have 
your contacts synchronized. This will check for changes, such as phone number or 
address changes from the server directory and synchronize them with your local 
contacts database:
Lotus Notes 8.5
Starting in Lotus Notes 8.5, Lotus Notes is supported on the Macintosh workstation.
While most of the enhancements in Lotus Notes 8.5 are on the server side, this 
section will examine the new features in the Lotus Notes 8.5 client. The ive areas 
that will be covered are as follows:
• 
User interface enhancements
• 
Mail features
• 
Calendar features
• 
Contacts
• 
Key software changes
User interface enhancements
The irst thing you will notice when logging into Lotus Notes 8.5 is that the start  
up sequence has changed. One big change that was made to launch the client faster 
is to load soffice.exe when Symphony is launched, rather than when the Lotus 
Notes client is launched. The soffice.exe ile is the Symphony productivity  
editor's executable.
There may be certain situations where you need to revert back to the 
pre-8.5 startup sequence. In these cases you can use the ini parameter 
ENABLE_EARLY_AUTHENTICATION=0 to do so.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 52 ]
Context menus have been updated in Lotus Notes 8.5. They are now streamlined 
for all views such as mail, contacts, and to-do lists. To see these new context menus, 
right-click on the document from the view. You can also now mark e-mails read and 
unread from this menu as well.
The following screenshot show context menus when right clicking on an e-mail in 
Lotus Notes 8.0:
The following screenshot show context menus when right clicking on an e-mail in 
Lotus Notes 8.5:

Chapter 2
[ 53 ]
This is the contextual menu when right clicking on a calendar entry is shown in the 
following screenshot:
You can now use the Tab key to navigate to the next ield as well as 
next window, in Lotus Notes preferences.
Now there is the ability to drag-and-drop between rich-text ields. This feature is 
only available in the Microsoft Windows platform.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 54 ]
You can even drag text from external applications to Lotus Notes name ields.  
If you have Sametime, you can drag contacts and groups into names and  
rich-text ields.
The live text functionality has been improved and changed from 8.0. Now,  
when you hover over live text, the cursor will change to a blue drop-down arrow.
After the cursor has changed, you can left-click on the live text to start an action.  
If there is a default action set, then it will run. Lotus Notes 8.5 also introduced 
Widgets and Live Text feature to the Macintosh and Linux platforms.
Mail features
Following the green computing theme of 8.5, Lotus Notes 8.5 can now automatically 
compress images that are pasted into documents. This reduces the space needed 
to store the images as well as send them. To enable this new feature go to File | 
Preferences | Basic Note Client Coniguration and then check Compress images 
pasted into documents. This setting is enabled by default:

Chapter 2
[ 55 ]
Using the OptimizeImagePasteSize notes.ini parameter, 
compression can also be enabled and disabled.
If you often have contacts with multiple e-mail addresses, the 8.5 release now allows 
you to use multiple email address with each contact. When you start to type the 
contact's name, type ahead will now bring up all e-mail addresses for that contact.  
The most frequently used addresses will be at the top, as they are sorted by frequency 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Open your inbox in 8.5, and you will notice a few changes to the icons. The icons for 
read and unread mail have changed. A star icon now appears next to unread mail,  
as shown in the following screenshot:
Now, in the All Documents view there is a new column that displays the folder that 
the message is in:

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 56 ]
Calendar features
The following sections detail the new calendar features.
Calendar federation
One of the new calendar features introduced in this release is calendar federation. 
This feature allows you to federate calendars from external sources, such as Google. 
You can federate calendars from web-based sources, other Lotus Notes users, or 
from iles. It will overlay the calendar into your Lotus Notes 8.5 calendar. The 
Other People's Calendars option in the navigator of Notes 8.0 has changed in Lotus 
Notes 8.5. It is now called Show Calendars. The beneit of the overlay feature in 
Lotus Notes 8.5 is that you now have the option of adding another Lotus Notes 
user's calendar directly into your calendar. Some customers (calendar managers, 
administrative assistants, and so on) may prefer to use this feature, but they can still 
open the other user's calendar in another tab, in the same way as they have always 
been able to do in previous releases.
The following screenshot shows the Add a Calendar window. If you want your 
calendar entries to synch with your mobile device, check the option View this 
calendar when ofline or on a mobile device checkbox:

Chapter 2
[ 57 ]
.
When you select the option to synch with a mobile device, you will see 45 days 
before and 45 days after the current date. The following screenshot is an example  
of a federated calendars:

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 58 ]
Repair calendar
There is also a new feature called the repair calendar feature. This feature in Lotus 
Notes 8.5, ixes issues where duplicate or repeated calendar entries exist in the mail 
ile. A Lotus Notes 8.5 client and template are both required for this feature to work. 
If you have duplicates due to replication conlicts, this will correct and repair  
the calendar.
To disable the repair feature, add the following line to the notes.ini 
ile on the client system: CSEnableEventRepair=0.
Interoperability of calendar invites between other systems, especially Outlook/
Exchange, has been enhanced with the use of two new coniguration settings.  
These settings are Compatibility Mode and MIME Simpliication. By default,  
these are not enabled.
When Compatibility Mode is off, the user will need to manually enable the Some 
invitees use other mail programs option. When you enable this option, it disables 
the ability to create custom repeating meetings. Here is a new INI parameter that 
can be used to hide this option, change the default value, or lock the option on 
for all meetings. When displayed, the Some invitees use other mail programs 
option appears above the attendee list in a meeting entry. The INI parameter is 
$CSCompatibilityMode. For a table of the values and recommended settings,  
see the Domino 8.5 Administrator Guide.
MIME Simpliication is enabled with the notes.ini parameter 
DisallowRelatedIcalendarMime. Enabling this controls when the iCal conversion 
code generates plain text versus rich text when sending an invitation to an Internet 
e-mail address. For a table of the values and recommended settings, see the  
Domino 8.5 Administrator Guide.
Contacts
There are three changes to contacts. They are as follows:
• 
Importing
• 
Exporting
• 
Forwarding.

Chapter 2
[ 59 ]
Importing
Contacts can now be imported, and ield mapping can be done before or after the 
contacts are imported.
Exporting
When exporting contacts, you can ilter the ields and you now have the option to 
export only basic ields (see the following screenshot):
Forwarding
Finally, you can now forward the contact directly from the contacts via the Forward 
vCard button, as shown in the following screenshot:
Key software changes
There are also key software changes in Lotus Notes 8.5.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 60 ]
Notes Shared Login
New to Lotus Notes 8.5 is Notes Shared Login. Notes Shared Login, allows users, 
without having to provide Notes passwords, to start Lotus Notes and use their  
Notes ID. Instead, users only need to log into Microsoft Windows using their 
Windows password.
If Notes Single Login has already been enabled for Lotus Notes 8 or 
earlier, it should be removed before enabling Notes Shared Login in 
Notes 8.5.
Unlike the Lotus Notes Single Login feature in earlier releases, Lotus Notes 8.5 
does not use the Windows password for the Notes ID ile. Instead, it stores a secure 
token used to unlock the Notes ID ile in a secure way, provided by an external 
mechanism. Lotus Notes 8.5 uses a Windows mechanism, so the secure token will 
only be accessible by users who have logged into Windows.
NSL is not supported for Lotus Notes IDs that are used on computers 
that do not run Microsoft Windows, are protected by smartcards 
or multiple passwords, are used with Notes on a USB drive, are 
used by users who have Windows mandatory proiles, or in a Citrix 
environment.
Notebook
In Lotus Notes 8.5, the Personal Journal has been given the new name of Notebook. 
The Notebook template (Notebook8.ntf) includes some of the same elements as the 
Journal template in earlier releases, such as categorized folders, views, and the ability 
to create a blank sheet without a heading. The Notebook template also includes 
some new features. You can now show or hide heading ields (Subject, Entry date, 
or Category) in Notebook entries. Printing is now allowed without a header. Soft 
deletions are now also enabled.

Chapter 2
[ 61 ]
Lotus Notes 8.5.1
There were several new features introduced into the Lotus Notes 8.5.1 client.  
This section of the chapter will highlight the following areas:
• 
Mail features
• 
Calendar features
• 
Rich Text Editor
• 
Replication and Synchronization
• 
Widgets and Live Text
• 
General changes
Mail features
Lotus Notes 8.5.1 contained many changes and improvements to the Mail features. 
One of these changes is Archiving. When the user is in an archive, the archive name 
is now highlighted in yellow. This is to help the users visually identify which mail 
ile they are currently accessing. Archive, Other Mail, Follow-up, and Tools folders 
will not appear when the user is in the archive. There is now a Archived view. This 
will assist when someone is looking for a recently archived document as seen in the 
following screenshot:
.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 62 ]
The Recently Archived folder now lists all recently archived messages, categorized 
by the archived date (see the following screenshot):
Another visual cue to the user, that was added, is in the subject line of a message 
opened or previewed from an archive. The subject line now contains {In Archive}.
Staying with the visual changes with the 8.5.1 client, there are now ten colors that can 
be assigned to a sender.

Chapter 2
[ 63 ]
Spam control has now been integrated into the 8.5.1 client, when using Lotus 
Protector. This allows the user to control the amount of inbound messages they 
receive, by blocking spam right from the client.
The ability to empty the trash has been added to the contextual menu, when right 
clicking from any mail view.
With a new preference setting under Preferences | Mail | Signature, you 
can append a vCard (.vcf) ile to your signature (through the Append My 
vCard option). The basic ields are illed in on basis of the information in your 
organization's directory, as shown in the following screenshot:

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 64 ]
Another preference called Fonts and Colors was added in 8.5.1. This one controls the 
setting for the bold black text for unread mail, as shown in the following screenshot:
An improvement was made in the behavior of attachments in the message.  
Now, the attachments appear at the top for all inbound MIME mail, as shown  
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 65 ]
Type-ahead addressing has now been added to the users' business card  
when highlighted.
Calendar features
Lotus Notes 8.5.1 contains many changes and improvements to the calendar features. 
Lotus Notes 8.5.1 has improved the preview pane to add the ability to accept and 
decline calendar invites (see the following screenshot):
 

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 66 ]
New to the calendar view is the choice on how to display calendar entries under 
Show | Summary or Show | Timeslots.
Additional drag and drop capabilities have been added to the calendar functionality. 
You can now drag a mail message to the calendar tab or Day-at-a-Glance. This will 
create a calendar invite to the users in the mail message, as well as the content of 
the e-mail. Dragging a calendar entry to a new date on the date picker in either 
your main calendar or the Day At A Glance sidebar pane, will allow you to change 
the date/time of the invite. This will open the Reschedule dialog box. This is a 
convenient way to counter a meeting invitation. To drag to a different month on the 
date picker, hover over the previous or next arrow while dragging.
Google calendars can be viewed ofline or on a mobile device. You can choose the 
length of time you want the Google calendar to display (see the following screenshot):
 

Chapter 2
[ 67 ]
For those users who like to leave the Lotus Notes client running over night,  
at midnight, the Day At A Glance views automatically refresh to the next day.
This feature is enabled by default. To turn it off, add the following line to 
your Notes.ini ile: CalendarRefreshOnSystemDateChange=0.
iCalendar invites sent from a Mac Notes client are now just as rich as those sent from 
Windows which improves interoperability between two popular operating systems. 
This now includes HTML content such as tables, inline images, ile attachments, and 
attached comments.
Tying into the LotusLive collaborative cloud offering, a new meeting type for 
LotusLive meetings has been added to the online meeting preference:

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 68 ]
This will display the online meeting information in the invite.
Rich Text Editors have been extended to the notes section of calendar invites.  
Now you can see the editors in the toolbar.
Rich Text Editor
Several new features have been added to the Rich Text Editor in Lotus Notes 8.5.1. 
When using the permanent pen, the cursor changes to signify the permanent pen is 
being used. Selection behavior in the notes section is now smoother. You can scroll 
smoothly through the text as in normal text. Scrolling occurs only when you drag out 
of the window, now the entire section is still selected. For list elements, if no text is 
on a line then, no list element is displayed.

Chapter 2
[ 69 ]
There is an exception, too. In edit mode, a list element displays on an 
empty line if the cursor is in the paragraph.
Table creation has been improved to allow the user to drag to reorder rows or columns. 
Multiple layers of undo have been added. You can now step through multiple edits 
and undo them. This feature is supported when editing lists also. Tables can also be 
resized, when dragging the outside margin of a table to resize it, press and hold down 
the Shift key. When the cursor changes appearance, double-click on the border of a 
row or a column to insert a new row or column. The new row or column is inserted in 
between the two rows or columns sharing the common border. The cursor changes as 
when moved over text from one cell to another. Drag-and-drop the contents of a cell to 
move it to another cell. When you create a ixed width table, you can now specify the 
width in the Create Table dialog box. In previous versions, the width for ixed width 
tables was automatically determined based on the available area. You can also  
drag-and-drop a column border to resize it.
Replication and synchronization
Activities can now be taken off-line. Now you will see any activities that you have 
taken ofline on the Replication and Sync page.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 70 ]
Widgets and Live Text
The Lotus Notes 8.5.1 client has made several changes around the Widget 
functionality. There is now a new toolbar added to the widgets sidebar.  
The buttons allow you to toggle how you view the widgets, and provide  
type to ind ield. The following screenshot shows the Thumbnails view  
of My Widgets:
Here is the Details view of My Widgets:

Chapter 2
[ 71 ]
In Preferences, you can now browse the Widgets catalog, as shown in the  
following screenshot:

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 72 ]
General changes
The Spell Check feature has now been enhanced to increase user productivity  
(see the following screenshot). Additional preferences have been added to correct 
simple typing errors. As users type in characters or words within the body of a 
memo or document, if there's a match to an entry in the correction tables, the  
entered word will be adjusted to relect that entry:
The INI parameters—AutoCorrect.UseReplacementTable=1, 
AutoCorrect.CapitalizeFirstWord=1, AutoCorrect.
CorrectTwoInitialCapitals=1—can be set to enable the options 
highlighted in the preceding screenshot or they can be enabled via policy.

Chapter 2
[ 73 ]
Finally, there have been areas of improvement when multitasking in the Notes client. 
You can now start a task in the client and still use the embedded Sametime chat or 
the embedded browser.
Lotus Notes 8.5.2
This section will cover the new features introduced in the Lotus Notes 8.5.2 client. 
Several exciting new features will be examined such as the following:
• 
Network optimization
• 
Fail over/fail back
• 
Serviceability
• 
Mail features
• 
Contacts
• 
Calendar and to-do enhancements
• 
Replication and synchronization
• 
Managed replica
Let's start with the additional operating systems that are now supported in Lotus 
Notes 8.5.2. Windows 7 (32 and 64 bit), Mac OS 10.6.2 and RHEL 5.4 desktop are all 
now supported.
Network optimization
In Lotus Notes 8.5.2, the background replicator is multi-threaded for operations 
to occur in parallel. This optimizes network trafic by reducing the number of 
transactions performed and reducing network latency. This network optimization 
works with the new Managed Mail Replica feature allowing the ability to use mail 
that is free of network delays and server outages. Managed replicas will be discussed 
in more detail later in this chapter.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 74 ]
Fail over/fail back
Until the Lotus Notes 8.5.2 client, the behavior of the client during a fail over situation 
would fail the user over to the cluster mate, but it would not have them read off their 
home mail server when it was available again. Signiicant improvements for a seamless 
and unobtrusive mail ile experience when the server goes down have been made. 
Now, it is possible to fail over to a working server silently without interrupting or 
losing any of the user's work and automatically return to the user's primary mail server 
when it becomes reachable. This is not only a smoother end user experience, but it can 
reduce calls to the help desk during outages.
Serviceability
Software that has built in capability to collect data that can assist in troubleshooting 
is very valuable. In Lotus Notes 8.5.2, there has been a focus on updating the IBM 
Support Assistant tool. These improvements include the way data is irst captured 
for issues, simpliications for customers to run/collect information, and expanded 
diagnostic data collection capabilities. These are in place to provide improvements to 
"close the loop" with customer diagnostic data.
Mail features
Several features and functions have changed in Lotus Notes 8.5.2. Now, you can sort 
your Inbox view by the type of message, using type icon as well as by last name, irst 
name (including designation of last name preixes). A new function allows you to 
set the current font as the default while composing or replying to an e-mail. New to 
Lotus Notes 8.5.2 is the ability to forward a message from the Trash folder without 
having to restore it irst, saving time. The signature functionality will allow you to 
now specify whether a signature is rich text, plain text, or an html or an image ile 
via preferences. Another improvement is keeping the message you have selected 
when changing to a different view or folder. A small improvement can sometimes 
make a big difference. Keeping folders open or closed when you re-open the Notes 
client allows a user to just start working right where they left off. No time is wasted 
manually re-setting your Notes client to your preferred state. Saving existing mail 
documents to EML iles was also introduced in Lotus Notes 8.5.2. Finally, there 
are some new preference settings around sending mail and preview panes. They 
include show details (CC and full addresses) in e-mail by default, an option to enable 
return receipt on all messages, an option to close original e-mail when replying or 
forwarding, an option for navigation panes and folders staying open/closed when 
re-opening Notes, and the preview pane collapsed by default via setting (see the 
following screenshot):

Chapter 2
[ 75 ]
Contacts
Switching between mail, calendar, to-do lists, and contacts is now easier when using 
the switcher icon.
Making a contact or a group private via the Make private checkbox or by  
right-clicking on the menu, is new in Lotus Notes 8.5.2. This hides the contact  
from people that are delegated to manage you contacts:

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 76 ]
Now, you can easily remove someone from your Recent Contacts list via a  
right-click menu option in the e-mail type-ahead list or Recent Contacts view.  
You can now send someone a group or location from your contacts. This is sent  
as an e-mail that lets the recipient import the group or location into their contacts.  
A new preference setting has been added, so that the recipients in the CC and BCC 
list of mail will not be added to recent contacts:
Calendar and to-do enhancements
Furthering the improvement of calendars refreshing at midnight, ofline calendars 
now automatically update at midnight as well. OS time zone changes are now 
accurately relected in the Lotus Notes calendar and meeting entries. In Lotus 
Notes 8.5.2, there is now improved handling of Facebook calendar entries. For 
room and resource owners as well as users, there is now the ability to view and 
reserve rooms and resources on your calendar. Another nice improvement to rooms 
and resources is that meeting subject changes are now relected in the Rooms and 
Resource reservations database. Private iCalendar feeds can be added to your Notes 
calendar. Lotus Notes has mobilized Team Room (TR) calendars, allowing access on 
mobile devices. Repeating meeting improvements allow meetings to be accurately 
rescheduled when they fall on weekends (as speciied by users). A new way to 
view calendar entries by category is available under the Lists view in the Calendar 
navigator pane.

Chapter 2
[ 77 ]
Replication and synchronization
Replication and synchronization is now multithreaded to improve throughput and 
timelines. This allows replication on client start and client exit to complete much 
faster than before:
Managed Replica
Managed Replica is a great feature introduced in Lotus Notes 8.5.2. It is the best of 
both worlds of receiving mail immediately and working off a local replica. The local 
managed replica is created in the background while the user continues to use the 
server copy. The company's Domino administrator can limit the managed replica 
to the last n days of mail/calendar entries if local space is a consideration or your 
users have very large mail iles. The initial creation of a managed replica is controlled 
to minimize the impact to the server of multiple users/clients creating managed 
replicas. After the managed replica is created, the user is automatically switched to 
the managed replica. As opposed to a standard local replica, if the managed replica 
needs to be ixed up, the ix up will occur in the background and the user will be 
redirected to their server copy. If the managed replica becomes corrupt, it will be 
deleted and recreated. This greatly reduces the need for a user to call the help desk 
for local corruption, as this is all seamless and invisible to the end user. To speed up 
the initial creation of the managed replica, documents beyond 30 days are initially 
truncated bringing down part of the document and omitting attachments. To allow 
simultaneous instantaneous mail notiications, new mail polling and notiication is 
performed against the server copy.
There are additional settings that complete the managed replica experience. If the 
user opens a truncated document, the rest of the document and/or attachments can 
be retrieved in the background. All mail sends will route immediately through the 
local mailbox to avoid any delays sending mail messages and attachments.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 78 ]
The Domino administrator can control the number of managed replicas are created 
simultaneously. By default, the client will allow 25 concurrently managed replica 
creations against any given server. For more granular control, an administrator can 
make the following changes:
• 
Enable the Smart Upgrade Governor in the server coniguration document
• 
Set the number of simultaneous Smart Upgrade downloads to a  
desired value
Initial managed replica creation will not exceed 90 percent of this value.
The Smart Upgrade Governor is used to support existing servers. 
Enabling the governor does not require the use of Smart Upgrade, it just 
facilitates a mechanism for multiple clients to coordinate the impact and 
load against a given server.
Lotus Notes 8.5.3
This section will cover the new features introduced in the latest Lotus Notes 8.5.3 
client release. Several exciting new features will be examined such as the following:
• 
Mail features
• 
Contacts
• 
Calendar and to-do enhancements
• 
Deployment enhancements
• 
Widgets and Xpages
• 
General changes
• 
LotusLive Notes 
Mail features
There have been a few changes to the default behavior of previous releases 
introduced in Lotus Notes 8.5.3.
Sorting by Subject
One of the key new features is a change to the way subjects are sorted. Now, when 
sorting by subject, several keywords are ignored (see the following screenshot). 
These keywords include Re and Fw:

Chapter 2
[ 79 ]
Signature option
A new Signature option has been added. The end user can choose whether to add  
a signature, or have no signature, as shown in the following screenshot:
Search functionality
The search functionality has seen improvement as well. There is now a new option  
to search by sender or subject, after right-clicking on an e-mail.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 80 ]
New mail notiication
New mail notiication has seen a modiication in behavior in Lotus Notes 8.5.3. 
When a new message arrives in the inbox, the client displays the subject in a pop-up 
notiication and allows the contents of the message to be opened from it. The pop-up 
will appear in the lower right-hand corner. The end user can grab and drag the  
pop-up to pin it open. The following screenshot shows the pop-up notiication:
This can be controlled by a preference setting. The preference is under Preferences 
| Mail. It is called Sending and Receiving, as shown in the following screenshot. 
Checking the preference for displaying a pop-up alert, will enable this new  
pop-up functionality:

Chapter 2
[ 81 ]
Type-ahead
Another new preference has been added around the type-ahead behavior. You can 
now choose to display an attribute such as Company Name for contacts in your 
type-ahead option list, as shown in the following screenshot. This is under the 
Contacts preference list:
Contacts
There are two changes to Contacts functionality in Lotus Notes 8.5.3.
• 
The irst change is to contacts that are in the mail ile. Users can now perform 
actions in the mail ile copy of their contacts, just as they would for contacts 
in their local address book, including preference settings.
• 
The second change is the additional preference settings to control the way 
recent contacts are populated.
Calendar and to-do enhancements
The calendar and to-do enhancements in Lotus Notes 8.5.3 are discussed in the 
sections that follow:

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 82 ]
iCal functionality
Forwarding iCal subscriptions is now incredibly simple. Just right-click on the 
invitation and choose Email to. When offering a meeting counter-proposal, you now 
have the Leave a placeholder for the original meeting on calendar option, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
Countered Meetings
As shown in the following screenshot, the default setting is to leave a countered 
meeting on your calendar. This can be controlled either with a preference or a policy. 
When the By default, leave a placeholder for countered meetings option is enabled, 
the countered meeting will be left on your calendar:

Chapter 2
[ 83 ]
Countered meetings will display on the calendar as shown in the following 
screenshot. The countered meeting will be at the time the meeting was scheduled 
for. The meeting will have a unique color on the calendar to visually distinguish 
itself. When hovering over the calendar entry, the hover text will indicate the new 
proposed time. All invitee actions will still be available so that an invitee can modify 
the response:
Auto-processing
A preference has been added to turn on invitee list updates and auto-processing 
information updates (see the following screenshot). This preference can also be set 
via a policy.
 

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 84 ]
When the When I add or remove meeting invitees, update other participants option 
is checked, all participants are notiied when adding or removing invitees. This 
is sent as an informational update to the meeting. Be aware that in some cases of 
repeating meetings, enabling this can result in multiple updates being sent in order 
to maintain data.
Enabling Automatically process meeting updates and apply changes to meetings 
option, will automatically apply any non-time changes to accepted meetings.  
This removes the step of the user having to update the calendar from the inbox  
or having to open the calendar entry to update it. This will not apply to reschedules.  
A reschedule will still require the user to accept or decline the reschedule.
Deployment enhancements
The major deployment enhancement in the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 client is the introduction 
of the Notes multiuser migration assistant tool that will allow an administrator to 
migrate a Notes single-user installation to a Lotus Notes multi-user installation.
Single-user to multiuser migration tool
The Notes multiuser migration assistant tool can be run on any Lotus Notes 8.x 
release prior to upgrading to a new release. Once migrated from a single user to 
a multiuser within the same 8.x release, you can then upgrade from that release 
to a new release. It will provide a method to convert a single-user installation to a 
multiuser installation for both the Basic and Standard clients. If you have a simulated 
multiuser installation (the user's data directory is on a mapped drive), you can now 
convert this coniguration to a true multiuser installation.
The tool is available for Windows platform deployments (Windows XP, 
Vista and 7) only and must be run as an administrator. It does not have 
a Graphical User Interface or a non-English version.
Migration is supported for the Lotus Notes client only, single-user installations.  
If you try to run the tool on an all-client or an existing multiuser coniguration,  
an "unsupported coniguration" message will appear.
The tool runs a supplied Visual Basic script (MUMigrationAssistant.vbs), which runs 
via a customized coniguration ile (MUMigrationAssistant.ini). The coniguration 
ile enables you to customize the migration for your unique environment. To ind these 
tools, look in the Utility folder of the Notes 8.5.3 install kit.

Chapter 2
[ 85 ]
The coniguration ile can be edited to add user speciic details such as the location 
of the current and new data directories. You can also enable read/write permissions 
on those directories. The MUMigrationAssistant.vbs tool will then perform the 
necessary migration operations, including modiication of user-speciic Notes.ini 
values and registry setting changes required. You can run the migration tool in 
two modes—dry run and actual. In dry run mode, a report indicating what the tool 
would have done will be generated. In actual mode it performs the migration.
Widgets and Xpages
Live Text is now functioning in MIME e-mails as well. Now, data will be recognized 
as Live Text in MIME e-mails. Lotus Notes 8.5.3 has introduced a new public Widget 
Provider API. This will allow developers to create custom widget types for customer 
applications. Then widgets can be created by power users and deployed to your  
end users.
A new widget creation wizard was introduced. It is for creating a widget from an 
XPages application running in the Lotus Notes client. The new wizard is available 
from the Conigure a Widget from the Current Context toolbar button. The wizard 
provides an easy way to display an XPages application in the sidebar, in addition to 
a new tab or window.
Web widgets can be launched in an external browser. When creating the web widget 
you can specify whether you want the web widget to launch in the internal or the 
external browser. Web widgets have been enhanced to support web applications 
using the local web container. The web container can now change ports on restart. 
Additionally, an enhanced Widgets catalog has been introduced that is based on 
XPages technology. It has added social features such as ratings, tagging, download 
count, and commenting.
General changes
Starting in Lotus Notes 8.5.3, RHEL 6.0 desktop, Citrix XenApp 6.0 are now supported. 
There is also enhanced 64-bit toleration for Windows. Lotus Notes 8.5.3 continues 
to make Mac usability improvements and support is given for e-mail gestures. Also, 
on the Mac, you can drag one or grouped iles to the Lotus Notes icon on your dock. 
When doing this, a new mail message will be created with those iles attached.

Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client Features
[ 86 ]
Embedded components
The embedded components have been upgraded. The embedded version of 
Sametime is now 8.5.1. It was previously 8.02. Embedded Symphony is now 3.0.  
It was previously 1.3. The embedded Symphony 3.0 changes will be discussed in  
the next chapter.
Exchange Migration Tool
The Exchange Migration Tool (Nupgrade.exe) is discontinued in the Lotus Notes 
8.5.3 release.
LotusLive Notes
LotusLive is an IBM suite of business collaboration and network based cloud 
services. The LotusLive suite provides the following services:
• 
State of the art enterprise e-mail
• 
Collaboration tools
• 
Online meetings
• 
File management tools
• 
Various support and enterprise retention tools
These tools are completely integrated with users that are not only hosted in the 
cloud, but also with end users that are in effect "guests". Using LotusLive, you can 
work remotely, manage remote teams, or use LotusLive as an integration point for 
disparate enterprise systems in your organization. LotusLive also provides all of 
these services in a secure designed cloud environment.
LotusLive Notes enhancements
The LotusLive enhancements were introduced in the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 client, to 
strengthen the LotusLive Notes experience.
Client-server transactions network toleration has been improved. This includes an 
analysis of current transactions and reduction, or combination. Network latency 
issues that the user might experience have also been improved.
There is now the ability to assign and enforce policies at a machine at machine-level. 
This will allow an administrator to target speciic policy settings to speciic machine 
conigurations and allow different settings based on machine or environmental 
characteristics.

Chapter 2
[ 87 ]
We are seeing the LotusLive Notes offering inluence the client code to beneit all 
users, whether their mail is on premises or in the cloud.
Summary
In this chapter, we have reviewed the major new features offered by Lotus Notes 8 
though the 8.5.3 client. We also provided a high-level overview to the new LotusLive 
offering. Many of these features involve enhancements to the client user interface 
itself. Other new features include enhancements to mail, calendar, and contacts. It 
is exciting to see the increasing improvements in each release, being made by Lotus 
Notes. These features signiicantly broaden the power and usefulness of the Notes 
client, while providing greater ease of use (and potentially minimal retraining)—an 
important consideration for any company planning to upgrade to Lotus Notes 8.5.3.
In the next chapter, we will examine the Lotus Symphony productivity tools that are 
included with the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 client.


Productivity Tools
With Lotus Notes 8.5 and 8.5 client come a new suite of productivity tools that support 
the OASIS Open Document Format (ODF). ODF is an international standard that 
provides support for multiple ile formats for word processing, presentations, and 
spreadsheets. By adopting this format, IBM has allowed Lotus Notes users to read 
and save documents in the Microsoft Ofice ile format. Both can be saved as ODF 
documents or as PDF format documents. IBM/Lotus ships these productivity tools  
in Lotus Notes 8.5 and these tools can also be downloaded as the Lotus Symphony 
Suite (www.lotus.com). Starting with the 8.5.3 Lotus Notes client, the embedded 
version of Symphony is now 3.0, an upgrade from the prior 1.3 release.
The advantage of using the productivity tools with ODF is that you no longer have 
to purchase an application from a single vendor in order to share and save your 
documents. Using a non-commercial ODF product will allow you to avoid having 
to maintain licenses, and will also allow you to stop worrying about your software 
reaching the end of its shelf life. These beneits can lead to a lower Total Cost of 
Ownership (TCO) for maintaining software for document-based data.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• 
Productivity tools integration with Lotus Notes 8.5.3
• 
Symphony and Domino policies
• 
Lotus Symphony Documents
• 
Lotus Symphony Presentations
• 
Lotus Symphony Spreadsheets
• 
Lotus Symphony 3.0

Productivity Tools
[ 90 ]
Productivity tools integration with Lotus 
Notes 8.5.3
The Eclipse architecture of the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 client supports the integration of 
other applications. Lotus has utilized this architecture to integrate another Lotus 
product, Symphony, into the Lotus Notes client. This allows the end user to access 
productivity tools directly in the Lotus Notes client, eliminating the need for 
deploying separate software packages for productivity tools.
The preferences for the tools are in the Preferences interface. When opening  
the preference options for the productivity tools, you will see a view as in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 91 ]
This setting will load a ile called soffice.exe. This ile corresponds to a stub that 
remains resident so that the tools will launch more quickly. If you do not want this  
to occur, choose the setting not to pre-load the productivity tools.
The productivity tools are independent of the Lotus Domino 8.5.3 server. This means 
that the tools will function without a Lotus Domino 8.5.3 server. They can even be 
launched when the Lotus Notes client is not running. To do this, either double-click 
on the icon on your desktop, or select the program from the Start menu.
Symphony and Domino policies
Lotus Domino polices allow the Domino administrator to assign settings to 
users' Lotus Notes clients, either explicitly or by organizational units. A Domino 
administrator can control Symphony through the Symphony Settings policy 
document. This gives the administrator the ability to control who can and cannot  
use Symphony  (and also control whether or not macros are permitted to run).  
It will also control what document types will be opened by Symphony. These 
settings are shown in the following screenshot:

Productivity Tools
[ 92 ]
There are three productivity tools:
• 
Lotus Symphony Documents
• 
Lotus Symphony Presentations
• 
Lotus Symphony Spreadsheets
These productivity tools are also referred to as document editors, as you use them to 
create and edit documents in various formats (word documents, presentations, and 
spreadsheets, respectively).
Lotus Symphony Documents
The Lotus Symphony Documents productivity tool is a document editor that allows 
you to create documents containing graphics, charts, and tables. You can save your 
documents in multiple formats. Lotus Symphony Documents has a spell checker, 
which provides instant corrections, and many other tools that can be used to enhance 
documents. This is the same spell checker that was used for Lotus Notes. No 
matter what the complexity of the documents that you are creating or editing, this 
productivity tool can handle the job. The following screenshot shows an example 
of a document created in Lotus Notes 8.5.3 using the embedded Lotus Symphony 
document productivity tool:

Chapter 3
[ 93 ]
Lotus Symphony Presentations
The Lotus Symphony Presentations tool will allow you to create professional 
presentations featuring multimedia, charts, and graphics. This tool comes with 
templates that you can use to create your slide shows. If you wish, you can create 
and save your own templates as well.
You can save a template in a different directory, but you'll need to navigate to it 
when creating a new presentation from that template.
Not only can you apply dynamic effects to the presentations, but you can also 
publish them in a variety of formats. The following screenshot is of a sample 
presentation created with Lotus Symphony Presentations embedded in the 8.5.3 
Lotus Notes client:
Lotus Symphony Spreadsheets
As the name indicates, Lotus Symphony Spreadsheets is a tool used to create 
spreadsheets. You can use this tool to calculate, display, and analyze your data.  
As with other spreadsheet applications, the tool allows you to use functions to  
create formulae that perform advanced calculations with your data.

Productivity Tools
[ 94 ]
One feature gives you the ability to change one factor in a calculation containing  
many factors so that the user can see how it affects the calculation. This is useful 
when exploring multiple scenarios to determine your outcome. One example of 
this is to see how changing the projected sales will change your revenue. Lotus 
Symphony spreadsheets also have a dynamic function that will automatically  
update charts when the data changes. You can see an example of a Lotus  
Symphony Spreadsheet in the following screenshot:
Lotus Symphony 3.0
IBM Lotus Symphony is a suite of Lotus applications for editing, creating, and 
sharing spreadsheets, text, and presentations.
The Lotus Symphony 3.0 product is the latest version of the software, and is now  
built into Lotus Notes 8.5.3. The following sections highlight some of the new features.

Chapter 3
[ 95 ]
New features
There are now new sidebars containing enriched property sections and panels across 
different editors, with the support of sidebar panel management to show or hide 
sidebar panels.
There is the ability to customize toolbar content and layout, as well as to create new 
business cards and labels. Also, you can now insert OLE, audio, and video iles into 
your documents.
Symphony 3.0 has enabled ile encryption and password protection mechanisms 
when saving iles as Microsoft Word and Excel iles.
Enhancements
There are many new enhancements in Symphony 3.0. Graphic object rendering has 
improved through improved anti-aliasing. This will really make the graphics stand 
out. The main menu and toolbar design have been reined for better usability and 
consistency across the document editors. Dragging and dropping a ile to a tab or 
empty workbench will now open the ile and will save time and clicks. There is now 
a new progress bar when launching and loading/saving iles. This provides a visual 
status on how much of the document has been opened. Finally, another signiicant 
enhancement is with online help content and structure. By streamlining the help,  
you can get the answer you need faster.
The following features are now disabled in Symphony 3.0:
• 
Importing of SmartSuite iles
• 
Print previewing in a presentation
• 
Creation of new XForm documents
• 
Connector support in the document editor
Summary
In this chapter, we have reviewed the Lotus Symphony 3.0 productivity tools 
provided with the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 client. These tools include Lotus Symphony 
Documents, Lotus Symphony Presentations, and Lotus Symphony Spreadsheets.  
We have briely examined how these tools are controlled by Domino policy 
documents, and how they are integrated with the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 client.
In the next chapter, we will examine the features of the Lotus Domino 8.5.3 server.


Lotus Domino 8.5.3  
Server Features
There are a number of signiicant improvements and new features added to the 
Lotus Domino 8, 8.5, and 8.5.3 servers. As with each of the other chapters in this 
book, all features noted for 8.x releases are also included in the 8.5 and 8.5.3 Lotus 
Domino releases. Also these features include mail-related features such as message 
recall and immediate "Out-of-Ofice" notiications. Other core components have 
been enhanced, such as cluster replication, Domino Domain Monitoring, and 
security. Server performance has also been improved, while maintaining backwards 
compatibility and ease of upgrade, which does not require changes to the hardware, 
the operating system, or even the On-Disk Structure (ODS). One of the biggest new 
features for Domino 8.5 is the Domino Attachment Object Service (DAOS). This 
chapter reviews the new features and enhancements in Lotus Domino 8, 8.5, and 
8.5.3. We will discuss the following topics: 
• 
End user and messaging enhancements
• 
Administration enhancements 
• 
Performance enhancements
• 
Domino Directory and security enhancements
• 
Enhanced integration with IBM servers and tools
• 
Lotus Domino 8.5.3 new server enhancements
 

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 98 ]
End user and messaging enhancements
There are a number of new features provided to both end users and administrators 
in Lotus Domino 8/8.5. This section will focus on the following:
• 
Message recall
• 
"Out-of-Ofice" messages
• 
Enhanced support for the mail thread feature
• 
Automated inbox cleanup
• 
Reverse-path setting for forwarded messages
• 
Rejecting ambiguous names and denying mail to groups
Message recall
You can now recall mail messages that have been sent to other users within a Lotus 
Domino environment. Previously, administrators needed to manually delete a message 
that had been inadvertently sent in error. This process was painstaking and often did 
not fully provide the ability to recall messages. The new message recall feature will 
allow the end users to initiate the recall of messages, and (as long as the message has 
been routed only through the NRPC protocol) the recipient's mail server will attempt 
to recall the message.
The message recall feature will only work for users using Lotus Notes 8 and above, 
and for mail templates with servers running Domino 8 and above. It will work across 
domains as long as the message was only routed via NRPC. Messages that are sent 
over SMTP through the Internet will not be recallable.
The message recall feature is enabled and conigured for the entire Domino 8.5/8.5.3 
environment through a Server Coniguration document. This Server Coniguration 
document allows administrators to conigure the service to recall messages, 
depending on whether or not they have been read by the end user, or depending on 
the age of the message:

Chapter 4
[ 99 ]
In addition to a global setting for the environment, message recall can be applied 
more granularly through the use of a mail policy. The mail policy can be conigured 
to change the parameters for the end users, but the use of a policy does not override 
the global coniguration. Within the policy document, administrators can set whether 
the end users can recall messages and whether messages sent to end users can be 
recalled. In addition, the policy can deine whether or not to recall messages based 
on whether they have been read by the end user or have passed a predeined age. 
The following screenshot shows the Message Recall settings:
"Out-of-Ofice" messages
In previous releases of Lotus Domino, the "Out-of-Ofice" message's functionality 
was only offered as an agent. As a result, there was a delay in processing  
"Out-of-Ofice" messages for the end users. Typically, senders of messages to end 
users that had enabled their "Out-of-Ofice" agent would not receive notice for up 
to four hours based on the default coniguration, but this could vary greatly based 
on internal implementations. Some environments were modiied to inform senders 
of their "Out-of-Ofice" status at a more frequent interval. This shortening of the 
interval could affect the performance of the servers, because they would need to 
process the agent on a more frequent basis. The Lotus Domino 8.5 environment 
allows administrators to conigure the "Out-of-Ofice" feature as a service on the 
server, rather than as an agent.

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 100 ]
The coniguration of the "Out-of-Ofice" feature as a service is not a requirement in 
Lotus Domino 8.5.3—the environment can continue to be conigured via an agent. 
It is important to note that the utilization of Lotus Notes 8.5, the Notes 8.5 mail 
template, and a Domino 8 or 8.5 server is required for this feature to work. If the 
Lotus Notes 8 template or all servers (including cluster pairs) are not running at  
least Domino 8, you must conigure the "Out-of-Ofice" feature as an agent.
You can mix any version of 8 and 8.5.3 together for 
this service to work correctly. 
Coniguring the "Out-of-Ofice" feature as a service allows Domino 8.5.3 to send the 
"Out-of-Ofice" notiications as soon as messages are received, after the server and 
end user mail rules are applied. Another enhancement of running the "Out-of-Ofice" 
feature as a service is that once an end user enables the feature, upon completion 
of the "Out-of-Ofice" time frame, the service is turned off after the irst message is 
acted upon or through normal server maintenance routines. The coniguration for 
the "Out-of-Ofice" feature is shown in the following screenshot:
Enhanced support for the mail thread feature
Mail threads were introduced in early versions of Lotus Notes and Lotus Domino. 
The earlier implementation of mail threads within the inbox in Lotus Notes had 
some limitations, speciically when messages within the mail thread were deleted, 
thus breaking the thread. Additionally, messages that were received from outside 
systems were not included in the mail thread. Lotus Domino 8 (as well as 8.5.3) 
support for client-based mail threads has been enhanced to ensure that the threads 

Chapter 4
[ 101 ]
are persistent and that deletion or archiving of messages within the thread will not 
cause problems. In addition, enhanced support for messages outside of the Domino 
environment has been extended and can be included within the mail threads.
The enhanced mail features are delivered through the Domino server to the end user. 
Therefore, the Domino 8.5.3 mail thread functionality is not dependent on Notes 8.5.3 
(as the Notes 7 client will provide the mail threads within the Inbox view), the Notes 
8.5.3 mail template, or the Lotus Domino 8.5.3 server for the senders or intermediate 
servers that will route the mail. The end user's mail server must be running at least 
Domino 8 for it to deliver the enhanced functionality.
Automated inbox cleanup
An excessive number of documents in a single view can be a signiicant end-user 
performance issue, particularly the primary view when the database is open. The 
number of documents in the Inbox view within the mail's database can hinder 
performance by increasing the time required to build the view. When end users  
leave all of their incoming messages in the Inbox view and do not archive messages 
or place them in folders, the inbox can become unwieldy. Lotus Domino 8 
introduced the automated inbox cleanup process that removes messages from the 
inbox. These features are also included in Lotus Notes and Lotus Domino 8.5.3.
The automated inbox cleanup feature can either be set through the Server 
Coniguration document or through the use of a mail policy. The Server 
Coniguration document is shown in the following screenshot:

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 102 ]
The following screenshot is from the mail settings policy document:
This feature doesn't require Lotus Notes 8.5.3 or the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 mail template, 
but your mail databases need to be hosted on at least a Lotus Domino 8 server. 
Through the Server Coniguration document and the mail policy document, 
administrators can schedule the inbox maintenance task based on the day and  
time. When it runs, it removes from the inbox the messages that meet the criteria 
set for the task. The messages are still in the mail ile and can be viewed in the All 
Documents view.
Administrators can add this functionality for all users or a selected group of users. 
The inbox cleanup can occur within a speciied time frame and can leave documents 
in the inbox if they have not been read.
Reverse-path setting for forwarded messages
As spam ilters and other technologies have proliferated, the use of reverse lookups 
has increased for ensuring that the proper address is used, so that the messages are 
not rejected. When a mail rule is set to forward messages within Lotus Domino 8.5.3 
and the forwarded message contains a null value, some spam ilters may reject the 
message. The Reverse-path for forwarded mail setting feature in Lotus Domino  
8.5.3 allows the setting of the path to ensure that messages are not rejected. Within 
the Server Coniguration document, administrators have the ability to set the 
reverse-path for forwarded mail, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 103 ]
There are two settings in the Reverse-path for forwarded mail ield. The default value 
is Set reverse-path to null. When this value is set, delivery status reports are not sent 
to the sender. The other option is Preserve existing value. This value will leave the 
setting as it is. With this setting, the sender may receive delivery failure reports.
Rejecting ambiguous names and denying mail 
to groups
In some SMTP conigurations, the environment is set up so as to conduct lookups to 
the directory before routing messages within the infrastructure. When this setting is 
conigured, the server will reject ambiguous addresses for end users and groups.

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 104 ]
Upon rejection of the message, a return message is routed to inform the sender 
that the message has been rejected by the Lotus Domino environment based on a 
corporate policy. This coniguration setting is shown in the following screenshot:
There are a number of other new and enhanced features in Lotus Domino 8.5.3, 
including router group expansion, transfer and delivery of delay reports, and 
improved HTML rendering for e-mail.
Administration enhancements
Lotus Domino administrators welcomed a number of important enhancements  
in Lotus Domino 8/8.5 including the following:
• 
Enhancements to the end user renaming process
• 
Enhancements to the Administration Process (AdminP)
• 
Enhancements to the Domino Domain Monitoring (DDM) feature

Chapter 4
[ 105 ]
The end user renaming process
The end user renaming process in Lotus Domino is executed by leveraging the 
AdminP. When the request for a change in the user's name or shift in the hierarchy 
is submitted, the AdminP begins to execute the renaming process in all databases 
throughout the environment. This ensures that the Access Control Lists (ACLs), 
reader ields, and so on are updated with the new information. These requests are 
very intensive and (depending on the size and complexity of the environment) can 
take a considerable amount of time.
In Lotus Domino 8, the names list feature builds a list of author and reader names 
found in the database, which the AdminP can then use. If the name is found in 
the list, the AdminP will make the appropriate changes to the ields. This new 
feature will increase the eficiency with which the AdminP executes name changes 
throughout the environment. The limitation for the names list is 4000. If the list is 
larger, the AdminP reverts to looking through the entire database to identify the 
ields where the name exists.
If your servers are running at least Domino 8 and have the new ODS 48 applied  
(see New ODS section later in this chapter), then the AdminP will be able to use  
this new names list feature.
The Administration Process (AdminP)
The Lotus Domino environment invokes the Administration Process (AdminP) for 
executing requests (user renaming, database moves and deletes, and so on) and uses 
the AdminP database, which is built from the Admin4.ntf template. A replica copy 
of the database is placed on every server. As the AdminP requests are generated, 
they are recorded on the administration server and then pushed out via replication 
to the other Domino servers. The servers will then look up and execute the tasks  
as required.
Starting in Lotus Domino 8, requests that are generated for a speciic server will be 
directly placed on that server as long as there is connectivity between the servers. 
The implementation of placing requests directly on the executing server should 
speed up the processing of the requests, because the replication of the AdminP 
database is removed from the process (which can cause some delays due to 
scheduling issues). There is no dependency on Lotus Notes 8.5.3 or the Lotus  
Notes 8.5.3 template to deliver this functionality, but the source server must  
be upgraded to at least Lotus Domino 8.

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 106 ]
This enhancement of AdminP is the default setting in Lotus Domino 8.5.3. To disable 
this feature, set the following parameter in the notes.ini settings:
ADMINP_DONT_ATTEMPT_DIRECT_DEPOSIT=1
The AdminP statistics
AdminP, starting with Lotus Domino 8.5, will generate statistics reports during the 
administration request processing. The AdminP will record statistics to help monitor 
various portions of the administration process tasks. The Admin4.nsf database 
(Administration Requests database) provides the basis for all administration process 
requests scheduled for processing. Administrators can manage and view the process 
of any administration request as it is processed by the AdminP.
Domino Domain Monitoring (DDM)
Domino Domain Monitoring (DDM) was introduced in Lotus Domino 7. The goal of 
DDM is to reduce the administrative workload required to troubleshoot and manage 
issues in the Domino environment. Prior to the introduction of DDM, administrators 
had to review a number of sources to collect the appropriate information to conduct 
problem determination. Lotus Domino 8 included several enhancements to DDM.
Domino Coniguration Tuner (DCT)
The Domino Coniguration Tuner (DCT) evaluates server settings according to  
a preset list of best practices. Servers in a single domain can be analyzed together  
or individually. DCT will be covered in more detail in Chapter 11, Domino 
Coniguration Tuner.
WebSphere Services probe
Lotus Domino 8 added the ability to monitor the Lotus Connections Activities 
function (the Lotus Connections software is not bundled with Domino, as this 
function only enhances the monitoring capabilities), which is hosted on a WebSphere 
server. A new WebSphere Services probe has been introduced to give the Lotus 
Domino administrator the ability to monitor the connectivity status of the activities' 
servers. The following screenshot shows the details of the WebSphere Services probe:

Chapter 4
[ 107 ]
LDAP search reporting
Lotus Domino provides a robust LDAP server built into its base server functionality. 
As more and more environments become dependent on the LDAP services provided 
by Lotus Domino, it is important to ensure that the searches are completed within 
appropriate response times. The new LDAP Search Response probe allows you to 
monitor and track response times as they relate to LDAP searches. The following 
screenshot show the details of the LDAP Search Response probe:

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 108 ]
The Common Actions quick access feature
The DDM database within the Lotus Domino 8 environment provides a set of common 
tasks that are performed by administrators. From within the DDM database, you can 
simply click on the Common Actions drop-down menu (as shown in the following 
screenshot) and access routine administrative actions without switching to another 
view or client:
The By Database view
Working through the DDM database can be dificult when you are trying to work on 
speciic issues related to a single database. In Lotus Domino 7, administrators were 
required to search through the database or create a custom view and then maintain 
that view as new releases of the product were deployed. The new By Database view 
allows you to research speciic issues related to a troublesome database or respond  
to a customer issue without having to ensure that the view is brought forward if 
it was customized in previous versions. The By Database view is shown in the 
following screenshot:
Other Lotus Domino 8 administration features include Domino Administrator 
integration with IBM CommonStore Archive Services (ICAS), Web Administration 
Server Bookmarks, and Automatic Report Closing (administration probe subtype); 
executing CA role, modular documents, and others.

Chapter 4
[ 109 ]
Performance enhancements
Lotus Domino 8/8.5 added a number of new features designed to enhance its 
performance. The focus of these enhancements was on reducing server overhead  
and load from functions within the environment.
This section will focus on the following enhanced features:
• 
Streaming cluster replication
• 
New ODS design note compression, on-demand collations  
(ODS 51 is required for DAOS)
• 
Simple search controls
Streaming cluster replication
The cluster replication process moves information between the cluster member 
servers to ensure that, in case of a server outage, users maintain access to the 
most up-to-date information. As a new item is received on one server, the 
cluster replication process pushes the information to the other server. A typical 
coniguration of the cluster replication task is to have one instance enabled on 
each server. You can increase the number of cluster replication tasks within the 
environment, but doing so increases disk I/O requirements, and this may have an 
effect on performance.
Lotus Domino 8 introduced a new feature for the cluster replication  
process—Streaming cluster replication. Streaming cluster replication allows for 
the immediate transfer of information from one server to its cluster mate, without 
requiring the server to write to the disk. The replication process occurs within the 
memory, thereby reducing I/O requirements. Cluster replication works closely 
with the normal replication process to ensure that the impact on the environment is 
reduced. Streaming replication is a server-based feature that does not require Lotus 
Notes 8.5.3 or the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 mail template.
New ODS
Lotus Domino 8 includes a new On-Disk Structure (ODS) that will allow the 
implementation of new features to increase performance and reduce the amount of 
overhead required to maintain and manage the environment. The new ODS 48 is not 
a requirement when moving to Lotus Domino 8. Instead, it allows the features of the 
design note compression (the design note compression and view collation features 
require ODS 48.) and on-demand collation to take advantage of the new ODS. 
 

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 110 ]
To upgrade the databases, add Create_R8_Databases=1 to your server's Notes.ini 
ile. To upgrade databases to the new ODS and compress the design, run a copy-style 
compaction. Now with Lotus Domino 8.5, you can use ODS 51—this is required for 
DAOS. You will need to use a different variable  (Create_R85_Databases=1) in the 
notes.ini settings, for this to work correctly.
Design note compression
Design note compression is a new feature provided in Lotus Domino 8 to assist in 
reducing the space required by the database templates. The compression feature 
allows design elements to be compressed, thereby reducing disk requirements.  
Based on preliminary testing, database size could be reduced by around 55 to 60 
percent. Design note compression does not require Lotus Notes 8.5.3 or the Lotus 
Notes 8.5.3 mail template, but as this is a server feature, at least a Lotus Domino 8 
server is required. As shown in the following screenshot, this feature can be enabled 
by checking the Allow compression of database design checkbox:

Chapter 4
[ 111 ]
On-demand collation
A feature added in Lotus Domino 8 is the ability to allow application developers to 
leave the creation of indexes until the end user leverages the sorting feature within 
the database. This option will reduce unnecessary overheads for the Domino server. 
To enable this feature, Lotus Notes 8.5.3 and the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 mail template are 
not required. But as this is a server-based feature, at least a Lotus Domino 8 server is 
required. To enable this feature, add the following line to Notes.ini:
ENABLE_ON_DEMAND_COLLATIONS=1
As index creation takes resources and time, this is going to have an effect on 
performance. Firstly, the creation time of the index will be unknown and thus can't 
be managed. Secondly, the user may have to wait for the index creation to complete 
before the search can be performed.
Managing simple searches effectively
The Lotus Notes/Domino environment allows for feature-rich searching capabilities. 
These capabilities leverage the full text index created for a database. If a full text 
index has not been created when the user searches for the information, the server 
attempts to locate the information within the database. The process of searching the 
database without a full text index can have a signiicant impact on the performance 
of the server. In Lotus Domino 8, a new enhancement is introduced so as to eliminate 
the use of simple searches and thus increase server performance.
By checking the Don't allow simple search checkbox within the Database properties 
tab (as shown in the following screenshot), you can signiicantly enhance performance. 

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 112 ]
If the database does not have a full text index and this feature is enabled, the end 
user will receive an error and the search will not be completed for the database:
There are a number of other new performance-related features and enhancements 
introduced in Lotus Domino 8/8.5. These include improved server availability in 
a cluster and critical request scheduling. A new INI parameter has been added to 
improve server availability in a cluster. When setting up a cluster you specify a port 
for the cluster, and you limit cluster replication only to that speciic port. Cluster 
trafic will fail if the port fails. By using the new parameter you can allow the use  
of other ports. The parameter is Server_Cluster_Default_Port.
If you do not specify a default port in the Server_Cluster_
Default_Port setting, all ports are tried.
One improvement in critical request scheduling is the ability to specify the time 
interval for when a speciic type of administration request will execute. For example, 
if you wanted to prioritize a speciic task, such as renaming a person's documents, 
you could set it to a higher interval to run. By default, it runs daily.

Chapter 4
[ 113 ]
Domino Directory and security 
enhancements
Lotus Domino 8/8.5 introduced a number of important Domino Directory  
and security enhancements. These include:
• 
IBM Tivoli Directory Integrator
• 
DirLint Directory Tool
• 
Authentication through Directory Assistance
• 
Directory Assistance LDAP Coniguration Wizards
• 
People View by Lotus Notes version
• 
Internet Password Lockout
• 
Enhanced Local Database Encryption
• 
Certiier Key Rollover
• 
Single Sign-On (SSO) for LTPAToken2
• 
Certiicate Revocation checking through the Online Certiicate Status 
Protocol (OCSP)
IBM Tivoli Directory Integrator
One of the most complicated problems to solve when implementing Lotus 
Domino (or any system that requires a directory to function) is locating the single 
authoritative source to use for access or identity management. Tivoli Directory 
Integrator (TDI) is a directory integration engine that provides a system that allows 
business rules to be applied to synchronize data in any direction. TDI provides 
different "assembly lines" (integration components that use the TDI API to connect 
various stores so as to allow TDI to apply those business rules).
For example, if you have Microsoft Active Directory for ile and print services, an 
LDAP store for web authentication, SAP or PeopleSoft for HR, or Lotus Domino for 
your mail directory, then TDI will allow granular control of user properties across all 
systems, with TDI serving as the arbiter and synchronizing "master". 

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 114 ]
The following diagram shows the TDI structure:
TDI
AssemblyLines
Java VM
Windows, Linux, AIX, zOS, Sun, HP, (i5/OS in 6.1.1)
Graphical
Integrated
Development
Environment
Web
Administration
and Monitoring
Action Manager
Monitor, control
and log Service
CommandLine
Interface
Services
Execution/RT
environment
Logging, tracing
API & JMX
SystemStore
SystemQueue
Function, delta,
libraries, pooling,
tombstones,
notifications
ACT event
processing
Components
Files
LDAP directories
HTTP, TCP
SNMP, JMX
CCMDB
GLA
more..
JDBC databases
JMS / MQ queues
Web Services
XML, LDIF, DMSL, CSV
This also applies to Lotus Domino. With e-mail, every message or calendar invitation 
that is sent requires a directory lookup to ind the recipient for delivery. In typical 
organizations, the e-mail directory and the authoritative directory are not the same. 
Lotus Domino 8 included a license for TDI to synchronize these directories in a 
manner that has previously been extremely dificult and expensive.
The following diagram shows a connection from Microsoft Active Directory as the 
directory partner for Lotus Domino, where directory entries low bi-directionally 
between the two systems:

Chapter 4
[ 115 ]
Active
Directory
TDI
Lotus
Domino
Applications
Applications
AD change
connector
Domino Users
connector
LDAP
connector
Domino change
connector
Sync adds/mods/deletes to Domino
Sync change to mail address back to AD
Previous versions of Lotus Domino included a tool known as ADSynch to perform 
a similar function. However, this tool was not as lexible or scalable as TDI. As the 
name suggests, ADSynch only synchronizes Active Directory and Domino. TDI can 
connect to nearly any system.
This model provides a single user interface for ID generation and management. If a 
user is created on either side, IDs and ancillary entries are created on the other. This 
could be with two systems as illustrated above, or with many systems and entries 
lowing to all the other systems' user-speciic attributes as deined by TDI.
When implementing Lotus Notes/Domino 8.5.3 in a "green ield" environment or as 
a migration, the directory integration piece is a primary component, not just another 
feature to be added. With the addition of TDI, Lotus Notes/Domino 8.5.3 lets you 
bring in many different directories and provide services much more easily than 
before. However, this does not mean that directory integration should be considered 
less important just because it's not as dificult. Disparate directories in organizations 
today are more prevalent than ive years ago, so this directory integration 
functionality has become more logistically complicated, as tools such as TDI have 
evolved to make the technical aspects simpler. (For a more complete review of 
the TDI features and functionality, you should refer to the IBM Tivoli Directory 
Integrator documentation.)

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 116 ]
DirLint Directory Tool
Domino 8 introduced a new tool called DirLint. This tool lets you verify the 
information that is contained within the directory. It runs against the directory  
and helps you identify issues, including invalid syntax in names and issues with  
the naming hierarchy scheme. It also checks to see if the users' names, that are  
found in groups through directory assistance, are consistent.
DirLint is a command-line utility that is loaded by simply entering the load 
dirlint command in the server console. It provides an XML document as output. 
This document can be read using any Internet web browser. The Lotus Domino 
Server console screen is shown in the following screenshot:
The information that is produced will be stored in \\Domino\data\IBM\IBM_
TECHNICAL_ SUPPORT\lintout_(ServerName)_(Date), as shown in the previous 
screenshot. An example of the information provided in the XML ile is shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 117 ]
Authentication through Directory Assistance
In previous releases of Lotus Domino, Directory Assistance provided all directories 
for both authentication and name resolution when addressing messages. This created 
a situation where ambiguous names would be displayed while a message was being 
addressed if there was an "authentication only" directory included in the directory 
assistance task. Starting in Lotus Domino 8, you have the option through Directory 
Assistance to specify that the server only references directories contained within the 
document during the authentication process. This allows you to effectively deploy 
Directory Assistance for authentication without affecting end users during the 
addressing of messages. The Coniguration Settings document for authentication 
through Directory Assistance is shown in the following screenshot:

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 118 ]
Directory Assistance LDAP Coniguration 
Wizards
Domino 8.5.3 offers coniguration wizards for LDAP directories. In previous releases, 
you needed to know a signiicant amount of information about the LDAP directories 
that were being connected via Directory Assistance. You still need to understand 
basic Directory Assistance and LDAP concepts, but the new Suggest and Verify 
buttons on the coniguration document help you complete the document, thus 
ensuring the proper connectivity to the LDAP servers. Some of the wizard buttons 
run scripts on the Lotus Domino server or connect to the LDAP server directly.  
The following screenshot shows the LDAP coniguration settings:

Chapter 4
[ 119 ]
People view by Lotus Notes version
As users log in to Lotus Domino, the AdminP captures the Lotus Notes version used 
to access the server. The information is stored within the Person documents in the 
Domino Directory as shown in the following screenshot: 
The new People | by Client Version view (see the following screenshot) allows you 
to go to the Domino Directory interface and identify the clients that the users are 
using to access the server. In previous releases, this was a custom view that needed 
to be developed and maintained:
Internet password lockout
Starting in Lotus Domino 8, an Internet password lockout feature was offered.  
This feature provides a mechanism (via the inetlockout.nsf database) to track  
all access attempts to the HTTP environment so that the status of the login attempt  
is logged. The creation of the Internet lockout database can be done manually, during 
server startup after the process has been conigured, upon the irst request to view 
a document, or when a document needs to be created within the database. The only 
caveat is that the service must have been running for a period of 10 minutes if the 
server is not to be rebooted.

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 120 ]
The Internet password lockout feature can be enabled for the entire environment 
through a coniguration document, or via a policy that more granularly assigns the 
ability to lockout users from the HTTP access. The Coniguration Settings document 
does the following: 
• 
Enables the Internet password lockout feature
• 
Sets the logging feature to report lockouts, failures, or both
• 
Sets the maximum number of tries allowed and the lockout expiration timing 
(in minutes, hours, and days), along with the maximum interval between the 
tries (in minutes, hours, and days)
The lockout feature only applies to HTTP access, and a traditional anti-spooing 
mechanism is leveraged within the rich Lotus Notes client so that services such 
as LDAP, POP, IMAP, Domino Internet Inter-ORB Protocol (DIIOP), Lotus 
QuickPlace, and Lotus Sametime are currently not supported with this feature. 
If your Lotus Domino environment is using a customized DSAPI ilter, there is a 
possibility that the Internet password lockout feature will not function, because 
customized DSAPI ilters can be coded to bypass the standard Lotus Domino login 
facility. The following screenshot shows the settings for the Internet lockout feature:
 

Chapter 4
[ 121 ]
When coniguring the Internet password lockout feature via a security policy,  
the same options are presented as with the coniguration document, as shown  
in the following screenshot:
It is important to note that enabling this feature could increase the initial call volume to 
your help desk, or the administrative overhead required to manage passwords, if the 
HTTP password feature is used signiicantly within the organization. Also, malicious 
attacks can occur on the Lotus Domino servers through denial of service attacks. This 
type of attack could signiicantly reduce effectiveness within the environment.
Enhanced local database encryption
Starting in Lotus Domino 8, the encryption level for all new databases will be set 
to Strong Encryption, as shown in the following screenshot. The ability to encrypt 
databases with an end user's ID, to prevent access by other users' IDs, is necessary to 
ensure the protection of data once a database is brought to the local workstation. In 
previous releases, databases had the ability to be encrypted at the simple, medium, 
or strong level, depending on the needs and requirements of the environment and 
the end users. Lotus Domino will still provide backwards compatibility for the 
simple and medium encryption models, but from now on, all new replicas will be 
encrypted as strong:

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 122 ]
Certiier Key Rollover
Lotus Domino administrators can assign a new set of public and private keys to 
a Domino Certiicate Authority (CA). These keys are used to certify the keys of 
Organization Units (OUs), servers, and users in that organization. The process of 
assigning new keys is known as Key Rollover. Rolling over a CA key may become 
necessary if the current key is considered too short for adequate encryption, the current 
key is too old, or if the value of the current private key has been compromised.
When an administrator assigns a new set of keys to a Domino certiicate authority, 
they are created and self-certiied, and added to the top-level certiier ID ile in the 
pending key area of the ID ile. The keys that were previously used are added to the 
archived keys area of the ID ile, and rollover certiicates binding the new and old 
keys are added to the rollover certiicate area of the ID ile.
In order to support certiier key rollover, the Domino trust model has been extended 
to include new types of certiicates, called rollover certiicates. These certiicates are 
issued by an entity to itself. In a hierarchical certiicate, there is a single issuer name,  
a single subject name, and a single subject key. In a rollover certiicate, there is a single 
name (which is both the issuer and the subject) and two subject keys—one key is used 
to sign the certiicate and attests to the fact that the subject name is legitimately in 
possession of the other key.
Generally, when a key is rolled over, two roll-over certiicates are issued—one of 
them is signed by the old key saying that the new key is valid, and the other is 
signed by the new key saying that the old key is valid. Each certiicate has its own 
expiration date.
Rollover certiicates are essential for limiting the expiration dates of certiicates 
issued to the older keys. One of the reasons for rolling over a key is that a former key 
has been compromised or considered to be old enough for the danger of compromise 
to be unacceptable. In such cases, limiting the expiration date of a rollover certiicate 
limits the lifetime of a formerly issued child certiicate. This is done by specifying an 
early enough expiration date in the rollover certiicate.
Single Sign-On (SSO) for LTPAToken2
Multi-server session-based authentication, also known as Single Sign-On (SSO), 
allows web users to log in once to a Domino or WebSphere server, and then access 
other Domino or WebSphere servers in the same DNS domain that is enabled for 
SSO without having to log in again. LTPAToken2 is incompatible with Domino 7 and 
prior releases, but provides SSO security improvements. The new SSO feature makes 

Chapter 4
[ 123 ]
logging in and using multiple servers in a mixed environment easier for users. Web 
browsers must have cookies enabled, as the authentication token that is generated by 
the server is sent to the browser in a cookie.
SSO may be set up by creating a domain-wide coniguration document in the 
directory and enabling the multi-servers option for session-based authentication  
in a website or a server document.
Certiicate revocation checking through the 
Online Certiicate Status Protocol
The Online Certiicate Status Protocol (OCSP) enables applications to determine 
the revocation state of an identiied certiicate. OCSP checks are made during S/
MIME signature veriication and mail encryption by the Lotus Notes client. OCSP is 
enabled through a policy, using the Enable OCSP checking setting in the Keys and 
Certiicates tab, as shown in the following screenshot:
Other Lotus Domino 8/8.5 directory/security features include LDAP server 
improvements for WebSphere Member Manager (WMM) and larger key support.
Enhanced integration with IBM servers 
and tools
The Lotus Notes and Domino environment has continually leveraged other IBM 
technologies to improve performance, reliability, administration, and functionality. 
The Lotus Domino 8 release has built upon prior successes and added more robust 
support for other IBM technologies. This section will focus on the integration of 
WebSphere Portal, and the Tivoli Enterprise Console.

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 124 ]
IBM WebSphere Portal integration wizard
WebSphere Portal has introduced an enhanced integration wizard that  
reduces the complexity required to enable Lotus Domino 8.5.3 and WebSphere  
Portal integration. This includes the setting up of the Common PIM  
(Personal Information Management) Portles (CPP) and the Lotus  
Domino Extended Products Portlets (DEPP).
The wizard automates the following:
• 
Coniguration of single sign-on (includes exporting LTPA token and creating 
a Web SSO document on Lotus Domino)
• 
Coniguration of Lotus Sametime (includes single sign-on, enabling 
awareness for Lotus Domino Web Access, and setting up trusted servers  
in STCENTER.NSF)
• 
Coniguration of Lotus Domino Directory (includes single sign-on, DIIOP 
and coniguring collaborative services to bind to Lotus Domino LDAP)
• 
Coniguration of Lotus Domino mail servers (includes single sign-on, DIIOP, 
notes.ini settings for HTTP, and enabling XML services)
Perhaps the most dramatic improvement is the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 rich client. Lotus 
Notes and Domino 8.5.3 software makes it easy for you to integrate line-of-business 
solutions and data into a new class of applications, called composite applications. Both 
Lotus Domino 8.5.3 and WebSphere Portal 6 servers can host composite applications. 
This will allow clients to run both Domino applications and portlets (as well as servlets 
and Internet applications). This is explained in the following diagram:

Chapter 4
[ 125 ]
IBM Tivoli Enterprise Console integration 
The Tivoli Enterprise Console consolidates events from networks, hardware, and 
software throughout the environment, and presents them in a single monitoring 
interface. Lotus Domino 7 allows you to conigure events that are generated by 
the operating system probes, so that they can be viewed with other events in the 
Enterprise Console.
Lotus Domino 8.5.3 allows you to conigure any event to be forwarded to the 
Enterprise console. The irst thing you need to do is conigure the connectivity to the 
Tivoli Enterprise Console Settings through the Lotus Domino Server Coniguration 
document, as shown in the following screenshot:
It is then necessary to forward the events to the Tivoli Enterprise Console. You do this 
by coniguring the events.nsf database so as to describe the proper Event Handler 
documents required by the Enterprise console, as shown in the following screenshot:

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 126 ]
Lotus Domino 8.5.3 new server 
enhancements
The following sections will cover the new 8.5.3 server enhancements.
8.5.3 generic error clariication
Lotus Domino error messages can sometimes be generic and hard to igure out. 
In Lotus Domino 8.5.3, there has been an effort to add clarity to some of the 
more generic errors. Examples of these generic errors are "Unknown OS Error", 
"Object variable not set", and "Note Item not found". This enhancement will make 
diagnosing and troubleshooting Lotus Domino errors less challenging.
8.5.3 error collection enhancements
In Lotus Domino 8.5.3, Error Collection through the NSD process has improved. 
The summary of memory information has been added to the NSD. Statistics about 
sharing, private, OS, and Java memory are now given. This will allow immediate 
statistic collection to tell if a memory problem exists and will aid in speeding up 
identiication of low memory conditions and memory-related crashes.
8.5.3 replication enhancements
Lotus Domino 8.5.3 has introduced an improvement in replication. This is based 
on the purge interval. A new database option, Purge Interval Replication Control 
(PIRC), will prevent old documents and deletions from replicating into a database. 
PIRC is enabled in the replication settings dialog box under the Space Savers tab.  
In the following screenshot you can see the new setting in the replication settings:

Chapter 4
[ 127 ]
To enable PIRC on multiple databases, run Compact server with the 
new -pirc on switch. An example of this new parameter is ncompact 
foo.nsf -pirc on.
You can also enable Purge Interval Replication Control on multiple databases  
using the administrator client, under Advanced Database Properties as seen  
in the following screenshot:
Once enabled, replication will block all documents that are older than the date 
speciied by the purge interval from replicating into the database. This not only 
prevents old documents from replicating back into the database, but also prevents 
the replication problems that can occur by modifying the "replication since time" 
value. When dealing with pre-8.5.3 clients or servers, NoteUpdate will block 
documents from being saved to a database whose SequenceTime is older than the 
purge interval. There is also a NOPIRC switch. This will allow a single instance 
replication of databases that ignores the PIRC setting. In order to be able to monitor 
this new functionality, a DDM probe can be used to allow the administrator to track 
down "bad" replicas of the database.

Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Server Features
[ 128 ]
8.5.3 AdminP enhancements
Lotus Domino 8.5.3 introduced a new AdminP command in the admin4.nsf 
database. It is called "Rename Person in Calendar Entries and Proiles in Mail File 
Extended". This command runs automatically and manages the correct processing 
of a user rename in all ACLs, calendar proiles, and calendar and scheduling 
documents, in every database that is marked as including a calendar.
As a result of this new AdminP command, the Modify All Names Fields ACL 
setting is no longer necessary. Any changes to it by users are ignored. All servers 
must be 8.5.3 in order for this command to work. The AdminP database should  
also be using the 8.5.3 template.
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at the major new and enhanced feature areas in Lotus 
Domino 8, 8.5 and 8.5.3. This included end user and messaging enhancements, 
administration enhancements, performance enhancements, Domino Directory and 
security enhancements to 8.5, enhanced integration with IBM servers and tools, and 
Lotus Domino 8.5.3 new server enhancements.
In the next chapter, we will examine the deployment enhancements in Lotus Notes 
and Domino 8.5.3.

Deployment Enhancements 
in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
The deployment and management of Lotus Notes/Domino has traditionally been 
divided between the Domino administration staff and the desktop management 
team. In previous releases, the deployment of Lotus Notes was a completely 
standalone process, and Domino administrators relied on the desktop team to  
deploy the client. Lotus Domino then introduced a feature called Smart Upgrade  
to assist with the management and deployment of new Lotus Notes client releases. 
This concept of server-based management of the client was signiicantly enhanced 
with the introduction of policies and enhancements to Smart Upgrade.
The task of managing the Lotus Notes client through Lotus Domino has been 
signiicantly enhanced in Lotus Notes/Domino 8, 8.5, and 8.5.3. With the 
introduction of the Eclipse client platform for Lotus Notes, the Domino server 
becomes a provisioning tool. Advancements in policies and the introduction  
of the database redirect feature also signiicantly improved the ability to manage  
the Lotus Notes environment.
This chapter focuses on the new and improved technologies that allow Lotus 
Domino to better deploy and manage upgrades to the Lotus Notes client.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• 
Client provisioning
• 
Policies
• 
Database redirect
• 
Pushing trusted certiicates to Notes clients

Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
[ 130 ]
Client provisioning
The shifting of Lotus Notes to the Eclipse platform has a signiicant impact on the 
end user community. As noted in Chapter 2, Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client 
Features, the new look and feel of the client and the underlying Eclipse foundation 
enhances the end user environment. Eclipse-based plugins in Lotus Notes extend 
the user's ability to work in a collaborative environment. Unfortunately, the 
management of these new features may require a higher level of user interaction. 
Lotus/IBM has recognized this issue, and has leveraged the native Eclipse 
provisioning architecture to allow for the management of plugins and the desktop 
environment. The introduction of these provisioning features does not replace the 
Smart Upgrade feature; this utility can still be used to deploy versions of the client.
Server-managed provisioning
Lotus Domino 8 offers functionality that allows for the deployment of the full Lotus 
Notes client, Eclipse-based plugins, and applications (native Domino, composite, or 
Expeditor based). The following diagram shows the different models for managing 
the end user environment:
Domino Server
Domino, Composite
or expenditor based
Applications
Eclipse Plugins/
Components
(non-Notes Client)
Smart Upgrade
Components
(Client)
Deploy and
manage
Plugins
Deploy and
manage
Client version
Deploy and
manage
Application
Notes release 8
End User Workstation

Chapter 5
[ 131 ]
Smart Upgrade
The traditional Smart Upgrade feature within the Lotus Domino server can be used 
to deploy Lotus Notes to the end users. The Smart Upgrade feature will assist in 
pushing the entire set of client code to the Lotus Notes user community.
For more information on the Smart Upgrade feature, refer to the Domino 8 
Administrator Help database (http://publib.boulder.ibm.com/infocenter/
domhelp/v8r0/index.jsp).
Eclipse-based provisioning
Lotus Notes 8 is built on the Eclipse foundation. Composite applications are 
considered as features within the Lotus Notes architecture, so their deployment and 
management is handled through the same process as other Eclipse-based features. 
The management of Eclipse-based clients such as Lotus Notes and Sametime 
Connect 7.5.x has now shifted to the native provisioning model. When the end 
user or administrator wants to push out a new feature to Lotus Notes, they will be 
directed to a site.xml, which contains the information for installing the feature. 
The feature that is being installed within the Eclipse framework will have dependent 
plugins required for the feature to function properly.
Starting in Lotus Domino 8, the update.ntf template leverages the native Lotus 
Notes replication and security features, to provide and manage access to new and 
updated features, as shown in the following diagram:
site.xml
\Features
\Plugins

Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
[ 132 ]
Policies
Policies were introduced in earlier releases of Lotus Domino to assist in the 
management of end users through a server-managed process. They are conigured 
through the Domino Directory:
Lotus Domino 8 and 8.5.3 introduce new policy documents, as well as new options 
within existing policy documents. This section will review these new and enhanced 
policies and options. 
It is important to note that Lotus Domino uses dynamic coniguration to 
deploy all policy settings, with the exception of the mail policy settings. 
When end users authenticate with their home servers, the information 
stored within the policy settings' documents is deployed (pushed down) 
to the end users. The mail policy settings are not deployed through the 
dynamic coniguration process. Instead they are deployed throughout 
the environment via the Administration Process (AdminP).

Chapter 5
[ 133 ]
The How to apply this setting feature
In previous releases of Lotus Domino, policies were applied to all end users who 
were conigured to receive them. This was limiting, as it forced users to conform  
to the policies without giving them the option of changing them later, if necessary. 
The new How to apply this setting option allows you to conigure whether the 
policy is applied, using one of the following three options:
• 
No policy, use default value: This option uses the initial coniguration  
upon installation of the client
• 
Set initial value: This option sets the value for the end user, but  
does not prohibit the end user from later changing it to better suit  
current requirements
• 
Set and prevent changes: This option sets the value for the end user  
and enforces the option so that the end user cannot make a change
Activities policy settings document
Lotus Connections does not require the use of Lotus Notes/Domino, but with the 
Eclipse platform, the Activities portion of the product can be leveraged as a plugin to 
the client environment. To support this new product and the plugin, Lotus Domino 
8 contains a new Activities policy document to manage the Activities environment, 
speciically with the ability to conigure the Activities server URL and Activities 
server port. Additionally, you can specify whether or not SSL is leveraged to encrypt 
the username, password, and data.

Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
[ 134 ]
Productivity tools settings document
The support of Open Document Format (ODF) has been extended to Lotus Notes/
Domino through the introduction of productivity tools within the client. To support 
this new feature, Lotus Domino 8 contains a new productivity tools policy document. 
This document can be used to leverage the tools and macros, and gives you the 
ability to choose which Microsoft Ofice and Symphony iles and templates to open, 
by default:
Desktop policy settings document (and setup 
policy settings document)
To ease the management of the environment, the options for the setup policy 
settings document are now also available in the desktop policy settings document. 
You can now use just one document (the desktop policy settings document) to 
establish the desktop policy settings as well as many of the setup policy settings. It is 
recommended that in the future you can use the new, updated desktop policy settings 
document to deine both your desktop policy settings and your setup policy settings.

Chapter 5
[ 135 ]
The desktop policy settings document controls the user's workspace. Desktop 
settings are enforced the irst time a user logs in to Lotus Notes and runs the setup. 
After the initial setup, you can use the policy settings to update the user's desktop 
settings. Users receive updates to the settings when any of the policy settings 
change—the desktop policy settings are enforced the next time that the users 
authenticate with their home server.
Replication settings through the desktop and 
setup policy documents
As customers are consolidating their Lotus Domino environments, the use of the 
local replication model is becoming more popular. Local replication allows end users 
to interact with their mail databases locally on their machines and to leverage the 
native asynchronous notiication process to deliver mail to the workstation.
Deploying the local replication model is the key to the success of the consolidation 
project. With local replica-based mail, users perform all their mail functions in a 
replica stored on the hard drive of the workstation. They can use replication to create 
a local instance of a Domino database on the workstation. Updates, such as receiving 
new mail or template changes, are initially received by the server mail replica. The 
Notes client then pulls these updates to the local database via replication. Any 
changes that have been made on the local mail replica, such as composing new 
mail, deleting mail, or putting it in a folder, are pushed to the Domino server after 
receiving new updates via replication:
Mail\euser.nsf
compAdircat.nsf
Mail\euser.nsf
compAdircat.nsf
Mail\euser.nsf
compAdircat.nsf
Local Replica Model

Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
[ 136 ]
Implementing local replica-based mail allows users to access databases on the 
workstation without requiring a connection to a Domino server. This approach 
provides advantages for users who are connected over a Wide Area Network or a 
Virtual Private Network, as the operations of sending and receiving mail happen 
without the user noticing. By performing these operations in the background, slight 
errors in network communication will not be known to the user. As new messages 
are kept locally until sent, your system will not hang in the Lotus Notes client when 
a server connection is slow or lost.
For the consolidated environment, Lotus Notes clients will be conigured to connect 
to a primary and secondary e-mail server at the closest geographic site. The local 
replication model will be used and new messages will be synchronized with the 
servers in a high priority replication interval of 5–10 minutes. Addressing services 
will be provided by a condensed directory replicated to the local Lotus Notes client 
on a normal replication cycle of 30–60 minutes. Applications will be replicated 
following the normal replication cycle. Lotus Notes 8 clients will use the integrated 
instant messaging services linked to a clustered Sametime instant messaging server.
The desktop policies include a section that allows you to set and enforce replication 
on end users' workstations. In previous versions of Lotus Notes/Domino, there was 
no way to set and/or enforce replication to the end user's desktop. This allowed some 
users to disable replication or set the replication threshold at one minute or less.
The following screenshot outlines the replication settings available through the 
desktop policy. All options have the new How to apply this setting feature to 
enhance the setting of standards throughout the environment:

Chapter 5
[ 137 ]
Security policy settings document
The security policy settings document has been enhanced to allow administrators  
to better manage Lotus Notes and Internet passwords, conigure password policies, 
set up key rollover, and manage administration Execution Control Lists (ECLs).  
In addition to these features, the security policy document in Lotus Domino 8 has 
been enhanced to account for the installation of Eclipse-based plugins. There are 
three options that can be conigured within the security policy document under  
the Signed Plug-in Basics tab, as shown in the following screenshot:
Each option has the ability to be conigured with one of the following values:
• 
Ask the user
• 
Never install
• 
Always install
Lotus Domino 8.5 and 8.5.3 policies
In the following sections, we will review some of the new policy enhancements  
that were introduced in Lotus Notes/Domino 8.5 through 8.5.3. These include:
• 
Dynamic policy settings
• 
Roaming policy settings
• 
Enabling provider IDs for Widgets policy
• 
iNotes policies
• 
Mail quota support in Lite mode
 

Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
[ 138 ]
Dynamic policy settings
In earlier releases of Lotus Notes/Domino, there were two types of policies.  
They are as follows:
• 
Organizational policies: Organizational policies are based on the user's 
hierarchical name and are applied to all users that are registered to a 
particular organizational unit. If a user is moved into that organizational 
unit, the policy will be applied.
• 
Explicit policies: Explicit policies can be assigned to a particular user, or 
group of users. When assigning the policy to a group, the tool would assign 
the policy to every user in the group. This, however, will only run once, at 
the time you assigned the policy. If users were added to the group after the 
policy had been assigned, they would not receive the policy.
New to Lotus Notes/Domino 8.5 is the Dynamic Group support for policies, which 
allows the Domino administrator the ability to assign user policy settings to a user 
group by specifying the group name in a policy document. Dynamic policies allow 
the Domino administrator to set an explicit policy with the group name in it. When 
users are added to the group, they are automatically added to the policies. This 
reduces the amount of time and effort it takes for the Domino administrator to 
manage policies. Once the dynamic policy is created, it never needs to be touched 
again to update who it is assigned to. Just updating the group will take care of this.
To enable this feature, you can go to the Policy Assignment tab in the primary 
Policy document (not a settings document), as shown in the following screenshot:
For this feature to work, the client software version must be 8.0 or greater 
and the user's home server version  must be at least 8.5.

Chapter 5
[ 139 ]
Roaming policy settings
New to Lotus Notes 8.5 is the ile server roaming feature that addresses the needs of 
customers in remote locations who do not have a "local" Lotus Domino server, yet 
need a way for users to roam between multiple workstations. Unlike Domino server 
roaming, where the client operating system can be Windows, Linux, or Macintosh, 
File Server Roaming is restricted to Windows only.
Users who are conigured for ile server roaming have a new Lotus Notes User 
Preference that enables them to manually enable and disable roaming. To conigure 
ile server roaming, use the new Roaming Settings document as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Once the policy is set up, the end user's client must be able to access the ile server. 
In addition, the users must have read/write/modify access to the directory. The 
roaming user's iles are encrypted on the ile server for security.
Policies cannot be used to conigure the Domino server roaming in the 
8.5 release. The Roaming Settings document applies only to ile server 
roaming.

Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
[ 140 ]
Enabling provider IDs for the Widgets policy
Enabling provider IDs for the Widgets policy is a new setting under the Widget tab 
(see the following screenshot). It will allow an administrator to control the widget 
and to allow live text functionality to selected users. This setting will allow the 
administrator to deine what widgets the users can install:
Machine-speciic policies
In Lotus Domino 8.5.3, a new policy has been introduced. This allows an 
administrator to assign a policy to a user based on the characteristics of the user's 
machine. For example you  could create a policy to use managed replicas, only 
applied to laptop users. This is implemented by using the @GetMachineInfo 
function. Lotus Notes clients' version must be 8.5.3 for the policy to work.
The following screenshot shows an example of creating a managed replica  
for a laptop user:

Chapter 5
[ 141 ]
iNotes policies
New to Lotus Notes 8.5 is the ability to use desktop and mail policies to enforce 
settings and preferences for iNotes users. This feature is one that has been requested 
by quite a few customers. The beneit of using policies to enforce settings for 
iNotes users is that now you can apply them to speciic users or groups. Any policy 
settings that were applied to iNotes users and created in an earlier release will still 
be enforced after the upgrade. There is an iNotes policy in 8.5.1 that allows you 
to disable local archiving using a mail policy setting. You can apply this policy to 
groups or individual users. There is a new Lotus iNotes tab on the Mail Settings 
policy document as shown in the following screenshot:

Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
[ 142 ]
Starting in iNotes 8.5.1, Archive policies for archiving to the server only 
are supported.
With the Notes client, the Dynamic Client Coniguration (DCC) is what propagates 
the policy. By default, DCC runs automatically on the irst authentication with the 
users' home mail server, after the policy has been set. But with iNotes, policies are 
propagated after the AdminP runs as scheduled, or when you manually run the tell 
AdminP process mail policy command. The user must log out of the browser and 
log back in for the policy to take effect. Policies that are deployed to the client are 
stored in the local address book in the $contacts view. Now with policies in iNotes, 
they are stored in the mail ile itself. To check this, you need to view the mail ile 
with NotesPeek. In NotesPeek navigate to Proiles | inotesproile and look for the 
$FieldsSetByPolicy item. This item lists the preferences that have been set via policy, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Mail quota support in Lite mode
One of several new settings that can be set in policy documents is Mail quota support 
in Lite mode. This policy can be found in the desktop policies document under the 
Mail tab. The following screenshot shows the Desktop Settings document:

Chapter 5
[ 143 ]
The following screenshot shows how it appears to the user in the browser:
Some other features that can be controlled in iNotes and iNotes Lite through a 
desktop policy document are mark documents read when viewed in the preview 
pane, sign mail that is sent, encrypt mail that is sent, as well as prompt when a new 
mail arrives. For a full list of desktop policy settings that can be applied to iNotes 
and iNotes Lite user, see the IBM Lotus Domino and Notes Information Center.
Now you can push the Eclipse preferences and notes.ini settings during client 
installation or upgradation, as well as deployment of the Notes client features and 
plugins, using widget deployment methods. This can be found on the Custom 
Settings tab on the desktop policy.
You can use the notes.ini setting, quotawarningtext=<value>, to specify the 
URL or the text that will be displayed when a Notes user's mail ile size exceeds the 
mail quota threshold or the maximum mail quota size. In the notes.ini setting, you 
specify a URL or actual text that will display. One message you can provide to your 
users is instructions for reducing the size of their mail ile.

Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
[ 144 ]
Database redirect
In previous releases of Notes/Domino, when the administrator moved or deleted a 
database, it was sometimes dificult to have end users redirect their links to the new 
location or (in the case of deletion) shift them to a replica. To address this, Domino 8 
introduced a new feature called database redirect.
Redirecting when databases are moved 
To redirect to a database that has been moved, open the administration client  
and select the database under the iles tab. Then, in the right-hand pane, go to 
Database | Move....:
You will get a dialog box as shown in the following screenshot. Select the servers 
to which you want to move the database, and select the directory in which the 
databases should be placed. In the right-hand pane, select the server, and in the 
lower right-hand section, check the Create a redirect marker for updating client 
references checkbox. This creates the redirection after the administrative process 
completes the move:

Chapter 5
[ 145 ]
Redirecting when databases are deleted 
Under the administration client iles tab, select the database to be moved. Then, in 
the right-hand pane, go to Database | Delete, as shown in the following screenshot:

Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
[ 146 ]
You will see a dialog box as shown in the following screenshot. In the dialog box, 
check the Create a marker that allows clients to update their references to this 
database checkbox:
Then choose the server to which users will be redirected to access the database.  
This is very useful when deleting a database on a speciic server where the end  
user population is known:
You can then move users to a replica on another server to help the load to balance 
within the environment. When the dialog box as shown in the following screenshot 
is displayed, click on the Add button to select the replica to which users are to  
be redirected:

Chapter 5
[ 147 ]
When selecting the database for redirection, you have the option of selecting which 
users should be redirected to the replica of the database: 
Then click on the OK button in the dialog box to conirm the redirect.

Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3
[ 148 ]
Pushing trusted certiicates to Notes 
clients
Cross-certiicates can be created in the Domino Directory for Internet certiiers  
and Lotus Notes certiiers and then pushed down to the local contacts database. 
Cross-certiicates are used to establish client trust of a certiier when accessing 
servers, reading encrypted S/MIME mail, or installing signed Lotus Notes client 
plugins. Pushing cross-certiicates to users will prevent end users from being 
prompted to cross-certify. You can also push Internet certiiers to clients and  
enable users to create cross-certiicates themselves. You can do this through  
Domino security policy settings or through customization of the Lotus Notes  
client installation kit.
Summary
In this chapter, we have examined a number of important Notes/Domino 8, 8.5, and 
8.5.3 features that can make rolling out your new deployment signiicantly easier. We 
discussed client provisioning, including Eclipse-based client and server provisioning 
functionality. We also looked at policy enhancements and the new database redirect 
feature. Lotus Notes 8, 8.5, and 8.5.3 have made some great improvements to the 
policy functionality introduced in the 6.x code stream, making it even easier to 
control your end users' experience.
In the next chapter, we will cover the new features in releases Lotus Domino 8,  
and Lotus Domino 8.5 up to Lotus Domino 8.5.3.

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
The release of Domino 8.5 centered on improvements to overall performance and 
compatibility. The new releases of Domino server code have focused on reducing 
the total cost of ownership and simplifying administration for the environment. 
There are a number of components that are included in the Domino 8.5 release that 
accelerate these savings—most notably the Domino Attachment Object Service 
(DAOS) and Document Body Compression. While the DAOS and compression 
components have provided accelerated savings within environments, this is only 
part of the story.
The latest release of Domino provides signiicant improvements in CPU and disk 
I/O performance, which offers the opportunity to better consolidate and leverage the 
hardware in the environment to host more end users. In addition to the performance 
improvements, signiicant administrative tools have been added to simplify 
management of the environment. This is done by enhancing the management of 
users' identities with ID Vault, access to the environment through the Notes Shared 
Login feature, and overall system health through the utilization of the Domino 
Coniguration Tuner (DCT). We will discuss the Domino Coniguration Tuner (DCT) 
in detail in Chapter 11, Domino Coniguration Tuner.
The goal of this chapter is to provide an overview of the new enhancements and 
features that have been included in the latest versions of the Domino product. We 
will also take a brief look at the future road map of the IBM Lotus Domino product. 
The IBM Lotus Notes design team is continuously adding enhancements to the 
product offering, which results in delivering more value to the end user and to the 
support and administrative processes. This drives down environment costs and 
delivers enhanced value to the IBM customers.

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 150 ]
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
• 
Domino Attachment and Object Service
• 
Document Body Compression
• 
Lotus Notes Shared Login
• 
ID Vault
• 
Auto-populated groups
• 
Performance enhancements
• 
iNotes and Quickr integration 
• 
Quickr integration
• 
The future road map (Project Vulcan)
Domino Attachment and Object Service
Domino Attachment and Object Service was introduced in version 8.5 to address 
the space issue on Mail and Application servers. In previous versions of Lotus 
Notes, and later, Domino, there was an implementation of the Single Copy Object 
Store (SCOS) that could be employed to reduce the overall footprint of the mail 
environment. The functional limitations and administrative overhead made the 
implementation of this technology very dificult in large organizations. With the 
introduction of DAOS, small and large organizations will be able to gain the beneits 
of a reduced footprint to deliver an enhanced environment in a more cost-effective 
manner. The following sections will provide an overview of the DAOS technology 
and some high-level implementation steps.
The DAOS technology is a process by which the Domino server identiies messages 
that contain an attachment and then shifts that attachment to the ilesystem in the 
form of a Notes Large Object (NLO) that is stored in a subdirectory on the server. 
A reference to the NLO is placed in the end users' mail database, rather than the 
attachment itself being stored in the mail database. If an attachment is sent to 
multiple users, references are placed in all of the mail databases, and only one copy 
of the attachment is stored on the server. If that message is replied to, or forwarded, 
the reference is included and not the attachment. It is important to note that DAOS 
stores the attachments on a per server basis. So, if there are four users who sent 
the message, and if three of the users are located on one server and one of them is 
located on another server, two copies of the attachment will be placed within DAOS, 
on separate servers. To aid in the effectiveness of DAOS, grouping the users on a 
server by department or by functionality is optimal, but not necessary.

Chapter 6
[ 151 ]
User1.nsf
User2.nsf
User3.nsf
User4.nsf
Lotus Domino
Mail Servers
End User
Mail Databases
DAOS Reference Files
to Manage Service
Files in DAOS Subdirectory
DAOS.cfg
DAOScat.nsf
DAOS.cfg
DAOScat.nsf
Attachment A
Attachment B
Attachment C
Attachment A
Attachment B
Attachment C
The DAOS manages the attachments within the environment from the time a new 
mail arrives. As shown in the following diagram, when a new message arrives at the 
server, the DAOS removes the attachments from the message for all recipients whose 
databases are participating in DAOS, creates and moves an NLO ile to the DAOS 
subdirectory, and places a reference in the header of the message:
New Message
arrives
NLO File is
created and
placed in
Subdirectory
Reference to NLO
file is placed in
Message
Reference
information is
stored in DAOS
indexes
There is an attachment volume limit on the the DAOS repository. In each 
DAOS subdirectory, the maximum limit is up to 1,000 subdirectories, 
with a limit of 40,000 iles in each, or a total of 40 million attachments.

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 152 ]
Advantages of DAOS
A test by Lotus has determined that most Domino environments can achieve savings 
when DAOS is implemented in the environment. These savings can range from 
very small numbers, if attachments are not used within the environment, to a very 
signiicant number, if end users send attachments extensively. The percentage of 
reduction to the storage environment will vary, so it is recommended that, prior 
implementing DAOS, the administration team run a utility to determine the impact.
The Domino development team has created the DAOS Estimator tool, which 
can perform a scan of all databases on the server and produce a report that will 
summarize the potential savings to be gained from implementing the tool. For  
more details, visit the following URL:  
http://www-01.ibm.com/support/docview.wss?rs=463&uid=swg24021920
There are a number of articles that have been written outlining the 
beneits of DAOS that can be used as a reference, but the best reference 
is always your environment. If you are going to leverage the DAOS 
Estimator tool, please read the instructions at the preceding URL, and 
follow the best practices outlined, to ensure minimal impact on the 
production environment.
The Estimator tool provides a complete breakdown for every database in the 
environment; the following screenshot displays the summary information that is 
provided by the Estimator tool. When run on a production environment, the tool 
outlined a potential saving of 38 percent in storage, as a result of DAOS alone:

Chapter 6
[ 153 ]
Setting up DAOS
Once you have determined that leveraging DAOS in your environment will be 
productive, it is important to properly conigure the environment to support  
the service. It is important to understand that transaction logging is required to  
implement DAOS and must be enabled once DAOS is implemented. When a  
database on a server has DAOS enabled, the contents of the message, including  
the attachment, are included in the transaction log. If there is a failure on the server 
and the log is replayed, all of the contents will be written, including the attachment.
Once transaction logging is enabled in the environment, the next step is to ensure 
that all of the databases are at On-Disk Structure (ODS) 51. Other features available 
within Domino, such as compression, require a minimum of ODS 48. Once the ODS 
is at the proper level, the DAOS service needs to be enabled and conigured on the 
server. To conigure the DAOS service, the server coniguration document will need 
to be modiied. Please keep in mind that the server will need to be recycled for the 
settings to take effect; make sure that enabling the service its within your maintenance 
windows and the settings have been tested to ensure no end user impact.
Locate the server coniguration document that you want to enable DAOS on.  
Open the server coniguration document. Go to the DAOS tab and click on  
the Edit Server button.
Click on the Store ile attachments in DAOS drop-down box and change it  
to Enabled. This will expose three additional ields, as shown in the following 
screenshot. You can conigure a minimum size for attachments to participate  
in the service, and the location of the DAOS path. The DAOS directory can be  
housed outside of the data directory. 

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 154 ]
Refer to the Help database and to the DAOS Best Practices document at http://
www-10.lotus.com/ldd/dominowiki.nsf/dx/daos-best-practices, to ensure 
proper placement of the directory), and the number of days that attachments will 
remain in the DAOS directory until they are removed, once the last reference is 
removed from databases in the environment:
The next step is to enable DAOS on the databases that are intended to leverage the 
service. In the administrator client on the Files tab, highlight the databases and click 
on the Advanced Properties... button.
In the Advanced Database Properties dialog box, locate the Use Domino 
Attachment and Object Service option and select it (see the following screenshot). 
This will include the database in the DAOS service. Once this option is set, the 
database will have its attachments referenced by the DAOS service. If this option 
is removed later, the DAOS server will continue to manage attachments for the 
database until the compact -c -daos off command is executed on the database.  
This will bring the attachments back into the database:
 

Chapter 6
[ 155 ]
Now the server has been conigured and all current databases that need to be 
included in the DAOS server have also been conigured. To enable new databases  
to be included in the DAOS environment, the notes.ini ile needs to be modiied  
to include this Create_R85_Databases=1. Once this setting is included, newly 
created databases will be included.

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 156 ]
To this point, the server is conigured for DAOS, the current databases have been  
set to be included in the service, and all future databases will be included, but no 
legacy data has been moved to the service to start the process of saving data. To 
include current data on the DAOS server, from the administration clients' server 
console, execute the load compact -c -daos on command, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
The implementation of DAOS does not have an impact on the quota or limits that are 
put in place within the environment. The logical size of a mail ile will include the 
elements that are stored in the DAOS service. For example, if a user's mail database 
is identiied as 260 MB, the actual physical size of the database on the server may be 
150 MB.
Document Body Compression
With the expanding use of graphics within the body of e-mail messages and the 
growth of high resolution graphics in signature iles, a large volume of storage is 
being consumed. While DAOS is effective in removing the attachments from an 
e-mail, Document Body Compression is designed to reduce the overall storage 
requirements by compressing elements within the body of the message. The process 
of compressing non-summary information within the body of a message has been 
shown to reduce the overall mail database requirements by up to 60 percent. This 
compression feature requires that databases be at a minimum of ODS 48. Later 
versions of the ODS, such as ODS 51, which is provided in version 8.5, can also be 
leveraged. Please refer to the Domino 8.5 Administration Help for more current 
information on how to update the ODS version on databases.
In addition to upgrading the servers to 8.0.1 (as a minimum) and the ODS (ODS 48 
as a minimum), the databases will need to be enabled for future documents and the 
older documents already present in the databases.

Chapter 6
[ 157 ]
To enable compression on future documents, the Compress document data checkbox 
under Advanced Database Properties... needs to be checked. The process can be done 
on an individual database (or on a group of databases) through the administration 
client, by going to the Files view, selecting the iles and clicking on Advanced 
Properties... on the sidebar.
There are a number of different options that are available on the Advanced Database 
Properties... tab; the selections on your databases may be different from what is 
presented in the following example. Locate the Compress document data option and 
select it. Click on the OK button to apply the settings for the selected databases, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 158 ]
The next step is to go back and compress the data that already exists within  
the databases. From the administration clients' server console, execute the  
load compact –c -v command:
The databases will participate in document body compression until the 
administration team decompresses the data. To decompress the data within the 
databases that have been compressed, from the administration clients' server console, 
execute the load compact –c -v command.
Lotus Notes Shared Login 
Previous versions of the Lotus Notes environment had a single-login feature 
that leveraged the Lotus Notes ID functionality. An additional set of iles and 
functionality were installed to pass the Windows password to the Client Single 
Logon feature. When the user logged into a Windows-based workstation, the feature 
captured the password that was utilized and then presented that password on login 
to the Notes environment. The standard way to access the Notes environment is to 
leverage the native password to unlock the ID ile.
Password
ID File
(with Encryption Key(s))
Domino Access

Chapter 6
[ 159 ]
The client single-login feature required that the Windows and Notes passwords  
be synchronized. When either password was changed, the user was required to  
go through steps to ensure that the password was appropriately passed to the  
other system to ensure synchronization. As a result, when the password was  
forgotten and reset from a Windows perspective, the client was unable to access  
the Domino environment directly without going through a different process to  
modify the password.
The new Notes Shared Login (NSL) effectively removes the password requirements 
from the Notes ID and shifts the responsibility for authentication to the Windows 
login. As a result of the architecture, the Windows platform is the only supported 
environment; NSL will not work with the MAC or Linux desktop systems. Password 
changes and resets are conducted through the Windows authentication environment 
and the credentials are stored on the local machine. As a result, environments such 
as Citrix and the Notes USB (on a stick) environment are not supported.
A secure
Token from
Windows
ID File
(with Encryption Key(s))
Domino Access
The implementation of the NSL feature is carried out by removing previous 
implementations of Client Single Logon and the implementation of a policy for 
users who will be leveraging the NSL feature. The feature is enabled and managed 
through a security policy. If the environment already has a security policy enabled, 
it can be modiied to enable the NSL feature. As an administrative team, you may 
choose to implement the NSL feature outside of the current security policies. If this  
is the case, create a new security policy. The policy allows the administrative team  
to enable the NSL feature, allowing the users to participate, and allows for the use  
of standard or custom dialog boxes to activate and deactivate usage. 

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 160 ]
The policy document shown in the following screenshot outlines the settings that 
will enable the feature:
Once the security policy is enforced, the user will participate in the NSL process. 
The end user will be notiied by a standardized dialog box that they are now 
participating in NSL (see the following screenshot):

Chapter 6
[ 161 ]
If the administrative team allows the end user to make changes to whether they 
participate in the NSL process, they can modify this setting by accessing the User 
Security... dialog box, as shown in the following screenshot:
In the User Security dialog box (as shown in the following screenshot), the option  
for participating in NSL is identiied as Log in to Notes using your operating system 
login box. The end user can check or uncheck the box as per their requirements:
The new NSL feature can offer an enhanced user experience but requires some 
planning and implementation across the environment to ensure proper utilization.  
It will be important to leverage the appropriate resources (online or through a  
service organization) to ensure the proper implementation of the feature.
ID Vault
The Notes ID Vault is a new feature within Domino that allows for the centralized 
management and maintenance of the ID iles within the environment. This includes 
setting and restoring passwords, management of multiple IDs, removing end user 
interaction during the rename process, and additional operations.

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 162 ]
The ID Vault process requires the creation of an ID vault through the administrators' 
client. As shown in the following screenshot, clicking on the Create button 
will provide a step-by-step coniguration utility. Please ensure that you plan 
appropriately prior to implementing this feature within your environment:
The initial coniguration screen will provide an overview of the creation process.  
As shown in the following screenshot, click on the Next button to advance to the 
next screen:

Chapter 6
[ 163 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, the initial step is to create the ID Vault 
database that will provide the functionality for the environment. Keep in mind,  
as noted on the screen, that once the process is completed and the vault is created, 
the vault's name cannot be changed. Click on the Next button to continue:
Now, the vault is created with an ID associated for handling the management of the 
process. Provide a password for the ID Vault process and click on the Next button to 
continue. This is shown in the following screenshot:

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 164 ]
The ID Vault resides on an initial server; this step in the process will outline the 
server on which the initial database will reside. Additional replicas of the vault can 
be created at a later point in time, as noted in the following screenshot. Click on the 
Next button to continue:
The ID Vault is managed by an administrator or a group of administrators. At this 
stage in the coniguration process, as shown in the following screenshot, identify  
the administrators for the ID Vault. Click on the Next button to continue:

Chapter 6
[ 165 ]
The administrator will need to assign the organizational units that will participate in 
the ID Vault process on the next screen, and then the authorities will be named for 
each organization. To simplify the management process, the end users can be given 
the ability to reset their passwords by selecting the Self-service password reset 
authority option, as shown in the following screenshot. Click the Next button on 
each screen to continue:
The ID Vault process needs to be assigned to a security policy document within the 
environment. The administrative team can create a new policy at this stage or modify 
an existing policy document to contain the ID Vault information. In this example, an 
existing document is modiied. Click on the Next button to continue:
Then, the coniguration tool will prompt for a custom dialog Help screen for 
assisting users with resetting their passwords. Click on the OK button to continue:

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 166 ]
The tool will prompt for the IDs of the organization and organizational units that 
will participate in the ID Vault process. Once this is completed, the Vault will be 
created on the server, and the security policy identiied will be modiied to enable 
the ID Vault process for users within the environment. Click on the Close button to 
complete the coniguration process. Users who have been assigned the policy will 
have their IDs loaded into the tool and will be presented with the opportunity to 
reset their own passwords, if required.
The new ID Vault feature can offer an enhanced user experience but requires some 
planning and implementation across the environment to ensure proper utilization.  
It will be important to leverage the appropriate resources (online or through a 
services organization) to ensure the proper implementation of the feature.
Auto-populated groups
The management of policies and distribution lists based on the users located 
on a server has always been an effective management tool. Unfortunately, the 
process of managing the group membership has been a manual task. Typically, the 
administration team updates the group membership list during the user registration 
and deletion process. The new auto-populated group feature allows updating of 
group membership when the update task is run on the Domino server. The resulting 
groups allow the administration team to effectively apply policies to the users who 
use the mail server as their home server.
The process of administering the auto-populated groups feature requires the 
coniguration of the Directory Proile and the individual group properties. The 
Domino Group Proile can be accessed by opening the Lotus Domino Directory in 
either the Notes or the Administrative client. Go to Actions | Edit Directory Proile 
and you will get the following screen:

Chapter 6
[ 167 ]
Set the Auto-populated group Members update interval option to the appropriate 
setting for the environment; the default setting is 30 minutes. After setting the 
coniguration, click Save & Close to conirm the new setting:
The next step is to conigure the groups that will leverage the auto-population 
feature. In the Groups section of the Domino Directory, click on Add Group  
to begin the coniguration:
 

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 168 ]
It is important to set the Auto Populate Method option to Home Server and list 
the appropriate server in the Home Server ield. After coniguring the group, click 
on Save & Close to create the new group. The new group membership will be 
populated based on the users listed as utilizing the speciied home server, including 
the member speciied in the Additional Members ield and excluding the members 
speciied in the Excluded Members ield. The auto-populated list cannot be 
manually changed; therefore, it is important to manage the inclusion and exclusion 
of members through the Group document. If the group grows too large, the  
Auto-populate feature will create subgroups and populate them through the  
Domino server task.
If the number of users is too large for the NameLookup process to complete, the 
updating of the group membership will not occur. In the event that Domino  
Domain Monitoring is currently being leveraged in the environment, the  
following error may be identiied if the group membership exceeds the  
NameLookup threshold for the server:
Search for auto-populated group members failed for group MailServer01: 
NAMELookups are limited on this server to a size smaller than what would  
be returned. See your Domino Administrator for more information.
The administration team for the environment will be required to increase the 
threshold for NameLookups by coniguring the notes.ini setting—Namelookup_
max_mb=1. It is recommended to replace the 1 with a larger value starting at 2 and 
adjusting appropriately for your environment.
Please refer to the Domino 8.5 Administration Help documentation for more current 
information on this feature.
GNU Zip
Reducing the impact of the Domino server environment in terms of bandwidth has 
been greatly enhanced through the support of GNU Zip (Gzip) technology that was 
introduced for the Domino Web Server in version 8.5. This support will effectively 
allow for the leveraging of Gzip technology within the content stored on the 
Domino Web Server. It is important to understand the coniguration requirements 
for leveraging the Gzip technology when deploying it within Domino Web Server 
content. The following are examples of coniguration requirements, as noted in the 
Domino 8.5 Administration Help Database. Please refer to this section in the Help 
database for complete information prior to deployment:

Chapter 6
[ 169 ]
• 
The notes.ini ile must not contain the following setting: 
HTTPDisablePreCompressedGzipFiles=1.
• 
The name of the compressed ile is the name of the original ile with an 
additional extension of .gz. For example, the gzip counterpart of c:\notes\
data\domino\html\foo.html is c:\notes\data\domino\html\foo.html.
gz. (A browser sees this ile as http://<servername>/foo.html.)
• 
The original ile must be present in the same directory as the .gz ile.  
The original ile is served if it is newer than the .gz ile or compression  
is disabled.
Performance enhancements
The Domino development team has identiied a number of enhancements to server 
performance by implementing the new features available in Domino 8.5. The overall 
goal was to reduce load on the servers through the implementation of DAOS, 
compression, and transaction logging, to lower the CPU and disk I/O requirements. 
In addition to the new optional features, the development team enhanced the router 
to increase performance. The router has been optimized to include multiple threads, 
so mail lows through the mail box in a more eficient manner. As a result of the new 
design, multiple mail low processes occur in parallel, and as a result, delays in one 
process do not affect other processes in mail low.
The Domino Server Performance team has published a number of articles related 
to the new enhancements, on the Domino Wiki, and a series of articles on Domino 
performance have been posted on developerWorks (http://www.ibm.com/
developerworks/lotus/library/domino85-performance/). The following is a 
sample from one of the published articles. Please refer to online resources for the 
most up-to-date information on performance measurements and enhancements. The 
Domino 8.5 performance article simulated a 4,000-user workload across six different 
platforms that Domino 8.5.x is supported on and compared the loads against similar 
Domino 8.0.x-supported environments. There were signiicant reductions seen across 
the platforms, particularly in disk operations and bytes per second. 

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 170 ]
The graph in the following diagram shows server resource reduction with Lotus 
Domino 8.5, with 4,000 simulated Lotus Notes users:
iNotes and Quickr integration
One of the changes in iNotes in Domino 8.5 is the name. For this release, IBM Lotus 
Domino Web Access (DWA) has been renamed IBM Lotus iNotes. iNotes Web 
Access was the original name of the product before it was changed to Domino 
Web Access in release 6.0.3. The features that have been updated in Domino 8.5 are 
focused on bringing the same functionality of the Notes client to iNotes, as well as 
an effort to match the user interfaces between the iNotes Full and Lite modes, so 
that they offer a single-user experience in iNotes. Quickr integration has also been 
introduced in this release. In the following sections, we will cover the improvements 
and updates in iNotes 8.5.
iNotes and Notes client similarities
The following sections will compare the similarities between the IBM Lotus Notes 
client and the IBM Lotus iNotes web client.

Chapter 6
[ 171 ]
User Interface 
We will irst look at some of the more signiicant changes made to iNotes 8.5 to make 
it more similar to the Notes client in terms of functionality and user interface (UI). 
There is now a new, tabbed framework in iNotes 8.5 Full mode. Later, we will look at 
some of the areas that are not consistent between iNotes 8.5 and Notes 8.5. The irst 
thing you will notice when opening an iNotes 8.5 mail ile is the improved UI. Now, 
the tabs formed when opening new messages or other items look like they do in the 
Notes client:

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 172 ]
To compare with the IBM Lotus Notes client inbox UI, the IBM Lotus iNotes view of 
the inbox is shown in the following screenshot:
Another UI change was made with the placement of the quota indicator. Prior 
releases of DWA had a quota indicator. In iNotes 8.5, the quota indicator has been 
re-positioned (see the following screenshot) to be more congruent with the Notes 8.5 
client quota indicator:
 

Chapter 6
[ 173 ]
The Quota indicator only appears for users that have 
a quota set.
Preferences
In iNotes 8.5, under Preferences | Mail |General, there is a new section called 
Outgoing Mail. This section contains a new option called Spell-check message 
before sending, as shown in the following screenshot. This was previously only 
available in the Lotus Notes client:
The All Documents and Sent views
In iNotes 8.5, a message opened from the All Documents or the Sent view opens 
as a tab at the top, as in the Notes client. This functionality is new in iNotes 8.5. 
Previously, in DWA 8.0.x and prior releases, mail messages opened as separate 
windows/dialog boxes. This functionality is helpful when trying to use pop-up 
blockers in your browser.

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 174 ]
Sidebar
The sidebar was a major enhancement in the Notes 8.5 client. Now, the Calendar 
sidebar exists (Day At A Glance) in iNotes 8.5, as in the Notes client. Calendar is 
not alone in the sidebar; you would also see the Sametime plugin if Sametime were 
installed and conigured. The sidebar did not exist in DWA 8.0.x.
iNotes and Notes client differences
There are not that many areas that are signiicantly different between iNotes 8.5  
and the Notes 8.5 client. In this section, we will highlight a few areas where there  
are differences.
Switching
When switching between functional areas, you will notice some slight differences.  
In iNotes, you can click the icon representations with a single click. In the Notes 
client, you have more options for switching but they all involve at least two clicks.
The following screenshot shows you how to switch in the Notes 8.5 client:
The following screenshot shows another option to switch in the Lotus  
Notes 8.5 client:

Chapter 6
[ 175 ]
In the following screenshot, we will see how to switch in iNotes:
Re-ordering tabs
Another functionality that exists in the Notes client, that does not exist in iNotes,  
is the ability to reorder tabs.
Calendar overlay
The new ability to overlay Google calendars now exists in iNotes 8.5 as well as in 
the Notes client. There are some differences in the way this functions as well as in 
the setup procedures. The terminology is different in each client type. The following 
screenshot shows the view from iNotes 8.5:

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 176 ]
In iNotes, this feature is called My Calendars (see the preceding screenshot). In version 
8.5 clients, this view is Show Calendars (see the following screenshot). In the Notes 8.5 
client, there is a View this calendar when ofline or on a mobile device checkbox. This 
option does not exist in iNotes. A policy or notes.ini parameter is needed to enable 
the calendar overlay feature in iNotes; neither is needed in the Notes client. The feature 
is enabled by default:
To enable My Calendars, the Domino administrator can create a mail 
policy settings document for iNotes users and set the ield Allow 
Calendar Subscriptions to Enable or set the iNotes_WA_CalOverlay=1 
parameter in the notes.ini ile on the Domino server. The ini parameter 
will override the policy setting on servers that it is set on.

Chapter 6
[ 177 ]
There are additional differences in the calendar overlay functionality. Once your 
calendar has been added, if you attempt to modify the URL for the calendar overlay 
in iNotes, there is no way to edit the URL. It appears in the Modify Calendar dialog 
box, but the URL is not editable. The only items you can change are the colors, icon 
and a checkbox for taking the calendar ofline. In iNotes 8.5, you can take your 
Google and other calendar types ofline. You cannot do so with the Notes 8.5 client.
Finally, the following is a list of calendars that can be overlaid in Notes 8.5 clients  
but not in iNotes 8.5:
• 
Other Notes user calendars
• 
Notes TeamRoom calendars
• 
Other Notes application calendars
• 
iCalendar feeds (.ics)
• 
Activities (Lotus Connections) calendars
iNotes modes—features that are the same
Let's examine the areas of iNotes Full and Lite modes that are the same.
Preferences
In previous releases of DWA, the Preferences menu option was only available in the 
Full mode. However, in iNotes Web Access, the Preferences menu option is available 
in both Full and Lite modes. The following screenshot shows the iNotes Lite mode:
The following screenshot shows the iNotes Full mode:

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 178 ]
Previously, the More option in the action bar was only available in the Full mode. 
However, from iNotes 8.5 Lite, the More option in the action bar is available in 
both Full and Lite modes. This allows the iNotes Lite mode users to set up or make 
changes to the Out of Ofice... feature as well as change other preferences under the 
Preferences option, as shown in the following screenshot:
The right-click menu
The right-click menu existed in DWA 8.0.1 Full mode only. In DWA 8.0.1 Lite mode, 
you can see the standard browser menu choices. The right-click menu in the Inbox 
view has now been added to Lite mode. These menu choices now exist in both 
iNotes 8.5 Full and Lite modes:

Chapter 6
[ 179 ]
In DWA 8.0.1 Full mode, you were able to drag-and-drop a document into a folder; 
this functionality did not exist in Lite mode. In iNotes 8.5, this functionality works in 
both Full and Lite modes.
Domino Web Access console
One interesting and helpful feature that was introduced in 8.0.1 DWA Lite mode 
was the Domino Web Access console. This allows Lotus technical support to collect 
additional log and error information. Starting with iNotes 8.5, the Domino Web 
Access console is available in Full and Lite modes. To enable the console in iNotes 
8.5, hold the Ctrl key while clicking the IBM Lotus Notes logo in the upper-left corner 
of the browser.
Calendar
Another aspect of iNotes 8.5 Lite mode, that places it more on par with Full mode, is 
the addition of the calendar functionality. In DWA 8.0.1, you could not access your 
calendar in Lite mode. You had to irst switch to the Full mode to open the calendar. 
Now, you no longer have to switch to the Full mode to view your calendar; you can 
do this in the Lite mode, too.
iNotes modes—features that are different
Now, we will cover the features that are different between iNotes 8.5 Full and  
Lite modes.

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 180 ]
In the Lite mode, the only switcher icon choices are Mail, Calendar, and Contacts, 
as shown in the following screenshot. You do not see choices for switching to Home, 
To Do, or Notebook, as these functional areas are not available in the Lite mode, 
although the Preferences tab may lead you to believe otherwise, due to the Display 
Options drop-down box:
Furthermore, under Preferences | Basics, notice the option Enable Instant 
messaging (highlighted in the following screenshot). This Sametime integration 
feature is not an option in Lite mode, even though it appears as a selectable choice  
in the Lite mode preferences:

Chapter 6
[ 181 ]
In the Preferences tab, go to Mail | Display and look for the Do not show remote 
images without permission option (highlighted in the following screenshot). This 
image-security feature, which prevents an initial loading of images in mail messages 
until you click on the Show Images button, exists only in iNotes Full mode, even 
though it also appears in Preferences while you are in the Lite mode:
In the Lite mode, regardless of how the Do not show remote images without 
permission option is set, all images will automatically be displayed. As you can see, 
although all of the preferences from the Full mode are displayed in the Lite mode, 
they are not all functional.
As we have seen with Preferences, Mail, and Calendar, navigators in iNotes Full 
and Lite modes relect some of the features available in one mode but not the other. 
The following items are in the Calendar view navigator in Full mode and are missing 
from Lite mode:
• 
The Group Calendar and Meeting Notices views
• 
The Other Calendars option
• 
The My Calendars option
This means that you cannot view delegated calendars or overlay Google calendars 
while you are in the Lite mode.

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 182 ]
iNotes 8.5.1 new features
iNotes 8.5.1 has introduced several new features in the following areas:
• 
New user interface enhancements
• 
ID Vault synchronization for iNotes
• 
iNotes INI settings
• 
Other features
New user interface enhancements
Starting with IBM Lotus iNotes 8.5.2, the inbox will automatically refresh. There are 
now also unread counts for folders as well as the inbox.
Another enhancement is the addition of scroll hints; now, when scrolling through 
a large inbox, a hint box will appear to show you where you are in the view. The 
following screenshot demonstrates this new feature:

Chapter 6
[ 183 ]
This feature can be enabled through a new preference setting, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
ID Vault synchronization with iNotes
Synching your ID with the ID vault can now be accomplished via an iNotes 
preference setting, as shown in the following screenshot:

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 184 ]
iNotes INI settings
In IBM Lotus Notes 8.5.1, there are several new INI settings that, when added to the 
server hosting the iNotes mail iles, affect the behavior of iNotes users. The settings 
and the behaviors that are affected are as follows:
• 
iNOTES_WA_DISABLE_WEBSTYLE_SEARCH=1: This setting will revert Notes to 
the old behavior in the previous 8.x version, for the results of the FT search 
via HTTP to be in Notes-style syntax.
• 
iNOTES_WA_EnableOpenLinkInEditor=0: This setting will disable links so 
that users cannot identify or open links when editing or replying (this setting 
is applicable for IE only and is set to 1 by default).
• 
iNOTES_WA_ChromeBrowserBlock=0: This setting will unblock the Google 
Chrome browser.
• 
NOTES_WA_AllowPassThruHtml=1: This setting will allow pass-through of 
HTML in Domino 8.5.1. Pass-through of HTML that is enclosed in square 
brackets is disabled, by default.
• 
iNOTES_WA_PrefetchDocuments=<value>: This setting will have messages 
open faster because the contents have already been fetched. It can be set to 
any one of the following values:
 °
1: Fetches all unread documents shown in the mail view
 °
2: Fetches all documents shown in the mail view
Enabling the iNOTES_WA_PrefetchDocuments setting might have 
bandwidth or server CPU consumption trade-offs.
Other features
In iNotes 8.5.1, there is now a method to customize color gradients. All gradient ills 
and colors are now deined in the dwa.properties ile. To do this, irst edit the dwa.
properties ile in forms85.nsf. To change colors, edit this ile in Domino Designer 
and provide new color values.

Chapter 6
[ 185 ]
iNotes 8.5.2—new features
iNotes 8.5.2 has introduced several new features in the following areas:
• 
Mail
• 
Calendar
• 
Other features
Mail
In new messages, you can spell-check the body of the message. Misspelled words 
will appear with a squiggly red line, as they do in the Lotus Notes client. If you open 
a new tab, an asterisk will indicate unsaved changes. When the changes are saved, 
the asterisk will be removed. In Lite mode, you can now sign and send encrypted 
messages. Another feature that brings parity to the Lotus Notes client is the ability  
to mark the subject as Conidential, as shown in the following screenshot:
There have been some changes in the year format for users. Now, you can choose 
between two-digit and four-digit year formats by using the International Date 
Settings preference. To set this for all users on a server, use the INI parameter 
iNotes_WA_Prefer2DigitYearInView to disable that preference and enforce  
the two-digit date format.
 

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 186 ]
Calendar
In the Calendar, there is now a new Sametime 8.5 Meeting Room type, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
Users can now add secondary calendars in addition to the primary calendars. The 
secondary calendars are displayed next to the day of the date header in the calendar.
Other features
The following supported browsers were added in iNotes 8.5.2:
• 
Firefox 3.6
• 
Internet Explorer 8
• 
Safari 4.x on Macintosh OS
From an administration perspective, one of the more helpful changes introduced in 
IBM Lotus Notes 8.5.2 is the standalone install package for web controls. This allows 
administrators to push the controls to end users' Windows-based workstations. This 
is useful when web browsers blocking pop-ups and workstations are locked down to 
prevent users from installing software. The following screenshot shows the ActiveX 
installer for 8.5.2:

Chapter 6
[ 187 ]
Finally, in iNotes 8.5.2, there is the introduction of new supported devices. These are 
the Apple iPad and the Android OS-based devices.
iNotes 8.5.3—new features
iNotes 8.5.3 has introduced several new features in the following areas:
• 
Mail
• 
Calendar
• 
Contacts
• 
Supported Browsers

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 188 ]
Mail
To further the parity between the thin client and the full Lotus Notes 8.5.3 client, you 
can now sort e-mails by subject as the "RE:" and "FW:" are stripped out. This follows 
the behavior in the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 client:
Furthermore, you can now choose from multiple e-mail signatures.
Calendar
Many improvements have been made in the calendar parity of the Lotus Notes full 
client and IBM Lotus Notes 8.5.3. Counter-proposed meetings now show as ghosted 
on your calendar. This allows you to see the counter-proposed meeting on your 
calendar before you accept it.
Auto-processing of calendar entries has improved in IBM Lotus iNotes 8.5.3,  
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 189 ]
 
IBM Lotus iNotes 8.5.3 users can use these new calendar display preferences to 
improve the automatic handling of meeting updates. You now have the following 
options: When I add or remove meeting invitees, update the other participants  
and Automatically process meeting updates and apply changes to meetings.
Contacts
Contacts in the mail ile, seen in the Contacts view, have been improved to enhance 
the web-based experience. Users can now perform actions from the Contacts view 
in the mail ile, just as you would in your local contacts ile. This feature requires the 
8.5.3 template. You can now also import contacts from non-English CSV iles.
Supported browsers
New to IBM Lotus iNotes 8.5.3 is support for Google Chrome 12.

Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements
[ 190 ]
Quickr integration
Lotus Quickr is a team collaboration software that allows you to collaborate, share 
content, and work online with your teams. Lotus Quickr now integrates with IBM 
Lotus Notes by allowing established preferred Lotus Quickr places within IBM 
Lotus Notes preferences. You can store received attachments within a Lotus Quickr 
place. While composing outgoing messages, you can now browse and insert links 
to Lotus Quickr iles, folders, or places. IBM Lotus Notes automatically stores such 
attachments in a prespeciied Lotus Quickr place and sends links to those iles, 
when sending any outgoing attachments. IBM Lotus Notes can also be set to prompt 
the user about whether it should move such attachments to a Lotus Quickr store 
and send links or whether to send the attachments as they are, when sending any 
outgoing attachments.
You must enable session-based authentication using either a single server or multiple 
servers, also known as Single Sign-On (SSO), for your Lotus Domino mail server to 
use Lotus Quickr integration features in IBM Lotus Notes 8.5. Users can access Lotus 
Quickr servers just by allowing the LTPA token to be passed through the whitelist, 
if your Lotus Domino server is conigured for SSO and the Lotus Quickr servers 
that you are connecting to are in the same domain. Users will be prompted during 
each session to authenticate with the servers they are connecting to, when the Lotus 
Quickr server is not in the same domain.
The future road map (Project Vulcan)
Social technologies are moving quickly into the enterprise. Companies overall 
are starting to move away from e-mail- and document-centered systems to new 
social-based systems. The enterprise has discovered social software and cloud 
technologies to help move into the next millennium. At Lotusphere, in January 2010, 
IBM announced the blueprint for the future of collaboration. This vision was called 
Project Vulcan. This IBM project provided a speciic road map that includes future 
elements of collaboration, integration, messaging, and application development. The 
key theme of this particular project from IBM includes social and business analytics. 
IBM said, "The vision of Project Vulcan intends to deliver collaboration across 
company boundaries". As IBM expands this project into speciic IBM Lotus software 
products, you will see the use of the following:
• 
HTML5
• 
xPages
• 
Web services

Chapter 6
[ 191 ]
Each of these new integration points will be hosted on the new Eclipse Lotus Notes 
8.x client. Project Vulcan is the next part of these "new" technologies. Lotus Notes is a 
growing platform and will continue to grow with each new type of social software.
Summary
Lotus Domino 8.5.3 is an improvement over previous releases. The development 
team has introduced some signiicant new features that will assist with providing 
existing environments an enhanced Return On Investment (ROI) by upgrading 
and deploying the new features. Delivering an enhanced ROI to match the end user 
experience that was seen with Notes 8.5 was achieved. This can be leveraged by 
moving forward with an upgrade or deployment of Lotus Domino 8.5.3.
It is very important to access the appropriate resources to ensure that the 
deployment of the new features closely matches with the knowledge gained from 
other installations. This chapter was intended to provide an overview of the new 
release of Domino and provide some steps on how to best take advantage of them in 
a new or existing environment. It should not be used to replace other tools available 
online or through a Service Provider, which may outline updated information that 
may be relected differently.
In the next chapter, we will cover best practices when upgrading to IBM Lotus Notes 
and Domino 8.5.3.


Upgrading to Lotus Notes 
and Domino 8.5.3
After you have decided to upgrade to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3, you will need 
to create an upgrade plan. Most of the companies are not able to upgrade all users 
(clients) and servers at once. There are several things that you need to consider 
before you upgrade. This chapter explains these things. Overall, the upgrade process 
from the Notes 6 or Notes 7 clients is relatively easy. You can use the Smart Upgrade 
process for upgrading these clients.
The Smart Upgrade Tracking reports will only be created for Notes 
client versions 6.5.3 and later.
This chapter is divided into two main sections. In the irst section, we look at the 
Lotus Notes and Domino upgrade process in general, discussing concepts and steps 
that should be considered whenever you upgrade to any major release of Lotus 
Notes and Domino. In the second section, we look at upgrade issues that are speciic 
to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• 
The Lotus Notes and Domino upgrade process
• 
The Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3 upgrade process
• 
A use case document example

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 194 ]
The Lotus Notes and Domino upgrade 
process
The Lotus Notes and Domino upgrade process consists of a number of phases.  
These are listed as follows:
• 
Vision and direction
• 
High-level architecture analysis
• 
Use cases
• 
Requirements
• 
Agreements
• 
Final target architecture
• 
Creating the design and upgrade plans
• 
Creating a test plan
• 
Testing
• 
Creating upgrade process documents and plans
• 
Executing logistics plans and schedules
• 
Creating pilots
• 
Updating and inal changes
• 
Transformation management
These phases are explained in the sections that follow.
Vision and direction
This phase is where you deine your goals for the upgrade. These goals can include 
your business needs, a basic idea of your current IT architecture, and some rough 
timelines for the upgrade. A simple vision charter might read something like this:
THE COMPANY will upgrade their ND5/6/7/8 architecture to Lotus Domino 8.5.3 in X 
months, taking advantage of new Lotus Domino 8.5.3 features, and will also consolidate 
several servers during the upgrade.

Chapter 7
[ 195 ]
High-level architecture analysis
Before you upgrade, make sure that you know what you have. Experience tells 
us that most companies cannot identify 100 percent of their environment. A good 
review is prudent, so as to keep surprises to a minimum. Take the time to obtain a 
list of applications, including e-mail applications and custom applications, backup 
systems, virus scanners, and web-based services and appliances. Build an inventory 
of all things that "touch" Domino. This will help you identify any items that may be 
affected by the upgrade.
One of the best methods to help determine your inventory is to use native Lotus 
Notes/Domino tools. These include the following:
• 
log.nsf (the statlog process will create the entries in log.nsf—database 
inventory)
• 
names.nsf (use the server view to get a complete inventory of servers)
• 
statrep.nsf (the collector process will update this database)
• 
DDM.NSF (if enabled, use this to determine the overall health of your Domino 
environment)
• 
Domino Coniguration Tuner: This tool provides an extensive list of 
potential problems that should be ixed before you upgrade your servers
Use cases
A use case, in this context, is a statement and description of a system/service that 
deines the use and behavior of an environment. A basic use case should include the 
following elements:
• 
Upgrade steps
• 
Description of requirements
• 
Goals to help target requirements
• 
Identiication of actors (these are the people using the system, for example, 
users, administrators, operators, and so on)
• 
Identiication of associations between use cases and actors
These documents will help you build a set of requirements. In each use case, you 
should also identify various states of the upgrade. Examples include upgrading the 
servers and enabling the new mail policy feature, once all of the clients and servers 
have been upgraded.

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 196 ]
A use case can point to the need for:
• 
Client upgrade
• 
Server upgrade
• 
On-Disk Structure (ODS) upgrade (optional with Lotus Domino 8.5.3)
• 
Communications and transformation management
• 
Application upgrade
• 
Custom API upgrades
• 
Calendaring and scheduling (including rooms and resources)
• 
Administration tool upgrade
• 
SMTP service upgrade
• 
Security impacts
• 
Directory impacts
• 
Process upgrade
• 
Help desk
A sample use case is included at the end of this chapter.
As already stated, ODS 51 is optional with Lotus Domino 8.5.3, but ODS 
51 is needed if you require the use of the Domino Attachment Object 
Service (DAOS).
Requirements
When all the use cases have been created and agreed on, you can summarize them 
into a total list of requirements. These use cases and requirements can be used 
to determine upgrade steps, use of new features, systemic impacts, budgets, and 
timelines. These requirements will be used to create the "draft" target architecture.

Chapter 7
[ 197 ]
Agreements
This phase is where you will build out your budgets, build out decision records,  
and obtain agreements from all interested parties in your organization. After all  
of the agreements have been approved and signed, your target architecture can  
be inalized.
Final target architecture
At this point, the inal target architecture can be created. In most organizations, this 
will normally be a phased approach. It can take several iterations to get to this inal 
architecture. One example would be the new Lotus Domino 8.5.3 programming 
functions. In order to take advantage of this feature, you will need to have both 
servers and clients upgraded before the new functions are enabled.
Creating the design and upgrade plans
This is where you start to detail the upgrade process. You will need to begin 
documenting the process that will be used as a step-by-step upgrade guide.
Creating a test plan
Remember the identiication of new features and requirements? This is where you 
create a test plan to test each of the upgrade elements, which includes the server, 
clients, applications, custom tools, and other items.

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 198 ]
Testing
The following lowchart shows the testing and pilot process:
Testing
Create Upgrade
Process Documents
and Plans
Execute
Logistics
Plans and
Schedules
Create Pilots
Plans and docs
Execute
Technical
Pilots
Execute
Process Pilots
Each part of the upgrade should be tested before you actually put any new technology 
into a production environment. Most companies execute tests that are known as unit 
or component tests. These tests are the basic components of the new technology. For 
example, you might choose to test the Lotus Notes 8.5.3 client on a sampling of your 
current PCs. This particular test veriies that Lotus Notes 8.5.3 will run on your existing 
hardware and does not affect any other applications and/or the PC environment. As 
testing progresses, you will start to include each element into the environment, for 
example, Notes 8.5.3 on the network, Lotus Notes 8.5.3 on applications, Lotus Notes 
8.5.3 client that will access a Domino 6 or 7 server, and so on.

Chapter 7
[ 199 ]
The goal is to test Notes/Domino in a holistic test environment that replicates 
various parts of your production environment.
One very important step is to contact each vendor for any third-party 
tools and utilities. The upgrade process will make changes to the 
directory, and then to each server. Be sure to contact every vendor and 
determine whether or not Lotus Domino 8.5.3 (or any new release of 
Notes/Domino) is supported by that vendor. Double-check to verify 
that APIs have been recompiled (as needed) by the vendor, and that the 
new directory is supported. Then do your own testing, to make sure 
that all APIs are working as advertised by the vendor.
Creating upgrade process documents and 
plans
Create all of the upgrade steps, procedures, and schedules, training, and Frequently 
Asked Questions documents. Some of these documents will be the actual upgrade 
steps and checklists. If you are upgrading a large number of servers and users, then 
you can use a tracking database and/or a spreadsheet. The results of the testing will 
be manifested in the upgrade process. Also, communication plans should be created 
at this time.
Executing logistics plans and schedules
This is where you order any equipment, hire any additional staff, and start the 
overall upgrade process. Included in the scheduling process will be the execution  
of pilots.
Creating pilots
Next, create and document each pilot that is needed. You will need two pilot types:
• 
Non-production pilots (technical pilots and process pilots)
• 
Production pilots

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 200 ]
As we mentioned earlier, you should test as much as possible in a test environment, 
before executing a production rollout. These non-production pilots are an 
opportunity to test each step of a process. These should include:
• 
Upgrade steps
• 
Training and education
• 
Communications
• 
Help desk testing and FAQ
• 
Executive help staff
One important step of the pilots is "lessons learned". Each pilot is an opportunity  
to modify upgrade steps and processes.
Non-production pilots are normally separated into two types. These are listed  
as follows:
• 
Technical pilots: Technical pilots verify that each holistic step of the upgrade 
works correctly
• 
Process pilots: Process pilots verify that the actual checklists and documents 
are correct
Once all of the pilots have been completed, you will need to start the actual upgrade 
process. Use a set of "friendly" users (never use executives!) for the irst pilot. The 
preceding diagram shows two production pilots. In reality, you will execute as many 
as are needed. Each pilot will provide lessons learned to be used for the next pilot.
Updating and inal change
After all the pilots have been executed, and you have had an opportunity to update 
the processes and make any inal changes to the overall upgrade process, you will be 
ready to roll out the upgrade to your enterprise.
Transformation Management
When upgrade/migration projects fail, it is always the "people issues", not technical 
problems, that are the root cause. Transformation Management (TM) is a formal 
process to help identify and mitigate people issues associated with each project. 
Change is implied by any upgrade and/or migration. TM takes into consideration 
the various work environment issues that occur during the upgrade/migration 
project. One core fundamental part of any TM plan is communication.

Chapter 7
[ 201 ]
Here is a simple example that could form the basis of the communication part of a 
TM plan.
 Your company is taking on a migration/upgrade to Lotus Domino 8.5.3. Your 
company may experience a few changes to the architecture, some changes to end 
user clients, and possibly a few changes to the administration teams. In some cases, 
the end user and administrators may require some training on Notes and Lotus 
Domino 8.5.3. Your company should consider the following activities as part of  
the administration and migration team's transformation management activities:
• 
Develop a team name, for example, "The Lotus Domino 8.5.3 Upgrade 
Team". Also create a team logo.
• 
Develop a team charter, for example, "Migrate/upgrade x number of users  
in n number of weeks".
• 
Announce the date of the inal "migration done" party.
• 
Create an intranet website with a list of FAQs, and the names and pictures  
of the migration team members.
• 
Create a Red/Yellow team to isolate the migration team from the end users 
(post-migration issues).
• 
Develop two sets of communications from the migration team to end users. 
This should be added to the overall TM planning.
• 
Introduce users to the migration team. These users will be notiied about  
the migration team and their purpose. Also, users should be instructed  
about whom they should contact with questions about the upcoming 
migration. LPS/ISSL recommends that the help desk be trained about  
the migration and possible end user questions.
• 
A pre-migration FAQ should be created and hosted on the Intranet.
• 
Print posters with the name of the team and the logo at the top of the  
poster, and place them where they are likely to be seen (break rooms, 
elevators, and so on).
• 
After users have been migrated, send out a weekly message to the migrated 
users, with "Tips of the week" and other relevant information.
• 
Three milestone meetings will be needed for your company's  
migration/upgrade:
 °
The opening meeting: The CIO or CEO should open this meeting. 
A quick ive-minute pep talk is all that is needed from the VPs, 
but it could be important for the team to let them know that there 
is executive support. The lead project manager will launch the 
migration, announce the plans, hand out procedures, and review  
the whole process.
 

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 202 ]
 °
The "half-way" meeting: This occurs when 50 percent of users have 
been migrated. This is a great cause for celebration, so give out some 
special awards!
 °
The inal party: At the "98 percent of users migrated" mark, close out 
the migration. Move the remainder of the migration processes to the 
permanent support staff.
• 
 Close the project.
• 
Transfer any leftover migrated users into the Customer Ready State and then 
notify the support staff that this step has been completed.
A "go/no-go" decision is made before the production pilots are executed. This 
decision will be based on the results of the testing and pilots. If all have been 
successful, then the next step will be the production pilots:
Go
NO-Go
Decision
Production
Pilot 1
Production
Pilot 2
Update and
Final Change
Roll out to
Enterprise
End

Chapter 7
[ 203 ]
The Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3 
upgrade process
So far, we have discussed a generic Lotus Notes/Domino upgrade process.  
In this section, we will discuss the speciic upgrade process for Lotus Notes/Lotus 
Domino 8.5.3.
Reviewing the current infrastructure  
(The health check)
Before you upgrade, you will need to identify the components and systems that will 
be affected by this upgrade. This is an opportunity for you to execute a system-wide 
health check. This normally includes a review of the following:
• 
Servers: Identify any existing issues, such as crashes, problem servers, and 
slow access. Your servers should be tested before you process the upgrade. 
Be sure to set up similar servers in a test environment, and use Server.Load 
to test the performance capabilities of your servers. Also, make sure that your 
servers are not "sick"; you should not upgrade a server that is crashing or 
having hardware issues. Fix issues and problems before you upgrade.
• 
Monitoring systems: This includes Tivoli, DDM, BMC, and so on. There are 
many new monitoring features with Lotus Domino 8.5.3. Be sure that your 
current monitoring systems work with Lotus Domino 8.5.3 and that there  
are no conlicts with any new features.
• 
Directory architecture: This includes directory analysis and directory 
customization. This is a big step. Analyze your directory, and determine 
whether or not there is any customization. Determine whether or not any 
custom design features (views, forms, and so on) need to be moved into 
a new directory. In some cases, you may ind these customizations are no 
longer needed in Lotus Domino 8.5.3.
• 
Clients: Test your clients and make sure that your current hardware and 
software coniguration will support Notes 8.5.3.
• 
PDA and/or other wireless systems: With each new release, new features are 
added. Be sure to verify that any new features don't conlict with your PDA 
devices. For example, we have seen in the past where an ODS change broke 
the connection between the local PDA and the data on the Notes Client.
• 
AdminP status: This is a great opportunity to make sure that admin4.nsf is 
replicating to all servers and that all AdminP ACL database assignments are 
correct. Also, there are new features that allow you to set up several directory 
AdminP servers using Extended Directory access control.

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 204 ]
• 
Application analysis: This includes any issues with applications being 
upgraded, custom templates, and API analysis. Be sure to test your 
applications with Lotus Domino 8.5.3. In general, upgrading to Lotus 
Domino 8.5.3 should not result in any issues relating to existing applications, 
but it's always a good idea to test with any upgrade. Make sure that your 
custom APIs are still working as needed with Lotus Domino 8.5.3. In some 
cases, you may need to recompile some of these APIs, and in other cases,  
you may no longer need the APIs.
• 
Custom templates: This includes checking for customization of system 
templates. You can compare this customization with any new features 
in Lotus Domino 8.5.3, and determine whether or not you need to move 
this customization into the templates and applications. The use of the Ives 
TeamStudio Delta tool will help you with your analysis.
• 
Messaging architecture: This includes NRPC services, SMTP services, 
messaging tracking, enterprise-wide communications, mass mail, corporate 
communication, and co-existence with other messaging systems and other 
tools. NRPC rarely causes problems during or after upgrades, but it's never 
a bad idea to test this anyway. Make sure that NRPC Notes Name Networks 
(NNN) or Domino Named Networks (DNN) work as before the upgrade. 
Test each SMTP services feature that is enabled. Test each Domino message 
tracking feature that is enabled in your current environment. There are a 
wide variety of mass-mailing tools and other customized features that may 
be installed in your environment. Be sure to test each of these tools. Large 
enterprise organizations can have several varieties of mail systems and 
servers. Test any custom interfaces, software, and SMTP connectivity. Be sure 
and check out the new Out-of-Ofice coniguration features for ND8—you 
now have the option of using the router to launch the Out-of-Ofice messages 
in place of the standard agent.
• 
Other services and servers: There are a large number of Lotus/IBM 
products. All of these need to be tested. Examples include Quickr, Sametime, 
LEI, SMTP gateways, virus scanners, backup services, and provisioning 
systems. Ensure that these products (and the versions that you have 
installed) are supported by Lotus/Domino 8.5.3.
• 
Domino replication: This includes activity logging, replication topology, 
replication settings, connection documents, access control, replication 
schedules, cluster replication, if enabled. Our experience with most upgrades 
is that there is rarely an issue with replication and upgrades, but be sure to 
test this.

Chapter 7
[ 205 ]
• 
Messaging topology: This includes server topology, named networks, 
domains, inbound and outbound message low, routing requirements, 
routing priorities, volume metrics, client strategy, server versus local 
replication, alternative client access (POP, IMAP, web, and mobile users),  
and hand-held device recommended practices (Treo versus Blackberry).  
With ND7 a new task was added—the Room and Resource Manager  
task. Be sure to test your Rooms and Resources architecture as part of  
your upgrade.
• 
Mail-enabled applications: Most Domino architectures will have several 
mail-enabled applications. These can, and will, be affected by an upgrade 
to a new release of Domino. Overall, Lotus Notes and Domino provide 
great backward compatibility, but you still need to exercise due diligence 
regarding any new LotusScript elements, new "@functions", and new design 
elements. At the minimum, verify that the mail-in database records are 
functioning correctly.
• 
Architecture: This includes high-level review and connections to internal 
systems such as networks, uniied messaging, and SMTP/Internet domains.
• 
Network: This includes platforms, DNS/DHCP, and remote access. Overall, 
we see very little impact to this area, with an upgrade. Again, take the time  
to test the new release to make sure that the "basics" work.
• 
Calendar and scheduling: This includes user calendaring (delegation, 
manager access, and so on) and enterprise scheduling (resources, shared 
group calendars, and so on).
• 
Directory: This includes directory architecture (in particular directory 
design), directory management, directory synchronization, naming  
(servers, users, organizations and organizational units).
• 
Security: This includes ACL access, anonymous access, encryption  
and certiicates, certiication practice statement, organization structure,  
ID management, and access controls (ile server system, console and  
physical, server access/passthru/deny, client execution control, and 
administration access).
• 
Capacity: Determine if servers can handle current user loads (mail ile size 
and hardware sizing), load balancing/sage, and capacity planning. Our 
experience is that each new release of Domino provides better performance 
in the CPU and memory, and that each new release provides more features. 
With each new feature or function, you will ind additional resources being 
used—in particular, system memory. Be sure to monitor, via statistical 
baselines, the impact of a new release on the current setup of hardware.

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 206 ]
• 
Coniguration settings: These are a very important part of the server 
upgrade. Review each server coniguration to determine if you need  
to make any changes.
• 
Environmental variables: Check for abandoned Notes.ini variables and 
obsolete Notes.ini settings. Check the online support tools for this list.  
The release notes may also have some information about the current set  
of supported Notes.ini variables.
• 
Management and administration: Change control, administration  
model, client management, remote access recommendations, stafing  
levels, service monitoring and reporting, systems management, and  
backup and restore models.
• 
ESX/VMware: There are a number of Domino enterprises that are looking 
at ESX and VMware. At the time of writing, there are limited sets of data 
regarding the successful use of ESX for Domino "messaging". If you are 
considering using ESX for ND8 messaging, we suggest the following:
 °
Review the current supportability statements (URL and release notes) 
from IBM on this topic.
 °
If possible, do not upgrade to both ND8 and ESX/VMware at the 
same time. This is the old rule of not making too many changes  
at once.
 °
Be sure to set up a test lab to check how ESX will work with a shared 
CPU and memory model. Also, pay close attention to the Disk I/O 
queues. Server.Load can help you with testing loads/scripts.
If you are using clustering, you should monitor the work queue depth and seconds 
on queue statistics.
It is recommended that you run the Domino Coniguration Tuner 
(DCT) before you upgrade your servers. This tool will evaluate server 
settings according to a set list of best practices. At the time of writing, 
this tool will analyze servers in a single domain, which can be evaluated 
together. Once the DCT tool executes, it will generate a number of 
valuable reports that explain each rule output that the DCT ran against. 
For more details, see Chapter 11, Domino Coniguration Tuner.
Overall, the DCT is easy to use—as of this writing, there is no easy way to export  
the reports (look for an enhancement in the future for this). A simple LotusScript 
agent that you can run to export the DCT data has been provided by the following 
sample code:

Chapter 7
[ 207 ]
The following code is not supported; use at your own risk. This is not 
oficial Lotus Notes code.
Sub Initialize
 
 '* Name:  DCT export Sample Code
 '* Author: Authors
 '* Notes:  This code is not supported -- use at your own risk
 '*    
 
 
 '--- Declare Class Variables
 
 Dim session As New NotesSession
 Dim db As NotesDatabase
 Dim view As NotesView
 Dim doc As NotesDocument
 Dim rtitem As NotesRichTextItem
 
 '--- Declare Variables
 
 Dim strStatus As String
 Dim strServer As String
 Dim strSeverity As String
 Dim strExplanation As String
 Dim strRecommendations As String
 Dim strDatabases As String
 Dim strDatabasesList As String
 Dim StrException As String
 Dim strLink_0, strLink_1, strLink_2, strLink_3, strLink_4 As String
 Dim strTemp As String
 
 Dim intDebug As Integer
 Dim intFileNum As Integer
 Dim intLoop As Integer
 
 '--- Initialize Class Variables
 
 Set db = session.CurrentDatabase
 Set view = db.GetView( "vwScansMostRecent" )
 Set doc = view.GetFirstDocument
 
 '--- Initialize Variables

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 208 ]
 
 intDebug = False
 intFileNum = Freefile()
 
 '--- Open the report file
 
 Open "c:\dct_report.htm" For Output As #intFileNum
 
 '--- Loop through the documents in the View
 
 While Not ( doc Is Nothing )
 
  '--- Set the first text fields
  strStatus = doc.RuleStatus(0)
  strServer = doc.ServerName(0)
  strSeverity = doc.Severity(0)
 
  '--- Set the Explanation Rich Text Field
  Set rtitem = doc.GetFirstItem( "Explanation" )
  If Not (rtitem Is Nothing) Then strExplanation = rtitem.Text
 
  '--- Set the Recommendations Rich Text Field
  Set rtitem = doc.GetFirstItem( "Suggestion" )
  If Not (rtitem Is Nothing) Then strRecommendations = rtitem.Text
 
  '--- Set the remaining fields
  strException = doc.Exception(0)
  strDatabases = doc.ResultList(0)
  strLink_0 = doc.Link_0(0)
  strLink_1 = doc.Link_1(0)
  strLink_2 = doc.Link_2(0)
  strLink_3 = doc.Link_3(0)
  strLink_4 = doc.Link_4(0)
 
  '--- Process the database list
 
  strDatabasesList = ""
  For intLoop = 1 To Len(strDatabases)
   strTemp = Mid$(strDatabases, intLoop, 1)
   If strTemp = "," Then strDatabasesList = strDatabasesList + "<br>"  
   Else strDatabasesList = strDatabasesList + strTemp
  Next
 
  '--- If Debug mode, display contents of the document

Chapter 7
[ 209 ]
  If intDebug = True Then Messagebox _
  "Status:" & Chr$(9) & strStatus & Chr$(10) & Chr$(13) & _
  "Server:" & Chr$(9) & strServer & Chr$(10) & Chr$(13) & _
  "Severity:" & Chr$(9) & strSeverity & Chr$(10) & Chr$(13) & _
  "Explanation:" & Chr$(9) & strExplanation & Chr$(10) & Chr$(13) & _
  "Recommendations:" & Chr$(9) & strRecommendations & Chr$(10) &  
    Chr$(13) & _
  "Exception:" & Chr$(9) & strException & Chr$(10) & Chr$(13) & _
  "Databases:" & Chr$(9) & strDatabasesList & Chr$(10) & Chr$(13) & _
  "Link 0:" & Chr$(9) & strLink_0 & Chr$(10) & Chr$(13) & _
  "Link 1:" & Chr$(9) & strLink_1 & Chr$(10) & Chr$(13) & _
  "Link 2:" & Chr$(9) & strLink_2 & Chr$(10) & Chr$(13) & _
  "Link 3:" & Chr$(9) & strLink_3 & Chr$(10) & Chr$(13) & _
  "Link 4:" & Chr$(9) & strLink_4,, "Debug"
 
  '--- Write the document to a file
  Print #intFileNum, "<hr>Status: " & Chr$(9) & strStatus & "<br><br>"
  Print #intFileNum, "Server: " & Chr$(9) & strServer & "<br><br>"
  Print #intFileNum, "Severity: " & Chr$(9) & strSeverity & "<br><br>"
  Print #intFileNum, "Explanation: " & Chr$(9) & strExplanation & 
"<br><br>"
  Print #intFileNum, "Recommendations: " & Chr$(9) & 
strRecommendations & "<br><br>"
  If strException <> "" Then Print #intFileNum, "Exception: " & 
Chr$(9) & strException & "<br><br>"
  If strDatabasesList <> "" Then Print #intFileNum, "Databases: " & 
Chr$(9) & strDatabasesList & "<br><br>"
  If strLink_0 <> "" Then Print #intFileNum, "Link 0: " & Chr$(9) & 
strLink_0 & "<br><br>"
  If strLink_1 <> "" Then Print #intFileNum, "Link 1: " & Chr$(9) & 
strLink_1 & "<br><br>"
  If strLink_2 <> "" Then Print #intFileNum, "Link 2: " & Chr$(9) & 
strLink_2 & "<br><br>"
  If strLink_3 <> "" Then Print #intFileNum, "Link 3: " & Chr$(9) & 
strLink_3 & "<br><br>"
  If strLink_4 <> "" Then Print #intFileNum, "Link 4: " & Chr$(9) & 
strLink_4 & "<br><br>"
 
  '--- Process the next document
  Set doc = view.GetNextDocument( doc )
 Wend
 
 '--- Close the report file
 Close #intFileNum
 

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 210 ]
 '--- Write a message to show the process is complete
 Messagebox "Report complete",,"Process"
 
End Sub
The upgrade process
After you have checked the infrastructure, it is time to start the upgrade. The steps 
mentioned in the following sections show the basic upgrade path. This path can 
vary, based on your research and the use cases that you have created.
Systemic normalization
The irst step of your upgrade is to "normalize" your architecture. We have already 
mentioned that it is important not to make any changes, upgrades, or migrations  
to an environment that is sick. Take the time to review each health check category 
and determine if your environment is stable. If it is stable, you can then upgrade 
your architecture.
Upgrade the Domino Administrator clients
Upgrade all of your Domino Administrator clients. Verify that all features and 
functions run in the current environment before you upgrade your irst server.
Upgrade the Domino Directory
This step can be executed before you upgrade your irst server. Remember the 
use case above? Use that to drive the upgrade of the directory, making any 
customizations and changes required. Be sure to work with IBM/Lotus support to 
make sure that the directory is backward compatible with your current directory. 
(You should have done this in the testing phase of the upgrade.)
Upgrade the administration server
This is a very important server. AdminP requires that you assign an administration 
server to the Domino Directory (names.nsf). The AdminP server task runs on all 
Domino servers. This task loads when the Domino server is irst started, and is 
controlled through the notes.ini variable ServerTasks. The AdminP server task 
wakes up at periodic time intervals (speciied in the Administration Process section 
of the Server document) and executes commands waiting in the Administration 
Request database. Each command placed in the Administration Request database  
has an assigned proxy action. These proxy actions are essentially the op-code that 
runs the administration process. Each command placed in the Administration 

Chapter 7
[ 211 ]
Request database is represented by a document. Each document has a number 
of ields, including one called proxy action. After each action has completed on a 
server, a response document is created to indicate the status of that request. There 
is a new option (since release 7) to use multiple servers to maintain the Domino 
Directory. If a Domino domain is geographically dispersed, then you can use  
several servers to process administration requests.
Carefully evaluate your administration server
Due to the new complexities of Lotus Domino 8.5.3 and some new proxy actions,  
you may need to have a dedicated administration server. AdminP can generate a 
large number of proxy actions, as your architecture grows.
Upgrade utility servers
This step can be different with each customer. In some cases, the hub server can be 
upgraded irst, then the utility servers. Utility servers are deined as SMTP, support, 
tools, and other servers. In some cases, vendors may not be ready with their updates 
to support a new release of Domino.
Upgrade hub servers
Upgrade each server, and then monitor the "normal" operations between each 
upgrade. Verify that replication is still working, that agents are still executing,  
and that mail is still routing.
Upgrade spoke/messaging servers
After the hub servers have been completed, upgrade your spoke and  
messaging servers.
Upgrade specialized servers
In some cases, these may be some of the irst servers you upgrade. One example 
would be specialized backup software. Once again, you need to contact your vendor 
before you upgrade your irst server or upgrade the directory. The issue here is 
backward compatiblility. Verify with each vendor that the tools and utilities will 
work with each release. 
Upgrade the application servers
One important step is to test the applications before you upgrade. 

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 212 ]
Upgrade Notes clients
You are now at the point where you can upgrade the Notes clients. Smart Upgrade 
can be used, if you have Notes/Domino 6/7 installed. If not, you can use an MSI-/
MST-type install process to roll out the code.
Implement new Lotus Domino 8.5.3 features
When all servers and clients have been upgraded, you can implement the new Lotus 
Domino 8.5.3 features. Each feature should be tested, and in some cases, you may 
need to build an architecture/design for each feature. One new feature that you 
should consider is the mail policy. This is a new policy that can be enabled after you 
have upgraded both servers and clients. Also, you can review it using the following 
new features:
• 
DAOS: ODS 51 is required.
• 
Mail policy settings for iNotes (DWA): Lotus iNotes supports some of the 
mail policy settings that can be applied either to IBM Lotus Notes users or  
to Lotus iNotes (DWA) users.
• 
Desktop policy settings for iNotes (DWA): Lotus iNotes supports some  
of the desktop policy settings.
• 
New dynamic policies: Dynamic policy assignment is a new option 
for assigning explicit policies that allow you to assign policy settings to 
individual users and groups just by specifying the appropriate user or  
group name in a policy document.
• 
Notes shared login: Notes shared login allows users to start IBM Lotus  
Notes and use their Notes IDs without having to provide Notes passwords.
• 
ID vault: The ID Vault is a Domino database that holds a secure copy of 
Notes user IDs. The use of the ID Vault allows administrators to more easily 
manage Notes user IDs.
Upgrade applications
When your architecture is pure Lotus/Domino 8.5.3, you can start to implement 
new Lotus Domino 8.5.3 features in your applications. Use the testing methodology 
discussed in the Testing section.

Chapter 7
[ 213 ]
Special feature upgrade considerations
Lotus Notes and Lotus Domino 8.5.3 include a number of important new features. 
These features are discussed in Chapter 2, Overview of New Lotus Notes 8.5.3 Client 
Features, and Chapter 3, Productivity Tools, in this book. Be sure to consider the 
following features as part of your upgrade planning:
• 
Productivity tools: Lotus Notes 8.5.3 includes a set of ofice productivity 
tools that support the Open Document Format (ODF) standard. These 
include IBM Lotus Documents (create, edit, and share word-processing 
documents), IBM Lotus Presentations (create and deliver presentations), and 
IBM Lotus Spreadsheets (create spreadsheets and analyze numerical data).
• 
LOB: Lotus Notes/Lotus Domino 8.5.3 also makes it easier to integrate 
Line of Business (LOB) solutions and data into new types of applications, 
called composite applications. Composite applications are manifested in the 
frontend of a Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA).
• 
Mail recall: This is a "planned" option of Lotus Domino 8.5.3. Work with 
your administrator to determine if you can use this feature and what options 
are available.
• 
Improved Out-of-Ofice capabilities: This includes an option to specify 
special hours, in addition to speciic dates. Now, notiications can be sent 
almost immediately if a person has enabled the Out-of-Ofice agent.
• 
Central management: Lotus Domino 8.5.3 offers the option to centrally 
manage initial deployment and upgrades of Lotus Notes 8.5 client software 
and composite applications. Using server-managed provisioning, you can 
even deploy different Lotus Notes 8.5 client features to different users. This 
new capability will support the existing Lotus Notes Smart Upgrade feature.
A use case document example
The following is an example of a use case document. You can use this example as a 
guideline when creating your own use case documents, which is an important step 
in the Lotus Domino 8.5.3 upgrade process:
Use case
Domino Server Upgrade.

Upgrading to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
[ 214 ]
Subject area
This use case identiies the basic steps needed to upgrade the messaging servers from 
Notes/Domino 7 (or 6.x) (or 5.x) to Lotus Domino 8.5.3.
Business event
The upgrade will provide new TCO and management features to your company.
Actors
• 
Architecture team
• 
End user
• 
ISSL
• 
Administration team
• 
Operations
• 
Support teams
Use case overview
This use case deals with the architecture.
Help and support
Be sure to check out the following sites for help and support from IBM and Lotus:
• 
Upgrade Central:http://www-306.ibm.com/software/lotus/support/
upgradecentral/index.html
• 
Forums: http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/lotus
• 
Wiki Domino Upgrade Cookbook: http://www-10.lotus.com/ldd/
dominowiki.nsf/dx/UC1_TableofContents.htm
Summary
In this chapter, we presented a high-level overview of the steps involved in the Lotus 
Notes and Domino upgrade process. We then discussed the tasks and considerations 
speciic to upgrading your environment to Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3. We also 
included an example use case that you can use as a template for your own use cases, 
as well as links to sites that can provide you with additional Lotus Notes/Domino 
8.5.3 upgrade information.
In the next chapter, we will examine common co-existence issues between Lotus 
Notes/Domino releases.

Coexistence between  
Notes/Domino Releases
This chapter discusses the coexistence between Notes/Domino 8.5.3 and the earlier 
versions. When you install a new release, there are several things to consider relating 
to coexistence with earlier releases of Notes/Domino. For example, always test 
coexistence scenarios before implementing changes in your production environment. 
Follow the recommended upgrading routine described in Chapter 7, Upgrading to Notes 
and Domino 8.5.3. Be sure to check with http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/
lotus to ind the most recent technical notes and articles on Coexistence.
In this chapter, we will cover the following:
• 
Notes client coexistence
• 
Domino server coexistence
• 
LotusLive hybrid
Notes client coexistence
Although running two different releases of the Notes client on one workstation is 
an unsupported coniguration, it can be done. The Notes 8.5.3 install program will 
automatically upgrade any existing Notes client. But you can install Notes 8.5.3  
on a PC, while retaining the previous version of the Notes client.
In the following section, we will assume that Notes 7 is installed in 
the default Windows client for e-business locations (C:\Notes for 
programs, and C:\Notes\Data for the data directory). If you run Notes 
7 from another directory (such as C:\Program Files\Lotus\Notes, 
the default Notes 7 product install location), all references to C:\Notes 
should be substituted with that directory, in the description that follows.

Coexistence between Notes/Domino Releases
[ 216 ]
If you want to save your existing Notes 7 (or 6) client binaries, but still want to share 
the data directory (which is the easiest to use and switch between), you should do 
the following:
1. Copy the existing Notes directory and subdirectories to a Notes 7 directory. 
You only need to copy the Notes directory and the JVM, license, MUI, and 
xmlschemas subdirectories (not the data subdirectories), but it is easier to 
copy all directories and subdirectories if you have the space. For this, do  
the following:
 °
Create a new desktop shortcut to run the Notes 7 version. To do this:
 °
Create a copy of your existing Notes desktop shortcut icon, 
then right-click on it and choose Properties.
 °
Change the Target value under the Shortcut tab to: <path>\
notes7\notes.exe =<path>\notes\notes.ini. (This 
indicates Notes 7 executables using the Notes 8.5 Notes.ini 
ile and data.)
 °
Change the Start in value to <path>\notes7.
 °
Change the Title (General tab) to Notes 7.
 °
Click on the OK button to close the Properties dialog box.
 °
Install the Notes 8.5.3 client.
2. The Notes 8.5.3 installation will upgrade the original Notes directory  
and subdirectories to Notes 8.5.3 (leaving your Notes 7 copy alone).
3. If you want to save your existing Notes 7 client binaries and data,  
keeping two separate data directories and Notes.ini iles, then  
perform the following:
 °
Copy the existing Notes directory and subdirectories to 
a Notes 7 directory. Edit your notes7\notes.ini ile, 
replacing any references to \notes\ with \notes7\.
 °
Create a new desktop shortcut to run the Notes 7 version.
 °
Create a copy of your existing Notes desktop shortcut icon, 
then right-click on it and choose Properties.
 °
Change the Shortcut tab Target value to <path>\notes7\
notes.exe = <path>\notes7\notes.ini (This indicates 
Notes 7 executables using the Notes 7 Notes.ini and data.)
 

Chapter 8
[ 217 ]
 °
Change the Start in value to <path>\notes7.
 °
Change the Title (General tab) to Notes 7.
 °
Click on the OK button to close the Properties dialog box.
 °
Install the Notes 8.5.3 client.
You will see that various ile extensions will be associated with Lotus 
Notes. These include .nsf, .ntf, .ns2, .ns3, .ns4.
The Notes 8.5.3 installation will upgrade the original Notes directory to Notes 8.5.3, 
but you will still have a separate copy of your Notes 7 binaries and data. Usually, 
you would upgrade Notes clients, after upgrading your Domino servers. This way, 
Notes users can take advantage of the new features that exist on the server, such  
as mail message recall (which also requires that the mail template be a Notes  
8.5.3 design).
There are actually two Lotus Notes clients—the basic Notes 8.5.3 client and the 
standard Notes 8.5.3 Eclipse-based interface. The basic Notes client offers a subset  
of features of the Eclipse-based client.
Basic Notes 8.5.3 client
The basic Notes 8.5.3 client cannot utilize the Eclipse-based technology such as 
productivity tools, vertical preview pane, composite applications, the sidebar, and 
mail improvements related to recent contacts. The basic client should be used on low 
memory workstations that do not meet the higher requirements of the Notes 8.5.3 
Eclipse client. There are also other impacts to running the basic client as follows:
• 
Integrated Sametime will not have the same level of features  
and functionality
• 
Widgets will not be available
• 
The preference GUI will be displayed differently
Standard Notes 8.5.3 client
The standard Notes 8.5.3 client has full Eclipse extensibility. It makes use of the 
Java-based Eclipse technology to enhance existing Notes functionality such as 
mail, calendar, and contacts. Eclipse architecture allows the integration of other 
applications, such as productivity tools and composite applications, into Notes.  
With the standard client, widgets can be added to the sidebar.

Coexistence between Notes/Domino Releases
[ 218 ]
For more information on the features that are not available in the 
Notes 8.5.3 Basic client, consult the Notes 8.5.3 release notes.
Calendaring and scheduling
Many of the new features in Notes 8.5.3 require the server, the client, and the 
mail ile design to be at the base (or minimum) version 8 code-streams to function 
properly. As a result, most of this new functionality will be unavailable to users  
until all three are upgraded.
Calendar delegation
Calendar delegation occurs when an owner of a calendar gives another user access to 
their calendar for the purpose of managing it (for example, a manager giving access 
to an assistant). These users require special planning when upgrading to Notes 8.5.3. 
The best practice is to upgrade the clients of the delegate and owner at the same time. 
We also recommend upgrading the templates at the same time. This will limit issues 
that can occur if the clients do not have the same release.
Domino server coexistence
This section discusses the coexistence of Domino 8.5.3 and the previous versions of 
Notes/Domino. This will occur as soon as you upgrade your irst server. This state 
is called a mixed environment due to the existence of the Domino 8.5 server code 
as well as the pre-Domino 8.5.3 code. The following sections detail the areas where 
coexistence issues can and do appear.
Domino Directory
One of the irst things to do is to upgrade the design of the Domino Directory to 
Notes/Domino 8.5.3. This can be done in advance, before the server code upgrade, 
or at the same time as you upgrade your administration server. There are Domino 
8.5.3 features that may not function on pre-Domino 8.5.3 servers. These features are 
mostly found in the server and coniguration documents.

Chapter 8
[ 219 ]
If you have applications that rely on custom views in your Domino Directory, we 
recommend that you test your applications with the new Domino Directory design. 
If possible, before upgrading from a previous release, clean up any unneeded 
views and agents in the existing Domino Directory. After the design of the Domino 
Directory has been upgraded, the next phase is to upgrade the server code. One of 
the biggest issues found after an upgrade is that the directory does not properly 
upgrade. There are several techniques and tools to help determine if the directory 
design has been upgraded correctly. One example is where the "person" form has 
not upgraded correctly. If this happens, then the "new" person elements will not be 
displayed correctly. One simple technique to check for a design difference is to use 
the Lotus Notes Designer and check if the design date is different in the Pubnames.
ntf template from the design element in names.nsf after the upgrade.
On-Disk Structure (ODS)
In Domino 8.5.3, the default On-Disk Structure (ODS) is the same as in Notes/
Domino 7—ODS 48. There is a new ODS in Domino 8.5, ODS 51. This new ODS 
is optional, and should be applied if you need to utilize these new features. In 
particular, you will need ODS 51 in order to use the Domino Attachment and Object 
Service (DAOS).
Administration Requests and events databases
After you upgrade your server, the Administration Requests database (admin4.nsf) 
and events database (events4.nsf) will automatically be upgraded. There should 
be no issues because the design of these upgraded databases replicate to the other 
servers. It is recommended that you check to make sure the design elements  
upgrade correctly.
Rooms and Resource Reservations database
The Rooms and Resource Reservations database has not changed from Notes/
Domino 7. If you are upgrading from Domino 7, then you will not need to make any 
changes. If you are upgrading from the Domino 6.x code stream, some changes will 
be necessary. Resource Reservation databases with a design of 6.x or earlier are not 
supported on the Domino 8.5 server. In releases prior to Notes/Domino 7, the router 
was the task that processed reservations in the Resource Reservations database.
Starting in Notes/Domino 7, there is a new task that performs this duty—the Rooms 
and Resources Manager (RnRMgr) task. This new task was added to prevent some of 
the issues such as double booking that was seen when the router task was used.

Coexistence between Notes/Domino Releases
[ 220 ]
The RnRMgr task is now responsible for processing all reservation requests. This task 
will also update the busytime.nsf database with room and resource requests. One 
very important consideration with the new RnRMgr task is that this task must be 
loaded in the Server tasks line in the notes.ini settings of each server that requires 
this task.
The Schedule Manager (sched) task is no longer responsible for updating the server 
busytime for rooms or resources.
One potential advantage of the RnRMgr task is that all servers can now run SMTP  
as both the internal and external mail routing service. Historically, the NRPC  
service was required due to the fact that the router was integrated into the  
rooms and resources process.
One new web functionality has been added to the room and resource reservation 
database in 8.5.3. When an end user accesses the rooms and resources database  
from the web, the user can delete reservations and also create repeat meetings.  
This requires the 8.5.3 Resource Reservations database design.
Domino Domain Monitoring
Domino Domain Monitoring (DDM) was irst introduced in Domino 7. Most DDM 
probes do not function on a pre-Domino 7 server. There are also some new probes 
that are speciic to new features and functions in Domino 8.5. For the new features  
in DDM in Domino 8.5.3, refer to the Domino 8.5.3 administrator help.
Policies
There are several new policies that have been introduced in Domino 8.5.3. New 
policies that were introduced in Domino 7 or 8 will not be recognized by Notes 
6.5.x or earlier clients. Newer policies will not adversely affect the earlier client; 
they will not be recognized or enforced until the client is upgraded to Notes 8.5.3. 
One example of a new 8.5.3 policy that will only work on 8.5.3 clients and above is 
the machine-speciic policies. For more information on policies, refer to the Policies 
section in Chapter 5, Deployment Enhancements in Notes/Domino 8.5.3.
Message recall
While in a mixed environment, if the message recall functionality is enabled, users 
will not be able to recall a message for a user on a pre-Domino 8.5 server. Message 
recall is no longer enabled by default.

Chapter 8
[ 221 ]
Cluster coexistence
A new feature in Domino 8.5. code is Streaming Cluster Replication (SCR). SCR 
takes advantage of the fully-connected nature of clusters and Notes data streaming 
to produce a low-impact cluster replicator. SCR provides a signiicant reduction in 
cluster replicator latency.
In a mixed cluster, the SCR feature will not work. Both servers attempting to 
replicate in the cluster need to be at a minimum Domino 8.5 (or at least 8.x) code 
stream in order for SCR to occur. In a mixed cluster, the Domino 8.5.3 server will 
attempt to initiate SCR. When it cannot do so, it will fail and revert back to a regular 
replication. Cluster replication will function as it did before the upgrade and mixed 
cluster state. Once two or more of the servers in the cluster have been upgraded to 
a minimum of Domino 8.5, Streaming Cluster Replication will automatically occur 
between them.
In the Domino base code 8.5, there have been some minor changes to the cluster 
database directory or cldbdir.nsf. These changes are all backward compatible  
with pre-Domino 8.5 servers. You can have mixed releases in a cluster. However,  
we suggest you upgrade the cluster mates in quick succession.
As with all upgrades, it is recommended that you check the data consistency of all 
your databases before the upgrade:
• 
Check to make sure that the data in names.nsf was not modiied
• 
Make sure that any changes to cldbdir.nsf are retained after the upgrade
• 
Make sure that admin4.nsf is clean (upgrade and docs approved ) before 
you upgrade
Out-of-Ofice
There have been changes to the Out-of-Ofice (OOO) functionality. Now there is the 
option of having the Out-of-Ofice feature as a service rather than as an agent. If one 
of the servers in the cluster is running the pre-Domino 8.5 code, the Out-of-Ofice 
feature must be run as an agent.
The original Out-of-Ofice agent was based on a LotusScript agent that was 
integrated into the Lotus Notes mail template. Once enabled by the end user, the 
Out-of-Ofice agent automatically responds to mails that arrive into the end user's 
mail ile. Once this message arrives then the agent, based on a scheduled time, will 
execute and respond with a user-based message stating that they are out of the ofice.

Coexistence between Notes/Domino Releases
[ 222 ]
The service provides the ability for instant response for out of ofice responses.  
The following table shows the differences between the Out-of-Ofice agent and  
the service:
Functionality
Service
Agent
OOO Response time
Instant response
Every six hours (default)
Support for cluster 
failover?
Yes
No
OOO Disables when 
done
Automatic disable
Manual disable
Minimum duration time One hour
One day
User Delegation
Supports delegation with Access 
Control List (ACL)
Supports delegation with 
ACL agent security
The Out-of-Ofice service requires a minimum of the Lotus Domino 8 server, the 
Lotus Notes 8 client, and the Lotus Notes 8 mail template.
Domino Web Access
Domino Web Access requires two aspects to work properly:
• 
Mail ile template: In Notes/Domino 8.5.3, the mail template is built into 
Domino Web Access. There is no longer a separate mail ile template for all 
Domino Web Access.
• 
Forms database: New features are added to the Forms Database with each 
release. In Notes/Domino 8.5.3, the Forms Database is called Forms8.nsf. So 
if you upgrade the template to Domino 8.5.3, make sure there is such a ile on 
the server.
If a web access issue occurs and is affecting all users, then most likely it is a template 
issue. If the issue only affects users on a single server, then it is most likely an issue 
with the Forms8.nsf on that server.
ID iles
In each Domino release, there have been changes to the encryption key length so as 
to provide enhanced security. Older keys can be used on new clients, but they are 
not forward compatible. This means that newer keys cannot be used on older clients. 
It is advisable to upgrade your ID iles after you have completed your entire upgrade 
to Notes/Domino 8.5.3. This will provide you with the enhanced security offered 
by the longer key length. Also, be sure to check out the ID vault feature, new with 
Notes/Domino 8.5.

Chapter 8
[ 223 ]
LotusLive hybrid
LotusLive hybrid is a new option when extending your on-premises environment 
into the cloud. In this coexistence state you will have servers behind your irewall 
making secure connections to the LotusLive Notes cloud servers. The servers that 
you will need to set up as the hybrid servers will have speciic functions such as mail 
routing, pass through, and directory synchronization. These servers must meet the 
requirements discussed in the following sections.
Supported Server Versions
Domino servers will need to be added if you are using the LotusLive hybrid 
coniguration. For existing mail servers to be able to do free-time look up, they 
need to be at a minimum release. The following table outlines the supported server 
versions for setting up a hybrid environment as well as mail server requirements  
for free-time look up in LotusLive Notes:
On-premises server type
 
Supported versions
Mail routing servers that connect directly 
to LotusLive Notes mail servers for mail 
routing.
Lotus Domino 8.5.1 Fix Pack 2 or a later 
ix pack, or a later release.
Administration server (used by the 
Administration Process) for the Domino 
Directory of at least one directory 
synchronization server.
Lotus Domino 8.5.1 Fix Pack 2 or a later 
ix pack (with corresponding Domino 
Directory template), or a later release.
Directory synchronization server (if in 
a different domain than the directory 
synchronization server referred to in the 
previous row in this table).
Any supported version of Lotus 
Domino.
Mail servers that request the free time of 
LotusLive Notes users.
Lotus Domino 8.5.1 Fix Pack 2 or a later 
ix pack, or a later release.
Passthru domain servers.
Any supported version of Lotus 
Domino. Lotus Domino 8.5.2 or later is 
recommended for a fast response time 
for connections from the LotusLive 
Notes server to on-premises servers.
For more information about planning and coniguring your LotusLive  
Notes hybrid environment, refer to the LotusLive Notes Wiki:  
http://www-10.lotus.com/ldd/bhwiki.nsf.

Coexistence between Notes/Domino Releases
[ 224 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we examined a few coexistence issues involved with running Notes/
Domino 8.5.3 in a mixed environment with one or more previous releases. We began 
by taking a look at the Notes client coexistence. We explained how to install two 
different versions of Notes on a workstation, and discussed potential issues with 
calendaring and scheduling in a multi-release environment.
We concluded with a discussion of the Domino 8.5.3 server coexistence, including 
features such as the Domino Directory and ODS.
In the next chapter, we will look at the new features in the Lotus Designer 8.5.3 and 
the enhancements to 8.5.3 application development.

New Features in Notes/
Domino 8.5.3 Development
For the past 20 years, the combination of Lotus Notes and Domino has been the 
premier collaborative application platform of choice. Small businesses and Fortune 
500 companies alike are using the Notes/Domino application platform for e-mail, 
calendaring and scheduling, instant messaging, and applications.
There are hundreds of IBM business partners supporting the community of 
approximately 130 million users with their daily blogs, websites, podcasts, and 
support forums. Any visit to Lotusphere, IBM's premier end user conference for the 
Lotus brand, will leave your head spinning with a myriad of possibilities to integrate 
Notes/Domino with other technologies in your business.
So, what exactly is the strategy for the future of Notes/Domino development? Given 
that IBM has a history of protecting their user's investments in the platform, the 
strategy is obviously one of extension of the platform while continuing to support 
legacy applications. 
All of the applications written for the platform have one thing in common, the end 
user. The end user operates in a speciic context. For Notes/Domino users, this 
context is one of Notes for collaboration (e-mail, calendaring, and instant messaging), 
an operating system with its ile system for other work such as storage and retrieval 
of documents, and other applications and ofice technologies.
The IBM strategy for Notes/Domino is to allow the user, in his or her context, to 
collaborate more effectively in new lexible ways while maintaining the ability to 
support legacy and new open composite applications.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 226 ]
One way this is being done is by allowing developers new and better ways of 
taking complicated and related applications, and placing them together to create 
new conceptual whole applications, or composite applications (applications that 
are composed of two or more applications). In order to allow this within the Notes/
Domino application platform, IBM has added new development tools and features, 
allowing Notes/Domino the ability to take part in the new world of Service-Oriented 
Architectures (SOAs), while continuing to support the rich legacy of applications 
already built. Based on the new SOA, this chapter will include a review of:
• 
Composite applications
• 
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.0 client features
• 
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5 client features
• 
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.1 client features
• 
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.2 client features
• 
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.3 client features
• 
Lotus Component Designer
• 
New Web 2.0 features
• 
Lotus Expeditor
Composite applications
Composite applications are applications that consist of two or more components 
that may have been independently developed, working together to perform tasks 
that none of the member applications could perform by itself. Each component 
publishes and consumes messages from other components, and performs actions 
based upon user interaction or information received from other components. 
Support for composite applications is one of the central points for Notes/Domino 
8. Composite applications in Notes 8 can wire together multiple components from 
Notes applications, Lotus Component Designer applications, and Eclipse into a 
single application context for the end user.
Composite applications, whether they are based on Notes/Domino 8, Web Sphere 
Portal, or Lotus Expeditor, are the frontend or user interface to an enterprise's SOA 
strategy. They, in effect, consume the services that are offered by the composite 
architectures put in place to support SOA.
An example of a composite application would be a simple customer relationship 
management application. This application needs to display a list of accounts, 
opportunities, and contacts to end users.

Chapter 9
[ 227 ]
The accounts component should display accounts owned by the end user. When 
the end user selects an account in the account component, the opportunities for that 
account should be displayed in the opportunities component, and all of the contacts 
for the irst opportunity should be displayed in the contacts component.
In the application described, the components are "communicating" with each other 
by publishing and consuming properties via a property broker. When the user 
clicks on an account, the account component publishes the accountkey property to 
the property broker. The opportunities component has been written to "listen" for 
the accountkey property to be published, and when it is, it performs a lookup into 
a data store, pulling back all the speciic opportunities for the published account 
key. Once it has displayed all of the opportunities for the account, it selects the irst 
opportunity for display and then publishes the opportunitykey property to the 
property broker. The contacts component then performs a lookup to display all of 
the contacts for the opportunity.
When the user selects a different opportunity, the opportunity component  
again publishes an opportunitykey property and the contacts component  
receives this new opportunitykey property and displays the correct contacts  
for the selected opportunity.
Using component applications, developers can respond quickly to requests from  
the line of business for functionality changes. For example, in the case of the 
customer relationship management application described, the line of business may 
decide to purchase a telephony component to dial the phone and log all phone calls 
made. The developers of the application would need to simply modify the contact 
component to publish the phone number of a contact with a name that the new 
telephony component listens for and the call could be made on behalf of the user.
In addition to being used within the customer relationship management application, 
the components developed could be put together with other components to form 
entirely different applications. Each component already understands what data 
it needs to publish and consume to perform its actions, and contains the code to 
perform those speciic actions on backend systems. The reuse of the components  
will save the developers and the organization time whenever they are reused.
Composite applications also require a new programming model for Notes/Domino 
8. This model mirrors the model within WebSphere Portal 6, in that multiple 
components are aggregated into a single UI with the property broker acting as the 
"glue" that allows the various components to interact and share data, even if the 
components are from different systems. This programming model is something new 
in Notes 8 and required some changes to Domino Designer 8.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 228 ]
As a side note, the new programming model of composite applications will most 
probably bring its own set of problems. For example, what happens in a composite 
application when one of the components fails? In this "composite crash" situation, 
what does the composite application need to do in order to recover?
Additionally, from an infrastructure point of view, composite applications will only 
be as available as their weakest component. What good would a reservations system, 
implemented with many components, be if one of the components were not hosted 
by a highly available infrastructure, while the others were? We see these sorts of 
issues being dealt with currently by customers venturing into the composite world 
via SOAs.
There are two main categories of change for development related to composite 
applications in Notes/Domino 8 application design and programming. We will  
look at both of them in the following sections.
Application design
In order to allow your Notes or Domino application to participate within a composite 
application, you must irst decide which design elements need to be accessible to 
other components. To make these components available to other components within 
your composite application, they are speciied within a Web Services Description 
Language (WSDL) ile. The composite application property broker then uses this 
WSDL ile as a map into your application and its published properties and actions.
To allow this mapping to occur, the Composite Application Editor is used. Without 
making changes to legacy Notes/Domino application functionality, the Composite 
Application Editor can be used to surface the elements of the application such as 
forms, views, documents, and other Notes elements to the composite application.
Another element of composite application design is deciding where the application 
components will reside. Composite applications can be hosted within a local NSF ile 
on a Notes client, on a Domino 8 application server, in the WebSphere Portal, or in 
Lotus Expeditor. The Notes/Domino application components are created with the 
Composite Application Editor, while WebSphere Portal composite applications can 
be created with the Composite Application Editor or the Portal Application  
Template Editor.

Chapter 9
[ 229 ]
Programming
As mentioned earlier, the addition of composite applications to the development 
strategy for Notes/Domino 8 required some changes and additions to the existing 
programming model.
Within a composite application, the components must be able to interact even if they 
were deined with different tools and technologies. Some components may even be 
stored within different database technologies. One component may be NSF-based 
while another may be stored within a relational database store. The components 
need a standardized way to deine the properties and actions that they support, so 
that an application developer can wire them together into a composite application. 
The standard way to deine these properties and actions is via a WSDL ile.
Let's take a quick look at properties, actions, and wires.
Properties
Component properties are the data items that a given component produces. They are 
either input properties (consumed by the component) or output (produced by the 
component) properties. Each property is assigned a data type, which is based on the 
WC3 primitive data types. These include String, Boolean, decimal, time, and date. 
The primitive data types can also be utilized to build new data types. For example, 
within Notes 8, some new data types for components will be available that map to 
common data available within the mail, calendar, and contacts applications. Some of 
these new data types are listed in the following table:
Data type name
Extends 
data type
Description
Example
mailTo
String
List of people 
to receive an 
e-mail
"mailto:suzie@company.
com?subject=Our Dogs 
are Smart&cc=frankie@
company.com,domino@
company.com&bcc=gromit@
company.com
e-mailAddress822
String
E-mail address 
following RFC 
822
"My Gerbil <shelbie@
company.com>"
"Little Man <nate@
company.com>"

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 230 ]
Actions
Actions are the logic that is used to consume a property. For example, a component 
may implement an action that sends an e-mail when it receives a mailTo type 
property from another component. The code within the component that sends the 
e-mail based on the information consumed from the property is the action for the 
component. Components can obviously contain multiple actions depending on the 
business logic required for the component.
It is easy to confuse a web services action with a Notes action. The web services 
action is a name in a WSDL ile that represents functionality that will consume a 
property. Notes actions can be coupled with a web services action so that the Notes 
action gets called to consume a property. The LotusScript in the Notes action can 
then implement code to act on the property.
The following screenshot shows a Notes action in the Notes 8 mail template that is 
coupled with a web services action, NewMemoUsingMailtoURL. You can see that 
in the code, the LotusScript is using a property broker to gain access to the property:

Chapter 9
[ 231 ]
Wires
Wires are the construct by which components interact within a composite 
application. A wire is simply a programmatic deinition of which components talk to 
each other. The components must share common properties and then produce and 
consume them via actions. More simply put, wires connect properties to actions.
For example, an application developer could wire together a contact list component 
with an e-mail component. When the user selects a contact from the contact list, the 
contact list component would produce and publish a mailTo type property, which 
could then be consumed by the e-mail component. The e-mail component would 
consume the published mailTo property and compose an e-mail using the data 
contained within the property.
The following screenshot shows the components available within the Notes 8 mail 
template that are available for use in other component applications as well, shown 
from the Component Palette within the new Composite Application Editor:

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 232 ]
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.0 client 
features
With the addition of composite applications to the development strategy of Notes/
Domino 8, there are a number of changes required to Domino Designer 8 to allow 
for composite applications design, development, and use. Some additional new tools 
were also required.
These changes augment existing functionality. They were made without sacriicing 
supportability of existing applications. They allow legacy applications, as well as 
new applications, to play a part in an SOA by providing a platform that permits 
multiple technologies to be combined into a single application, side by side.
Composite applications support
New Domino Designer 8 features that support composite applications include 
Property Broker Editor and the Composite Application Editor.
Property Broker Editor
One of the irst things you will notice in Domino Designer 8 is the new support for 
composite application design elements. These design elements store the WSDL and 
XML iles for wiring properties and applications. You can see these new design 
elements by selecting the Composite Applications item, as shown in the  
following screenshot:
 

Chapter 9
[ 233 ]
The Wiring Properties view is where Domino Designer stores the WSDL that deines 
the properties, types, and actions for the application. These design elements are 
edited with the Property Broker Editor, which is new in Domino Designer 8. To edit 
wiring properties, select the wiring property from the new Notes 8 mail template 
and click on the Open File button. This will open the Property Broker Editor dialog 
box as shown in the following screenshot:
The Property Broker Editor allows you to create or edit the Properties, Types, or 
Actions for your applications. Once the Property Broker Editor saves the WSDL as a 
design element, you will be able to associate the deined properties and actions with 
other design elements.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 234 ]
Composite Application Editor
Also within the Composite Applications view, within Domino Designer 8, is the 
Applications listing. These design elements store the XML that deines the makeup 
of the composite applications and their associated wiring.
However, launching the Composite Application Editor is not done via the Domino 
Designer interface and may confuse new composite application developers. To 
launch the Composite Application Editor, open the Notes client and then select 
Actions | Edit Application:
Once the Composite Application Editor is open, you can select a component and 
then edit the wires for this component. The following screenshot shows the wiring 
properties for the Notes Calendar Navigator component:

Chapter 9
[ 235 ]
Web Service Consumers
Web Services were supported starting with Notes/Domino 7. However, the web 
services supported with Domino 7 could only be web service providers. They could 
be called as a normal web service from a remote computer and return information 
from Domino databases, or perform other Domino-related functions. It was also 
possible in release 7 to write web service consumers and have them hosted by 
Domino, but there was no speciic support for web service consumers within 
Domino and creating them was a matter of Java development.
With the release of Notes and Domino 8, Domino-based web service consumers are 
supported. Notes/Domino applications can now call web services hosted on remote 
computers. Notes/Domino 8 makes it simple to call web services. Domino Designer 
will even import the WSDL and create the code required to use the web service  
for you.
Unlike web service providers in Domino, which are stored in special design 
elements, web service consumers in Domino 8 are stored in a special type of script 
library. This script library can be written in either Java or LotusScript. Just as with 
other script libraries, code that wants to use the web service consumer must use the 
script library that contains it.
Consuming a web service in Notes/Domino 8 is very simple. The high-level steps 
are as follows:
1. Locate a web service that you would like to consume and acquire its  
WSDL ile.
2. Create a new script library to contain the web service consumer.
3. Import the WSDL ile into the new script library.
4. Have your application call the script library so as to consume the  
web service.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 236 ]
For this example, we have selected a free stock quote web service that retrieves 20 
minute delayed quotes from Yahoo! The web service description and its WSDL ile 
are located at the following URL:
http://www.webservicelist.com/webservices/f.asp?fid=37722
We will create a script library to contain the web service, create a form with a simple 
button to prompt the user for a company symbol, and then call or consume the web 
service and display the resultant stock quote.
Once you have selected a web service to consume and have its WSDL ile, you 
need to create a new script library to contain the web service code. Create a 
new application, and select Create | Design | Script Library (see the preceding 
screenshot). Select either LotusScript Library or Java Library depending on your 
language of choice. For this example, we will create a LotusScript Library. Save the 
script library and provide a name for it when prompted. For this example, we called 
the script library as stockquote. Keep this script library open. You now have a new, 
empty script library, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 237 ]
At the bottom of the code window in Domino Designer, you will see a button labeled 
WSDL. This button will allow you to import the WSDL ile. This ile describes the 
web service that you are going to consume and also generate the code for consuming 
this web service. This will save you a lot of time going through the WSDL ile and 
crafting your classes!
Import the WSDL ile that you downloaded for your selected service. Notice that 
Domino Designer generates the class required to consume the web service.
For the free stock quote service selected, the generated LotusScript code looks like 
the one in the following screenshot:
Notice that Domino Designer did the hard work of decoding the WSDL ile to create 
a class with functions to consume the web service. If you want, you may even decide 
to modify the generated code so as to make it a bit more readable; for example, by 
changing the class name.
It is a good idea, at this time, to inspect the code that was generated and become 
familiar with it. In this example, we can see the generated LotusScript created a 
class called NetxmethodsservicesstockquoteStockQu_n0 and a function called 
getQuote. Domino Designer got these values from the WSDL ile that was imported. 
We will use the class name and the function name later within our button that will 
call the script library that consumes the web service.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 238 ]
Now, all we need is some code to consume the web service via the special web services 
enabled script library that we just created. To keep things simple, let's create a button 
on a form that will prompt the user for a stock symbol and then display the results.
Create a blank form. Within the Globals section of the form, place the following 
code, which disallows implicit variable declarations (a good practice) and identiies 
the stockquote script library as used within the form:
Option Public
Use "stockquote"
On the same form, create a new button. Give the button a clever label such as  
Get a stock quote (as seen in the preceding screenshot), and then insert the code  
into the button.
Save the form, and then open the application. Create a new instance of the form that 
contains the button:

Chapter 9
[ 239 ]
Now, click on the button to invoke the code within it. As shown in the following 
screenshot, you will be prompted to enter the stock symbol whose quote you 
would like to retrieve via the web service. For this example, we selected my favorite 
hamburger chain:
When you click on OK, Notes will execute the code to invoke and consume the web 
service. Once that has been done, Notes will then process the Messagebox call to 
present the results:

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 240 ]
This is obviously a very simple example of consuming a web service, but it should 
open your mind to the possibilities. There are web services available for almost 
anything you can imagine. Some are free and others are available for a fee. You  
can use web services to retrieve grocery items by UPC number, perform credit  
card transaction processing, and even track packages shipped with FedEx or UPS.
Now that Notes/Domino 8 can consume web services, you have another data 
integration tool at your disposal.
View enhancements
Domino Designer 8 view enhancements include new column number formats, 
extended to use available window width, defer index creation until irst use,  
and show default items in the right-mouse menu.
New column number format
There is a new number format for number columns that will display the column 
contents in kilobytes, megabytes, or gigabytes, which makes it much easier to 
determine the relative size of the number represented in the column. In the  
following screenshot, the size of ile attachments is used:
When displayed in Notes 7, the column shows just the size of the attachment for  
each document.
However, when the same column is displayed in Notes 8 with the Bytes (K/M/G) 
number format, the column displays a much friendlier format as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 241 ]
Extending columns to use available window width
In Notes 8, you can select which column within a view to expand, to utilize the 
available width of the window. In previous releases, this option was only available 
for the last column in a view:

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 242 ]
For this option to work, the view level option Extend last column to 
window width takes precedence and must be deselected. In addition, the 
column to be extended must be marked as Resizable. Multiple columns 
can be designated to extend to use the available window width. However, 
only the irst column, which has this attribute set, will expand.
Deferring index creation until irst use
Index creation can now be deferred for Click on column header to sort view 
columns. Using this option, the view index won't be created until a user irst clicks 
on the column to sort it. Only views that users click to sort will have their indexes 
built. This can help reduce the load on servers, as not all column indexes will be 
created automatically. They will only be created when they are used:
Note that the deferred index creation feature requires the database to be using the 
new On-Disk Structure (ODS) for Notes/Domino 8. By default, Notes/Domino 8 
still creates databases with ODS 43, which was introduced in release 6 and used 
through releases 7 and 8. To enable the creation of databases in ODS 48 format, use 
the notes.ini parameter, Create_R8_Databases=1, on the Domino 8 server or the 
Notes 8 client.
Show default items in the right-mouse menu
Developers have been able to add custom actions to the right-mouse menu with 
previous versions of Notes/Domino. With release 8, you can choose not to have the 
default right-mouse menu items shown in the menu, allowing just the menu items 

Chapter 9
[ 243 ]
you select to be displayed. The default is to show just default items. The following 
screenshot shows that we have deselected the option, allowing only the actions that 
we select to be shown in the menu. This will make it easier for the end user of the 
application to ind the actions we have deined for the view or folder:
Form enhancements
There is a new rich text lite ield option that allows you to add a thumbnail picture to 
a form (see the following screenshot). This new feature is used in the Notes/Domino 
8 address book templates. 
For example, in the personal address book template, you can add pictures of your 
contacts to their contact records. This is handy to help remember the face that goes 
with the name.
To add the thumbnail picture to a contact note in Notes 8, edit the contact record, 
click on the Import icon (shown in the following screenshot), and select a picture:
 

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 244 ]
Once a picture has been selected, it will be displayed in place of the Import button, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
To delete the picture, you should edit the record, select the thumbnail, and click on 
the Delete key.
To enable thumbnails in your rich text lite ield, select the second tab of the 
properties box, and then select Thumbnail in the Only allow selection ield. When 
Thumbnail is selected, all of the other options will automatically be deselected for 
you. Also, you may only select Thumbnail in the First display property, as shown  
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 245 ]
You can also resize the thumbnail image by selecting the width and height in pixels 
from the Width and Height ields.
Agent enhancements
Agents can now be tagged so as to determine when the server starts. These agents 
will start a few minutes after the Domino server boots up. They should not be relied 
upon to start immediately.
Agents triggered to start when the server starts will not run when just the agent 
manager itself is restarted. They will only run when the entire Domino server is 
started. This allows agents to perform actions that should only occur after a server 
has started and not be repeated each time the agent manager starts up.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 246 ]
To trigger an agent this way, select When server starts for the On event trigger type, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Agents that are triggered when the server starts can also be given dates to start 
and stop running. This could be helpful if the agent is implementing a date-driven 
business process.
To edit these agents' schedule properties, click the Edit settings button on the  
Agent properties box. This will open the Agent Schedule window, as shown in  
the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 247 ]
Formula language and LotusScript additions
Domino Designer 8 includes several enhancements to formula language  
and LotusScript.
Formula language additions
The following are some selected new commands that are available within Notes/
Domino 8:
• 
@Command([CopySelectedAsTable]): This new command performs the 
same action as its menu command counterpart ( Edit | Copy As | Table) 
which copies one or more selected view entries into a table. It places the table 
of the selected view entries on the clipboard. It also includes a link to each 
of the documents in the table. This is very useful when sending co-workers 
links to documents from a database in a preformatted table.
• 
@Command([OpenInNewWindow]): This new command allows your formula 
language code to open a document from a view, folder, or calendar in a new 
window instead of opening it within a new tab within Lotus Notes.
LotusScript additions
The following are some selected new classes, methods, and events available within 
Notes/Domino 8.
• 
The NotesProperty and NotesPropertyBroker classes, and the Onselect 
event were added to support the new composite application programming 
model.
• 
MarkAllRead and MarkAllUnread methods—Within the NotesView, 
NotesViewEntryCollection, and NotesViewNavigator classes, two 
new methods dealing with read/unread marks are available. Using these 
classes, you can mark documents as having been read or unread using the 
MarkAllRead or MarkAllUnread methods. These methods will affect the 
documents within the collection or navigator. There are, of course, Java 
counterparts available.
• 
NotesDirectory class—Objects created with this new class correspond 
to the directories on a speciic Domino server or Notes client. The objects 
are contained within a NotesSession object, and they contain one or more 
NotesDirectoryNavigator objects.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 248 ]
The following table displays properties that are available in the NotesDirectory 
class. Unless otherwise speciied, these properties are read-only:
Property
Type
Description
AvailableItems
Variant array
This property is set by the methods 
LookupNames and LookupAllNames. 
If a NotesDirectory object has been 
created but no lookups have been 
performed with it, this property will have 
a null value.
AvailableNames
Variant array
This property will contain the names 
returned from the most recent 
LookupAllNames or LookupNames 
call. If a NotesDirectory object has 
been created but no lookups have been 
performed with it, this property will have 
a null value.
AvailableView
String
This property contains the name of 
the view speciied in the most recent 
LookupAllNames or LookupNames 
call. If a NotesDirectory object has 
been created but no lookups have been 
performed with it, this property will have 
a null value.
GroupAuthorizationOnly
Boolean
This is a read/write property. This 
property controls which directories will 
be used during lookups. If the property 
is True, only the directories marked 
Enable for Group Authorization will 
be searched. If set to False, the default 
lookups performed will search all 
directories available.
LimitMatches
Boolean
This is a read/write property. If True, 
directory lookups will be limited to ifty 
entries. If False then lookups performed 
will return all matches.
PartialMatches
Boolean
Controls whether or not lookups will 
match on partial names. If True, partial 
names will match. If False, the default, 
lookups will not match on partial names.

Chapter 9
[ 249 ]
Property
Type
Description
SearchAllDirectories
Boolean
This is a read/write property. If True, the 
default, all directories will be searched 
during lookups. If False, lookups will 
cease after the irst directory containing 
the view name speciied.
Server
String
This property contains the name of the 
server represented by the instance of 
NotesDirectory.
TrustedOnly
Boolean
This is a read/write property. This 
property controls which directories will 
be used during lookups. If True, lookups 
will search only directories which contain 
trust information. If False (default) the 
lookups will search all directories.
UseContextServer
Boolean
This is a read/write property. This 
property controls whether the server 
of the context database or the server 
speciied in the lookup methods will be 
used. If True, the server context database 
will be used. If False, the default, and 
then the server speciied in the lookup 
method, will be used.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 250 ]
The following table displays the methods that are available for the  
NotesDirectory class:
Method
Returns
Description
CreateNavigator
NotesDirectoryNavigator
Used to create additional 
DirectoryNavigators 
to allow multiple 
DirectoryNavigators to 
be used.
FreeLookupBuffer
N/A
As the resultant name lookup 
buffers can be quite large, this 
method can be used to free 
memory in the current lookup 
buffer, in effect resetting all 
navigators. Used for memory 
management.
LookupAllNames
NotesDirectoryNavigator
Performs a lookup of 
designated items contained 
within the speciied view.
LookupNames
NotesDirectoryNavigator
Performs a lookup of 
designated items contained 
within the speciied view for 
the speciied items.
NotesDirectoryNavigator objects are returned by methods of the NotesDirectory 
class and allow the developer to navigate the items returned by a directory search.
The following table displays properties that are available for the 
NotesDirectoryNavigator class. Unless otherwise speciied, these  
properties are read-only:
Property
Type
Description
CurrentItem
String
This property will contain the current 
item for the NotesDirectoryNavigator 
and is updated with subsequent calls of 
GetNextItemValue and GetNthItemValue 
methods.
CurrentMatch
Long
An index to the current match for the 
NotesDirectoryNavigator and is updated 
by subsequent calls to FindFirstMatch, 
FindNextMatch and FindNthMatch methods.

Chapter 9
[ 251 ]
Property
Type
Description
CurrentName
String
The name of the current match indicated 
by the CurrentMatch property index for 
NotesDirectoryNavigators created with the 
LookupNames method.
CurrentView
String
Contains the name of the directory view used 
to create the NotesDirectoryNavigator 
object. This property is updated when directory 
lookups are performed.
MatchLocated
Boolean
If set to True, a match was successful. If set to 
False, the match was not successful.
NameLocated.
Boolean
If set to True, a name was located. If set to 
False, the name was not located.
The following table displays the methods available for the 
NotesDirectoryNavigator class:
Method
Returns
Description
FindFirstMatch
Boolean
Moves the navigator of the irst 
match of the current name in the 
NotesDirectoryNavigator. Returns 
True if a match was found, otherwise 
returns False indicating no match was 
found.
FindNextMatch
Boolean
Moves the navigator of the next 
match of the current name in the 
NotesDirectoryNavigator. Returns 
True if a match was found, otherwise 
returns False indicating no match was 
found.
FindNthMatch
Boolean
Moves the navigator of the nth 
match of the current name in the 
NotesDirectoryNavigator. Returns 
True if a match was found, otherwise 
returns False indicating no match was 
found.
 

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 252 ]
Method
Returns
Description
FindFirstName
Long
Moves the navigator to the irst name in the 
NotesDirectoryNavigator returning 
the number of matches found.
FindNextName
Long
Moves the navigator to the next name in the 
NotesDirectoryNavigator returning 
the number of matches found.
FindNthName
Long
Moves the navigator to the nth name in the 
NotesDirectoryNavigator returning 
the number of matches found.
GetFirstItemValue
Variant
Returns the value of the irst item of the 
current match.
GetNextItemValue
Variant
Moves the navigator to the next item within 
the current match and returns the value of 
that match.
GetNthItemValue
Variant
Moves the navigator to the nth item within 
the current match and returns the value of 
that match.
The NotesProperty class represents a single component property within the 
composite application. Component properties are data items that a given component 
produces and the NotesProperty class allows your application to manage the 
publishing of the deined properties within an application.
The methods for the NotesProperty class are only active when used within the 
Notes 8 Standard coniguration. They are not available when used by applications 
running on the Domino server or from within the Notes 8 Basic coniguration.
The following table displays the properties that are available for the NotesProperty 
class. Unless otherwise speciied, the properties are read-only:

Chapter 9
[ 253 ]
Property
Type
Description
Description
String
This class property returns the description for the 
NotesProperty object.
IsInput
Boolean
If set to True, the property is an input property. If set 
to False, the property is an output property.
Name
String
This class property returns the name of the 
NotesProperty.
NameSpace
String
This class property returns the namespace for the 
NotesProperties data type.
Title
String
This class property returns the title of the 
NotesProperty.
TypeName
String
This class property returns the type name of 
the NotesProperty. When combined with the 
NameSpace property, it provides a unique identiier 
for the NotesProperty type.
Values
Variant array 
of Strings, 
Integer, Real, 
or  
NotesDateTime
This read/write class property sets or returns the 
array of values for the NotesProperty. The array 
items must be of all the same data type and input 
properties by deinition cannot be set using this 
property. The Publish method must be called after 
using this property to set values or the values will not 
persist.
The following table displays the methods that are available for the  
NotesProperty class:
Method
Returns
Description
Clear
N/A
For output properties only, this method clears the 
new or modiied values of the speciied property 
from the temporary cache used for publishing via 
the property broker. If called from an input type 
NotesProperty the method will have no effect.
Publish
N/A
Publishes to the property broker the new values for 
the NotesProperty object.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 254 ]
The following table displays which properties are available for the 
NotesPropertyBroker class. This is where all the composite application magic 
occurs in Notes/Domino 8. Unless otherwise speciied, the properties are read-
only. The current implementation of the property broker for Notes/Domino 8 only 
supports a single input property. The InputPropertyContext is, however, declared 
as an array to allow for future expansion of the property broker to support multiple 
input properties in the future:
Property
Type
Description
InputPropertyContext
Array of 
NotesProperty
Returns an array of NotesProperty 
objects, with only the irst item of the 
array populated.
The methods for the NotesPropertyBroker class are only active when used within 
the Notes 8 Standard coniguration. They are not available when used by applications 
running on Domino server or from within the Notes 8 Basic coniguration.
The following table displays the methods that are available for the 
NotesPropertyBroker class:
Method
Returns
Description
ClearProperty
N/A
Clears the new or modiied values of a 
speciied property from the temporary 
cache used for publishing.
GetProperty
NotesProperty
Returns a NotesProperty object for a 
speciied property.
GetPropertyValue
Variant array 
of String, 
Integer, Real, or 
NotesDateTime
Returns the value of a speciied input 
property. Used when implementing an 
action.
HasProperty
Boolean
If set to True, the speciied property 
is associated with the property broker. 
If False, the property broker does not 
have a property with the speciied name.
Publish
N/A
If values of the NotesPropertyBroker 
have been modiied, this method will 
publish them.
SetPropertyValue
NotesProperty
Returns a NotesProperty object with 
the value of a speciied output property.

Chapter 9
[ 255 ]
The Onselect event was added to the NotesUIView class to give developers the 
trigger needed to have other components respond to selected documents within a 
view. The Onselect event is used to contain code that publishes properties to the 
property broker based on the documents selected.
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5 client 
features
In this section, we will explore the new features in Domino Designer 8.5. There 
are many exciting changes and additions to Domino Designer 8.5. The irst feature 
we will cover is the introduction of the Eclipse-based integrated development 
environment. Domino Designer 8.5, which is also known as Domino Designer on 
Eclipse (DDE), takes advantage of Eclipse technology to deliver a more powerful 
developer environment. The look and feel is more consistent with Notes client 
version 8.x, with the features and lexibility one would expect of an Eclipse-based 
IDE. The new UI will be examined at a high level. The next major feature addition 
that will be covered is XPages. XPages are a new type of design element being 
introduced in the 8.5 release that will revolutionize Domino Web Applications. 
XPages enable application developers to quickly and easily create rich Domino web 
applications with a Web 2.0 look and feel. Finally, we will review improvements to 
CSS support, enhancements to HTML generation, JavaScript controls, a new method 
related to ID Vault called ResetUserPassword and changes to web services.
Domino Designer on Eclipse
Now in 8.5, the Domino Designer client is based on Eclipse, as the Notes client 
was in 8.x. Eclipse is an award-winning, open source platform for the construction 
of powerful software development tools and rich desktop applications. For more 
information on Eclipse, visit the following URL:
http://www.eclipse.org/
This architectural change allows the new designer client to become an open source 
pluggable environment. By allowing the use of plugins, objects can be built, re-used, 
and shared.
Some of the differences in the new 8.5 Designer client can be seen when examining 
the processes associated with Domino Designer. It is useful to know how they relate 
to one another and what component each controls. Prior to release, 8.5 designer 
clients, when you launched designer.exe, nlnotes.exe would be spawned.  
This is the process for the releases prior to 8.5 Domino Designer.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 256 ]
Now, in the 8.5 Designer client, designer.exe loads and spawns nlnotes.exe.
On faster machines, designer.exe shows up briely, and may not be 
seen at all.
Then the notes2.exe process spawns and designer.exe quits.
notes2.exe is the Java process that corresponds to the Eclipse 
shell.
Finally, nlnotes.exe spawns ntaskldr.exe after Domino Designer on Eclipse 
(DDE) opens.
Some other things you may notice is that it takes longer to launch and exit DDE than 
in previous versions. This is due to the Eclipse startup and shutdown sequences. This 
can lead to problems on exit or launch. If you experience a problem with launch or 
exit, it may be due to one of the following issues. Due to the longer exit time, the user 
may have initiated the launch before all prior processes had been killed, or the user 
may have initiated the launch sequence multiple times. It is also possible that, on 
prior exit, the client did not shut down all processes.
With a few exceptions, the launch process will be able to compensate for these errors. 
However, if you still can't launch or exit the 8.5 designer client, you can manually kill 
the nlnotes.exe and notes2.exe processes with the task manager, or if the client 
still will not launch or exit, log out of the system to completely kill all  
process threads.
The new Eclipse-based GUI
Now that the 8.5 Designer client is Eclipse based, there is a new GUI. The default 
perspective in 8.5 is the Domino Designer perspective. A perspective contains editors 
and views speciic to that task. There are other perspectives available in Domino 
Designer 8.5, each suited to a particular task. You can select a different perspective 
from the menu, by selecting Window | Open Perspective | Other, as seen in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 257 ]
Not all perspectives have a corresponding layout in the GUI.
Perspectives can be customized to suit individual preferences. One way is by resizing 
the views and editors.
You can resize views and editors in two ways. They are as follows:
• 
Click the Maximize/Restore button located in the title bar of the view  
or editor, as shown in the screenshot that follows
• 
Click and drag the border of a view or editor

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 258 ]
Views and editors can also be hidden by clicking on the Close button:
In the menu, select Window | Show Eclipse Views to re-open closed views  
(as shown in the following screenshot). You can use this menu to open any Eclipse 
view, including those from other perspectives:
To return to the current perspective's default layout, select Window | Reset 
Perspective...:
XPages
For a while now, it has been dificult to create elegant web applications for Notes/
Domino. XPages are a new type of design element being introduced in the Notes 
Domino 8.5 release, that will allow application developers to quickly and easily 
create rich Domino web applications with a Web 2.0 look and feel.

Chapter 9
[ 259 ]
Applications built using XPages are supported for web use only, for the 8.5 release. 
Starting in Lotus Notes 8.5.1, XPages are also supported on the client. To enhance the 
appearance and functionality for web use, existing applications can be extended to 
utilize XPages. The standard design elements must be included in the database for 
use in the Notes client and the application. If a new application is targeted for both 
the Notes client and web users, then you can also include XPages for use on the Web.
XPages are built on top of Java Server Faces (JSF). XPages also have built-in AJAX 
support, which allows application developers to take advantage of AJAX features 
such as type-ahead and partial page refresh. They are created in pure XML markup. 
When the application developer adds controls to XPages using drag and drop, the 
XML is generated automatically.
XPages do not require any additional steps to install on a Domino server. When you 
create a new XPage in an application, you start with a blank page similar to what you 
see when a new form or page is created. You then build the XPage by dragging and 
dropping controls onto the XPage to add functionality. A wide range of controls are 
available out of the box, which enables application developers to quickly and easily 
get a web application up and running. Some examples of the controls available are a 
pager, rich text editor, date picker, tabbed panel, and many more. Controls can also 
be combined into a single object, called a custom control. Custom controls are similar 
to subforms, as they can be used in other XPages in the current application, or copied 
into other applications for reuse. Just like with subforms, if a change is made to a 
custom control in an application, that change is propagated out to all other instances 
of that custom control in that application.
There is a default system template in the 8.5 release that uses XPages. The discussion 
template has been enhanced to include XPages in 8.5:

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 260 ]
Improvements to Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) 
support
In Domino Designer 8.5, you can edit and create CSS. Previously, you would have 
had to use an external editor to do this. Not only can you create custom stylesheets, 
but you can import existing ones. You can also group your favorite stylesheets and 
script resources into a theme to provide a common look and feel in your application 
and map style classes to UI controls. This will save developer time and effort when 
adding CSS to applications. 
To create a new stylesheet, go to File | New | Style Sheet Resource from the main 
Eclipse menu. In the New Style Sheet dialog box, do the following:
1. In the Name ield, type the name of the stylesheet, as shown in the  
following screenshot:
By default, Domino Designer adds a CSS ile extension to this name.
2. In the Application ield, select an application for the stylesheet. Click on the 
OK button.
Another method of creating a stylesheet, is by double-clicking on Style Sheets under 
Resources in the Applications Navigator and then clicking on the New Style Sheet 
in the editor.
Enhancements to HTML generation
With the 8.5 Domino Designer, the new enhanced HTML-generation option can be 
used to leverage a CSS, via a theme, to enhance the look and feel of a traditional 
Notes application. There is limited support for this functionality in XPages themes. 
One function that is supported is that HTML pages will include references to the 

Chapter 9
[ 261 ]
text/CSS resources deined in the theme. Another functionality that is supported is 
that the body control style property (as deined in the theme) is included in the body 
tag class attribute. What is not supported is the ability to search for theme design 
notes beyond the current database or theme inheritance.
To enable this functionality, select the database and go to Design | Design 
properties. Go to the Web access section of the Database properties box and  
select Enable enhanced HTML generation:
JavaScript controls
The JavaScript control enhancements in Domino Designer 8.5 focus on the controls 
for the rich text ields on the Web. Starting in 8.5, you can enable the display of 
rich text on the Web as a Dojo-based JavaScript control. The Dojo Toolkit is an 
open source modular JavaScript toolkit designed to ease the rapid development of 
cross platform, JavaScript/AJAX-based applications and websites. The Dojo-based 
mechanism uses standard HTML and CSS, so the beneits are similar to using  
an applet. 

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 262 ]
To use this new option, go to Comment a rich text ield and choose Design | Field 
Properties. On the Info tab, for Web Access select Using JavaScript Control:
The following screenshot is of the Rich Text Editor with this option selected:
Using the JavaScript control, these are now available options for editing, redo, strike 
through, changing the foreground color, and changing the background color. Table 
operations, such as delete row, add row, and so on, are not available when using the 
JavaScript control, but are available when using the preview setting.
New methods related to ID Vault—
ResetUserPassword
There is a feature introduced in Notes/Domino 8.5 that allows Domino 
administrators to manage users' ID iles with less effort, called the ID Vault. You 
can read more about this feature in Chapter 6, Domino 8.5.3 Enhancements. In Lotus 
Notes Domino 8.5, a new method was added, called ResetUserPassword. This new 
method allows you to leverage the ID Vault feature in custom applications. It can be 
used to reset the password and download count on an ID ile stored in the ID Vault 

Chapter 9
[ 263 ]
and to set both the password and download count. Using this method, a developer  
is able to design an application for the help desk to perform password resets, or a 
self-serve application that end users can access to reset their passwords.
Lotus Notes Domino 8.5 comes with a sample self-service application, called 
PwdResetSample.nsf, which uses the new method in a LotusScript agent that you 
can customize for your needs. In order to run this method from a LotusScript agent or 
Java agent, you must provide password reset authority with the "Self-service password 
reset authority" lag to a user identity that has signed the agent. It is recommended 
that one is registered speciically for this purpose. The server on which you deploy 
the agent must also have this authority and must give the agent signer Run restricted 
LotusScript/Java agents access. You must provide password reset authority with the 
"Self-service password reset authority" lag to the user or server identity under which 
the application is authorized to run, when the ResetUserPassword method is used 
in a non-agent application. To set the access, switch to the Coniguration tab in the 
Administrator client and select your ID Vault under Security | ID Vault. Then go to 
Tools | ID Vaults | Authority to Reset Passwords.
Set both the Vault Administrator (your Server Administrator) and your Domino 
Server as self-service password reset authorities:

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 264 ]
Make sure that both your Vault administrator and your Domino server 
have been conigured as self-service password reset authorities. If they 
are not, you will receive the following error on the server console:
HTTP Server: Agent 'User Password Reset' Missing or invalid 
Password Reset Trust certiicate
Changes to web services
Prior to Domino 8.5, Web Services were treated as a single entity. In Domino 8.5, 
web services are differentiated between two entities, web service providers and 
web service consumers. While the categorization and handling has changed a bit, 
the underlying data is backward compatible. Any web services that you created in 
a previous version will be displayed as a web service provider in Domino 8.5. In 
Domino Designer 8.5, a fundamental shift in object creation has occurred. To create 
an object, a name for the object is now required. The object is then saved in the 
application as soon as it is created and displayed back to the user.
In previous versions of Domino Designer, web services looked something like  
what is shown in the following example from Domino Designer 8.0.1. The following 
screenshot shows where Web Services in the Shared Code folder of a database can 
be located:

Chapter 9
[ 265 ]
In Domino Designer 8.5, Web Service Providers and Web Service Consumers items 
are now found under the Code folder. Selecting the Web Service Providers item  
in the navigator brings up the Web Service Providers list as shown in the  
following screenshot:
What's ahead?
As you know, Domino Designer is used to create Notes/Domino applications. You 
have seen how it can be used to take a Notes application and build components from 
the various Notes/Domino design elements using the Property Broker Editor and 
the Composite Application Editor, and new integration points with actions and  
view columns.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 266 ]
Future plans for Domino Designer may include merging it with Lotus Component 
Designer within an Eclipse framework, bringing the two designer tools together into 
an integrated development framework for Lotus applications. All development will 
be performed within the Eclipse environment with new script editors and shared 
design element bookmark navigation:
Bringing these multiple development tools under a single designer framework 
will make the developer's job easier by offering them a consolidated view of the 
development process.
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.1 client 
features
Perhaps the biggest news in Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.1 was the announcement 
that the 8.5.1 Domino Designer Client was a free download. This marked the focus 
on Domino as a Rapid Application Development (RAD) platform. Additional 
features include XPages updates. 

Chapter 9
[ 267 ]
XPages updates
The Notes client can now run XPages. This means that all of the beneits and features 
that were previously only available to browser users, are now available to the Notes 
client as well. This allows users to have the same experience in the application when 
accessing it from either a browser or a client. This also streamlines development 
effort as the application only needs to be created once for all end users regardless  
of how they access the application. The end user does not need to have the Designer 
client to run XPages.
You can now take XPages applications ofline. Existing applications can be taken 
ofline by creating a local replica and enabling the XPages client launch option via  
a Designer property sheet or the client's InfoBox.
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.2 client 
features
One of the most requested changes made its way into Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.2 
in the form of application icons. Application icons had been stuck in the past due to 
limitations of 16 colors. Now, you can still use the familiar 16 color icon editor, or 
choose a PNG, GIF, JPEG, or BMP image ile for better quality images. Lotus Domino 
Designer 8.5.2 also provides a single editor that centralizes management of the 
application icons. Additional features include the following:
• 
Lotus Domino Designer enhancements
• 
Lotus Domino Designer Eclipse framework enhancements
Lotus Domino Designer enhancements
Starting in Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.2, you can now reorder ields when dropping 
them from the palette. Drag-and-drop can also be performed from palettes when in 
source mode. Check Box Group and Radio Button Group controls have been added 
to the Controls palette. Their properties can be set after adding an XPage, using the 
properties view. A designer now has more control over windowing behavior. You 
can choose to open elements in a new window or reuse the same tab.
The following are the supported Notes agent methods. These methods allow XPages 
to run an agent on a notes client:
• 
NotesAgent.runOnServer
• 
NotesAgent.run
• 
NotesAgent.runWithDocumentContext(NotesDocument)
 

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 268 ]
In Lotus Domino 8.5.2, Dojo was upgraded to 1.4.1. The Dojo iles are under domino\
js\dojo-1.4.1 in the Notes data directory. Dojo widgets can be used in a variety  
of controls.
Server-side JavaScript global objects now has a new way to create a session called 
sessionAsSigner(). This will allow you to simultaneously have code that runs with 
the permissions of the signer of the XPage design element as well as code that runs 
with the permissions of the current user. Database scripts are now supported in the 
LotusScript editor in Eclipse. You can also deine database scripts as @<formula>.
Lotus Domino Designer Eclipse framework 
enhancements
Design notes can now be signed in your application directly in Designer. To do this 
right-click on the application and go to Application | Sign Design:

Chapter 9
[ 269 ]
Passthru HTML on a form/page can be edited with an Eclipse HTML editor.  
To do this go to View | HTML Editor or you can also choose HTML Editor  
from the right-click menu on the passthru HTML: 
Now, you have the ability to see which version of Designer your design elements have 
been saved with. You can set an application property using XPages to set the minimum 
Notes version required for the page to run. The value can be between release 8.5 and 
8.5.2. A null value will allow the page to determine the lowest version.
New Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.3 client 
features
Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.3 continues the progression of the earlier releases 
in XPages functionality and performance. With a new preload setting, XPages 
performance increases greatly with this release. This allows an administrator 
the ability to tell the server (or client) to preload the XPages run time. Speciic 
applications can be selected to be preloaded as well so they are compiled, cached, 
and in-memory ready-to-use. Additional features include Lotus Domino  
Designer enhancements.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 270 ]
Lotus Domino Designer enhancements
In Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.3, you can now add a Java class as a true design 
element (see the following screenshot). Prior to Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.3,  
you would manually add it using the Package Explorer:
The following screenshot displays the buttons that are available in the Java view:
Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.3 has added a new function to support the machine 
speciic policy setting called @GetMachineInfo().
There is now an updated JavaScript Editor. With this editor, you now have Java, 
Lotuscript, Javascript, SSJS and CSS in the Eclipse editors. The Lotus Domino 
Designer 8.5.3 is truly a one stop shop for developers.
XPages and Forms/Views perspectives allow you to hide classic design elements 
you don't need in a new application. You can also customize the design element 
types you want to have appear. So, if you want some classic design elements 
but never use others, you can hide the ones you do not use. Continuing with the 
customization theme, you now have the ability to select and ilter the design element 
types you want to display in the Applications Navigator and perspectives based on 
your preference.

Chapter 9
[ 271 ]
The Dojo version shipping with Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.3 is now 1.5.0. In Lotus 
Domino Designer 8.5.3 there is also a plugin API that will allow you to surface 
additional Dojo libraries (such as a custom widget you've written) and even different 
Dojo versions. So, if you want to drop 1.6.1 on your server, you can achieve this. 
There is also a new Dojo property panel added for XPage and Custom control.  
The Dojo property panel is shown in the following screenshot:
Domino is aware of the Dojo dependency hierarchy. What this means is you can 
create XPage applications that have rich functionality. If you are trying to mobilize 
your apps for mobile, internet-based, or high latency users, you can enable 
Domino GZip compression for database output. This will really make your XPages 
application eficient and lightweight.
By specifying the xsp.client.script.dojo.version property in 
xsp.properties, you can change the default version of Dojo used in 
XPages; however, doing so creates an unsupported coniguration.
A new attribute has been added as an Application Properties performance property 
on XPages. It is Evaluate the entire page on refresh:

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 272 ]
A new Display XPage instead attribute has been added to View | Web Access 
InfoBox tab. This Web only attribute lets you select an XPage from a drop-down  
list to display as a web view instead of using a standard view:
There have also been several usability updates such as the ability to control the 
opening of InfoBoxes, a sign button in all design list editors, and the ability to 
rename design elements name and alias. You would control the opening of the 
InfoBoxes with the preference setting shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 273 ]
The following screenshot shows the Sign button:
There is also the ability to expand and collapse all the sections in a view:
Finally with Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.3, you can now incorporate Full Text (FT) 
search result sorting on XPage view controls.
Lotus Component Designer
Lotus Component Designer is the new version of Workplace Designer, with support 
for WebSphere Portal 6. It is a development environment built on top of Eclipse, 
which allows for the creation of document-based applications using visual design 
methods with no need to know the intricacies of J2EE.
Forms are the building blocks for applications built with Lotus Component Design. 
Applications can have more than one form associated with them. Each form then 
contains one or more controls. Controls include views, images, text boxes, combo 
boxes, radio buttons, and tables.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 274 ]
Once the controls are placed on a form, the built-in JavaScript editor can be used to 
customize functionality. The JavaScript editor supports color-coding and code-assist, 
so developers who are comfortable with developing in Domino Designer will feel 
right at home.
The forms and controls within a Lotus Component Designer application are used to 
manipulate an XML-based document model, which is stored in a relational database. 
This allows for the separation of the look and feel of the application from its data.
Here are a number of new features of Lotus Component Designer:
Migration tool
Lotus Component Designer allows you to migrate components created with previous 
releases into release 8. The migration tool is a part of the component import process 
and can detect older versions of components. When an older version is detected, its 
pages are converted to the new XSP format.
Help and enhanced welcome page
As shown in the following screenshot, the new Lotus Component Designer welcome 
page offers a rich set of options including an overview, tutorials, samples, web 
resources, and context-sensitive help:

Chapter 9
[ 275 ]
Accessibility
Lotus Component Designer is an accessible software development tool with 
which you can create accessible components. It is compliant with IBM Corporate 
Instruction 162 (CI 162) which meets the U.S. government's federal accessibility 
guidelines for information technology. It requires that the hardware, software, 
services, web pages, and internal applications are accessible to persons  
with disabilities.
Composite application support
With Lotus Component Designer, you can now create applications that can work 
within the IBM WebSphere Portal composite application model. These components 
can interact with components created with Notes/Domino 8 as well.
Controls and pages
There are many new features and additions to controls and pages. A few favorites 
are as follows:
• 
Preview images directly from the Choose Image dialog box without having 
to add it to the page irst
• 
Create custom controls, which combine two or more controls into a  
single control
• 
Add UI controls that are not listed in the standard UI Controls palette, such 
as supported AJAX controls
• 
Web page preview without having to leave Lotus Component Designer
Data connections
Some of the new features and enhancements for data connectivity are as follows:
• 
Local connections are supported in components. Connections are the sets of 
information used to connect to a data source such as a database.
• 
The schema editor has been improved so as to provide an easy graphical way 
to create and edit XML schemas.
• 
Components can now store data in external data sources such as Domino 
databases and XML iles on a target server.
• 
A new query editor is available to provide a more granular and lexible way 
to populate view queries.
• 
Components can now consume external web services and manipulate the 
data received with JavaScript.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 276 ]
Scripting
Some of the new features and enhancements for deployment are as follows:
• 
There is a new XSP ile format for registry and page loading which has been 
made public. For more information, visit the Lotus Component Designer 
developerWorks website at the following URL:
http://www-01.ibm.com/software/lotus/
• 
A new XSP tag library is available, offering a library of UI controls, data 
sources, simple actions and other controls. This library is located in the \doc\
controls directory.
• 
A JavaScript debugger is now included and can be used to debug any 
JavaScript code that runs on WebSphere Portal 6.x.
Deployment
Some of the new features and enhancements for deployment are as follows:
• 
One can deploy components to servers without having knowledge of J2EE 
applications and without the administrator credentials
• 
Components can be deployed to a cluster for production deployment 
by exporting the components Web Archive (WAR) and Data Deinition 
Language (DDL) iles and providing them to your administrators
• 
Basic authentication is now supported for WebSphere Portal 6.x
New Web 2.0 features
Some of the new Web 2.0 features that are available in Notes/Domino 8.5, such  
as RSS and ATOM are discussed in the following sections.
RSS and ATOM
RSS and ATOM are feed formats used to publish web content that is updated on 
a regular basis. News organizations, governments, private companies, and even 
individuals via their daily blogs publish RSS and ATOM feeds. All you need to read 
these feeds is an RSS or ATOM reader such as Notes 8 and access to the Internet.
Feeds within Lotus Notes 8.5 are included as a sidebar plugin along with the 
Sametime Contacts, Activities, and Day-At-A-Glance, on the right-side of  
the screen:

Chapter 9
[ 277 ]
With Notes/Domino 8, you can also generate RSS feeds from Domino databases 
including the new blog template and Domino Web Access. The Domino RSS 
Syndication template is used to create the feeds from any Domino view. The agents 
and script libraries from this template can also be used within other applications.
The irst step is to create a database to manage your feeds. Create the new 
application and base it on the RSS Feed Generator template:

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 278 ]
Once the database has been created, you will want to set up the global options that 
apply to all the RSS feeds that are generated. To do this, click on Set Global Options 
in the Action bar of the application:
Using the Set Global options dialog, you can control the following:
• 
Protocol used when accessing feeds: This can be set either to http://  
or https://
• 
RSS <guid> element preix: This can be set either to notes:// or http://
• 
Default database page redirect time: This is entered in seconds
• 
Available Feeds Header (use HTML): This displays all available feeds
• 
Default Database Page (use HTML): This is the default HTML for the  
feed database

Chapter 9
[ 279 ]
Once the defaults are set, you can deine a feed and direct it to a speciic mail ile, 
based on a user or on a speciic database.
When a feed is deined, you are able to get a list of all available feeds from the 
Domino server by directing your browser to the feed database that you created 
earlier. From this web page, you will be able to add the feed into your favorite  
RSS feed reader:

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 280 ]
Blog template
Starting with Notes 8, you can create your own web log, or blog, using the new 
Domino Web Log template (dominoblog.ntf). Once created, you can use either 
Lotus Notes or a web browser to add content and manage your blog. The resultant 
web page shows the irst entry of the author's blog. The template allows a creation  
of blog entries from the Notes client or from the website itself:
The following screenshot shows what the new blog template looks like when 
accessed from a client:

Chapter 9
[ 281 ]
AJAX support
Domino 8 added support for JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) as an output 
format. JSON is a lightweight data-interchange format. It is easy for humans to  
read and write. This makes JSON an ideal data-interchange language.
Lotus Expeditor
Lotus Expeditor is the base platform for Lotus rich clients such as Notes 8 Standard 
and Sametime 7.5. It is also a product that companies can leverage to build their own 
rich client solutions. Built on top of Eclipse (an open source IDE), Lotus Expeditor 
adds the ability to create composite applications, a local data store for credentials and 
application data, role-based provisioning, enhanced security, and ofline abilities.
One of the problems with rich clients in the past, was the cost of deployment 
and support. Rich clients are large installations that needed to be upgraded and 
supported. In fact, it is the cost of deployment and support that helped to drive the 
web-based applications that we see in wide use today. Everyone with a rich client 
knew what version of it they were running, but there is no reason to know what 
version of eBay, Google Mail, or your corporate WebSphere Portal you may be using 
because they are server managed and will have been updated all the time with new 
features, functions, and content.
In fact, as the rush towards web-based applications required more and more 
functionality to be supported by the browser, the "light browser" itself became very 
large and started to require deployment and support planning. In some instances, 
the browser footprint on a client became larger than some rich client applications.
Lotus Expeditor can be thought of as a platform that has all the beneits of rich clients 
but also has the beneits of those web-based applications because it can be centrally 
managed. It can also be described as a "local portal" because it can be used to create 
composite applications that contain Notes/Domino 8 components, JSR-168 compliant 
portlets, SWING, and AWT applications without the need for a network connection.
Lotus Expeditor does this by implementing client-side containers for the components 
that communicate via a local property-broker implementation. This can have another 
beneit—speed of execution. As the code is executing within the Lotus Expeditor 
platform, the composite application may not be affected by network and backend 
systems latency, or at least may be affected only to the extent that it utilizes  
those systems.

New Features in Notes/Domino 8.5.3 Development
[ 282 ]
In addition to responsiveness, applications built with Lotus Expeditor can also be 
more reliable and portable due to their local execution and data stores. This results 
in a rich client that has the beneits of a browser but with a user experience that can 
be better than a browser due to speed, reliability, centralized management, and 
the ability to work online or ofline. When working ofline, the applications store 
transactions in the local data store. Once connected to the company network, Lotus 
Expeditor can then synchronize the transactions to the host application and may 
even download updates for the application itself.
Some of the applications that can be built with Lotus Expeditor include customer 
service and support applications, such as bank teller and reservations clerk, as  
well as sales force automation applications, such as mobile CRM or insurance  
claims management.
Summary
In this chapter, we reviewed some of the major new features and enhancements that 
affect Notes/Domino 8 application development.
We then covered Lotus Component Designer, Web 2.0, and Lotus Expeditor. In the 
next chapter, we will take a look at integration of Lotus Domino with other Lotus 
and IBM products.

Integration with Other  
Lotus/IBM Products
The Lotus brand within the IBM Software group represents the "people facing" side 
of the overall IBM product family. This does not necessarily mean that the end user 
uses no other IBM products, but the Lotus brand is the frontend of the IBM SOA 
Interaction services component.
This chapter shows the various interactions between Domino and other IBM 
integration products. Each product can be deployed as a separate infrastructure piece 
and provide value. However, when they are leveraged as an integrated solution, the 
possibilities are endless.
Each of these add-on products represent key components in the overall product 
strategy that IBM has for the collaboration space.
However, this chapter does not cover all of the products available under the Lotus 
brand. For additional information on these, please visit http://www.lotus.com.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• 
Lotus Quickr
• 
Lotus Sametime
• 
Lotus Connections
• 
IBM Learning Widget
• 
IBM Multimedia Library
• 
New integration features in Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 284 ]
Lotus Quickr
The Lotus Quickr product has been available for several years. Previously known 
as QuickPlace, Quickr has become recognized as a leader in web-based team 
collaboration, and it is used in many large corporations throughout the world.
The goal of the change from QuickPlace to Quickr is simpliication. IBM wants the 
product to be so simple that an end user can, with a few clicks, generate productive 
services. There is also a focus on server deployment simpliication. This will be 
covered in detail later in this chapter.
One of the key components of Quickr is the connector technology that it introduces. 
These connectors will allow for direct and programmatic interaction with the data 
stored in the Quickr places. Connectors that will be shipping with Quickr 8.5.1 are  
as follows:
• 
Notes
• 
Sametime
• 
File System/Windows Explorer
• 
RSS/ATOM
In this section, we will cover each edition and discuss how it integrates with Domino.
Quickr with services for Domino
The Domino-based edition of Quickr should be thought of as a signiicant upgrade to 
the existing QuickPlace product line. This product has been maturing over many years, 
and this new release provides many new capabilities. These include native support for 
wikis and blogs out of the box. The Quickr wiki is found at the following URL:
http://www-10.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf/
The basic installation process for Quickr with service for Domino is very simple. 
It involves installing a base Domino server version 8.5.1. The Quickr product 
components are then installed on top of this server. Based on this writing, the 
support for Quickr 8.5.1 will be supported on Domino 8.5.1 and Domino 8.5.3. 
Currently, support for Quickr 8.5.1 installation support on Domino 8.5.2 is being 
skipped and will go straight to Domino 8.5.3. Quickr for Domino is installed in four 
basic steps that are listed as follows:
• 
Install and conigure Lotus Domino Server 8.5.1 and Fix Pack 5  
(or Domino 8.5.3)
• 
Install Lotus Quickr 8.5.1 on the Domino Server
 

Chapter 10
[ 285 ]
• 
Conigure Multi-server Single Sign-on (MSSO) authentication, Domino 
servlet engine, and UTF-8 character encoding on the Lotus Domino Server
• 
Conigure Quickr Domino Server settings
Installing and coniguring Lotus Domino Server
Installing and coniguring Lotus Domino Server is a standard Lotus Domino Server 
install. There are some additional Notes.ini variables that can be added, but overall 
this is just a standard Domino install. It is recommended to install Domino Ofline 
Services (DOLS), if you would like to take your Quickr Places ofline. Some of these 
Notes.ini variables could include the following:
• 
Create_R8_Databases=1: This is used for On-Disk Structure management.
• 
Create_R85_Databases=1: This is used for On-Disk Structure management.
• 
$QuickPlaceDisallowAnonAccess: This contains the settings that enable 
and disable anonymous access.
• 
QuickPlaceNestedGroupLimit=x: Here, x is the number of nested group 
lookups, the higher the number, the slower the authentication.
• 
INET_Authenticate_with_Secondary=1: This is set to use a secondary 
directory.
• 
$DOLS_TCPIPAddress=1: This is used to conigure a cluster that uses the IBM 
Network Dispatcher to work with Domino Ofline Services. A value of 0 
(zero) disables this setting.
• 
CheckCacheBeforeDSAPI=1: Enables authentication to work for ofline users. 
A value of 0 (zero) disables this setting.
• 
EXTMGR_ADDINS: Dependent on an operating system.
• 
libdolextn (on AIX): Enables Domino Ofline Services to work with Lotus 
Quickr.
• 
NoWebFileSystemACLS=1: If you use the Sun Java System Portal Server with 
IBM Lotus Quickr as a reverse proxy, use the Notes.ini setting to prevent 
users from having to re-authenticate after installing places ofline. A value of 
0 (zero) disables this setting.

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 286 ]
Installing Lotus Quickr
It is very easy to install Lotus Quickr. The following screens show you how to get 
your Domino Quickr Server installed:
1. The irst step is to get your Lotus Quickr Code from the Lotus Passport site.
2. Launch the code and you will see the following screen:
3. Next, select the temporary directory. We used E\Temp\Quickr-Install as 
our temporary directory for this demonstration. The following screenshot 
shows this selection:
4. Once the install starts, you will see a splash screen. As noted, Quickr 8.5.1 
will run on Lotus Notes 8.5.1 (with Fix Pack 5) or the new 8.5.3 release.

Chapter 10
[ 287 ]
5. As usual, you will receive a Software License Agreement dialog box (see 
the following screenshot). You can print the agreement from this dialog box, 
click on the Accept or the Decline button to accept or decline the agreement:

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 288 ]
6. The next set of dialog boxes provide the interface questions that need to be 
answered as part of a standard Quickr install:
7. An installed Domino server is required for Quickr to be hosted on. As 
shown in the following screenshot, the question in the dialog box is about 
the location of the Domino server's executable iles. In this installation, this 
location was found automatically and the location was prompted to the end 
user. Overall, this location cannot be changed; it must match the location of 
where Domino is installed:

Chapter 10
[ 289 ]
8. The following screenshot conirms the location of the data and the Domino 
executable directory. If this is not correct then you can go back, or cancel the 
installation and review the Notes.ini ile for the actual location of where these 
elements are located. If this is correct click on the Next button to proceed:
9. The following screenshot shows a progress dialog box. This gives you an idea 
of the Quickr installation progress:

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 290 ]
10. The following dialog box shows that you have completed the base 
installation of Quickr. Click on the Next button to go to the next step:
11. This step is where you deine the Quickr Administration's username and 
password, as shown in the following screenshot. You will be prompted 
anytime that you need to make changes to any of the Quickr administration 
changes. Click on the Next button to continue:

Chapter 10
[ 291 ]
12. At this point, you are inished with the basic install for Quickr. As shown in 
the following screenshot, click on the Finish button to complete this install:
Coniguring Multi-server Single Sign-on (MSSO) 
authentication
The next step is to set up the Multi-Server Single Sign-on (MSSO) authentication.  
In older releases of Lotus Domino, the MSSO was denoted as Server Single  
Sign-on (SSO). The features provide the ability for Web users to log in to a  
Domino or Websphere server once. A "token" will be provided to each user's  
Web client that will, in effect, authenticate that user for any server that is sharing  
the MSSO-based credentials. End users will only be prompted once for their 
credentials. The username and password will not be asked for again.
Base requirements for MSSO
Each end user browser must have their cookies enabled. As a token is being used, the 
browser must have the ability to accept those tokens. If you would like to review the 
cookie then just add javascript:alert(document.cookie) as a comment in place 
of a URL. Do not enter "http://".

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 292 ]
The DNS domain that applies to the participating SSO servers is speciied to each 
MSSO server coniguration document. IP addresses cannot be used as part of the 
URL syntax. For example, http://192.9.200.20/ is not a legal entry for MSSO.  
The following URL will work:
http://Quickr.example.com
Be sure and check RFC 1736 and RFC 1738 for more information about 
URLs.
Also, it is critical for the DNS name to match the entry point into the server. For 
example, each MSSO coniguration is setup based on a DNS name (example.com). 
As long as a server can resolve to an address, there is the possibility that HTTP can 
respond. But in the case of MSSO, the DNS name for the URL must match what was 
conigured in the Domino server.
For example, DNS via NSLookup shows an IP address assigned to IBM.com as 
9.9.9.9. Also, DNS via NSLookup shows an IP address assigned to example.com  
as 9.9.9.9.
This can be accomplished via a variety of techniques including DNS 
A and CNAME records.
If the DNS name is example.com, the IBM.com address will not accept the  
MSSO token.
WebSphere cannot use Domino based authoritative LTPA tokens. To include 
Domino and WebSphere in the same LTPA group, you need to create the 
authoritative LTPA token irst in WebSphere then you must export the LTPA token 
from WebSphere and import it into Domino.
Now, that you understand some of the basic rules, let's create a MSSO document and 
the associated security keys.
You can use the Domino Server document or a site document for the base  
Domino Web coniguration settings. This is up to you and how you have  
conigured your environment.
1. Open the Administration Server—names.nsf.
2. Select the Internet Sites view.
3. Click on Create Web SSO Coniguration.

Chapter 10
[ 293 ]
4. In the SSO document, click on Keys.
5. Initialize the Web SSO Coniguration with the shared secret key, at this point 
you have the following two choices:
 °
To choose Domino only, select the Create Domino SSO Key option:
 °
Choose Domino and WebSphere and import the Keys.
6. The following screenshot shows the SSO (MSSO) coniguration document:

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 294 ]
7. The inal step for MSSO is to assign the token to a server or a site document. 
As mentioned earlier, you will need to assign the MSSO to your server or a 
site document. Be careful and enter the correct name for the fully qualiied 
host name. If you are using a server document to host the MSSO then set the 
Load Internet Coniguration from Server/Internet Sites document—this 
will be set to Disabled for the server and Enabled for site documents:
The following screenshot shows your inal step. In the Domino Web Engine 
tab, select the Multiple Single Sign on option for the Session authentication 
ield. This will then display a dialog box showing the LTPA tokens that you 
created. Select the one that matches your Internet domain name:
Now the server is conigured for MSSO. Restart HTTP (or the Domino Server).

Chapter 10
[ 295 ]
Coniguring Quickr Domino Server settings
So far, you have set up Domino, Quickr, and MSSO. Now, it is time to conigure the 
Quickr Settings. The following steps describe this process:
Start with the following URL:
http://quickr1.example.com/LotusQuickr/lotusquickr/Main.nsf/
You will see the following screenshot:
As shown in the preceding screenshot, there are three important points on this 
screen. They are:
• 
The login/logout tab. This is how you manage the Quickr Server. Use the 
Administration password that you set as part of the Quickr install (Marked 
as 1 in the preceding screenshot).
• 
There is a link to download the Lotus Connections Connectors (Marked as 2 
in the preceding screenshot).
• 
If you are authenticated then you will see the Administration link. This link 
does not display unless you have authenticated to the Quickr Server.

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 296 ]
You will see there are two basic areas of Administration:
• 
Place Administration: This link provides the ability for the Administrator to 
manage the sites, enable policies, and locked out sites.
• 
Site Administration: This link provides the ability for the Administrator to 
manage the complete Quickr Server. This includes Security, Directory links, 
and other interesting settings such as ile size.
Directory integration
After you have installed Quickr, there is some additional coniguration required, 
depending on the intended usage. They are:
• 
User/group directory coniguration is used to control the authorization and 
authentication of the environment.
• 
Sametime integration is used to enable presence awareness within the 
Quickr places.
• 
QPServlet coniguration is used for WebSphere Portal integration.
The user/group directory coniguration allows you to select one of two  
directory types:
• 
Lotus Domino Directory allows users and groups to be stored in the names.
nsf database (public address book) and corresponding directories surfaced 
via directory assistance.
• 
LDAP directory allows for users in a supported native LDAP directory (for 
example, Domino, IBM Tivoli Directory Server, Microsoft Active Directory, 
Novell Directory, or Sun One Directory). This coniguration allows for the 
reinement of the settings used to interact with the LDAP source.
Application development
The inal integration component of Quickr with services for WebSphere Portal and 
Domino comes in the area of application development. As Quickr is built on top of a 
Domino foundation, it is possible to use traditional Domino development techniques 
to customize and extend it in many ways. Developers can use the standard Lotus 
Developer client to extend the use of Quickr places.

Chapter 10
[ 297 ]
Quickr with services for WebSphere Portal
The WebSphere Portal-based edition of Quickr represents a signiicant application in 
the Web 2.0 space. It heavily leverages these technologies to bring an industry-leading 
collaboration experience. This product expands on the capabilities originally created 
from IBM Workplace Collaboration Services and IBM Workplace Services Express.
Installing Lotus Quickr services
The installation of Quickr services for the WebSphere Portal server has been 
optimized for ease of deployment. There are three installation types that are 
available in the setup program:
• 
Departmental/Express provides the fastest deployment. The server is fully 
deployed with all necessary components including DB2.
• 
Advanced Single Server allows for additional options during setup for 
future expansion.
• 
Advanced Enterprise Cluster allows for a base installation that is intended 
for a clustered deployment.
Additional details about the product installation are available in the Quickr 
administration guide.
Integrating Sametime for Quickr WebSphere Portal
The use of awareness within Quickr services for WebSphere Portal is conigured in 
the same way as any other WebSphere Portal installation:
• 
Conigure the Sametime server using the LDAP directory. It is possible to 
use the native Domino directory for Sametime, but integration is easier if 
WebSphere Portal/Quickr and Sametime are both using LDAP.
• 
Conigure SSO between WebSphere Portal/Quickr and Sametime. This 
is accomplished by exporting the LTPA token value from the WebSphere 
application server and importing it into the Domino domain hosting the 
Sametime servers.
• 
Update the wpconfig.properties ile for WebSphere Portal/Quickr with 
the values for the Sametime server. This includes the following:
 °
Sametime host name
 °
Sametime protocol (HTTP)
 °
Sametime http port
 

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 298 ]
• 
There are additional coniguration options available in the CSEnvironment.
properties ile to facilitate name mapping, if a different directory is used  
for Sametime.
• 
Run the WPSconfig.bat/.sh lcc-configure-sametime coniguration 
program to name the necessary system changes.
Lotus Quickr Connectors
One of the key features of Quickr is the openness provided by the connector 
architecture. These connectors allow for direct interaction with the Quickr servers 
independently of the backend architecture (WebSphere Portal/Domino).
To install the Lotus Quickr Connectors, you will need to complete the  
following steps:
1. The installation begins via the large link on the main page of the Quickr place 
page. This link will initiate the download and installation of the connector's 
package. This is handled as a standard install package starting at the 
welcome screen. The next dialog box will ask about language. The following 
screenshot shows English (United States) as the selected language:

Chapter 10
[ 299 ]
2. After you click on OK, the install will start. You will see the InstallShield 
Wizard and the installer will be installed:
3. The next step is for you to select what features. The following screenshot 
shows all of the features being installed, but normally you just install the 
features that you will use. Select the connector type and click on the  
Next button:

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 300 ]
4. Once you have selected your connectors, the installer will install each of the 
connectors for you; click Next to continue:
5. The connector will now be installed on your machine. Now that the Quickr 
Connector is conigured, it will be visible in the various applications. Within 
Lotus Notes, Quickr connectors are visible from the Actions menu. This 
allows interaction with the Quickr services to provide links to content and 
save ile attachments into the content store:
6. The following screen is called Insert Link from Places. It allows a user to 
send a link to a document in the Quickr content store instead of putting it in 
an e-mail message. This allows different users to access a central copy of the 
content. After the link has been added to the e-mail message, others can use 
it to open the content:

Chapter 10
[ 301 ]
The connector for Sametime allows access to Quickr content stores. It is implemented 
as a Lotus Expeditor plugin within the Sametime 8.5.1 client (and higher). The 
connector for Microsoft Ofice provides access to Quickr document management 
functions directly from within Ofice applications. As you can see, the Lotus Quickr 
connectors provide for tight integration into the content. This will give the end users 
a choice as to how they work and interact with their content.
Lotus Sametime
Lotus Sametime is an enterprise client instant-messaging and web-conferencing 
product that has been available for many years. Starting with version 8.5.1, it 
extended these capabilities with a revised web conference meeting center client  
and Lotus Expeditor-based instant messaging client.
The product is a core component of the uniied communications and collaboration 
strategy. This represents an integrated messaging solution that includes instant 
messaging, voice, and video.
The client product supports not only Windows, but also Linux and Mac OS X.  
These additional client platform choices expand its enterprise reach.
The 8.5.1 product release introduced a new server platform with Linux. This has 
been a long-sought-after operating system for the server platform.
Installing Lotus Sametime
The installation of Lotus Sametime 8.5 requires Domino 8.5 or higher. The Domino 
server is used for the HTTP services, coniguration, and meeting data storage. A 
slight variation of this is the Enterprise Meeting Server (EMS) product. It extends 
the capabilities of Sametime with the WebSphere application server as the frontend. 
The main difference is that EMS provides meeting services fail-over. While the 
WebSphere application server is used as the frontend, the engine driving the 
meetings themselves is a standard Sametime server running on Domino.
The installation process involves running the Sametime server installation wizard 
on an existing server. After you answer a few simple questions, the installation will 
complete in a matter of minutes. After the base installation has been completed, 
additional customization is possible.

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 302 ]
One important thing to note is that Sametime Connect clients are not installed as part 
of the Sametime server. The installation programs for these must be installed after 
the base server install.
There is a Sametime SDK toolkit that can be installed as part of the base package. 
This provides API services and sample applications to build integrated solutions.
Directory integration
The base installation itself is fairly simple with a minimal number of questions. The 
key difference is the directory-type selection of either Domino or LDAP. Regardless 
of user directory type, the base functions of Sametime are the same.
If the Domino Directory is used, then the coniguration is very straightforward. The 
Sametime server needs a replica copy of the Domain Directory. It also needs a Web 
SSO document deined to function correctly. This is done by default as part of the 
Sametime setup, if such a document does not already exist.
If an LDAP Directory is used, then the coniguration can be a bit more complicated. 
During the installation process, you will be asked for the LDAP server host name 
and port number. Further coniguration is handled via the Sametime administration 
web interface or by editing the stconfig.nsf database via a Notes client.
When an LDAP Directory is used in Domino, it has two interface points. The irst 
is for instant messaging. These services directly access the LDAP server and don't 
use Domino. The second is for meeting services. These use the Domino Directory's 
assistance database to interact with the LDAP source. The reason behind this is that 
meeting services leverage the Domino authentication services and database ACLs to 
manage access.
Application integration
Lotus Sametime has many integration points. This is in addition to the Lotus 
Expeditor-based client. The integration points are as follows:
• 
Notes Sideshelf
• 
Notes view/document integration (for instance, Inbox)
• 
Quickr
• 
The WebSphere Portal Server
This list includes a few integration points that are available. The key is that the 
Sametime services can be integrated into virtually any application that can use the 
API services it provides.

Chapter 10
[ 303 ]
Lotus Connections
Lotus Connections represents a new classiication of applications within the 
enterprise. It is targeted as a social network tool to allow for dynamic end user 
collaboration through Web 2.0 tools and technologies.
The product has eleven key areas that it brings into an environment. Each of these 
can be deployed separately or mixed and matched as needed. However, to fully  
take advantage of this product, all eleven should work in unison. The eleven areas 
are as follows:
• 
Home Page: This is a single interface to display all of the other connection 
features.
• 
Proiles: This provides personal information about end users within the 
environment. This can include reporting structures, contact information,  
and associated content within the remaining four components.
• 
Communities: This provides a collaboration environment based upon the 
wiki structure.
• 
Blogs: This provides basic blogging services for an enterprise.
• 
Files: A place where end users can share, post and discover documents.  
This is a great place to store presentations, images, and more.
• 
Social: You can get updates from across your deined social network through 
the consolidated home page, microblogs, and tags.
• 
Wikis: Create web content together, edit, and publish it in a convenient 
location with access that you manage.
• 
Social Analytics: Work with people who share common interests and 
expertise and expand your social network with widgets.
• 
Bookmarks: Save, share, and discover bookmarks through this social 
bookmarking service.
• 
Forums: Exchange ideas with, and beneit from, the expertise of others.
• 
Activities: Provides a new task-based work management tool. An activity 
is a discrete work stream that can consist of one or more components and 
can involve many individuals. An example activity would be the creation of 
a book such as this. The book itself would be the activity with many active 
participants. Then, as content is created, reviewed, and updated, those 
activities can be managed in the context of the activity.
The architecture and installation for Lotus Connections is based on the WebSphere 
application server. For additional information, see the Lotus Connections 
administration guide.

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 304 ]
IBM Learning Widget
The IBM Lotus Learning Widget for IBM Lotus Notes is a new sidebar widget that 
is used to display learning materials inside your IBM Lotus Notes client. This new 
Widget is available for version 8.0.1 or higher.
The Learning Widget for IBM Lotus Notes gives you access to a variety of learning 
features including:
• 
Videos: You can display videos that will focus on a speciic skill and/or topic
• 
Web Seminar: This is a presentation based learning activity that is delivered 
as a self-paced activity
• 
Reference Cards: Reference cards are provided as a quick reference for end 
users to quickly ind how to execute a common activity in a product
There are many more features, too. They are as follows:
• 
Task-based demonstrations
• 
Tutorials
• 
Product tours
• 
Online courses
IBM Multimedia Library
IBM also provides a comprehensive library for multimedia training for its products, 
these include:
• 
The Multimedia Library for Lotus Quickr 8.2/8.5x
• 
The Multimedia Library for IBM Sametime 8/8.5x
• 
The Multimedia Library for Lotus Notes 8/8.5x
• 
The Multimedia Library for IBM Connections
• 
 The Multimedia Library for iNotes
You can check the demos for these libraries at the following URL:
http://www-01.ibm.com/software/lotus/training/multimedialibrary.html

Chapter 10
[ 305 ]
New integration features in Lotus Notes 
and Domino 8.5.3
There are many new integration features in Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3, including 
the following:
• 
Domino Designer moves to Eclipse
• 
Xpages
• 
Themes in Xpages
• 
Components based on Xpages
• 
Composite Application Editor
• 
Drag and Drop enhancements
Domino Designer moves to Eclipse
Starting with Lotus Notes 8.5, the Domino Designer is now hosted on the  
Eclipse platform for Lotus Notes. As a result, the Eclipse application development 
platform provides the same Eclipse elements that are included in the Lotus Notes 
and Domino client. XPages are one of the design elements available from the 
Applications Navigator.
XPages
The XPage Designer lets you create Web 2.0 enabled pages based on the JSF 
technology. Speciic features of XPages include:
• 
AJAX enabled
• 
Fully extensible using custom controls
• 
Support for web clients
• 
Full support for styling using CSS
• 
JavaScript scripting language support for client-side and server-side action
• 
Direct access to Java libraries on the server
• 
Easy page design using pre-built controls
Themes in XPages
Starting with Lotus Notes 8.5, there are themes available for XPages. These are used 
for server-side customization of HTML. Themes can be set globally and applied to all 
applications or a single application on a server.

Integration with Other Lotus/IBM Products
[ 306 ]
Components based on XPages
Starting with Lotus Notes Designer 8.5.2, components based on XPages can now  
be developed with Domino Designer.
Composite Application Editor
Starting with Lotus Notes Designer 8.5.2, the following updates (and support 
elements) have been made to the Composite Application Editor:
• 
Palette support for the Notes View containers
• 
Managed Browser/Browser Container support
• 
Notes Document Container support
• 
Symphony container support
• 
Host On-Demand (HOD) container support
• 
Inline editing support
• 
Custom action support
• 
Support for adding widgets from a catalog to the component palette
Drag-and-drop enhancements
Starting with Designer 8.5.2, developers can now drag and drop from the XPages 
Controls and Data palettes to the Source tab of the XPages editor.
Additionally, with Lotus Notes Designer 8.5.2 (and higher) you can manage and use 
the following: 
• 
Design element iltering
• 
Working sets
• 
Eclipse-based HTML editor
• 
Enhanced Application Icon image
• 
Application Properties editor
• 
Version
• 
Application Signing directly in the designer

Chapter 10
[ 307 ]
Summary 
In this chapter, we looked at several add-on products that are typically integrated 
into a Lotus Notes/Domino environment. Each of the add-on products represents  
a key component for the software environment in your company.
Be sure and check out support add-on features at the following URL:
http://www-01.ibm.com/support/docview.wss?uid=swg27013116#Lotus%20
Notes%20Diagnostic
As we mentioned previously, there are a number of other Lotus/IBM  
products that can be integrated into Notes/Domino. For more information, 
visit http://www.lotus.com. In the next chapter, we will cover the Domino 
Coniguration Tool (DCT).

 

Domino Coniguration Tuner
Lotus Notes/Domino 8.5 saw the introduction of a new, free tool that allows 
administrators to review their coniguration settings against a predetermined set 
of best practices. The Domino Coniguration Tuner (DCT) is a tool that runs in the 
Notes client or Domino Administration client against a user deined set of servers. 
When a DCT scan is run, rules are evaluated comparing existing setting values 
against setting values listed in the best practices catalog. Rules are written to evaluate 
for speciic Domino versions and operating systems. The rules will also differentiate 
between 32 and 64 bit operating systems and Domino versions. This chapter will 
cover the following topics:
• 
Obtaining and setting up the DCT
• 
Navigating and using the DCT
• 
Life cycle and participation
• 
Usage patterns and practices
• 
Troubleshooting
Obtaining and setting up the DCT
To run the DCT, you must be using a Notes or Domino Administration client 
version 8.0 or later. These versions and later contain the required Java Runtime 
Environment (JRE) for execution. Everything else that you need to set up DCT is 
contained in the Notes database template ile—dct.ntf. The template is shipped 
as part of both the Domino Administration Client and Domino Server. It is also 
available as part of the IBM Support Assistant (ISA) Lite and can be downloaded 
for free from the IBM Support site at the following URL:
https://www-304.ibm.com/support/docview.wss?q1=dct&dc=D400&rs=0&conte
xt=SWA00&uid=swg24019358&cs=utf-8&wv=1

Domino Coniguration Tuner
[ 310 ]
Setting up the DCT is equally straightforward. If you are using the Domino 
Administration Client, click the Server tab; you will ind the Domino Coniguration 
Tuner tree entry on the Analysis sub-tab. Clicking on this entry will automatically 
create dct.nsf on the client machine. You will also ind a new entry similar to this  
in the client machine's notes.ini ile, DCT_FILE_PATH=C:\Notes\Data\DCT.nsf.
All of the iles required to run DCT are contained within the template, and  
are deployed when dct.nsf is created. A new quicktune directory structure  
is created under the Notes\Data directory on the client machine, as shown in  
the following screenshot:
When the database opens, the license is displayed on the Help/About page. If you 
do not want to accept the terms, close and delete the database. You will also need 
to delete the quicktune directory and all subdirectories, as well as the DCT.jar 
ile, located under notes\jvm\lib\ext. To accept the terms, close the Help/About 
page. The deployment of the needed Java iles will require that the Notes client gets 
restarted, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 311 ]
Navigating and using DCT
The welcome screen of DCT simply indicates that the database has been properly set 
up. The header section contains several buttons that allow you to perform different 
actions within the tool or to see various settings in the tool. These buttons are listed 
as follows:
• 
Run New Scan
• 
View Results
• 
Check for Updates
• 
Preferences
• 
Help
Run New Scan
The irst time the Run New Scan button is clicked, you will be prompted to build 
a server list. The server list will be pulled from your home mail server unless you 
specify another server, as shown in the following screenshot:
Once the server list has been built, the New Scan screen will be displayed. Servers in 
the list that was just created are now selectable in the left pane, while the right pane 
allows space for the inclusion of servers from other domains. Server names being 
entered manually must be entered in abbreviated format; for example MyServer/IBM.

Domino Coniguration Tuner
[ 312 ]
You must have at least VIEW_ONLY_ADMIN access to the servers 
that you wish to scan.
Running a DCT scan in this manner allows servers from multiple domains to be 
included in a single scan. After selecting and/or entering the server names for 
scanning, you can provide a name for the scan, which will be displayed in the scan 
results. Naming allows you to differentiate your scans. Your regularly scheduled 
scans might be named "Monthly Maintenance", while if you are trying to understand 
why a set of your servers are exhibiting different behavior for the http task, you 
might name it "HTTP Behavior".
Following the coniguration of the scan, click on Run Scan in any of the blue boxes 
and the scan will begin. DCT scans are run by a background agent, which allows you 
to continue to do other work in your chosen client. When the scan is completed, or if 
it fails for any reason, the completion/failure will be indicated in the client's status 
bar, either as DCT Scan Completed. Please View Results or >>> DCT Scan  
Failed - Please Check Status Bar History and Java Debug Console for Details <<<.

Chapter 11
[ 313 ]
View Results
If the scan was successful, then the View Results button will display results for  
the executed scan. Otherwise, it will display the results of the last successful scan. 
The results provide an abundance of data at various levels of detail. Looking at the 
initial or overall results screen, you will see high-level information about the scan 
including the scan name, how the reports are currently iltered, statistics about the 
scan, a list of the rules that were evaluated and against which servers, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Domino Coniguration Tuner
[ 314 ]
The ile name of the current database and the date of the rule set in use are shown in 
the header bar. In the Current Report section, the name of the scan is displayed, as 
well as the date and time that the scan was run. Also, in this section are options such 
as Change, Delete or Run again. Clicking on Change will display a dialog box that 
will allow you to select a different result set to look at. Clicking on Delete will delete 
the current scan results. You will need to click on Change to view other results, 
or the Run New Scan button in the header to initiate a new scan. Clicking on Run 
again will run a new scan with the same parameters as the scan whose results you 
are viewing.
The Filtered by control allows you to vary how you view the results. The default 
view is by server, and includes all servers. Other choices you have are to view by 
rule or severity. Additionally, each of these options, including iltering by server, 
allow you to ilter to a single instance of the chosen type. So, you could switch to  
All Severities, and then narrow it down further to only critical issues (select the 
Critical option) in your Domino domain.
When looking at overall results, the lower section of the results displays a view on  
the left-hand side and other high-level information on the right-hand side. The default 
view will be categorized by server, then by severity. The right-hand side shows an 
overview of how your servers fared in the scan. Statistics are shown above a list of 
the servers that were scanned, and—if any failed—the list of servers not scanned and 
the reason why they were not scanned. Finally, the list of rules that is evaluated in the 
scan is presented. Clicking on any of the result documents in the lower-left section will 
display a single report.
Individual results will always provide an indication of what the mismatched setting 
is, as well as what the server's Domino version and operating system are.

Chapter 11
[ 315 ]
The severity of the condition is also indicated. An explanation of the setting and the 
expected value is displayed, as well as a recommendation for how to remedy the 
setting and what the default value is, if there is one. When the setting in question 
relates to a database list—ODS level settings, for example, the list of affected 
databases will also be displayed. Links to resources are provided, too. These may 
point to Notes/Domino wiki postings, IBM RedBooks, RedPapers or Technotes. 
When the rule is related to a server document setting, a doclink to the server 
document will be included.
Recent updates to DCT include the availability of the often requested "make it so" 
button, labeled as Apply Recommended Change. This button is available for  
notes.ini setting rules only, and executes a set config remote console command.

Domino Coniguration Tuner
[ 316 ]
Clicking on the Apply Recommended Change button will ire a dialog box 
indicating which setting will be changed and on which server. If you click on the 
OK button, the remote console command will be issued. If you click on the Cancel 
button, no changes will be made. Finally, if there is a server coniguration document 
with conlicting notes.ini settings, the server coniguration documents notes.ini 
settings will supersede those set by DCT.
If you would like to view your DCT results outside of the DCT database, you can  
run the Export to HTML action, which will create the ile report.html in the 
quicktune directory.
Checking for Updates
By default, the quicktune directory will contain the java directory, config.xml and 
version.xml. The version.xml ile is one of the iles stored on the support site and 
contains information about the rule set, as well as the DCT.NTF itself. The following 
screenshot shows the contents of the version.xml ile:
The Check for Updates button queries the IBM Support site to see if there are 
any new rules and/or a new dct.ntf available for download. The time date 
stamp of config.xml is compared to the value stored in version.xml, while the 
dct.ntf value in version.xml is compared to the $TemplateBuildDate in the 
$TemplateBuild shared ield. If there are new updates available, you will see a 
screen indicating so, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 317 ]
Click on the Accept License and Download button to get the new iles. When you 
have inished downloading the iles, DCT will automatically refresh the design of 
the current dct.nsf. If you have multiple DCT databases—maybe you are managing 
multiple domains — the other databases will have to have their designs refreshed 
manually. Once the design refresh has completed, you will need to close the current 
dct.nsf and re-open it.
If you create a new DCT database in either the Notes or Administration 
client by going to File | New... it is important that you leave Inherit 
future design changes selected.
Preferences
The Preferences button will open a page (shown in the following screenshot) that 
allows you to manage which rules are active at any given time for a scan. This allows 
you to ine tune your scans so that if you want to look at a speciic set of servers, to 
see how the settings related to the Agent Manager are conigured, you can do so. The 
list of rules is generated on the irst scan execution, so opening this page prior to the 
irst scan will yield a blank screen:
 

Domino Coniguration Tuner
[ 318 ]
Help
The Help button will display the three tabs of the Help page. The Help Topics tab 
includes information about installing and uninstalling DCT, as well as scanning 
instructions and troubleshooting. The Rule Catalog tab contains the current list of 
rules available, and the Change Log contains the list of ixes that have gone into  
the tool.
Life cycle and participation
The lifecycle of DCT rules has a series of phases, with several opportunities for 
participation. The lifecycle is as follows:
• 
A Domino setting is identiied internally or through customer engagement
• 
The setting is researched by IBM
• 
A new DCT rule is created based upon research results
• 
The rule is posted to the web for download
• 
Customers and/or internal users provide feedback
DCT is designed and intended as a participatory tool. There are numerous ways to 
communicate your thoughts and comments to IBM. You can comment on the Notes/
Domino wiki where most of the DCT settings have an entry. You can also comment 
on Tuner Blog entries when new rule sets are released. The Notes/Domino forums are 
monitored regularly and are also a good place to voice your opinions and concerns.
The importance of participation to ensure that the rules that we execute continue to 
represent best practices cannot be overstated. For example, several settings which 
were previously recognized and reported by DCT are now default values in Domino 
8.5.3. The following former notes.ini parameters are now handled and/or set by 
the server code to help servers perform better and provide better "irst failure" data:
• 
The GROUP_CACHE_SIZE parameter is now set to 15360, or 15 megabytes. 
The default for this was previously 4 megabytes. IBM Support routinely 
recommended increasing the size.
• 
The CONSOLE_LOG_ENABLED parameter is now set to 1, by default. This 
is another setting that IBM Support recommended following a server 
issue. Having this enabled, by default, will allow IBM Support to collect 
information on the irst occurrence of an issue.
• 
The CONSOLE_LOG_MAX_KBYTES parameter now defaults to 204,800 or 200 
megabytes. The default size of this was previously 1 megabyte. The console 
log runs in a circular manner, so that when the 200 megabyte limit is reached, 
the older entries will start to drop off.

Chapter 11
[ 319 ]
• 
The DEBUG_THREADID parameter is now set to 1 so that the thread ID is 
automatically shown in the console and reported in the console log.
• 
The DEBUG_CAPTURE_TIMEOUT parameter now also defaults to 1, allowing 
semaphore debugging information to be output to the console and written  
to the console log.
Changing these settings is a direct result of the usage of DCT and collaboration 
between customers, IBM Support, and IBM Development.
Usage patterns and practices
There are patterns of usage that will allow you to leverage DCT to its maximum 
potential. You can manage multiple domains from a single DCT database, ensure 
server proiles or check for behaviors in speciic areas of the servers you're scanning.
If you manage multiple domains, you have the option of running scans out of a 
single DCT database, or creating a separate DCT database for each domain. If you 
use the latter option, when presented with the "initialize server list" screen, choose 
Use this server and indicate a server name—in abbreviated format—from the 
desired domain.
DCT is also a great tool for detecting differences between server conigurations. 
Specify a subset of servers and/or rules, and then run the scan. Review the results to 
determine where differences exist then modify settings as necessary to ensure that 
the subsets of servers are conigured and performing similarly. This mode can be 
tweaked by selecting rules from different subject areas—for example, agent manager, 
HTTP, LDAP or debug settings—and comparing the results. Following result 
comparison, scans should be re-run to conirm your changes.
It is recommended that DCT be run on a regular basis 
as part of your Domino maintenance schedule.
Troubleshooting
DCT was designed to be straightforward and easy to use with minimal documentation 
needed. When dificulties arise, the solutions are easy to be found and implemented. 
Two of the more common issues are listed below. Additionally, the bottom of the Help 
Topics tab on the Help page has a section dedicated to troubleshooting.

Domino Coniguration Tuner
[ 320 ]
If you experience performance issues with DCT, the JavaMaxHeapSize setting in the 
client notes.ini ile may need adjustment. By default, Notes has this set internally 
to 64 megabytes. Setting JavaMaxHeapSize=256 can solve this issue.
If you are constantly prompted to restart your client when opening DCT, check  
your notes\jvm\lib\ext directory for the presence of DCT.jar. This ile should 
have been automatically deployed. If it is not present, you can download it from 
https://www-304.ibm.com/support/docview.wss?uid=swg21414339&wv=1 and 
copy it to notes\jvm\lib\ext. You will need to close and re-open your client for the 
new JAR ile to be recognized.
If other issues arise, setting QUICKTUNE_DEBUG=4 in the client notes.ini settings will 
ensure that all DCT data gets written to disk, making it available for IBM Support 
and Development review.
Summary
In this chapter, we reviewed the Domino Coniguration Tuner (DCT). Creating  
and using DCT is easy and useful for ensuring smooth operation of the servers in 
your domain.
Lotus Notes Domino 8.5.3 represents the latest release of IBM Lotus' messaging and 
collaboration offering. The IBM Lotus development team has introduced some new 
features that will assist in providing existing environments an enhanced Return 
On Investment (ROI) by upgrading and deploying the new features. Delivering an 
enhanced ROI to match the end user experience that was seen with Notes 8.5 was 
achieved and can be leveraged by moving forward with an upgrade or deployment 
of Lotus Domino 8.5.3.
It is very important to access the appropriate resources to ensure that the 
deployment of the new features is closely matched with knowledge gained from 
other installations. This book is intended to provide an overview of the new release 
of Lotus Notes Domino and provide some steps on how to best take advantage 
of them in a new or existing environment. It should not be used to replace other 
tools available online or through a Services Provider which may outline updated 
information that may be relected differently.

Index
Symbols
8.5.3 AdminP enhancements  128
8.5.3 error collection enhancements  126
8.5.3 generic error clariication  126
8.5.3 replication enhancements  126, 127
@Command([CopySelectedAsTable])  
command  247
@Command([OpenInNewWindow])  
command  247
A
abstraction  8
Accept License and Download button  317
Access Control Lists (ACLs)  105
Action bar  34, 43
actions  230
activities policy settings document  133
administration enhancements, Lotus 
Domino 8.5.3
about  104
Administration Process (AdminP)  105
Domino Domain Monitoring (DDM)  106
end user renaming process  105
Administration Process. See  AdminP
Administration Requests database  219
administration server
evaluating  211
upgrading  210
AdminP
about  105
statistics  106
AdminP statistics  106
AdminP status  203
Advanced Menus option  30-32
agent enhancements  245, 246
AJAX support  281
All-day events option  44
All Documents view  173
Allow compression of database design 
checkbox  110
ambiguous names
rejecting  103, 104
application administrator  13
application assembler  13
application design, composite application  
228
application servers
upgrading  211
Apply Recommended Change button  316
assembled composite application
adding, into Lotus Notes Designer 8.5.3  9
assemble phase, SOA lifecycle  11
ATOM  276-279
automated inbox cleanup feature  101, 102
auto-populated groups  166-168
auto-processing option  83, 84
AvailableItems property  248
AvailableNames property  248
AvailableView property  248
B
basic Notes 8.5.3 client
about  217
impacts  217
beneits, SOA  8
blog template  280
BMC  203
bookmarks  27
Business Card view  50
By Database view  108

[ 322 ]
C
calendar
about  179
cancelled invitations, displaying  45
calendar and to-do enhancements, Lotus 
Notes 8.5.2  76
calendar and to-do enhancements, Lotus 
Notes 8.5.3
about  81
auto-processing  83, 84
Countered Meetings  82, 83
iCal functionality  82
calendar delegation  218
calendar feature, iNotes 8.5.2  186
calendar feature, iNotes 8.5.3  188, 189
calendar features, Lotus Notes 8.0
about  42
Action bar  43
All-day events  44
cancelled invitation, displaying in calendar  
45
free time, locating for subset of invitees  46
new invitations, managing from Calendar 
view  44
schedule, checking  46
View navigation  42
calendar features, Lotus Notes 8.5
about  56
calendar federation  56, 57
repair calendar feature  58
calendar features, Lotus Notes 8.5.1  65-68
calendar federation  56, 57
calendaring  218
Calendar overlay  175-177
Calendar view
invitations, managing from  44
cancelled invitations
displaying, in calendar  45
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) support
improvements  260
Certiicate Authority (CA)  122
certiicate revocation
verifying, through OCSP  123
characteristics, SOA  8
Check Calendar button  46
Check for Updates button  316, 317
Clear method  253
ClearProperty method  254
client provisioning  130
cluster coexistence  221
Common Actions quick access feature  108
component applications
using  227
component developer  13
component properties  229
composite application
about  13, 226
application design  228
assembling  13-20
example  226, 227
programming  228
Composite Application Editor  13, 234, 306
Composite Application Editor   19
composite applications support
about  232
Composite Application Editor  234
Property Broker Editor  232, 233
coniguration, Out-of-Ofice feature  100
CONSOLE_LOG_ENABLED parameter  318
CONSOLE_LOG_MAX_KBYTES parameter  
318
contact features, Lotus Notes 8.5.2  75
Contact form feature  47-49
contacts feature, iNotes 8.5.3  189
contacts features, Lotus Notes 8.0
about  47
Business Card view  50
Contact form  47-49
Recent Contacts view  50, 51
contacts features, Lotus Notes 8.5
about  58
exporting feature  59
forwarding feature  59
importing feature  59
contacts features, Lotus Notes 8.5.3  81
contextual toolbars  28
conversations view  36, 37
CORBA  9
Corporate Instruction 162 (CI 162)  275
Countered Meetings  82, 83
CreateNavigator method  250
cross-certiicates  148
CurrentItem property  250

[ 323 ]
CurrentMatch property  250
CurrentName property  251
CurrentView property  251
D
DAOS
about  149, 150, 212
advantages  152
Estimator tool  152
overview  150, 151
setting up  153-156
database redirect  144
databases  27
Data Deinition Language (DDL)  276
DCOM  9
DCT
about  106, 149, 206, 295, 309
lifecycle  318
navigating  311
obtaining  309
participation opportunities  318
practices  319
setting up  310
troubleshooting  319, 320
updates, verifying  316, 317
usage patterns  319
using  311
DCT, buttons
Check for Updates  316, 317
Help  318
Preferences  317
Run New Scan  311, 312
View Results  313-316
DCT.jar ile  310
dct.ntf ile  309, 310
DCT scan
running  311, 312
DEBUG_CAPTURE_TIMEOUT parameter  
319
DEBUG_THREADID parameter  319
deployment enhancements, Lotus Notes 
8.5.3
about  84
single-user to multiuser migration tool  84, 
85
deploy phase, SOA lifecycle  12
Description property  253
design note compression  110
desktop policy settings document
about  135
replications settings  135, 136
Directory Assistance  117
Directory Assistance LDAP Coniguration 
Wizards  118
DirLint  116
Document Body Compression  156-158
document editors  92
document selection option  39
Dojo Toolkit  261
Domino 8
database redirect feature  144
Domino administrator  91
Domino Administrator clients
upgrading  210
Domino Attachment and Object Service. See  
DAOS
Domino-based edition, Quickr  284, 285
Domino Coniguration Tuner. See  DCT
Domino Designer on Eclipse (DDE)
about  255, 256
new Eclipse-based GUI  256-258
Domino Directory
about  218, 219
upgrading  210
Domino Directory and security  
enhancements
about  113
authentication through Directory  
Assistance  117
certiicate revocation, verifying through 
OCSP  123
Certiier Key Rollover  122
coniguration wizards, for LDAP directories  
118
DirLint Directory Tool  116
enhanced local database encryption  121
IBM Tivoli Directory Integrator  113-115
Internet password lockout feature  119-121
People | by Client Version view  119
Single Sign-On (SSO), for LtpaToken2  122
Domino Domain Monitoring (DDM)
about  106, 203, 220
By Database view  108

[ 324 ]
Common Actions quick access feature  108
Domino Coniguration Tuner (DCT)  106
LDAP search reporting  107
WebSphere Services probe  106
Domino Extended Products Portlets (DEPP)  
124
Domino Internet Inter-ORB Protocol 
(DIIOP)  120
Domino Named Networks (DNN)  204
Domino Ofline Services (DOLS)  285
Domino server coexistence  218
Domino server coexistence, issue areas
Administration Requests database  219
cluster coexistence  221
Domino Directory  218, 219
Domino Domain Monitoring (DDM)  220
Domino Web Access  222
events database  219
ID iles  222
message recall feature  220
On-Disk Structure (ODS)  219
Out-of-Ofice feature  221
policies  220
Rooms and Resource Reservations database  
219, 220
Domino Server Performance team  169
Domino Web Access (DWA)
about  170, 222
forms database  222
mail ile template  222
Domino Web Access console  179
Dynamic Client Coniguration (DCC)  142
dynamic policy settings
about  138
explicit  138
organizational  138
E
Eclipse  13, 23
Eclipse-based provisioning  131
embedded components  86
Enable OCSP checking setting  123
end user and messaging enhancements, 
Lotus Domino 8.5.3
about  98
ambiguous names, rejecting  103, 104
automated inbox cleanup feature  101, 102
mail, denying to groups  103, 104
mail thread feature  101
message recall feature  98, 99
Out-of-Ofice feature  99
Reverse-path for forwarded mail setting 
feature  102, 103
end user renaming process  105
enhanced local database encryption feature  
121
Enterprise Meeting Server (EMS)  301
Enterprise Resourse Planning (ERP)  11
Estimator tool  152
ESX  206
events database  219
Exchange Migration Tool  86
Execution Control Lists (ECLs)  137
existing Notes 7
saving  216
explicit policies  138
Extensible Markup Language. See  XML
F
fail over/fail back situation, Lotus Notes 
8.5.2  74
features, IBM Learning Widget
about  304
online courses  304
product tours  304
reference cards  304
task-based demonstrations  304
tutorials  304
videos  304
web seminar  304
features, XPages  305
Filtered by control  314
FindFirstMatch method  251
FindFirstName method  252
FindNextMatch method  251
FindNextName method  252
FindNthMatch method  251
FindNthName method  252
form enhancements  243-245
forms database  222
formula language additions
about  247

[ 325 ]
commands  247
FreeLookupBuffer method  250
G
general changes, Lotus Notes 8.5.3
about  85
embedded components  86
Exchange Migration Tool  86
GetFirstItemValue method  252
GetNextItemValue method  252
GetNthItemValue method  252
GetProperty method  254
GetPropertyValue method  254
GNU Zip (Gzip)  168
GroupAuthorizationOnly property  248
GROUP_CACHE_SIZE parameter  318
Group document tabs  30
groups
mail, denying to  103, 104
H
half-way meeting  202
HasProperty method  254
Help button  318
horizontal preview pane  34, 35
How to apply this setting option  133
HTML  10
HTML generation
enhancements  260
HTTP  10
hub servers
upgrading  211
Hypertext Transfer protocol. See  HTTP
I
IBM  89
IBM CommonStore Archive Services (ICAS)  
108
IBM Learning Widget
about  304
features  304
IBM Multimedia Library  304
IBM Software group  283
IBM Support Assistant (ISA)  309
iCal functionality  82
ID iles  222
ID Vault
about  161
overview  162-166
ID Vault synchronization, with iNotes  183
inline spell checking option  38, 39
iNotes
and Quickr integration  170
iNotes 8.5.1
features  182
other features  184
iNotes 8.5.1, new features
about  182
ID Vault synchronization  183
iNotes INI settings  184
new user interface enhancements  182
iNotes 8.5.2
features  185
iNotes 8.5.2, new features
about  185
Calendar  186
Mail  185
supported browsers  186, 187
iNotes 8.5.3
features  187
iNotes 8.5.3, new features
about  187
Calendar  188, 189
Contacts  189
Mail  188
supported browsers  189
iNotes, and Notes client similarities
All Documents view  173
Preferences  173
Sent view  173
Sidebar  174
User Interface (UI)  171, 172
iNotes INI settings  184
iNotes modes, different features  179-181
iNotes modes, similar features
about  177
Calendar  179
Domino Web Access console  179
Preferences menu option  177, 178
right-click menu  178, 179
iNotes policies  141, 142
InputPropertyContext property  254

[ 326 ]
installing
Lotus Domino Server  285
Lotus Quickr  286-291
Lotus Quickr Connectors  298-300
Lotus Quickr services  297
Lotus Sametime  301
Internet password lockout feature  119-121
invitations
managing, from Calendar view  44
IsInput property  253
J
JavaMaxHeapSize setting  320
Java Runtime Environment (JRE)  309
JavaScript controls  261, 262
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)  281
Java Server Faces (JSF)  259
K
Key Rollover  122
key software changes, Lotus Notes 8.5
about  59
Notebook  60
Notes shared log-in  60
L
LDAP directory  296
LDAP search reporting  107
LimitMatches property  248
Line of Business (LOB)  213
Lite mode
mail quota support  142, 143
Live Text, Lotus Notes 8.5.1  70, 71
LookupAllNames method  250
LookupNames method  250
Lotus
about  283
Notes Shared Login (NSL)  158-161
URL  283
Lotus Component Designer
about  273
features  274-276
Lotus Component Designer, features
accessibility  275
composite application support  275
controls and pages  275
data connections  275
deployment  276
help and enhanced welcome page  274
migration tool  274
scripting  276
Lotus Connections
about  303
activities  303
blogs  303
bookmarks  303
communities  303
iles  303
forums  303
home page  303
proiles  303
social  303
social analytics  303
wikis  303
Lotus Domino  21
Lotus Domino 8.5.3
administration enhancements  104-108
database, redirecting when deleting  145-
147
database, redirecting when moving  144
Domino Directory and security  
enhancements  113
dynamic policy settings  138
end user and messaging enhancements  
98-104
enhanced integration, with IBM servers and 
tools  123
features  212
iNotes policies  141, 142
machine-speciic policies  140
mail quota support, in Lite mode  142, 143
performance enhancements  109-112
roaming policy settings  139
Lotus Domino 8.5.3, features
about  212
DAOS  212
desktop policy settings for iNotes (DWA)  
212
ID vault  212
mail policy settings for iNotes (DWA)  212
new dynamic policies  212
Notes shared login  212
 

[ 327 ]
Lotus Domino Designer 8.0
client features  232
Lotus Domino Designer 8.0, features
about  232
agent enhancements  245, 246
composite applications support  232
form enhancements  243-245
formula language  247
LotusScript additions  247
view enhancements  240
Web Service Consumers  235-240
Lotus Domino Designer 8.5
client features  255
Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.1
client features  266
XPages updates  267
Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.2
client features  267
Eclipse framework enhancements  268, 269
enhancements  267
Lotus Domino Designer 8.5.3
client features  269
enhancements  270-273
Lotus Domino Designer 8.5, features
about  255
changes, to web services  264, 265
Domino Designer on Eclipse  255, 256
future plans  265
XPages  258, 259
Lotus Domino Directory  296
Lotus Domino polices  91
Lotus Domino Server
coniguring  285
installing  285
Lotus Expeditor  23, 281, 282
LotusLive hybrid
about  223
supported server versions  223
URL  223
LotusLive Notes
about  86
enhancements  86
Lotus Notes 8  21
Lotus Notes 8.0
about  25
features  25, 26
Lotus Notes 8.0, features
calendar features  42
contact features  47
mail features  34
user interface enhancements  26
Lotus Notes 8.5
features  51
Lotus Notes 8.5.1
about  61
features  61
general changes  72, 73
Lotus Notes 8.5.1, features
calendar features  65-68
Live Text  70, 71
mail features  61-64
replication and synchronisation  69
Rich Text Editor  68, 69
widgets  70, 71
Lotus Notes 8.5.2
about  73
features  73
Lotus Notes 8.5.2, features
calendar and to-do enhancements  76
contacts  75
fail over/fail back situation  74
mail features  74
Managed Replica  77
network optimization   73
replication and synchronisation  77
serviceability  74
Lotus Notes 8.5.3
about  7, 21, 78
composite applications, assembling  13-20
features  78
general changes  85
productivity tools, integrating with  90, 91
working, with SOAs  12
Lotus Notes 8.5.3, features
calendar and to-do enhancements  81
contacts functionality  81
deployment enhancements  84
mail features  78
widgets  85
XPages  85
Lotus Notes 8.5, features
calendar features  56
contacts features  58, 59

[ 328 ]
key software changes  59
mail features  54, 55
user interface enhancements  51-53
Lotus Notes 8.5.x
and open technologies  22, 23
Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3
components, based on XPages  306
Composite Application Editor  306
Domino Designer, moves to Eclipse  305
drag and drop enhancements  306
new integration features  305
themes, in XPages  305
XPages  305
Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3 feature  
upgrade considerations
about  213
central management  213
improved Out-of-Ofice capabilities  213
Line of Business (LOB)  213
mail recall  213
productivity tools  213
Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3 upgrade 
process
about  203
administration server, evaluating  211
administration server, upgrading  210
AdminP status  203
application analysis  204
application servers, upgrading  211
architecture  205
calendar and scheduling  205
capacity  205
clients  203
coniguration settings  206
current infrastructure, reviewing  203
custom templates  204
directory  205
directory structure  203
Domino Administrator clients, upgrading  
210
Domino Directory, upgrading  210
Domino replication  204
environment variables  206
ESX  206
hub servers, upgrading  211
mail-enabled applications  205
management and administration  206
messaging architectures  204
messaging topology  205
monitoring systems  203
network  205
Notes client, upgrading  212
security  205
servers  203
specialized servers, upgrading  211
spoke/messaging servers, upgrading  211
systemic normalization  210
utility servers, upgrading  211
VMware  206
Lotus Notes and Domino upgrade process
about  194
agreements  197
design, creating  197
inal target architecture  197
high-level architecture analysis  195
logistics plans, executing  199
pilot process  198, 199
pilots, creating  199, 200
requisites  196
scheduling process  199
testing process  198, 199
test plan, creating  197
Transformation Management (TM)  200-202
upgrade plan, creating  197
upgrade process documents, creating  199
upgrade process plans, creating  199
upgrading and inal change  200
use cases  195, 196
vision and direction phase  194
Lotus Notes contacts  14
Lotus Notes Designer 8.5.3
assembled composite application, adding 
into  9
Lotus Notes discussion application  15
Lotus Quickr
about  284
and iNotes integration  170
installing  286-291
services, for Domino  284, 285
services, for WebSphere Portal  297
services, installing  297
Lotus Quickr Connectors
about  298
installing  298-300

[ 329 ]
Lotus Quickr integration  190
Lotus Quickr services
installing  297
Lotus Sametime
about  301
application integration  302
directory integration  302
installing  301
integrating, for Quickr WebSphere Portal  
297, 298
LotusScript additions
about  247
classes  247
events  247
methods  247
Lotus Symphony 3.0
about  94
disabled features  95
enhancements  95
new features  95
Lotus Symphony Documents  92
Lotus Symphony Presentations  93
Lotus Symphony Spreadsheets  93, 94
Lotus Symphony Suite
URL  89
LtpaToken2
about  122
Single Sign-On (SSO)  122
M
machine-speciic policies  140
mail
denying, to groups  103, 104
mail feature, iNotes 8.5.2  185
mail feature, iNotes 8.5.3  188
mail features, Lotus Notes 8.0
about  34
Action bar  34
conversations view  36, 37
horizontal and vertical preview panes  34, 
35
improved Out-of-Ofice functionality  42
Mail header options  37-41
mail threads  35, 36
mail features, Lotus Notes 8.5  54, 55
mail features, Lotus Notes 8.5.1  61-64
mail features, Lotus Notes 8.5.2  74
mail features, Lotus Notes 8.5.3
about  78
new mail notiication  80
search functionality  79
Signature option  79
Sorting by Subject feature  78
type-ahead option  81
mail ile template  222
Mail header options
about  37, 38
document selection  39
inline spell checking  38, 39
message recall  40, 41
recent collaborations  40
mail quota support, Lite mode  142, 143
mail thread feature  101
mail threads  35, 36, 100
Make Available Ofline feature  32
Managed Replica feature, Lotus Notes 8.5.2  
77
Manage phase, SOA lifecycle  12
MarkAllRead method  247
MarkAllUnread method  247
MatchLocated property  251
message recall feature  98, 99, 220
message recall option  40, 41
Message Recall settings  99
messaging topology  205
MIME Simpliication  58
mixed environment  218
Model phase, SOA lifecycle  11
MSSO
about  285
authentication, coniguring  291
base requisites  291-294
Multimedia Library for IBM Connections  
304
Multimedia Library for IBM Sametime 
8/8.5x  304
Multimedia Library for iNotes  304
Multimedia Library for Lotus Notes 8/8.5x  
304
Multimedia Library for Lotus Quickr 
8.2/8.5x  304
Multi-server Single Sign-on. See  MSSO   

[ 330 ]
N
NameLocated property  251
Name property  253
NameSpace property  253
network optimization, Lotus Notes 8.5.2  73
new Eclipse-based GUI, Domino Designer 
on Eclipse (DDE)  256-258
new mail notiication  80
new server enhancements, Lotus Domino 
8.5.3
8.5.3 AdminP enhancements  128
8.5.3 error collection enhancements  126
8.5.3 generic error clariication  126
8.5.3 replication enhancements  126, 127
New Web Service button  22
non-commercial ODF product  89
non-production pilots  200
Notebook  60
Notes, and Notes client differences
about  174
Calendar overlay  175-177
switching  174
tabs, re-ordering  175
Notes client, and iNotes similarities
All Documents view  173
Preferences  173
Sent view  173
Sidebar  174
User Interface (UI)  171, 172
Notes client coexistence
about  215-217
basic Notes 8.5.3 client  217
calendar delegation  218
calendaring  218
standard Notes 8.5.3 client  217
Notes clients
trusted certiicates, pushing to  148
upgrading  212
NotesDirectory class  247
methods  250
properties  248, 249
NotesDirectory class, methods
CreateNavigator  250
FreeLookupBuffer  250
LookupAllNames  250
LookupNames  250
NotesDirectory class, properties
AvailableItems  248
AvailableNames  248
AvailableView  248
GroupAuthorizationOnly  248
LimitMatches  248
PartialMatches  248
SearchAllDirectories  249
Server  249
TrustedOnly  249
UseContextServer  249
NotesDirectoryNavigator class
methods  251, 252
properties  250, 251
NotesDirectoryNavigator class, methods
FindFirstMatch  251
FindFirstName  252
FindNextMatch  251
FindNextName  252
FindNthMatch  251
FindNthName  252
GetFirstItemValue  252
GetNextItemValue  252
GetNthItemValue  252
NotesDirectoryNavigator class, properties
about  250
CurrentItem  250
CurrentMatch  250
CurrentName  251
CurrentView  251
MatchLocated  251
NameLocated  251
Notes Large Object (NLO)  150
Notes Name Networks (NNN)  204
NotesPropertyBroker class
about  247
methods  254
properties  254
NotesPropertyBroker class, methods
ClearProperty  254
GetProperty  254
GetPropertyValue  254
HasProperty  254
Publish  254
SetPropertyValue  254
NotesPropertyBroker class, properties
InputPropertyContext  254

[ 331 ]
NotesProperty class
about  247
methods  253
properties  252, 253
NotesProperty class, methods
Clear  253
Publish  253
NotesProperty class, properties
Description  253
IsInput  253
Name  253
NameSpace  253
Title  253
TypeName  253
Values  253
Notes Shared Login (NSL)
about  60, 158, 159, 212
implementing  159-161
NotesView class  247
NotesViewEntryCollection class  247
NotesViewNavigator class  247
NRPC protocol  98
NSF  13
O
OASIS  10, 22, 89
ODF  22, 89, 134
ODS 48  109, 153, 156, 219
ODS 51  153, 156, 219
OLE  95
on-demand collation  111
On-Disk Structure (ODS)
about  97, 109, 110, 219
design note compression  110
on-demand collation  111
Online Certiicate Status Protocol (OCSP)
about  123
certiicate revocation, verifying through  
123
Onselect event  255
Open Document Format. See  ODF
opening meeting  201
Open list menu  27, 28
OpenWebService command  21
organizational policies  138
Organization for the Advancement of 
Structured Information Standards. See 
OASIS
Organization Unit(s) (OUs)  122
Out-of-Ofice feature
about  42, 99, 221
coniguring  100
P
PartialMatches property  248
People | by Client Version view  119
performance enhancements  169
performance enhancements, Lotus Domino 
8.5.3
about  109
new ODS  109, 110
simple searches, managing effectively  111, 
112
streaming cluster replication  109
perspectives, on SOAs  9
pilots
creating  199, 200
PIRC  126
policies
about  132, 220
activities policy settings document  133
desktop policy settings document  135
How to apply this setting feature  133
productivity tools settings document  134
security policy settings document  137
Policy Assignment tab  138
Preferences button  317
Preferences interface  90
Preferences menu option  177, 178
process pilots  200
production pilots  199
productivity tools, Lotus Notes 8.5.3
integration  90, 91
Lotus Symphony Documents  92
Lotus Symphony Presentations  93
Lotus Symphony Spreadsheets  93, 94
productivity tools settings document  134
programming, composite application
about  228
actions  230
component properties  229
wires  231

[ 332 ]
Project Vulcan  190
Property Broker Editor  232, 233
provider IDs
enabling, for Widgets policy  140
proxy action  211
Publish method  253, 254
Purge Interval Replication Control. See  
PIRC
Q
QPServlet  296
QuickPlace  284
Quickr Domino Server
application development  296
directory integration  296
settings, coniguring  295, 296
Quickr Domino Server settings
coniguring  295, 296
Quickr WebSphere Portal
Sametime, integrating for  297, 298
R
Rapid Application Development (RAD)  266
Recall Message button  40
recent collaborations option  40
Recent Contacts view  50, 51
RedBooks  315
RedPapers  315
repair calendar feature  58
replication and synchronisation feature, 
Lotus Notes 8.5.1  69
replication and synchronisation feature, 
Lotus Notes 8.5.2  77
Reverse-path for forwarded mail setting 
feature  102, 103
Rich Client Platform (RCP)  7, 23
Rich Text Editor, Lotus Notes 8.5.1  68, 69
right-click menu  178, 179
roaming policy settings  139
rollover certiicates  122
Rooms and Resource Reservations database  
219, 220
RSS  276-279
Run New Scan button  311, 312
S
Sametime integration  296
scheduling  218
SearchAllDirectories property  249
Search center  32, 33
searches
managing, effectively  111, 112
search functionality  79
security policy settings document  137
Sent view  173
Server Coniguration document  98
server-managed provisioning
about  130
Eclipse-based provisioning  131
Smart Upgrade  131
Server property  249
serviceability feature, Lotus Notes 8.5.2  74
Service-Oriented Architecture. See  SOA
Set Global options dialog  278
SetPropertyValue method  254
Signature option  79
Signed Plug-in Basics tab  137
Simple Object Access Protocol. See  SOAP
Single Copy Object Store (SCOS)  150
Single Sign-On (SSO)  122, 190, 291
single-user to multiuser migration tool  84, 
85
SmartSuite iles  95
Smart Upgrade
about  129-131
URL  131
Smart Upgrade Tracking reports  193
S/MIME signature veriication  123
SOA
about  7, 8
beneits  8
characteristics  8
lifecycle  10, 11
Lotus Notes 8.5.3, working with  12
need for  9, 10
perspectives  9
standards, for interoperability  10
SOA lifecycle
about  10
Assemble phase  11

[ 333 ]
Deploy phase  12
Manage phase  12
Model phase  11
SOAP  10
Sorting by Subject feature  78
specialized servers
upgrading  211
Spell Check feature  72
spoke/messaging servers
upgrading  211
standard Notes 8.5.3 client  217
Streaming Cluster Replication (SCR)  109, 
221
supported browsers, iNotes 8.5.2  186, 187
supported browsers, iNotes 8.5.3  189
switching  174
Symphony  51
Symphony 3.0. See  Lotus Symphony 3.0
Symphony Settings policy document  91
T
TDI  113-115
Team Room (TR) calendars  76
technical pilots  200
Technotes  315
tell AdminP process mail policy command  
142
Title property  253
Tivoli  203
Tivoli Directory Integrator. See  TDI
Tivoli Enterprise Console  125
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO)  89
Transformation Management (TM)  200-202
trusted certiicates
pushing, to Notes clients  148
TrustedOnly property  249
type-ahead option  81
TypeName property  253
U
UDDI  10
Uniied preferences  28, 29
Universal Description, Discovery, and Inte-
gration. See  UDDI
use case
about  195
elements  195
needs  196
use case document example  213, 214
UseContextServer property  249
user/group directory coniguration  296
user interface enhancements, iNotes 8.5.1  
182
user interface enhancements, Lotus Notes 
8.0
about  26
Advanced menus option  30-32
ofline applications  32
Open list menu  27, 28
Search center  32, 33
toolbars  28
Uniied preferences  28, 29
Windows management and tabs  29
User interface enhancements, Lotus Notes 
8.5  51-53
utility servers
upgrading  211
V
Values property  253
vertical preview pane  34, 35
view enhancements
about  240
columns, extending for using available 
window width  241, 242
default items, showing in right-mouse 
menu  242
index creation, deferring  242
new column number format  240
View navigation  42
VIEW_ONLY_ADMIN access  312
View Results button  313-316
VMware  206
W
Web 2.0
about  276
features  276-281
 

[ 334 ]
Web 2.0, features
AJAX support  281
ATOM  276-279
blog template  280
RSS  276-279
Web Archive (WAR)  276
Web Service Consumers  235-240
web service provider  21
Web Services Description Language. See  
WSDL
Web Services design window  22
WebSphere Everyplace Deployment. See  
WED
WebSphere Portal-based edition, Quickr  
297
WebSphere Portal components  13
WebSphere Portal integration wizard  124
WebSphere Services probe  106
WED  23
widgets, Lotus Notes 8.5.1  70, 71
widgets, Lotus Notes 8.5.3  85
Widgets policy
provider IDs, enabling for  140
Windows management and tabs
about  29
Group document tabs  30
wires  231
wpconig.properties ile  297
WSDL  10, 16, 228
WSDL command  21
X
XForm document  95
XML  10
XPages
about  258, 259, 305
enhancements, to HTML generation  260
features  305
improvements, to Cascading Style Sheets 
(CSS) support  260
JavaScript controls  261, 262
new methods, related to ID Vault-Rese-
tUserPassword  262, 263
themes  305
XPages, Lotus Notes 8.5.3  85
XPages updates  267

 
Thank you for buying  
IBM Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3: 
Upgrader's Guide  
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its irst book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on speciic technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give 
you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get 
the job done. Packt books are more speciic and less general than the IT books you have seen in 
the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving 
you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home to 
books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including (but 
not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles will offer 
information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, developers, 
architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like 
to discuss it irst before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning 
editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Lotus Notes Domino 8: 
Upgrader's Guide
ISBN: 978-1-847192-74-5             Paperback: 276 pages
What's new in the latest Lotus Notes Domino 
Platform
1. 
Upgrade to the latest version of Lotus Notes 
and Domino.
2. 
Understand the new features and put them to 
work in your business
3. 
Appreciate the implications of changes and 
new features
IBM Lotus Domino: Classic 
Web Application Development 
Techniques
ISBN: 978-1-84968-240-4             Paperback: 344 pages
A step-by-step guide for web application 
development and quick tips to enhance applications 
using IBM Lotus Domino
1. 
Classic techniques used for Web-enabling 
traditional Domino applications
2. 
Demonstrates how to incorporate HTML, CSS 
and JavaScript into designs
3. 
Offers tips and suggestions for testing, 
debugging, and troubleshooting
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

IBM Lotus Notes 8.5 User Guide
ISBN: 978-1-849680-20-2             Paperback: 296 pages
A practical hands-on user guide with time saving 
tips and comprehensive instructions for using Lotus 
Notes effectively and eficiently 
1. 
Understand and master the features of Lotus 
Notes and put them to work in your business 
quickly
2. 
Contains comprehensive coverage of new Lotus 
Notes 8.5 features
3. 
Includes easy-to-follow real-world examples 
with plenty of screenshots to clearly demonstrate 
how to get the most out of Lotus Notes
4. 
Packed with expert tips and best practices, 
for using business e-mail, calendars and 
other Lotus Notes applications for eficient 
business communication
IBM Cognos 8 Report Studio 
Cookbook
ISBN: 9781849680349            Paperback: 252  pages
Over 80 great recipes for taking control of Cognos 8 
Report Studio 
1. 
Learn advanced techniques to produce real-life 
reports that meet business demands
2. 
Tricks and hacks for speedy and effortless 
report development and to overcome tool-
based limitations
3. 
Peek into the best practices used in industry 
and discern ways to work like a pro
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles
 

