www.allitebooks.com

IBM Cognos Insight
Take a deep dive into IBM Cognos Insight and learn 
how this personal analytics tool can be integrated  
with other IBM Business Analytics products
Sanjeev Datta
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

IBM Cognos Insight
Copyright © 2012 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: November 2012
Production Reference: 1071112
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
Livery Place 
35 Livery Street 
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84968-846-8
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Faiz Fattohi ( faizfattohi@gmail.com )
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Sanjeev Datta
Reviewer
Kirk Wiseman
Acquisition Editor
James Keane
Commissioning Editor
Meeta Rajani
Technical Editors
Kirti Pujari
Pooja Pande
Project Coordinator
Priya Sharma
Proofreader
Maria Gould
Indexer
Hemangini Bari
Production Coordinator 
Melwyn D'sa
Cover Work
Melwyn D'sa
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Sanjeev Datta is a seasoned Consultant, passionate text and video blogger,  
and Business Analytics enthusiast. As Practice Director at PerformanceG2, 
Inc., he works extensively with executives and decision-makers across finance, 
manufacturing, retail, and pharmaceuticals as a trusted advisor in corporate 
performance management, building client relationships and managing Business 
Analytics implementations.
Sanjeev's work as a strong Project Manager, Pre-sales and Post-sales Consultant, 
trainer, and mentor has led to many successful implementations. While at Merador, 
LLC, Sanjeev worked as a Consultant/Architect building solutions for  
global organizations.
Previous to that, Sanjeev was a Cognos Developer/Consultant while at Softpath 
Systems, LLC and lead successful Cognos BI solutions and developed Cognos BI 
training material for numerous clients.
He is certified in numerous IBM products and is an IBM Technical Specialist and 
IBM Sales Mastery Professional.
Sanjeev has a degree in Computer Science from Mumbai University and a degree  
in Interdisciplinary Studies from The University of Texas.
Connect with Sanjeev on LinkedIn or Twitter: @1dsanjeev
About PerformanceG2, Inc:
PerformanceG2 is a full-service IBM Premier Partner and Performance  
Management Consultancy that helps organizations achieve breakthrough 
performance. PerformanceG2 offers a comprehensive package of performance 
management solutions including business analytics tools, Business Intelligence 
Roadmap services, custom onsite Cognos training, online Cognos training, financial 
performance management solutions, Cognos support, staffing services, consulting 
services, and more—all delivered by a team of experienced consultants and  
award-winning trainers.
www.allitebooks.com

Acknowledgement
Every piece of work has people and experiences that help in giving it shape and 
taking it to the finish line, and I hope this acknowledgement lets you know how 
much I truly appreciate your efforts.
Personally, I would like to thank my wife and co-worker, Dhrity. Your kindness and 
support have made this possible. Thanks for listening to my ideas in the middle of 
the night. To our beautiful daughter, Lyzah, your smile makes every day seem to 
go by easily. Thanks to my mother for her prayers throughout and my father who 
once told me: Never complain about working too hard, because there is always someone who 
is working harder for lesser. Thanks to my sister for the competitive encouragement. 
Thank you all for the great experiences!
Professionally, I would like to thank PerformanceG2, Inc. Candace Taylor for being 
the best marketing professional I've come across. Kirk Wiseman: my good friend, 
career guide, and guru. Gary Frings and Michael Bloch for helping me grow and for 
your leadership skills. You all make the best team to work for!
Thanks to Packt Publishing, specifically Meeta Rajani and Priya Sharma for your 
guidance and professionalism throughout this process. To Kerry George of Pearson 
PLC (UK), for believing in the idea of this book. Thank you to Mr. Hemang Desai  
of Softpath Systems, LLC for your call that one November afternoon that kicked off 
my career.
Lastly, thanks to the IBM Business Analytics team for making this and other  
great products.
I've thoroughly enjoyed writing this book. I hope you enjoy reading it and gain much 
knowledge from it.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewer
Kirk Wiseman is the Vice President of Services for PerformanceG2, an IBM 
Premier partner that specializes in Business Analytics. Kirk has over 15 years 
experience in the Information Technology industry with an emphasis in Business 
Analytics, specifically with Cognos where he spent over eight years of his career 
supporting the North and South American Cognos user base as a trainer, consultant 
and architect. Kirk came to PerformanceG2 from Merador where he was Director 
of Training Services. Prior to Merador, Kirk was a trainer and consultant at Cognos 
Corporation where he was recognized with awards including North American 
trainer of the year and Eclipse Outstanding Performance. In addition, Kirk was a 
Program Director at ITI, a private post-graduate school located throughout Canada. 
Kirk holds a Bachelor of Science degree from Memorial University of Newfoundland 
and a post graduate diploma in Applied Information Technology from ITI.
Kirk contributes Business Analytics videos to YouTube on a regular basis  
that can be viewed at http://www.youtube.com/PerformanceG2 and he blogs  
at http://www.performanceg2.com/blog.
You can contact Kirk at kirk.wiseman@performanceg2.com.
I would like to thank Sanjeev for putting together a primer for 
Cognos Insight and Packt for giving me the opportunity to review. 
I hope my feedback proved helpful. Much love and thanks for my 
wife, Mireille and our three children, Aiden, Zachary, and Kaelyn.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers 
and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub files 
available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print book 
customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at service@
packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range 
of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com 
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book library. 
Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib today 
and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for immediate access.
Instant Updates on New Packt Books
Get notified! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on 
Twitter, or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: The New-age Analytics and IBM Cognos Insight	
7
Analytics with IBM Cognos Insight	
10
Features of IBM Cognos Insight	
10
An example case for IBM Cognos Insight	
11
The building blocks of Business Analytics 	
13
Business Intelligence	
13
Performance Management	
14
Predictive Analytics	
15
Risk Management	
16
Using analytics successfully	
17
Summary	
19
Chapter 2: Installing IBM Cognos Insight	
21
System requirements for installing IBM Cognos Insight	
21
Processor and memory	
21
Operating systems	
22
Cognos Server environments	
22
Data sources	
22
Server environments for IBM Cognos Connection installer	
23
Available options to download Cognos Insight	
24
Installing IBM Cognos Insight Standard Edition	
27
Installation of IBM Cognos Insight on an existing Cognos  
BI Environment	
34
Uninstalling IBM Cognos Insight	
36
Connecting IBM Cognos Insight to the Cognos BI and IBM TM1 
Environments	
37
Summary	
41
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Chapter 3: Usability of IBM Cognos Insight	
43
Importing data into IBM Cognos Insight	
44
Reorienting data into Cognos Insight	
56
Drag-and-drop dimensions	
56
Slice and dice title dimensions	
57
Nesting dimensions	
58
Sorting of data	
59
Swap rows and columns	
60
Charting options	
62
Filtering values/explorer points	
63
Types of calculations	
65
Writing rules	
70
Formatting methods	
71
Grouping dimensions	
72
Reconstructing data in Cognos Insight	
72
Write-back	
73
Data spreading	
76
Adding cubes, dimensions, and members	
77
Adding parent and child members	
80
Moving members	
81
Adding comments	
82
Cosmetic changes to Cognos Insight	
82
Adding widgets, charts, and tabs	
83
Adding images, buttons, and themes	
85
Zero suppress and exporting data	
87
Protecting workspaces and my preferences	
88
Summary	
90
Chapter 4: Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight	
91
Analyzing marketing conditions	
92
Advertising cost analysis	
94
Product cost-benefit analysis	
96
Global market conditions	
99
Measuring sales performance	
100
Sorting Variance columns in ascending order	
102
Finance and price strategy	
104
Summary	
107

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Chapter 5: Enterprise Collaboration	
109
Launching workspace files to clients	
110
Leveraging IBM Cognos Insight collaboration and sharing	
117
Summary	
120
References	
121
Index	
123


Preface
Fast analytics is the new addiction! As decision making yearns to get faster, easier, 
and more accurate by the decade, technology giants such as IBM continue to invest 
billions of dollars to bring their strategy and business visions to reality. This book 
encompasses those billion dollar ideas and innovations into a new product from 
IBM's Business Analytics division.
IBM Cognos Insight is the new analytics software targeted to improve decision 
making at all levels. It starts with the basic concepts of business intelligence and 
advanced analytics but has the ability to expand from medium to enterprise levels 
by collaborating and sharing data analysis seamlessly. The in-memory computing 
improves querying performance and the options to connect to different data sources 
including IBM Cognos suite of products establishes this as a robust and  
flexible application.
As part of the IBM Cognos family of products, Cognos Insight is regarded as the 
personal analytics, "desktop-residing" application that provides rich dashboard 
style reports in minutes. The simplicity and intuitiveness of this product minimizes 
the learning curve and empowers the end user by making them proactive and 
independent in their efforts to analyze data. As the end users build their analysis, 
they have the ability to deploy to larger audiences seamlessly or share their analysis 
offline and sync up their contributions once back in connected online mode.
With the in-memory engine, corporations can leverage the write-back capabilities 
to build budgets, plans, and forecasts. This alternate scenario building technology 
helps analysts and decision makers in formulating better business cases for industry 
domains ranging across finance to risk management, procurement to information 
technology, and so on.
The ability to collaborate and share data analysis with larger work groups 
across the organization is accomplished using the high-fidelity, centralized, and 
administratively-governed publishing mechanism which increases productivity  
and adds immediate business value.

Preface
[ 2 ]
IBM Cognos Insight's features and functionalities lower the total cost of ownership 
(TCO) hugely due to reduced software and associated hardware license costs, a  
self-service approach to a simple yet powerful product that minimizes the learning 
curve and maximizes usability, and enterprise deployment capabilities, thereby 
generating a high return on investment (ROI).
This book provides new and existing users of business analytics with details about 
IBM Cognos Insight from an implementation, installation, and usability approach. 
IBM's vision, leadership, and new product, Cognos Insight, were the inspiration 
behind writing this book which also helped achieve my personal goal of being a 
published author.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, The New-age Analytics and IBM Cognos Insight introduces the concept of 
business analytics and the technologies such as Business Intelligence, Performance 
Management, Predictive Analytics, and Risk Management that have fused together 
to form the core of Analytics. This chapter then introduces IBM Cognos Insight as 
the new in-memory, desktop application from IBM and focuses on the path of a 
successful Business Analytics implementation.
Chapter 2, Installing IBM Cognos Insight installs IBM Cognos Insight and sets  
up the application to be a collaborative tool with IBM TM1 and IBM Cognos  
Business Intelligence.
Chapter 3, Usability of IBM Cognos Insight is meant to showcase the features  
and functionalities of the product with explanations of its benefits and uses.  
At the end of the chapter, IBM Cognos Insight workspaces should be easy  
to build.
Chapter 4, Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight talks about the 
business cases of using IBM Cognos Insight in the real world and how to leverage 
the information in Chapter 3, Usability of IBM Cognos Insight to build workspaces in 
Cognos Insight for finance, sales, marketing, and advertising groups.
Chapter 5, Enterprise Collaboration demonstrates the deployment of  IBM Cognos 
Insight workspaces into IBM Cognos BI and TM1 products. This chapter will 
demonstrate the power and seamless publish mechanism that takes the desktop  
built workspaces into enterprise environments.
References provides the sources that will be quite valuable to you.

Preface
[ 3 ]
What you need for this book
A desire for "fast-analytics-now" is the key requirement for this book. The product 
speaks for itself and the book shows new and existing users all the aspects of the 
product. Having a computer around with the minimum product requirements 
mentioned in Chapter 2, Installing IBM Cognos Insight will help in learning the features 
in Chapter 3, Usability of IBM Cognos Insight and finally building the workspaces 
in Chapter 4, Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight. Having access to 
Cognos or TM1 environments will benefit those readers looking to publish their 
workspaces. Nonetheless, the book gives readers all the information required to 
work on a day to day basis with the IBM Cognos Insight.
Who this book is for
This book is for anyone and everyone looking to build personal analytics. With 
a simple desktop installation, the product is ready to go in minutes and builds 
dashboards in seconds. This product is for those in and out of the corporate world 
who are looking for immediate answers. This product and the book bring value to 
any organization by beginning with small to medium analyses and deploying them 
to enterprise-grade environments. The menu driven creation of dashboard style 
analysis and the ability to share them creates an organization-wide waterfall effect  
by going from the desktop to server with minimal to no coding required.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on  
the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this:  
"Click on Explore in the title bar to see the Explore Pane".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title through the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things  
to help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for all Packt books you have purchased 
from your account at http://www.packtpub.com. If you purchased this book 
elsewhere, you can visit http://www.packtpub.com/support and register to have 
the files e-mailed directly to you.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem  
with any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.


The New-age Analytics and 
IBM Cognos Insight
Business decision making relies on data analysis. Over the time, the analytical 
proficiency has improved with technological advancements in software and the 
supporting hardware. To satisfy the growing demands of quality data analysis, 
organizations such as IBM are constantly investing in better hardware and software 
applications that not only meet the business demands but also tackle the current 
needs such as exponential data growth, predicting outcomes from historical data 
trends, managing risks real time, and applying smarter analytical capabilities over 
structured and unstructured data. 
IBM Cognos Insight is one of IBM's newest innovations surrounding smarter 
analytics. A software product installed on desktops yet runs in memory, and builds 
fast analytical cubes to answer the four broad questions—what, when, why,  
and how. IBM Cognos Insight answers these questions by working with numerous 
types of data to provide deeper insights to help make better business decisions. 
Coupled with genius algorithms and rich visual, descriptive and textual outputs, 
this new product has the capabilities to start at a desktop level and launch into an 
enterprise-wide Business Analytics solution. 
We use analytics in every sphere of life, be it financial services, consumer 
behavioral management, healthcare management, human capital management, 
risk management, sales and marketing, or technology, to name a few. Business 
Analytics is a term that sums up the various analytical domains. It serves to improve 
the business performance and adds to the total business value by leveraging on 
raw data, and trusting the processes and software applications to provide smarter 
analytical capabilities.

The New-age Analytics and IBM Cognos Insight
[ 8 ]
Business Analytics is gaining more recognition in the business world than ever  
before. It provides management teams with a competitive advantage, business 
performance visibility, and high Returns On Invested Capital (ROIC). In a joint  
MIT Sloan Management Review and IBM's Institute for Business Value (IBV), the 
top-performing organizations use analytics five times more than the lower performers.
The following chart tracks the differences between the tendencies of the  
top-performing organizations versus the lower performing organizations  
in terms of usage of business analytics:
The graph shows that the lower performing organizations tend to use intuition when 
it comes to customer service, risk management, product research and development, 
and so on, within their organization, which might suggest improper (or no) use of 
business analytics at an enterprise level. Thus they have a higher probability of not 
making the cut of a top performing organization. 

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
To understand Business Analytics further, it is important to understand its building 
blocks and take a deeper dive into its core components. The four main components 
that fall under the Business Analytics umbrella are shown in the following diagram: 
The following are the explanations for these four building blocks:
•	
Business Intelligence (BI): This was first described by computer scientist 
Hans Peter Lunn of IBM in 1958 as an "intelligence system that will utilize 
data-processing machines for auto-abstracting and auto-encoding of 
documents…for creating interest profiles for each of the "action points" in an 
organization". The definition has changed over the years with advancements 
in technology which IBM today defines as: "BI helps predict, track, analyze, 
and present information as it relates to business performance".
•	
Performance Management: Performance Management asks scenario-based 
questions to organizations and their departments with the intention of 
improving their overall health. These what-if simulations are an input to gain 
insight and to add value to the business. Typically consisting of planning, 
budgeting, and forecasting solutions, performance management tends to 
improve the financial processes, and increases the profitability for all the 
organizations that invest in its processes and methodologies.
•	
Predictive Analytics: Predictive Analytics, as the name suggests, predicts 
the future outcomes by trending the historical values mixed with intelligent 
calculations and algorithms from mining, on structured and unstructured 
data. Statistical analysis towards various data models enable the prediction 
of outcomes ranging from text mining on social media to correlation analysis 
that link entities, for understanding the growing volumes of data better.
•	
Risk Management: Risk Management applications provide risk analysis  
and manage change in the regulations along with compliance procedures 
and governance regulations to reduce financial losses.

The New-age Analytics and IBM Cognos Insight
[ 10 ]
Analytics with IBM Cognos Insight
IBM Cognos Insight is the a new product on IBMs Business Analytics block installed 
on desktops and capable of supporting the five pillars of business intelligence and 
analytics—reporting, advanced analytics, visual dashboards, score carding, and 
predictive and risk analytics. The following diagrams hows the features of IBM 
Cognos Insight:
Features of IBM Cognos Insight
The simplicity of the application lies in its drag-and-drop functionality and  
built-in smart metadata wizard that enables importing spreadsheets and other types  
of databases. This desktop application is built upon the robust foundations of IBM 
TM1 (formerly Applix), which stores the data in the memory and in multi-dimensional 
formats. Much like the structure of a rubix cube, data analysis is performed by 
analyzing multiple dimensions of the cube structure. In addition, the cube compresses 
and rolls up the data points into levels to form a hierarchical design that can be 
analyzed by drilling up and drilling down, or slicing and dicing across the  
multiple-dimensions for a complete analytical exploration.
From a performance stand point, IBM Cognos Insight is an in-memory application 
that makes for faster development and enhances analysis efforts. Coupled with 
its visual appeal and data exploration capabilities, it makes for a tremendously 
powerful reporting and dashboard application. With IBM TM1 as the underlying 
technology and with its write-back functionality, part of the advanced analytics 
provides the what-if scenario approach used for an alternate scenario analysis. 

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
It also helps in spreading the data across plans, budgets, and forecasts, which the 
organizations are looking for to give greater financial visibility and improved 
business performance. Even when not connected to a server system, IBM Cognos 
Insight provides write-back, report authoring, dashboard designing, and scorecard 
developing capabilities in its offline mode, as the data resides within the application 
and syncs to larger deployments on demand.
IBM Cognos Insight has the ability to share authored reports and dashboards that 
can be distributed to larger workgroups, collaborating on the same data sets and 
towards similar goals. The collaborative effort is a huge plus for this self-service 
desktop application. As per an IBM Institute for Business Value (IBV) study in which 
1700 CEO's were interviewed globally, 75 percent of the CEOs demand collaboration 
as a priority among its workforce. Another benefit of sharing a stand-alone data 
asset with larger workgroups is that is provides standardization across departments, 
and governance with workflow processes that have an overall effect towards 
improvement in performance. 
All of the features mentioned here minimize the IT involvement and hand-holding for 
a technology application used in the business world, thereby making organizations 
more self-sufficient and agile. 
An example case for IBM Cognos Insight
Consider an example of a situation where an organization from the retail industry 
heavily depends on spreadsheets as its source of data collection, analysis, and 
decision making. These spreadsheets contain data that is used to analyze customers' 
buying patterns across the various products sold by multiple channels in order  
to boost the sales across the company. The analysis hopes to reveal customers'  
buying patterns demographically, streamline sales channels, improve supply  
chain management, give an insight into forecast spending, and redirect budgets  
to advertising, marketing, and human capital management, as required. 
As this analysis is going to involve multiple departments and resources working 
with spreadsheets, one of the challenges will be to have everyone speak in similar 
terms and numbers. Collaboration across departments is important for a successful 
analysis. Typically in such situations, multiple spreadsheets are created across 
resource pools and segregated either by time, product, or region (due to the technical 
limitations of spreadsheets) and often the analysis requires the consolidation of these 
spreadsheets to be able to make the educated decision. After the number-crunching, 
a consolidated spreadsheet showing high level summaries is sent out to executives, 
while the details remain on other tabs within the same spreadsheet or on altogether 
separate spreadsheet files. This manual procedure has a high probability of errors.

The New-age Analytics and IBM Cognos Insight
[ 12 ]
The similar data analysis process in IBM Cognos Insight would result in faster 
decision making by keeping the details and the summaries in a highly compressed 
Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) in-memory cube. Using the intuitive  
drag-and-drop functionality or the smart-metadata import wizard, the spreadsheet 
data now appears instantaneously (due to the in-memory analysis) in a graphical 
and pivot table format. Similar categorical data values, such as customer, time, 
product, sales channel and retail location are stored as dimension structures. All 
the numerical values bearing factual data such as revenue, product cost, and so on, 
defined as measures are stored in the OLAP cube along with the dimensions. Two or 
more of these dimensions and measures together form a cube view that can be sliced 
and diced and viewed at a summarized or a detailed level. Within each dimension, 
elements such as customer name, store location, revenue amount generated, and 
so on, are created. These can be used in calculations and trend analysis. These 
dimensions can be pulled out on the analysis canvas as explorer points that can be 
used for data filtering and sorting. Calculations, business rules and differentiator 
metrics can be added to the cube view to enhance the analysis.
After enhancements to the IBM Cognos Insight workspace have been saved, these 
workspaces or files can be e-mailed and distributed as offline analyses. Also, the 
users have the option to publish the workspace into the IBM Cognos Business 
Intelligence web portal, Cognos Connection or IBM Cognos Express, both of which 
are targeted to larger audiences, where this information can be shared with broader 
workgroups. Security layers can be included to protect sensitive data, if required. 
The publish-and-distribute option within IBM Cognos Insight is used for advanced 
analytics features and write-back functionality in larger deployments. where, the 
users can modify plans online or offline, and sync up to the enterprise environment 
on an as-and-when basis. As an example, the analyst can create what-if scenarios for 
business purposes to simulate the introduction of a new promotion price for a set 
of smart phones during high foot traffic times to drive up sales. Or simulating an 
extension of store hours during summer months to analyze the effects on overall 
store revenue can be created. 
The following diagram shows the step-by-step process of dropping a spreadsheet 
into IBM Cognos Insight and viewing the dashboard and the scorecard style reports 
instantaneously, which can then be shared on the IBM Cognos BI web-portal or 
published to an IBM TM1 environment.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
The preceding screenshot demonstrates the steps from raw data in spreadsheets 
being imported into IBM Cognos Insight to reveal a dashboard style report 
instantaneously. Additional calculations to this workspace creates scorecard type 
graphical variances, thus giving an overall picture through rich graphics. 
The building blocks of Business 
Analytics 
The four building blocks or components of Business Analytics comprise of Business 
Intelligence, Performance Management, Predictive Analytics, and Risk Management. 
Built to perform and deliver as a Business Analytics software, IBM Cognos Insight 
can answer the business queries from each of these components.
Business Intelligence
Decision making that is based on large volumes of data can be a daunting task  
and using data intelligently, and converting it into an asset to reveal answers  
that help decision making easier is defined as Business Intelligence. Transactional 
and operational reporting, scorecards, and analysis together form the basis  
of Business Intelligence.

The New-age Analytics and IBM Cognos Insight
[ 14 ]
IBM Cognos Insight provides the basis of business intelligence through its  
features. Leveraging on the cube design fundamentals of dimensions and measure 
for analysis, creating business reports and scorecards displaying variances are the 
core features and benefits that enable Business Intelligence capabilities. The  
drag-and-drop functionality or the smart-metadata import wizard provides value  
in reducing time consuming processes such as requirements gathering and 
depending on IT to build reports. Users of IBM Cognos Insight can benefit 
from publishing workspaces as starting points for reports, which can be further 
customized and formatted in IBM Cognos BI or IBM Cognos Express environments, 
thereby creating Cognos Report Studio reports for each published workspace. This 
saves tremendous amounts of time in building simple to complex BI reports.
Performance Management
Executives rely on data to answer questions, so they can make the difficult decisions 
and/or strategic moves that will define the fate of their organization. Questions, 
such as the following, can be answered intelligently using Performance Management 
methodologies, which take an organization's performance to the next level and 
ahead of the competitors:
•	
How can our revenue grow faster?
•	
How and why are our competitors out-performing us?
•	
Where can we trim the expenses for a lean structure?
•	
When should we see a profit on a new product?
•	
How can we structure bonus payouts to maximize employee retention?
Performance Management can be applied to any part of the Business world as it 
improves the decision making capabilities and gives insight into the day-to-day 
operations, strategic moves and future investments, streamlines processes, automates 
procedures and so on. The write-back functionality enables simulating business 
scenarios that demonstrate alternative business cases that eventually lead towards 
the right decision making for any organization.
From a performance management perspective geared towards the financial health 
of an enterprise, Financial Performance Management (FPM) plays a key role 
where CFOs are constantly engaged in maintaining a balance between reducing 
costs and increasing profitability from the customers and product bands. Other Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) of financial growth are as follows:

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
•	
Gross profit
•	
Net profit
•	
Interest rates
•	
Variable costs
•	
GL expenses
•	
Labor, material, and production costs
•	
Marketing and advertising costs
•	
Operating variances
•	
Assets and liabilities
•	
Net cash flow
Using IBM Cognos Insight, these metrics can be graphically, comparatively, or 
numerically displayed, and vital financial reports such as profit and loss statements, 
balance sheets, and income and cash flow statements to name a few, can be authored to 
give deeper financial insight into the functioning of the organization. The simulation of 
alternate business cases using write-back technology is often used for creating budgets, 
plans, and forecasts.
IBM Cognos Insight is used as a Performance Management application and in areas 
such as Financial Performance Management (FPM) to increase revenue growth, 
lean operating expenses, shorten financial close processes and improving corporate 
planning, budgeting, and forecasting processes in many organizations. 
Predictive Analytics
Prior to the year 2007, before the boom of social networking, if a product was 
shipped out we didn't receive a direct feedback from the consumer until after the 
product was a sell-out or a high percentage of returned items were received. 
Five years later, it is a different situation as vast amount of data is collected, analyzed, 
and business decisions are made faster. These vast amounts of data can be used to 
measure patterns and be able to predict the outcomes based on past trends. IBM 
Cognos Insight connects to these predictive databases such as IBM SPSS to quickly 
analyze the current market scenarios so that businesses can act faster on  
customer feedback.

The New-age Analytics and IBM Cognos Insight
[ 16 ]
IBM Cognos Insight has the capability to connect to predictive data to analyze  
future outcomes. An example of a Customer Relationship Management case is a 
call center. Cognos Insight uses the predictive data to read the customers intentions 
before connecting live with the customer, thereby giving higher risk callers faster 
attention over other satisfied customers. Not only does this improve customer 
service but reduces the risk of losing the customer by providing IBM Cognos  
Insight dashboards, based on the customers' behavioral patterns and past  
positive preferences. 
Risk Management
A Risk Management case where IBM Cognos Insight can provide high value in 
predictive modeling is when it collaborates with IBM SPSS to predict natural 
disasters from past patterns before they arise. An alert system can flag disaster 
management and first-response entities to prepare the insurance companies 
better, thereby reducing the risk before the disaster arrives. Cognos Insight can 
act as a desktop application for various field experts who can input live data into 
their dashboard design workspaces and publish them into a centralized Cognos 
BI environment. This collaborative effort between experts on the field and other 
organizations using IBM Cognos Insight and Cognos BI provides fast decision 
making capabilities. This in turn can minimize the stress on the government  
and the financial institutions with reduced insurance damage payouts.
In Other cases where Business Analytics using IBM Cognos Insight, IBM Cognos BI 
and IBM SPSS serves industries is to  ensure higher customer satisfaction, better sales 
pipelines, greater product yields, better order fulfillments, reduced overall risks, and 
avoiding bottlenecks in complex supply chains. 
The power of Analytics today is applied in and outside of the business world. 
IBM Cognos Insight can leverage spreadsheets, IBM Cognos BI content, and other 
database systems (relation, statistical, and so on) through ODBC connections, to 
build faster analytics. Cognos Insight can act as a provider of data that might not 
exist in the organization's main database systems. 
With all the data in the world today, 90 percent of which has been created over the 
last two years alone, Analytics is going from the business world into the world of 
sports. Sports Analytics is the term used to define what global sport associations 
and groups are doing with predictive analytics (using statistics and mathematics) 
by tapping into years of historical data to spot trends and predict the outcomes of 
games before they begin and well before they end. 

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
One such example recently has been the 2012 Wimbledon Championship, where 
IBM's Business Analytics team set up IBM SlamTracker. A web product that 
displays data in visual dashboard styles to display in real-time, player statistics 
using key metrics such as number of aces, the percentage of wins on the first serve, 
the percentage of wins, percentage on the second serve, receiving points won, 
break points conversions, net approaches, and other such parameters. SlamTracker 
analyzes 39 million data points available over the last seven years of all the Grand 
Slams for each player to come up with a player pattern in real time.
Using Analytics in sports is taking place in other sports leagues as well such  
as National Basketball Association (NBA), National Hockey League (NHL), 
National Football League (NFL), Soccer World Cups, and the Olympic games.
Using analytics successfully
Over the past few years, there have been huge improvements in the technology and 
processes of gathering the data. Using Business Analytics and applications such 
as IBM Cognos Insight we can now analyze and accurately measure anything and 
everything. This leads to the question: Are we using Analytics successfully?
The following high-level recommendations should be used as a guidance for 
organizations that are either attempting a Business Analytics implementation for 
the first time or for those who are already involved with Business Analytics, both 
working towards a successful implementation:
1.	 The first step is to prioritize the targets that will produce intelligent analytics 
from the available trustworthy data. Choosing this target wisely and 
thoughtfully has an impact on the success rate of the implementation. Usually, 
these are high value targets that need problem solving and/or quick wins to 
justify the need and/or investment towards a Business Analytics solution.
2.	 Avoid the areas with a potential for probable budget cuts and/or involving 
corporate cultural and political battles that are considered to be the major 
factors leading to an implementation pitfall. Improve your chances by asking 
the question—where will we achieve maximum business value?
www.allitebooks.com

The New-age Analytics and IBM Cognos Insight
[ 18 ]
3.	 Selecting the appropriate product to deliver the technology is the key for 
success—a product that is suitable for all the skill levels and that can be 
supported by the organization's infrastructure. IBM Cognos Insight is one 
such product where the learning curve is minimal; thanks to its ease of use 
and vast features. The analysis produced by using IBM Cognos Insight 
can then be shared by publishing to an enterprise-level solution such as 
IBM Cognos BI, IBM Cognos Express, or IBM TM1. This product reduces 
dependencies on IT departments in terms of personnel and IT resources due 
to the small learning curve, easy setup, intuitive look, feel, and vast features. 
The sharing and collaborating capabilities eliminate the need for multiple 
silos of spreadsheets, one of the reasons why organizations want to move 
towards a more structured and regulated Enterprise Analytics approach.
4.	 Lastly, organize a governing body such as a Analytics Competency Center 
(ACC) or Analytics Center of Excellence (ACE) that has the primary 
responsibility to do the following:
°°
Provide the leadership and build the team
°°
Plan and manage the Business Analytics vision and strategy  
(BA Roadmap)
°°
Act as a governing body maintaining standardization at the 
Enterprise level 
°°
Develop, test, and deliver Business Analytic solutions
°°
Document all the processes and procedures, both functional  
and technical 
°°
Train and support end users of Business Analytics
°°
Find ways to increase the Return on Investment (ROI) 
°°
Integrate Business Analytics into newer technologies such as mobile 
and cloud computing 
The goals of a mature, enterprise-wide Analytics solution is when any employee 
within the organization, be it an analyst to an executive, or a member of the 
management team, can have their business-related questions answered in real time 
or near real time. These answers should also be able to predict the unknown and 
prepare for the unforeseen circumstances better. With the success of a Business 
Analytics solution and realized ROI, a question that should be asked is—are the 
solutions robust and flexible enough to expand regionally/globally? Also, can it 
sustain a merger or acquisition with minimal consolidation efforts?

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
If the Business Analytics solution provides the confidence in all of the above, the final 
question should be—can the Business Analytics solution be provided as a service to 
the organizations' suppliers and customers?
Summary
As analytics advances with technological improvements and innovations with tools 
such as IBM Cognos Insight, decision making capabilities will only get faster and 
more accurate. IBM Cognos Insight provides the starting point in analytics with 
offline capabilities for business users, with the option of taking their development 
efforts to an enterprise level so as to share and collaborate with teams within their 
organization. Being able to build dashboards in minutes with powerful analytical 
capabilities makes IBM Cognos Insight an application for all.
The next chapter will show a step-by-step installation procedure of IBM Cognos 
Insight. The readers will be able to then build their own analytical solutions to 
answer business-related questions and get deeper insights.


Installing IBM Cognos Insight
IBM Cognos Insight has a simple, wizard-driven installation procedure. This desktop 
application can be used in a stand-alone mode for personal analytics or can be used 
as a collaborative application, sharing its workspaces into IBM Cognos Business 
Intelligence or IBM Cognos Express environments. With an in-memory analytical 
(OLAP) engine under the covers, IBM Cognos Insight can extend its collaborative 
functionality to other IBM Business Analytics domains such as performance 
management (IBM TM1), predictive analytics, and mobile devices.
Before planning an IBM Cognos Insight installation, careful attention should 
be given to the supported environments such as the operating system, server 
environments, and data sources and their connectivity options, so as to successfully 
install and use all the features of the application.
System requirements for installing IBM 
Cognos Insight
Here is a list of environments that will support IBM Cognos Insight.
Processor and memory
The following should be considered as the minimum system requirements for using 
IBM Cognos Insight. A faster processor, additional memory, and disk space will 
contribute to a better performance; specifically when dealing with larger volumes  
of data and complex design.
•	
Processor: 1500 Megahertz (MHz) processor or higher
•	
Memory: 2 gigabytes (GB) or higher
•	
Hard disk: 500 megabytes (MB)
•	
Display: 1024 x 768 or higher resolution

Installing IBM Cognos Insight
[ 22 ]
Operating systems
IBM Cognos Insight can be installed on the following operating systems:
•	
Microsoft Windows XP Professional SP3 32-bit
•	
Microsoft Windows Vista SP2
•	
Microsoft Windows 7 Professional 32-bit/64-bit
The following are the system requirements for users installing and configuring IBM 
Cognos Insight for versions other than the Personal Edition and Standard Editions. 
The versions that require server information, data sources, and query builder 
information are:
•	
IBM Cognos Insight Provision install for IBM Cognos Business Intelligence
•	
IBM Cognos Insight Provision Install for IBM Cognos Express
•	
IBM Cognos Insight Provision Install for IBM TM1
Cognos Server environments
Server Environments
Share
Publish
IBM Cognos BI 10.1.1 64-bit 
Installation on UNIX
Compatible
Not Supported
IBM Cognos BI 10.1.1 32-bit/64-bit 
Installation on Windows
Compatible
Not Supported
IBM Cognos BI 10.2
Active
Active
IBM Cognos TM1 10.1
N/A
Compatible
IBM Cognos TM1 10.1.0.1
N/A
Compatible
IBM Cognos TM1 10.1.1
N/A
Active
High - Fidelity publish is not supported in IBM Cognos 10.1.1
Data sources
The following Data Sources are supported by IBM Cognos Insight 10.2.
•	
ODBC
•	
IBM Cognos BI 10.1.1 List Reports (Report Studio)
•	
IBM Cognos BI 10.2 List Reports (Report Studio)
•	
IBM Cognos BI 10.1.1 Packages
•	
IBM Cognos BI 10.2 Packages

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
•	
IBM Cognos TM1 10.1 Cube Views/Subsets
•	
IBM Cognos TM1 10.1.0.1 Cube Views/Subsets
•	
IBM Cognos TM1 10.1.1 Cube Views/Subsets
•	
Microsoft Excel 2007, 2010
•	
Delimited text file
•	
Other Data Sources via ODBC
°°
DB2 10.2
°°
DB2 9.7
°°
DB2 9.1, 9.5
°°
MS SQL 2008
°°
MS SQL 2005
°°
Oracle 11g Release 2
°°
Oracle 10g Release 2 
°°
SPSS .sav
Server environments for IBM Cognos 
Connection installer
The following are the server environments for IBM Cognos Connection installer:
•	
Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 SP1 (Standard/Enterprise Edition) 
32-bit/64-bit
•	
Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 (Standard/Enterprise Edition)  
32-bit/64-bit
•	
Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 (Web/Datacenter Edition) 32-bit/64-bit
•	
Microsoft Windows Server 2008 SP2 (Standard) 32-bit/64-bit
•	
Microsoft Windows Server 2008 SP2 (Enterprise/Web/Datacenter Edition) 
32-bit/64-bit 
•	
Microsoft Windows Server 2008 (Standard/Enterprise/Web/Datacenter 
Edition) 32-bit/64-bit
•	
Microsoft Windows Vista SP2 (Cognos Connection only)
•	
Microsoft Windows 7 SP1 32-bit/64-bit (Cognos Connection only)
•	
Microsoft Windows XP Professional SP3 32-bit/64-bit
•	
IBM AIX 7.1 64-bit
•	
IBM AIX 6.1 64-bit

Installing IBM Cognos Insight
[ 24 ]
•	
HP-UX 11i v3 Itanium 64-bit
•	
HP-UX 11i v2 Itanium 64-bit
•	
Novell SUSE Linux Enterprise 11 (IBM Power)
•	
Novell SUSE Linux Enterprise 11 (IBM System z)
•	
Novell SUSE Linux Enterprise 11 64-bit Novell SUSE Linux Enterprise 10 SP3 
(IBM System z)
•	
Novell SUSE Linux Enterprise 10 SP1 64-bit
•	
Red Hat Enterprise Linux AP 6.3 and above (IBM Power)
•	
Red Hat Enterprise Linux AP 6.3 and above 64-bit
•	
Red Hat Enterprise Linux AP 5.8 and above (IBM Power)
•	
Red Hat Enterprise Linux AP 5.8 and above 64-bit
•	
Red Hat Enterprise Linux ES/WS 5.8 and above 64-bit
•	
Red Hat Enterprise Linux AS/ES/WS AP 4.6 and above (IBM Power)
•	
Red Hat Enterprise Linux AP 4.6 and above 64-bit
•	
Red Hat Enterprise Linux AS/ES/WS 4.6 and above 64-bit
•	
Sun Solaris 10 (SPARC) 64-bit
•	
Sun Solaris 9 (SPARC) 64-bit
For an updated version of the IBM Cognos Insight supported environments, 
visit the IBM webpage at http://www-01.ibm.com/support/docview.
wss?uid=swg27025127.
Available options to download Cognos 
Insight
IBM Cognos Insight provides multiple versions of installing, based on the user's 
needs and availability of other IBM products within the installing environment. 
Download IBM Cognos Insight from https://www.analyticszone.com or from  
the available CD/DVDs as provided.
•	
Personal Edition: This version of Cognos Insight can be downloaded from 
the IBM Insight community website at https://www.analyticszone.com. 
This is a free version with limited features.

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
This version allows the importing of data source files (.xls or .csv files 
only). The ODBC connectivity and connecting to the Cognos server for BI 
Reports are disabled features. This application can be used as a personal 
analytics solution with no sharing capabilities and this allows for analyzing 
and exploring data. The intention is to use this version for non-commercial, 
personal use and is installed with the user having administrator rights to  
the computer.
If you wish to upgrade to the Standard Edition, uninstall this version 
first and then install the Standard Edition. Keep in mind Provision type 
installations from Cognos BI or TM1 will overwrite this version of IBM 
Cognos Insight.
•	
Standard Edition: This version of IBM Cognos Insight is a stand-alone 
version with the ability to use spreadsheets (CSV and XLS) and other data 
sources via ODBC connections to create analyses. Like the Personal Edition, 
the Standard Edition also requires that the users have administrator rights 
on the computer where Cognos Insight will be installed. The installation files 
have combined 32-bit and 64-bit components that are used to install with 
the appropriate operating system. This version allows users to share their 
development efforts with other users of the same version but keep in mind 
that the Personal or Provisional versions will overwrite the Standard versions 
of Cognos Insight.
•	
Provision install for existing IBM Cognos BI Environments: Available for 
both Windows (32-bit and 64-bit) and Unix Environments, this option is 
useful when Cognos BI is already available in the installing environment. 
The advantage of this option is that it allows multiple end users to download 
Cognos Insight from the web portal—Cognos Connection—after the Cognos 
BI Administrator assigns these selected users either the Advanced Business 
Author or Enhanced Consumer roles. This ensures all the users are on the 
same version of Cognos Insight.
This version of Cognos Insight completely integrates into the Cognos BI 
environment, allowing for publishing workspaces from Cognos Insight into 
Cognos Connection. The ability to publish dashboards, contribute to plans 
(write-back analysis), and sharing Cognos Insight (.cdd) files to Cognos 
connection. It uses Report Studio reports or Framework Manager packages as 
data sources as well, which differentiates this version from the Standard and 
Personal Editions.
There are two steps involved when installing this version of Cognos Insight. 
The first is installing the IBM Cognos Connection Installer on the available 
Cognos BI servers (version 10.1.1 or higher).

Installing IBM Cognos Insight
[ 26 ]
The second step will allow the end user to install Cognos Insight on-demand, 
straight onto their desktops, from the Cognos Connection web portal.
As shown in the following screenshot, when a user logs into IBM Cognos BI's 
web portal Cognos Connection, a new item appears in the My Actions section. 
Once the user clicks on the highlighted portion, Cognos Insight is installed on 
the user's desktop. This is the provision install from Cognos BI and benefits by 
standardizing all the users on the same version of Cognos Insight.
•	
IBM Cognos Express: IBM Cognos Insight can also be installed from Cognos 
Express environments either through Cognos Express Planner or Cognos 
Express Advisor. This provision method ensures users are on the same 
version of Cognos Insight and prompts users if newer versions are found  
on the servers where Cognos Express is installed.
•	
IBM TM1 10: IBM Cognos Insight can also be installed from TM1 10.1 version 
(and higher). This option is available in the TM1 environment for users 
who belong to the "Contributor" or higher role. The functionality within 
this option of installing Cognos Insight includes all the above features 
such as data analysis, exploration, sharing with other Cognos Insight users 
and publishing & distributing to the Cognos BI environment and TM1 
environment via Performance Modeler. This Cognos Insight version features 
the write-back capability and business rules applications for scenario analysis 
and planning, similar to TM1 Environments.
When installing Cognos Insight from an existing IBM TM1 environment, users 
can install Cognos Insight from the TM1 application portal. As this version of 
Cognos Insight resides on the TM1 server, users are notified to upgrade their 
local versions, if the server has a newer version of Cognos Insight.

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
Installing IBM Cognos Insight Standard 
Edition
The following are the step-by-step instructions to install IBM Cognos Insight 
Standard Edition. 
1.	 Once the installation file has been unzipped, double-click on the win32 folder 
as shown next. If you are installing directly from a CD/DVD the Autorun.inf 
file will execute automatically to run the wizard, bypassing the next two steps.
2.	 The following screenshot shows all the files inside the win32 folder.  
When executed, the file issetup.exe starts the installation wizard that  
will help us install the product on a local computer. 

Installing IBM Cognos Insight
[ 28 ]
The following image shows the Install Stream program that will generate the 
wizard. Notice that the version on the product is 10.2.
3.	 The following image shows the first screen in the wizard—the Welcome 
screen. Language Selection for the installation process and access to the 
installation guide is available, as seen in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
4.	 The following screenshot shows the IBM License Agreement. Read and 
understand the agreement and then select the I Agree radio option to 
proceed with the installation process.

Installing IBM Cognos Insight
[ 30 ]
5.	 The next screenshot shows the location of the installer file—CognosInsight.
msi. By default IBM Cognos Insight Installer is installed at the path C:\
Program Files\IBM\CognosInsight for a 32-bit installation on a 32-bit 
Microsoft Windows system.
If you are installing the 32-bit Cognos Insight on a 64-bit Microsoft Windows 
system, the default location would be C:\Program Files(x86)\IBM\
Cognos\CognosInsight/.
For users installing IBM Cognos Insight from IBM Cognos BI, the 
Cognos Connection Installer is installed in the following locations:
•	
C:\Program Files\IBM\Cognos\c10 folder for a 32-bit 
installation on a 32-bit Windows system
•	
C:\Program Files\IBM\Cognos\c10 folder for a 64-bit 
installation on a 64-bit Windows system
•	
C:\Program Files(x86)\IBM\Cognos\c10 folder for a  
32-bit installation on a 64-bit Windows system

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
6.	 The following screenshot shows the Installation Summary of the  
Cognos Insight Install that is about to begin. This confirmation page  
shows the following:
°°
Local disk space (required and available): Local disk  
space information
°°
Installation location: Dialog Entry Information
°°
Installation logs location on the machine: Summary-Error  
Log Location

Installing IBM Cognos Insight
[ 32 ]
7.	 For confirming the installation, click on Next. The following screenshot 
shows the installation status. Once all of the 17 components are installed,  
the setup is completed successfully:
The following screenshot shows that the installation process is finished:

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
8.	 You can view the log files by clicking on the View the transfer log or View 
the summary-error log buttons to see each of the log files, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Installing IBM Cognos Insight
[ 34 ]
9.	 Once you click on Finish, the installation is completed and a shortcut to 
Cognos Insight is installed on the desktop. You can either access Cognos 
Insight Standard Edition by clicking on the shortcut icon on the desktop  
or navigate to Start | Program Files | IBM Cognos Insight to start  
the program.
The following screenshot shows the icon shortcut to IBM Cognos Insight created on 
the user's desktop machine:
To confirm that an install was successfully done, check that the following folders and 
files appear in the location as shown:
Installation of IBM Cognos Insight on an 
existing Cognos BI Environment
The prerequisites for a Provisioned install of Cognos Insight in an existing Cognos BI 
environment are as follows:
•	
Make sure that the version of Cognos BI is 10.1.1 or higher
•	
Cognos BI administrator should assign the targeted users the Enhanced 
Consumer role
•	
Disable browser pop-up blockers

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
For single server installs, where the gateway, Cognos application server, and the 
content, store are all the installs on the same server:
1.	 Stop all the Cognos services.
2.	 Install Cognos Insight successfully using the installation wizard.
3.	 Restart the Cognos services.
4.	 Cognos BI admin should assign the Enhanced Consumer role to  
the targeted users.
5.	 Cognos Insight will now be available in Cognos connection for  
those selected users.
For a distributed server install, the following are the steps to install Cognos Insight  
in a distributed environment. Follow these steps when installing Cognos Insight in  
a distributed environment:
1.	 Stop all the Cognos services.
2.	 Start the Cognos installation wizard.
3.	 Select the Cognos Insight BI Integration.
4.	 For all the Gateway machines, select Cognos Insight BI Integration Gateway.
5.	 Proceed with a successful install.
6.	 For all Cognos Application server machines, select Cognos Insight  
BI Integration.
7.	 Proceed with a successful install.
8.	 Restart the Cognos services.
9.	 Cognos BI Admin should assign Enhanced Consumer role to targeted users.
10.	 Cognos Insight will now be available in Cognos Connection for those users.
For remote installations, Cognos Insight can also be installed to multiple  
remote desktops using third-party network tools and command line codes that  
send the CognosInsight.msi file to target locations. This topic is out of bounds  
for this chapter.

Installing IBM Cognos Insight
[ 36 ]
Uninstalling IBM Cognos Insight
Here are the steps to uninstall Cognos Insight.
1.	 Cognos Insight Standard Edition can be uninstalled from the Start Menu | 
Program Files | IBM Cognos Insight, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 Follow the steps in the wizard and select the objects and components  
that need to be uninstalled. The Uninstall Wizard is shown in the  
following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
3.	 Uninstalling Cognos Insight for a provisioned install can be accomplished 
from the Control Panel in a Windows operating system. The following 
screenshot displays the Control Panel program in a Windows based 
operating system:
 
Connecting IBM Cognos Insight to the 
Cognos BI and IBM TM1 Environments
Connecting IBM Cognos Insight to Cognos BI and IBM TM1 is done by configuring 
the Cognos BI and TM1 link into Cognos Insight. 
www.allitebooks.com

Installing IBM Cognos Insight
[ 38 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, from the Actions drop-down menu on the top 
left-hand side, select Publish and follow the wizard instructions:
Input the connection string parameters, as shown in the next screenshot, into 
the TM1 systems URL box and click on Finish. Cognos Insight workspaces 
are then sent to the TM1 server and the users can access the Cognos Insight 
workspaces via Cognos Business Intelligence and Cognos Express. 

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
Sharing Cognos Insight workspaces into the Cognos BI environment requires the 
user to select Share. On the top left-hand side corner in Cognos Insight, click on the 
drop-down Actions menu and select Share (as shown in the following screenshot):

Installing IBM Cognos Insight
[ 40 ]
Follow the wizard; input the existing Cognos BI gateway as the required parameters. 
Depending on the security setup, a login/password might be required, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
Once the credentials have been accepted, click on Finish. This will publish the 
Cognos Insight content into the Cognos Business Intelligence web portal, Cognos 
Connection. This deploys the workspace into Cognos connection and can now be 
shared with a broader group of users. 
Configuring the Cognos BI and IBM TM1 URLs as part of the installation procedure 
under Preferences within Cognos Insight saves the URL information. This can be  
a time saver for the users, as the URLs are now available any time a "publish"  
is required.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
Summary
Much like any other application install, a plan of action is necessary for a  
successful install. Following the steps described in this chapter will ensure  
a successful installation.
The next chapter will describe features such as importing, exploring, and analyzing 
the data sets within IBM Cognos Insight.


Usability of IBM 
Cognos Insight
Now that IBM Cognos Insight has been successfully installed as a desktop 
application, it is time to understand how to best use its features to import data, 
analyze it, and build workspaces. This chapter will describe how to bring in different 
data sources into Cognos Insight and use its functionalities to reorient, restructure, 
and display data in rich visual formats. In addition, the chapter will demonstrate the 
sandbox functionality for write-back scenario based planning and analysis.
Before we begin, it is important to understand the basic concepts of OLAP 
Technology. Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) is a data structure in the form of 
a cube. The simplest cube can be created using two dimensions and one measure. 
Dimensions are a stack of similar data grouped together such as region, product, 
or time. A dimension is comprised of various levels that structure the dimension in 
a form of a hierarchy. Take an example of the regions dimension, which may have 
levels such as country, state, district, and city; or the example of a time dimension 
that might have levels such as year, quarter, month, week, and day. This hierarchical 
structure enables users to drill down and drill up on the cube, thereby giving 
summary and detail levels within the same structure. Furthermore, a member is 
defined as the data within the level. Members within the country level of a region's 
dimension would include USA, France, England, Japan, and so on. Members of a 
time dimension across all levels would be 2012, Quarter 4, November, Week 47, 23rd 
day of the month.
Dimensions add context to the measures and without context, measures are 
meaningless numbers. They are quantitative data items that give a numeric value 
to the data, such as revenue, cost of goods sold, profit margin, net sales, discounts, 
employee headcount, and so on, that eventually drive the performance metrics and 
set goals.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 44 ]
By contrast, an attribute in OLAP is an additional piece of information about data in 
a cube that provides descriptive information. Product color or product size would 
be attributes for the product dimension, month name would be an attribute of the 
month level in a time dimension, and so on. OLAP cubes are the foundations of IBM 
Cognos Insight and are used to answer the 4 Ws: what, who, when, and where, using 
the combination of dimensions and measures. Relate these questions to any data set 
and they provide the key analysis that Cognos Insight can derive for  
your organization.
A multi-dimensional analysis would then be considered as one with more than two 
dimensions and measures in a cube structure that enables analysis of the data from 
various perspectives. This technology makes a true multi-dimensional analysis.
Importing data into IBM Cognos Insight
To begin with any analysis, importing data into IBM Cognos Insight is the first step. 
The following are three possible methods to accomplish this:
•	
Drag and drop (Quick Import method): This method allows  
spreadsheets (Excel files), CSV files, or existing Cognos Insight Workspaces 
(cdd file extensions) to be dropped onto the Cognos Insight interface. The 
smart-metadata capability automatically creates a highly compressed OLAP 
cube structure with dimensions, levels, measures, and the relationships 
between them based on the data in the file. As per the following screenshot, 
a spreadsheet containing the US Economic Census for the Mining Industry is 
dropped onto the application. JPG images can also be dropped in the similar 
manner to show the image on Cognos Insight.

Chapter 3
[ 45 ]
Alternatively, the Quick Import method brings up a window from where file 
selections can be made. This option can be accessed by selecting Get Data 
| Quick Import... or by selecting Quick Import from the startup screen, as 
shown in the following screenshot:
The following is a screenshot of the data in the file:
A quick look at the source file shows IBM Cognos Insight recognizing the first 
three columns and their data to be type text and defines them as Dimensions 
in the cube. The smart-metadata enables the import wizard to differentiate 
data types within the columns as measureable or non-measureable values 
such as Number of Paid Employees versus customer number. The remaining 
columns in the data source are numeric in nature; these comprise of the 
Measures within the OLAP cube. For purely analysis purposes, the data is 
now represented in Cognos Insight in the form of a crosstab or pivot table with 
rows and columns.
The following screenshot shows a crosstab and a chart of the data imported 
into Cognos Insight. This representation is displayed in a widget or container 
that resides on the workspace. The various dimensions and measures are 
displayed on the title bar which allow the slicing and dicing of data for 
analysis purposes. Slicing and dicing in OLAP terminology refers to focusing 
on a particular data set by changing the original orientation and then filtering 
certain aspects of the new desired orientation. 

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 46 ]
The widget has some additional properties that will be discussed later in the 
chapter. This and other widgets lie on a tab sheet. A workspace in Cognos 
Insight can have multiple tabs.
•	
Import Wizard method: When importing various types of data structures 
and sources, Cognos Insight has a built-in import wizard. This wizard can 
be accessed by the Get Data tool bar menu and selecting Import Data... or 
Import Dimensions..., as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
The difference between selecting either the Import Data... or Import 
Dimensions... option depends on the source data. Use the former when  
data has dimensions and measures, while the latter is used when importing 
only dimensions.
There are four types of Data Source that exist to allow for importing multiple 
data sources:
°°
File
°°
Relational Data Source (ODBC)
°°
IBM Cognos Report Data
°°
IBM Cognos Package Data
The highlighted section in the following screenshot shows the import 
wizard's multiple data type options:
The following screenshot shows the Source Details options when importing 
data. As shown under the Source Details section, importing data across 
various options exist to accommodate the data format. These options can also 
be used to select or deselect columns within the data source, thereby giving 
the import process the flexibility to bring in relevant data only.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 48 ]
When importing a file, the smart-metadata within the import wizard can 
identify the data type and automatically roll up logical levels for measures. 
An example of this would be when the smart-metadata algorithm creates 
links to the data and displays the data as natural hierarchies of product line 
to product type to product or year to quarter to month. As shown in the 
following screenshot, the data type is of a crosstab or pivot table. The import 
wizard then provides the following options to bring in the appropriate data 
structure with the flexibility to select the data range within the source file:

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
Users also have the ability to connect to an ODBC connection. Cognos Insight 
can import data from multiple vendor applications, such as Microsoft Access, 
SQL Server, dBASE files, and so on. If looking to leverage predictive data or 
other kinds of relational data sources, one can connect through this method 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 50 ]
Under the SQL Query window, input SQL commands to access the data or 
use the Query Builder to drag and drop tables from the Metadata Explorer, 
create the relationships between the tables, and specify the cardinalities as 
shown in the following screenshot:
 
IBM Cognos Insight also connects to an organization's existing Cognos 
Business Intelligence (BI) environment to leverage trusted BI data via 
list reports. Once the correct parameters (Gateway URI link and valid 
credentials) have been entered, a new window allows browsing for specific 
reports and selecting them as a data source. If the reports have prompts, 
ensure the prompt selections have been satisfied and the report is in a  
tabular format.

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
A Data Preview window will show the report data to be imported, as shown 
in the following screenshot: 

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 52 ]
Lastly, Cognos Insight connects to the existing IBM Cognos packages.  
In order to connect to the BI environment, select the package location  
and name. Then choose the query subjects that will provide data for the 
analysis and preview the selection in the window pane.
The Advanced> icon at the bottom of the wizard provides options to map 
the importing data. The mapping portion of the import wizard provides a 
Data Preview at the top and the mapping information at the bottom half of 
the window. Use the bottom half section to build dimensions and levels by 
dragging the source columns (on the left-hand side) into the target columns 
(on the right-hand side).

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
Each of the columns under the Source Items (right-click) can be used in the 
analysis as dimensions, measures, levels, and attributes.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 54 ]
Use the Properties window on the right-hand side to add the Target Cube 
Name and specify the data import behavior type. From the following 
screenshot, selecting Add to existing values adds the newly imported data 
to the target cube, while the other option replaces the older values with the 
newly imported values:
As shown in the following screenshot, other options such as Clear target 
data, Store zero values, and Replace empty strings with default values, 
assist in refining the import process.
The Advanced option, as shown in the following screenshot, allows the  
usage of existing OLAP cube components (dimensions and measures)  
to be included in the importing of new data:
Next select Summary to see a list of import messages and the property 
summary of each object being imported into Cognos Insight. Finally,  
the Import button will close the wizard and import data based on the  
user's selection.

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
•	
Data Refresh method: There are two methods of refreshing existing data in 
Cognos Insight: Silent Refresh and Guided Refresh. These options are cube 
specific and can be accessed from the content icon on the top right of the 
application as shown in the following screenshot:
This provides the set of options for a guided or silent refresh as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Select Silent Refresh when the data has been modified in the data source 
and Cognos Insight is aware of the location of the data source. This option is 
selected when there is no change to the metadata, meaning no columns have 
been added or deleted from the source. While the mappings are unchanged, 
this option will refresh the data in Cognos Insight.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 56 ]
Use Guided Refresh when the source data has been modified in terms of 
the data structure. This will bring up the import wizard that will provide the 
flexibility in importing data. Follow the wizard, as described earlier, to bring 
in the new data structure as required.
Reorienting data into Cognos Insight
Cognos Insight provides rich visualization options to raw data and allows us to drill 
up and down on crosstabs or various available charts. The crosstabs and charts provide 
interactivity with the data to allow further analysis that leads to deeper insights.
This section will describe the various features used to reorient the data in a fashion 
that suits the user's needs.
•	
Drag-and-drop dimensions
•	
Slice and dice title dimensions
•	
Nesting dimensions
•	
Sorting on data
•	
Swap rows and columns
•	
Charting options
•	
Filtering values/explorer points
•	
Types of calculations
•	
Writing rules
•	
Formatting methods
•	
Grouping dimensions
US Economic Census and IBM Cognos data have been used to build these examples.
Drag-and-drop dimensions
Changing the orientation of the cube can reveal many more answers in a 
multi-dimensional analysis. In Cognos Insight, drag-and-drop the title dimensions  
over either a row dimension or column dimension to change the existing view  
of the cube into a new view.

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
As shown in the previous screenshot, the Year dimension will be replaced with the 
classification dimension by dragging and dropping the classification dimension 
over the Year dimension.
Slice and dice title dimensions
Typical to OLAP applications, the slice and dice functionality will, in a way, present 
a specific cube view with a desired positioning order of the dimensions and filter 
this dimensional data specific to an OLAP member. The dimensional member values 
of a cube are referred to as the OLAP "edge" while the body of a cube contains the 
measure values. In this case, from the measures dimension, slice to the measure 
Annual payroll ($1,000). This will change the data focus from No of Establishments 
to payroll information, without changing the row and column dimensions.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 58 ]
Nesting dimensions
Nesting dimensions or stacking them side by side, provides additional information 
to the cube view. Nesting dimensions allows two or more dimensions stacked in  
a row and/or column dimension to show data from multiple perspectives within  
the same cube view, thereby maximizing the real estate available on the page with 
data values.
In the following screenshot, Total of Customer Type title dimension is moved  
over and stacked to the right-hand side of the Territory row dimension:
The following screenshot shows the resulting output:
As can be noted, the Quarter dimension displays information in the rows  
(row dimension), while the column dimension is now nested with Territory type  
and Customer Type dimension. The Territory type dimension acts as the parent  
and displays only the customers available under specific territories.

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
Sorting of data
The sorting of dimensional data in Cognos Insight can be done on the row or column 
dimension. Select the row or column dimension on which sorting is to be applied 
and right click on the header.
In the following screenshot, Sort by Label (Ascending or Descending) will sort 
alphabetically on the names of the states. Sort by Value will sort based on the data 
values for the states.
Don't Sort cancels any sorting on the dimensional row or column.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 60 ]
The following screenshot displays the Sort by Label result on the US States row 
dimension by descending order:
Swap rows and columns
Swapping rows and columns is a feature that reorients the rows with the columns in 
the existing cube view. This is used to give an improved view for analysis when too 
many data elements exist in the current combination of row and column dimension. 
The following screenshot shows the Territory dimension and the Quarter by week 
column dimension. This is a busy view that makes visual at-a-glance analysis a 
challenge. Leveraging the swap row and column feature will change the view by 
swapping the rows with the columns.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
The following screenshot shows the swapped rows and columns. The stacked 
columns have now moved to the row dimension level and the graph is easier to read.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 62 ]
Charting options
In Cognos Insight, there are numerous types of charts. Charts act as visual displays 
and in many cases, can display analysis better than textual data.
The previous screenshot can be simplified for the Analyst user by clicking on the 
Change Chart icon 
 on the widget. The view of the chart now displays units 
shipped by day across all territories. Additionally, data can be directly added to 
charts from the content pane. Depending on the type of data in the analysis, Cognos 
Insight provides other chart types, such as Area charts, Bar, or Column charts, Tree 
Map that display hierarchies as nested rectangles, Line charts to display data as a 
series of points, and Pie or Point charts to display positive numerical values. Suitable 
colors can be selected from the Palettes option. To hide or show the legends, series, 
categories, grid lines, headers, and the like, select View Options for each chart type.

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
Filtering values/explorer points
The concept of explorer points in Cognos Insight enables filtering across multiple 
widgets in a workspace. From the content pane on the right-hand side, when 
dimensions are dragged onto the canvas area of the workspace, an explorer point for 
that dimension is created. Use the explorer points to filter the analysis and focus on 
areas of interest.
Resize the widget by restoring it using the restore icon 
 to make room on  
the canvas for explorer points. Drag the Territory dimension onto the white  
space to create an explorer point for the Territory dimension as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 64 ]
The following screenshot shows the explorer point for Territory dimension. The 
search icon on the top right-hand side of the explorer point enables us to search for 
data members within the dimension and is useful for large dimensions with many 
members. Clicking on the filter icon will disable the filter. The explorer point forms  
a widget on the canvas with its own properties and can be sized accordingly.
Additionally, Cognos Insight has the ability to display all the dimensions in an Explore 
Pane. Click on Explore in the title bar to see the Explore Pane on the left-hand side of 
the workspace. Other features such as disabling all filters or hiding the Explore Pane 
can be controlled from this drop-down as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
To make filtering easier with limited to no expression or coding required,  
Cognos Insight provides users to filter on top and bottom values. By selecting the 
column or row to filter, the menu driven option gives users the capability to filter 
on Top or Bottom 3 to 5 or 10 data values or create custom ones, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Types of calculations
Cognos Insight is capable of creating simple calculations such as additions, 
subtractions, multiplications, and divisions, and at the same time complex 
calculations involving comparative values to spot trends and discover sweet spots. 
As an example of a simple calculation, let's divide Annual Payroll by No of All 
Workers to see each worker's compensation. 

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 66 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, select the two column headers, right-click on 
them, and use the Calculate option to create a new calculated column:
Another method of viewing the variance between the two columns or rows can be 
done by using the comparing values feature. In the following example, select the 
values, right-click and compare between Texas and California and California and Texas:

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, a score card visual view of the variances  
is displayed. The metrics show the comparative values by a set of circles, squares, 
and diamond shaped objects.
The score cards provide a new calculation metric. The green circle shows excellent 
values or 10 percent higher values than the comparative option, while the yellow 
diamond shows an average value, and the red square displays a 10 percent lower 
comparison, suggesting a poor variance change.
Creating customized or complex calculations in Cognos Insight can be accomplished 
by using calculation expressions. Each widget has a calculate icon which brings up 
the calculation expression window. 

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 68 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, the expression window has a calculation 
which will be executed specific to this cube/widget:
Some complex calculations would include gross margin percentage, profitability 
percentage, inventory turns, net present value, internal rate of return, return on 
invested capital, contribution values to totals, and so on.

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
Cognos Insight offers prebuilt Rollup for summaries such as Average, Minimum, 
Maximum, and Count, as shown in the following screenshot:
Editing calculations can be done by right-clicking on the new calculation and 
selecting Edit this Calculation. Alternatively, this can be done from the Calculation 
icon on the widget as well.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 70 ]
Writing rules
Adding complex calculations or business rules that are governed by complex 
calculated values, including cell level modifications, can be computed by writing 
rules in Cognos Insight. Like calculations, rules are written in the Calculation 
window and must end with a semicolon (;) as shown in the following screenshot:
As rules are cube specific, they can be accessed from the "widget actions" icon  
on the canvas of the workspace. Selecting the Rules option brings up the  
expression window.
In the previous screenshot, the highlighted keywords are the special functions 
used to compile rules in Cognos Insight. The expressions show all the calculations 
performed on this data set so far, which demonstrates that rules would have been 
written and complied with to accomplish the same calculations as done previously.

Chapter 3
[ 71 ]
Formatting methods
Formatting data types to give more meaningful expressions can be done by selecting 
the options (right-click) on the measure header title or cell and selecting Format 
measure-name. This will open a new formatting window as shown in the  
following screenshot:
Use this window to apply Currency values, Date, and Text formats and a flexible 
Custom format.
Alternatively, the same formatting window can be accessed by selecting Edit and 
Move on each row or column header (right click). To modify the formatting changes, 
use the right-hand side of the window to apply the changes, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 72 ]
Grouping dimensions
One of the features in Cognos Insight used to display data in a structured format is 
by grouping dimensions. Grouping dimensions makes it easier to navigate across 
dimensions and is a cube specific feature. Adjust the dimension structure by using 
the wizard that is available from the content pane cube option (right click), as shown 
in the following screenshot:
Once the dimensions to be grouped have been moved from the left-hand side to the 
right-hand side in the order of grouping or forming hierarchy, provide a name for 
the new cube that will be created for this. Use the available options in the wizard to 
either reference or copy the data from the original cube.
Reconstructing data in Cognos Insight
As an analytical tool that resides over data, Cognos Insight provides users with the 
ability to create what-if scenarios in a personalized sandbox environment, which can 
then be pushed towards a contribution. Added flexibility allows users to continue 
contributing to plans while being in connected or distributed mode, as well as 
offline mode. Users that are offline can continue to work on their plans and sync up 

Chapter 3
[ 73 ]
their contributions once back online. With some restrictions towards data structural 
changes, this is a fairly seamless process. Cognos Insight also allows for the creation 
of OLAP components such as dimensions, measures, and members within the 
application itself in cases when the imported raw data lacks the needs to complete  
an analysis.
This section will describe the various features used to reconstruct data and use 
spreading techniques to accomplish the what-if scenario analysis. These features  
are as follows:
•	
Write-back
•	
Data spreading
•	
Adding cubes, dimensions, and members
•	
Adding parent and child members
•	
Moving members
•	
Adding comments
Write-back
Write-backs are used for what-if scenario planning. This allows analyst users to 
create business scenarios for planning and forecasting purposes. These could be  
used to generate a demand plan or forecast depending on the kind of data and how 
it is utilized.
Cognos Insight is built on IBM TM1 (OLAP) technology, and much like TM1 
Cubes, Cognos Insight stores data at the lowest level cells. For example, with time 
dimensions having levels from year to day, data is stored at the day level and all 
calculations and summarizations are performed on the fly (in memory). This is the 
reason for the performance improvement in TM1 and Cognos Insight as compared  
to other OLAP applications on the market.
When performing write-backs at a higher level, all the lower level cells that are 
related to the range of write-backs get affected. After a write-back is performed 
and the values change, the font color changes from default black to blue, indicating 
cells or ranges within the data set that are affected by the write-back. These newly 
changed values are only written back to the TM1 (cube) database, when the user 
(administrator only) making the changes commits to the new values. Once a commit 
is done, as shown in the following screenshot, the font changes back to default black 
and all the changes made by the user are applied to the entire workgroup.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 74 ]
The personal sandbox environment now publishes the changes to an environment 
where all users will see the new changes. The same concept works with deleting 
items in the workspace. As soon as a commit is performed, all users are affected 
by the change. Hence, to better manage these situations, a strict governance and 
workflow process may be applied to audit data changes and track accountability 
amongst the user base.
As an example of the use case for write-back functionality, analysts are tracking the 
effects of a probable increase in the cost of manufacturing products in Europe based 
on current global trends. To forecast this event, an increased value of $2 million is 
added on to the existing $68 million to see the effects across Total Territory.
In the following example, typing 70M in the highlighted cell will write-back 
70,000,000 and apply it towards the entire analysis. Once applied, notice the blue 
fonts representing all affected cells and regions:
This shows the overall costs associated with the increase and how it affects the 
various products within the region. The what-if planning using Cognos Insight 
provides readiness and gives deeper insight into future decision making. This proves 
to be a valuable feature not only in volatile market conditions but also in planning, 
forecasting, and budgeting more accurately across all industry domains.

Chapter 3
[ 75 ]
Cognos Insight has shortcuts available for write-backs such as "grow", "hold", and 
"^", which translates to increased values, hold cell values, and copy data values to all 
the children, respectively.
Applying Hold on a cell or group of cells will lock their values and prevent these 
locked cells from being affected by any write-backs or data spreading.
If a cell or group of cells have a hold, select the cell or area of cells and release the 
hold (right-click) as shown in the following screenshot:

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 76 ]
In Cognos Insight, what-if scenarios can be applied directly on graphs as well. Click 
on the Revenue measure for the Office product category and drag the cell upwards 
to show increase in revenue. As shown in the following screenshot, this has the same 
effect as the write-backs performed on crosstabs.
Data spreading
Data spreading is a technique used by analysts to spread numbers or values across 
regions of cells. This is typically used for modifying numbers using predefined or 
custom techniques such as Equal Spread and Relative Proportional Spread. In 
Cognos Insight, selecting on the aggregate cell to spread data brings up the data spread 
wizard. Equal Spread will spread values equally among all selected cells. If 1000 is 
input across an area of 10 cells, the value 100 will be distributed into each cell.
Relative Proportional Spread spreads the desired value based on the numeric  
values of the selected or reference cells. This can be based on other dimensions such 
as time or region to provide complex data distribution techniques, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 77 ]
Adding cubes, dimensions, and members
These simple methods will assist in creating cubes and dimensions for additional 
analysis. Creating cubes and dimensions in Cognos Insight will allow users to input 
data into the new cubes manually, by data spreading techniques or by copy-pasting 
values directly into it. This can be done from the content pane on the right-hand side 
of the workspace where the New icon, as shown in the following screenshot, will 
create a Blank Cube.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 78 ]
This functionality provides users with the flexibility to bring in new data into their 
analysis. As mentioned previously, this data can be input manually or by other 
means. The addition of cubes can be used to enhance data sets and dashboards  
or for creating calculations and rules that rely on this new data rich cube.
This will create a simple blank data cube with two dimensions and one measure 
within a measure folder as shown in the following screenshot:
Similarly, add dimensions to the existing cubes and measures as well. The measures 
and cubes can be stored in folders for organization purposes. The addition of 
Dimensions can be done as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 79 ]
The addition of Measures can be done as shown in the following screenshot:
The creation of folders can be done as shown in the following screenshot:
Another method of adding a cube to a workspace within Cognos Insight is by 
leveraging the Insert menu on the tool bar, as shown in the following screenshot:

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 80 ]
Sharing and reusing dimensions in a Cognos Insight workspace can save tremendous 
amounts of time in development efforts. Within Cognos Insight, dimensions can 
be copied or shared from one cube and used in another using the drag-and-drop 
method. This is followed by a wizard that assists with the process and can be seen  
in the following screenshot:
Adding parent and child members
Additional flexibility allows users to add data items within a cube and modify the 
structure of the cubes. As shown in the following screenshot, adding data items to 
existing data elements within a dimension such as the Regions dimension enables 
children and parent members to be added. Here, a data element such as the city 
Dallas can be added as a data child element to Texas. Similarly, a parent element  
can be added such as US States to which Texas becomes a child.

Chapter 3
[ 81 ]
In the following example, Dallas is added as a child level into the US State of Texas.
To Delete, Rename, or Duplicate a member, make the appropriate selection from the 
list as shown in the previous screenshot.
Moving members
Users can overwrite the order of elements in a dimension by using the Edit and 
Move feature in Cognos Insight to move members within a dimension, as shown  
in the following screenshot where Texas is added before Tennessee in the  
regions dimension using the drag-and-drop functionality:

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 82 ]
Adding comments
Comments are useful when doing analysis and what-if scenario planning to leave 
notes. This is particularly useful for financial analysts or anyone dealing with 
critical data. Cognos Insight has the ability to apply comments on individual cells so 
users can modify changes and write justifications for doing so as per their business 
requirements. The comments are stored and can be extracted for auditing purposes. 
A comment can be applied to a cell as shown in the following screenshot:
Additional functionality using Browse All Comments... displays all comments. 
These can also be deleted based on the user's request.
Cosmetic changes to Cognos Insight
By this point, most of the usability features of Cognos Insight have been discussed. 
The remaining features, listed as follows, will enhance the look and feel of the Cognos 
Insight workspace:
•	
Adding widgets, charts, and tabs
•	
Adding images, buttons, and themes
•	
Zero suppress and exporting data
•	
Protecting workspaces and my preferences

Chapter 3
[ 83 ]
Adding widgets, charts, and tabs
Cognos Insight has no documented limits as to how many tabs and widgets can be 
added to a workspace. However, for clarity and data digestion it is recommended 
to build dashboards that are clean and provide a concise amount of information. 
This introduces adding multiple widgets and tabs to a workspace. The following 
screenshot shows adding a new cube to the workspace as it acts as a data container 
for a new widget:
Each of the multiple widgets on a canvas have their own settings that make the 
widget unique. The following screenshot displays the list of available options:

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 84 ]
A list of available options and the description of each option is shown in the 
following table. Use the Lock Widget feature to avoid moving around the widgets 
and apply Freeze Panes when necessary.
Options
Description
Remove from Workspace 
This removes the widget from the canvas area of the 
workspace.
Lock Widget
This helps to lock the widget when ready to share 
the workspace or avoid accidentally moving around 
the widgets.
Print
This option prints widgets to a printer. A printing 
wizard asks for the items to include in each tab.
Export
This option imports the widget either to an Excel 
spreadsheet or CSV file.
Freeze Panes 
This option freezes the pane to enable scrolling 
across rows or columns without losing sight of 
critical headings.
Add tabs by selecting the add icon next to each tab on the bottom left-hand side of 
the workspace, as shown in the following screenshot:
Use multi-tab workspace files to store more data, cubes, and widgets. As the data 
resides within Cognos Insight (unless in server connected mode), the more tabs and 
cubes per workspace, the larger the files tend to be.

Chapter 3
[ 85 ]
 Adding images, buttons, and themes
Images, text items, buttons, and themes add cosmetics and usability to workspace 
files. As shown in the following screenshot, leverage the Insert menu on the toolbar 
to bring each of these items onto the canvas:
Adding text items such as dashboard title or widget/area title can be done  
and placed anywhere on the workspace canvas by double-clicking on the  
canvas area. As shown in the following screenshot, this brings up a textbox  
with formatting options:
Action buttons are very useful and can serve two purposes:
•	
It can provide a navigation technique to go from one tab to another when 
dealing with multi-tab workspaces.
•	
It can run a TM1 "TurboIntegrator" script. This script can be used  
for refreshing data for the cube or for any other purpose as set by  
the TM1 administrator.

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 86 ]
The following screenshot shows the properties of the Action button. Images can be 
used as buttons and styles can also be applied to the action button to enhance the 
look of the workspace.
Cognos Insight has pre-defined themes that give a visual appeal to the canvas and 
workspace. Custom themes can also be created based on the user's preferences that 
include logos or corporate color codes. Use Style on the menu tool bar to apply  
a predefined theme as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 87 ]
The following screenshot shows the Focus theme used on an existing workspace:
 Zero suppress and exporting data
Another feature that can be used to present clean and concise data is that of zero 
suppression. In Cognos Insight, apply this feature for each widget to suppress the 
zero values on rows or columns as shown in the following screenshot:
www.allitebooks.com

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 88 ]
A usability feature that will save a tremendous amount of time is the exporting of 
cube data to CSV files. All development efforts applied to a workspace, including 
calculations, rules, formatted cells, and more, can be sent out to a CSV file by using 
the Export to CSV feature as shown in the following screenshot. This will export the 
data to a user selected location.
 Protecting workspaces and my preferences
As described in Chapter 2, Installing IBM Cognos Insight, workspaces can be shared 
with other users of Cognos Insight. Whether sending workspaces across private/
public networks or publishing them to Cognos Business Intelligence, Cognos 
Express, or IBM TM1 environments, protecting workspace files (cdd extension) is 
always a good practice. The Actions menu on the top left-hand side corner of Cognos 
Insight provides the means to password protect workspaces, as shown in  
the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 89 ]
As a recommendation, when using Cognos Insight to publish workspaces to 
enterprise wide environments, use the My Preference menu option under Actions 
menu. As a one-time action, this will set the parameters needed to connect to 
other IBM applications such as the Cognos Business Intelligence portal, Cognos 
Express, IBM Business Viewpoint, or IBM TM1. Once the necessary parameters are 
authenticated, sharing and publishing data is defined. Some of the preferences are 
shown in the following screenshot:

Usability of IBM Cognos Insight
[ 90 ]
Summary
After installing Cognos Insight, leveraging the functions of this application will help 
in building workspaces. This chapter showed the various features within Cognos 
Insight that enable users to be self-sufficient in building and publishing workspaces 
not just to enterprise environments but to also utilize this as a self-service desktop 
application. Learning about the various flexibilities that Cognos Insight provides 
opens the field of creativity for building workspaces to analyze data to analysts and 
developers. Visualizing data in multiple orientations and creating calculations along 
with rules only adds to the usability and options for customized requirements. The 
next chapter will focus on building analysis using IBM Cognos Insight workspaces to 
spot trends, better understand data, and build analyses with rich visual content.

Strategic Decision Making 
Using IBM Cognos Insight
The previous chapter demonstrated various features and functionalities of IBM 
Cognos Insight, describing in detail how and when to use some of them. In this 
chapter, we shall utilize our new knowledge of Cognos Insight for building 
workspaces, using its features to analyze data and make decisions. Let us begin this 
chapter with a scenario where a company is looking to outsource its marketing, sales, 
and future revenue generation capabilities to a fictitious company called PointScore. 
PointScore has established itself as a research firm that helps its clients in making 
decisions, based on the actual research data and plugging in predictive intelligence 
to build case studies to justify the investments and further development.
In this situation, the client is looking to develop and launch a set of new electronic 
video games worldwide and hires PointScore to provide the business analysis 
and investment justifications. PointScore will analyze global market conditions, 
demographics, advertising strategies, consumer sentiment, customer demands, 
develop sales strategies, and create various product pricing options. By intelligently 
analyzing this data, PointScore is looking to provide a justification of the investment 
to its client to launch a new product type outside its core competency (new to the 
business). The new product type hopes to align the strategic initiatives of the client 
to match the competitive markets and provide an entry point into a market share 
that has not been pursued yet. The goal for launching this new product type will also 
be to create an excitement within the employees of the company and enhance the 
corporate image.

Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight
[ 92 ]
To accomplish these objectives, PointScore has chosen IBM Cognos Insight and 
other IBM Cognos Business Analytics suites of products to analyze the research 
and present it to their client. The in-house analysis will be performed using Cognos 
Insight by various departments such as marketing, sales, and finance. This holistic 
approach is needed to minimize the time to market the new products, provide a sales 
direction and a pricing strategy. The cross-functional teams working to accomplish 
this project will import researched data into Cognos Insight and tie up the analysis 
together. Thereafter, Cognos Insight workspaces will be delivered to the client to 
present the objectives and outcomes that PointScore was assigned with.
Analyzing marketing conditions
Marketing departments define the face of a product or organization. The definition 
of a new product, service, or company depends on surveys and strategies from 
data analysis. Marketing for new products across a global audience requires deep 
insights into the global market conditions, customer needs, customer base, field of 
competition, and product information. 
PointScore has researched this data and is now putting it together using IBM Cognos 
Insight to answer questions such as the following:
•	
How favorable are the global markets to launch the new product?
•	
What demographics make up our target customer base? 
•	
How are our competitors performing in the same market? 
•	
How can we best infiltrate the market using streamlined  
advertising strategies?
These and other marketing questions answered intelligently will prove to be critical 
in providing the go-ahead signal for the product marketing and the strategy to gain  
a market share of a new business venture.
The analysis will begin by understanding the end customer better. PointScore's R&D 
department provides a customer data spreadsheet that will act as the data source.
The following instructions will help build a Global Customer Survey analysis using 
Cognos Insight. Use the Customer.xls file provided with this book as the data 
source for this workspace. At the end of these instructions is the final output file,  
as seen in the screenshot that will follow:
1.	 Drag and drop the customers' data onto the Cognos Insight application.
2.	 Reorient the initial view of the data by dragging and dropping  
the dimensions.

Chapter 4
[ 93 ]
3.	 Replace the Customer Measures dimension by the Product Type dimension.
This view will now show the various age groups of the customers segmented 
as rows along with the three Product Types—Educational, Strategic, and 
3-D Games. The 3-D Games is the new Product Type that PointScore is 
going to study and analyze.
4.	 From the Customer Measures dimension, slice to the Sentiments element 
member. This initial observation shows a keen interest in the customer base 
for a 3D video game series. This excitement would be seen as positive news 
for PointScore's client.
5.	 Resize the widget to appear on the left-hand side of the workspace.
6.	 From the widget properties uncheck the Listen to all widgets option.  
This step makes the widget into a standalone widget.
7.	 Drag and drop the customer cube from the content pane on the right-hand 
side to the workspace.
8.	 Resize the widget to appear on the bottom of the workspace.
9.	 Replace the Customer Measures dimension by the Regions dimension.
10.	 Swap rows and columns: the Regions dimension is now a rows while Age 
Group is a column.
11.	 Stack/nest the Country dimension to the right-hand side of the  
Regions dimension.
12.	 Reorient the visual to show Count as Measure.
13.	 Display only the Chart from the Change Display icon.
14.	 Change the Chart type to show the 3D column chart.
15.	 Under Change Chart, choose the Compare Chart by Rows option  
and change Palette to Dynamic.
16.	 From the widget properties, uncheck the Listen to all widgets option.
The analysis shows a higher number of customers in the Asia-Pacific region in 
the age group of 19-27 followed by the American region. This helps in focusing 
marketing efforts towards the specific micro-segmented markets to achieve the 
targeted audience.
1.	 From the content pane, drag and drop the customer cube again and resize  
the widget.
2.	 Product Type is the row dimension while Competitor is the  
column dimension.
3.	 Slice to Revenue from the Measure dimension.

Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight
[ 94 ]
4.	 Change the Chart display type to be 3D Pie and Palette to Dynamic.
5.	 Apply a theme to the canvas with the title Global Customer Survey.
This analysis reveals that the competitive market share in the 3D video games belongs 
to ForceGT, followed by Maseotronic, while Tall Tower has its concentration towards 
Educational game types. As shown in the following screenshot, the Customer 
information is presented in a dashboard style using Cognos Insight:
Advertising cost analysis
As a derivation of marketing analysis creating micro-segmented customer bases, 
advertising to the appropriate audience with the correlated material is essential. 
The analysis followed by the marketing department leads to the business' fixed cost 
expense, that is, advertising associated with the new product, the various channels, 
and their costs. These answers will give a better insight into the product cost and 
marketing methodology.
Some of the questions answered by marketing department through advertising 
would be:
•	
How much are we spending on advertising costs?
•	
Based on past experiences and factual data, what is the trend of spending  
for all the advertising costs?
•	
What is the average spending on all the advertising costs?

Chapter 4
[ 95 ]
•	
Which method of advertising is returning more gains?
•	
How can we predict the outcome in spending costs for the new product type?
Let us apply the R&D department's researched data and utilize the spreadsheet in 
Cognos Insight as the data source, to analyze this data.
The following instructions will help build an advertising cost analysis using Cognos 
Insight. For this workspace, use the AdvertisingCost.xls spreadsheet as provided. 
At the end of these instructions is the final output file, as seen in the screenshot that 
will appear next:
1.	 Click to create a new tab in the existing Cognos Insight workspace.
2.	 Drag and drop the advertising data spreadsheet provided by the R&D 
department.
3.	  Reorient to have the Advertising Measure as the column dimension.
4.	 Swap the rows and columns.
5.	 Ctrl+click on select the Revenue and Count elements under the  
Advertising Measures.
As we are looking for the advertising costs, we can safely remove the Revenue  
and Count elements from the data analysis.
1.	 Drag Year in the column dimension to stack above Product Type.
2.	 Select Educational and Strategic members from the Product  
Type dimension.
3.	 Right-click on the selection and select Calculation to create an average of  
the two selections. This calculation will give an average of spending costs  
on advertising, based on the other two product types in the organization. 
This will be a predictive costs analysis based on historical trends followed  
by the client.
4.	 Hide any other columns or rows not required for the view. If there are other 
columns or rows that do not add value to the analysis other than what is in 
the scope, right-click on those items and select Hide.
5.	 Right-click on the newly-formed calculated column and select  
Calculate again.
6.	 From the given options select Average * Number.
7.	 Select 1.4 as the number to calculate. The 1.4 value suggests that the 
advertising costs across the board will be about 1.4 times the cost of 
the average spent for other product types per year. This details out the 
advertising expense costs by method.

Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight
[ 96 ]
8.	 Rename the new column to 3D Games.
9.	 Hide the First Average Calculated column. This will keep the data view 
clean and concise. The idea is to get the fastest answers at a quick glance.
10.	 Right-click on the Product Type dimension and sort values by the 
descending method.
11.	 Add a title at the top of the workspace.
12.	 Add a text description with a summary of the analysis.
13.	 Lock all the widgets.
The following screenshot shows the advertising costs over the last two years. It also 
predicts the advertising costs related to the new product, based on the historical 
trends with respect to the other product types. Based on the visual dashboard, the 
overall advertising costs dropped compared to the previous year, but the write-back 
calculations suggest that the new product type will require slightly more investments.
 
Product cost-benefit analysis
Given the financial investments poured into the R&D of a new product type 
development, PointScore has acquired financials of its client's other product types 
over the last two years. The intention is to leverage this data and the analytical 
capabilities of Cognos Insight to develop a fact-based probable revenue generation  
of the new product type—3D Games.

Chapter 4
[ 97 ]
The result from this analysis will shed some light on the cost and benefits of 
launching this new product type into a mature market. Given the risks involved 
financially and the client's reputation at stake, a high level analysis followed by 
a detailed financial analysis of the clients sensitive data is performed to calculate 
product profitability. PointScore has been provided with a spreadsheet from the 
client's finance department, which has been passed on to PointScore's marketing 
head for further product analysis.
The following instructions will help build a Predictive Revenue analysis using 
Cognos Insight. Use the Products.xls spreadsheet as the data source to build  
this workspace. At the end of these instructions is the final output file as seen in  
the next screenshot:
1.	 Create a new tab and rename it to Product Analysis.
2.	 Drag and drop the Products spreadsheet file onto the worksheet.
3.	 With Product Type in the rows dimension, stack the Year dimension to 
the Product Sales Measure dimension. This measure dimension contains 
elements such as Revenue and Production Cost.
Next, a calculation needs to be added to calculate the ratio between the Revenue and 
Production Cost. An average of this ratio type can be used to predict the Revenue to 
be generated by the new product type.
1.	 Ctrl+click Revenue and Production Cost and right-click to  
select Calculation.
2.	 Create a calculation to find ratio of Revenue/Production Cost.  
A new calculated column is added to the analysis.
3.	 Select the row elements for Education and Strategic, right-click and  
select Calculate.
4.	 Create an average of the two selections.
A new row is added to the analysis. The intersection shows an average value of 
1.206. This number is critical for the business analysis and is going to be used to 
determine future product revenue capabilities.
1.	 Resize the widget.
2.	 Insert a blank Crosstab into the current workspace.
3.	 Move this new widget to the right-hand side of the page.
4.	 Rename the new element row member to 3D Gaming.

Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight
[ 98 ]
5.	 Rename the new element column member to 2013.
6.	 Right-click on the 2013 member and select Insert Child.
7.	 Rename this column to Production Cost.
8.	 Type in the value of 4500.
This is a confidential value that has been provided by the client. This is a 
range of the Production Cost for the new product—3D gaming.
9.	 Right-click on the Production Cost column and create a calculation.
10.	 The new calculation should be a multiplication between Production Cost  
for 2013 and 1.206.
11.	 Swap the rows and columns.
12.	 Change the chart type to be a 3D bar chart and an Active Palette.
13.	 Add a Title Text to the workspace.
14.	 Lock all the widgets.
As shown in the following screenshot, this analysis has quickly provided predictive 
revenue figures for the new product development. This revenue number is higher 
than the client's other two product types and is considered as a reinforcing go-ahead 
signal to be relayed to the client.

Chapter 4
[ 99 ]
Global market conditions
With product, customer, and advertising costs defined and analyzed, PointScore 
researches Global Market trends to streamline strategic sales and marketing 
opportunities. This approach will provide the confidence and focus on markets 
where higher chances of sales with the launch of a new product exist. This high risk 
phase needs analysis, which will be performed using Cognos Insight to determine 
a priority of investments based on the analysis feedback and provide insight to 
maximize high returns in the first few weeks since the launch date.
The two measures used in this analysis are Consumer Price Index (CPI), which 
measures the consumer confidence and the Retail Sales, which is used to analyze 
revenue from sales. Both of these measures will provide insight into the global trends 
among these regions and help in making better business decisions to favor  
the launch of the new products.
The following instructions will help build a Global Market Conditions analysis using 
Cognos Insight. Use the GMC.xls spreadsheet as the data source required to build 
the workspace. At the end of these instructions is the final output file as seen in the 
screenshot that will follow:
1.	 Create a new tab in the existing workspace and rename it to Global Markets.
2.	 Drag and drop the GMC researched spreadsheet file onto the new tab area.
3.	 Regions should represent the rows dimension and Year should represent the 
column dimension in the analysis.
4.	 Right-click on Total of Year and Sort by Ascending (Sort by Label).
5.	 From the Measure Dimension, slice to select either CPI or Retail Sales.
6.	 Change the display chart to Line chart.
7.	 Resize the widget.
8.	 Drag and drop the Regions dimension to create an Explorer Point (filter).
9.	 Lock the widgets.
10.	 Add a Title Text Item.
11.	 Add a text summarizing the analysis.

Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight
[ 100 ]
As seen in the following screenshot, the analysis reveals that retail sales have fallen 
in Central Europe over the last 10 years and so has the consumer confidence. At the 
same time the American region has had an increase over the last 10 years. However, 
the increase is not as fast as the Asia-Pacific region. 
The Asia-Pacific region shows the highest retail sales and consumer confidence 
that leads to believe  new products in this emerging market would pay off higher 
dividends than other regions. Hence to leverage this situation and maximize the 
regions' potential, it might be a good approach to launch the product in Asia prior  
to Central Europe.
With this, the marketing analysis has been completed. The analysis has revealed 
information about customer, product, advertising, and global markets—all the 
necessary domains when considering launching a new product.
Save this file as Marketing Analysis. The file or Cognos Insight workspace will have 
the extension .cdd and will contain all the TM1 cubes and the data used to build this 
analysis. This analysis can now be viewed offline as all the data resides on this file.
Measuring sales performance
To understand the revenue generation better, it is important to focus on sales.  
Better insight into the sales figures and an analysis on sales performance can enhance 
revenue streams for the company. Deeper sales analysis can enable companies to 
realize demand and plan supply.

Chapter 4
[ 101 ]
PointScore is looking into the sales figures to find trends and better estimate sales by 
employees or "sales reps", and view sales by territory. This kind of analysis is done 
with the intention of using the historical data to plan for the future product release.
PointScore has obtained data from a similar situation from the year 2010, when its 
client launched another product type. Analyzing this data should answer questions 
such as the following:
•	
How are our employees performing?
•	
What are the sales reps' bonus structures and how is it affecting  
the performance?
•	
How are we performing across global territories?
•	
Which are the best sales quarters and why?
•	
How can we improve the sales pipeline and reduce returns?
•	
How many new customers are we selling to and how much revenue did our 
existing customers generate?
These and other questions can be answered with data analysis. PointScore is going  
to leverage Cognos Insight to answer these and other sales related questions for  
their client.
The following instructions will help build a sales performance by Employee 
and Region analysis using Cognos Insight. For this workspace, use the 
ForSalesAnalysis.xls spreadsheet as the data source. At the end of these 
instructions is the final output file as seen in the screenshot that will follow:
1.	 Drag and drop the Sales Analysis spreadsheet onto Cognos Insight.
2.	 Reorient the crosstab to show Country dimension in rows and Sales 
Measures in columns.
3.	 Create a Variance calculation between the Actual and Target columns.
4.	 Rename this column to Variance. This calculation will reveal the  
difference between the given target, based on budgets and growth,  
and the actual targets.
5.	 Ctrl+click the Actual and Target columns, right-click on Compare Values. 
Cognos Insight creates scorecard indicators based on data difference. This 
indicator is a visual to the Variance column and provides an 'at-a-glance' 
option into data. Predefined values set the three indicators based on the 
values Excellent, Average, and Poor performance.

Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight
[ 102 ]
6.	 Sort on Variance column by Value in the ascending order. The initial 
analysis shows Australia and France as the worst performing regions  
for the given year 2010, while China and Canada were the top performing 
territories.
7.	 Reorient the data to show the Country dimension as the row and Territory  
as the column.
8.	 Change the display type to Chart only.
9.	 Slice the Measures Dimension to the Variance data element. This analysis 
visually displays the sales performance of the territories and at-a-glance 
displays the top performers and bottom performers.
10.	 Resize the widget.
11.	 From the Content pane, drag the Sales cube onto the canvas.
12.	 Reorient to show the Sales Rep dimension as rows and Measures as column.
Sorting Variance columns in ascending order
To apply our focus on the lower performers, only show the rows of data that are the 
low five performers. The following are the steps to do this:
1.	 Select all the rows after Jane Russell, right-click, and select Hide.
2.	 Right-click on the Actuals column and select Calculation.
3.	 Select the option to multiply Actuals with 0.05.
4.	 Create another calculation column to calculate a second bonus scenario based 
on 7.5 percent of Actuals.
5.	 Drag the Country dimension from the Content pane onto the canvas as an 
Explorer Point (filter).
6.	 Add a title to the page.
7.	 Lock all the widgets.
As seen in the following screenshot, the crosstab shows two scenarios of bonus 
figures for 7.5 percent and 5 percent. As the data focuses on sales reps who have 
not been up to the mark from the last time new products were developed, these two 
scenarios will be presented to the client as a sales bonus incentive. These incentives 
could be used to reward sales reps and by discussing their bonus rates could attract 
higher sales volume, thereby increasing sales for the region and the company.

Chapter 4
[ 103 ]
The following instructions will help build a Sales Variance analysis using Cognos 
Insight. For this analysis, leverage the sales cube from the earlier workspace. At the 
end of these instructions is the final output file as seen in the screenshot that will 
appear next:
1.	 Create a new tab and rename it to Monthly Sales by Variance.
2.	 Drag and drop the existing Sales cube from the content pane and resize  
the widget.
3.	 Reorient the data to show Sales Performance Measures as rows.
4.	 Show the Month dimension as columns.
5.	 Hide the Quarterly results from the columns.
6.	 In the rows, keep only Actuals, Target, Actual-Target, and Compare Actuals 
vs. Target.
7.	 Add an appropriate title to the page.
8.	 Lock all the widgets.
As seen in the following screenshot, the analysis reveals monthly sales figures for 
all the regions, by all employees, on a monthly basis. Taking into consideration an 
overall analysis, this shows that there was a considerable drop in Variance in the 
month of November and December. 

Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight
[ 104 ]
Comparing these numbers to global economic conditions and being in a similar 
situation of new product development, this analysis is alarming for the 3D gaming 
product type. Sales executives would plan this as an opportunity and drive sales 
strategies, based on the poor performance in Q4, and analyze Q2 and Q3 as higher 
revenue quarters.
Sales analysis leads to many questions that may change strategy across 
organizations. Scenarios such as the cost of products being too high, might have an 
impact on the sales, or poor sales performance can be improved by incentivizing 
employees with higher benefits to "push" for more sales, especially on new products.
Cognos Insight has proven to point out the "pain points" faced during a similar 
situation in 2010, which it has captured and analyzed to come up with results.  
These results will be presented to the client to enable faster decision making  
using rich visual dashboards.
Finance and price strategy
In Chapter 1, The New-age Analytics and IBM Cognos Insight, we learned how companies 
that do not leverage analytics and go with their gut feelings instead do not tend 
to make it as top performers in the industry. In some cases, even today, planning 
and decision-making takes place without factual data analysis. IBM Cognos Insight 
provides scenario planning capabilities as one of its features that enable planning 
and forecasting. This technique creates alternate business scenarios to better prepare 
organizations in solving business-related queries across all the domains.

Chapter 4
[ 105 ]
PointScore is going to leverage this technique in addressing a pricing strategy for the 
new products being introduced in a market that is not new to its client's competitors. 
Given the situational awareness, three pricing strategy types have been carefully 
chosen and are going to be analyzed further using Cognos Insight. The pricing 
options' objectives are to deliver breakthrough impact into the market, maintain 
estimated revenue (from previous analysis), and continue upward profit generation 
over the lifetime of the products. Advanced analysis using Cognos Insight should 
help achieve these goals. 
The selected pricing methods are as follows:
•	
Penetration pricing: As the name suggests, this pricing technique is used for 
entering a new market and has been selected as one of the options given the 
launch of new product types
•	
Cost plus pricing: This method is used to maximize profits and is calculated 
by increasing production until marginal revenue matches marginal costs 
further determined by the demand
•	
Market-oriented pricing: This pricing option uses prior research efforts 
to price products, based on consumer feedback, market trends, and other 
variables that drive the business domain
Financial analysis and pricing strategy should answer some of the following 
questions and others such as the following:
•	
Which price model will best suite this product and our organization?
•	
What should the selling price be based upon competition and consumer 
spending capacity?
•	
Will the product be profitable when developed and marketed to  
the customer?
•	
What will be the estimated growth rate with a new product?
•	
How will the product be produced most cost effectively?
PointScore R&D department has researched an average amount of $50.00 per 
product to be the market retail price of similar products from competitors.  
We will use this amount to further our analysis.
The following instructions will help build a Product Pricing analysis using  
Cognos Insight. At the end of these instructions is the final output file as seen  
in the next screenshot:
1.	 Double-click on Cognos Insight to start a new workspace.
2.	 Create a new Crosstab from the Insert menu.

Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos Insight
[ 106 ]
3.	 Rename the dimension A to Product Type.
4.	 Add a data element called 3-D Gaming.
5.	 Rename dimension B to PS Measures with elements Production Cost 
and Revenue.
6.	 Create a new dimension called Pricing Strategy with elements 
Penetrating Price, Cost Plus Price, and Market-Oriented Price.
7.	 Right-click on Revenue and Production Cost, and select Calculate.
8.	 Create a calculation to show Profit Revenue-Production Cost.
From the outcome of the marketing analysis, PointScore was able to determine the 
production cost for the new products to be at $450 million. Its revenue is predicted  
to be $540 million. 
Hence the analysis reveals that the profit should amount to $90 million.
1.	 Create a new Calculation that divides Production Cost by $50.
2.	 Rename this calculation to be Number of Units. This calculation reveals 90 
million units have to be sold to generate the numbers from the marketing 
research and analysis.
3.	 Resize the widget.
4.	 Drag and drop the existing cube to create a new cube.
5.	 Reorient the crosstab to show the Pricing Strategy dimension as rows and PS 
Measures as columns.
6.	 Right-click on the columns to create a new column called Price  
per Unit.
7.	 Right-click on the cell values of both Production Cost and Revenue. This will 
hold the costs and allow for the what-if scenario. This will help us determine 
the number of copies to be sold or calculate the pricing options per price 
strategy method type.
8.	 Create a new calculation by dividing the Production Cost by Price per  
Unit. Apply values to the empty cells to adjust the what-if situation  
in calculating the number of units needed to be sold.
9.	 Add an appropriate text title.
10.	 Add descriptive text items next to each crosstab.
11.	 Lock all the widgets.
As seen in the following screenshot, the three pricing options display the number  
of units to sell in order to maintain the profits generated from the market research  
by PointScore.

Chapter 4
[ 107 ]
Summary
This chapter used the OLAP concepts and features of IBM Cognos Insight from 
the previous chapters to create business scenarios for marketing, sales, and finance 
departments. Building multiple workspaces for different departments shows the 
flexibility of Cognos Insight to build the dashboard style analysis quickly and 
effectively. Much more can be derived from the analysis performed by PointScore  
for its clients and further analyses are left for the readers imagination and  
business experience.
Building the various workspaces, the analysis revealed that the selling strategy from 
economic conditions, regions, and other customer demographics. Advertising costs 
and the effect on the revenue of the new products were displayed using just a few 
dashboards, built in minutes. Finally, a pricing strategy from three different options 
were presented to PointScore's client, which will be utilized to promote and develop 
the new products. The new products are to be targeted towards their existing and 
new customer base.
The next and the final chapter is going to take the analyses from Cognos Insight 
and present it using Cognos Business Intelligence. Chapter 5, Enterprise Collaboration 
will focus on sharing the Cognos Insight workspaces with larger user  groups by 
publishing the analysis into IBM Cognos Business Intelligence. The collaborated 
analysis will then tie in all departments together to maximize productivity and 
display the same data across the entire organization. 


Enterprise Collaboration
In Chapter 1, The New-age Analytics and IBM Cognos Insight, we learned the importance 
of collaborative efforts in analytics for modern business. In 2012, a global study 
was conducted jointly by IBM's Institute of Business Value (IBV) and MIT Sloan 
Management Review. This study, which included 1700 CEOs globally, reinforced  
the fact that one of the top objectives within their organizations was sharing  
and collaboration. 
IBM Cognos Insight, the desktop analysis application, provides collaborative features 
that allow the users to launch development efforts via IBMs Cognos Business 
Intelligence, Cognos Express, and Performance Management enterprise platforms. 
We shall visit these as a part of the case study from Chapter 4, Strategic Decision 
Making Using IBM Cognos Insight, by the fictitious company called PointScore.
Having completed its marketing, sales, and price strategy analysis, PointScore is  
now ready to demonstrate its research and analysis efforts to its client. Using IBM 
Cognos Insight, PointScore has three available options. All of these will leverage  
the Cognos Suite of products that its client has been using and is familiar with. Each  
of these options can be used to share the information with a larger audience within 
the organization. 

Enterprise Collaboration
[ 110 ]
Launching workspace files to clients
The following are the three options available for PointScore, as they take Cognos 
Insight workspace files and launch it to their clients Cognos environment. These 
options are available in Cognos Insight under the Actions menu.
•	
Share: Navigate to Actions | Share, as shown in the following screenshot. 
This method will publish the Cognos Insight workspaces directly into 
Cognos Business Intelligence. Follow the wizard to share the workspace. 
The next image shows the wizard in the process of sharing the workspace 
files. Use this window to input the Cognos BI URL, login credentials, and the 
location to publish Cognos Insight:

Chapter 5
[ 111 ]
This will take each of the Cognos Insight workspaces and deploy them as is 
using the wizard into the Cognos Business Intelligence web portal, Cognos 
Connection. Each Cognos Insight workspace (.cdd file) will be placed in the 
Cognos Connection portal location specified in the wizard, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Enterprise Collaboration
[ 112 ]
These individual workspaces can now be accessed by anyone that has  
the appropriate access permissions to download and view the Cognos  
Insight workspaces. 
For those users who do not have IBM Cognos Insight installed on their local 
computers, a provision install follows when the users click on the Cognos 
Insight workspace in Cognos Connection. Users can then download the CDD 
files on their local computers. 
•	
Publish: This option will publish Cognos Insight workspaces to the IBM 
Cognos Application portal. The data belonging to each workspace is stored 
on an IBM TM1 server to which Cognos Insight connects. This setup can be 
used to govern and provide access security to the workspaces. This typically 
should be governed by the IT departments as a centralized hub for all the 
Cognos Insight workspaces that will be published to the enterprise servers.
As shown in the following screenshot, under the Action menu, click  
on Publish. 
 

Chapter 5
[ 113 ]
This is followed by a window displaying the Publish and Publish and 
Distribute options, as seen in the following screenshot:
The Publish option requires a link to the IBM TM1 server. Follow the 
instructions in the wizard to publish the Cognos Insight file into the Cognos 
Application portal. 
In the Publish wizard, as seen in the following screenshot, select an option 
for the Use a dimension to control access to data field. This selection will 
centralize security, based on the items specified in the dimension. In this  
case, customer data elements in the Customer dimension will drive the 
security specifications.

Enterprise Collaboration
[ 114 ]
If unchecked, a central application type will be created, which is typically 
shared by a smaller group of users who share the tasks of planning and  
data analysis. 
As seen in the following image, a new application is created for each of the 
Cognos Insight workspaces that have successfully been published to the 
Cognos Application Portal:

Chapter 5
[ 115 ]
By clicking on each application, user permissions and the amount of data 
they can view or contribute to in their plans can be controlled, as seen in the 
following screenshot:
The Publish option provides a centralized approach, where administrative 
governance can be applied by the responsible departments or employees. 
Secured data resides on the TM1 server to keep a controlled access on the 
users contributing to the enterprise server. In the disconnected mode, the 
users can continue to contribute to their plans and sync up data changes to 
the centralized server, once back online.
•	
Publish and Distribute: The Publish and Distribute option converts the 
Cognos Insight workspaces into Cognos BI reports. Using the wizard, input the 
TM1 server information and Cognos BI web portal information. A data source 
is created in Cognos Connection and a Cognos package is published into 
the desired location. This package contains Cognos BI reports, created from 
Cognos Insight widgets that can be accessed using Cognos reporting studios.
As seen in the following screenshot, the Financial Analysis Cognos  
Insight workspace has been published into the Cognos BI and IBM  
TM1 environments:

Enterprise Collaboration
[ 116 ]
The summary page in the wizard verifies the creation of the following items:
°°
A new TM1 server
°°
A new application in the Cognos Application portal
°°
A new Cognos BI package
°°
A new Cognos BI data source
°°
New Report Studio reports for each widget on the Cognos  
Insight workspace
To verify if the Publish and Distribute created these objects, begin 
by looking into Cognos Connection. The following image shows the 
Administration Studio and the newly-created data source connection:
Next, the Cognos package will exist in the Public Folders, as seen in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 117 ]
Click on the Finance Package option. This will display the newly-created 
Cognos Report Studio reports. This is a huge advantage in using Cognos 
Insight and the Publish and Distribute mode—the widgets within the 
Cognos Insight workspaces are converted into reports in Cognos BI, as seen 
in the following screenshot:
Leveraging IBM Cognos Insight 
collaboration and sharing
PointScore decides to use the third option—Publish and Distribute—to share its 
analysis with the client leveraging their existing Cognos BI and TM1 environments. 
PointScore uses the Publish and Distribute wizard to input their client's web links for 
both, TM1 and Cognos BI. The data and reports now reside in the client's environment.
PointScore is going to provide a demonstration to its clients on its findings, using 
Cognos Business Insight (renamed to Cognos Workspace in BI version 10.2). This 
web studio makes building dashboards easier for the business user by dragging and 
dropping the existing BI content onto a canvas. 

Enterprise Collaboration
[ 118 ]
As seen in the following screenshot, Cognos Insight dashboards have seamlessly 
been integrated with the company's existing BI content, and a quick dashboard for 
business users has been created in Cognos Business Insight.
Now that the Cognos Insight data files have been published into the Cognos BI 
system, the client can now perform their own analysis. This newly-imported data 
asset can be worked on as a collaborative effort. Department heads assign plans or 
segments of plans to analysts and contributors to allow the what-if analysis. These 
plans are then submitted for approvals, and are either accepted or rejected. When 
changes are accepted and saved to the TM1 server, a lockdown takes place until the 
particular plan is rejected. There are two types of collaboration methods, which are 
as follows: 

Chapter 5
[ 119 ]
•	
Distributed mode: As the name suggests, distributed mode is used when the 
user base contributing to plans is large. Ownership of plans or portions of 
plans are allowed only at the lowest level (leaf level). As there are numerous 
resources working on portions of the same plan, an unlimited number of 
data changes can be made. This is because they are stored on local machines, 
until those changes are committed to and submitted. Thereafter, the changes 
are sent to the TM1 server from where the entire user base can view the 
newly-updated plans.
•	
Connected mode: For the situations where the data is updated frequently 
and the size of the data is very large, the connected mode is preferred. Data 
is saved directly to the server and not locally; but the ownership can be taken 
from any level.
From researching and performing in-house analysis using IBM Cognos Insight, 
PointScore leveraged its client's IBM Business Analytics applications to seamlessly 
publish Cognos Insight to an enterprise level Business Intelligence environment.  
This methodology minimized the re-work efforts, reduced development periods,  
and combined the functionalities of these applications so that the client could share 
and collaborate data to a larger audience. The client also uses Motio CI's capabilities 
as a version control, stress test and impact analysis product. This impressive product 
integrates into Cognos BI and enhances the clients environment.
This newly published data can also be consumed using Cognos BI Mobile, which 
provides a rich, interactive, and intuitive experience on mobile devices such as 
smart phones and tablets. Users of IBM Cognos Mobile technology can benefit from 
features such as prompt selections, drilling up and down, and cell highlights to use 
their Cognos reports and dashboards to answer business-related questions on the go.

Enterprise Collaboration
[ 120 ]
Summary
This chapter discussed the various methods of publishing Cognos Insight into Cognos 
BI and TM1 products. The sharing and collaboration functionality within Cognos 
Insight puts tremendous power into the desktop application. Be it contributing to 
offline/online plans or consuming BI reports via mobile technology, Cognos  
Insight—collaborated with larger audiences using menu-driven options—quickly 
turned desktop analysis into enterprise-wide collaborative efforts. 
Though technical, this book is written for a non-technical audience as well. IBM 
Cognos Insight is a product that has its roots embedded in Business Intelligence and 
its foundation is built upon Performance Management solutions. This book provides 
the readers with Business Analytics techniques and discusses the technical aspects of 
the product, describing its features and benefits.
The goal of writing this book was to make you feel confident about the product and 
to use the book as a reference guide. As Chapter 3, Usability of Cognos Insight provides 
screenshots of every feature, Chapter 4, Strategic Decision Making Using IBM Cognos 
Insight, is meant to expand on your creativity and broaden the scope of your vision to 
align with each individual's experiences and business background, so that the reader 
can build better analysis and workspaces using Cognos Insight.
The final chapter focuses on the strengths of the product, which is to share and 
collaborate the development efforts into an existing IBM Cognos BI, Cognos Express, 
or TM1 environment. This sharing is possible because of the tight integration among 
all the products under the IBM Business Analytics umbrella.
After reading this book, you should be able to tackle Business Analytics 
implementations from a bottom-up and a cross-functional approach and leverage the 
sharing capability to reach an end goal of spreading the value of Business Analytics 
throughout their organizations.

References
The following sources will be quite valuable to you:
•	
www.ibm.com (IBM Software | Products | Business Analytics)
•	
IBM IBV Analytics: The new path to value
•	
IBM Journal of Research and Development Vol 2 Number 4, Oct 1958
•	
IBM 2011 Tech Trends Report
•	
www.wimbledon.com (IBM Slamtracker)
•	
Business Intelligence Strategy: A Practical Guide for Achieving BI Excellence, John 
Boyer, Bill Frank, Brian Green, Tracy Harris, and Kay Van De Vanter, MC Press 
Online, LLC
•	
The Performance Manager: Proven Strategies for Turning Information into Higher 
Business Performance, Roland Mosimann, Patrick Mosimann, and  
Meg Dussault, Cognos Press
•	
Wikipedia – Pricing Strategy (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pricing_
strategies)
•	
Performance Dashboards and Analysis for Value Creation, Jack Alexander,  
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
•	
www.analyticszone.com
•	
IBM Cognos Insight User Guide
•	
IBM Cognos Insight Supported Environments (http://www-01.ibm.com/
support/docview.wss?uid=swg27025127)


Index
A
Actions menu
about  110
Finance Package option  117
Publish  112, 113
Publish and Distribute option  115, 116
Publish and Distribute options  113
Publish wizard  113, 114
Share  110, 111
Analytics Center of Excellence (ACE)  18
Analytics Competency Center (ACC)  18
Analytics, IBM Cognos Insight
advanced analytics  10
predictive and risk analytics  10
reporting  10
score carding  10
visual dashboards  10
Applix  10
Autorun.inf file  27
B
building blocks, Business Analytics
about  9
Business Intelligence (BI)  9, 13
Performance Management  9, 14
Predictive Analytics  9, 15
Risk Management  9, 16, 17
Business Analytics
about  8
building blocks  9, 13
using  18
using successfully  17, 18
Business Intelligence (BI)  9-14
C
charting options  62
Cognos BI Environment
IBM Cognos Insight, installing on  34, 35
Cognos Connection  111
Cognos Insight dashboards  118
CognosInsight.msi file  35
Cognos Workspace  117
collaboration methods
about  118
connected mode  119
distributed mode  119
connected mode  119
cosmetic changes
about  82
buttons, adding  85
charts, adding  83
data, exporting  87
images, adding  85
My Preference menu  89
tabs, adding  84
themes, adding  86
widgets, adding  83
workspaces, protecting  88
zero suppression  87
cost plus pricing  105
customized or complex calculations
creating  67
D
data import, Cognos Insight
about  44
Data Refresh method  55, 56

[ 124 ]
drag and drop (Quick Import method)  44, 
45
Import Wizard method  46- 49
data reconstructing
about  72, 73
comments, adding  82
cubes, adding  77
data spreading  76
dimensions, adding  78, 80
members, adding  79
members, moving  81
parents and children members, adding  80, 
81
Write-backs  73-76
Data Refresh method  55
data reorienting
about  56
charting options  62
dimensional data, sorting  59
dimensions, grouping  72
drag and drop dimensions  56
methods, formatting  71
nesting dimensions  58
rows and columns, swapping  60, 61
rules, writing  70
slice and dice title dimensions  57
types of calculations  65-69
values/explorer points, filtering  63-65
data sources
file  47
IBM Cognos Package Data  47
IBM Cognos Report Data  47
Relational Data Source (ODBC)  47
dimensional data
sorting  59
drag and drop dimensions  56
drag and drop (Quick Import method)  44, 
45
E
example, IBM Cognos Insight
about  11
dashboard and scorecard style reports, 
viewing  12
data analysis process  12
spreadsheet, dropping  12
F
financial analysis and pricing strategy   
105, 106
Financial Performance Management (FPM)  
14
G
global market conditions
about  99
financial analysis and pricing strategy   
104-106
sales performance, measuring  100, 101
grouping dimensions  72
I
IBM Cognos BI web-portal  12
IBM Cognos Connection installer
server environments  23, 24
IBM Cognos Insight
about  7, 21
Analytics  10
collaboration and sharing, leveraging  117, 
119
connecting, to Cognos BI  37-40
connecting, to IBM TM1 Environments  
37-40
data, importing  44
data, reconstructing  72
data, reorienting  56
downloading, options  24-26
example  11
features  10, 11, 82
installing, on existing Cognos BI Environ-
ment  34, 35
options, for PointScore  110
system requisites  22-24
uninstalling  36, 37
usability  43
IBM Cognos Insight Standard Edition
installing, steps  27-34
IBM TM1  10
IBM TM1 environment
about  12
IBM Cognos Insight, connecting to  37-40

[ 125 ]
Import Wizard method  46-54
installing
IBM Cognos Insight, on Cognos BI  
Environment  34, 35
IBM Cognos Insight Standard Edition  27-34
Institute for Business Value (IBV)
about  8
Analytics  7
Business Analytics  8
K
Key Performance Indicators (KPI), financial 
growth  14
M
market conditions analysis
about  92, 94
cost analysis, advertising  94, 95
product cost-benefit analysis  96, 97
marketing conditions
analyzing, Cognos Insight used  92
market-oriented pricing  105
methods
formatting  71
N
National Basketball Association (NBA)  17
National Football League (NFL)  17
National Hockey League (NHL)  17
nesting dimensions  58
O
Online Analytical Processing (OLAP)  12
P
penetration pricing  105
Performance Management  9, 14, 15
methodologies  14
PointScore
about  91, 109
options  110
workspace files, launching to clients   
110-112
Predictive Analytics  9, 15
pricing methods
about  105
cost plus pricing  105
market-oriented pricing  105
penetration pricing  105
Q
Quick Import method  45
R
Return on Investment (ROI)  18
Returns On Invested Capital (ROIC)  8
Risk Management  9, 16, 17
rows and columns
swapping  60, 61
rules
writing  70
S
sales performance
measuring  101
Variance column, sorting in ascending 
order  102-104
server environments, IBM Cognos  
Connection installer  23, 24
slice and dice title dimensions  57
Sports Analytics  16
system requisites, IBM Cognos Insight
data sources  23
operating systems  22
server environments  22
T
types of calculations
about  65-67
additions  65
complex calculations  65
divisions  65
multiplications  65
simple calculations  65
subtractions  65

[ 126 ]
W
workspace files
launching, to clients  110
U
uninstalling
IBM Cognos Insight  36, 37
V
values/explorer points
filtering  63-65

 
Thank you for buying  
IBM Cognos Insight
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give 
you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get 
the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in 
the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving 
you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For more 
information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home to 
books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including (but 
not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles will offer 
information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, developers, 
architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like 
to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning 
editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

IBM Cognos 10 Business 
Intelligence
ISBN: 978-1-84968-356-2             Paperback: 450 pages
A practical approach to all things IBM Cognos 10 
Business Intelligence.
1.	
Learn how to better administer your IBM 
Cognos 10 environment in order to improve 
productivity and efficiency.
2.	
Empower your business with the latest 
Business Intelligence (BI) tools.
3.	
Discover advanced tools and knowledge that 
can greatly improve daily tasks and analysis.
4.	
Explore the new interfaces of IBM Cognos 10.
IBM Cognos Business 
Intelligence 10.1 Dashboarding 
Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-582-5             Paperback: 206 pages
Working with dashboards in IBM Cognos BI 10.1 
Design, distribute, and collaborate
1.	
Exploring and interacting with IBM Cognos 
Business Insight and Business Insight 
Advanced
2.	
Creating dashboards in IBM Cognos Business 
Insight and Business Insight Advanced
3.	
Sharing and Collaborating on Dashboards 
using portlets
4.	
Best practices related to Dashboards in Cognos 
10.1
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

IBM Cognos 8 Planning
ISBN: 978-1-84719-684-2             Paperback: 424 pages
A practical guide to developing and deploying 
planning models for your enterprise
1.	
Build and deploy effective planning models 
using Cognos 8 Planning
2.	
Filled with ideas and techniques for designing 
planning models
3.	
Ample screenshots and clear explanations to 
facilitate learning
4.	
Written for first-time developers focusing on 
what is important to the beginner
IBM Cognos TM1 Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-210-7            Paperback: 490  pages
Build real world planning, budgeting, and forecasting 
solutions with a collection of over 60 simple but 
incredibly effective recipes
1.	
A comprehensive developer’s guide for 
planning, building, and managing practical 
applications with IBM TM1
2.	
No prior knowledge of TM1 expected
3.	
Complete coverage of all the important aspects 
of IBM TM1 in carefully planned step-by-step 
practical demos
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles


