www.allitebooks.com

IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5 for 
Domino Administration 
Ensure effective and efficient team collaboration by 
building a solid social infrastructure with IBM Lotus 
Quickr 8.5
Keith Brooks
David Byrd
Mark Harper
Olusola Omosaiye
N
professional expertise distilled
www.allitebooks.com

IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5 for Domino Administration
Copyright © 2011 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: January 2011
Production Reference: 1110111
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
32 Lincoln Road 
Olton 
Birmingham, B27 6PA, UK.
ISBN 978-1-849680-52-3
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by David Guettirrez (bilbaorocker@yahoo.co.uk)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Authors
Keith Brooks
David Byrd
Mark Harper
Olusola Omosaiye
Reviewers
Alex Kassabov
Dennis van Remortel
Acquisition Editor
Dhwani Devater
Development Editor
Hyacintha D'Souza
Technical Editor
Sakina Kaydawala
Indexer
Rekha Nair
Editorial Team Leader
Mithun Sehgal
Project Team Leader
Lata Basantani
Project Coordinator
Vishal Bodwani
Proofreader
Lindsey Thomas
Graphics
Geetanjali Sawant
Production Coordinator 
Arvindkumar Gupta
Cover Work
Arvindkumar Gupta
www.allitebooks.com

About the Authors
Keith Brooks is currently the Director of Services, IBM Solutions, for the SAS 
Group which is a Lotus Leadership Alliance member. Keith previously worked 
for the Office of the CTO in EMEA, as a Lotus Specialist for Lotus and IBM. Keith 
has been working with QuickPlace, since it was in beta and with Lotus Notes since 
Release 2. Keith has written articles for The View magazine, as well as presenting  
at The View Admin conference, Lotusphere, MWLUG, and industry events  
from Nokia, Microsoft, and Research in Motion. Keith's blog can be found at  
http://lotustech.blogspot.com.
I would like to thank my co-authors, Packt Publishing, and my 
editors, especially Alex for all their help and comments. Also thanks 
to Duffbert for his encouragement. Lastly, my apologies and thanks 
to my wife Vanessa for so many evenings of not going out and 
letting me write. And for my Noffiya, Elnadav, and Shalhevet, I love 
you all and hope you grow to write your own books.
www.allitebooks.com

David Byrd is an IBM Senior Certified Executive IT Architect with IBM Software 
Services for Lotus, based in Fayetteville, Georgia. He has been an IBM/Lotus 
employee for 12 years in a number of consulting positions, covering various 
technology areas. David has a deep background in virtually all areas of Lotus 
products and technologies covering areas ranging from low-level API development, 
to collaborative application architectures, security architectures, and messaging 
architectures. His current focus is on IBM's Social Software technologies, as well 
as other collaboration products and their associated deployment within enterprise 
customers. He has worked with Lotus Notes and Domino for over 17 years. David 
has authored several books and technical articles during his tenure with IBM.
I would like to thank many people for their support in the creation of 
this book. 
 
Firstly, I would like to thank my wife and children for their continual 
love and support of my endeavors.  
 
Thank you to Packt Publishing for providing me with the 
opportunity to once again be an author. Additionally, thank you to 
the co-authors for this book of deciding to take the ride as first time 
authors and get this content out to the masses.  
 
Another group of people that I would like to show my gratitude  
to are a set of co-workers who have been influential in the many 
areas covered in this book: Mustansir "Miki" Banatwala, Jonathan F 
Brunn, Steve Hardison, Mark Harper, Chris Heltzel, David Kajmo,  
Greg Melahn, Marc Pagnier, Thomas Schaeck, Tim Speed, and  
Amy Widmer.  
 
Finally, I would like to close by thanking the ISSL management team 
for their support of this book and my involvement.
www.allitebooks.com

Mark Harper is an IBM Certified Consulting IT/Specialist with twenty years 
of experience in messaging and collaboration system implementation and 
administration. He possesses a strong knowledge of messaging systems with a 
focus on Lotus Notes/Domino. He has an extensive background with collaboration 
including Lotus QuickPlace, Domino.Doc, and Lotus Quickr. Mark also possesses a 
strong skill set in messaging system migration products and planning. Mark spent 10 
years in the IBM Software Services for Lotus, before making the move to Sales and 
Distribution in January of 2007. 
I would like to thank my wife Sonia Harper and my two daughters 
Amber Harper and Bailey Harper for their support in writing this 
book. I want to thank my mother LaVada Harper and father George 
"Woody" Harper for pushing me to be the best I could be. I want 
to thank David Byrd for his help and patience in completing this 
process. I would also like to thank other co-workers and friends 
who drive me to better myself and grow everyday. Some of those 
who have helped me along the way are Jeff Pinkston, Ann Marie 
Darrough, Holly Rush, Lori Clark, Gene Leo, Johnny Smith, Larry 
Berthelsen, Bob Miller, Carl Radino, Chris Biega, Luis Benitez, Ted 
Stanton, Carla Gillespie, and Steve Hardison.
Olusola Omosaiye (Sola) is an IBM Software Engineer and IBM Manager 
with IBM Software Group's Lotus Division. He has been an IBM employee for 12 
years in a number of positions covering various technology areas. Sola has a deep 
background in technology and software solutions as a Developer, Technology 
Specialist in Web Content Management, as well as serving as a Solutions and 
Services Architect.
Sola is now focused on the business value chain link of social collaboration in the 
globally connected world. As a Development Manager, Sola leads a team of skilled 
technical engineers in global delivery of service to the real world deployments of 
IBM's social software solutions.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Alex Kassabov is a technology consultant and solutions architect with over 15 
years of extensive IT experience. For majority of his career, Alex's focus has been on 
collaboration technologies with emphasis on the IBM/Lotus solutions space. 
At PSC Group, Alex leads the Collaboration Practice—a team of consultants, 
delivering innovative web and collaboration solutions. His team has been recognized 
for its outstanding work by IBM, eight times in the past seven years, by winning the 
IBM/Lotus Award for categories such as Best Competitive Win, Best People Centric 
SOA Solution, and Best Philanthropic Solution. 
As an active participant in the Lotus technology community, Alex is a blogger and a 
frequent speaker at local user groups and IBM events. 
Dennis van Remortel is a senior Lotus Notes/Domino Administrator at Interface 
Inc, the worldwide leader in the manufacture of modular commercial flooring.
In this position, Dennis is responsible for administration, upgrades, and security for 
not only Lotus Notes and Domino, but also Sametime, Quickr, and Traveler.
Prior to his current position, Dennis worked as a consultant, installing and 
maintaining Notes/Domino and other Lotus/third party products in small,  
medium, and large environments.
He has been working with Lotus Notes and Domino for seven years.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers, and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to  
your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub 
files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print 
book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at 
service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up  
for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books  
and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com 
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book 
library. Here, you can access, read, and search across Packt's entire library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
• 
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• 
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
• 
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for 
immediate access.
Instant Updates on New Packt Books
Get notified! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on 
Twitter, or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Introduction to Team Collaboration with  
IBM Lotus Quickr	
7
The evolution of IBM Lotus Quickr	
8
IBM Lotus Quickr delivers Enterprise 2.0	
8
Team collaboration beyond document management	
9
Adopting social collaboration in the Enterprise	
10
Summary	
11
Chapter 2: IBM Lotus Quickr Services Overview	
13
IBM Lotus Quickr services architectures	
14
IBM Lotus Quickr for Domino	
15
IBM Lotus Quickr for WebSphere Portal	
17
IBM Lotus Quickr connectors	
19
Interaction with IBM Lotus Connections	
20
Interaction with Enterprise Content Management products	
21
Summary	
22
Chapter 3: IBM Lotus Quickr Domino Architecture	
23
Product components	
23
Server architecture	
24
Browser architecture	
25
Desktop connector architecture	
26
Product deployment architectures	
26
Single server	
27
Clustered servers	
27
Expanded deployment	
28
Summary	
29
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Chapter 4: Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr	
31
Before you get started	
31
Start with an IBM Lotus Domino server	
32
Setting up an IBM Lotus Domino server	
37
Starting the server	
45
Installing Fix Pack 3	
46
Installing Interim Fix 2	
50
Installing Quickr 8.5	
53
Post installation IBM Lotus Quickr configuration	
59
The Domino Servlet	
59
Configuring single sign-on (SSO)	
60
Offline settings for notes.ini	
65
Web page cache settings for notes.ini	
65
Other settings for notes.ini	
66
Client logging notes.ini settings	
68
Server logging settings for notes.ini	
68
Summary	
70
Chapter 5: Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr	
71
IBM Lotus Quickr clustering concepts	
71
IBM Lotus Quickr cluster installation	
74
IBM Lotus Quickr cluster configuration	
80
IBM Lotus Quickr cluster management	
84
Summary	
85
Chapter 6: Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers	
87
Using the site administration tools	
87
Security	
89
User Directory	
89
Other Options	
90
AdminP and Quickr	
91
Managing place members	
92
Adding an external member to a place	
92
Adding local members to places	
94
Changing member names in places	
95
Changing the hierarchy of a user name in a place	
97
Updating external member names in places	
97
Removing members from places	
99
Changing local member passwords	
100
Maintaining your Quickr server	
101
Place Catalog statistics	
101
Generating reports for the Quickr server	
102
Maintaining your Quickr server in a cluster	

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Understanding replicamaker	
106
Automating replicamaker	
106
Manually using the qptool replicamaker command	
109
Using the qptool command	
109
Summary	
110
Chapter 7: Upgrading and Migrating to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5	
111
The process of upgrading	
111
Upgrading IBM Lotus Domino	
112
Which version are you running today?	
113
Version 8.1 or 8.2	
113
Upgrading the IBM Lotus Domino server	
114
Unlocking the places	
114
Let's talk about DAOS	
118
Version 6.5.1 or 7.0 of QuickPlace	
119
Are offline services enabled?	
120
Summary	
122
Chapter 8: Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr	
123
Creating a place	
123
Place Catalog	
127
Place Statistics	
128
Managing places	
129
Locking and unlocking places	
130
Archiving a place	
132
Restoring a place	
134
Renaming places	
135
Creating place policies	
136
Assigning policies to a place	
138
Assigning policies to a template	
141
Managing PlaceTypes	
143
Creating a PlaceType from an existing place	
143
Reordering PlaceTypes	
146
Hide/unhide PlaceTypes	
148
PlaceTypes design updates	
150
Refreshing a PlaceType through the web	
150
Refreshing a PlaceType using qptool command	
152
Summary	
154
Chapter 9: Customizing IBM Lotus Quickr 	
155
You bought it, now brand it	
155
Changing the logo	
156
Creating a place	
157

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Customizing your place	
158
Basics	
159
Choose a Theme	
163
Forms	
163
Placetype Options	
165
Custom Themes	
166
PlaceBots	
168
Summary	
169
Chapter 10: IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors	
171
Overview of connectors	
171
Connector deployment	
172
Leveraging policies with the connectors	
175
Implementing desktop single sign-on	
176
Implementing other authentication services	
187
Summary	
188
Chapter 11: Leveraging IBM Lotus Quickr APIs	
189
Interacting with IBM Lotus Quickr services	
189
Example business scenario	
190
Implementing and leveraging the APIs	
190
APIs on IBM Lotus Quickr for IBM Lotus Domino	
191
Listing all my places (ACME Claims I am assigned to)—place services	
192
Displaying my role on the team—member services	
194
Contributing to the artifacts in the place—document services	
195
Listing folder contents	
195
Editing folder content	
198
Summary	
199
Chapter 12: Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other  
IBM Products	
201
Enabling LDAP for integrating applications with IBM Lotus Quickr	
201
Enabling IBM Lotus Quickr to use LDAP	
201
Integrating IBM Lotus Sametime with Quickr 8.5	
202
Planning for Sametime integration	
205
Installing the Sametime SDK files	
206
Configuring the Quickr server to use Sametime	
207
QPConfig.xml Sametime settings explained	
207
IBM Lotus Connections and Quickr integration	
209
Activities integration	
209
Communities integration	
211
Sample of Communities integration on the IBM Lotus Connections server	
212
Business card integration	
212
Sample of Business card after integration to the IBM Lotus Quickr server	
213

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Integration of IBM Lotus Quickr to ECM(IBM Filenet P8 and IBM Content 
Manager)	
214
Configuring SSO to the ECM	
214
Configuring the iNotes proxy configuration	
220
ECM settings in the qpconfig.xml file	
224
Installing the ECM connector on your ECM system	
226
Verifying your IBM Lotus Quickr ECM integration	
226
Summary	
228
Index	
229


Preface
When the IT strategy calls for maximizing the value of social software for building 
effective teams, neither social networking nor team collaboration are sufficient on 
their own. IBM Lotus Quickr team collaboration software delivers the promise of 
social software, but ensuring that a business's social networking site is compliant, can 
be daunting. This book will help you ensure effective and efficient team collaboration 
by building a solid social infrastructure with IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5.
This book will familiarize system administrators with all the information they need 
to install, upgrade, and manage IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5. The reader will also learn to 
leverage social software principles to foster diverse teams in an interconnected world. 
This book will help you break virtual boundaries and remove the impediments to  
the development of high performance teams through the embrace of IBM Lotus 
Quickr 8.5.
It starts off by providing you with a clear, detailed walkthrough of key concepts 
including collaboration beyond document management, and adopting social 
collaboration in an enterprise.
We then examine the product architecture of IBM Lotus Quickr services and provide 
the reader with a walkthrough of deployment aspects of IBM Lotus Quickr, to 
provide a scalable environment through clustering. This book covers some of the 
basic tools used to set up and manage the IBM Lotus Quickr server, along with 
unique methods for upgrading to the latest 8.5 version. This book provides you 
with an in-depth look at the concepts of IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors deployment, 
management, and a new capability around a Windows-based single sign-on, to solve 
a variety of problems.
By the end of this book, you will be able to build a well executed social collaboration 
platform that delivers the productive edge needed to succeed in the digitally 
interconnected business world of today.

Preface
[ 2 ]
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Introduction to Team Collaboration with IBM Lotus Quickr, covers the basic 
concepts around team collaboration in the Enterprise.
Chapter 2, IBM Lotus Quickr Services Overview, provides an overview of the IBM 
Lotus Quickr 8.5 product.  It includes a summary of both the IBM Lotus Domino and 
IBM WebSphere Portal-based architectures, additionally touching on the desktop 
connector services.  Finally, it provides some guidance on selecting a platform.
Chapter 3, IBM Lotus Domino Architecture, dives into the IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5 for 
Domino architecture covering the product and deployment architecture topics.
Chapter 4, Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr, provides a step-by-step guide to installing 
IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5 and IBM Lotus Domino.
Chapter 5, Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr, covers the various aspects of installing and 
configuring a IBM Lotus Quickr for Domino clustered environment.
Chapter 6, Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers, will cover managing your IBM Lotus 
Quickr server including tools and commands that you may need.
Chapter 7, Upgrading and Migrating to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5, provides information on 
the optional ways to perform an upgrade to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5.
Chapter 8, Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr, covers managing IBM Lotus Quickr 
places as well as the tools and commands used to manage and maintain places in the 
IBM Lotus Quickr environment.
Chapter 9, Customizing IBM Lotus Quickr, provides a guide to customizing IBM  
Lotus Quickr 8.5 so that your sites can be personalized for your product,  
company, or service.
Chapter 10, IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors, covers the IBM Lotus Quickr Desktop 
connectors. The key topics of deployment, policy management, and desktop single 
sign-on integration are discussed.
Chapter 11, Leveraging IBM Lotus Quickr APIs, provides an introduction to extending 
IBM Lotus Quickr capabilities into the Enterprise's business processes, by leveraging 
the Open Standards-based APIs.
Chapter 12, Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products, covers integrating 
other IBM products like IBM Lotus Sametime, IBM Lotus Connections, and IBM 
ECM products into your IBM Lotus Quickr environment.

Preface
[ 3 ]
What you need for this book
As this book is orientated primarily to a IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5 for Domino audience, 
it is important for the reader to have at least some background in the Lotus Domino 
product. The topic areas are mainly around core infrastructure configuration and 
deployment. This book also discusses key configuration areas in Lotus Domino when 
appropriate, but it is not intended to provide an in-depth education on broader topics 
of the Lotus Domino product. There are other materials available from IBM and Packt 
Publishing on Lotus Domino which can be used to gain this information if necessary:
• 
IBM Lotus Notes and Domino wiki—http://www.lotus.com/ldd/
dominowiki.nsf
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr wiki—http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf
• 
IBM Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.1 book—https://www.packtpub.com/ibm-
lotus-notes-and-domino-8-5-1-upgraders-guide/book
Who this book is for
This book is for system administrators and business analysts who need to facilitate 
the effective and efficient performance of diverse teams in an interconnected world.
Additionally, it can be leveraged by management to gain a high-level understanding 
of the new features and capabilities offered by the product. You don't require any 
prior knowledge of IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5. This book will teach you everything you 
need to know.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: " The first way is by using the qptool 
command from the Lotus Quickr server console."
A block of code is set as follows:
</targetHost>
    <targetLibrary>
      /QuickrRoot/QKSmokeApplication/QKSmokeLibrary

Preface
[ 4 ]
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
load qptool register -a -install
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Select the 
Next button from the bottom of the page to return to the original Basics page".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us 
to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a book that you need and would like to see us publish, please  
send us a note in the SUGGEST A TITLE form on www.packtpub.com  
or e-mail suggest@packtpub.com.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be 
viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately, so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.
www.allitebooks.com


Introduction to Team 
Collaboration with  
IBM Lotus Quickr
IBM Lotus Quickr is a team collaboration software that enables business to expedite 
the flow and sharing of information within a team. Information sharing enables 
collaboration and fosters team effectiveness. IBM Lotus Quickr helps you remove the 
impediments to the development of high performance teams.
Bruce Wayne Tuckman is well known for his Group Development Model. Tuckman 
discusses the four stages a group of individuals go through to become a high 
performing team. These stages are forming, storming, norming, and the performing 
stage. IBM Lotus Quickr team collaboration software is the catalyst a business needs 
to ensure that teaming is effective and efficient.
This chapter will introduce the following foundational concepts around team 
collaboration in the enterprise:
• 
The evolution of IBM Lotus Quickr
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr delivers Enterprise 2.0
• 
Collaboration beyond document management
• 
Adopting social collaboration in the Enterprise

Introduction to Team Collaboration with IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 8 ]
The evolution of IBM Lotus Quickr
IBM Lotus Quickr was first released in 2007 as services for both Lotus Domino  
and WebSphere Portal platforms. Lotus Quickr offered similar functionality for 
Domino-centric as well as enterprise Java users. This marked the evolution of 
Lotus QuickPlace and Lotus Workplace Collaboration services into Web 2.0 team 
collaboration software for the enterprise.
The Lotus Quickr software adds additional value by integrating team collaboration 
with the other aspects of a business' Social Software portfolio. This integrated value 
is achieved by surfacing the collaborative services in Lotus' Social Software suite 
of products. End users can experience and interact with Lotus Quickr from such 
offerings as IBM's Lotus Connections and Lotus Sametime, while using their favorite 
desktop applications. An alternative office productivity application which Lotus 
Quickr delivers this integration story in, is IBM Lotus Symphony.
IBM Lotus Quickr delivers Enterprise 2.0
In researching the term Enterprise 2.0, you find that the Association for Information 
and Image Management defines it as:
".. a system of web-based technologies that provide rapid and agile collaboration, 
information sharing, emergence, and integration capabilities in the extended 
enterprise."
IBM Lotus' Social Software portfolio delivers this capability to the enterprise.
Its ability to seamlessly integrate social networking tools like blogs, wikis, social 
bookmarking, talent profiles, and so on, with team collaboration's staple functionality, 
document management, delivers social collaboration through Lotus Quickr.
Let's take a look at where Lotus Quickr fits in a high performance organization that 
has embraced the Enterprise 2.0 paradigm. First let's list the components:
• 
Lotus Connections Profiles
• 
Lotus Sametime people awareness
• 
Lotus Quickr Team places
The Wikipedia article on Social Software refers to team collaboration software with a 
social integrant, as social collaboration software. Lotus Quickr advances the notion of 
a social element further by leveraging social networks within an organization. Lotus 
Quickr's integration with Lotus Connections delivers a strong value proposition 
by melding social networking tools such as Profiles with the Team Collaboration 
platform, Lotus Quickr Team places.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
The flow of a project's execution now becomes one that starts with talent discovery, 
using the Connections Profiles. The Lotus Connections' Profiles component serves 
as the talent and skills discovery mechanism when building a team. It is possible 
to quickly check the individual with identified skills' availability by instantly 
conversing with them or their management team. This can be achieved using the 
Lotus Sametime people awareness capabilities from within the Connections Profile 
application. Once skilled resources are assembled, a place to congregate and share 
information is then needed. This is where seamless integration with Lotus Quickr 
delivers the promise of Enterprise 2.0 with Lotus Quickr Team places.
We will take a closer look at the components available to end users in a Lotus Quickr 
place in subsequent chapters.
Team collaboration beyond document 
management
Document management is a key component of team collaboration. However, for 
effective social collaboration, mere document sharing is not sufficient. Teaming in 
today's world requires more flexibility in communication and expression.
Lotus Quickr was designed with today's mobile and digitally interconnected 
world in mind. Understanding that team collaboration needs to occur at the speed 
of information, and that the ability for a platform to provide notification through 
multiple channels becomes key. An example of when notification is crucial, can be 
when a document has been approved by a key stakeholder. Other instances include, 
key date or milestone update notifications, a task completed or updated requesting 
clarification, or even as simple as a new member being added to the team while 
another member switches roles. 
Lotus Quickr is designed to meet you where you want to collaborate from. Lotus 
Quickr delivers its functionality through a Web-based interface as well as through 
your favorite desktop applications. The use of desktop applications is enabled 
through the Lotus Quickr Connectors. The Lotus Quickr Connectors are designed to 
provide seamless user interaction from within applications such as: Lotus Sametime, 
enables collaboration on a document in real time with cohorts across the world, 
Lotus Symphony, enables real time editing and publishing of artifacts from within 
the document editors, Lotus Notes, enables storing of e-mails as documents into 
a team place as well as solving the multiple e-mail attachment problem, known to 
plague e-mail system administrators. Lotus Quickr also provides similar Connector 
support for the Microsoft Office suite of products.

Introduction to Team Collaboration with IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 10 ]
For additional access points, Lotus Quickr provides REST and Web services APIs 
that enable an Integrated Systems Vendor to provide added value. These APIs are 
designed and implemented to ensure that an integrated systems vendor is able to 
leverage the Lotus Quickr REST and Web services, regardless of the back office 
platform the Quickr services are provided from Lotus Domino or WebSphere Portal. 
Adopting social collaboration in the 
Enterprise
Now its time to get our executives who control the purse strings, to buy in to the 
need for Social Software in the context of team collaboration. An Information Week 
article from 2007, entitled Facebook Costs Employers More Than $5 Billion A Year, 
written by Sharon Gaudin, is enough to discourage IT strategists.
Dispelling some of these long held misunderstandings about Social Software in the 
enterprise is crucial to its adoption. Pragmatists must focus on the goal of maximizing 
the people and technology investments that a business has already made.
What about Business Conduct and Content Guidelines?
Ensuring that a business' social networking site is compliant can be daunting, 
however, social networks have also proven to be self policing due to self interest  
in ones reputation. It is crucial that leadership within a business participate, as  
this drives awareness and maintains a high level of professionalism by participants 
at all levels.
Lotus Connections social networking software makes your business world smaller 
by breaking down barriers imposed by geography, language, and demographics. 
The missing link in harnessing this new found advantage of a highly interconnected 
world is bridged by seamless team collaboration, through Lotus Quickr. Lotus 
Quickr team collaboration software delivers this capability by integrating with Lotus 
Connections to deliver a social collaboration platform that is ready for business.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Another concern raised by technology officers considering investing in Social 
Software is the "Good Enough" phenomenon. An officer could simply look at 
features and functions with social networking tools and surmise that a tool like 
Lotus Connections and Quickr are interchangeable. First, lets look at what part 
of a business' value chain each of these products is designed to address. Lotus 
Connections is designed to encourage intimacy and build high efficiency cultures 
within an organization. This brings value to the forming stages discussed before. 
Team collaboration with Lotus Quickr is designed to promote collaboration to solve 
very specific problems. The distinction becomes apparent as you consider the value 
the two tools bring to a business. When the IT strategy calls for maximizing the value 
of Social Software for building effective teams, neither social networking nor team 
collaboration is sufficient on their own. We find that social collaboration delivers the 
promise of Social Software.
Summary
Lotus Quickr team collaboration software leverages Social Software principles; 
integration with a rich set of out of the box capabilities, and the Web 2.0 paradigm 
in enabling diverse teams in an interconnected world. Lotus Quickr should not be 
viewed by IT managers as just another entrant to the document management space, 
but as a well executed social collaboration platform, that delivers the productivity 
edge needed to succeed in the digitally interconnected business world of today. 
Lotus Quickr enables IT managers seeking to break the virtual boundaries of 
geography and demographics, to connect the new college graduate on one side of 
the world with the 30 year business veteran on the other. Lotus Quickr unleashes a 
business' global investment.


IBM Lotus Quickr 
Services Overview
The IBM Lotus Quickr product line has grown from a diverse background of products 
to reach the point it is at today. Those lines reach as far back as Lotus QuickPlace, IBM 
WorkPlace, and WebSphere Portal more recently. Many components fell in place to 
define the Lotus Quickr 8.0 product that was released in 2007.
Lotus Quickr itself represents a set of capabilities allowing end users to effectively 
drive team based collaboration, both internally and externally, to the corporate 
network. These capabilities include the following:
• 
Team places to allow groups of end users to share information
• 
Templates for the quick creation of new team places 
• 
Document and content library management services
• 
Integration with Enterprise Content Management services
• 
Connectors to provide desktop integration with existing productivity tools
Beyond the preceding list, is a set of various other features to meet the needs of a 
collaborative work environment such as calendaring, task management, and so 
on. Additionally, Lotus Quickr can be viewed as a solution, a platform allowing 
customers to define and address business challenges either directly or with a range  
of extendable development services. These customization topics are covered in 
Chapter 9, Customizing IBM Lotus Quickr and Chapter 11, Leveraging IBM Lotus  
Quickr APIs. Additional information sources for the customization of Lotus Quickr 
are available on the Lotus Quickr product wiki site: http://www.lotus.com/ldd/
lqwiki.nsf.

IBM Lotus Quickr Services Overview
[ 14 ]
The remainder of this chapter covers an overview of the following topics.  
The technical details of product installation and integration are outlined in  
other chapters.
• 
Architecture platforms of the Lotus Quickr product
• 
Desktop Connectors
• 
Integration with Lotus Connections
• 
Integration with Enterprise Content Management Systems
IBM Lotus Quickr services architectures
The Lotus Quickr product itself is a common set of services that are built on top of 
two very different product architectures. When you buy Lotus Quickr you get both. 
These foundation level deployment architectures are Lotus Domino and WebSphere 
Portal. There are a host of reasons for this type of product design, but the key is that 
customers have different requirements and it is not practical to build a "one size fits all" 
solution. Each of the deployment platforms provide capabilities that can be leveraged 
to build enterprise class collaboration solutions.
The next sections will dive deeper into each of the deployment architectures. While 
the WebSphere Portal platform is discussed at some level, the focus of this book is on 
the Lotus Domino product. It was not practical to cover both platforms in adequate 
detail in the scope of this book, given the significant backend differences between 
the deployment platforms. Lotus Quickr for Domino represents the vast number of 
deployed seats of the product.
A common question that comes up is 'What is the right deployment platform for a 
given situation?' Well, the answer for that will depend on many key areas. That said, 
in some cases either of them, can just as effectively meet your needs.
• 
Do you already have one of the original products such as Lotus QuickPlace?
• 
What existing products are deployed within your environment? For example, 
WebSphere Portal or Lotus Domino.
• 
What skills sets exist within your environment? For example, Java/J2EE or 
Lotus Domino.
• 
Do you need to have geographically distributed server deployments that 
share data and/or offline support?

Chapter 2
[ 15 ]
For example, if your environment only contains Lotus Domino servers and your staff 
possess deep Lotus Domino-based skills then leveraging Lotus Quickr for Domino 
is likely to be the best option. Likewise, if you have existing WebSphere application 
services such as WebSphere Portal or similar WebSphere Application Server-based 
applications, then Lotus Quickr for WebSphere Portal is likely to be the best option. 
However, this is not set in stone, but is intended as general deployment guidance. 
There are situations such as strategic technology changes or if one of the Lotus 
Quickr platforms provides key functions, that can drive changes to this pattern.
IBM Lotus Quickr for Domino
The Lotus Domino-based product has the longest history. It dates back to the Lotus 
QuickPlace v1.0 product. Since then, the core set of capabilities available to end users 
has grown significantly. While it has seen extensive changes over the years, the core 
DNA still exists.
The deployment architecture of this product is based on Lotus Domino. This means 
that out of the box it has a wide range of enterprise class services such as security, 
directory services, content storage, and replication, to name a few. For customers 
who already have an established Lotus Domino environment this product is a 
natural fit into that infrastructure. It can easily co-exist within the Lotus Domino 
administrative domain. The existing skill sets of the Lotus Domino administrators 
can directly be applied to managing the server. There are some additional skills 
required that are specific to Lotus Quickr, but they can be easily picked up. These 
tasks are covered later in this book as well as covered thoroughly in the Lotus 
Quickr product documentation. By leveraging the very powerful replication services 
natively available in Lotus Domino, the servers can be distributed widely across the 
world while still sharing content. Speaking of deployments, the Lotus Quickr for 
Domino release is wide and represents a majority of the Lotus Quickr seats today.
A broad business partner community exists for Lotus Quickr for Domino which 
provides custom data migration solutions, as well as, packaged business solutions 
that can readily be deployed. If a Lotus Domino-based environment will work for 
you, Lotus Quickr for Domino would be a solid technology investment.
www.allitebooks.com

IBM Lotus Quickr Services Overview
[ 16 ]
The following screenshot provides a look at a Lotus Quickr for Domino 8.5 team 
place rendered in Microsoft Internet Explorer 8:
This image displays a user's team place contains most of the available elements. 
The active component is the Library feature. This provides structured content 
management. The primary use of this feature is to manage file attachments.
The user interface itself has been modernized with the latest version 8.5  
release and heavily utilizes Web 2.0 technologies. This interface can be adjusted  
through customization features available to a place owner, as shown in the  
following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 17 ]
IBM Lotus Quickr for WebSphere Portal
The following screenshot provides a look at a Lotus Quickr for WebSphere  
Portal 8.5 team place, rendered in Firefox 3.5, running on Linux to demonstrate 
workstation diversity:

IBM Lotus Quickr Services Overview
[ 18 ]
The preceding screenshot shows a typical project team place and has some similar 
elements that the earlier Lotus Domino-based image contained also. The Library is 
shown in the previous screenshots, but this place was customized to contain project 
tasks, a calendar, a discussion forum, a blog, and a wiki. These elements can very 
easily be added or removed by a place owner, using the customize functions shown in 
the following screenshot:
The deployment architecture of this product is based on WebSphere Portal Server 
v6.1.5. As such, the user experience power of the WebSphere Portal platform is 
available to the product. These functions include such elements as page layout, 
portlets, and security. The entire Lotus Quickr web interface is built as a set of portal 
page artifacts that are visible in the administration interface. 
For existing WebSphere Application Server and/or WebSphere Portal customers  
this deployment architecture of Lotus Quickr is very compelling. They can easily 
glean the necessary administrative requirements of the application from their 
existing skill base.
In terms of physical deployment the architecture is very different from Lotus 
Domino and provides is a self-contained application server environment. In a typical 
WebSphere Portal infrastructure, it consists of number components including HTTP 
Servers, WebSphere Application Servers, Relational Database Servers, and LDAP 
Directory Servers. Each of these infrastructure elements work in unison to provide 
the foundation for the overall solution. This is common for an existing WebSphere 
Portal environment that would have experience in configuring and managing these 
elements.  Additionally, with the exception of the WebSphere Application Server, 
the other elements can leverage non-IBM solutions. For example, in the relational 
database space, Oracle is supported. There is a range of LDAP servers which are 
supported as well.

Chapter 2
[ 19 ]
For a new customer without previous experience in these technologies it can be a 
steep learning curve to tackle. There is a wide range of education material available 
today to help with that task though. This would not be much different than asking 
a J2EE focused staff to learn Lotus Domino. The two technologies have little in 
common from a deployment and administration standpoint. It would represent 
a significant learning curve. Each just represents a different set of technologies. 
The intent is not to discourage a Lotus Domino-based customer from evaluating 
WebSphere Portal or Lotus Quickr for WebSphere Portal, but to point out a set of 
challenges seen by the authors at customer sites.
The Lotus Quickr for WebSphere Portal product also has a strong business partner, 
eco-system, designing solutions specific to the platform. Many of these partners, 
as you can imagine, were originally focused on WebSphere Portal-based solutions 
and Lotus Quickr was a natural addition to their portfolio. It provides a solid team 
collaboration-based environment built on a J2EE foundation.
If a WebSphere Portal-based environment will work for you, Lotus Quickr for 
WebSphere Portal would be a solid technology investment.
IBM Lotus Quickr connectors
The Lotus Quickr connectors represent key capability common across both  
Lotus Quickr architecture platforms. These connectors are deployed locally on 
Windows-based workstations to allow direct integration into the productivity 
applications, which a user already comfortable with. That allows a user to continue 
to work in Lotus Notes or Microsoft Office and directly manage the content on the 
Lotus Quickr servers.
The architecture of the desktop connectors allow them to integrate with various 
backend server environments including Enterprise Content Management (ECM) 
systems. IBM has made available, the Lotus Quickr integration code for IBM FileNet 
and Content Manager, to allow them to appear as a traditional Lotus Quickr server 
to these desktop connectors. From an end user standpoint, they don't have to be 
directly aware the type of system they are using to store their data. They can focus 
on producing content and interacting with other team members.

IBM Lotus Quickr Services Overview
[ 20 ]
An example of interacting with the Quickr Connector from the Microsoft Windows 
Explorer is shown in the following screenshot:
This integration allows an end user to treat Lotus Quickr like just another folder. The 
exception is that it includes rich content services such as check-in/check-out and 
enhanced meta data entry.
Additional information on the Lotus Quickr connectors is available in Chapter 10, 
IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors.
Interaction with IBM Lotus Connections
One of the common patterns seen in customer environments today is the need for an 
integrated solution. It is important that solutions like Lotus Quickr be able to easily 
integrate content into other environments which have already be deployed.
Out of the box, Lotus Quickr provides several types of integration. This includes 
both the deployment architectures mentioned earlier. Some of those other  
integration areas which are covered later in Chapter 12, Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr 
with other IBM Products, are around the Lotus Connections, Lotus Sametime, and 
Enterprise Content Management products.

Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
Lotus Connections is a social networking product that provides a very rich set of 
capabilities, which enterprise customers are looking for today in the social space. 
Examples of these services include employee profile and contact information, 
communities, wikis, blogs, social activities, social bookmarks, discussion forums, 
and file sharing. In the Lotus Connections product, these bundled services built on 
a WebSphere Application Server stack, are designed for small, medium, and large 
customers alike.
The integration story with Lotus Quickr is primarily around the following two areas:
• 
Posting of file attachment content into a Lotus Quickr place from an activity.
• 
Creation and integration of team places within the scope of a community.
The activity integration is available out of the box with some simple configuration 
changes. The community integration is handled by installing of a piece of plugin 
code on the Lotus Connections server.
After the community integration is enabled a navigational link is available between 
both Lotus Quickr and Lotus Connections. This allows end users to easily navigate 
quickly between the two.
Interaction with Enterprise Content 
Management products
The final area to cover is around Enterprise Content Management (ECM) 
integration. The Lotus Quickr product has been broadening these services for 
several releases now. The Lotus Quickr 8.5 release grows these capabilities to a 
whole new level. Now ECMcontent can be made available in both the Lotus Domino 
and WebSphere Portal deployment platforms. The integration itself has deepened 
significantly with this latest release, particularly in the following areas:
• 
Web based user interface services in both deployment platforms
• 
Prompting for meta data and enforcement of required fields
• 
Publication of Lotus Quickr content into ECM system
• 
Viewing of ECM content in Lotus Quickr
• 
Ability to search ECM content from within Lotus Quickr
These integration capabilities require Lotus Quickr integration code to be separately 
installed on the backend ECM system. 

IBM Lotus Quickr Services Overview
[ 22 ]
Having the ability to connect Lotus Quickr with ECM systems opens a wide 
range of possibilities. Now collaborative content can be generated quickly within 
Lotus Quickr and once finalized, it can be published for long term retention and 
auditability within the ECM system.
Additional information on the ECM integration is available in Chapter 12, Integrating 
IBM Lotus Quickr with other IBM Products .
Summary
This chapter exposed you to the two deployment architectures available for Lotus 
Quickr, as well as an overview of the products. Additional areas of integration 
in terms of Lotus Connections, Enterprise Content Management, and desktop 
productivity applications that Lotus Quickr provides, were also discussed. This is 
just a brief insight of the potential here. The product itself can easily be inserted into 
larger solutions sets to meet your business collaboration needs.
The remaining chapters of this book will dive deeper into the Lotus Quickr for 
Domino product installation, administration, customization, and integration. While 
it is not intended to replace the product documentation, the goal is to provide you 
with valuable information from the author's experiences.

IBM Lotus Quickr 
Domino Architecture
The Lotus Quickr Services for the Lotus Domino product has a long standing 
architecture which has grown over many years of product development. The roots 
started with the Lotus QuickPlace v1.0 product released during 1999, a product 
that ran on top of Lotus Domino v5.0. Since those early days many wide range of 
features have been introduced. With the introduction of Lotus Quickr 8.0 in 2007 a 
wide range of expanded services were brought to the market. This included a broad 
expansion into the Web 2.0 space as well as the Desktop Connectors.
The following sections will outline the basic architecture of the Lotus Quickr Services 
for Lotus Domino product and cover various deployment architectures.
• 
Product components
• 
Server architecture
• 
Browser architecture
• 
Desktop connector architecture
• 
Deployment topologies
Product components
The Lotus Quickr Domino product is based fully on a Lotus Domino platform. It 
leverages a range of core services for the Lotus Domino server from the security, 
directory, HTTP, and JVM. The Lotus Quickr components are then built on top 
of this, providing custom page creation, user security, administration, and place 
creation/management services to name a few.

IBM Lotus Quickr Domino Architecture
[ 24 ]
Depending on the final configuration, additional components including an LDAP 
server(s) or load balancers may be required. However, it is possible to build a fully 
functional Lotus Quickr server that resides on a single server. It should be noted 
that although a single server deployment is possible, it doesn't provide any form of 
failover or scalability. There are numerous production customer environments that 
are built on this type of topology.
As the requirements for service failover and expanded scaling come into play, 
the Lotus Quickr product supports full clustering support. Similar to most other 
elements the core Lotus Domino product features are leveraged to provide this 
support. This means that the Lotus Domino clustering functions provide the 
foundation of clustering in Lotus Quickr.
The basic design requires first the Lotus Domino server stack to be deployed and 
configured. If there are no other Lotus Domino servers deployed within your 
environment then this would mean setting up the user directory, mail routing, and 
general administration infrastructure.
The Lotus Quickr product is then installed on top with a minimal amount of 
additional responses requested during this process. Really the only question is for  
an administrative user for the Lotus Quickr server itself. This user is locally 
defined and does not exist in the Lotus Domino directory or LDAP server. It is 
worth noting that if this user does exist outside of the Lotus Quickr server then it 
can cause problems. For example, if the user exists in the Lotus Domino directory 
various issues can arise. This includes challenged authentication as well as problems 
accessing the browser-based administration pages. The key reason this causes 
problems is because the Quickr application cannot determine which user is the 
correct one, between the local user and the directory-based user.
After the basic product installation is completed the configuration process starts.  
This configuration is covered in other sections of this book as well as in the  
product documentation.
Server architecture
The Lotus Quickr server runs entirely on top of a Lotus Domino server. It leverages 
the HTTP stack for all end user access regardless if that is through a web browser 
or the desktop connectors. The NSF database services are used for all content 
storage and searching. This means that enhanced Lotus Domino capabilities such 
as streaming cluster replication and DAOS can directly be leveraged within a Lotus 
Quickr server environment.

Chapter 3
[ 25 ]
The logical component architecture, as shown in the following diagram, outlines the 
structure of the Lotus Quickr services and how the components fit into the overall 
Lotus Domino product stack.
The server components are primarily built using Java, C, and C++ codebases. These 
are tightly integrated into the Lotus Domino HTTP services to provide for a rich 
page generation engine. The backend administrative services are driven by the 
qptool command functions. These perform various operations within Lotus Quickr 
and are described in more detail later in this book.
Browser architecture
The Web browser is a primary interface point for the Lotus Quickr product. One 
of the key aspects is the ability for end users to provision new places based upon a 
defined template. These places are dynamically generated using the page generation 
engine within Lotus Quickr. The generated pages are built using a combination of 
static HTML elements, DHTML, CSS, JavaScript, Dojo, and AJAX-based content.
The location of these elements is a blend of static files under the domino\html\
qphtml folders and a special notes database called LotusQuickr\AreaTypes\
HaikuCommonForms.ntf. This NTF database contains specially constructed design 
elements that make up the page framework. While these elements can be opened in 
the Lotus Designer client it is not generally recommended they be edited. This NTF 
file is frequently updated during system updates.

IBM Lotus Quickr Domino Architecture
[ 26 ]
Desktop connector architecture
The desktop connectors provide for direct desktop level integration within Lotus 
Quickr. This allows the end users to continue to leverage their daily productivity 
applications such as Lotus Notes, Lotus Sametime, Lotus Symphony, Microsoft 
Office, Microsoft Outlook, and Windows Explorer. Within these desktop 
applications, the user can exchange files with other users of the Lotus Quickr place 
or other desktop connector compliant application servers. The desktop connectors 
provide for rich content lifecycle operations such as check-in/check-out and round 
trip editing to name a few. For example, other application services including 
Enterprise Content Management solutions like IBM FileNet and IBM Content 
Manager, have been enabled to interact with the desktop connectors. The broad set 
of features currently provided by desktop integration allows for some users to fully 
operate out of the connectors without the need to leverage the Web browser.
While viewed as a single desktop deployment component, there are actually two 
different services. One is a native Windows application and the other is an Eclipse 
(Java) based application. They both provide the same functions, but were built 
this way due to the various integration requirements of desktop applications. For 
example in Microsoft Office it leverages the native Windows application stack, while 
in the Lotus Notes client it operates as an Eclipse plugin.
The connectors interact with the Lotus Quickr server using either HTTP(S)-based  
or ATOM-based API calls. The calls are documented on the Lotus Quickr product 
wiki. Additionally, this means that custom solutions can be constructed using the 
same API services, to provide Lotus Quickr integration across a wide range of 
applications. A demonstration of this extensibility is an example publicly available 
example, of a Lotus Quickr Connector for Firefox based upon these services. The 
following, is a link to this solution in the IBM Lotus and WebSphere Portal Business 
Solutions Catalog:
https://greenhouse.lotus.com/plugins/plugincatalog.nsf/assetDetails.
xsp?action=editDocument&documentId=8654D918D26C8DAB852576AB006ED5BA.
Product deployment architectures
The Lotus Quickr product can be deployed in a number of different topologies. The 
two basic designs consist of a single server or a cluster of servers. The clustered 
environment starts life as a set of single servers that are clustered together using the 
Lotus Domino clustering services.

Chapter 3
[ 27 ]
Single server
A single server topology looks similar to the following diagram:
This deployment model is very straight forward and can provide the full set of 
capabilities for the Lotus Quickr product, assuming that no external LDAP services 
are used. If an external LDAP server is to be leveraged, then the single server would 
have a connection to that system.
The single server setup can effectively serve a wide range of purposes from 
development and test systems, to production deployments. The key consideration 
with a production deployment is that it does not provide any failover capabilities. 
However, depending on the business requirements this might be acceptable.
While the earlier diagram shows a single logical server, the common deployment 
pattern is to integrate with an existing Lotus Domino environment. This Lotus 
Domino environment could include messaging and other application services. This 
type of deployment would allow for normal Lotus Domino-based administration, 
mail routing, and replication to be leveraged.
Chapter 4, Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr, covers the installation of a single Lotus 
Quickr server.
Clustered servers
The next stage up from a single server deployment is to configure the clustering 
services. A cluster will provide scalability in terms of user load as well as providing 
failover to minimize the impact of system outages or maintenance. The foundation 
of a cluster is the installation of two or more single server deployments and then 
configuring Lotus Domino clustering across the systems. The typical cluster size  
is two or three servers, but it is possible to expand beyond this based upon  
scaling requirements.
To distribute user traffic across the cluster members some form of load balancing 
solution is necessary. In situations where end user load distribution is not the goal 
it is possible to direct traffic using DNS name services. An example of this would be 
defining a cluster member for backup usage and other administrative services.

IBM Lotus Quickr Domino Architecture
[ 28 ]
A clustered topology is shown in the following diagram: 
Chapter 5, Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr covers the installation of a clustered Lotus 
Quickr server in more detail.
Expanded deployment
Additional services can be added into a Lotus Quickr environment, such as, external 
LDAP servers for user and group management. It is also possible to deploy a 
dedicated Lotus Domino Index server to manage cross place search features. By 
default, the search functions out of the box with Lotus Quickr only provide a content 
search within the scope of a single place. The Domain Index function provides for 
content searches across multiple places, concurrently.
In the following diagram, the inclusion of some potential external components  
are shown:

Chapter 3
[ 29 ]
Beyond the services shown in the previous diagram, Lotus Quickr can be integrated 
into a host of other IBM products including the following:
• 
IBM Lotus Connections
• 
IBM Lotus Sametime
• 
IBM WebSphere Portal
• 
ECM Solutions (such as IBM FileNet and IBM Content Manager)
The API services available within Lotus Quickr allow it to be open to a diverse set of 
custom and business partner solutions.
Integration is possible with external authentication and authorization providers, 
such as, IBM Tivoli Access Manager and Computer Associates SiteMinder products. 
These provide a rich set of enterprise class security functions that can cover a wide 
range of products.
Summary
This chapter outlined the product architecture of Lotus Quickr Services for Lotus 
Domino and some potential deployment topologies that can be leveraged. The 
general deployment concepts from Lotus Domino can be directly applied to a Lotus 
Quickr environment.
The next chapter will cover installation of the Lotus Quickr software.


Installation of  
IBM Lotus Quickr
We know you are excited to proceed to the hands on task of installation. But before 
we do this we need to review some of the software requirements IBM has defined. 
Infrastructure planning should never be taken lightly and IBM Lotus Quickr 
installations, while not difficult, do have quite a list of "things to do" before opening 
the server up to everyone.
Before you get started
At the time of writing, IBM requires that IBM Lotus Quickr for Domino 8.5 is 
installed on top of an IBM Lotus Domino 8.5.1 Fix Pack 3 Interim Fix 2 server or 
earlier version. This means there are a few places you will need to visit to download 
the files, not just your usual Passport Advantage website.
This outline details the software requirements and where they can be found to bring 
you up to the latest levels. We will assume, going forward that you are on the newest 
versions and for this book and our screenshots, using a Microsoft Windows Server.
• 
Passport Advantage Website (http://www.ibm.com/software/howtobuy/
passportadvantage/pao_customers.htm)
• 
IBM Lotus Domino server 8.5.1
• 
IBM Lotus Notes Clients, including Administrator and Designer 8.5.1 (For 
the Administrator to make some changes in the directory)
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr server 8.5 for Domino (make sure to get the correct 
operating system version)
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5 Connectors

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 32 ]
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5 Language Packs as required
• 
IBM Support Central (http://www.ibm.com/support/fixcentral/):
• 
IBM Lotus Domino 8.5.1 Fix Pack 3
• 
IBM Lotus Domino 8.5.1.3 Interim Fix 2
• 
Java (http://java.com/): 
Download the latest Java version for your server
Once you have downloaded all of these, you may proceed to the next step, that is 
setting up your Domino server.
Start with an IBM Lotus Domino server
IBM Lotus Quickr for Domino, as the name implies, is loaded on top of an IBM Lotus 
Domino server. If you have never installed a Lotus Domino server you will want to 
follow this section closely. We will walk you through the bare minimum of how to 
bring an IBM Lotus Domino server to life with Web access, some aspects of security 
and, the setting up of DAOS.

Chapter 4
[ 33 ]
Follow these steps to install IBM Lotus Domino 8.5.1:
1.	 Run the executable file for the Domino server and the first screen you will see 
looks like the preceding screenshot.
2.	 Click on the Next button.
3.	 The End User License Agreement will be displayed, take 2.8 seconds to read 
the first line and then click I accept the terms in the license agreement, and 
then click on the Next button:

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 34 ]
4.	 You will then be prompted to choose where you want to install the program 
files. Simply enter a directory name using either the default naming or 
something short and simple like Domino, then click on the Next button.
Do not use Domino851 or any folder title with a version 
number attached as this may cause you unnecessary confusion 
in the future when you upgrade your server with new versions.
5.	 Now you will be asked where the data files should be stored. Click on Next 
after entering a location:

Chapter 4
[ 35 ]
6.	 You will now be presented with a screen asking which version to install. 
Select Domino Enterprise Server and then click on the Next button:
7.	 You will now be taken to the final review screen: 
www.allitebooks.com

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 36 ]
8.	 Click on the Next button.
9.	 The installation will begin: 
10.	 Once completed you will see the following message, click on the Finish button: 

Chapter 4
[ 37 ]
11.	 You should see an icon on the desktop screen for the server:
We will now look at setting up the Domino server. 
Setting up an IBM Lotus Domino server
Follow these steps to setup a Domino server:
1.	 Clicking on the desktop icon for the Lotus Domino Server will start the 
setup process:

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 38 ]
2.	 After the splash screen goes away the setup process will begin, click on the  
Next button: 
3.	 The first screen of the setup asks if this is the first server in the domain or will 
it be joining an existing Domino domain: 

Chapter 4
[ 39 ]
4.	 We will be adding this server into an existing domain for the purpose of this 
illustration. Click on the Next button to continue: 
5.	 Now you will need to locate the server ID file you created for this  
new server. Click on the Browse button to locate the file, then click  
on the Next button:

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 40 ]
6.	 Once you have selected the ID, the setup program recognizes the defined 
Domino name for the server. Click on Next to continue:
7.	 Select the services required for this Domino server, that will be running 
Quickr. You can then click on Customize to review other Domino services:

Chapter 4
[ 41 ]
8.	 Next you can configure your ports and set a hostname (which should be the 
fully qualified domain name) by clicking on Customize:
9.	 As seen in the following screenshot, you can disable NetBIOS if it is  
not required in your network. You should also check the boxes to encrypt 
and compress network traffic and enter the fully qualified domain name 
of the server. These settings will be incorporated into the server document, 
which is in the directory. Click on OK to go back to the previous screen and 
see your changes.

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 42 ]
10.	 Verify your settings and then click on Next to continue the setup process.
11.	 Now name the primary Domino server, that has the directory you want the 
new server to be using. Enter the Domino name or you may enter the IP 
address or the fully qualified name. Click on the Next button when you are 
ready to move forward:

Chapter 4
[ 43 ]
12.	 Next you will need to select the option to set the server to use the directory as 
a Primary directory and then click on Next to continue.
13.	 The setup process now asks if you want it to set some security related items 
automatically. Leave both options checked and click on the Next button:

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 44 ]
14.	 Finally, review the options which you have selected and if you are happy, 
click on Setup to complete the setup of the Domino server:
15.	 You should see a pop up window similar to the following one during  
this process: 
16.	 Once completed, you will receive the Congratulations message, click on the 
Finish button. 

Chapter 4
[ 45 ]
Starting the server
The Domino server should be started at this point to allow it to process all the  
items which have been configured and get ready for general usage, as well as  
the Quickr installation.
1.	 Double-click on the server icon found on the desktop and you will see a pop 
up window that asks how you want to run Lotus Domino in the future. You 
can choose to start it as a regular application or as a Windows service. In 
general, choosing it to run as a Windows service is a good option, as when 
the server restarts it can automatically restart the Lotus Domino and Quickr 
server as well. Also check both of the option boxes to always start this way 
and not ask next time.

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 46 ]
2.	 Next a console window will appear which may move rather quickly while it 
is performing its tasks. The following screenshot is just a part of  
the process:
3.	 To verify if all tasks are completed, type sh ta (for Show Tasks) and then 
press Enter. The server will list any tasks, that are still active. If the screen has 
stopped scrolling and no tasks are active, (tasks will be listed as Idle,) you 
can shut down the server.
4.	 Type quit at the console prompt, as shown and the server will start its shut 
down process.
Installing Fix Pack 3
Once Domino 8.5.1 has been installed, the next step is to install the Fix Pack. The 
required Fix Pack for Quickr 8.5 is Fix Pack 3.
1.	 The Fix Pack should have already been downloaded from the IBM Fix 
Central site (http://ibm.com/support/fixcentral) and accessible on the 
network or the server.

Chapter 4
[ 47 ]
2.	 Locate the file and double-click on it to run it. You will see the following 
window popup, verifying the Fix Pack file is 100% ready to be installed and 
downloaded fully.
3.	 Once verified, the Fix Pack Installer will provide a window, as seen in the 
following screenshot, asking you to accept the End User License Agreement 
or EULA. Click on I accept and then click on Next to continue:

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 48 ]
4.	 The following screen prompts you for the location of your Domino program 
files and Domino data directories. Once verified click on Next:
5.	 The installer will now check the files to be updated and ensure that 
everything is set in place before asking you to select Next to start the update.

Chapter 4
[ 49 ]
6.	 During the update the installer shows a progress bar to let you know how 
much more needs to be completed. Do not worry about it saying you are 
Updating Notes, it is a typographical error:
7.	 Once completed, the following screen will appear and you can click on Close 
to complete this installation.
You should now start the Domino Server and make sure it recognizes the update you 
just applied to it.

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 50 ]
If you wait for the server to complete its startup routine and then type sh ser from 
the server console, you should see something that looks like the following:
You can now tell the server to stop by typing quit at the server console. Once the 
server is shut down, you can move on to installing the Interim Fix 2.
Installing Interim Fix 2
The requirements for Quickr 8.5 state that a Domino Server version of 8.5.1 FP3IF2 
is required. If you have previously downloaded the Interim Fix 2, locate the file and 
run the executable.
1.	 You should see a window similar to the following screenshot, asking for you 
to accept the EULA. If you do accept it then click on the Next button:

Chapter 4
[ 51 ]
2.	 You will be asked to verify the location of your Domino program files 
directory and the Domino data directory. Once verified, click on the  
Next button:
3.	 The verification screen will appear and check whether you have the required 
version of Domino installed, 8.5.1 FP3 and to continue click on Next:

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 52 ]
4.	 The Interim Fix is now being installed. Again as before, ignore the 
Upgrading Notes reference:
5.	 Once completed, the following screen will appear letting you know you have 
upgraded your server and you can click on Close:
6.	 At this point start the Domino server again and when it has finished loading, 
type sh ser at the console and see if you have something similar to the 
following listed. If so, you are ready to start installing Quickr 8.5.

Chapter 4
[ 53 ]
7.	 Shut down the Domino server by typing quit at the server console and  
wait for it to completely finish before moving to the next section on  
installing Quickr 8.5.
Installing Quickr 8.5
The download file for Quickr 8.5 (IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5 for Domino Windows 
Multilingual—CZM8HML) can be found on the IBM Passport Advantage download 
website and should be accessible to the server it will be installed upon.
1.	 Once downloaded, run the executable and the following window will appear 
and you should click on the OK button:
2.	 Select where you want the temporary files to be stored while the installation 
is in progress and click on Unzip:

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 54 ]
3.	 Once the files have been unzipped you will see the following message, and 
click on the OK button: 
4.	 Open the directory where the files were unzipped and locate the setup.exe 
file. Double-click on it or run it to start the installation.
5.	 It is followed by the Quickr 8.5 splash screen: 

Chapter 4
[ 55 ]
6.	 Next there is an EULA agreement to be accepted, click on Accept after 
reading it:
7.	 The setup process now moves forward to the installation. Click on the  
Next button:

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 56 ]
8.	 The location of your Domino server is required to ensure Quickr is properly 
installed. If the correct information does not appear, browse to find the 
correct location. Then click on the Next button:
9.	 You will now be presented with list of current settings, if you are happy with 
your settings, click on the Next button.

Chapter 4
[ 57 ]
10.	 As the program installs a progress bar will be displayed.
11.	 When  the installation completes, click on Next to configure the  
Quickr server:
This step is crucial and one which many junior administrators 
or new Quickr administrators do not perform properly. 
12.	 When Quickr asks for a User name, it does not want you to enter ANYONE 
that is listed in the Domino Directory. This is  where you need to create the 
QPADMIN account. Make sure you make a note of it, otherwise you will 
need IBM Technote # 1296289 to help you reset the password. 
13.	 If you cannot remember what name you used, look inside the Quickr server 
notes.ini file for the following line:
QuickPlaceAdmin=CN=My QPAdmin/OU=QP/O=Domain

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 58 ]
14.	 Once complete, click on the Next button:
We specifically put "Not Your Name" in the User name 
field to make sure you do not use your name. This is a 
common error when first configuring Lotus Quickr. 
15.	 After this step you will get the congratulations window and clicking Finish 
will complete the software installation:

Chapter 4
[ 59 ]
Post installation IBM Lotus Quickr 
configuration
There are a number of configuration settings that should be checked to ensure that 
they have been set properly for Lotus Quickr. As a reminder, Internet Site documents 
are not supported with a Quickr server. In order to do these, you must have access to 
a directory either on the Quickr server or a replica on another Domino server.
The Domino Servlet
The IBM Lotus Quickr Wiki (http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf) explains 
that the servlet engine must be enabled to use Lotus Quickr place administration to 
ensure that the Lotus Quickr homepage does not have an empty display.
1.	 To make this change, open the Domino directory (names.nsf) on a server.
2.	 Open the server document which corresponds to the Quickr server.
3.	 Go to the Internet Protocols tab and then the Domino Web Engine sub-tab.
4.	 Under Java Servlets (found on the right side of the screen), select Domino 
Servlet Manager in the Java servlet support field. See the following 
screenshot. Save and close the document.
5.	 Restart the Domino server for this configuration change to take effect.

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 60 ]
Configuring single sign-on (SSO)
Single sign-on is a key aspect of any network that includes other Lotus products 
because without it, users would need to repeatedly login and provide their password 
every time they moved between the servers.
The likelihood of you having only a standalone Quickr server is very low, therefore 
we will now look at the steps required to enable the SSO.
1.	 Open the Domino directory and drop down to the Web category, then the 
Internet Sites sub category. As seen in the following screenshot: 

Chapter 4
[ 61 ]
2.	 Click on Web and then click on Create Web SSO Configuration.
3.	 Click on Keys at the top of the Web SSO Configuration document.
4.	 To create the Web SSO Configuration with a Domino shared secret key, click 
Create Domino SSO Key. See the following screenshot:
5.	 Enter LtpaToken in the Configuration Name field (see the  
following screenshot).

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 62 ]
6.	 The rest of the document should look like the following: 
7.	 Click on Save & Close to save the document.
8.	 In cases where multiple servers will be using the SSO configuration, you 
must replicate names.nsf to each server so that they can accept the new 
configuration. Type the following command at the server console:
load replica targetserver names.nsf.
What about if the Web SSO configuration document already exists in your 
domain? If so, you need to add the Domino server names of the Lotus Quickr 
server to the existing Web SSO Configuration document.
9.	 Securing HTML files by adding the following line to your notes.ini will 
prevent anonymous access to the HTML files in the Lotus Quickr server.
NoWebFileSystemACLS=1
10.	 To complete the SSO configuration you need to enable multi-server session-
based authentication in the server document for each Lotus Domino server 
that you want to use the single-sign on.
11.	 Open the Domino directory. 

Chapter 4
[ 63 ]
12.	 Click on the Lotus Quickr Server document and click on Edit Server.
13.	 Click on the Ports tab, then Internet Ports then Web, and then enable Name-
and-password authentication for the Web (HTTP or HTTPS) port.
14.	 Click on the Internet Protocols tab and then Domino Web Engine tab.
15.	 Next to Session authentication, select Multiple Servers (SSO). See the 
following screenshot.
16.	 Next to Web SSO Configuration, select LtpaToken.
17.	 Click on Save & Close.
18.	 The next step involves creating the Domino Web Server Configuration 
database (domcfg.nsf) if it does not exist already.
19.	 From a Lotus client, press CTRL+O or choose File | Application | New.
20.	 Next to the Server on the top of the section, select the server that runs  
Lotus Quickr. 
21.	 Next to Title, type a description, for example, "Quickr Web  
Server Configuration".
22.	 In the File name, field you must type domcfg.nsf.
23.	 Next to the Server in the middle of the dialog box, select any server.
24.	 Click on Show advanced templates.
25.	 Next to Template, select Domino Web Server Configuration (domcfg5.ntf).
26.	 Click on the OK button.
27.	 Create a mapping form in the Domino Web Server Configuration database to 
enable single sign-on to work with Lotus Quickr.
28.	 Open the Web Server Configuration database (domcfg.nsf).

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 64 ]
29.	 Click on Add Mapping, the following screenshot depicts this form:
30.	 Next to Applies To, select All Web Sites/Entire Server which is the  
default option.
31.	 Next to Target Database, type LotusQuickr/resources.nsf, replacing the 
default entry.
32.	 Next to Target Form, type QuickPlaceLoginForm. The 
QuickPlaceLoginForm form is important for the local administrator’s 
account to be able to sign in. This login form has special code to handle 
Quickr-specific users. It is not required for other servers because SSO does 
not work for local or Quickr-specific users. 
33.	 Click on Save & Close.
34.	 Replicate the database to all the Lotus Quickr servers that will use single 
sign-on.
35.	 Restart the servers
This is not the limit of configuration and installation options for Lotus Quickr, as 
there are many other options. Most of these options have to do with editing the 
Qpconfig.xml file. The Qpconfig_sample.xml file resides on the Domino server in 
the data directory and outlines how to make use of it and details all types of options 
available as well. By copying the file to be called qpconfig.xml, Quickr will make 
use of it.
Additionally, there are numerous notes.ini settings which can be included if 
necessary. We have pulled a list from this wiki page. http://www.lotus.com/ldd/
lqwiki.nsf/dx/notes.ini_settings_qd85.

Chapter 4
[ 65 ]
Offline settings for notes.ini
These settings are for those who wish for more detailed options for offline users.
• 
$DOLS_TCPIPAddress=1
Used to configure a cluster that uses the IBM Network Dispatcher to work 
with Domino Off-Line Services. A value of 0 (zero) disables this setting.
• 
CheckCacheBeforeDSAPI=1
Enables authentication to work for offline users. A value of 0 (zero) disables 
this setting.
• 
EXTMGR_ADDINS= dependent on operating system
On Windows®: ndolextn
On AIX®: libdolextn
Enables Domino Off-Line Services to work with Lotus Quickr.
• 
NoWebFileSystemACLS=1
If you use Sun Java System Portal Server with IBM Lotus Quickr as a  
reverse proxy, use this notes.ini setting to prevent users from having  
to re-authenticate after installing places offline. A value of 0 (zero) disables 
this setting.
Web page cache settings for notes.ini
If performance tuning is of your interest, these settings will enhance the user 
experience:
• 
QuickPlaceWebCacheDir==<pathname>
Sets the cache directory where <pathname> is the full file path name of  
the directory. If this variable is omitted from your server’s notes.ini, the 
server cache is automatically set to the default directory <NOTESPROGRAM>\\
data\\cache.
• 
QuickPlaceWebCacheEnabled=1
Disables or enables the cache. A value of 0 (zero) disables this setting.
• 
QuickPlaceWebCacheGCIntervalInMIN=<minutes>
Sets the time interval for cache cleaning.

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 66 ]
• 
QuickPlaceWebCacheLimitInMB=<MB>
Sets the cache size limit. This variable sets the cache size limit in megabytes. 
If you enter a number of zero or less (or omit the variable from your notes.
ini file), the cache size limit defaults to 50 MB.
• 
QuickPlaceWebCacheLogging=<n>
Sets the cache logging level, which determines how detailed log messages 
will be. Acceptable values are 1, 2, or 3; where 1 is the least detailed and 3 is 
the most detailed.
• 
QuickPlaceWebCacheUsers=<value>
Defines which users will be affected by caching. By default, server 
caching applies to all users when the cache is enabled. To set the cache for 
anonymous users only, enter QuickPlaceWebCacheUsers= Anonymous.
Other settings for notes.ini
These settings can assist with e-mail generation, setup details, and other items of 
general usage for the Quickr server:
• 
$h_MailDomain=mydomain.com
Specifies the domain of the server that hosts the place to which Quickr  
routes replies to e-mail generated from places. Combined with the next 
setting "h_Undelivmail" defines the name used for Quickr generated  
e-mails for newsletters.
• 
h_UndelivMail=QuickrPlacename
Specifies the place to which Lotus Quickr routes replies to e-mail generated 
from places. Combined with the previous setting $h_MailDomain defines the 
name used for Quickr place generated e-mails for newsletters.
• 
h_ScopeURLinQP=1
Enables image caching in environments that do not use single sign-on 
authentication. A value of 0 (zero) disables this setting.
• 
NoWebFileSystemACLs
Prevents anonymous access to files in the HTML directory and is a part of 
setting up single sign-on authentication. Also, if you use Sun Java System 
Portal Server with IBM Lotus Quickr as a reverse proxy, use this notes.ini 
setting to prevent users from having to re-authenticate after installing places 
offline. A value of 0 (zero) disables this setting.

Chapter 4
[ 67 ]
• 
PLATFORM_CSID=hhh
Where hhh is a hex number that represents the codepage. Required on UNIX 
servers to support names in a user directory that contain accented characters.
• 
QuickPlaceExpireCachedUsers=<time interval in seconds>
Specifies the length of time user entries remain in the user cache.
• 
QuickPlaceExtensionManagerAllowServers=1
Gives a Domain Catalog server the access to index the places on a Lotus 
Quickr server that uses the Search Places feature and Off-Line Services. A 
value of 0 (zero) disables this setting.
• 
QuickPlaceMaxCachedUsers=<n>
Specifies the maximum number of users allowed in the user cache.
• 
QuickPlaceNestedGroupLimit=<n>
Controls how deep LDAP queries are performed to return groups nested in 
other groups. For example QuickPlaceNestedGroupLimit=1 limits lookups 
to 1 nested group instead of the default 8.
• 
QuickPlaceUpgradeServerOnStartup=1
Controls whether a server is upgraded on startup. A value of 0 (zero) 
disables this setting.
• 
HTTPAllowDecodedUrlPercent=1
Ensures that an uploaded document or a page attachment whose name 
includes a special character can be previewed. A name that includes a special 
character has to be encoded, which introduces the percent sign (%) in the URL. 
Special characters that need to be encoded can include but are not limited to:
°°
Dollar ("$")
°°
Ampersand ("&")
°°
Plus ("+")
°°
Comma (",")
°°
Forward slash/Virgule ("/")
°°
Colon (":")
°°
Semi-colon (";")
°°
Equals ("=")
°°
Question mark ("?")
°°
‘At’ symbol ("@")

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 68 ]
• 
Windows: extmgr_addins=nqpcmextmgr, AIX: extmgr_
addins=libqpcmextmgr_r.a, Linux: extmgr_addins=libqpcmextmgr.so
Enables AdminP task to work on the Quickr for Domino server. Needs to be 
added manually to the notes.ini file
Client logging notes.ini settings
Enhanced troubleshooting and debug code can be set with the following options:
• 
$h_Debug
Enables the browser to display detailed messages about JavaScript errors that 
occur on the client, instead of the general Lotus Quickr message, "Unable to 
process your request at this time".
• 
$h_ClientDebugConsole
Displays a console log on all clients that access the Lotus Quickr server.  
For Internet Explorer, the console log is an additional browser window  
and for other browsers the console log is the JRE Java log console. Use  
this setting on a temporary basis to help IBM Support troubleshoot specific 
client-side problems.
• 
h_ExceptionDetail=1
Adds the source code name and line number from which errors and 
warnings are generated to the error and warning messages that the server 
sends to the browser. Use this setting on a temporary basis to help IBM 
Support troubleshoot a problem.
Server logging settings for notes.ini
A Domino server log is the place where you can see everything that happens and 
track it properly. If so, then you will need to take advantage of the following options.
• 
QuickPlaceArchiveLogging: Archive tool logging.
• 
QuickPlaceAuthenticationLogging: Authentication logging for 
authentication events, failures, successes, group expansion, and  
names list generation.
• 
QuickPlaceCalendarSubscriptionLogging: Calendar event logging.
• 
QuickPlaceCompressionLogging: Page compression logging.

Chapter 4
[ 69 ]
• 
QuickPlaceDbCommandPerformanceLogging: Server command  
performance logging.
• 
QuickPlaceExtensionManagerIfLogging: Offline place installation logging.
• 
QuickPlaceHTTPInterfaceLogging: Lotus Quickr and IBM Lotus Domino 
HTTP interaction logging. It is useful primarily as a first step toward 
isolating user authentication problems or problems related to the interaction 
between Lotus Quickr and Lotus Domino. Use with other logging settings, 
for example, QuickPlaceAuthenticationLogging—it provides a clearer 
picture of URL processing.
• 
QuickPlaceJavaLogging: Java Debug logging.
• 
QuickPlaceJavaServerLogging: Java Server logging.
• 
QuickPlaceJniLogging: Java Native Interface (JNI) to C++ layer logging.
• 
QuickPlaceJvmLogging: Java Virtual Machine logging.
• 
QuickPlaceLargePOSTLogging: Large uploads logging.
• 
QuickPlaceLockLogging: Place Lock tool logging.
• 
QuickpPlaceLtpaLogging: LTPA logging when Lotus Domino controls 
directory services.
• 
QuickPlaceMailLogging: Lotus Quickr e-mail process logging.
• 
QuickPlaceMembershipModelLogging: Expanded membership logging.
• 
QuickPlaceMyPlacesLogging: My Places logging.
• 
QuickPlaceQOMLogging: Object model logging.
• 
QuickPlaceObjectPoolLogging: ObjectPool Memory management for 
PlaceCatalog logging.
• 
QuickPlacePerformanceLogging: Performance data collector logging.
• 
QuickPlacePlaceCatalogLogging: Place Catalog logging.
• 
QuickPlacePlaceCatalogQueryLogging: Queries into Place Catalog 
logging; use level 4 to include more details on My Places queries and qptool 
report command queries.
• 
QuickPlacePlaceTypeCentralRefreshLogging: PlaceType refresh logging.
• 
QuickPlaceSearchPlacesLogging: Search across places logging.
• 
QuickPlaceSpellCheckEngineLogging: Spell checker engine logging.
• 
QuickPlaceStyleSheetAttributeCmdLogging: Style sheet  
processing logging.
• 
QuickPlaceStubMakerLogging: Stub creator logging for Lotus Quickr 
cluster support.

Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 70 ]
• 
QuickPlaceToolLogging: Qptool logging.
• 
QuickPlaceUpgradeLogging: Upgrade logging (upgrade places).
• 
QuickPlaceUserCacheLogging: User cache parameter logging.
• 
QuickPlaceUserDirectoryLogging: User directory logging (applicable only 
when Lotus Quickr controls directory services).
• 
QuickPlaceWebCacheLogging: Web caching logging (caches pages sent  
to browser).
• 
QuickPlacePlaceStatisticsLogging: Place statistics logging.
• 
QuickPlaceNSFLogging: NSF database logging.
• 
QuickPlaceDocumentLogging: Document-level logging
• 
QuickPlaceLDAPLogging: LDAP logging
• 
QuickPlacePreviewLogging: Document preview generation logging
Summary
With the installation completed you are closer to reaching your goal of using 
Lotus Quickr to its full potential. Enabling single sign-on will enhance your users 
experiences by reducing unwanted and repeated login efforts. The next chapter 
which will discuss the more advanced administration aspects of clustered servers, 
will expand on more details of configuration.

Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr
After the basic Lotus Quickr Domino environment has been deployed, the next 
question typically is, how this environment can be scaled in addition to providing 
highly available services. These deployment aspects of Lotus Quickr are discussed in 
this chapter.
This chapter covers the following topics:
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr clustering concepts
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr cluster installation
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr cluster configuration
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr maintenance and troubleshooting
The intention of this chapter is not to cover every possible topic related to clustering. 
However, we want to provide you with an overview to get started in the space of 
clustering a Lotus Quickr system. Additional information is available in the product 
documentation for both Lotus Domino and Lotus Quickr. Another great resource is 
the Lotus Quickr product Wiki.
The following is a link to this Wiki:
http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf/xpViewCategories.
xsp?lookupName=Lotus Quickr 8.5 for Domino documentation
IBM Lotus Quickr clustering concepts
To best understand the concept of clustering with Lotus Quickr, it is important 
to consider one key piece of information. Lotus Quickr Domino lives on top of 
the Lotus Domino software stack. The concepts and deployment patterns used 
with Lotus Domino clustered deployments are just as relevant. This holds true for 
monitoring and performance tuning methods.

Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 72 ]
A Lotus Quickr cluster starts with a minimum of two Lotus Domino servers, that 
have the Lotus Quickr product installed with matching update levels. Ideally the 
Lotus Domino servers should also have matching version numbers across the cluster 
as typical best practices. At a minimum, they need to be at a prerequisite level for the 
current version of Lotus Quickr being deployed. The following screenshot represents 
a typical clustered environment with three nodes servicing end user requests.
Consider that in practice, most clusters consist of two or three members. While it is 
technically possible to support a larger number of cluster members; the benefits of 
growing a single cluster to this point doesn't in practice provide significant value. 
The most common approach is to configure additional sets of clusters to handle 
additional Lotus Quickr places as the load demands. Deploying a cluster does not 
increase the scaling potential of any single server in terms of concurrent users or 
place volume, but it does however expand the overall system capacity by providing 
multiple servers to handle concurrent user traffic. This is on top of the operational 
advantages of providing fault tolerance. Additional information on this topic is 
available in the following IBM Technical note:
TN 1320470—Determining how many servers to include in a cluster

Chapter 5
[ 73 ]
Within a cluster, the end-user traffic enters the cluster using a Load Balancer or 
IP Sprayer solution provided by some external infrastructure service outside 
of Lotus Quickr. Some examples of load balancer solutions seen in enterprise 
customer environments are the IBM WebSphere Edge server, Cisco Local Director, 
or F5 Network's Big-IP. There are a number of other potential solutions available 
beyond this list, but these are not commonly seen within customer environments. 
The Lotus Internet Connection Manager process is often raised during clustering 
discussions. While it does provide failover services, it does so in a manner that 
causes problems with the Lotus Quickr desktop connectors. ICM does not provide 
a true virtualization of the backend servers. When a URL is requested through the 
ICM process, it looks up the database in the Lotus Domino cluster database directory 
and then sends a redirect response back to the end user. This operation is visible to 
the end user through a host of redirects. It will cause failures in the Lotus Quickr 
Desktop connector which does not expect to receive a redirect response. Similar 
issues can be observed with other integration points into Lotus Quickr. By using 
some type of load balancing appliance to fully virtualize the backend servers, a much 
cleaner overall experience is seen.
The load balancer needs to be set up with session affinity, such that when an end-
user request enters the cluster that request remains with one backend server for the 
life of the browser session. In the event of a failure on a backend system the request 
can be distributed to a different cluster member. If the end user closes the browser 
down and launches a new session, they could be redistributed to a different server in 
the cluster pool.
The load balancer's server pool containing the Lotus Quickr nodes are exposed 
to the end user as a Virtual IP Address (VIP). This VIP is assigned a DNS name 
accessible by end users within their network. For example, the user would enter 
http://quickr.example.com in their Web Browser and the Lotus Quickr Desktop 
Connectors would resolve it to the VIP. The Load Balancer would then distribute the 
requests to one of the backend Lotus Quickr cluster members. Keep in mind that in 
terms of Lotus Quickr this traffic is HTTP or HTTPS based in nature.
Each of the Lotus Quickr server nodes will individually respond to the user's request 
using the Load Balancer. The end user would never directly access the Lotus Quickr 
member itself without first going through the Load Balancer.

Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 74 ]
Any new data created by the end user is synchronized between the cluster members 
using the standard Lotus Domino cluster replication services. This is a critical point 
on the use of session affinity in the load balancing solutions deployed. As you may 
be aware, cluster replication is not instant. There is a delay in the time between a 
change being registered on one of the nodes and that change being distributed across 
the other cluster members. This delay can be a matter of seconds or perhaps minutes 
depending on numerous factors that we will get into later in this chapter. With Lotus 
Domino 8, streaming cluster replication services can significantly reduce the delay in 
updates across the cluster members. However, this value still needs to be considered 
across the cluster members.
The management of place and place type content across the cluster is handled by a 
special qptool command called replicamaker. The qptool replicamaker server 
task is intended to run as a scheduled program document and will properly create 
the replica stubs on the other cluster members when a new place or placetype is 
created. The use of this task will be discussed in more depth later in the chapter.
The other critical piece of the Lotus Quickr clustering picture is around directory 
services. If Lotus Domino is natively used for the user directory then each server 
will locally reserve the user and group information. However, if LDAP is used then 
those services also need to be configured behind a load balancer type solution. This 
will prevent an outage in one LDAP server causing outages within Lotus Quickr. If 
the Lotus Domino native directory is used, then each server will leverage the local 
directory services on that system.
IBM Lotus Quickr cluster installation
The installation of a Lotus Quickr cluster starts with the same steps outlined in 
Chapter 4 , Installation of IBM Lotus Quickr. Each member of the cluster begins life 
as a single server installation of Lotus Quickr. Ideally the locally defined Lotus 
Quickr administrative user should match both in name and password across the 
cluster members. This is primarily to ease in overall system administration of the 
environment going forward.
The member needs to be fully configured including SSO configuration and 
traditional Domino setup. The basic Lotus Quickr configuration needs to be  
repeated on each system including the initial fixpack and/or hotfix installation.
The real fun starts after the base systems are set up and running. It is advisable to 
test each system respectively at this time before moving forward with the clustering 
configuration. This will enable an easier diagnosis of potential problems before 
expanding the system complexity.

Chapter 5
[ 75 ]
As discussed earlier in this section, the Load Balancer should already be configured 
at this point. This means defining the following elements:
• 
A DNS name associated with an IP address that will represent the cluster to 
end users
• 
The Port numbers that will be presented to the end users. Generally this will 
be 80 (HTTP) and/or 443 (HTTPS) depending on the security requirements.
• 
A defined pool of Lotus Quickr servers that will make up the cluster
After the baseline testing and load balancer configuration has been completed, the 
next step is to start the Lotus Domino clustering process.
1.	 Open the Lotus Domino Administration client and select the first cluster 
member server document as shown in the following screenshot from the 
Configuration | Server | All Server Documents | view.
2.	 Click on the Add to Cluster action.
www.allitebooks.com

Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 76 ]
3.	 At the Verification dialog indicate that you wish to continue as shown in the 
following screenshot.
4.	 Select the Create New Cluster option and click on the OK button as shown 
in the following screenshot.
5.	 Enter a descriptive name for the new cluster name and click on the  
OK button.
6.	 Click Yes to perform this action immediately. Otherwise, click No to have the 
Domino Administration Process create the cluster.
7.	 At this point a successful cluster creation dialog should appear. Click OK  
to continue.

Chapter 5
[ 77 ]
At this point you should restart the server to verify that the clustering setup is 
present and loads successfully. This is indicated by the creation of a cluster directory 
database (cldbdir.nsf) as well as the starting of the cluster replication task. Unlike 
older versions of Lotus Domino, the cluster replication is started automatically and 
does not leverage the ServerTasks= notes.ini configuration.
The next step is back in the Lotus Domino Administration client to add the 
additional server(s) to the cluster. The process is the same for each additional  
cluster member.
1.	 Open the Lotus Domino Administration client and select the next cluster 
member server document from the Configuration | Server | All Server 
Document | view.
2.	 Click the Add to Cluster action
3.	 Click on Yes in the verification dialog shown in the following screenshot.
4.	 Select the cluster name created earlier and click on OK in the Cluster name 
dialog as shown in the following screenshot.
5.	 Select the creation method of the cluster. Click on Yes to perform this action 
immediately. Otherwise, click on No to have the Domino Administration 
Process create the cluster.

Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 78 ]
6.	 At this point a successful cluster addition dialog should appear. Click on OK  
to continue.
If the Lotus Domino Administration Process was used to perform the cluster creation 
then additional time will be required as these requests replicate across the servers 
and the request is processed. To minimize this time the immediate approach can  
be used.
The key action these steps accomplish is to define a new cluster name in the server 
document, to associate each of the servers with a common cluster name. Lotus 
Domino will initialize the required services during startup when it sees a value. As 
discussed earlier, after the server is restarted, the clustering tasks should be visible 
in the server console as shown in following screenshot. These include the Cluster 
Manager, Cluster Administrator, Cluster Replicator, and Cluster Directory tasks.

Chapter 5
[ 79 ]
The Lotus Quickr servers should now also see the other respective cluster members 
and be replicating content between the systems.
The clustering configuration can be verified using the show cluster Lotus Domino 
console command as shown in the following screenshot:
> show cluster
 Cluster information:
 Cluster name: QuickrCls, Server name: quickr1/Example
 Server cluster probe timeout: 1 minute(s)
 Server cluster probe count: 70
 Server cluster default port: *
 Server cluster auxiliary ports:
 Server availability threshold: 0
 Server availability index: 100 (state: AVAILABLE)
 Server availability default minimum transaction time: 3000
 Cluster members (2):
        Server: quickr1/Example, availability index: 100
        Server: quickr2/Example, availability index: 100

Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 80 ]
A few additional setup steps are recommended for a production environment:
1.	 Configure transaction logging on the servers. This is a requirement for DAOS 
if configured, but provides many other advantages on a production system 
related to backups and system restart times.
2.	 Allocate/configure the DAOS disk storage on each cluster member. 
Remember that DAOS is not shared across the cluster members and each 
server requires dedicated storage to take advantage of this feature.
3.	 Create a connection document to schedule regular replications between the 
cluster members of each database. Despite the fact that the cluster replicators 
capture in flight transactions, it is still a recommended practice to schedule 
a catch all replication event every few hours. This will be on top of the 
scheduled replication event required for qptool replicamaker discussed 
later in the chapter.
4.	 Configure the number of cluster replicators based upon the anticipated 
number of CRUD transactions the servers will process using the  
Cluster_Replicators notes.ini setting. The default is 1.
5.	 Configure a dedicated network connection between the cluster members for 
intra-cluster traffic. The default uses the primary server port. With modern 
gigabit network connections this is less of an issue than in the past, but 
still advisable if possible. The idea is to reduce potential network traffic 
contention between end users and servers.
6.	 Clean up the default server tasks that are not required on the cluster 
members. For example, if the server does not require the calendar connector 
or schedule manager, it doesn't need to be running. Thinking minimal is a 
good approach here.
At this stage the Lotus Quickr servers should be ready to begin the specific 
configuration steps outlined in the next section to make them cluster aware.
IBM Lotus Quickr cluster configuration
This section will complete the cluster configuration of the Lotus Quickr components 
to make them cluster aware. The good news is that once you become familiar  
with general Lotus Domino clustering practices they can be directly applied to  
Lotus Quickr.
1.	 Shut down all members in the cluster.
2.	 Delete the Place Catalog database (placecatalog.nsf) on all but one of the 
cluster members.

Chapter 5
[ 81 ]
3.	 Create a replica of the Place Catalog database (placecatalog.nsf) on the 
other cluster members.
4.	 Create a replica of the Place Catalog statistics database (PlaceStatistics.
nsf) on the other cluster members.
5.	 Create a qpconfig.xml on each cluster member, if not already present from 
the qpconfig_sample.xml file under the Lotus Domino data directory.
6.	 Edit the qpconfig.xml file on each of the servers to define the cluster name.
<cluster>
<master virtual="true" ssl="false">
<port>80</port>
<hostname>quickr.example.com</hostname>
<path_prefix></path_prefix>
</master>
</cluster>
This section should contain the common DNS name of the cluster and needs to 
match the load balancer configuration activities discussed earlier in the chapter. If 
SSL is configured on the cluster then the ssl="false" value should be changed 
to ssl="true" along with the correct port value (typically 443). Other settings are 
described in the Lotus Quickr product Information Center.
1.	 At this point make any other adjustments to the qpconfig.xml as required 
to configure the Lotus Quickr server. For example, the super user account 
and if appropriate, LDAP settings. The qpconfig.xml contains a wide range 
of potential settings. The file is largely self documenting using comments 
located within the file itself.
2.	 Adjust the ServerTasks entries in the notes.ini such that the following 
items are only run on one member of the cluster that has been identified as 
the Place Catalog server. The Place Catalog server is a logical administrative 
system that manages the Place Catalog database and compiles usage 
statistics. Additional information about the Place Catalog is available in the 
Lotus Quickr product documentation. If they are run on multiple servers 
various issues can occur such as replication save conflicts in the Place Catalog 
or duplicate newsletter generation.
ServerTasksAt1=qptool newsletter -daily –a
ServerTasksAt4=qptool refresh -a,qptool report 
-policyexecute,qptool register -pts
ServerTasksAt6=qptoolplacecatalog -update

Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 82 ]
3.	 Note that this does not affect the other standard scheduled Domino tasks, 
such as Updall and Design, outlined in the server's notes.ini configuration 
file. They should remain in place although in your environment the times 
might need to be adjusted. It is also possible to run some of them as program 
documents to provide finer control over the execution windows.
Example for quickr1/Example (acting as Place Catalog server)
ServerTasks=Update,Replica,Router,AMgr,AdminP,HTTP,LDAP
ServerTasksAt1=Catalog,Design,qptool newsletter -daily -a
ServerTasksAt2=UpdAll,qptool remove -cleanup
ServerTasksAt3=qptoolplacecatalog -push -a,qptooldeadmail -cleanup
ServerTasksAt4=qptool refresh -a,qptool report 
-policyexecute,qptool register -pts
ServerTasksAt5=Statlog
ServerTasksAt6=qptoolplacecatalog -update
Example for quickr2/Example
ServerTasks=Update,Replica,Router,AMgr,AdminP,HTTP
ServerTasksAt1=Catalog,Design
ServerTasksAt2=UpdAll,qptool remove -cleanup
ServerTasksAt3=qptoolplacecatalog -push –a,qptooldeadmail -cleanup
ServerTasksAt5=Statlog
4.	 Restart the HTTP servers on each of the Lotus Quickr cluster members to 
reload the qpconfig.xml settings.
5.	 Run the following command, on each one of the cluster members.  
It is important that this is run on only one server at a time. For  
consistency purposes, run it on the primary server first, but the  
order is not overly important.
load qptool register –server
This should update the placecatalog.nsf and 
placestatistics.nsf databases with a virtual document and 
server documents. In Lotus Quickr Domino 8.5, the Place Catalog 
will only show one virtual document. In previous releases it would 
show one for the virtual document as well as one for each physical 
server. In the statistics database it shows all of these documents.

Chapter 5
[ 83 ]
6.	 If the servers have existing places on them then you will also need to run the 
following command on each server, one at a time. These existing places will 
be synchronized in a later step with the replicamaker command.
load qptool register -a
7.	 Create a new program document in the Lotus Domino Directory to schedule 
the following command to run throughout the day. Commonly this is run at 
a 10-15 minute intervals:
load qptool replicamaker –t <server name> -a
8.	 The parameter <server name> would be defined as the other server in the 
cluster from the server running this qptool scheduled program document.
This command will search for new places and PlaceTypes on both the 
source and target systems. As such it does not matter which server(s) 
are in the cluster it runs on as long as adequate coverage is defined. If 
there are only two servers in the cluster it is not necessary to have more 
than one qptool replicamaker program document. However, if 
more than two members exist then a pattern of program documents is 
required to allow coverage across all members. Additionally, qptool 
replicamaker does not replicate the database contents. It only creates 
the required replica stubs. It depends on the normal Lotus Domino 
replication process to populate the content. Generally this is handled by 
a scheduled replication document. It is worth considering that until the 
place is fully replicated, the content will not be available on the other 
cluster members. The timing for scheduled intra cluster replication 
needs to be considered for availability of new places.
9.	 Restart the servers and verify that they start without errors.
It is important to note that the Lotus Quickr Administration place that maintains 
various configuration elements about the environment, is not replicated across the 
cluster members. This must be configured individually to be the same on each system.
This chapter does not dive into details related to the setup and 
configuration of a dedicated Place Catalog server. The concept of a Place 
Catalog server is discussed in much more detail within the product 
documentation. This system has a place in a cluster either as a dedicated 
system or as a dual function with one of the cluster members. The 
examples discussed here follow the pattern of having one of the cluster 
members function as the Place Catalog server. If it was on a dedicated 
system it would need changes to be made to the ServerTasksAt values 
as well as some additional tweaks in the qpconfig.xml, to identify the 
dedicated server.

Clustering IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 84 ]
IBM Lotus Quickr cluster management
There are a few aspects to consider when managing a cluster over a single  
server deployment.
The first is around deployment of fixes on the servers. The process has been in a state 
of transition in the past so it is important to review the specific steps that are released 
with each set of fixes. In general the fix files need to be deployed across all cluster 
members. However, any qptool commands should only be executed on one cluster 
member unless instructed otherwise. Replication will then transfer the place level 
changes to the other systems in the cluster.
The synchronization of place content is a bit unique in a cluster. When a new place 
or placetype is created it only exists on one server in the cluster. This will be on the 
server that the creating user is accessing at that moment, using the load balancer. 
Then the qptool replicamaker will run periodically using the schedule defined 
earlier in the chapter. The qptool replicamaker command will create the necessary 
stubs on the other servers in the cluster. At this point though, those replica stubs 
need to be populated before they can be used. If a user attempts to access a replica 
stub using the browser they will receive an error message. The population of the 
place contents happens initially using a scheduled replication event on the servers 
and then using the cluster replicator. It is important to understand this flow and 
synchronize the schedules of these events to prevent potential issues.
The cleanup process works similar to that in a single server environment, but must 
be run on each server in the cluster to be effective. When a place is deleted by an 
end user, it isn't physically removed from the file system immediately. Instead the 
database title is changed and a daily scheduled event deletes it from the file system 
and other locations. This is the purpose of the qptool remove—cleanup task.
Monitoring replication traffic is important in a cluster. This will show not only the 
raw number of changes exchanged between the servers, but more importantly, how 
long on average it takes for a change to be transferred. This time on queue transfer 
average is a key statistic as it can provide an indication that additional cluster 
replicator tasks are required or that the cluster members have a bottleneck between 
them. For example, if the cluster members are not collocated and transfers occur over 
a WAN link, then the time on queue can rise quickly.

Chapter 5
[ 85 ]
Summary
This chapter explained clustering through Lotus Quickr for Domino and hit  
on some key points required to get it functioning correctly. Overall the Lotus 
Domino product stack handles the core components and the associated heavy  
lifting. Clustering Lotus Quickr only requires a fairly minimal amount of 
configuration beyond a single server.
As other components of Lotus Quickr are discussed throughout this book,  
any special consideration in terms of clustering will be mentioned. For example,  
in the Lotus Quickr Desktop Connector section, examples will show interaction  
with a cluster.


Managing IBM Lotus  
Quickr Servers
This chapter is going to help you with the daily administration of your IBM Lotus 
Quickr Server. In this chapter, we will detail some of the most commonly used 
administrative functions of Lotus Quickr for Domino. This chapter will also include 
information on the following items.
• 
Using the site administration tools
• 
Admin process
• 
Detailed use of the qptool commands
Using the site administration tools
Managing the Lotus Quickr server from a browser gives you access to many settings 
used for the configuration of the server.
To access the site administration tools, navigate to the Lotus Quickr server using the 
web browser.
1.	 Login to the Quickr server using a Quickr administrator id.

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 88 ]
2.	 Locate the Site Administration link in the lower-left corner of your  
browser window.
3.	 Selecting the link will show the Site Administration menu.

Chapter 6
[ 89 ]
Security
The Security option allows you to choose who can create places on the server as well 
as those who can administer the server.
User Directory
The User Directory option allows you to choose your server authentication method 
for users who are logging into the server.
The options are:
• 
(No Directory): This selection allows Quickr to maintain the login credentials 
for the places local to the server.
• 
LDAP Server: This selection allows you to connect to a supported LDAP 
server for user authentication.

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 90 ]
Using the LDAP option will allow users to integrate the Lotus Quickr environment 
into other applications for single sign-on. Using the LDAP option will also allow you 
to integrate your Quickr server into other supported directories that end users may 
be using for access to other applications.
The following are supported directories for Lotus Quickr:
• 
Lotus Domino 8.0.2
• 
Tivoli Directory Server 6.2
• 
Lotus Domino 8.5.1
• 
Microsoft Active Directory 2003
• 
Microsoft Active Directory 2008
• 
Novell eDirectory 8.8
• 
Sun Java System Directory Server 6.1
• 
Domino Server: This selection allows you to use your Domino directory.
The Domino directory option is good for small organizations with only Lotus 
products that have no plans of adding non-Domino type servers. Sametime 
awareness is supported using the Domino directory option; however the best 
practice is to make sure the Lotus Sametime Server is also using Domino 
directory for authentication.
Other Options
The Other Options menu provides server-wide configuration options.

Chapter 6
[ 91 ]
The options that can be configured are as follows:
• 
Enable/Disable ActiveX and Java: Turns on and off ActiveX and Java 
Controls. Turning off ActiveX and Java will disable the ability for users to 
make changes to the place themes. This feature should only be disabled after  
the final theme changes are made.
• 
Enable/Disable Form PlaceBots: Turns on or off access for place managers to 
run PlaceBots.
• 
File Attachment Size Limit: Set the maximum size for a file attachment.
• 
Specify Sametime Servers: Settings for the Sametime Instant Messaging and 
Meeting Server.
• 
Domino Offline Passthru Server: Configuration for the passthru server 
which is used when accessing Quickr Offline.
• 
Alternate Offline Download URL: The URL setting for downloading the  
Quickr Offline installer. This feature allows you to host your connectors 
download, from another server other than your Lotus Quickr server. You 
may want to do this to limit traffic from downloading code, during peak 
times on your server.
• 
Email Link Format: Change the URL for place links displayed in outgoing 
e-mail messages.
• 
Calendar Subscriptions: Allows you to enable or disable members ability to 
subscribe to calendars.
AdminP and Quickr
In Lotus Quickr 8.5, IBM has added the ability to use the AdminP process, to do user 
renames and deletes. You must be using the Domino Directory(Native) or Domino 
LDAP for user authentication for this feature to work.
If the environment is using another LDAP directory source, the AdminP functions 
cannot handle the name change requests. Additionally, in a Lotus Domino directory-
based environment careful testing needs to be completed as there are conditions 
that could prevent name changes from functioning as expected. You are likely to see 
changes to this integration in future maintenance releases. In the interim, the existing 
qptool rename function is the most effective solution for handling large user or 
group change operations.
To enable this feature on a Microsoft Windows server:
1.	 Make sure the AdminP process is listed in the server tasks line of your notes.
ini file on the Quickr server.

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 92 ]
2.	 Add the parameter extmgr_addins=nqpcmextmgr to your notes.ini file.
3.	 Restart the Lotus Domino Server.
Sample notes.ini entries:
DefaultMailTemplate=mail85.ntf
Preferences=32
ServerTasks=Update, Replica, Router, AMgr, AdminPHTTP, LDAP 
ServerTasksAt1=Catalog, Design, qptool newsletter -daily -a
ServerTasksAt2=UpdAll, qptool remove -cleanup
ServerTasksAt5=Statlog
extmgr_addins=nqpcmextmgr
For parameters for other operating systems please refer to the Lotus Wiki  
http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf.
For configuration of the AdminP process in general please refer to 
the Domino Info Center. http://publib.boulder.ibm.com/
infocenter/domhelp/v8r0/index.jsp.
Managing place members
Place members can be managed using the qptool command from the server console. 
The following is a list and description of what can be changed using this tool, from 
the command-line, as a system administrator.
Adding an external member to a place
The following are examples of using the qptool command to add external members 
to places. An external member is someone who is outside of the local contacts.
nsf database for the place. This could be one of the users in you LDAP or Domino 
Directory that has been added to a place.
From the Quickr server console, you would issue the load qptool addmember 
parameters command.
The changemember command is used from the Lotus Quickr server console. An 
example of the command is:
load qptool addmember -dn "cn=Heather Reeds,ou=Marketing,o=Example" 
-author -allrooms -p Packt Book Place

Chapter 6
[ 93 ]
This command will add Heather Reeds to the Packt Book Place, as an author in all 
rooms of the place.
One advantage in using the addmember command is that multiple members can be 
added and access to the place from the web is not necessary. The following is an 
example.xml file for adding users.
<?xml version='1.0'?>
<service>
  <servers>
    <server local='true'>
      <places>	
        <place>
• 
This section is the place name
          <name>Packt Book</name>
• 
This section is for adding new users
          <members>
            <person action='add' id='newuser'>
              <dn>CN=Frank Adams,ou=users,dc=example, dc=com</dn>
            </person>
            </person>
          </members>
 
          <rooms>
            <room>
              <name>main.nsf</name>
             <access>
                <readers>
                  <member action='add'>
                    <link idref='newuser'/>
                  </member>
                </readers>
              </access>
            </room>
          </rooms>
         </place>
      </places>
    </server>
  </servers>
</service>

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 94 ]
Adding local members to places
Adding local members to a Quickr place that is not part of your Domino/LDAP 
directory is done via the end user UI. The following are the steps to add those  
users to a place. These members are listed in the contacts.nsf file for the place  
you are managing.
Login to the Quickr Server as either the place manager or as the Admin Super user, 
which is set in the qpconfig.xml file.
1.	 Navigate to the place you want to add external users.
2.	 Select the Members page from the Quickr place.
Once the Members page is selected, you will see a list of existing members of  
the place.

Chapter 6
[ 95 ]
3.	 Select the Create Members… button at the top of the members list. You will 
now be presented with a pop up box containing the fields to allow you to 
create an external user.
4.	 Select the level of access you want the user to have to the place and then 
complete the fields for the external user. Click on OK and the new external 
user will be added to the place.
Changing member names in places
The qptool changemember command is used to change the name of a local user, 
external user, or external group member in specified places.
The changemember command is used from the Lotus Quickr server console. An 
example of the command is:
load qptool changemember -p Packt Book Place -sourcedn "CN=Amy 
Chao,O=Example" -targetdn "CN=Amy Blanks,O=Example"
The qptool changemember command can also be used to rename users and groups 
from one value to another and to perform batch renames of large numbers of users 
and groups.
This feature can also take advantage of a XML file to do multiple name and group 
changes within a Quickr place. The following is an example of using an XML file to 
change user names and groups:
<?xml version='1.0'?>
<service>
  <servers>
    <server local='true'>
      <places>
        <place>

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 96 ]
• 
This section is the place name
          <name>Packt Book</name>
• 
This section is for adding new users
          <members>
            <person action='add' id='newuser'>
              <dn>CN=Frank Adams,ou=users,dc=example, dc=com</dn>
            </person>
• 
This section is used to remove users
            <person action='remove'>
              <dn>CN=Bill Jordan,OU=NA,O=Example</dn>
• 
This section is renaming people as well as moving them to a new OU. This 
is helpful if you change directories or move users within the LDAP tree and 
need to update the place with changes to the organization.
            </person>
            <person action='rename'>
              <dn>CN=Amy Chao,OU=NA,O=example</dn>
              <new_dn person='true'>CN=amy blanks,ou=users,, 
                 dc=example,dc=com</new_dn>
            </person>
            <person action='rename'>
              <dn>CN=Jody Liu,OU=NA,O=Example</dn>
              <new_dn person='true'> 
                 CN=Jody Doe,ou=users,dc=example,dc=com</new_dn>
            </person>
            <person action='rename'>
              <dn>CN=Glenn Cloud,OU=NA,O=example</dn>
              <new_dn person='true'>CN=Glenn D Cloud,ou=users, 
                 dc=example,dc=com</new_dn>
            </person>
          </members>
 
          <rooms>
            <room>
              <name>main.nsf</name>
             <access>
                <readers>
                  <member action='add'>
                    <link idref='newuser'/>
                  </member>
                </readers>

Chapter 6
[ 97 ]
              </access>
            </room>
          </rooms>
 
        </place>
      </places>
    </server>
  </servers>
</service>
Changing the hierarchy of a user name in a 
place
The qptool changehierarchy command is used to change the hierarchy of external 
user and group member names in places. This command should be used when 
people are moving within your directory, for example, to another OU. The OU 
may represent a new location or place. In the following example, all the users in 
the Oklahoma OU will be changed to the Texas OU. Another example of when this 
command could be used is if one of your office locations has moved and you wanted 
to rename all the OUs for the old office, to the new office name. These are just a 
couple of examples for using this command.
The changehierarchy command is used from the Lotus Quickr server console. The 
following is an example of the command:
load qptool changehierarchy -sourceh OU=Oklahoma,O=Example -targeth 
OU=Texas,O=Example -p Packt Book Place
Updating external member names in places
The qptool updatemember command is typically used when updating information 
for users that have changed in the user directory. This can be used in place of the 
server process if you want to manually update the information. The command 
updates the following information for external users:
• 
E-mail address
• 
First name
• 
Last name
• 
Phone number
• 
Display name for external users
• 
Display name for external groups

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 98 ]
The updatemember command is used from the Lotus Quickr server console. An 
example of the command is:
load qptool updatemember -dn "cn=Heather Reeds,ou=Marketing,o=Example" –a
This command will run and update all the user information for Heather Reeds in all 
places. This information is pulled from the user directory.
This process can also be used as a server task and run nightly to keep user 
information up to date in all places. The process for creating a server task for the 
updatemember command is shown in the following steps.
1.	 Open the notes.ini file for the Lotus Quickr server.
2.	 Navigate to the Lotus/Domino directory.
3.	 Edit the notes.ini file located in the Lotus/Domino directory.

Chapter 6
[ 99 ]
4.	 Add the text ServerTasksAt3=qptool updatemember -allmembers –a to 
the server task area of the notes.ini file.
5.	 After adding this task and restarting the Lotus Domino server, the Lotus 
Quickr server will now run the updatemember command every day at 3 AM. 
This time is changeable to whatever fits in your server maintenance window.
Removing members from places
The qptool removemember command is used to remove local or external members 
from places. This command can also remove external groups as well.
The removemember command is used from the Lotus Quickr server console. An 
example of the command is:
load qptool removemember -dn "cn=Heather Reeds,ou=Marketing,o=Example" -p 
Packt Book Place

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 100 ]
The removemember command can also be executed for multiple users from a XML 
file. Here is an example of the XML file below:
<?xml version='1.0'?>
<service>
  <servers>
    <server local='true'>
      <places>
        <place>
• 
This section is the place name
          <name>Packt Book</name>
• 
This section is used to remove users
            <person action='remove'>
              <dn>CN=Bill Jordan,OU=NA,O=Example</dn>
            </person>
          </members>
           <rooms>
            <room>
              <name>main.nsf</name>
             <access>
                <readers>
                  <member action='add'>
                    <link idref='newuser'/>
                  </member>
                </readers>
              </access>
            </room>
          </rooms>
 
        </place>
      </places>
    </server>
  </servers>
</service>
Changing local member passwords
The qptool password command allows you to change passwords for local members.
The password command is used from the Lotus Quickr server console. An example 
of the command is:
load qptool password -p Packt Book Place -u "Heather Reeds" -pw 
examplepassw0rd

Chapter 6
[ 101 ]
A scenario of when this command can be used, is to force a password change on a 
user but was the place owner that may no longer be with your company. It will allow 
you to login to the place as the user and change the place ownership.
Maintaining your Quickr server
This section will help you to maintain the actual Lotus Quickr server. This section 
contains information on the following items:
• 
Place Catalog statistics
• 
Generating reports for the Quickr server
• 
Maintaining your Quickr server in a cluster
Place Catalog statistics
The qptool placecatalog command is used to update statistics that are not 
updated real-time on the server.
The following statistics are updated using the placecatalog command:
• 
PlaceLastModified
• 
PlaceSize
• 
NumberOfReaders
• 
NumberOfAuthors
• 
NumberOfManagers
• 
NumberOfEditors
• 
NumberOfDocs
• 
NumberOfDrafts
• 
NumberOfAttachments
• 
NumberOfCustomForms
• 
NumberOfOfflineInstalls
• 
LargestDocSize
• 
LasyDayUses
• 
LastDayReads
• 
LastDayWrites
• 
LastWeekUses
• 
LastWeekReads
• 
LastWeekWrites

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 102 ]
• 
LastMonthUses
• 
LastMonthReads
• 
LastMonthWrites
The placecatalog command can be used manually from the server console or it  
can be added to the notes.ini file and setup as a scheduled server task. This task 
can then be configured to run multiple times in a day if more up to date statistics  
are required.
The following screenshot shows an example of this command being run from the 
server tasks setting in the notes.ini file. The outcome of this setting would cause 
the statistics for all the places on the server to be updated at 3 AM.
Generating reports for the Quickr server
The qptool report command can be used to pull information from the Place 
Catalog to generate reports about servers. This includes the following statistics: 
Name, Access Protocol, Access TCP Port, Access URL Prefix.
To run the sample report for all places simply complete the following steps:
1.	 Make sure the Place Catalog for the Quickr server has been full  
text indexed.

Chapter 6
[ 103 ]
2.	 From the server console enter load qptool –a –o quickrreport.xml.
3.	 The server will run the report against the Place Catalog and the output file 
will be stored in the /Lotus/Domino directory.
The following is an example of a sample report for all places:
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<service>
<servers>
<server>
<hostname>quickrd.example.com</hostname>
<host_url>quickrd.example.com</host_url>
<places>
<place locked="false">
• 
Place Name
<name>packtquickrbook</name>
<title><![CDATA[Packt Quickr Book ]]></title>
<size>12010</size>
• 
Last access date which for this place is 6/21/2010
<last_accessed>20100621T174451,13-05</last_accessed>
• 
Last modified which for this place was 7/12/2010
<last_modified>20100712T113103,98-05</last_modified>
• 
Notice in the following fields, anything that contains the word CDATA is a 
empty data field or is not contained in the place.
<place_description><![CDATA[This Place will be used in creating 
book content]]></place_description>
<place_managers><![CDATA[]]></place_managers>
<policy><![CDATA[Large Place]]></policy>
<placetype><![CDATA[Standard]]></placetype>
<policyid><![CDATA[300763E4EA989D0286257749006CBCE4]]></policyid>
<meta_data>
<PlaceServerIsMaster><![CDATA[1]]></PlaceServerIsMaster>
<PlaceServerIsVirtual><![CDATA[0]]></PlaceServerIsVirtual>
<h_Modified><![CDATA[20100712T113343,04-05]]></h_Modified>
<UpdateLastModified><![CDATA[]]></UpdateLastModified>
<PlaceTypeID><![CDATA[C4FB5D92A43356AD8625775E005AF9FD]]></
PlaceTypeID>

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 104 ]
• 
List of Placeowners
<PlaceOwners><![CDATA[CN=Heather Reeds,O=example]]></PlaceOwners>
<PlaceOwners_CN><![CDATA[Heather Reeds]]></PlaceOwners_CN>
<h_ShowInOnramp><![CDATA[]]></h_ShowInOnramp>
• 
Listing of Place owners e-mail addresses
<PlaceOwnersEMail><![CDATA[hreeds@example.com]]></
PlaceOwnersEMail>
</meta_data>
</place>
<place locked="false">
<name>reedsdemo</name>
<title><![CDATA[Reeds Demo]]></title>
<size>20733</size>
<last_accessed>20100809T132153,68-05</last_accessed>
<last_modified>20100712T113114,82-05</last_modified>
<place_description><![CDATA[]]></place_description>
<place_managers><![CDATA[]]></place_managers>
<policy><![CDATA[Large Place]]></policy>
<placetype><![CDATA[Standard]]></placetype>
<policyid><![CDATA[300763E4EA989D0286257749006CBCE4]]></policyid>
<meta_data>
<PlaceServerIsMaster><![CDATA[1]]></PlaceServerIsMaster>
<PlaceServerIsVirtual><![CDATA[0]]></PlaceServerIsVirtual>
<h_Modified><![CDATA[20100809T133405,02-05]]></h_Modified>
<UpdateLastModified><![CDATA[]]></UpdateLastModified>
<PlaceTypeID><![CDATA[C4FB5D92A43356AD8625775E005AF9FD]]></
PlaceTypeID>
<PlaceOwners><![CDATA[CN=Heather Reeds,O=example]]></PlaceOwners>
<PlaceOwners_CN><![CDATA[Heather Reeds]]></PlaceOwners_CN>
<h_ShowInOnramp><![CDATA[]]></h_ShowInOnramp>
<PlaceOwnersEMail><![CDATA[hreeds@example.com]]></
PlaceOwnersEMail>
</meta_data>
</place>
<place locked="false">
<name>reedsprojectplace</name>
<title><![CDATA[Reeds Project Place]]></title>
<size>4416</size>
<last_accessed>20100802T102824,35-05</last_accessed>
<last_modified>20100727T102506,62-05</last_modified>
<place_description><![CDATA[]]></place_description>
<place_managers><![CDATA[]]></place_managers>

Chapter 6
[ 105 ]
<policy><![CDATA[@@[nquickplacers.sidSystemPolicy_Name]@@]]></
policy>
<placetype><![CDATA[Standard]]></placetype>
<policyid><![CDATA[0185CF007866E1C086257720007237F6]]></policyid>
<meta_data>
<PlaceServerIsMaster><![CDATA[1]]></PlaceServerIsMaster>
<PlaceServerIsVirtual><![CDATA[0]]></PlaceServerIsVirtual>
<h_Modified><![CDATA[20100802T104448,24-05]]></h_Modified>
<UpdateLastModified><![CDATA[]]></UpdateLastModified>
<PlaceTypeID><![CDATA[C4FB5D92A43356AD8625775E005AF9FD]]></
PlaceTypeID>
<PlaceOwners><![CDATA[CN=Heather Reeds,O=example]]></PlaceOwners>
<PlaceOwners_CN><![CDATA[Heather Reeds]]></PlaceOwners_CN>
<h_ShowInOnramp><![CDATA[]]></h_ShowInOnramp>
<PlaceOwnersEMail><![CDATA[hreeds@example.com]]></
PlaceOwnersEMail>
</meta_data>
</place>
</places>
</server>
</servers>
<action_status action="getPlaces">
<code>0</code>
<start_time><![CDATA[20100818T155933,281-0500]]></start_time>
<end_time><![CDATA[20100818T155933,718-0500]]></end_time>
</action_status>
</service>
Maintaining your Quickr server in a cluster
Configuring your Quickr server for use in a cluster is important for making sure you 
have your data if a disaster occurs. Clustering is done using the standard domino 
clustering service however the best practices for maintaining that cluster will be 
described in this section.

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 106 ]
Understanding replicamaker
This section will explain what the replicamaker is doing in the background when you 
use the command. Clustering will be covered in more detail in Chapter 5, Clustering 
IBM Lotus Quickr.
1.	 Creates replica stubs for MAIN.NSF and CONTACTS1.NSF on the local server or 
another server when a place or PlaceType is created.
2.	 Makes a new copy of SEARCH.NSF on the local server or another server when 
a place is created.
3.	 Creates replica stubs on the local server or another server for any new rooms.
Automating replicamaker
To ensure that the replica stubs of new places, rooms, and PlaceTypes are created 
quickly and that replication then populates the places, rooms, and PlaceTypes, 
follow these steps:
1.	 Create a program document in the Domino Directory that runs the qptool 
replicamaker command with the -a –t parameter, between the servers 
in a cluster every five minutes. If there are more than two servers in the 
cluster, you must use more than one program document to run the qptool 
replicamaker command to ensure that replica stubs are created on all 
servers in the cluster.

Chapter 6
[ 107 ]
When the program document is functioning correctly, you will see the 
following messages on your server console.
2.	 Schedule non-cluster replication between all servers in the cluster, to occur 
at least every ten minutes, to compensate for any lags in cluster replication. 
The following screenshots show what the different tabs of your replication 
document would look like.
The Basics tab:

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 108 ]
The Replication/Routing tab:
The Schedule tab:

Chapter 6
[ 109 ]
Manually using the qptool replicamaker 
command
It is possible to use the qptool replicamaker from the main cluster server to 
perform various actions manually. The following are some examples:
• 
For the new place "Packt Book Place "on server quickr1, create replica stubs 
on the server quickr2/Example
load qptool replicamaker -p Packt BookPlace -t Quickr2/Example
• 
For the new place "Packt Book Place "on server quickr2, create replica stubs 
on the server quickr1/Example
load qptool replicamaker -p Packt Book Place -s Quickr2/Example
• 
For all new places, rooms, and, PlaceTypes created on the Quickr1, create 
replica stubs on Quickr2.
load qptool replicamaker -t Quickr2/IBM –a
• 
For all new places, rooms, and, PlaceTypes on Quickr2, create replicate stubs 
on the Quickr1 server.
load qptool replicamaker -s Quickr2/IBM -a
Using the qptool command
The qptool command is used to manage the IBM Lotus Quickr server places and 
place membership. This tool can be used from the command-line as well as part of a 
server process.
The following is an example of using the qptool command from the server console.
load qptool [command] [parameter]
The following is an example of the qptool command being run from the windows 
command-line, from the \Lotus\Domino directory:
nqptool [command] [parameter]
For information on using the qptool command with other operating 
systems and a list of qptool commands please see the Lotus Quickr 
Wiki. http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf.

Managing IBM Lotus Quickr Servers
[ 110 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we covered some of the basic tools you will need to manage an 
IBM Lotus Quickr Server in your environment. You can also find more detailed 
information about some of these commands on the Lotus Quickr Info Center as  
well as the Lotus Quickr Wiki: http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf. The next 
chapter will provide you with information on upgrading and migrating your Lotus 
Quickr server.

Upgrading and Migrating to 
IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5
In this chapter, we will be discussing the process required to upgrade your IBM 
Lotus QuickPlace and Quickr services to the new version, 8.5. While the premise 
may be the same for most versions, there are some unique aspects which must 
be considered. We will be discussing these aspects and providing guidelines to 
performing your upgrade, over the course of this chapter.
The process of upgrading
The process of upgrading an existing IBM Lotus QuickPlace or IBM Lotus Quickr 
server to version 8.5 is something you should do, no matter which preceding 
version your servers are currently running. There are numerous reasons to upgrade, 
including: security updates, upgraded web-related software, compatibility with 
more recent operating systems such as Microsoft Windows 7 or Microsoft Windows 
Server 2008 x86-64 option, and compatibility with new versions of business 
productivity suites like Microsoft Office and advances in Lotus Domino and Lotus 
Sametime as well.
You have many options to accomplish the task of upgrading however, the project 
must be planned appropriately.
Start at the beginning, look at your existing hardware and network operating 
systems. Do these meet the latest hardware requirements as detailed by IBM in the 
wiki (http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf)? Are these older servers ready for 
additional usage? Are they up-to-date with their versions and patches or updates? 
If these need to be updated, start setting that plan in motion with ordering new 
hardware or defining the change management plans to get everything prepared and 
up-to-date.

Upgrading and Migrating to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5
[ 112 ]
Upgrading IBM Lotus Domino
Once the base level is there, do you need to upgrade Domino to the latest 
version that runs Quickr 8.5 (http://www.ibm.com/support/docview.
wss?uid=swg27009740)? Before you start upgrading your Domino server, we should 
step back a minute and review some key items that should be considered:
1.	 Your 'Corporate Names' and 'Address Book', contained in the names.nsf 
file should be the priority, always. If you are already at the latest version of 
Domino then, there is no need to worry. However, if you are on an older 
version and are therefore using an older template for your names.nsf, you 
need to plan for the upgrade across all of your servers.
2.	 You should check the On-Disk Structure or ODS version  that your Domino 
files are running and bring all important databases, such as names.nsf and 
any existing places, to the latest version which is 51(as of 8.5). A small change 
to many, but not upgrading decreases your servers performance.
3.	 If you have used LDAP integration, you will need to test your Domino 
infrastructure upon upgrading your Domino names.nsf as well as testing 
all your other applications which are relying on LDAP itself. There were 
changes in Domino 8.5 which may affect other applications adversely.
4.	 If you use IBM Lotus Sametime integration, this may be a good time to upgrade 
those servers as well. If you need more information on Sametime integration, 
see Chapter 12, Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products.
5.	 Backup everything. The entire Domino directory files. You can never be  
too careful.
We will discuss the secondary steps in the following paragraphs, but first we need to 
get the basics covered, once you have the infrastructure ready.
First, you will need to sign in to the Lotus QuickPlace or Quickr server as a server 
administrator and document the settings in Server Settings/Security, Server 
Settings/User Directory, and Server Settings/Other options.
Ensure at least one manager is shared across all the rooms in each place/
site. This manager will become the place owner in Lotus Quickr 8.5. If 
there is no manager for all of the rooms in a place, an owner will need to 
be manually assigned by the server administrator after the upgrade.
On the server, enter the following command at the server console, to update statistics 
in the Place Catalog:
load qptool placecatalog -push –a

Chapter 7
[ 113 ]
With the basics out of the way, let's start discussing the options which are available 
to you, depending on the version of IBM Lotus QuickPlace or Quickr you are  
currently running.
Which version are you running today?
Hopefully, most of you reading this book are already running IBM Lotus Quickr and 
not still running the older IBM Lotus QuickPlace versions. With this in mind, we 
should start with the most recent versions of IBM Lotus Quickr and work our way 
back to IBM Lotus QuickPlace.
The following diagram represents the paths for upgrading:
Version 8.1 or 8.2
This following line is from the preliminary Quickr 8.5 documentation:
Customers currently running the English language version of QuickPlace 7.0  
or an earlier release must upgrade to Lotus Quickr 8.0, or later, before installing 
Quickr 8.5.
If you are on version 8.2 or 8.1 of IBM Lotus Quickr, you can perform an in-place 
upgrade to 8.5, providing you first upgrade Lotus Domino to 8.5. This should  
mean that you could shut Domino down, run the Quickr 8.5 installation files and 
then start your server. This is of course, not entirely true, as there are many more 
steps to be taken.

Upgrading and Migrating to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5
[ 114 ]
Upgrading the IBM Lotus Domino server
So, what is truly involved in upgrading the Lotus Domino server? 
1.	 The first thing to do is ensure the qpconfig.xml file (found in the default 
installation directory of root\IBM\lotus\domino\data) and all the places 
and PlaceTypes have been properly backed up.
2.	 Make sure the IBM Lotus Domino server has been shut down and any Web 
applications or services which listen on, or use the HTTP port 80 for TCP/IP 
or IBM Lotus Domino itself are stopped.
3.	 Run the setup.exe found in your installation files and follow the on-screen 
directions to complete the upgrade.
4.	 If you will be using the Quickr connectors and we strongly encourage 
everyone to do so, be sure to install the newest versions of the Quickr 
connectors. This will provide access to IBM Lotus Notes, IBM Lotus 
Sametime, Microsoft Windows Explorer or Microsoft Office applications.
Unlocking the places
Now that you have restarted your server and all looks good, we can move on to 
upgrading the individual places. We start by unlocking all of the places.
To unlock all your places at once, enter the following command at the IBM Lotus 
Domino server console:
load qptool unlock -a
You will now need to use the qptool upgrade command to upgrade the design of 
all the databases found on the IBM Lotus Quickr server.
To upgrade the design of the databases from the IBM Lotus Domino server console, 
enter the following command:
load qptool upgrade -f -server
Once the upgrade is finished, you will notice that there is a file created in the 
IBM Lotus Domino program directory, called qptool.upgrade.xml. The file lets 
you know if the upgrade was successful or if there were any errors. This file is 
overwritten every time the qptool upgrade command is run. The qptool.upgrade.
xml file contains XML code which may look like the following:
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<service>
<servers>
 <server>

Chapter 7
[ 115 ]
    <hostname>servername</hostname>
    <placetypes/>
    <places/>
    <action_status action="forceUpgrade">
      <code>code number(0 if successful)</code>
      <message>error message(if there's an error)</message>
    </action_status>
 </server>  
</servers>
</service>
The themes which were used in previous versions have been updated in 8.5. In order 
to take advantage of them, you will have to run a qptool command.
Once a place's theme is upgraded to the 
new theme in 8.5, it cannot be reverted to 
a non-8.5 based theme later.
Enter the following command at the Lotus Domino server console: load qptool 
settheme -a (this will update all themes).
Using a -? at the end of a command 
will show you the optional ways to run 
the tool.
If you have been a responsible administrator, then you have probably done this 
already, but it is a good idea to clean out any unused or retired places. The command 
do this at the Lotus Domino server console is:
load qptool remove -cleanup
Place information is the next item that should be updated. Use the qptool register 
command to update all of the place information in the Place Catalog on the IBM 
Lotus Quickr server.
Enter the following command from the Lotus Domino server console:
load qptool register -a -install

Upgrading and Migrating to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5
[ 116 ]
You have the option to upgrade all places and PlaceTypes at once or perform 
this task incrementally. However, before you make your choice, please keep the 
following limitations in mind:
• 
Before upgrading places and PlaceTypes, you will not be able to use existing 
places or PlaceTypes to create new places or PlaceTypes.
• 
Any custom policies which may exist will be lost when places and 
PlaceTypes are upgraded.
• 
Remember to not modify or refresh PlaceTypes until they have been 
upgraded, otherwise the system will make changes to the PlaceTypes,  
that will prevent them from successfully upgrading.
• 
When a place is upgraded, the user interface parts SiteMapLauncher and 
MyPlaces are not added to any custom themes. Place managers must add 
these components themselves afterwards.
• 
Keep in mind places are locked while they are being upgraded. If you 
upgrade multiple places all at the same time, only one place will be locked  
at a time.
• 
To log server activities related to upgrading places and PlaceTypes, use the 
notes.ini setting QuickPlaceUpgradeLogging=value, where value is 
a number from 1 to 4. Only enable upgrade logging temporarily to aid in 
troubleshooting.
• 
If you are upgrading all places at once, be sure to review the output.xml 
file to check that the upgrade completed successfully for each place. If the 
upgrade process stopped at a particular place or error messages are issued 
for a particular place, you will need to perform the following:
°°
Restore the place from a backup.
°°
Correct any problems reported.
°°
Run the upgrade for the new version of the specific place. During 
the first upgrade attempt, some processing may have been done that 
can cause the remaining processing not to be attempted, if another 
upgrade for the original version of that place is attempted.
As you can see, the easiest way to upgrade all your places and PlaceTypes is to do 
the upgrade all at once. However, it is of the utmost importance that once the upgrade 
begins, the process should not be stopped. We have seen this process take anywhere 
from minutes, to hours, to days so make sure that the UPS is plugged in and charged 
just in case. So, if there are a large number of places or PlaceTypes, you may wish 
to upgrade your places and PlaceTypes incrementally. If the upgrade process stops, 
you can force an upgrade after restoring and repairing the place that caused the 
process to stop.

Chapter 7
[ 117 ]
Depending on your environment, you may need to run a Domino notes.
ini parameter to restrict access to the server during this process: Add server_
Restricted=1.
• 
To run the upgrade process, type the following command from the IBM 
Lotus Domino server console:
load qptool upgrade -a
• 
Alternatively, if there are places which are not normally upgraded, you can 
force an upgrade using the following command:
load qptool upgrade -a -f
• 
If you prefer to perform the upgrade incrementally, type the following for 
each place:
load qptool upgrade -p placename
Once the preceding upgrade process has completed, you must use the qptool 
unregister command to unregister all the places. Then you must use the qptool 
register command to re-register the places with the Place Catalog. These steps add 
the place fields into the Place Catalog that are new in IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5. You can 
unregister and re-register all places at once.
• 
To unregister all places, enter the following command at the server console:
load qptool unregister –a –placecatalog
• 
To re-register all places, enter the following command at the server console:
load qptool register –a –placecatalog
You may recall that we discussed the On-Disk Structure (ODS) versions, previously 
in this chapter. However, what we did not discuss previously was how to enable 
it for your server. The Quickr installation will add a parameter in your notes.
ini called CREATE_R85_DATABASES=1. This will, by default, enable ODS 51 so that 
all new places are created with the latest level. However, no IBM Lotus Domino 
databases are upgraded to ODS 51 by default, during the upgrade.
Instead, after upgrading to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5, administrators need to use the 
command compact -c so that existing places are upgraded to ODS 51.
In a clustered environment, the compact -c command 
should be run on each node of the cluster.

Upgrading and Migrating to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5
[ 118 ]
To compact all databases for the entire server, enter the load compact -c command 
using one the following methods:
• 
From a command line run from the Domino program directory when the 
server is down:
ncompact -c LotusQuickr
• 
From the Lotus Domino server console:
load compact -c LotusQuickr
Let's talk about DAOS
DAOS stands for Domino Attachment and Object Services, which run under 
IBM Lotus Domino. It is part of IBM Lotus Domino starting with release 8.5. Its 
primary function is to consolidate attachments from multiple databases, in a 
separate repository on the server, so that they can be retrieved upon request. This 
can potentially save significant space at the file level, by sharing data identified as 
identical, between databases or applications on the same server. Another benefit is 
that this can reduce backup windows by greatly reducing mail file sizes.
To enable DAOS, an administrator needs to set up the IBM Lotus Domino server 
for the task to run properly. Afterwards, the administrator needs to mark selected 
databases for attachment consolidation as follows:
• 
Ensure transaction logging is enabled (for more details on transaction 
logging, see the IBM Lotus Domino Wiki page found at http://www.lotus.
com/ldd/dominowiki.nsf).
• 
Make sure Shared Mail is disabled.
• 
Fill in the four fields on the DAOS tab of your server document.
°°
Store file attachments in DAOS: Set to Enabled
°°
Minimum size of object before Domino will store in DAOS (bytes): 
The default was 4096 for release 8.5. 64,000 is recommended
You can use the DAOS estimator tool to provide a more optimal 
attachment size. You can find the tool here: http://www.ibm.com/
support/docview.wss?uid=swg24021920
°°
DAOS base path: Specify a file path for DAOS storage. This file path 
can be a valid absolute path (for example, C:\DAOS on Windows), 
or a relative path to be created as a subdirectory of the Domino data 
directory. The default is "DAOS"

Chapter 7
[ 119 ]
°°
Defer object deletion for (days): The default is 30. This  
is recommended
• 
From the Lotus Domino administrator, select Tools | Advanced Properties.
• 
Enable the Use Domino Attachment and Object Service advanced database 
properties for every database on the server that you want to be consolidated.
• 
Enter load compact -c daos on x:\ibm\lotus\domino\data"x:\ibm\
lotus\domino\data to move existing attachments to the DAOS repository 
replacing the directory option by either a filename or a specific directory like 
your mail directory.
• 
Restart your server.
Version 6.5.1 or 7.0 of QuickPlace
To upgrade from IBM Lotus QuickPlace 6.5.1 or 7.0 to Lotus Quickr 8.5, you would 
be wise to perform a side-by-side upgrade. A side-by-side upgrade means that a new 
physical server, which is running IBM Lotus Domino and Quickr 8.5, is required. 
In this scenario, the IBM Lotus QuickPlace data files and system settings are first 
migrated to the new server and then upgraded to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5.
For Microsoft Windows or IBM AIX systems, the Lotus QuickPlace 
and Lotus Quickr servers must be on separate systems. For IBM i 
systems, these servers can be on the same or separate systems. 
While this may sound extreme, however, in order to not cause undue issues for your 
users, this is truly the best route to take.
So how is this route different from the previous in place upgrade?
Much of the preliminary work is the same: scope out the server and requirements, 
back up everything, clean up anything that may have not been done in the past.
Then when you are ready, start with the existing names.nsf. If your existing server 
uses the IBM Lotus Domino server as a user directory, you must replicate the names.
nsf between the existing and new Lotus Domino servers.
If you are running a clustered environment, replicate the IBM Lotus QuickPlace files 
throughout the cluster to ensure that you have the most recent files, before starting 
the upgrade process.

Upgrading and Migrating to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5
[ 120 ]
Then, working with only one Lotus QuickPlace server and one Lotus Quickr server 
at a time, migrate the upgraded files throughout the target cluster when the upgrade 
is complete.
Are offline services enabled?
If you are upgrading a Lotus QuickPlace server that is set up for offline use, then 
offline users should perform the following steps on their clients, before you stop the 
server for the final time. Users will need to re-install places offline after the upgrade 
is complete.
1.	 Synchronize offline places with the Lotus QuickPlace server.
2.	 Click on Start | Programs | Lotus Domino Sync Manager | Uninstall Lotus 
Domino Sync Manager.
3.	 Shut down the Lotus QuickPlace machine.
If Lotus QuickPlace uses LDAP as a user directory, install a new Lotus Domino 8.5 
server to run Lotus Quickr 8.2, which will become the target server.
If QuickPlace uses the Lotus Domino server as a user directory, install the new 
Domino server using the steps which are appropriate for your environment.
If you only have one IBM Lotus Quickr server which is also the only IBM Lotus 
Domino server in the environment, then follow these guidelines to update the server:
1.	 Copy names.nsf from the previous installation into the new server  
install location:

Chapter 7
[ 121 ]
2.	 Copy over from the old server all .id files but especially the server, cert, 
and admin ID files:
3.	 Run Domino 8.5 server setup, as outlined in Chapter 4, Installation of  
IBM Lotus Quickr.
4.	 Select Set up the first server or a stand-alone server.
5.	 Enter the server name.
6.	 Select I want to use an existing server ID file.
7.	 Select I want to use an existing certifier ID file.
8.	 Enter the Domain name.
9.	 Select I want to use an existing Administrator ID file.
10.	 Select the services to run by default.
11.	 Configure network ports.
12.	 Configure secure settings.
13.	 Confirm server settings.
14.	 Finish setup.
If there are other Lotus Domino servers in the environment, the process is  
slightly different:
1.	 Obtain the directory details from other server in Domain.
2.	 Obtain the location for the original server.id file.
3.	 Run Domino 8.5 server setup using the guidelines in Chapter 4, Installation of 
IBM Lotus Quickr,with these slight differences.
°°
Select Set up an additional server.
°°
Select the location of the ID file.
°°
Confirm the server name.
°°
Select the services to be run by default.
°°
Configure network ports.

Upgrading and Migrating to IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5
[ 122 ]
°°
Select the other server to provide system databases.
°°
Select Set up as a primary Domino Directory.
°°
Configure secure settings.
°°
Confirm server settings.
°°
Finish setup.
Now that Domino has been installed, the next step is to install Lotus Quickr 8.1  
or 8.2 on the new server. Once this is completed, you will need to configure the  
user directory and other Lotus Quickr options, to match the previous Lotus 
QuickPlace options.
Next you should compare the new qpconfig.xml settings with the saved  
qpconfig.xml backup file. Then you will need to update all the user-defined  
settings to match your previous Lotus QuickPlace environment.
Now we need to copy the existing Lotus QuickPlace places to the Lotus  
Quickr 8.2 server.
This can be done by using a file system command to copy the place's directory and 
contents from the domino_data_root/QuickPlace directory on the original server, 
to domino_data_root/LotusQuickr on the target server.
Also, don't forget your PlaceTypes, copy the Lotus QuickPlace customized 
PlaceTypes to the Lotus Quickr 8.2 server.
This can be done by using a file system command to copy the customized 
PlaceType's directory and contents from the domino_data_root/QuickPlace/
AreaType directory on the original server, to domino_data_root/LotusQuickr/
AreaType on the target server.
Once completed, you can then follow the directions found earlier in this chapter for 
an in place upgrade to get to release 8.5.
Summary
Many of you reading this chapter are probably thinking about how long this process 
will take, but it really all depends on how much data you need to upgrade or move. 
However, it is worth remembering that these are some basic guidelines, which have 
been discussed as best practices from IBM and other places, and tested live by the 
authors numerous times.
No matter if you are still on IBM Lotus QuickPlace or running the latest fix packs for 
release 8.2, you now have an excellent resource to help you move forward.

Managing Places in  
IBM Lotus Quickr
This chapter will cover managing places on a IBM Lotus Quickr server. This chapter 
will dive deep in the following areas:
• 
Creating places
• 
Place Catalog
• 
Place Statistics
• 
Locking and unlocking places
• 
Backup/archive and restoring places
• 
Policies
• 
Managing PlaceTypes
Creating a place
The process for creating a place in Lotus Quickr is a simple process. However, many 
steps happen behind the scenes at the backend, when the end user or administrator 
creates a place. These steps include the following:
• 
Selecting a place
• 
Completing information about the place
• 
Building the place sub-directory
• 
Creation of the Quickr databases
• 
Creation of the mail in database record

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 124 ]
In the following steps, we will outline in detail what happens behind the scenes as 
well as telling you what is created and where:
1.	 From the Lotus Quickr My Places page, click on the Create a Place button:
2.	 After clicking on the Create a Place button you will be asked to select a 
PlaceType. With an out of the box installation, you will have only three 
PlaceTypes available to create a place. It is possible to create custom 
PlaceTypes to be added to the list and that will be covered later in this chapter.
3.	 After selecting the PlaceType you will be asked to enter information  
about the place you are creating. Fill in this information and select the  
Create button.

Chapter 8
[ 125 ]
The information needed about the place is as follows:
°°
Name of Place—This is what you want the name of the finished place 
to be. This is changeable, later, from within the place.
°°
Description—This is a brief description of what the place is and what 
information might be contained in the place.
°°
Permanent URL—This is a short name for the place that can be 
accessed from the browser without navigating to the My Places page. 
This name needs to be unique. To use this URL you would simply 
enter the following, into the browsers address bar: http://quickr.
example.com/shortname.
°°
User name—This should be the user name that you used to login to 
the Lotus Quickr server. It's used for offline access.
°°
Password—This should be the password used to login to the Lotus 
Quickr server.
°°
Make this user a local id for this place only—This option allows you 
to set a user name and password different from your normal login 
details, that is only stored in the local contacts.nsf database.
°°
Send me an email confirming the information on this page—This 
option will generate an e-mail with all the information you filled in 
the previous fields.

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 126 ]
4.	 Upon clicking the Create button, several processes happen in the background 
of the Quickr Server. First, a place directory is created under /data/
Lotusquickr. The name of the directory matches the place name and is 
unique. Under the place directory, three databases and one full text index are 
created. The databases that are created are: 
°°
Contacts1.nsf—Contains data about place members and access 
levels. This database is created from the Contacts.ntf template.
°°
Main.nsf—This is the parent database of a place created from the 
MeetingRoom.ntf template.
°°
Search.nsf—Contains search information for the place.
5.	 After the databases are created, a Domino Mail database entry is created in 
the Quickr server Domino Directory. The entry name corresponds to the 
name used to create the Quickr place. The entry in the directory must be 
unique. If the place creation process discovers that the name is not unique, 
the creation process will fail with an error message. You should check the 
Lotus Domino Directory as well as the /data/Lotusquickr directory for 
possible duplicate names.

Chapter 8
[ 127 ]
6.	 Lastly, the system creates an entry in the PlaceCatalog.nsf and the 
PlaceStatistics.nsf for the new place. 
Place Catalog
The Place Catalog is the master list of all places on the Quickr server. Listed in the 
Place Catalog is information about the place including, owner information and access 
control information.
Each place has its own entry in the Quickr Place Catalog. The information in the 
place catalog is used to build the My places page for the users. If a place is not 
displayed in the My Places page, you should verify that it's listed in the Place 
Catalog and that the user name matches the user that's missing the place. Typically, 
you should not need to edit the Place Catalog and caution should be taken before 
doing so. It is possible to rebuild the Place Catalog by deleting the catalog.nsf file 
from the server and restarting the Quickr server. After the server has restarted issue 
the following command:
load qptool register place catalog - a
This command will add all places in to the /data/Lotusquickr directory.

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 128 ]
The following is an example of a Place Catalog entry:
Place Statistics
The PlaceStatistics.nsf file contains statistical information about each place on 
the server including the following fields:
• 
PlaceLastModified
• 
PlaceSize
• 
NumberOfReaders
• 
NumberOfAuthors
• 
NumberOfManagers
• 
NumberOfEditors
• 
NumberOfDocs

Chapter 8
[ 129 ]
• 
NumberOfDrafts
• 
NumberOfAttachments
• 
NumberOfCustomForms
• 
NumberOfOfflineInstalls
• 
LargestDocSize
• 
LasyDayUses
• 
LastDayReads
• 
LastDayWrites
• 
LastWeekUses
• 
LastWeekReads
• 
LastWeekWrites
• 
LastMonthUses
• 
LastMonthReads
• 
LastMonthWrites
These data fields are updated by the server process placecatalog –push –a which, 
by default, runs at 3 AM on the Quickr server. These fields can be manually updated 
from the server console by using the following command:
load qptool placecatalog –push –a
Managing places
This section will cover managing the places that have been created on the system. 
Items to be covered in this section are as follows:
• 
Locking and unlocking places
• 
Archiving/backing up places
• 
Restoring places
• 
Place policies

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 130 ]
Locking and unlocking places
In Quickr 8.5, we have two ways of locking places. The first way is by using the 
qptool command from the Quickr server console, and the second method is by 
using the Quickr Administrator user interface (UI) from the My Places server page. 
Locking a place takes it in and out of service without having to restart the Quickr 
server. Administrators may want to use this feature to lock a place that needs 
maintenance or if they didn't want users to add to or log into a place. This can be 
helpful if you are wanting to archive a place from a certain point as this will not 
allow anyone to make changes until the place has been unlocked.
To lock a place using the the qptool command use the following syntax (replacing 
the words place name with the actually name of the place that you wish to lock):
load qptool lock -p place name -message "The Place is down for 
maintenance"

Chapter 8
[ 131 ]
To unlock a place using the the qptool command, use the following syntax:
load qptool unlock -p placename
To lock/unlock a place using the Administrator UI, please complete the  
following steps:
1.	 Login as the Quickr administrator.
2.	 Select Place Administration from the bottom-left hand corner of the My 
Places page:

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 132 ]
3.	 Select the place that you wish to lock by checking the box next to the  
place name.
4.	 Select the More Actions button and then select Lock to lock the Quickr place.
After locking a place, a small lock icon will appear in the lock field indicating 
that the place is now locked:
5.	 To unlock a place follow steps 1 to 4 again but this time selecting Unlock 
from the More Actions menu instead of Lock: 
Archiving a place
Use the qptool archive command to copy place directories and their contents to a 
specified archive directory.

Chapter 8
[ 133 ]
Use the archive command when you want to perform the following:
• 
Back up active places by archiving them to a target directory without 
deleting them from the server.
• 
Back up active places before moving them to another server.
• 
Back up inactive places before removing them from the server.
To archive/backup a quickr place complete the following steps:
1.	 From the Quickr server console issue the load qptool –dir c:\
quickrbackup  -p packtquickrbook –o archivelog command:
2.	 The tool will run on the server, producing an archive copy of your Quickr 
place. During the archive process it will create the directory that you chose as 
part of the archive command, as well as a subdirectory with a corresponding 
name to the place which you are archiving.

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 134 ]
3.	 After the tool finishes you will be able to navigate to your backup directory 
and make sure the place was archived.
4.	 You will also have a log file which by default is created in the /Lotus/
Domino directory. The log file will contain information about the place and  
the backup.
Restoring a place
If you archived a place and removed it from the server but now wish to restore it, use 
the qptool unlock and qptool register commands.
1.	 Use a system copy command to copy the archived place back to the domino_
data_root\LotusQuickr directory.
2.	 Enter the following commands at the server console:
load qptool unlock -p place
load qptool register -p place –install

Chapter 8
[ 135 ]
3.	 The previous command will unlock the archived place and enable it ready 
for access. The –install command adds the place record back into the Place 
Catalog so that end users will be able to see it from the My Places page.
More information and parameters for the archive/
restore command can be found in the Lotus Quickr Wiki: 
http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf.
Renaming places
Renaming a Quickr place can be done with the server still up and running using the  
following steps:
1.	 Issue the following commands from the Quickr server console:
load qptool unregister -p currentplacename
load qptool lock -p currentplacename
This step unregisters the place from the Place Catalog and locks it so users 
can't access the place while it's being renamed.
2.	 Enter the following command from the Quickr server console to release any 
open database handles:
Dbcache flush
3.	 Through the system, rename the place's folder in the domino_data_root\
LotusQuickr directory.
4.	 To finish the rename process, issue the following commands from the Quickr 
server console.
load qptool unlock -p newplacename
load qptool register -p newplacename –install
This command unlocks the place so that users may access it and adds the place with 
its new name into the Place Catalog.
www.allitebooks.com

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 136 ]
Creating place policies
Creating policies allows you to control how large places can get, and how long 
a place can be inactive before the owner is notified and the place is locked. The 
following steps will show you how to create a custom policy that will fit the needs  
of your organization.
1.	 Login to the server as the Quickr administrator and select Place 
Administration from the lower-left corner of the My Places page:
2.	 Select Policies and then select the Create new policy button to create a new 
place policy:

Chapter 8
[ 137 ]
3.	 Complete the policy information box with information that is relevant to 
your environment. Notice you can control place size as well as lock the 
place if it has not been accessed in a certain number of days. The following 
screenshot, is an example of what a Large Place policy might look like. After 
filling in the fields click on OK to save the policy:
4.	 Policy document choices are as follows:
°°
Policy name—This is the name you would like to call the policy. It 
should be descriptive so that you understand what the policy is for. 
It is possible to name the policy the same as the place name if that 
policy is going to be unique to one place.
°°
Maximum size—This field controls the maximum size a place can 
grow to on the server. After the maximum size is reached the place 
will be locked and access will be blocked to that place. The warning 
limit can be set to send an e-mail to the place manager and members, 
if the warning limit size is exceeded.

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 138 ]
°°
Expiration—This field allows you to lock the place, if after a certain 
number of days the place has not been accessed. The warning limit 
allows you to send an e-mail to place managers and members, if the 
maximum number of inactive days have been exceeded.
°°
Lock/Warning tabs—This allows you to choose whether the place 
managers or place members get the lock/warning messages. It also 
allows you to customize the message that is sent when the maximum 
values have been reached.
The policy has now been created and will be available to be assigned to a place or 
template. This will now be covered in the following section of this chapter
Assigning policies to a place
After policies have been created on the server, it is then possible to assign these 
policies to a place as well as a template. When a policy is assigned to a specific 
Quickr place that policy will be enforced for that place only.
To assign a policy to a place, complete the following steps:
1.	 Login to the server as the Quickr administrator and select Place 
Administration from the lower-left corner of the My Places page:

Chapter 8
[ 139 ]
2.	 Select Places from the top tab. You now have a list of available places to 
assign a policy to:
3.	 Select the place to which you would like to assign a policy to, using the 
checkbox next to the place name.

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 140 ]
4.	 Select the Assign policy button: 
5.	 Select the policy from the pop up box that you would like to apply to the 
selected place(s). After selecting the policy click on the OK button:
6.	 The policy has now been assigned to the place which you selected.

Chapter 8
[ 141 ]
Assigning policies to a template
After policies have been created on the server, it is then possible to assign these 
policies to a place as well as a template. When assigning a policy to a Quickr 
template, the policy will be enforced for all future places created using that template.
To assign a policy to a template, complete the following steps:
1.	 Login to the server as the Quickr administrator and select Place 
Administration from the lower-left corner of the My Places page:
2.	 Select Templates from the top tab. You now have a list of available places to 
assign a policy to:

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 142 ]
3.	 Select the template to which you would like to assign a policy to, using the 
checkbox next to the template name.
4.	 Select the Assign policy button:
5.	 Select the policy from the pop up box that you would like to apply to the 
selected template(s). After selecting the policy click on the OK button:
6.	 The policy has now been assigned to the place template which you selected.

Chapter 8
[ 143 ]
Managing PlaceTypes
In this section, we will cover information on managing places on a Lotus Quickr 
server. The topics we will cover are as follows:
• 
Creating a PlaceType from an existing place.
• 
Reordering PlaceTypes.
• 
Hiding/unhiding of PlaceTypes.
• 
Refreshing of PlaceTypes through web.
• 
Refreshing of PlaceTypes using qptool command.
Creating a PlaceType from an existing place
Creating PlaceTypes from existing places can be useful when you have a Quickr 
place that would make a good template. Maybe you have a place that you build over 
and over for each project and by making it into a PlaceType you could take the work 
out of recreating the place structure each time. You also have the option to reuse the 
members list of the existing place if that is necessary.
To create a new PlaceType from an existing Quickr place you will need to follow the 
steps as shown:
1.	 Login as the place owner and select the place you want to use to create the 
new PlaceType.
2.	 Select the Customize button in the upper-right corner of your Quickr place to 
open the customize options for your place:

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 144 ]
3.	 Select PlaceType Options from the customize menu:
4.	 Select Yes on the Allow PlaceTypes to be created from this place? option on 
the PlaceType Options page:

Chapter 8
[ 145 ]
5.	 Login to the Quickr server as the Quickr administrator and select Work with 
Templates on the My Places page:
6.	 Select the Create PlaceType button:

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 146 ]
7.	 Name the new PlaceType and select the relevant place from the drop-down 
box and click Next. The place you marked in step 4 should appear in this 
list. If the place is not listed make sure you have the Allow PlaceTypes to be 
created from this place? option set to Yes.
8.	 After adding the PlaceType, the new template will be listed in the template 
list on the Quickr server:
Reordering PlaceTypes
If you would like to reorder your list of PlaceTypes you can do so by completing 
the following. You might want to reorder your place list to have your corporate 
templates appear first on the list and the lesser used templates appear towards 
the bottom. This will help end users to easily find the correct place templates. If 
you would like to reorder your list of PlaceTypes you can do so by completing the 
following steps:
1.	 Login to the Quickr server as the Quickr administrator.

Chapter 8
[ 147 ]
2.	 Select Work with Templates from the My Places page.
3.	 Click on the Reorder button:

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 148 ]
4.	 Using the up and down arrow buttons you can reorder the list of PlaceTypes. 
Click on the Next button to save the new order.
5.	 The final output looks like the following screenshot:
Hide/unhide PlaceTypes
It may also be necessary from time to time, to hide a PlaceType from the list of 
available places. To hide/unhide PlaceTypes use the following steps:
1.	 Login to the Quickr server as the Quickr administrator.
2.	 Select Work with Templates from the My Places page:

Chapter 8
[ 149 ]
3.	 Click on the Show/Hide button:
4.	 Deselect any PlaceType you would like to hide from the list and click on the 
Next button:

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 150 ]
5.	 After hiding the PlaceTypes you should see a visual confirmation that the 
places are now hidden: 
PlaceTypes design updates
When refreshing a PlaceType you have two options for upgrading its design. One 
option is using the qptool command from the Quickr server console and the other 
is using the Work with Templates web UI. Please see the following steps to complete 
a PlaceType refresh.
Refreshing a PlaceType through the web
1.	 Login to the Quickr server as the Quickr administrator.
2.	 Select Work with Templates from the My Places page:

Chapter 8
[ 151 ]
3.	 Select the PlaceType you wish to refresh from the list of PlaceTypes.
4.	 Click on the Edit button:

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 152 ]
5.	 Select Yes, copy changes and update the information below and click on 
Next (if you select No only the title and thumbnail graphic will be updated).
6.	 On the server, the qptool refresh command should be executed to refresh 
the selected place from the updated PlaceType.
For further information on what actual fields are changed, during a 
refresh, please refer to the Lotus Quickr Wiki at http://www.lotus.
com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf. For further information on refreshing places, 
please check the Quickr wiki.
Refreshing a PlaceType using qptool command
This section will describe how to refresh a PlaceType using the qptool command 
from the Quickr server console.
1.	 Determine the name of the PlaceType you want to refresh by navigating to 
the /Domino/data/LotusQuickr/Areatypes directory:

Chapter 8
[ 153 ]
2.	 Issue the following qptool command from the Quickr server console.
Load qptool refresh -pt blog -o refreshlog
The –pt switch in this command is the PlaceType that you wish to refresh 
the design of. The –o parameter will create an output log of what actually 
happened with the command.
Once issued, the command starts the refresh process on server and refreshes 
the elements from the original PlaceType.

Managing Places in IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 154 ]
3.	 Check the log file, which is located by default in the /Lotus/Domino 
directory of the server, for any errors that may have occurred during  
the refresh.
Other parameters that you can use with the qptool refresh 
command are explained in more detail in the Lotus Quickr 
Wiki at http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf/dx/
Refreshing_using_the_qptool_refresh_command_qd85 
under the section Refresh using qptool refresh command.
Summary
This chapter gives you detailed information on how to manage Quickr place and 
PlaceTypes in a Lotus Quickr Domino environment. Further information and best 
practices can also be found in the Lotus Quickr Wiki located at http://www.lotus.
com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf.
In the next chapter of this book, we will cover customizing the IBM Lotus Quickr 
user interface. It will dive deep into changing the way Quickr looks to the end user.

Customizing IBM  
Lotus Quickr 
Usually the first question from the business people we meet, sounds similar to 
this: "Can we customize Lotus Quickr without too much effort?" The IT people in 
the meeting begin to cringe. Why? Because they know that customization of Lotus 
Quickr can cause headaches. Not big ones, but little ones which normally appear 
during upgrades and maintenance down times.
For those of you worried about those little headaches, we will show you how 
to make some enhancements and how to ensure you retain them, even during 
upgrades. We will be discussing customization ideas around logos, colors, creating 
templates from your designs, and more.
As an administrator, you should be able to follow our guidelines to produce some 
successful customizations. You can either document these customizations yourself, 
for reference at a later date or simply keep this chapter readily available.
You bought it, now brand it
Congratulations on your purchase, now that it is installed and running, you open it 
up and you have a new place to work. However, it could use some enhancements to 
give a more personalized look and feel. No matter whether you are the largest fast 
food restaurant on earth or the latest start-up technology company, or a simple  
non-profit organization, everyone wants to show pride through company colors, 
logos, and even font types.
Some questions that you may have now include: Where do we start? What options 
do we have? What access do we need to make these changes? Do we need an 
administrator or a developer, and who can anyone make these changes?

Customizing IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 156 ]
Changing the logo
Let us start at the beginning. When you first login to your server using a supplied 
URL which usually resembles this: http://www.servername.com/lotusquickr 
(this will always take you to the default home page) and then you will see a screen 
that looks similar to the following screenshot, in its top-left corner:
The Lotus Quickr logo in the corner is not a URL link back to IBM or Lotus page, it 
is just a graphic file. Yes, it does have some specific sizing requirements (106 pixels 
wide x 22 pixels high) but a slightly larger logo can be substituted in its place. 
Anything too large and it be displayed correctly depending on the screen your end 
user will be working on.
Can the end user do this? Where is this file stored? How do you make sure you  
put your logo in the correct location of the server? Let us review each of these 
questions separately.
No, the end user can not make this change as it takes place on the server file side. 
Your administrator or developer can make this change for you , providing you 
supply them with the directions found here.
Where is the file stored? On your IBM Lotus Quickr Server if you right-click on the 
logo in your browser of choice, you will see the option to "view the image". When 
you select this option, the screen will refresh and you will only see the logo on the 
screen. If you now look at the address line of your browser you should now see the 
file location of the logo displayed there. You should see something along these lines: 
http://www.servername.com/qphtml/skins/common/images/logo.gif.
IBM Lotus Domino puts all of the HTTP or web-related files by default in a path 
similar to: C:\Lotus\Domino\Data\domino\html\.
Thus, when you need to find the logo file, logo.gif, you would need to find it on 
your server in a directory structure that looks like the following: C:\Lotus\Domino\
Data\domino\html\qphtml\skins\common\images\logo.gif.

Chapter 9
[ 157 ]
The file logo.gif is a 565 bytes file and you can now replace it with any file you 
need, as long as it is in a .gif format. But before you do this, copy the existing  
logo.gif to another file, call it original_logo.gif. Now you can copy the new 
logo file to this directory. Once it is copied, rename the new logo file to logo.gif.
The server will accept the file change immediately, so if you go back to your browser 
and refresh the home page, you will see your logo. Sound simple enough? It may 
take a few tries to get the sizing right but you can use any graphic program to edit 
the file down to meet the size for this placement.
Congratulations! You just completed the first step in customizing your IBM Lotus 
Quickr sites by branding every page with your corporate logo.
Creating a place
Now let us presume that you want to create a site which will become a template for 
all the other sites on the server.
The home page contains a button which looks like the preceding image and you 
should click on it to start the process of creating your new site on the server.
This will take you to a new screen where you select a template to use. For 
demonstration purposes we will be using the Standard Place for Teams  
template, which you should click on to get to the next page.
This screen asks you to fill out some basic information, such as the name of your 
place, also called a site, and provides space to describe your place. You can also 
customize the name of your place, although we suggest you to keep it as simple  
as one word so that you will be able to jump right to the place using a URL of 
http://www.servername.com/placename.

Customizing IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 158 ]
You then need to supply your login name and your password, check the box to 
e-mail you the details of the place you are creating, and finally select Create. There 
will be a new window that appears to let you know that your new place is ready and 
clicking on the links will take you directly to it.
Customizing your place
Now you have reached the proverbial blank page. Time to customize the place 
before you start adding anyone or any files to it. Any owner of a place can do this 
section without any administrators or developers required.
Looking at the top-right corner of the screen, you will see some buttons under the 
search pane, and one that says Customize. Select this one and let's look at what we 
can do next.
You should now be looking at a window which has the following options, we have 
included the explanations for each item as well:

Chapter 9
[ 159 ]
1.	 Basics—Choose a logo, reorder the table of contents, show or hide various 
items, select notification, mail-in, offline, and other options, delete the place.
2.	 Choose a Theme—Change the way your place looks. Choose an overall 
visual theme for it from a gallery of standard themes, plus any custom 
themes you have created.
3.	 Forms—Create custom forms for authors to fill out. Forms can have fields 
such as text, pop-up lists, and so on, and a workflow such as approval cycle 
or editor-in-chief.
4.	 PlaceType Options—Use this place as a template for future places. Choose 
whether this place can be used as PlaceType and which of its features to 
include in future places based on it.
5.	 Custom Themes—Create custom themes for your place, to give it a new 
layout and visual style. Upload new custom themes, and edit or delete 
existing custom themes.
6.	 PlaceBots—Customize how your place operates by creating PlaceBots - 
procedures that run when a form is submitted or on a scheduled basis.
With so many choices and options we will start at the top and work away through 
each of the choices.
Basics
Clicking on the Basics option produces a window which looks similar at first to the 
original page we saw when we created the place, but looking further down the page 
you will see a variety of choices:

Customizing IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 160 ]
After the initial choices of deleting your place, renaming it, and editing the 
description, there is an option to upload a logo or create one using the Logo Maker. 
So you can be as creative as you want or take the simple option.
You could upload your logo and move down to the next section but that wouldn't 
really be too exciting, that is unless your company spent some serious money on 
branding this project or team or whatever reason it is you are creating this place, in 
this case upload the logo.
If you choose to use the Logo Maker, the first thing you will be asked to do is to 
enter the text for the logo and then you will see a list of about 20 graphics to choose 
from. Select whichever one that is relevant to you, there are no incorrect choices here.
At the end of the graphics is a drop-down box which asks if you want the text to be 
animated. This is up to you, but remember that the purpose of your site is probably 
not to scare people from using it. So if you think this will be good, and it turns out to 
not look right later, simply return here and try something else.
Now you get to Choose a size and color for your text from the color picker as shown 
in the following screenshot. The second color chart provides a background color for 
your graphic in case you need or want one.

Chapter 9
[ 161 ]
The last option on the page is for a font to use in your graphic and you have the 
choices as shown in the following screenshot:
Once you have made your choices, select the Next button from the bottom of the 
page to return to the original Basics page. There you will see your logo, the following 
screenshot shows the one we made for our Customizations place.
Now you have the choice to reorder the table of contents in your place or leave it as it 
appears by default.
What follows next is a long list of items to choose whether they should be shown or 
hidden. Some of the choices are security related, others are about what you want the 
people using the place to work with, or without. Leaving the default options is a safe 
option. For instance if you do not use Sametime, then the choice to hide the chat link 
is probably a good choice.

Customizing IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 162 ]
A key part of the functionality of IBM Lotus Quickr are the notifications that are sent 
to members of a place. You have the following options to choose from:
When you click on Customize News you have the choice of daily or weekly updates 
and a choice of what aspects get reported on.
Click on Next to return back to the Basics menu and you should see Incoming Mail. 
From here you can enable the place to accept incoming e-mails. Enabling Incoming 
Mail allows users to e-mail content such as documents or updates straight into  
the place. 
The next two options are specific to environments that are very restricted in  
their usage of  web features, and if necessary you can select to disable Activex  
and Java applets.
The last two remaining options are related to taking the places offline which 
synchronizes the place to an individual desktop and enable it to be used offline 
(without Internet connectivity to the Quickr server). The first option asks if you want 
to take offline places and encrypt them using one of the three levels of encryption or 
use none. The second option grants the person taking the place offline, to use their 
login password when an online password has not been created.
Now that you have made these decisions it is time to finish this page by clicking on 
the Done button which will return you to the original Customize page.

Chapter 9
[ 163 ]
Choose a Theme
Selecting Choose a Theme will take you to a new screen which will provide you 
with the option to customize your theme or use an existing one, if you had any 
saved. If this is a new server then you will be taken back to the home page of the 
place you have created. Quickr by default comes with a set of themes. The list will be 
displayed, making a theme available for selection.
Forms
Selecting the Forms option will show you a new window, from which you can 
create customized forms for use in your place. Clicking on New Form will display a 
window which allows you to begin the process of creating a new form.
Start by entering a title for the new form. Add fields as you require. As you can see 
from the following screenshots, there are many choices for you to select from or 
create as you require.
Once you have selected a field to create, you will be asked for a name and a 
description for the new field. Selecting Next will bring you back to the original 
Forms page where you can now select a workflow type.

Customizing IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 164 ]
Clicking on Modify will bring you a group of choices in a new window, as seen in 
the following screenshot:
With little effort on your part you can have a highly effective workflow process 
defined for your human resources department, finance team, sales staff, or even your 
children's school.
The remaining options on the page include the possibility to: create version 
documents with this form, assign a folder for the forms documents to be stored in, 
and the text to be used for the button which will create this new form. Of course you 
can also provide more details or explanations for the form before selecting Done.
After clicking on the Done button, you will be brought back to the create as form 
page where you need to click on Close. This should then return you back to the 
home page of the place you created.
To test that the form you created is available in your place, click on the drop down 
Place Actions button found in the top-right corner of the place, as seen in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 165 ]
Select New and the form you created should be the last item on the list. In the 
following screenshot we have used Biz Cards as our example of a newly created form:
Placetype Options
Placetype Options allow you to save an existing place as a template for future usage. 
The system calls these templates Placetypes. This is helpful if you are preparing a 
place which will be used for repetitive situations. For instance, patients of doctors or 
clients of businesses, IT projects, and countless other possibilities. If you will create 
a new place for each individual item, but want each place to look and feel the same, 
this is where you can make it happen.
The first question you will be asked is do you want Placetypes to be created from 
this place. Select Yes for this example. The next line asks if you want to include a 
description which is followed by an image (that you may want to use to represent 
this Placetype) and any URL which may provide extra information.
There are options to do the following:
• 
Include current members of the place in all future Placetypes, saving 
someone a large amount of administration.
• 
Give the place creator, manager access to rooms in places created from the 
PlaceType, this also helps keep administration efforts to a minimum.
• 
Show the members page. This is important because if you do not, how will 
you manage membership in the place? Not to worry, the form does stipulate 
this for those who had not thought about it yet.
• 
Allow managers to make changes to the table of contents section.

Customizing IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 166 ]
Lastly you can choose which areas of the place can be included in the  
future Placetypes.
The following screenshot shows the checkbox options for this and once you have 
completed the choices, click on Next to save your changes:
Custom Themes
Customizing a theme does require a bit more effort from you compared to the other 
customizations we have discussed. When you select Custom Themes you will get 
a secondary window which comes up showing any custom themes you have made 
or asking to create a new one. Select New and you will then be asked to name the 
theme and provide more details about it.
While writing this book, it was found that Internet 
Explorer was required for this option to be enabled.
You will now be presented with four upload boxes which in the words of the place, 
"Provide a style sheet file and the HTML layout files for reading and editing content".

Chapter 9
[ 167 ]
Here is where you would upload the following items:
• 
Style Sheet (.css file)—defines visual style (fonts, colors, etc.) for all layouts.
• 
Page Layout (.htm file)—defines the layout of content while being read.
• 
Edit Layout (.htm file)—defines the layout of content while being edited.
• 
List Folder Layout (.htm file)—defines the layout of list and  
discussion folders.
Once you have loaded these files, the last action is to provide an image to be used in 
the Themes Gallery, for others to use for their own places.
At the time of writing the logo size must be 
no larger than 80 x 60.
It is important to get your web developers involved with this part, if you need to, as 
it may take some work to make it all look and feel right when it gets used in a place.

Customizing IBM Lotus Quickr
[ 168 ]
PlaceBots
PlaceBots are like mini agents, described in the documentation as follows "PlaceBots 
allow you to add new behavior to your place. A PlaceBot is a Lotus Domino agent, 
written in Java or LotusScript, that can run either when a form is submitted or on a 
scheduled basis".
This means that you can design it yourself or with the help of a developer. But trust 
us, the effort is worth it, especially if you are using a place that will be interactive or 
used specially for submitting documentation and forms.
Clicking on PlaceBots will take you to a new window, where you can click on New 
PlaceBot which takes you to a form.
After providing a name and description for the PlaceBot, you have to make a choice 
of how the PlaceBot will run, either on an event or at a set scheduled time.
If you want to choose to run it on an event you have a list of options to select from as 
shown in the following screenshot:
After you have made your selection, you will need to input your Java code and Java 
classes, if required, and then click on the Done button.
If you want to run a PlaceBot on a scheduled basis, you have the following options:
• 
You can select the PlaceBot to run against all documents or just new ones 
and on one or all of the folders in the table of contents of the place.
• 
There are the following options for the frequency it should run, monthly, 
weekly, daily, and more than once a day or hourly, as well as disabling  
for weekends.
• 
You can also set a specific date when the PlaceBot should start to run or 
finish running and of course an option to disable it entirely.

Chapter 9
[ 169 ]
Summary
With so many options to choose from and design, its hard to imagine anyone would 
ever need more, isn't it? Yet, what we have covered here is just the very basic tip of 
the iceberg and nearly all of it can be done without outside help.
You are now ready to provide your organization, places and themes for their 
projects, clients, or whatever else you require. The choices are endless and the 
capabilities you can provide should reduce startup efforts for others.


IBM Lotus Quickr 
Connectors
The IBM Lotus Quickr connectors provide a rich integration environment for end 
users, beyond the traditional browser experience. This allows users to manage 
collaborative content directly from inside the traditional desktop products. The 
following sections will cover the Lotus Quickr connectors deployment, management, 
and a new capability around Windows-based single sign-on.
Overview of connectors
The Lotus Quickr connectors consist of an application that is deployed to end user 
workstations. This application provides integration with the following services, out 
of the box:
• 
Microsoft Windows Explorer
• 
Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, and PowerPoint)
• 
Microsoft Outlook
• 
Lotus Symphony
• 
Lotus Notes
• 
Lotus Sametime

IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors
[ 172 ]
The following screenshot shows an example of the Microsoft Windows Explorer 
connector integration.
On the server-side, integration is available with the Lotus Quickr Services product 
sets for both Lotus Domino and WebSphere Portal-based architectures. The other 
backend integration target is with Enterprise Content Management products. The 
following IBM products are supported through an additional software installation:
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr Services for IBM FileNet  
• 
IBM Lotus Quickr Services for IBM Content Manager
Additional information about the ECM integration is covered in Chapter 12, 
Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products.
Connector deployment
The Lotus Quickr connectors are available using a link in the product browser 
interface. This allows the connectors to be downloaded and installed with relative 
ease, assuming the necessary permissions exist for this installation. Generally, this 
requires the user to have direct administrator access to the workstation or to be 
able to run the installer as an administrator. A common practice when users have 
restricted access levels on the workstation, is to use a silent installer to deploy the 
connectors under the necessary authority levels.

Chapter 10
[ 173 ]
The installation process is pretty standard in accordance with other products.  
A list of available installation options, outlining the various integration services  
is shown in the following screenshot:
Depending on which features are selected, the associated product's installation path 
must be verified and adjusted if necessary. When integrating into the Lotus Sametime 
client, it requires the standalone client and not the integrated client embedded within 
the Lotus Notes client. The Quickr connectors provide direct integration into the Lotus 
Notes client. After the installation has completed the connectors have no places added 
by default, so the next step is to add places into the connector.
To add places to the connectors, enter the Lotus Quickr or appropriately configured 
ECM server URL. The add places option can be accessed either in Windows Explorer 
or by right-clicking the Quickr Monitor in the Windows system tray. Next, provide 
the necessary credentials for the server. This can be done by entering a User ID and 
Password as shown in the following screenshot:

IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors
[ 174 ]
If the Integrated Windows Authentication option is selected as shown in the 
following screenshot, the User ID and Password values will not be required. This is 
because the current Windows user credentials will be sent to Lotus Quickr.
The Integrated Windows Authentication services will be covered in more detail later in 
this chapter. The Lotus Quickr connectors provided this client-side capability starting 
with version 8.2. However, at that time the Lotus Quickr server platforms didn't 
natively support the required SPNEGO (Simple and Protected GSSAPI Negotiation 
Mechanism) services. With the Lotus Quickr 8.5 release, the SPNEGO services are 
now available natively in the Lotus Domino server. This allows the direct client-side 
Integrated Windows Authentication to function correctly. Lotus Quickr can leverage 
this feature as well as other Lotus Domino web-based services, such as iNotes.
After authenticating with the server a list of available places should be presented. 
This list will show places that the authenticated user has access to, either through 
direct membership or from public access.

Chapter 10
[ 175 ]
When the place is added to the connector it will be visible through any of the 
supported products to manage content.
The Lotus Quickr connectors can also be distributed using standard software 
deployment tools. For example, by running the qkrconn.exe installer with the /help 
command line argument, a full set of configuration options are displayed that can 
tailor the installation behavior.
Therefore, running the following example of the command will silently install  
the desktop connectors, enabling the Microsoft Windows Explorer and Microsoft 
Office features.
qkrconn.exe /install /quiet ADDLOCAL=WindowsExplorer,MicrosoftOffice
Leveraging policies with the connectors
After the base installation of the Quickr connectors, features exist allowing the 
assignment of local policies to the workstation, to manage various preferences,  
pre-configure servers, and pre-configure places. The preference settings cover  
all of the visible values available in the connector preference interface. These  
include items such as the default authentication type and whether the passwords are  
to be saved by default.
The ability to administratively control the defined places on the connectors is a 
very powerful service. For example, the organization could have a set of places that 
should be made available to all end users as part of the deployment.
The policy interface for the Lotus Quickr connectors is managed by the QuickrCfg.
exe command. The default configuration filename is QuickrCfg.xml.
The basic command syntax for the QuickrCfg.exe command is as follows:
QuickrCfg.exe [Primary command function (ie import/export)] [Option to 
apply to command] <file name to process>
The command provides a range of base functions. The primary ones are defined in 
following list:
• 
Backup of current configuration (-backup)
• 
Restore from configuration backup (-restore)
• 
Export configuration to file (-export)
• 
Import configuration from file (-import)
• 
Display help (-help)

IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors
[ 176 ]
Each of these are passed as command line arguments to the QuickrCfg.exe 
program. This program is deployed as part of the base Lotus Quickr connector 
software deployment process.
The options further control how the function is executed. For example, it is possible 
to exclude certain types of settings from being processed. It is also possible to control 
whether the new settings or places should be merged, replaced, or overwritten in the 
existing client configuration.
In an environment that uses an automated client deployment tool, the QuickrCfg.
exe command can be run after the base installation program. This would allow a 
tightly controlled configuration to be predefined on the user's workstation prior 
to usage. The creation of a baseline configuration would generally involve the 
administrator setting up one workstation with the desired preferences and places 
defined. Afterwards this the configuration would be exported to a file. This file could 
then be used for other workstations. Care must be taken around user credentials that 
might be stored in the exported file.
Some other potential uses of these policy files are possible if some custom  
scripting is used. It would be possible to read the current places a user has defined 
and adjust the list. For example, if a place was moved between servers.  
The server URL for the place would be different after the .move. The configuration 
file itself is XML-based and as such most scripting tools can easily adjust the content 
to tailor specific configurations.
For additional information regarding this configuration tool, refer the IBM Lotus 
Quickr connector product documentation.
Implementing desktop single sign-on
One of the key features released with Lotus Quickr 8.5 is Integrated Windows 
Authentication (IWA). This is a Microsoft term for a pretty basic concept of 
Windows-based single sign-on. For the more technical readers, this also can be 
referred to by the technique leveraged during the handshake called SPNEGO. 
The intention of IWA is that the user's current Windows credentials are sent to a 
backend server. This should prevent the user from being challenged to re-enter their 
credentials, assuming the authentication is successful.
To setup this level of SSO, several components need to be configured not only on the 
workstation, but also on the server-side. If the Lotus Quickr and/or Lotus Domino 
administrator is not one of the Microsoft Active Directory administrators, it is time to 
reach out to them now. The setup requires careful co-ordination to function.

Chapter 10
[ 177 ]
The aim of this section isn't to go in full detail for all of the available options in 
setting up IWA, but instead to demonstrate a basic setup. Given the wide range of 
potential workstations—Domino and Microsoft Active Directory configurations-it 
is not practical to cover them all. The Lotus Domino 8.5.1+ product documentation 
provides a good set of reference material on how to setup various configurations: 
http://publib.boulder.ibm.com/infocenter/domhelp/v8r0/topic/com.ibm.
help.domino.admin85.doc/H_SETTING_UP_SPNEGO_AUTHENTICATION_FOR_WEB_
CLIENTS_STEPS.html.
The following information outlines the steps required to setup IWA with Lotus 
Quickr 8.5 and the connectors. This example assumes that all the user accounts are 
located in the Microsoft Active Directory only. It does not go into specifics around 
name mapping. Consider at the end of this, a user that has successfully authenticated 
with the Microsoft Active Directory Domain should be able to access the Lotus 
Quickr server either using a supported Web browser or desktop connectors, without 
providing additional credentials.
1.	 Determine the DNS name that the server will be accessed on by end users. 
This could be the Domino server name or if a load balancer is used, then the 
virtual name assigned to the Lotus Quickr cluster. In this example, quickr1.
example.com is used.
2.	 Create a user account in Microsoft Active Directory that will be used for the 
SSO integration. This step is important as on Windows-based Lotus Domino 
servers this is the service account the server will run under. In this example, 
quickr1sso is used as the account name.
3.	 Create a new SPN (Service Provider Name) entry in Microsoft Active 
Directory. This is ultimately used during end user authentication to verify 
credentials. The SPN is created with the Windows Resource utility setspn. 
The following example demonstrates the execution of the setspn command 
on the Microsoft Active Directory Domain Controller.
setspn.exe -a HTTP/quickr1.example.com quickr1sso
Registering ServiceProviderName for CN=quickr1sso,CN=Users,DC=exam
ple,DC=com
  HTTP/quickr1.example.com
Updated object
Lotus Domino ships with a utility called domspngeo.cmd that 
will assist with creating the necessary setspn command format.

IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors
[ 178 ]
4.	 Setup the Lotus Domino server and Lotus Domino Diagnostics Windows 
services to run under these user credentials. In this example, this user 
account is quickr1sso. That name will be displayed in a typical domain 
format of quickr1sso@example.com:
Once this is done the Domino server console window 
won't appear when logging into the system.
5.	 Next the Lotus Domino server needs to be configured to process 
the incoming Windows user credential requests. Edit the Web SSO 
Configuration for: LtpaToken document in the Lotus Domino address 
book as described earlier in this book. Enable the Windows single sign-on 
integration option:

Chapter 10
[ 179 ]
After changing the Web SSO document, ensure that it is saved and if 
necessary gets replicated across the Lotus Domino domain. 
6.	 Setup an LDAP Directory Assistance entry for the Microsoft Active  
Directory source.

IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors
[ 180 ]
7.	 Define the Directory Assistance Naming Contexts (Rules) settings if required. 
Typically, the default settings are as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Configure the LDAP connection information to the Microsoft Active Directory 
environment. The following screenshot shows an example set of values: 

Chapter 10
[ 181 ]
9.	 After making the necessary changes to the DIRECTORY ASSISTANCE 
configuration, save the document and ensure that the Directory assistance 
database name is defined in the Lotus Domino server document as shown in 
the following screenshot:
10.	 At this point the Lotus Domino server should be able to handle user 
authentication from Windows clients. The next step is to configure the 
Lotus Quickr server to handle Microsoft Active Directory and SPNEGO 
authentication.

IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors
[ 182 ]
11.	 Create or modify the qpconfig.xml on the Lotus Quickr server. Adjust the 
configuration of the <user_directory>...</user_directory> section to 
match the specifics to the Microsoft Active Directory environment.
Specifically, adjust the search filters, attribute names, and other schema 
configuration settings as shown in the following example:
  <ldap_is_active_directory enabled="true" />
<secondary_cn_component enabled="true"/>
  <do_not_deref_for_groups enabled="true" />
Additional information on configuring Lotus Quickr with Microsoft 
Active Directory is available in the product resource center located at the 
Lotus Quickr Wiki (http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf).
12.	 Open the notes.ini on the server and add the entry QuickPlaceSPNEGO=1 
to the bottom of the file. Save and close the notes.ini. 
13.	 Log into Lotus Quickr as an administrator and configure the User Directory 
type to be LDAP. Then setup the specifics to connect the Microsoft Active 
Directory environment as shown next:

Chapter 10
[ 183 ]
This example shows an SSL connection to Microsoft Active 
Directory. To handle this, will require the setting up an SSL 
keystore on the Lotus Domino server. If the Lotus Quickr server 
was previously configured to use SSL to encrypt end user HTTP 
requests this key store would already be created. Assuming 
the key store files have been created it might be necessary to 
import the SSL certificate trusted root keys from the Microsoft 
Active Directory environment. The Microsoft Active Directory 
administrator can typically assist with providing the necessary 
keys or trusted root certificates required. Specifics for handling 
the SSL configuration are located in the product documentation. 
Additionally, this example shows a direct connection to the LDAP 
services port 389/636(SSL) of the domain controller. In some 
configurations, connecting to the Microsoft Active Directory Global 
Catalog could be more effective as it combines objects across the 
Active Directory forest. If you were connecting to a Global Catalog, 
the port numbers would become 3268/3269(SSL).
14.	 Before saving the Lotus Quickr User Directory configuration page, disable 
creation of local users in the places. This will not function correctly with 
SPNEGO configured. After finishing making the necessary changes, save and 
close the page by clicking the on the Next button.
15.	 If the LDAP configuration is saved successfully in Lotus Quickr, the 
following page should be shown indicating it was OK with credentials:

IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors
[ 184 ]
16.	 Next the Access Control List (ACL) for the LotusQuickr\lotusquickr\
Main.nsf database needs to be adjusted. The Anonymous user needs to 
be set with No Access as shown in the following screenshot. To make this 
change, open the database using the Lotus Notes Administrator client.

Chapter 10
[ 185 ]
Lotus Quickr will perform this ACL change during creation of the 
LotusQuickr\lotusquickr folder if the QuickPlaceSPNEGO=1 
value is present in the notes.ini. Consider that if the 
LotusQuickr\lotusquickr folder is deleted it will be 
recreated when the server is restarted, however, most of the server 
configuration settings will have to be reapplied.
17.	 Restart the Lotus Quickr server. The server should now be ready to handle 
inbound Windows SSO credentials for both the Web browser and Lotus 
Quickr connector.
18.	 The final piece is to configure the Web browser to send the Windows 
credentials to the server. These browser settings defined by zone, control 
what sites the workstation will transmit the credentials to. A common 
problem seen during SPNEGO setups is that Internet Explorer was not 
correctly configured, resulting in the user credentials never being sent to 
the server, thus preventing login. The first step is to define the sites to send 
credentials to, as shown in the following screenshot:

IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors
[ 186 ]
19.	 The next step is to automatically login to the intranet zone only, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
20.	 The final step is to enable IWA support in the general browser settings as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 187 ]
These browser settings can be automatically deployed to 
the workstations using various deployment tools such as 
the Microsoft Internet Explorer Administration Kit (IEAK) 
and Microsoft Windows Group Policies.
When these settings are put in place the end user will be able to directly access the 
Lotus Quickr environment with no credential challenges.
To troubleshoot issues with Integrated Windows Authentication, refer to  
IBM Technote: 1394592—Troubleshooting Windows single sign-on for Web  
clients (SPNEGO)
For additional information, refer to the IBM Lotus Domino and Lotus Quickr  
product documentation.
Implementing other authentication 
services
The Lotus Quickr connectors provide a custom authentication framework to 
handle special cases that may come up in some Enterprise deployments. This API 
framework is based on a set of extension points within the connector code base.
Due to the fact that the connectors are built in both Java (Eclipse-based products) and 
C++ (Microsoft Windows Native Connectors, that is Microsoft Explorer, Microsoft 
Office, and so on) if an extension point is required two implementations of the 
authentication handler must be constructed.
These custom authentication handlers are very specific to your environment. It is the 
experience of the authors of this book that the term "standard" configuration, has a 
wide range of meanings when it comes to single sign-on infrastructures in use today. 
For example, it is possible to provide an authentication framework that uses X509 
certificates stored on USB key fobs or RSA tokens, that display an ever changing 
set of values. The authentication framework allows integration of the Lotus Quickr 
desktop connectors into this SSO infrastructure.
Additional information on the construction of custom authentication 
handlers is outlined in the Lotus Quickr Wiki (http://www.lotus.
com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf/dx/Lotus_Quickr_Connectors_
Authentication_Extension_Development_Guide).

IBM Lotus Quickr Connectors
[ 188 ]
Summary
This chapter has walked you through the deployment, control, and security 
integration of the Lotus Quickr connectors. These connectors provide full end user 
workstation-side emersion into the Lotus Quickr collaboration environment, using 
the products they already use day-in and day-out.
The next chapter will discuss the available API services within Lotus Quickr and 
how they can be leveraged to create and retrieve content in the system.

Leveraging IBM Lotus  
Quickr APIs
This chapter deals with Lotus Quickr's ability to enable diverse and geographically 
dispersed teams, collaborate, and contribute intellectual assets to an  
organizations projects.
The Lotus Quickr APIs provide yet another facet of value. They extend team 
collaboration to a business' existing critical applications.
The Lotus Quickr APIs are based on open Internet standards. By defining a set of 
services that can be interacted with using Representational State Transfer (REST) 
architecture, as well as, SOAP-based Web services, Lotus Quickr provides quick 
integration into pre-existing business processes. This integration fills the gaps that have 
previously delayed organizations in becoming efficient project-based operations.
Lotus Quickr APIs are documented in the Lotus Quickr 
Wiki: http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf.
Interacting with IBM Lotus Quickr services
A Lotus Quickr place first needs to be established. Establishing a Quickr place 
involves creating the place, adding its users and defining their roles within the 
Quickr team place. Once the team place is established, contributions in terms of 
content can be added to the place using direct interaction by a user, or indirectly 
through a process. This process would be started by a decision point in an external 
workflow defined in a business' core process application.
Lotus Quickr was designed to integrate seamlessly into existing process frameworks. 
Therefore, information technology professionals deploying Lotus Quickr can expect 
to be able to: extend end user-driven operations executed within a team place, and to 
automate processes from other applications outside of the team place.

Leveraging IBM Lotus Quickr APIs
[ 190 ]
Example business scenario
Consider a fictitious insurance company, ACME Insurance Co. ACME is looking to 
leverage social collaboration to enhance the existing business critical applications 
that aid efficient insurance claims processing. This case study is a good illustration of 
how Lotus Quickr APIs will be leveraged to streamline ACME's process.
ACME is looking to combine smart mobile devices and data center deployed 
software to speed up and streamline its automobile insurance claims processing. 
They have also recognized the value of projectizing all claims and would like that 
implemented in a roll out to its agents. ACME believes it can leverage the talents of 
its human resources better when they are deployed as virtual teams. 
Today, these virtual teams of processors, interact asynchronously to settle claims. 
The teams assemble all the claim materials into a single repository. Once all the 
claim related artifacts are collated, a team leader reviews and makes a decision on 
the status of the claim. ACME insurance has chosen Lotus Quickr services for Lotus 
Domino to fulfill this social collaboration need.
Implementing and leveraging the APIs
ACME's team of developers will be leveraging a subset of the RESTful APIs provided 
by Lotus Quickr to enable its mobile applications. We will now look at the aspects of 
the services, the team will be leveraging. These will be the following:
• 
Place services
• 
Member services
• 
Document services
ACME's technical team has also been furnished with a set of assumptions when 
developing their smart mobile device application.
1.	 Each existing claim will already be provisioned with a Lotus Quickr  
team place.
2.	 Each team place will have a set of users with predefined roles
3.	 These roles will determine if the provisioned user can do the following:
°°
Contribute content to the team place
°°
Modify content in the team place
°°
Delete content from the team place

Chapter 11
[ 191 ]
The mobile application will utilize the place services to surface contextual place 
information to the field adjuster in the mobile application using REST APIs from the 
place services. The application will make sure that the adjuster has been assigned 
the appropriate role required to add content to the team place, this is done using the 
member services. Once the adjusters role is verified, he will then be able to upload 
content directly from his mobile device to the appropriate Lotus Quickr team place.
Manipulating content within the team place is accomplished using the document 
services API.
This is by no means an exhaustive list of available services or APIs within  
Lotus Quickr. A link to the documented APIs has been provided before for  
reference purposes.
APIs on IBM Lotus Quickr for IBM Lotus 
Domino
In order for the mobile application to provide a list for the adjuster, the mobile 
application queries the server using the adjusters credentials. The mobile application 
will send a request to the Lotus Quickr server with the appropriate URL pattern 
representing the query. The Lotus Quickr server, will then respond with an HTTP 
payload representing an XML payload that the mobile application can parse, process, 
and format for consumption by the field adjuster.
Much like a request from a web browser, RESTful applications take advantage 
of HTTP to transport requests and responses from the Application Server. These 
requests are further parameterized using the various HTTP Methods such as:
• 
GET
• 
PUT
• 
POST
• 
DELETE
Additional arguments can be delivered to the server using the HTTP headers, which 
take the form of a key and value pair for example:
• 
SLUG
• 
Content-Type
• 
Content-Language
• 
Content-Length 
Lotus Quickr on Lotus Domino also utilizes regular URL arguments to deliver 
requests to the server.

Leveraging IBM Lotus Quickr APIs
[ 192 ]
As a rule of thumb, you should assume all requests made to the Lotus 
Quickr server will be made with credentials. The Lotus Quickr APIs 
require the requests to be made with authenticated user credentials.
Now let's look at examples of the requests and responses that ACME's application 
will make to the Lotus Quickr server, and examples of the responses that the smart 
mobile client will receive as a response from the server.
Listing all my places (ACME Claims I am 
assigned to)—place services
First, let's get a listing of all the places I have access to. Please see the request, the 
HTTP method and the response shown in the following information:
• 
Request: http://hostname.acme.com/myqcs/rest/places/feed
• 
Method: GET
• 
Response: The response is returned to the requesting client application in the 
form of an Atom XML web feed as shown next:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<feed xml:base="http://acme.quickrserver.com/" xmlns="http://www.
w3.org/2005/Atom"
xmlns:td="urn:ibm.com/td">
    <id>urn:lsid:ibm.com:td:places</id>
    <title type="text">Quickr Place Collection</title>
    <link rel="alternate" type="text/html" href="http://acme.
quickrserver.com/LotusQuickr/lotusquickr/Admin.nsf/index.
htm?open"/>
    <link rel="self" type="application/atom+xml" href="http://
acme.quickrserver.com/myqcs/rest/places/feed?page=1&amp;pagesize=2
0&amp;sortby=PlaceTitle&amp;sortorder=1&amp;filter=all
    + all&amp;total=13"/>
    <author>
        <name>Omosh, Olusola A.</name>
    </author>
    <generator version="1.0" uri="http://acme.quickrserver.com/
LotusQuickr">
     Lotus Quickr 8.5.0.0
    </generator>
    <entry>
        <id>urn:lsid:ibm.com:td:_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain</id>
        <title>Zeta Hospital</title>
        <author>

Chapter 11
[ 193 ]
            <name>Melvin, Greg T. (Greg)</name>
        </author>
        <td:owner name="Melvin, Greg T. (Greg)" dn="uid=gregmelvin
,c=us,ou=acmepages,o=acme.com">
            </td:owner>
        <td:template>Standard</td:template>
        <published/>
        <updated>2010-10-18T18:42:49Z</updated>
        <link rel="alternate" type="text/html" href="http://acme.
quickrserver.com/JohnDoeClaim1"/>
        <link rel="self" type="application/atom+xml" href="http://
acme.quickrserver.com/myqcs/rest/place/%5B@PJohnDoeClaim1/@RMain.
nsf%5D/entry"/>
        <link rel="roles" type="application/atom+xml" 
href="http://acme.quickrserver.com/dm/atom/library/_
PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
members?action=roles"/>
        <link rel="members" type="application/atom+xml" 
href="http://acme.quickrserver.com/dm/atom/library/_
PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
members?action=members"/>
        <link rel="documentLibraries" type="application/atom+xml"
        href="http://acme.quickrserver.com/dm/atom/libraries/
feed?placeId=%5B@PJohnDoeClaim1/@RMain.nsf%5D"/>
        <td:locked>0</td:locked>
        <td:alert>0</td:alert>
        <td:size>37623</td:size>
        <td:policyname>!Default Policy</td:policyname>
        <td:lastmodified>2010-10-18T18:42:49Z</td:lastmodified>
        <td:policyID>3815A51E20288D2F052576C1004A9460</
td:policyID>
    </entry>
    .
    .
    .
</feed>
Each entry in the feed contains information about the team places which the user 
belongs to.
The link sub elements contain href attributes that can be sent as requests back to the 
server to gain additional information about the individual places. 
These links invoke APIs in other services, such as the member services, as we will see 
in the following sections.

Leveraging IBM Lotus Quickr APIs
[ 194 ]
Displaying my role on the team—member 
services
The following example shows the URL pattern used to request the feed for the 
existing users that are members of a team. Again, the client application parses the 
prior feeds in order to navigate to the users:
• 
Request:http://hostname.acme.com/dm/atom/library/_
PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
members?action=members
• 
HTTP Method: GET
• 
Response:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<feed xml:base="http://acme.quickrserver.com/" xmlns="http://www.
w3.org/2005/Atom"
xmlns:td="urn:ibm.com/td" xmlns:snx="http://www.ibm.com/xmlns/
prod/sn"
xmlns:ca="http://www.ibm.com/xmlns/prod/composite-applications/
v1.0">
    <title type="text">Membership List</title>
    <link href="dm/atom/applications/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
members"
    rel="self"/>
    <id>_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain</id>
    <updated>2010-10-20T00:03:01Z</updated>
    <entry>
        <title type="text">gregmelvin@acme.com</title>
        <id>dm/atom/applications/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/members/
U46563EC82E9B45148525779D0057E90D</id>
        <link href="dm/atom/applications/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
members/U46563EC82E9B45148525779D0057E90D"
        rel="self"/>
        <link href="LotusQuickr/agoelzer/Main.nsf/h_Toc/$defaultvi
ew/7CB1ED9DCD9FCEAB852567C3006E2DBE/?OpenDocument&amp;PreSetFields
=h_SetReadScene;h_SecurityMemberInfo,h_MemberName;UID=gregmelvin,c
=us,ou=acmepages,o=acme.com"
        rel="related"/>
        <updated>2010-10-20T00:03:01Z</updated>
        <content type="application/xml">
            <ca:member ca:id="dm%2Fatom%2Flibrary%2F_
PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain%2Ffolder%2F_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/members/
U46563EC82E9B45148525779D0057E90D"
            ca:DN="UID=gregmelvin,c=us,ou=acmepages,o=acme.com"
            ca:type="user" ca:email="gregmelvin@acme.com"
            ca:display-name="gregmelvin@acme.com" ca:first-
name="Greg"
            ca:last-name="Melvin" ca:phone-number="276-2791"

Chapter 11
[ 195 ]
            ca:description="" ca:role="Editor"/>
        </content>
    </entry>
    .
    .
    .
    <link href="dm/atom/applications/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
members?max-entries=10"
    rel="first"/>
    <td:totalNumber>10</td:totalNumber>
</feed>
Each returned entry in the atom feed contains information about the members of the 
place. The client application is then able to parse the feed looking for the element that 
contains the member information ca:member.
Contributing to the artifacts in the  
place—document services
Now that the client application has discovered, through the above requests, that  
edit rights are granted to the user, we can now explore the APIs for contributing 
artifacts to the team place. We'll look at a simple operation of listing the contents of 
a library's folder within a team place and then adding artifacts to the content of the 
library's folder.
Listing folder contents
The following example shows how the URL pattern is used to request the feed for 
the contents of a folder. Again, the client application parses the prior feeds in order 
to navigate down to the listings of a folder within a library:
• 
Request: http://hostname.acme.com/dm/atom/library/_
PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/view/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
FF9A07A3566C47D388525779D0057F41A/feed
• 
HTTP Method: GET
• 
Response:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<feed xml:base="http://acme.quickrserver.com/" xmlns="http://www.
w3.org/2005/Atom"
xmlns:td="urn:ibm.com/td" xmlns:snx="http://www.ibm.com/xmlns/
prod/sn">
    <title type="text">Performance</title>
    <updated>2010-09-13T16:00:42Z</updated>

Leveraging IBM Lotus Quickr APIs
[ 196 ]
    <created>2010-09-13T16:00:41Z</created>
    <author>
        <name>Melvin, Greg</name>
        <uri>UID=gregmelvin,c=us,ou=acmepages,o=acme.com</uri>
        <email>gregmelvin@acme.com</email>
    </author>
    <id>urn:lsid:ibm:com:td:_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
FF9A07A3566C47D388525779D0057F41A</id>
    <td:uuid>_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
FF9A07A3566C47D388525779D0057F41A</td:uuid>
    <link href="dm/atom/library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/view/_
PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_FF9A07A3566C47D388525779D0057F41A/feed"
    rel="self"/>
    <link href="LotusQuickr/agoelzer/Main.nsf/h_Toc/BEDFC09B71A80E
B88525779D0057F414?OpenDocument"
    rel="alternate"/>
    <generator uri="LotusQuickr/agoelzer/Main.nsf/h_Toc/BEDFC09B71
A80EB88525779D0057F414?OpenDocument"
    version="850000.000">LotusQuickr</generator>
    <serverdate>2010-10-20T00:59:44Z</serverdate>
    <entry>
        <id>urn:lsid:ibm:com:td:_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
D528F69AEEC5ABA2D8525779D00581D16_Anquickplace.dll</id>
        <td:uuid>_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
D528F69AEEC5ABA2D8525779D00581D16_Anquickplace.dll</td:uuid>
        <link href="dm/atom/library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_D528F69AEEC5ABA2D8525779D00581D16_
Anquickplace.dll/entry"
        rel="self"/>
        <link href="LotusQuickr/johndoeclaim1/Main.nsf/F9A07A3566C
47D388525779D0057F41A/528F69AEEC5ABA2D8525779D00581D16?OpenDocume
nt"
        rel="alternate"/>
        <link href="dm/atom/library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_D528F69AEEC5ABA2D8525779D00581D16_
Anquickplace.dll/feed"
        rel="current"/>
        <link href="dm/atom/library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_D528F69AEEC5ABA2D8525779D00581D16_
Anquickplace.dll/entry"
        rel="edit"/>
        <content type="application/atom+xml" src="dm/atom/
library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
D528F69AEEC5ABA2D8525779D00581D16_Anquickplace.dll/feed"/>

Chapter 11
[ 197 ]
        <link href="dm/atom/library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_D528F69AEEC5ABA2D8525779D00581D16_
Anquickplace.dll/media"
        rel="edit-media"/>
        <category term="document" scheme="tag:ibm.com,2006:td/
type"
        label="document"/>
        <title type="text">nquickplace.dll</title>
        <summary type="text"/>
        <published>2010-09-13T16:04:39Z</published>
        <updated>2010-09-13T16:04:39Z</updated>
        <author>
            <name>Melvin, Greg</name>
            <uri>UID=gregmelvin,c=us,ou=acmepages,o=acme.com</uri>
            <email>gregmelvin@acme.com</email>
        </author>
        <td:created>2010-09-13T16:02:26Z</td:created>
        <td:modified>2010-09-13T16:04:39Z</td:modified>
        <td:documenttype>94913AFBEAB46DA8052576A1006611BC</
td:documenttype>
        <td:modifier>
            <td:name>Melvin, Greg</td:name>
            <td:uri>UID=gregmelvin,c=us,ou=acmepages,o=acme.com</
td:uri>
            <td:email>gregmelvin@acme.com</td:email>
        </td:modifier>
        <td:responseCount>0</td:responseCount>
        <td:depth>0</td:depth>
    </entry>
    .
    .
    .
    <td:totalNumber>3</td:totalNumber>
    <link href="dm/atom/library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/
view/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_FF9A07A3566C47D388525779D0057F41A/
feed?pageSize=10"
    rel="first"/>
</feed>
The returned feed lists all the documents within the folder in the entry elements and 
provides links to take further actions on each entry. Let's take a look at how we can 
edit an existing document. 

Leveraging IBM Lotus Quickr APIs
[ 198 ]
Editing folder content
We will act on the link sub element with the attribute rel=self. The link  
sub element is found in the entry element. Refer to the atom feed in the previous 
section for reference.
This time we will use a different HTTP method and we will be sending an atom 
payload along with our request. We intend to update the title and description  
of this document.
• 
Request: http://hostname.acme.com/dm/atom/library/_
PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
D528F69AEEC5ABA2D8525779D00581D16_Anquickplace.dll/entry
• 
HTTP Method: PUT
• 
HTTP Payload:
<entry xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2005/Atom" xml:lang="en" 
xmlns:td="urn:example.com/td">
  <title type="text">new title</title>
  <summary type="text">new description</summary>
</entry>
• 
Response:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<entry xml:base="http://acme.quickrserver.com/" xmlns="http://www.
w3.org/2005/Atom" xmlns:td="urn:ibm.com/td" xmlns:snx="http://www.
ibm.com/xmlns/prod/sn">
  <id>urn:lsid:ibm.com:quickr:_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
DE4C9522934150A8B852577990064C0B9</id>
  <link href="http://acme.quickrserver.com/dm/atom/
library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
DE4C9522934150A8B852577990064C0B9/entry" rel="self"/>
  <link href="http://acme.quickrserver.com/LotusQuickr/place3/
Main.nsf/h_Toc/E4C9522934150A8B852577990064C0B9?OpenDocument" 
rel="alternate"/>
  <link href="http://acme.quickrserver.com/dm/atom/
library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
DE4C9522934150A8B852577990064C0B9/entry" rel="edit"/>
  <link href="http://acme.quickrserver.com/dm/atom/library/_
PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/folder/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain" rel="parent"/>
  <link href="http://acme.quickrserver.com/dm/atom/
library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
DE4C9522934150A8B852577990064C0B9/feed" rel="current"></link>
  <link href="http://acme.quickrserver.com/dm/atom/
library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
DE4C9522934150A8B852577990064C0B9/media" rel="edit-media"/>

Chapter 11
[ 199 ]
  <link href="http://example.ibm.com/dm/atom/library/_
PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/document/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain_
DE4C9522934150A8B852577990064C0B9/media" rel="enclosure" 
type="application/msword" title="new title" hreflang="en" 
length="0"/>
  <source xmlns:axis2ns417="http://www.w3.org/2007/app">
    <collection href="http://acme.quickrserver.com/dm/atom/
library/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/folder/_PJohnDoeClaim1_RMain/feed" 
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2007/app">
      <title type="text" xmlns:atom="http://www.w3.org/2005/
Atom">new title</title>
    </collection>
  </source>
  <author>
    <uri>UID=gregmelvin,c=us,ou=acmepages,o=acme.com</uri>
    <name>Melvin, Greg T. (Greg)</name>
    <email>gregmelvin@acme.com</email>
  </author>
  <td:modifier>
    <td:uri>UID=gregmelvin,c=us,ou=acmepages,o=acme.com</td:uri>
    <td:name>Melvin, Greg T. (Greg)</td:name>
    <td:email>gregmelvin@acme.com</td:email>
  </td:modifier>
  <title type="text">new title</title>
  <updated>2010-09-10T16:58:59Z</updated>
  <published>2010-09-09T18:20:29Z</published>
  <summary type="html"><![CDATA[new description]]></summary>
  <category term="document" scheme="tag:ibm.com,2006:td/type" 
label="document"/>
</entry>
The response which is sent back gives confirmation that the existing documents title 
and description has been modified. The response also carries pertinent information 
on who modified the document, and so on.
Summary
In summary, Lotus Quickr APIs can be leveraged by business applications 
which have been designed with open standards in mind. Lotus Quickr's design, 
implemented through a robust RESTful as well as Web services architecture, enables 
business application developers to deliver social collaboration-aware applications, to 
the business end users they serve.


Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr 
with Other IBM Products
This chapter will cover configuring your IBM Lotus Quickr server to work with other 
IBM products including the following:
• 
IBM Lotus Sametime
• 
IBM Lotus Connections and Quickr Integration
• 
IBM Filenet P8/ IBM Content Manager
Each section will give detailed steps to allow these products to integrate and  
function seamlessly.
Enabling LDAP for integrating 
applications with IBM Lotus Quickr
This section will cover the process needed to make sure your Lotus Quickr server  
is using a supported LDAP server, so that SSO integration will be possible with  
other applications.
Enabling IBM Lotus Quickr to use LDAP
This section will guide you through the process of configuring your Lotus Quickr 
server to use LDAP for authentication:
1.	 Make sure the LDAP directory server is running.
2.	 Open a browser and enter the server's host name. Click on Sign In.
3.	 Enter a Lotus Quickr administrator user name and password.

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 202 ]
4.	 Click on Site Administration.
5.	 Click on User Directory.
6.	 Click on Change Directory.
7.	 In the Type field, select LDAP Server.
8.	 In the Name field, type the host name of the LDAP directory server:
9.	 Click on Next. 
Make sure you click on the Next button, 
or your settings will not take effect.
Integrating IBM Lotus Sametime with  
Quickr 8.5
This section will cover configuring your Lotus Quickr server for single sign-on with 
your Lotus Sametime server. At the completion of this section, SSO will be configured, 
and the awareness and meeting services will be enabled. This chapter takes into 
account that you already have a working Sametime server in your environment. 
For more information on Lotus Sametime, please refer to the 
Sametime information center at http://publib.boulder.ibm.
com/infocenter/sametime/v8r5/index.jsp.
1.	 Ensure that the Domino directory on the server has replicated throughout the 
Domino domain since you installed Lotus Sametime.
2.	 Using Lotus Notes, open the Domino directory on the Lotus  
Sametime server.

Chapter 12
[ 203 ]
3.	 Click on the Configuration | Web | Web Configurations view.
4.	 From within this view, expand the list of Web SSO Configurations.
5.	 Open the Web SSO Configuration for: Ltpa Token document in edit mode. 
If you have an existing SSO document, make sure that adding the new 
information is not going to cause issues. Having multiple servers in the same 
SSO domain is fine as long as they are all using the same LTPA token. Make 
sure that the Domino Server Names field contains the name of each of the 
Lotus Quickr and Lotus Sametime servers that should participate in single 
sign-on. Make sure that the DNS Domain field contains the fully-qualified 
domain name of the Lotus Quickr and Lotus Sametime servers:
6.	 Click on Keys | Create Domino SSO Keys, if you want to create a new key 
for SSO.
7.	 Click on Save & Close.
8.	 Replicate the edits (edits to the server document) to the Lotus Quickr server.
9.	 Enable single sign-on authentication on the Lotus Quickr server.
10.	 From Lotus Notes, open the Domino directory for the domain. 
11.	 Open the Server document for the Lotus Quickr server in edit mode. 

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 204 ]
12.	 Click on Internet Protocols | Domino Web Engine, in the Session 
authentication field, select Multiple Servers (SSO), and then click on OK.
13.	 In the Web SSO Configuration field, select LtpaToken.
14.	 Click on Save & Close.
15.	 Add the following setting to the notes.ini file on the Lotus Quickr server: 
NoWebFileSystemACLs=1. Adding this to your notes.ini file will disable 
anonymous access to files through HTML. This setting should be added 
somewhere above the last line of your notes.ini.
16.	 Create a database from the Domino Web Server Configuration template 
(domcfg5.ntf), giving the database the file name domcfg.nsf. This database 
will allow the Quickr server to use the Quickr Login Screen instead of the 
default login on the Quickr server.
17.	 Open the database you created and click on Add Mapping to open a 
mapping document.
18.	 In the Target Database field of the mapping document, type LotusQuickr/
resources.nsf.
19.	 In the Target Form field, type QuickPlaceLoginForm, and then click on Save 
& Close to save the document.

Chapter 12
[ 205 ]
20.	 Restart both the Sametime and Quickr servers.
21.	 Verify that single sign-on is working between Lotus Quickr and  
Lotus Sametime:
°°
From a browser, connect to the Lotus Quickr server, because  
multi-server sign-on is enabled, you must enter the fully qualified 
host name to connect.
°°
Sign on to Lotus Quickr using the name of an external user registered 
in the user directory.
°°
Create a test place and verify that you can add several members from 
the user directory.
°°
Using the same browser session, connect to the Lotus  
Sametime server.
°°
Go to the Attend Meeting page and verify that you are still logged 
onto the server. If you can authenticate once and remain logged on  
to both Lotus Quickr and Lotus Sametime, then multi-server sign-on 
is working. If you must authenticate more than once, multi-server  
sign-on is not working and you must resolve the problem  
before continuing.
Planning for Sametime integration
You can integrate the awareness, instant messaging, and Web conferencing 
(Sametime meeting) features of Lotus Sametime with Lotus Quickr. Before you  
set up Lotus Quickr to work with Lotus Sametime, you should be aware of the 
following points:
• 
The Lotus Quickr and Lotus Sametime servers must reside in the same 
Domino domain and the same DNS domain.
• 
You must enable single sign-on authentication for Lotus Quickr and for 
Lotus Sametime.
• 
You must configure Lotus Quickr and Lotus Sametime to use the same LDAP 
directory. In addition, you must configure Lotus Quickr to use the LDAP 
directory instead of configuring the Domino directory for authentication.
• 
If you use a Domino directory as your LDAP directory, then you will need 
to make sure the LDAP service is started on a separate machine from your 
Quickr or Sametime server. This will help with server performance as well 
as not interfering with your LDAP service, if either the Quickr or Sametime 
server need to be restarted.

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 206 ]
You can use Lotus Quickr 8.5 with Lotus Sametime versions 
8.0.2 as well as Lotus Sametime 8.5.
Installing the Sametime SDK files
The Java toolkit is needed for the Lotus Sametime awareness files. These files 
communicate with the Lotus Sametime server and indicate when someone is online 
and ready to chat.
1.	 Download the Lotus Sametime 8.5x Software Development Kit (SDK) to a 
convenient directory. You will find the Lotus Sametime Software Developer 
Kit on the Toolkits tab of the Lotus Downloads section of developerWorks at 
http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/lotus/downloads/toolkits.html.
2.	 Unzip the downloaded file to a temporary directory where you can access 
the files needed.
3.	 In the Lotus Sametime server data directory, create the directory structure 
Domino\html\QuickPlace\peopleonline.
4.	 Copy the following files to the QuickPlace\peopleonline subdirectory you 
just created on the Lotus Sametime server:
°°
Stcomm.jar
°°
Commres.jar
°°
Peopleonline31.jar

Chapter 12
[ 207 ]
Configuring the Quickr server to use 
Sametime
The following steps will guide you through configuring the Lotus Quickr server to 
use your Lotus Sametime Community and Meeting server:
1.	 In a browser, enter the URL of the Lotus Quickr server, using the fully 
qualified host name. for example—http://quickr.example.com/
LotusQuickr.
2.	 Click on Sign In at the upper-right corner and type the user name and 
password of a Lotus Quickr administrator.
3.	 Click on Site Administration from the table of contents.
4.	 Click on Other Options in the list.
5.	 Click on the Edit Options button.
6.	 Under the Sametime Servers heading, type the URL for the Lotus Sametime 
server in the Sametime Community Server field, specifying the fully 
qualified host name of the Lotus Sametime server. Ensure you use  
https:// if SSL has been configured on the Sametime server.
7.	 Click on the Next button.
8.	 Wait a few minutes for the setting to take effect, or restart the Lotus Quickr 
server to enable awareness and instant messaging immediately.
QPConfig.xml Sametime settings explained
This section will explain in detail what the Sametime section of the QPConfig.xml 
file are used for:
<sametime ldap="true">

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 208 ]
• 
The previous setting allows you to choose what authentication source the 
Sametime server is using. true, if you are using LDAP and false if your 
using the Domino directory
    <members_online>
       <expand_external_groups enabled="true" max_depth="20"/>
• 
The previous setting allows the server to expand external groups. Setting this 
to true will expand groups into individual names and false will only use 
the group name itself. The max_depth parameter is the maximum levels that 
will be expanded for nested groups. The setting for max_depth needs to be 
set greater than one. 
    </members_online>
    <meetings invite_servers="false">
• 
The preceding setting will envoke the Quickr server inviting other Sametime 
meeting servers, when a meeting is started. However, the Sametime server 
should already be aware of the invited server. If you invite a server that is 
not configured, your meeting request will not work.
       <tools>
          <audio enabled="true"/>
          <video enabled="true"/>
• 
The settings will turn on and off the audio and video function in meetings. 
When selecting these settings they should both be set to either true or false. 
Any other configuration will not function.
       </tools>
       <credentials>
          <dn>cn=meeting doe/o=ibm</dn>
          <password>password</password>
• 
This user name and password should match the user that is in the STCenter.
nsf file on the Sametime server. This user name and password will be used 
when talking to the Sametime meeting server.
       </credentials>
    </meetings>
    <reverse_proxy enabled="false">
       <host_alias>http://reverseproxy.ibm.com</host_alias>
       <host_proxy>proxy.ibm.com</host_proxy>
       <host_port>39</host_port>
       <host_timeout>30000</host_timeout>
       <proxy_edge enabled="true"/>
    </reverse_proxy>

Chapter 12
[ 209 ]
• 
The previous settings will allow you to configure Quickr to use the Sametime 
reverse proxy. Complete this section with information from your environment.
    <token_type='ltpa'/>
• 
Token type is a important setting. If your Sametime server is using a 
different LDAP directory or is in a SSO configuration that has a token other 
than LTPA, you will need to set this feature to token_type='sametime'. 
This will enable use of the Sametime Secrets and Tokens instead of the 
standard LTPA token for SSO. 
 </sametime>
• 
This is the last line of the file.
IBM Lotus Connections and Quickr 
integration
This section will guide you through configuring your IBM Lotus Quickr server and 
your IBM Lotus Connections server for end user integration, this section contains 
details on the following integration points:
• 
Activities integration
• 
Communities integration
• 
Business card integration
Activities integration
After completing the Activities integration, the end user will be able to publish a 
document from a Lotus Connections Activity to a Lotus Quickr place. Configuration 
is needed on both the Connections server as well as the Quickr server.
For the Lotus Connections, you will need to edit the oa-config.xml file to enable 
activities integration. This file is stored as part of a package of files and will need to 
be extracted before you can edit it. To extract the file for editing, please follow the 
following steps:
• 
To be able to issue the commands, you will need to start a WSADMIN session 
on the Activities server.
• 
To start the WSADMIN session, navigate to the Appserver profile\bin 
directory, for example, C:\Websphere\Appserver\profiles\Appsrv01\bin 
for standalone installs. For network deployments, you will need to navigate 
to the DeploymentManager\bin directory.

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 210 ]
• 
Issue the wsadmin -lang jython -user <admin_user_id> -password  
<admin_password> -port (8880 for standalone or 8879 for network 
deployments) command.
• 
On a standalone deployment of Connections, you will need to execute the 
following command from the WSADMIN session on the Activities server:
execfile ("ActivitiesAdmin.py")
• 
For a network deployment, use the following command to extract the 
configuration files:
execfile ("profile_root/config/bin_lc_admin/activitiesAdmin.py")
• 
The profile_root, for example is located here \Program Files\IBM\
WebSphere\AppServer\profiles\<profile_name> directory.
• 
After extracting the configuration file, you will now need to checkout the file 
for editing. 
• 
To checkout the file, issue the following command from the  
Connections server:
ActivitiesConfigService.checkOutConfig ("c:/activitiesconfig/
temp","QuickrCell")
• 
QuickrCell should be replaced with the actual cell name of the WAS server 
where the Activities are installed.
• 
After the checkout command finishes, navigate to the temporary directory 
where you stored the files and edit the oa-config.xml file.
• 
In the oa-config.xml file, find the PublishFile section. Your file should 
look somewhat like the following example:
<PublishFile enabled="true" allowCustomServers="false" 
requireSSO="true">
• 
Make sure the PublishFile enable is set to true to enable the feature.
• 
The allowCustomServers parameter is used to allow users to type in the 
name of any Quickr server they may wish to publish the document to. If this 
is set to false, it will use the server list in the next line to select from.
• 
The requireSSO parameter is used to set whether SSO is enabled between 
the Activities and Quickr server. If this is set to false, you must configure 
the traffic between the servers to be SSL.
<server>http://quickr.example.com</server>

Chapter 12
[ 211 ]
• 
The server parameter in the previous example should contain 
a list of Quickr servers available to publish documents to. If the 
allowCustomServers is set to false, this field must contain all the  
servers you want to publish files to.
</PublishFile>
• 
After completing the edits to the oa-config.xml file, it will need to be 
checked back into the configuration files. To check-in the files, use the 
WSADMIN session used for checkout and issue the following command:
ActivitiesConfigService.checkInConfig()
• 
After the command completes type Exit in the WSADMIN client.
After checking in the configuration documents, you will need to add the Quickr 
network domain to the QuickrWhiteListProvider field from the WAS admin 
console. Detailed instructions for updating this list can be found in the Lotus 
Connections information center at http://publib.boulder.ibm.com/infocenter/
ltscnnct/v2r0/topic/com.ibm.lotus.connections.help/t_admin_act_
define_quickr_servers.html. 
Communities integration
Communities integration with Lotus Quickr will allow you to surface a Lotus Quickr 
Library in your Lotus Connections Community. Perform the following steps to 
enable the integration:
• 
From the Lotus Connections server, enable Lotus Quickr integration with the 
Connections Community feature, so that community members can organize 
and share files. They can also collaborate documents from a central location.
• 
Make sure SSO is configured between the Lotus Quickr and Lotus 
Connections servers.
• 
Make sure all servers have the same OS time zone, date, and time.
• 
Install the Lotus Connections Connector for Quickr on the Lotus Connections 
server, detailed instructions for installing this connector are located in 
the Lotus Connections info center at http://publib.boulder.ibm.com/
infocenter/ltscnnct/v2r0/index.jsp?topic=/com.ibm.lotus.
connections.help/t_admin_communities_install_quickr.html.
• 
During installation of the Lotus Connections Connector for Lotus Quickr, 
you are prompted to enable Lotus Quickr users to associate Wiki or team 
place PlaceTypes with a community.
• 
All installation choices are captured in the communities-quickr-config.
xml file.

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 212 ]
• 
After installation, the administrator can edit the communities-quickr-
config.xml file to add up to five Lotus Quickr server/placetype templates.
More detailed information on the configuration of Lotus Communities integration is 
located in the Lotus Quickr Wiki at http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf/dx/
The_communitiesquickrconfig.xml_file_qd85.
Sample of Communities integration on the IBM 
Lotus Connections server
As you can see in the following screenshot, you now have the ability to include the 
Lotus Quickr Wiki and Quickr Teamspace within a Lotus Connections Community:
Business card integration
From the Lotus Quickr server, configure the <profile_server> section of the 
qpconfig.xml file to include a link to the business card as shown in the following 
sample qpconfig.xml code:
<profile_server>
    <server_name ssl="false">
      profiles.profiles.example.com
    </server_name>
    <semantic_tag_service_location>
      /profiles/portalJS/portalBizCard.js
    </semantic_tag_service_location>
  </profile_server>
You will need to restart the Quickr server after making changes in qpconfig.xml.

Chapter 12
[ 213 ]
Sample of Business card after integration to the 
IBM Lotus Quickr server
The sample of Business card after integration to the Lotus Quickr server looks like 
the following screenshot:
As you can see, the business card now has a tab for places, which will give you a list 
of the places Franks Adams has created:

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 214 ]
Integration of IBM Lotus Quickr to 
ECM(IBM Filenet P8 and IBM Content 
Manager)
Integration of Quickr with your company's ECM system will allow you to extend the 
capabilities of Lotus Quickr, as well as the capabilities of your ECM system. Quickr 
will have the ability to store documents on the ECM as well as surface ECM content 
in a Lotus Quickr place. By moving or copying documents to the ECM system, you 
can take advantage of the archival and records management features, as well as the 
enhanced workflow capabilities. Adding Lotus Quickr to your ECM gives you the 
ability to add the team collaboration components around your documents as well. 
This section will cover the following:
• 
Configuring SSO to the ECM
• 
Configuring the iNotes proxy
• 
Installing the ECM connector on your ECM system
• 
Verifying your Lotus Quickr ECM integration
Configuring SSO to the ECM
Configure SSO to your ECM system using the instructions provided in this chapter 
under the Integrating Lotus Sametime with Quickr 8.5 section. This process may have 
already been completed, if you have integrated your Quickr server with any other 
servers.
You need to configure the Lotus Quickr and WebSphere Application Server to share 
the same LDAP server.
You will also need to configure your Filenet server to share the SSO key from your 
Lotus Quickr server:
1.	 Export the LTPA key from the WAS server of the ECM machine.
2.	 Open the Admin console of your ECM WAS server.
3.	 Click on Security | Global security:

Chapter 12
[ 215 ]
4.	 Under Authentication, click LTPA:

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 216 ]
5.	 This will take you to the LTPA screen:
6.	 Complete the single sign-on password and key file name and click on the 
Export Keys button:

Chapter 12
[ 217 ]
7.	 After the key exports, you will receive a message saying whether or not the 
key was exported successfully and where it was exported to. Save this key file 
on the Lotus Quickr server in a temporary directory for the next section, which 
will guide you through importing the key into the Quickr Domino server:
To configure your Domain server for SSO with your ECM system, complete the 
following steps:
1.	 Using Lotus Notes, open the Domino directory on the Lotus  
Sametime server.
2.	 Click on the Configuration | Web | Web Configurations view.
3.	 From within this view, expand the list of Web SSO Configurations.
4.	 Open the Web SSO Configuration for : Ltpa Token document in edit 
mode. If you have a existing SSO document make sure that adding the new 
information is not going to cause issues.

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 218 ]
5.	 Make sure that the Domino Server Names field contains the name of each of 
the Lotus Quickr servers that should participate in single sign-on. Make sure 
that the DNS Domain field contains the fully-qualified domain name of the 
Lotus Quickr servers:
6.	  Click on Keys | Import WebSphere LTPA Keys:

Chapter 12
[ 219 ]
7.	 Type the path and filename of the Websphere LTPA key and click on the  
OK button:
8.	 Type the password of the Websphere LTPA key and click on the OK button:
9.	 You should receive a message confirming that the key was  
imported successfully.
10.	 Click on Save & Close.
11.	 Replicate the edits (edits to the server document) to the Lotus Quickr server.
12.	 Enable single sign-on authentication on the Lotus Quickr server.
13.	 From Lotus Notes, open the Domino directory for the domain. 
14.	 Open the server document for the Lotus Quickr server in edit mode.
15.	 Click on Internet Protocols | Domino Web Engine, in the Session 
authentication field select Multiple Servers (SSO), and then click on  
the OK button:

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 220 ]
16.	 In the Web SSO Configuration field, select LtpaToken.
17.	 Click on Save & Close.
18.	 Add the following setting to the notes.ini file on the Lotus Quickr server: 
NoWebFileSystemACLs=1. Adding this to your notes.ini file will disable 
anonymous access to files using HTML. This setting should be added 
somewhere above the last line of your notes.ini file.
19.	 Create a database from the Domino Web Server Configuration template 
(domcfg5.ntf), giving the database the file name domcfg.nsf. This database 
will allow the Quickr server to use the Quickr Login Screen instead of the 
default login on the Quickr server.
20.	 Open the database you created and click on Add Mapping to open a 
mapping document.
21.	 In the Target Database field of the mapping document, type LotusQuickr/
resources.nsf.
22.	 In the Target Form field, type QuickPlaceLoginForm, and then click on Save 
& Close to save the document:
23.	 Restart the Quickr server 
Configuring the iNotes proxy configuration
This section will guide you through the process of configuring the iNotes proxy 
configuration which will allow your domino server to communicate with your ECM 
system. If this is not configured correctly your server will not be able to retrieve or 
post any information from your ECM system.

Chapter 12
[ 221 ]
Use the following steps to configure your iNotes proxy:
1.	 Open the names.nsf file.
2.	 Click on Policy and then Add Policy to create a policies document.
3.	 Enter */Demo for the Policy name.
4.	 Select Organizational for the Policy type.
5.	 For Security, click on the New button to create a security document:

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 222 ]
6.	 Enter the name of the security document that you want to create:
7.	 Select the Proxies tab and click on Edit List:
8.	 Enter the following information in the corresponding fields to create a new 
white-list rule, then click on the Add/Modify Value button.
°°
Context: /xsp/proxy/BasicProxy/ 
°°
URL: http://ecm.demo.com:9080/
°°
Actions: GET,POST,HEAD,PUT,DELETE
°°
Cookies: *
°°
Mime-types: *
°°
Headers: *

Chapter 12
[ 223 ]
9.	 Enter the following information in the corresponding fields to create a second 
white-list rule, then click on the Add/Modify Value button.
°°
Context: /xsp/proxy/BasicProxy/
°°
URL: http://ecm.demo.com:10038/
°°
Actions: GET,POST,HEAD,PUT,DELETE
°°
Cookies: *
°°
Mime-types: *
°°
Headers: *
10.	 Click on OK.

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 224 ]
11.	 In the Security field, click on the drop-down arrow and select ECM  
from the list.
12.	 Click on Save and restart the server.
ECM settings in the qpconfig.xml file
This section will show an example of the ECM section of the qpconfig.xml file and 
give definitions of what each field controls.
Sample config
<ecm_integration enabled="true">
    <targetHost>
      http://ecm.demo.com:9080
• 
Default ECM server for documents.
    </targetHost>
    <targetLibrary>
      /QuickrRoot/QKSmokeApplication/QKSmokeLibrary

Chapter 12
[ 225 ]
• 
Path of the default directory on the ECM server.
    </targetLibrary>
      <targetFolder>
      /Test/
• 
Default folder on ECM system.
    </targetFolder>
    <setDefaultOperation>
      Link
• 
Default publish type. Choices include copy, move and link.
    </setDefaultOperation>
    <allowHostEdit enabled ="true">
• 
When true this allows end users to type in ECM server names. When false 
users are forced to use the default ECM system.
    </allowHostEdit>
    <forceDefaultPublishLocation enabled ="false">
• 
If true then documents are forced to be published to the default folder as 
set in the qpconfig.xml file. If false then end user can select directory for 
document to be stored.
    </forceDefaultPublishLocation >
    <forceDefaultOperation enabled = "false">
• 
If this section is true the operation menu will be skipped and the default 
action as assigned in the qpconfig.xml will be used. If false, users will be 
prompted for what actions should be taken with the file.
    </forceDefaultOperation>
    <metaDataMapping>
      <form_4CF46B0FFCD3EE67482576E7003D0266 
formName="MappingTestG">
        <mappingInfo docType="CM_Briefing">
        </mappingInfo>
      </form_4CF46B0FFCD3EE67482576E7003D0266>
• 
This section is where meta data fields from Quickr are matched to the ECM 
meta data fields
    </metaDataMapping>
    <ECM_Search_Target name="lwptsthink02" url="http://ecm.demo.
com:9080"/>
• 
Server name for the Enterprise search option.
  </ecm_integration>

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 226 ]
Installing the ECM connector on your ECM 
system
After configuring your Quickr server, it will be necessary to install and configure the 
IBM FileNet Services for Lotus Quickr or the IBM CM8 Services for Quickr.
The complete installation guide for IBM Filenet Services for Quickr can be 
found in a PDF file at this location http://www.ibm.com/support/docview.
wss?rs=3278&uid=swg27013654.
The installation information for IBM Content Manager services for Lotus 
Quickr can be found at this address http://www.ibm.com/support/docview.
wss?rs=86&uid=swg27016796.
Verifying your IBM Lotus Quickr ECM 
integration
After following the steps to configure your Lotus Quickr 8.5 server for integration 
with your ECM system, you should verify that it was successful. Complete the 
following steps to verify your installation:
1.	 Login to your Lotus Quickr server as a user with at least editor rights to  
the place.
2.	 Navigate to the document library.
3.	 Select the drop-down box next to a document that you would like to publish 
to the ECM system:

Chapter 12
[ 227 ]
4.	 You should now see the Publish To menu item. By seeing this option, you 
know that at least part of your configuration is correct.
5.	 Click on Publish To.
6.	 You should now see a pop up dialog box named Publish to  
External Location.
7.	 If you are prompted for a username and password your SSO configuration 
is not correct. Please refer to the Integrating Lotus Sametime with Quickr 8.5 
section of this chapter for configuration help. 
8.	 Seeing a list of your ECM libraries means that your configuration to  
the ECM system is correct and you will now be able to publish  
documents to your ECM. 

Integrating IBM Lotus Quickr with Other IBM Products
[ 228 ]
Summary
After reading this chapter, you should now be able to connect your Lotus Quickr 
server to Lotus Sametime, Lotus Connection, and your IBM Filenet P8 or IBM 
Content Manager system. For all configuration choices for these services, please  
refer to the Lotus Quickr Wiki at http://www.lotus.com/ldd/lqwiki.nsf.

Index
Symbols
-backup command  175
-export command  175
-help command  175
-import command  175
-install command  135
-o parameter  153
-pt switch  153
-restore command  175
/help command  175
A
AdminP process
enabling  91, 92
using  91
allowCustomServers parameter  210
architecture, Lotus Quickr
about  14
for Domino  15-17
for WebSphere Portal  17, 18
B
button
Browse button  39
Create a Place button  124
Create button  126
Create  Members...button  95
Customized button  143
Next button  33
OK button  63
Reorder button  147
C
changehierarchy command  97
changemember command  95
client logging settings, notes.ini
$h_ClientDebugConsole  68
$h_Debug  68
h_ExceptionDetail=1  68
clustering, Lotus Quickr
concepts  71-73
configuration  80
Communities integration
about  211
example, on Lotus Connections  
server  212, 213
configuration, Lotus Quickr cluster
example  82, 83
steps  80
connectors
about  171
deploying  172-175
Microsoft Windows Explorer connector 
integration, screenshot  172
other authentication services,  
implementing  187
overview  171, 172
places, adding  173
policies, leveraging  175, 176
D
DAOS
about  118
enabling  118

[ 230 ]
design updates, PlaceType
refreshing, qptool command used  152-154
refreshing, through web  150-152
desktop single sign-on
implementing  176-187
DNS  75
document services
folder contents, editing  198, 199
folder contents, listing  195-197
Domain Name Service. See  DNS
Domino
Lotus Quickr  15
Domino Attachment and Object Services. 
See  DAOS
DAOS  118
E
ECM
about  21
products, interacting with  21, 22
ECM-Lotus Quickr integration. See  Lotus 
Quickr-ECM integration
Enterprise 2.0
defining  8
social collaboration, adopting  10
Enterprise Content Management. See  ECM
example, business scenario
APIs, implementing  190, 191
APIs, leveraging  190, 191
F
Fix Pack 3, IBM Lotus Domino server setup
installing  46-49
H
homepage, Lotus Quickr
customizing  59
I
IBM Lotus Domino
upgrading  112, 113
IBM Lotus Domino server
installing  33-37
splash screen  38
starting with  32-37
IBM Lotus Domino server setup
Domino Servlet  59
Fix Pack 3, installing  46-49
Interim Fix 2, installing  50-52
post installation Quickr configuration  59
Quickr 8.5, installing  53-58
single sign-on (SSO), configuring  60-64
starting  45, 46
steps  37-44
IBM Lotus QuickPlace 6.5.1-Lotus Quickr 
8.5 upgradation
enabling  119
IBM Lotus Quickr
about  31, 32
logo, changing  156, 157
place, creating  157
starting with  31, 155
iNotes proxy configuration
ECM settings, in qpconfig.xml file  224, 225
steps  221-223
installations, Lotus Quickr cluster
Create New Cluster option  76
Load Balancer, configuring  75
setup steps  80
Verification dialog  76
Integrated Windows Authentication. See  
IWA
Interim Fix 2, IBM Lotus Domino server 
setup
installing  50-52
IWA
about  176
setting up  177
J
Java toolkit
need for  206
URL  32
K
key component, Team collaboration
document management  9

[ 231 ]
L
LDAP application- Lotus Quickr integration
Quickr, enabling for LDAP usage  201, 202
Library feature  16
logo, IBM Lotus Quickr
changing  156
Lotus Connections
interacting with  20
Lotus Connections-Quickr integration
about  209
Activities integration  209-211
business card integration  212
Communities integration  211
Lotus Domino server
upgrading  114
Lotus QuickPlace server upgradation
offline services, enabling  120-122
Lotus Quickr
about  7
architecture  14
contents  8, 9
evolution  8
for WebSphere Portal  19
integration areas  21
overview  13
upgrade process  111
Lotus Quickr 8.5
key features  176
Lotus Quickr cluster
about  72
concepts  73, 74
configuring  80, 81
installations  74-80
managing  84
Lotus Quickr connectors. See  also 
connectors
Lotus Quickr connectors
about  19
architecture  19
example  20
Lotus Quickr Domino
about  23
design  24
Lotus Quickr-ECM integration
about  214
ECM connector, installing  226
iNotes proxy configuration, configuring  
220-224
SSO configuration, to ECM  214-220
verifying  226, 227
Lotus Quickr product Wiki
URL  71
Lotus Quickr server
logical component architecture  25
place, creating  123
Lotus Quickr service
about  23
artifacts, contibuting  195
browser architecture  25
business scenario, example  190
Desktop Connector Architecture  26
feed, requesting  194, 195
interacting with  189
Lotus Quickr on Lotus Domino,  
APIs  191, 192
places, listing  192, 193
product component  23
Product Deployment Architectures  26
server architecture  24, 25
Lotus Quickr Wiki  187
Lotus Sametime-Quickr 8.5 integration
about  202-205
planning, steps  205, 206
QPConfig.xml file settings  207-209
Quickr server configuration, for using with 
Sametime  207
SDK files, installing  206
Lotus Sametime Server
Other Options  90
M
max_depth parameter  208
N
notes.ini
client logging, settings  68
offline settings  65
other settings  66, 67
server loging, settings  68-70
troubleshooting, setting  68
web page cache, settings  65

[ 232 ]
notes.ini, settings
$h_MailDomain=mydomain.com  66
h_ScopeURLinQP=1  66
HTTPAllowDecodedUrlPercent=1  67
h_UndelivMail=QuickrPlacename  66
NoWebFileSystemACL  66
PLATFORM_CSID=hhh  67
QuickPlaceExtensionManagerAllow 
Servers=1  67
QuickPlaceMaxCachedUsers=<n>  67
QuickPlaceNestedGroupLimit=<n  67
QuickPlaceUpgradeServerOnStartup=1  67
O
OK button  76
P
password command  100
PlaceBot
clicking on  168
running, on scheduled basis  168
Place Catalog
about  127
viewing  128
placecatalog command  101
place, creating
Create a Place button, clicking  124
information, filling  124-127
steps  123
place, customizing
Basics option  159-162
Choose a Theme option, selecting  163
Custom Themes, selecting  166
Forms option, selecting  163-165
items  159
items, uploading  167
PlaceBot, running  168
Placetype Options  165
steps  158, 159
place management
archiving  132-134
items  129
locking  130-132
policies, assigning to  138, 140
policies, assigning to template  141, 142
policies, creating  136-138
renaming  135
restoring  134
unlocking  130-132
place members, managing
external member, adding  92, 93
external member names, updating  97, 99
local member passwords, changing  100
local members, adding  94, 95
member names, modifying  95, 97
members, removing from places  99, 100
qptool command, using  92
replicamaker  106
user name hierarchy, modifying  97
places
unlocking  114-117
Place Statistics
about  129
information  128
PlaceType management
creating, from existing place  143-146
design updates  150
hiding  148-150
reordering  146-148
steps  143
unhiding  148-150
Product Deployment Architectures
about  26
clustered servers  27, 28
external components, including  28, 29
Lotus Quickr, integrating into  29
single server  27
Q
qkrconn.exe installer  175
qptool addmember parameters  
command  92
qptool changehierarchy command  97
qptool changemember command  95
qptool command
about  25, 131, 153
using  109
qptool password command  100
qptool placecatalog command  101
qptool refresh command  152, 154
qptool removemember command  99

[ 233 ]
qptool replicamaker command
about  84
using  109
qptool upgrade command  114
Quickr
AdminP process, using  91
Quickr 8.5, IBM Lotus Domino server setup
installing  53-58
Quickr 8.5-Lotus Sametime integration. 
See  Lotus Sametime-Quickr 8.5 
integration
QuickrCfg.exe command  175
Quickr Connectors
designing  9
Quickr-Lotus Connections integration. 
See  Lotus Connections-Quickr 
integration
Quickr server, maintaining
catalog statistics, placing  101, 102
in cluster  105
reports, generating  102-105
R
removemember command  99, 100
replicamaker
about  74
automatic replicamaker, setting up  106, 107
qptool replicamaker command, using  109
using  106
Representational State Transfer. See  REST
requireSSO parameter  210
REST  189
S
server logging settings, notes.ini
QuickPlaceArchiveLogging  68
QuickPlaceAuthenticationLogging  68
QuickPlaceCalendarSubscriptionLogging  
68
QuickPlaceCompressionLogging  68
QuickPlaceDbCommandPerformance 
Logging  69
QuickPlaceDocumentLogging  70
QuickPlaceExtensionManagerIfLogging  69
QuickPlaceHTTPInterfaceLogging  69
QuickPlaceJavaLogging  69
QuickPlaceJavaServerLogging  69
QuickPlaceJniLogging  69
QuickPlaceJvmLogging  69
QuickPlaceLargePOSTLogging  69
QuickPlaceLDAPLogging  70
QuickPlaceLockLogging  69
QuickPlaceMailLogging  69
QuickPlaceMembershipModelLogging  69
QuickPlaceMyPlacesLoggingg  69
QuickPlaceNSFLogging  70
QuickPlaceObjectPoolLogging  69
QuickPlacePerformanceLogging  69
QuickPlacePlaceCatalogLogging  69
QuickPlacePlaceStatisticsLogging  70
QuickPlacePlaceTypeCentralRefresh 
Logging  69
QuickPlaceQOMLogging  69
QuickPlaceSearchPlacesLogging  69
QuickPlaceSpellCheckEngineLogging  69
QuickPlaceStubMakerLogging  70
QuickPlaceStyleSheetAttributeCmd 
Logging  69
QuickPlaceUpgradeLogging  70
QuickPlaceUserCacheLogging  70
QuickPlaceUserDirectoryLogging  70
QuickPlaceWebCacheLogging  70
QuickpPlaceLtpaLogging  69
server parameter  211
setspn command  177
site administration tools
accessing  87, 88
Other Options menu  90, 91
Security option  89
User Directory option  89, 90
T
team collaboration
component, document management  9
Token type setting  209
U
updatemember command  98
upgrade process  111

[ 234 ]
web page cache settings, notes.ini
QuickPlaceWebCacheDir==<pathname
>  65
QuickPlaceWebCacheEnabled=1  65
QuickPlaceWebCacheGCIntervalInMIN=<
minutes>  65
QuickPlaceWebCacheLimitInMB=<MB>  66
QuickPlaceWebCacheLogging=<n>  66
QuickPlaceWebCacheUsers=<value>  66
X
XML code  114
XML file  95
V
version, IBM Lotus Quickr
8.1  113
8.2  113
upgrade path  113
VIP  73
Virtual IP Address. See  VIP
W
Web browser
architecture  25

 
Thank you for buying  
IBM Lotus Quickr 8.5 for Domino Administration
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For 
more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order 
to continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home 
to books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including 
(but not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles 
will offer information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, 
developers, architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

IBM Lotus Sametime 8 Essentials: 
A User's Guide
ISBN: 978-1-84968-060-8             Paperback: 284 pages
Mastering Online Enterprise Communication with 
this collaborative software
1.	
Collaborate securely with your colleagues 
and teammates both inside and outside your 
organization by using Sametime features such 
as instant messaging and online meetings
2.	
Make your instant messaging communication 
more interesting with the inclusion of graphics, 
images, and emoticons to convey more 
information in fewer words
IBM Lotus Notes 8.5 User Guide
ISBN: 978-1-849680-20-2             Paperback: 296 pages
A practical hands-on user guide with time saving 
tips and comprehensive instructions for using Lotus 
Notes effectively and efficiently
1.	
Understand and master the features of Lotus 
Notes and put them to work in your business 
quickly
2.	
Contains comprehensive coverage of new Lotus 
Notes 8.5 features
3.	
Includes easy-to-follow real-world examples 
with plenty of screenshots to clearly demonstrate 
how to get the most out of Lotus Notes
4.	
Packed with expert tips and best practices, 
for using business e-mail, calendars and 
other Lotus Notes applications for efficient 
business communication
 
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

IBM Lotus Notes and  
Domino 8.5.1
ISBN: 978-1-847199-28-7             Paperback: 336 pages
Upgrade your system and embrace the exciting 
new features of the Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.1 
platform
1.	
Upgrade to the latest version of Lotus Notes and 
Domino
2.	
Understand the new features and put them to 
work in your business
3.	
Thoroughly covers Domino Attachment Object 
Service (DAOS), Domino Configuration Tuner 
(DCT), and iNotes
IBM Cognos 8 Report Studio 
Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-849680-34-9            Paperback: 252  pages
Over 80 great recipes for taking control of Cognos 8 
Report Studio 
1.	
Learn advanced techniques to produce real-life 
reports that meet business demands
2.	
Tricks and hacks for speedy and effortless 
report development and to overcome tool-
based limitations
3.	
Peek into the best practices used in industry 
and discern ways to work like a pro
4.	
Part of Packt's Cookbook series-each recipe is a 
carefully organized sequence of instructions to 
complete the task as efficiently as possible
 
 
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

