Mobile World Congress Americas 
Hansaworld: 1 App for All Business Processess
Ramp up your Security
Top 7 Trends in Corporate Content
The MyMe Unity System 

800-524-9900       www.havis.com
“Made for iPad” 
Docking Stations
Innovative Mounting 
Solutions
Designed for
Surface Solutions
Tablet Docking
& Cradles
Mobile Office Solutions

I N F O @ M Y M E U N I T Y. C O M    |   WWW.MYMEUNITY.COM 
CAR | HOME | OFFICE | ANYWHERE
On your car Vent Holder
Combine Unity accessories 
Keep your cable where you need most
Place Untiy Case anywhere
On your car windshield
On your car dashboard
In your offce
At Home
Colors Available:

Carmine De Santo
publisher@iBusinessmag.com
Publisher & Senior Editor
Tara Rayner
admin@ibusinessmag.com
Assistant to Publisher
Alex De Santo
Editor@iBusinessmag.com
Senior Editor
Ele Mansouri
assistant@iBusinessmag.com
Executive Assistant
JC Seymour
chiefeditor@iBusinessmag.com
Editor-In-Chief
Zoi Sotirakos
production@iBusinessmag.com
Production Manager
Giuliano Rosati
graphics@iBusinessmag.com
Creative Director
Jose Seymour
pr@iBusinessmag.com
Press Releases & Public Relations
Joe Galati
reviews@iBusinessmag.com
Product Review Specialist
Dave Park, Terry Jarrell
reviews@iBusinessmag.com
Product Review Specialist
Inside this edition
iBusiness Magazine 
Apple Solutions for Business
iBusiness Magazine ISSN (Print): 2157-6629 & 2157-6637 (Online) is
published bi-monthly by Loop USA Inc. If you would like to subscribe
to iBusiness Magazine both print & digital Editions, please visit http://
www.iBusinessmag.com/iBusiness_Magazine/Subscribe.html
Opinions expressed are not necessarily the views of iBusiness Mag-
azine or Loop USA Inc. All content are Copyright by Loop USA Inc. All 
rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced with-
out written permission. iBusiness is a registered trademark of Loop 
USA Inc. Other trademarks and copyrights appearing in this magazine 
remain the property of their respective holders. From time to time 
we may rent our mailing list (emails, names and addresses only) to 
select third party whose products or services may be of interest to our 
readers. Please contact us should you wish to be excluded from these 
mailings using our contact information on this page.
Copyright (C) 2017 iBusiness Magazine. All Rights Reserved. Apple, 
the Apple logo, iPhone, iPod and iPad are registered trademarks of 
Apple Inc. in the U.S. and/or other countries.
We would love to hear from you! Please feel free and to contact us
here at iBusiness with any feedback, suggestions or questions that
you may have about our magazine. Feel free to call us  at
1-416-907-8410 or write to info@iBusinessmag.com. 
Printed in U.S.A
DISCOVER THE WORLD OF iBUSINESS MAGAZINE
The only Business Innovation (B2B) & Enterprise Magazine 
in the market is published bi-monthly available in all news 
stands and on subscription.
Monthly Newsletter
The iBusiness Magazine is available monthly. You can join 
our newsletter at http://www.iBusinessmag.com/newsletter
Print on Demand
You can get our magazine print on demand with our part-
ner MagCloud.com - http://www.magcloud.com/browse/
magazine/133463
Newsstand Edition App
We’ve just launched our iPad version of the magazine, with 
digital enhancements, you can get it at the Apple news-
stand. www.iBusinessmag.com/newsstand
Kindle Edition - Now Available
iBusiness Magazine is now available for the Amazon Kindle 
Tablet. You can purchase individual issues or subscription 
from the Amazon website. http://www.iBusinessmag.com/
amazon
Facebook, LinkedIn & Twitter
Keep up to date with iBusiness Magazine, our digital offer-
ings and the latest news via our Twitter feed twitter.com/
ibizmag, facebook page facebook.com/iBusinessmag and 
our LinkedIn Page, find us under iBusiness Magazine
Pinterest
Follow our pins at http://www.pinterest.com/iBusinessmag
Website
iBusinessmag.com - The website of iBusiness Magazine 
www.iBusinessmag.com
SMB
In Review
6	 Samsung : Mobile Security: Inhibitor or Enabler?
9	 Square
11	vmware
12	Calero
13	IBM
17	ManageEngine
19	MobileIron
21	SOTI
23	SyncDog
24	Samsung: Network Alliances
28	The MyMe Unity System
29	One Application for All Business Processes
30	OMNI
35	KanbanFlow
4	 A Story Of Growth Hacking  
	
Too Soon 
	
Marnï Melrose
5	 Your Have Just Been Infected 
	
With Ransomware 
	
Stefan Kanitz
8	  Tips On How to Ramp Up the  
	
Security of Industrial Networks 
	
Moxa
14	Battery Safety In Public 
	
Isodor Buchmann
16	Lights, Camera…The Top 7 
	
Trends In Corporate  
	
Video Content 
	
Vern Oakley
33	Know Your Personal  
	
Value Proposition 
	
Kari Gates
34	What’s the Appeal? - A Preview 
	
of Apple’s HomePod 
	
Jens Lodholm
36	Mobile Marketing – Yes, It’s  
	
Instant,  And Effective, But 
	
Consider This! 
	
Jey Raj
40	The Genius Of Steve Jobs In The 
	
 Apple Mobile Product Life-Cycle 
	
Rene Siegal

Standard ERP
One system for all your
business processes.

I am going to tell you the story of how I lost a client for 
growth hacking him too soon. This is a tale of caution to 
other growth hackers and companies thinking about hiring 
a growth hacker. 
I was new to the growth hacking process, and I made two 
mistakes. 
Make sure the instrumentation is in place 
first or that the contract is longer than  
3 months.
To begin with, this client had no CRM, no tracking, and no 
analytics in place there was no baseline. So the first phase 
was implementing systems that would track everything for 
them. One of his team was resisting this all the way. He was 
an instrumental member of his team, so it made it challeng-
ing. If I could advise anything here, make sure the CEO is 
strong enough to stand up to his employees or make sure 
all of the employees are on board with growth hacking and 
don’t feel threatened by it. Also growth doesn’t happen over-
night when you start from zero.
We got the system in place and started advertising. In one 
of our tests of the system, I managed to get his CPC down to 
46% less than the average Facebook CPC. In another test, I 
increased the sign ups on a landing page by 100%. In another 
we found that they definitely had product market fit - their 
users LOVED their product. However, no of that matters if 
their budget is too small to make a significant difference. 
Which leads me to the next thing I did wrong.
Don’t work with a company who isn’t ready 
to growth hack yet.
Yes, growth hacking can help your company acquire expo-
nential growth, but not if you aren’t growing already. I can’t 
stress enough that without product/market fit and fund-
ing, growth hacking can be a bumpy ride. If you aren’t get-
ting more than 5K in visitors a month, you aren’t ready for 
growth hacking. Tests need numbers to be statistically via-
ble. If you aren’t experiencing at least 20% growth year over 
year. You aren’t ready yet. 
First of all 9/10 hacks fail. Next, as a business owner, you 
need to have the following skills. The “Boss Skills” below 
were inspired by Morgan Brown, who leads Growth Hacking 
at  Booking.com
	
•	 You must be ok with being wrong.
	
•	 Okay with being proven wrong.
	
•	 Okay having your ideas tested like everyone else’s.
	
•	 Okay changing your strategy based on tests.
	
•	 Okay relinquishing control of the product to 
	
	 your customers.
	
•	 Okay with unexpected and unintended results.
	
•	 You must be willing to invest in experimentation and  
	
	 instrumentation.
I’ve learned my lesson, and I’ll keep learning every day 
that I am alive, thanks to groups like Growthhackers.com  
and others. 
So what does a growth lead do? The growth lead reports to 
the CEO and works with the heads of marketing, engineer-
ing, and product development to maximize growth. They 
focus on NOTHING ELSE but the growth of your business. 
Sometimes they can perform marketing, engineering or 
product development as well, depending on their skill set. 
A Story Of Growth Hacking Too Soon
SMB
Marnï Melrose is a 
business coach and 
technology trainer. 
Novaturience, LLC the 
experience of power-
ful change. 
Marnï Melrose
www.macangel.com
about.me/marnimelrose
Read iBusiness Magazine digitally with our following partners on your favourite mobile devices

	
•	 Your internal drive is encrypted
	
•	 Your external drive is encrypted
	
•	 Files on your NAS or server shares are encrypted
	
•	 Your entire Time Machine backup is encrypted
	
•	 Encrypted files have been replicated to iCloud /  
	
	
DropBox etc.
Time to get out your BitCoin wallet to pay up.
Not infected yet? What about that email attachment you are 
just about to open?  Is it the one?
Ransomware is no joke.  It has ruined businesses globally.  Many 
have never gotten their files back, all have lost time and energy 
in the recovery process.  Some have paid and been hit again.  All 
you need to do is read the news:  
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-40261693  
(BBC News June 13, 2017)
Scared yet?  You should be.
I am not going to focus on protecting OS X from attack.  With 
the types of threats changing and morphing on a daily if not 
hourly basis there is strong probability that the next tsunami of 
Cryptolocker or Wannacry type viruses will affect thousands of 
computers, both Windows and Apple alike.
Consider this; if your computer was to experience a hardware 
failure today, you could go out and purchase a new one at your 
local Apple retailer, restore your data from Time Machine or 
iCloud and be up and running again in an hour or two.  But 
ransomware is much worse than a hardware failure.  It encrypts 
your data including your backups.  Assuming you are going to 
get hit by the next wave, what should you do to protect your live-
lihood, reputation, critical files and ultimately your business?
Protecting critical data today requires much more than a back-
up.  You need to secure data and protect it from any current or 
future threat. Real data protection requires a solution that not 
only allows for a predictable time to get working again (recovery 
time objective - RTO) but also the ability to limit the amount of 
data and work lost (recovery point objective - RPO).
Imagine if you knew, beyond any doubt, that when hit with ran-
somware, you would lose no more than 5-15 minutes of work 
and that you could recover your data and operating system(s) 
in an hour or so.  What is the value in having the peace of mind 
of knowing your business is completely protected be it a stand-
alone Mac, a server or network of computers.
Every business owner should be able to calculate what a total 
business shut-down would cost on an hourly and daily basis.  If 
you do hourly contract work, that’s easy.  If you have a team re-
lying on a server or share, that is a little more difficult but can 
be done.  Make sure you add the cost of missed client deadlines, 
POS system failures or recreating lost work.  With this number 
in hand, consider what value there would be in knowing exactly 
how long it would take to recover and how much data would  
be lost.  
There is a cost to protecting your business and there is no way 
around it.   You experience this every time you pay your business 
insurance. Many businesses never make an claim, yet pay every 
year. What is it worth to your business to limit the risk of data 
loss, something that we have identified as a very real and imme-
diate possibility?  
The best solution on the market today is the Datto Total 
Data Protection solution.  Their on-site appliance, connect-
ed securely to redundant Cloud storage will back up one or 
more complete computers (OS, data, everything) as often 
as every 5 minutes.  These backups are replicated off-site 
throughout the day to protect against local disasters (torna-
dos anyone?).  With this in place the RTO and RPO for your 
business are known and can be fire-drill tested at any time. 
Datto’s solution has saved numerous businesses from disas-
ter by allowing ransomware encrypted data and even entire 
computers to be restored to a point just before the attack or  
disaster occurred.  
Including on-appliance virtualization, rapid bare-metal OS re-
stores, ransomware detection and many other data security 
features, Datto’s Siris 3 and NAS 3 appliances provide complete 
and total protection simply and effectively.  Regardless the size 
of your business, one Mac or a dozen you cannot afford to lose 
data or experience unpredictable down-time.  Perhaps it is time 
to sign up for an insurance policy that you will actually use, 
possibly just to recover a deleted folder or file, or in the worst 
case to ensure that you will never need a BitCoin account down 
the road.
There is no need to be held hostage by ransomware or deal with 
loss from user error or disaster.  The value in protecting your 
data and business from loss should be simple math.  Lets talk.
Your Have Just Been Infected With Ransomware
SMB
Stefan Kanitz is a Pro-
fessor at Seneca College 
teaching 
technology 
subjects 
to 
business 
students.  In addition, 
he is the owner of Cair-
itech, a small MSP North 
of the Greater Toronto 
Area with clients across 
a range of industries.  
With 25+ years’ expe-
rience in the computer 
and network support 
field, his primary focus 
is on small medium busi-
ness and education. 
Stefan Kanitz
www.linkedin.com/in/
stefankanitz 
info@cairitech.com 
Created For Teachers…. By Teachers
Table Top Testing & Privacy Partitions 
For more information email us at 
testdividers@gmail.com
5

Mobile Security: Inhibitor or Enabler?
by Kevin Gilroy, EVP, Samsung Business
In Review
Everything is getting smarter. Not just personal devices and home ap-
pliances, but also commercial and industrial equipment. In the agricultural 
industry, tractors now enable farmers to pinpoint varying soil conditions 
and provide irrigation as necessary to improve soil conditions. In the trans-
portation sector, shipping fleets are now routinely collecting and commu-
nicating information about shipment performance, fuel efficiency and en-
gine health as well as driver behavior and fatigue information. The Internet 
of Things (IoT) is even helping retailers reshape the shopping experience in 
an omni-channel world. The potential for enterprises to enhance customer 
experiences and drive operational excellence is seemingly endless.
But every new point of access to data is potentially also a new point of 
vulnerability. In an ecosystem that stretches from the cloud to the factory 
floor to a warehouse manager’s tablet to your smart watch, how do you 
make sure your data is secure? After all, headlines about major security 
breaches decisively disprove the old adage that “there’s no such thing as 
bad publicity.”
The resultant fixation on security leads to what I call “the IT paradox” — 
while the C-suite demands absolute protection against breaches, users are 
fed up with security protocols that inhibit their productivity. Those users 
are increasingly finding ways to optimize their own experience for conve-
nience and ease of use. According to Wired, 70 percent of millennials ad-
mit that they actively bypass security protocols. In other words, the largest 
segment of the U.S. adult population (and the only one that’s growing) sees 
security as an impediment to getting things done.
Challenging the Premise
The IT paradox presumes that security is inherently at odds with produc-
tivity and convenience, probably because it always has been. But it doesn’t 
have to be that way. At Samsung, we believe that security can actually 
enable productivity and convenience, liberating IT to focus on driving 
business results. We believe this idea can scale — the more security you 
have, the more you can increase productivity and convenience, the more 
business results you can drive. That belief is the core of our philosophy. It 
informs everything from the questions we ask ourselves to the innovations 
we introduce.
The problem with mobile security, we realized, is that it has historically 
been completely reliant on the operating system. Most mobile-security 
solutions are still built that way — as if nothing exists below the OS level. 
But of course there is a level beneath the OS, and the bad guys know it. 
That’s where they hide out, collecting data from your keystrokes and your 
screen. It’s like having spies in the basement of your home, and you didn’t 
even know you had a basement. You turn on your home-alarm system and 
go to bed feeling secure. Meanwhile spies have been watching you floss, 
peeking into your medicine cabinet, listening to your conversations, and 
recording everything.
The only way to turn security from a business inhibitor to a business en-
abler is to ensure your basement is secure, which means securing your 
device right down to the chip level. When you build security into the pro-
cessor, you establish an “original state” of security at the hardware level. 
After that, every change — like the provisioning or configuration of an app 
— can be compared to the original state. If
motion is detected anywhere in the house, including the basement, we 
can lock the entire house down. In fact, we can make the house disappear, 
leaving the bad guys nowhere. That’s why Samsung was the first company 
in the world to have mobile devices certified by the U.S. Department of 
Defense for out-of-the-box classified use.
What does that approach to mobile security enable for our enterprise cus-
tomers? In short, better conversations. Once mobile-security concerns 
are taken off the table, richer dialogues about business outcomes rise like 
cream to the top.
Solving the Paradox
Let’s take the healthcare industry as an example. Patient data security is 
a major cause of concern as government regulations demand that patient 
data must be protected at all costs. At the same time, millennials are ma-
turing and utilizing more and more medical services. This generation of 
“digital natives” represents a huge opportunity for hospitals and clinics, 
and the competition for them is fierce. Healthcare providers are increas-
ingly employing digital entertainment options to lure in millennials, who 
expect to be able to watch Netflix while they wait in examination rooms, 
or even in surgery.
Now imagine that each examination room has a tablet. Once the patient 
is checked in and assigned an exam room, the tablet in that room updates 
with her medical history. As the nurse measures the patient’s weight, blood 
pressure and other vital signs, that information is entered on the same tab-
let, along with the reason for today’s visit — let’s say shoulder pain. While 
waiting for the doctor, the patient can use the tablet to watch pre-loaded, 
branded content about bursitis and various treatment options. Or she can 
fire up an app like Facebook (if the clinic has decided to allow that), log in 
with a fingerprint, and ask her social circle which physical therapists they 
recommend locally. At the end of her visit, a single touch of an icon wipes 
the device clean and resets it for the next patient.
In this scenario, the user’s experience and the clinic’s operational excel-
lence are both enhanced because of security, not in spite of it. Instead of 
slowing things down, security lubricates the process and creates new pos-
sibilities. The IT paradox is solved.
Embracing the Future
In a few years, everyone will approach mobile security this way. The imple-
mentation details will vary according to the relative strengths and weak-
nesses of each mobile-device manufacturer, but the central tenet — that 
security must be built in from the chip up — will become universal as 
customers begin to expect richer conversations about business outcomes. 
“Mobility vendors need to take more of an outside-in perspective,” wrote 
Dan Bieler, a principal analyst at Forrester in a recent blog post, “seeing the 
world through the eyes of their customers and explaining in more detail 
why and how mobility will help their business.”
In the meantime, IoT is creating bold new possibilities for every kind of 
enterprise. How will it transform yours? The answer depends largely on 
whether you see mobile security as an inhibitor or an enabler.
You know where we stand.
6

Premium Leather
The Pinnacle of Apple Portable Protection Since 1999
www.mac-case.com
760. 729. 0620
iPad Pro Folio shown in Classic Pebble Grain Black
The World’s Best iPad Pro Cases
Customization Available

It is inevitable that the adoption of the Industrial IoT 
(IIoT) is going to continue to grow, facilitating more and 
more devices to be connected to networks. The momentum 
driving this trend is a strong desire from asset owners to en-
hance operational efficiency. However, achieving enhanced 
operational efficiency is not without problems. It is forcing 
asset owners to start to give serious consideration to the 
dangers posed by cybersecurity threats.
Every device that is added to a network creates a potential 
weak point or vulnerability by providing attackers with a 
possible entry point to the network. The importance that 
companies and even governments are starting to place on 
cybersecurity is hard to overestimate. In July 2016, the 
European Parliament1 published guidelines that should be 
adhered to in order to prevent cyber attacks. Asset owners 
are united in their demands for cybersecurity solutions that 
allow them to deploy secure devices and networks for indus-
trial applications.
What is the IEC 62443 Standard?
The IEC 62443 standard is constantly evolving to provide 
up-to-date security guidelines and a list of best practices for 
different parts of a network. It also includes information 
for those who perform different responsibilities on the net-
work in order to protect against known security leaks and 
unknown attacks. The ultimate goal of the standard is to help 
improve the safety of networks and enhance industrial auto-
mation and control settings security. At present, many sys-
tem integrators (SIs) require component suppliers to comply 
with the IEC 62443-4-2 subsection of the IEC 62443 stan-
dard that specifically pertains to the security of end devices. 
The subsection is compiled from foundational requirements, 
including identification and authentication control, use con-
trol, data integrity and confidentiality, as well as backup for 
resource availability.
Understanding the Security Risks
There is a general consensus among security experts that 
there are six main cybersecurity threats that can affect inter-
nal networks, including unauthorized access, unsecure data 
transmission, unencrypted key data, incomplete event logs, 
lack of security monitoring, and human setting errors. It is 
paramount that network operators understand these threats 
so that they can deploy devices that have sufficient securi-
ty features in place and ensure that their networks are safe 
from internal and external threats. Consideration will now 
be given to situations where these security risks can arise 
and some of the options that are available to network opera-
tors in order to neutralize threats to their networks.
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/ 
HTML/?uri=CELEX:32016L1148&from=EN
 Tips On How to Ramp Up the Security of Industrial Networks
SMB
Moxa is a leading man-
ufacturer of industrial 
networking, computing, 
and automation solu-
tions. With over 25 years 
of industry experience, 
Moxa 
has 
connected 
more than 40 million 
devices worldwide and 
has a distribution and 
service 
network 
that 
reaches customers in 
more than 70 countries. 
Moxa delivers lasting 
business value by em-
powering industry with 
reliable networks and 
sincere service for au-
tomation systems. In-
formation about Moxa’s 
solutions is available at 
www.moxa.com
Moxa
www.moxa.com

My previous experience with Square was when they first launched a 
small device that could plug into your device and process credit card trans-
actions. The Square Point of Sale System, takes this one step further and 
offers a complete point of sale system.
The system works for retailers or anyone who has an inventory of goods 
and processes payments.
It features a straight forward inventory system that includes graphics, 
pricing and stock levels. Square states the system is so intuitive your staff 
literally need no training and can dive right in and use the system. The 
inventory system also works in real time, removing items from inventory 
as they are sold.
The system is extremely flexible. Options are available for an iPad on a 
stand in a fixed system or a mobile system where your staff take the device 
with them and process transactions on the fly. I can see retailers using this 
system to provide a whole new shopping experience, wherein staff process-
es your payment and hand you your goods without having to wait in line.
The Square system also offers a device referred to as a: SQUARE CON-
TACTLESS + CHIP READER. This device allows customers to pay using 
NFC, also referred to as Apple Pay or Android Pay, wherein your device is 
used to conduct the transaction. Also the system includes a Chip and Pin 
credit card processor, which is standard practice where I live in Canada, and 
this is becoming the new norm in the United States. 
The payment system also gives customers the flexibility to receive their 
receipts via text message or email. Including in the system is an option to 
allow customers to extend a tip as well.
An added feature for restaurant and bar sales allows wait staff to setup 
an ongoing tab for the customers. Even allowing the wait staff to add to 
the tab while not connected to the internet and processing after the fact. 
Then once the customer is ready to pay, the bill can be split among multi-
ple credit cards or a mix of cash an credit cards. Imagine the convenience 
for customers. 
Interfacing with other devices is also an option. On their website Square 
lists compatible ethernet and bluetooth receipt printers. As well as a bar 
code scanner and cash drawers. Compatible tablet stands are also listed.
The Square system also includes analytics. You can view reports about 
trends in every type of transaction or product. Data is collected in real 
time, so you can see what is happening without having to wait for a report 
at days end. Customer data is also retained, how much and how often each 
customer spends with you. There is also a free Dashboad App so you can 
view your analytics data at any time from anywhere. Or just log into your 
Square account in a browser. Analytics also sends you a weekly summary 
via email, and data can be exported to CSV files into a spreadsheet.
The Square software is actually a free download. Credit card processing fees 
apply, Square lists 2.75% per swipe or 3.5% + .15 for keyed in transactions 
on their website. Money collected is deposited right into your bank account 
in one or two business days.
The Square system works on both iOS and Android devices, and your ac-
count is viewable from a browser. 
I can see the system working extremely well for small or growing business-
es that need to be able to get new employees up and running quickly. Giv-
ing your staff the equipment to check out customers from anywhere in the 
store makes for a pain free shopping experience for the customer. I believe 
that as more people turn their preference to shopping online retail has to 
react, and the answer is putting technology to work making the shopping 
experience fun and painless.
The Square POS System puts that technology in the hands of your staff.
In Review
9

HOW PRODUCTIVE AND SECURE 
IS YOUR WORKFORCE OUTSIDE 
YOUR NETWORK PERIMETER ?
•  Secure Personal Information 
   Management
•  Secure File Management 
•  Secure Internet/Intranet Access
•  Secure Location-based Services
www.syncdog.com  
sales@syncdog.com
(703) 430-6040
See more at Microsoft Ignite, 
Orlando, FL September 25-29, 2017
Partner
The farther you get from the network 
perimeter, the more secure mobile devices 
get, and in turn, the less functional your 
apps become. SentinelSecure™ was 
architected to keep your team as operational 
away from the office as they are when in 
the office. With SentinelSecure™, you get a 
host of enterprise apps within a secure FIPS 
140-2 approved containerized workspace.
Found in MobilIron Marketplace

In Review
Airwatch is VMware’s solution to Mobile Device Management. They 
state they are the leading solution and are utilized by such companies as 
Home Depot, Weight Watchers, Walgreens, The United Bank, Target and 
many more. Currently there are 12,000 global customers.
VMware states there solution can be used as part of comprehensive 
solution across all your device’s. The offer and end to end solution for your 
entire portfolio.
The also state they are a market leader with innovation making constant 
improvements to offer the latest technology.
Airwatch has been developed to scale as business grows allowing companies 
to expand without having to revamp systems.
It also works well with other systems and has been designed to integrate 
seamlessly with other companies offerings such as Office 365, Cisco, 
Dropbox and more.
Airwatch uses multilevel security including encryption to secure 
data on devices.
New devices can be added quickly and easily using either the Apple Device 
Enrolment program (DEP) or Windows Out-of-Box Enrolment (OOBE). 
The system allows for internal or bulk purchased APP’s to be deployed 
automatically. Alternately an entire enterprise catalog can be made 
available for on-demand installation. End users can self activate devices 
with their company credentials allowing them to connect to company WiFi 
VPN and intranet sites.
A diverse fleet of devices can be managed from a single console. 
Devices can be either corporate owned, bring your own, or even shared 
among employees. 
Airwatch supports integration with directory services, enabling IT staff 
to import their existing directory services structure. Changes are then 
synchronized with Airwatch, as well multiple domains within the same 
organization are supported. 
Device enrolment is easily performed either through the Airwatch 
Agent tool, QR Code, email or an SMS. Users can be authenticated with 
a username and password, directory services credentials and more. Users 
can be prompted to accept a custom terms of use before access is granted.
Profiles can be setup restricting access dependant on user or device 
ownership type. Restricting access to applications WiFi, VPN and more.
Airwatch also features automated compliance monitoring for unauthorized 
users and compromised devices. IT admins are alerted to threats and 
predestined actions such as blocking access to email applications and 
resources can be handled automatically.
Devices can be queried remotely and actions such as password clearing 
and device locking can be done. A device can even be wiped remotely  
if necessary.
Airwatch pricing is published on the website here:
https://www.air-watch.com/en/pricing
You can download a trial of the software here:
https://www.air-watch.com/lp/free-trial/
Read iBusiness Magazine digitally with our following partners on your favourite mobile devices

In Review
Calero’s solution is part of their Enterprise Communications and Man-
agement Suite. They state they have over 30 years of experience and 3,000 
customers worldwide. Their solution includes a custom designed solution 
tailored to your unique needs and goals.
Mobility management from them includes the ability to remotely manage 
devices, applications and data. It includes the ability to administer and 
enforce usage and security policies, as devices can be provisioned and ap-
proved. The system allows for easy activation and resolution of incidents, 
as well as provisioning mobile services and applications. 
The system also allows for auditing of devices to stay on budget and track 
expenses. A benchmarking tool is including for negotiating contracts with 
providers. Calero also includes a built in mobile help desk solution for end 
user support.
Benefits of the solution include maximized employee productivity, savings 
on resources and time, best possible contract terms rates and conditions, 
services are optimized for peak performance, guidance from experts.
Calero manages deployments of all sizes in multiple models to ensure ev-
ery device is received, inventoried, charged, imaged, secured, tested and 
the delivered ready to go to the end user. Support is also included to keep 
devices running after deployed.
Calero supports both corporate owned and bring your own device scenar-
ios, thousands of brands, applications, technologies and carriers are sup-
ported. Support is offered 24/7 - 365 and they are certified to support all 
leading devices and applications. As well as managing device activations, 
replacements, repairs, deployment and procurement.
Calero offers a unique offering as their solutions are custom tailored to 
your business. They offer best practice consulting for: BYOD, Business 
Process, MDM Selection, Policy Development, Mobile APP consulting, 
Network Capacity Management, Security and Compliance Audits, Mobile 
Invoice Audits, Portal Tools Requirements, and Training.
The Calero solution includes an industry proven implementation plan 
which reduces the chance of risk. They provide recommendations and in-
clude policy templates for maximum efficiency. 
They help build a device inventory and verify carrier services to optimize 
costs. Also included is an assessment of network operations and technol-
ogy. Local, wireless and data are all scrutinized to generate rapid savings.
Calero will analyze your current contract rates, terms and conditions, and 
compare them to contracts available in your area. They have been collect-
ing data for ten years from hundreds of contracts. They will provide com-
plete managed sourcing services to help you secure contracts tailored to  
your needs.
You can read more about Calero at:
https://www.calero.com/clm/service-support/managed-mobility-ser-
vices-mms/
You can also request a demo at:
https://www.calero.com/contact-us/request-demo/

In Review
Continuum IT management platform is a complete device management 
platform for SMB’s. It is powered by MaaS360 by IBM™ and allows com-
plete control over a BYOD platform. It allows for the management of iOS, 
Windows and Android devices with dynamic security.
It is a solution for MSP’s (Managed Service Provider) to assist business in 
managing their devices. Continuum states that by this year half of employ-
ees will be required to supply their own devices at work. As the ability to 
work from anywhere and collaborate with other employee becomes the 
new normal, businesses need to facilitate mobile device usage.
They also quote Gartner who states that by 2018 - 70% of mobile profes-
sionals will perform work on their own personal devices.
For managed service providers and consultants managing these devices 
on behalf of companies is a high growth market. These are after all just 
endpoints in need of security and management in the same way computer 
desktops used to be the only devices companies used.
When employees bring their own devices to work, they expect to be able to 
switch back and forth between their personal use and business use seam-
lessly. So they can both socialize on Facebook and view a report on the 
same device. The MDM (mobile device management) allows the work por-
tion of device access to be accessed in what Continuum refers to as a sep-
arate container. Information flowing in and out of that container is kept 
separate from personal data on the device.
Continuum gives the example of a waiter in a high turnover position as 
an example. The waiter is hired and uses his personal device to take orders 
from customers. Six months later when he leaves, the IT Admin staff are 
able to wipe only the business information from the device, without inter-
fering with his personal data and usage of the device.
This is also useful if a device is lost or stolen, all data including sensitive 
information can be quickly and easily remotely removed.
Verticals, or segments of types of businesses have specific needs when it 
comes to device security. Such as health care which has specific regulations 
on how data must be secured. Retailers are also expected to secure data 
such as credit card information. Financial institutions would also require 
the ability to quickly and easily remove any data. Educational customers 
want to restrict access to some applications while allowing students to ac-
cess the information they need.
As a Managed Service Provider it is not difficult to convince customers the 
device management s something they would not just want but need.
Mobile device management consists of Passcode enforcement. Which al-
lows for management of mandatory passcode use as well as length. Pass-
code rules can also be setup such as the wiping of a device after a set num-
ber of failed passcode attempts.
Geofencing is used to prevent access to applications outside of a geograph-
ic area for example when a device is in the workplace social media applica-
tions could be shut off. Once the employee leaves the workplace they are 
accessible again. If an employee works from multiple locations more than 
one policy can be setup. 
Administrators can also be alerted if a device is jailbroken or rooted. This 
prevents end users from bypassing restrictions put in place by Admins. 
Application restrictions can also be put in effect disallowing access to 
things like FaceTime, Siri or iCloud. Applications can be whitelisted or 
blacklisted allowing businesses the security of knowing devices are being 
used appropriately.
Continuum offers a trial of their solution here:
https://page.continuum.net/platform/software/trial/remote-monitor-
ing-and-management
For pricing it is best to contact the company for a quote.
13

The interest in batteries is growing, but stored energy 
must be respected. Children and adults alike are often un-
aware of the potential safety hazards when experimenting 
with batteries by heating cells, crushing them or applying an 
electrical short. Some batteries disintegrate with such a force 
they can cause serious harm, such as the loss of an arm or 
death. The damage inflicted depends on the chemistry and 
lithium-based cells are the most potent. Pay special attention 
to lithium-metal, the most energy-dense cell that is also the 
most powerful when stressed beyond its limits.
Folks are familiar with the alkaline, but this is the pussycat 
of batteries. Other systems are less forgiving and this article 
looks at common battery systems in the hands of the con-
sumer. We learn how to care for batteries, what to watch for 
when traveling and how to stay out of trouble with correct 
handling. 
Alkaline
Alkaline is the most common house-
hold battery. It provides longer run-
time and is slightly more expensive 
than the zinc-carbon that it replaced. 
Lewis Urry (1927–2004) invented the 
alkaline in 1949 while working with 
the Eveready Battery Company labora-
tory in Ohio, USA. 
A household alkaline has about 40 per-
cent more energy than the average Li-
ion. Alkaline is environmentally friend-
ly and does not leak when depleted, as 
the old zinc-carbon did that came on 
the market in 1868. Alkaline has a very low self-discharge 
and can be stored for up to 10 years. It has a good safety re-
cord and can be carried on an aircraft without subject to UN 
Transport and other regulations.
The negative of alkaline is high internal resistance that limits 
current loading to light loads only, such as remote controls, 
flashlights and portable entertainment devices. This has an 
advantage in that alkaline can safely be carried in our jeans. 
An electrical short with keys or coins will cause the cell the 
heat up but there is no danger of fire. In spite of being forgiv-
ing, never mix batteries metallic objects.
Alkaline batteries cannot be charged, or at least they should 
not. This does not stop individuals from trying to get some 
energy back into the cell. Ordinary alkaline batteries have 
been recharged in households for many years. Recharging 
is most effective if the cell is not discharged beyond 50 per-
cent. Depth of discharge governs the number of recharges 
and is limited to just a few. Battery makers do not endorse 
this practice for safety reasons; charging ordinary alkaline 
batteries may generate hydrogen gas that can lead to an ex-
plosion. (See BU-211: Alternate Battery Systems; go to Reus-
able Alkaline).
Button cells 
The button cell, also known as a coin cell, is used in toys, 
watches, hearing aids and medical devices. Children like to 
play with button cells, putting them in their mouth and pos-
sibly swallowing them. In the United States alone, each year 
more than 2,800 children are treated in emergency rooms 
for swallowing button batteries. According to a 2015 report, 
injuries and deaths from swallowing batteries has increased 
nine-fold in the last decade. (See BU-703: Health Concerns 
with Batteries)
If swallowed, the battery often 
gets stuck in the esophagus 
(the tube that passes food). 
Water or saliva creates a con-
duit for electrical current that 
triggers a chemical reaction 
producing hydroxide, a caus-
tic ion that can cause serious 
burns to the surrounding tissue. Doctors often misdiagnose 
the revealing symptoms revealing as fever, vomiting, poor 
appetite and weariness. Batteries that make it through the 
esophagus often move through the digestive tract with little 
or no lasting damage, although they can ulcerate the stom-
ach wall. 
The advice to parents is to choose safe toys and to keep small 
batteries away from young children. Similar to pharmaceu-
tical products, keep small batteries locked away from small 
children.
Lead acid
Lead acid produces high load current for 
a few seconds, causes sparks and melts 
metals but the battery soon gets ex-
hausted. An analogy is a drying felt pen 
that works for short markings on paper 
and then needs resting to replenish the 
ink. While recovery is fast, charging is 
notoriously slow and gets worse with 
age. An electrical short can cause a spill 
and create exhaust gases. Do not try to 
short lead acid.
Lead is a toxic metal that can enter the body by inhalation 
of lead dust or ingestion when touching the mouth with 
lead-contaminated hands. Children and fetuses of pregnant 
women are most vulnerable to lead poisoning. Excessive lev-
els of lead may affect a child’s growth, cause brain damage, 
harm kidneys, impair hearing and induce behavioral prob-
lems. In adults, lead can cause memory loss and lower the 
ability to concentrate, as well as harm the reproductive sys-
tem. Lead is also known to induce high blood pressure, nerve 
disorders, and muscle and joint pain. Researchers think that 
Ludwig van Beethoven became ill and died because of lead 
poisoning.
Do not store starter batteries where children play as the ter-
minals of a starter battery are made of lead. Lead acid also 
has one of the most corrosive electrolytes of all batteries that 
must be safeguarded. 
Lithium-ion
The damage a lithium-ion cell can inflict by an accidental 
short comes at a surprise to most. Packaged in an 18650 cell 
(pictured) Li-ion looks like a harmless AA alkaline cell. Not 
Battery Safety In Public 
SMB
Isidor Buchmann is 
the founder and CEO of 
Cadex Electronics Inc. 
For three decades, Bu-
chmann has studied the 
behavior of rechargeable 
batteries in practical, 
everyday 
applications, 
has written award-win-
ning articles including 
the 
best-selling 
book 
“Batteries in a Portable 
World,” now in its fourth 
edition. Cadex special-
izes in the design and 
manufacturing of bat-
tery chargers, analyzers 
and monitoring devices. 
For more information 
on batteries, visit www.
batteryuniversity.com; 
product information is 
on www.cadex.com. 
Isodor Buchmann
batteryuniversity.com
www.cadex.com
Continued on page 38
14

Discover the all-new Direct Mail 4.0
DOWNLOAD FOR FREE at www.directmailmac.com
Compose
Send
Track
Manage
Collaborate
Automate
Lightning Fast.
Drop-Dead Easy.
Deliver email campaigns that
deliver results with Direct Mail for OS X

We live in a visual society, and increasingly a video society. 
The corporate world knows this, and is leveraging video for 
uses other than just branding or marketing. Video is now 
often used to communicate important messages for mov-
ing people to action: for example, to invite investors to take 
a stake in your company, to encourage employees to rally 
around a strategy or initiative, or to recruit prospective em-
ployees.
As a filmmaker and creative director, I’m constantly look-
ing for the next technology or trend to make my own work 
stronger and understand the context that corporations are 
coming to the table with. Here are some trends I’ve noticed 
lately.
1) Welcome to the video tsunami. Video is by far the way 
more and more people want to receive messages and infor-
mation. We’re at the crest of the wave, and the surf is up. 
By 2020, 84% of all Internet traffic will be video. That’s an 
astounding number.
2) Video continues to move in-house. Many of the Global 
1000 corporations have in-house video departments.  The 
middle market is looking to outsource the whole video op-
eration and avoid staff and space allocations.  More to come 
on that.
3) There’s a lot of terrible video out there. The barrier to 
entry is so low in terms of costs, and business is so thirsty for 
content, which means that there is a perfusion of mediocre 
video. A great percentage of it is simply ignored.
4) Smart businesses demand ROI and ROI demands con-
text. To understand and create effective video content is a 
skill unto itself. What distinguishes the merely acceptable 
from the truly great is an advanced level of strategic and cre-
ative thinking, a firm grip on the business challenges, and 
the societal context your audience is experiencing.
5) Virtual Reality is a contender. We’ve barely scratched 
the surface of VR’s massive potential for corporate and insti-
tutional applications. While VR is currently in the “trough of 
uncertainty” stage of its development, there’s no doubt more 
immersive and interactive video experiences are here to stay. 
6) Culture beats strategy. Cultural differentiators are the 
most surefire (some might say only) way to stand out in a 
crowded global business environment. It starts at the top – 
no secret there.  A lot of the most compelling work solves a 
specific communication challenge around building and im-
proving a company’s culture, for example, human resources 
(recruiting, on–boarding  retention), investor relations, CEO 
or executive messaging, values, purpose, and corporate com-
munications.
7) Business has two speeds: faster and faster. Every proj-
ect has tight time constraints. This is a result of the speed of 
business and the reality of the lives of corporate leaders. As 
service providers, we need to understand their pressure and 
work with it to assemble pop-up teams at a moment’s notice, 
and how to do great creative work under duress.
Video is here to stay. The future is filled with potential and 
opportunity. In the end, understanding your audience, mak-
ing work that begs to be viewed and shared, and having clar-
ity around the business problems you’re using video to solve 
add up to the successful use of video in a noisy world. 
Lights, Camera…The Top 7 Trends In Corporate Video Content
SMB
Veteran 
filmmaker, 
speaker, author of Lead-
ership in Focus, and in-
dustry thought leader, 
Vern Oakley is CEO 
and creative director of 
Tribe Pictures, which he 
founded in 1986. Oak-
ley has created films for 
Fortune 500 companies, 
nonprofit organizations, 
universities, and their 
leaders, including Amer-
ican 
Express, 
AT&T, 
Pfizer, Princeton, and 
NYU Law. His mission 
is to help humanize the 
world’s most successful 
leaders and institutions, 
helping them to craft 
their stories and to cre-
ate meaningful human 
connections. To this end, 
he has studied with a va-
riety of experts and in-
stitutions, from Arthur 
Penn and the Actor’s 
Studio to Harvard Busi-
ness School. 
Oakley directed the ma-
jor motion picture, A 
Modern Affair, as well 
as the Emmy-winning 
children’s TV program, 
Reading Rainbow. His 
work has won over 500 
international 
awards, 
including the Cannes 
Golden Dolphin, and he 
is currently an Adjunct 
Professor 
in 
Baruch 
College’s 
Communica-
tions Graduate Program. 
To learn more, visit  
www.vernoakley.com.
Vern Oakley
www.vernoakley.com.
Read iBusiness Magazine 
digitally with our following 
partners on your favourite 
mobile devices
16

In Review
Manage Engine has created a solution for managing the proliferation of iOS, 
Android and Windows devices in the workplace.
Device enrolment includes an automated bulk set of tools. Namely Apple Con-
figurator and Apple DEP. Apple configurator uses a USB connection to setup the 
device. It allows for quick and easy setup of a device and it’s APP’s. One of the 
main advantages to this is that you can enrol devices in bulk.
Android devices can be setup with Samsung Knox or NFC.
The system allows you to setup device profiles. It includes the ability to restrict 
features and setup access to VPN, email etc. Device profiles can be setup for spe-
cific departments or locations. Such as setting up one device specific to mem-
bers of a sales team, another profile for members of an administrative team.
Once the devices are setup the Administrator of the software has complete ac-
cess to each device on the network. It includes a summary of all the App’s on the 
each device. As well a details about each device in your inventory. 
The software includes a dashboard that allows you to quickly and easily view 
devices. It is intuitive and Manage Engine states it has no learning curve. It 
includes useful details allowing for immediate action.
It also allows for levels of management, so different IT Admin’s can manage the 
device’s and attributes they need to. 
The package includes MAM or Mobile Application Management. This allows the 
installation of both in house and external APP’s both at deployment and after-
ward. APP’s can be installed without end user intervention. APP licenses can be 
revoked and issued also without user intervention. APP’s can also be blacklisted 
to prevent unwanted device use. MAM can also be used to check the status of 
installed APP’s on each device. This also allows for the use of a volume purchase 
program (VPP) in iOS and for Android SAFE devices. A device can also be locked 
to specific APP’s or setup in a Kiosk mode for usage cases requiring it. 
MAM software also includes advice on whitelisting and blacklisting APP’s. The 
ability to containerize APP’s to avoid mixing of enterprise and personal data. 
Allowing only whitelisted APP’s to be installed by the end user as well as quick 
and easy identification of devices using blacklisted APP’s. APP’s can also be re-
stricted so they cannot backup data.
It also includes a variety of reports regarding APP usage and installation by de-
vice for quick and easy access by your IT staff.
Another feature of the device management package is device security. IT staff 
can easily preform a data wipe on a lost or stolen device. A secure passcode can 
also be setup to guard against third party intrusions. Reports can also be gen-
erated to perform device audits. IT management staff can also check to see if 
devices have been jailbroken as well as remotely lock devices to prevent misuse. 
Devices can also be geo located for security. 
Email has not been overlooked in this device management software either. The 
setting of email policy is automated allowing for a holistic approach to email. 
Email is secure and end users cannot remove their accounts. As well data can-
not be shared between email and unauthorized applications. Email can also be 
remotely wiped in the event of a lost or stolen device. Included is a document 
viewer so attachments can be viewed securely. This feature also works in con-
junction with either Office 365 or your own Exchange server. 
For Android devices there is also a remote troubleshooting tool. It allows IT 
Admin’s to remotely access a device including screen sharing as well Samsung 
devices can be remotely controlled. This feature does not require the installation 
of further software. At the time of this writing this is only available for Android 
devices.
Mentioned previously was KIOSK mode. Android devices have the feature of 
running in KIOSK mode, whereas iOS devices are run in “Single APP mode”. 
This feature allows an IT Admin to run an Android device in a special mode, 
with a special homepage, and only approved APP’s. The iOS version allows users 
to only interact with a single APP or screen turning off specific features to allow 
interaction without full access to the device.
For a free trial of this software you can reach Manage En-
gine on the web at: 
https://mdm.manageengine.com/free-trial.html
For pricing it is best to contact his company for a quote.
Read iBusiness Magazine digitally with our following partners on your favourite mobile devices


In Review
Mobileiron brings together a platform of tools including: Security and 
Mobile Device Management, Mobile Application Management, and Mobile 
Content Management. It is to be used by IT Managers for the lifecycle of 
the device.
Mobileiron Cloud, delivers a layered security platform through a cloud-
based mobile device management console. IT managers log in to their 
account to make changes and administer the devices. From the console the 
IT Manager can setup and distribute policies for email, WiFi, VPN, user 
passwords and security to the mobile devices.
As well access to key files and presentations can be setup. A device can also 
be remotely wiped if it has been lost or stolen. The cloud-based service is 
intuitive and works with Android, iOS, macOS and Windows 10 devices. 
The console allows over the air setup without manual intervention. 
APP’s can also be distributed and updated. End users are provided with 
a self service portal to help reduce help tickets. Policies can be setup and 
administrative tasks can be delegated to save time. Reports can also be 
generated to see usage trends across devices.
You can read a data sheet about the available 
Mobileiron packages here:
https://www.mobileiron.com/sites/default/files/datasheets/files/
MobileIron_Cloud_EMM_Bundles_Fall_2016_DS_V4.3_EN-US.pdf
Mobileiron Core consists of: Mobile Device Management, Mobile 
Application Management and Mobile Content Management. This 
integrates with backend enterprise IT systems and can be integrated with 
API’s or with offerings from companies that partner with Mobileiron. 
Mobile Device Management is for setup, remote wiping of corporate data 
from both company owned and user owned devices. Mobile Application 
Management consists of the entire application lifecycle. Applications are 
available in the enterprise storefront, applications are secured on the 
device, user authentication is enforced, APP’s are isolated from personal 
use, and retirement is done when necessary. Mobile Content Management 
allows access to mobile documents residing in either SharePoint, file shares 
or other content.
A product demo video is available here:
https://www.mobileiron.com/en/products/platform-architecture/
mobileiron-core
A complete reporting system is included allowing Splunk diagnoses, 
database exports into 
Tableau, Crystal Reports, and QlikView, CSV exports for quick and easy 
spreadsheet analysis as well as Widgets for quick and easy viewing.
A 30 day trial is available here:
https://www.mobileiron.com/en/webform/30-day-trial
SAY HELLO TO  
YOUR COMMUNITY
Your CEDIA membership puts you in the center of a thriving community of 
home technology insiders — a network of thousands dedicated to helping you 
build connections, stay competitive, and tap into new opportunities for growth.
Learn more at cedia.net.
CEDIA 
Groups
Volunteerism
Online 
Community
Integrated  
Systems  
Europe
CEDIA 
Show
Member 
Directory

GLOBAL PARTNER
Mobile is elemental.
It is an essential part of how we interact, communicate, 
work, and play.
Experiences that were once limited by time and place are 
now instant and eﬀortless.
Innovative technology is transforming the connected world, 
driving change and creating endless possibilities.
The Tech Element.
Contact us to learn more about participating in the event as an exhibitor, 
sponsor, partner or advertiser: sales@mwcamericas.com
We are expecting 30,000 attendees; 
oﬀering you the opportunity to meet and 
network with key mobile industry 
inﬂuencers and top-tier media
A regulatory and public policy program; 
partner events; free seminars  
We are expecting 1,000 exhibitors 
showcasing cutting-edge mobile 
technologies, products and services 
A conference program featuring C-level 
speakers and leading industry experts

In Review
Soti offers a solution for mobile device management that works with 
iOS, Android and Windows devices. Soti features Soti Mobicontrol, a single 
pane of glass system for administrating all your devices regardless of oper-
ating system, vendor or usage case. It features a complete lifecycle solution 
from deployment to retirement. It includes asset tracking, application and 
content management as well as device security.
Soti MobiControl is currently in use by over 17,000 customers. It was 
ranked as Editor’s Choice by PC Magazine.
Soti Hub is the centre where users can access all company documents and 
all activity is logged.
Soti Surf is the browser tool allowing controlled access to the internet. IT 
Administrators can control browser features and access for iOS and An-
droid devices. 
Soti MobiControl includes remote support allowing Admins to view and 
control devices as well as chat with end users as well as the ability to sync 
files with the device. The device can be automatically configured with the 
property connectivity utilizing either 3G / 4G, WiFi or VPN connections 
wherever the end user is located. It also controls the Soti Hub to manage 
important files and documents. Devices can be managed “over the air”, to 
install configure and update, including the removal of APP’s from either an 
enterprise or public APP store.
Soti stage allows devices to be enrolled with either an NFC “bump” or via 
barcode scanning. OEM enrolment is supported including the Apple De-
vice Enrolment Program (DEP), as well as Zebra’s StageNow and the Hon-
eywell EZConfig solution.
Devices can be setup based on profiles for either user role or geo-
graphic location. Profile configurations can be set as well as packages 
(application sets).
The Soti system is designed for a mobile help desk. Your staff can quickly 
diagnose and fix mobile related issues if they are either training, device or 
APP related.
Soti supports the current internet of things revolution, as more and more 
device become connected and internet connected Soti can help you man-
age all of your endpoints.
You can download a free trial of Soti MobiControl here:
https://www.soti.net/products/mobicontrol/trial
Read iBusiness Magazine digitally with our following partners on your favourite mobile devices

Leveraging 3D4Medical’s award-winning expertise in 3D anatomical 
education, Complete Ortho was launched for use by physicians during 
patient clinic visits to reinvent and revolutionize Patient Education, 
Engagement and Empowerment; when patients clearly understand their 
care options as provided by their doctor, the results are better healthcare 
and ultimately better outcomes.
 
Delivered via iPad, Complete Ortho illustrates, explains and personalizes 
patient anatomy, pathology and procedure/treatment options through 
interactive 3D technology and animations. The combination of 3D 
anatomical model plus animations is buttressed with eLiterature, thereby 
delivering the most thorough, streamlined and simple educational 
platform for patients.
 
All content from the Careplan is then shared directly with the patient via 
email through a HIPAA secure portal. Put simply, patients take the point-
of-care consult home to share and review with family, eliminating much 
Complete Ortho 
Your Orthopedic Clinical Solution
On iPad Pro, iPad Air/Air 2, iPad Mini 4.
www.3D4Medical.com
Transforming Medical Learning
Incredibly 
powerful.
Incredibly 
simple.
of the anxiety and fear commonly associated with simply not knowing 
while simultaneously advancing their understanding of their healthcare 
options. Additionally, physicians and staff are able to effectively manage 
each patient’s Careplan through a personalized Dashboard that tracks 
patient utilization.
 
At present, Complete Ortho is available to all Orthopedic, Spine and 
Sports Medicine physicians. Additional platforms for Cardiology, Physical 
Therapy, OBGYN, Internal Medicine, Gastroenterology, and Urology will 
launch in 2017/18, with still more to come. 
3D4Medical has also made a Patient-Only version of Complete Ortho 
available for FREE on the App Store. Engage directly with the anatomical 
models, pain-specific pathologies and related treatment options to be 
the most educated patient possible. Empower yourself to engage with 
your healthcare. 
The future of patient-first healthcare is now with Complete Ortho: 
Education, Engagement and Empowerment; Simple, Shared and Secure.

In Review
The European Union’s General Data Protection Regu-
lation has been ratified and will go into effect May 25, 
2018. Why should we care in the United States?
Data security standards have been around for decades yet standards en-
forcement has been lacking. Next spring in Europe, this will all change 
when the General Data Protection Regulation or GDPR goes into effect. 
Unlike many of the standards in the U.S., GDPR will encompass a geog-
raphy and the people residing in that geography. In the U.S., data security 
standards are generally centered around industries. For instance, PCI DSS 
applies mostly to retail and hospitality industries, HIPAA to Healthcare, 
GLBA to banking/finance, and Sarbanes-Oxley to accounting. 
In the EU however, starting next year, GDPR will apply to “data subjects” re-
siding in the EU and regardless of where YOU reside, certain circumstances 
will require you to adhere to the GDPR. And if you don’t, the penalties will 
be devastating to your business. According to GDPREU.org, penalties will 
be tiered with the maximum fine for noncompliance as much as four per-
cent of global annual revenue, with a cap set at €20 million ($22.4 million 
USD at this writing). The lower-level fine is set at the two-percent-of-reve-
nue (previous year) mark or €10 million, whichever is higher. Fines will be 
administered by individual member states.
“Data Subject” and 5 Best Practices for GDPR Compliance
So, what constitutes a “data subject” and compliance? A data subject is a 
citizen of the EU who can be identified, directly or indirectly, using the 
following attribute types: name, photo, email address, bank details, social 
media post, medical information, or computer IP address. No matter your 
location, if someone in your organization accesses identifiable data of a 
“subject” who lives within the EU, as of May 25, 2018, your organization 
must comply with the GDPR. 
An example of accessing identifiable data that would be a condition of 
adhering to the GDPR standard would something like this: Your sales rep 
Bill has a contact in Berlin, Germany, named Tom. Bill calls Tom and does 
not get him. He makes the note in the CRM system: “Called Tom and left 
voicemail.” Bill calls Tom two days later and again gets his voicemail, and 
again leaves a message. Even though Bill never reached Tom, he used your 
organization’s CRM system that holds identifiable data about subject Tom, 
who lives in the EU. As holder of the record for Tom, you are on the hook to 
comply with the GDPR standard and secure the identifiable data for “sub-
ject” Tom. 
If you never have a breach, you won’t have to worry about GDPR. But what 
proactive business would take that approach? The better data security 
practice is to operate with the understanding that it is not a matter of IF 
you will be breached, it is a matter of WHEN. You must approach daily rou-
tines of handling identifiable data with a best-practice approach of:
	
1.	
Visibility to all user activity, especially privileged users, of all 
	
	
databases and systems that hold data
	
2.	
Log and secure the audit trail of all user activity indicative of 
	
	
cyber threat
	
3.	
Have a real-time alerting system that will notify any deviation of  
	
	
normal user behavior across your systems – to do this you must  
	
	
correlate user events on the system to identify anomalous user  
	
	
behavior, a function of your Security Information & Event  
	
	
Management or SIEM system.
	
4.	
Monitor and secure end-point devices on your network, 
	
	
especially BYOD assets that hold both personal and corporate  
	
	
data/intellectual property (IP) on the same device. 
	
5.	
Be sure systems supporting mobile endpoints are included into  
	
	
your SIEM and Security Operations Center (SOC) systems. 
End-Point Management via Container, because MDM is not SIEM
Arguably, the most vulnerable access point in your enterprise is the mobile 
device. The mobile device, more than any network-accessing asset is the 
endpoint closest to malicious applications because of BYOD. In very close 
proximity to your enterprise data and IP are personal applications, games, 
widgets and other software that may or may not be what they were adver-
tised at download. 
The breach scenario is played out over and over but we rarely hear about it 
because little details are provided after an enterprise is compromised. The 
user downloads a game or other personal make-your-life-easier app and 
once on the device, it has access to your network because the device is al-
ways connected. And once connected to your network, various exfiltration 
or virus injection scenarios are possible. Without visibility to the endpoint 
user activity from your SIEM or SOC, valuable time is lost to begin remedi-
ation after a cyber breach. 
Lack of visibility is the driving force in your inability to identify a breach, 
and in 2016 the time to identify a breach for enterprise-sized companies 
was a staggering 191 days.  You cannot fight what you cannot see, and in 
2016 visibility was again poor (2015 was 191 days) for enterprises identi-
fying a breach and stemming the bleeding. 
In a BYOD scenario, you’ll have a hard time telling employees not to down-
load personal apps and games but you do have options for securing corpo-
rate data and IP. The approach we use at SyncDog is a containerized and 
collaborative partition on the device, also known as the C2 Workspace. Our 
C2 Workspace is a software product called SentinelSecure™. SentinelSe-
cure™ provides a secure application platform that encrypts and transports 
data between the enterprise and a secure, partitioned “container” running 
on an employee’s mobile device. A full suite of mobile-enabled productiv-
ity applications is available in the defense-grade container that operates 
across both Android and iOS platforms. Apps include SharePoint, Enter-
prise Chat, Geo-location Services, DropBox, a Personal Information Man-
agement (PIM) Suite, Office Suite, Office 365, File Sync, Secure Mobile App 
Management & Development functions, and many others.
In an ideal scenario, the SentinelSecure™ C2 Workspace can be deployed as 
a complement to an existing Mobile Device Management (MDM) solution 
adding an extra layer of security on the endpoint device. SentinelSecure™ 
has been approved for the MobileIron MarketPlace and can be installed 
from there or from contacting us directly at SyncDog.com. 
Don’t give up Functionality for Security as you Prepare for GDPR
It is a fact that as you increase security farther away from your network at 
the device level, your device’s app functionality decreases. Adding the C2 
Workspace to your existing MDM deployment provides added security to 
your enterprise’s productivity tools on the device without sacrificing the 
device’s app functionality. The result is your team operating in a mobile en-
vironment as was originally intended – continuing to manage the business 
and accompanying workflows away from the office as well as they would if 
they were in the office. 
SyncDog has issued guidelines for GDPR compliance in a very informative 
whitepaper titled “GDPR will bring the Teeth that have been Missing in 
Data Security Auditing and Compliance.” You can download a copy of the 
whitepaper at www.syncdog.com/sentinelsecure-for-gdpr/. 
SyncDog.com
(703) 430-6040
info@syncdog.com 
23

In Review
Network Alliances:  
The Key to a Small Cell and 5G Future
By Alok Shah, Vice President, Networks Strategy, Business Development, & Marketing
5G technology represents a massive leap forward in wireless technology 
that will do nothing short of revolutionizing multiple industries. By 
offering the equivalent speed, efficiency, and power of a fiber optic cable 
connection—without the hassle of a cable—5G technology is expected to 
drive the next wave of mobile application development.
This advancement could have huge implications for enterprises across all 
verticals. Virtually every business would benefit from access to universally 
available services, accessible on multiple devices and across technologies, 
supporting many different interaction types, delivered in a secure way, on 
a responsive and reliable network. 5G is expected to serve as the backbone 
for a dramatically enhanced Internet of Things (IoT) infrastructure, and 
will bring mobility to technologies that were previously grounded in 
physical locations.
But of course, delivering and deploying 5G technology is easier said than 
done. Unlike previous networks, which are supported by large, powerful 
macrocell radios and amplifiers, achieving gigabit throughput in 5G 
networks requires higher-frequency millimeter-wave spectrum that puts 
the data signal in close proximity to the end user and their devices. In 
other words, the old architecture just won’t cut it. To achieve the goal of 
implementing mmWave 5G networks, we will have to come up with a new 
solution.
A key driver of the 5G network evolution are industry alliances: 
independently formed, supportive groups – either national or international 
– that bring together the right innovators to advocate for and develop new 
technologies. Just recently, Samsung Electronics joined the MulteFire 
Alliance – an independent, diverse, international member-driven 
consortium whose purpose is to promote and enable the market adoption 
of MulteFire-based small cells in private networks by telecom operators. 
MulteFire is just the latest of several network alliances that Samsung has 
joined over the past two years to work with industry partners and help 
push small cells and 5G forward.
Building Blocks for 5G
At Samsung, the evolution of the network, and its transition to 5G, is 
a primary reason we’ve been helping to build and advocate for small 
cell technology. Compared to their macro cell counterparts, small cells 
transmit at lower power and have a shorter range. But they make up for 
that difference by re-using frequencies and operating in both the licensed 
and unlicensed spectrum. They’re also physically smaller, which means that 
small cells take up far less space and don’t require access to the expensive 
towers and rooftops that you need to set up a macro cell network. As 
population growth continues to expand cities and place a premium on 
urban spaces, small cells have emerged as a cost-effective alternative that 
would future-proof networks and provide cellular service to our buildings, 
businesses, and cities.
As a pioneer in helping to shape the network and digital revolution, we 
believe Samsung can make a unique contribution to industry alliance 
groups, offering deep expertise that comes with being the world’s largest 
consumer electronics company, and a premier technology provider in the 
development of 5G networks. Samsung has been focused on the research 
and development of 5G networks for nearly half a decade. From the 
beginning, our vision has been to create a next generation wireless system 
that meets the needs of operators while providing a ubiquitous, high 
quality network experience to users around the world.
Because of this mission, Samsung has been a major leader in developing 
and deploying small cells both in and out of the U.S. We’ve provided 
small cells to the densest and most data-intensive networks in the world, 
including South Korea and Japan, and we advance our small cell portfolio 
for homes, small and medium businesses, and large enterprises. Through 
these efforts, we advise and advance the technology in markets that have 
lacked access to the most recent innovations.
How does this technology get implemented in practice? Consider a U.S-
based business that operates in a 10-story building with half a million 
square feet of office space. If the business deploys a Bring Your Own Device 
(BYOD) strategy for their employees, it would need to ensure that every 
employee and guest has access to strong mobility and connectivity services, 
regardless of their service provider. In the past, this might mean that the 
company would have to build four different cells—one for each of the 
major carriers in the United States. This becomes technically challenging—
not to mention expensive—to implement.
This poses a central challenge. How do we make these systems efficient, 
affordable, and secure? Right now, the market is clamoring for a “neutral 
host”—a network that can work with subscribers of multiple mobile 
operators. And it’s up to technology companies, including Samsung, to 
develop the next wave of solutions that can address these challenges and 
evolve the market. This is where alliance groups play a central role, helping 
companies figure out the technical standards and regulatory hurdles where 
stakeholders—from technology leaders like Samsung to carriers and 
operators – can meet to move our work forward. They help us build out the 
nitty-gritty specifics, and ensure that cutting-edge technology meets the 
standards and needs of operators and enterprises alike.
Continued on page 26
24

One application for all your business processes
True Integration
49 fully integrated modules
Global
Available in 30 languages with installations in over 100 countries.
Multi-platform and flexible mobility.
Windows, Mac OS X, Linux, Android and iOS
Whether your work alone or lead a team of hundreds, our cloud solutions will let you bring your business 
to the Mac. 
In Control, Anywhere
Standard ERP

The Path Forward
It will be a true challenge to deploy the infrastructure necessary to support 5G 
networks. But we can achieve it by having industry, enterprise, government, 
and service providers work together as partners to coordinate innovation and 
evolution on a massive scale.
To that end, Samsung has committed to joining small cell and network alliances 
that will enable this coordination. In addition to the MulteFire Alliance, we 
have joined three other initiatives over the past year. We also formed a broad 
industry summit, the Silicon Valley 5G Summit, to bring together academics, 
network operators, regulatory personnel, testing and design equipment 
providers, and Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) across the globe to 
figure out how to build the ecosystem we need to commercialize 5G networks 
in the near-term. By bringing together key industry thought-leaders and 
working together through these alliances, we are developing state-of-the-art 
industry solutions that will enable us to overcome challenges and enter a world 
powered by 5G.
Last year, we joined the Small Cell Forum, a unique, longstanding group that 
tears down barriers to small cell deployments for operators, and provides 
support for the enterprise and vertical go-to-market models. As  a member 
of the Small Cell Forum, Samsung helps define how to provide homes and 
businesses with access to the network infrastructure they need to ensure 
quality service and connectivity in their buildings.
We’re also a member of the CBRS Alliance, which focuses on the United 
States’ shared spectrum band (3.5 Ghz Citizens Broadband Radio Service). 
The alliance develops, markets, and promotes a variety of LTE-based solutions 
using this shared spectrum, including small cell technology. By advocating for 
the aggregation of unlicensed spectrum with licensed spectrum through small 
cells, we hope to support new business models for LTE coverage and capacity.
And in March, 2017, Samsung was elected to the Board of Governors of 5G 
Americas, a wireless industry trade association and the voice of 5G and LTE 
for North and South America. 5G Americas is working behind the scenes to 
advocate and advance 5G technology in two ways. First, the organization 
produces technical and business model research that demonstrates how 5G 
can create new revenue streams for operators and services for consumers. 
Secondly, it works with government bodies in the region to get approval and 
support for the changes necessary to support 5G networks. 5G Americas is 
a powerful advocacy group for the industry, and has a critical team offering 
necessary thought leadership on the future of mobile networks.
As important as small cell networks are to the evolution of 5G networks, we  
are also working with alliance programs to develop other technologies that  
 
can help achieve our vision of a 5G world. For instance, recently we joined the 
5GAA, which helps standardize approaches to develop, commercialize, and 
deploy wireless technologies – technologies that will power entirely new use 
cases, including connected and self-driving cars. Samsung was elected to a 
chair position which is responsible for developing connected car standards and 
advancing the opportunities we see in the automotive space. By participating 
in these kinds of programs, we create new avenues to innovate and drive the 
industry forward.
These efforts have the potential to spur economic growth by creating new 
opportunities for businesses and communities around the world to benefit 
from the expansion of high-quality, high-speed wireless services like LTE, small 
cell services, and soon, 5G networks. We’re proud to be a part of their efforts.
Today’s 5G pioneers join these alliances, forums, and partnerships to play 
a central role in bringing about a future defined by 5G that brings a host of 
previously unthinkable capabilities to the table. With high bandwidth and 
low latency, 5G networks will allow you to control industrial and medical 
equipment in real time. You’ll be able to watch 4K TV and play high-resolution 
games from the backseat of your car—while the driver gets real-time traffic and 
navigation updates. Eventually, the car won’t even need a driver, thanks to the 
high-bandwidth networks that can support autonomous driving technology. 
And you’ll be able to walk around connected smart cities powered by millions 
of IoT sensors that connect to a ubiquitous, wireless network. That’s the power 
of 5G.
But to make that vision a reality, the entire network ecosystem needs to join 
together and engage with each other. While network alliances are a fantastic 
place to start, they are just the beginning of our efforts to facilitate a faster 
evolution to 5G. We have to pull together testing and analysis from across 
industries, equipment, and spectrum. We have to get advice from academia, 
end-customers, and local and federal government agencies. And we have to 
go beyond major technology company participation to attract engagement 
from industry leaders in verticals such as transportation, healthcare, 
and manufacturing.
Throughout this process, engagement from all stakeholders will remain the 
key ingredient. The more we all work together, the faster we’ll be able to drive 
effective solutions and agree upon standards, and the quicker we can develop 
and deploy small cell technology. This will enable the industry to accelerate 5G, 
and make it a reality for both consumers and businesses. We’re optimistic that, 
together, we can advance the best path forward for small cell technologies, and 
bring 5G networks into the future sooner than we even imagined.
Continued from page 24
26

Discover the Future – at the World’s Largest
Commercial Drone Conference & Expo
“If you want to see the state-of-the-art and expand 
your knowledge about the drone industry, 
InterDrone is the place to be.”
—George Gorrill, Structural Engineer, Thomas Engineering Group
September 6-8, 2017
Las Vegas
www.InterDrone.com
Register Early for the 
Biggest Discount!

In Review
Introducing the MyMe Unity System.  For many years, cradles, cases, and 
smart cables were not thought as a system, they were always looked at as 
separate accessories.  Everyone knows they’re supposed to work with each 
other but, no one had any expectations of them working as a system.  Cra-
dles & holders were always thought as something only needed for the car, 
while cases where thought only for the phone.  Then there are the USB 
Cables, another separate, yet necessary accessory.  That’s where the MyMe 
Unity System comes in.  
First we introduced the MyMe Unity Cradle.  We wanted the user to have 
the ability to use it, not only in the car, but at home, the office, school, etc.  
Making it completely versatile.  However, we didn’t want to make it look 
like the everyday cradle everyone was used to seeing in cars.  We made it 
sleek and stylish while keeping it as simple as possible for the end user. 
Leonardo Da Vinci said “Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication”. Well, we 
achieved that level of simplicity and sophistication with the MyMe Unity 
System.  It is extremely easy to install by simply applying a small amount of 
pressure and twisting it clockwise to attach it, while making it just as easy 
to remove by turning it counter clockwise.  No more clips to squeeze to 
attach your phone in the cradle and no more needing to squeeze a button 
to release your phone.  With the cradles innovative metal joint, the user 
simply sits the device on the metal joint and the magnetic mounting sys-
tem installed directly in the MyMe Unity Case does the rest. 
Two GREAT features the cradle has is its ability to go completely vertical 
due to its strong suction and its ability to rotate 360 degrees, giving the 
end user the freedom they deserve.  It allows the end user to drive safely 
while keeping their device within reach on their dashboard or windshield.  
It can also be used to facetime, participate in a meeting, record and look 
at videos completely hands-free.  The possibilities are 
limitless because it goes where the user goes.
Now, for users who don’t want a cradle in their car be-
cause they’re worried about it impeding their visibility, 
then the MyMe Unity Air Vent Holder is for them.  Its 
mounting plate will ensure their phone stays secure 
without vibrating or wiggling even when driving on 
bumpy roads.  It has a holder grip that will fit most air 
vents and soft rubber on the grips to prevent scratch-
ing.  Best of all, its easily installed and can be removed 
with a push of a finger using its one touch switch lock.
Let’s talk about the case now.  Cases have always been 
thought as something only for protecting the phone.  The 
MyMe Unity case has an innovative magnetic mounting 
system installed directly within the case.  This allows the 
user to attach their phone onto the cradle by simple sit-
ting it on the round metal joint.  The magnetic mount-
ing system in the case does the rest.  Once on the cradle, 
this magnetic system allows you to rotate the phone 
360 degrees!
Now, we didn’t stop there, we wanted to make sure 
the case would keep the users phone safe.  These days 
a phone can be costly, we wanted to be assured the us-
ers device would be protected while in the MyMe Unity 
Case.  We made the exterior a hard polycarbonate case 
and the interior a soft silicone, giving the user two lay-
ers of protection while still keeping the case stylish. 
We also raised the bezel and included a tempered glass 
to assure the end user maximum protection for their 
phones screen. 
Thanks to the magnetic mounting system in the MyMe Unity Case, the user 
can attach their phone to any metal surface.  Working on a car?  GREAT! 
Attach it to any metal surface on the car and you’re good to go.  Working 
out at the gym?  GREAT!  Attach it to any metal surface on the machine 
and once again, you’re good to go.  The possibilities are limitless.  Now, 
some users are probably saying “What if there’s no metal surface, what do 
I do then?”  Well, we thought of that as well.  We included two additional 
metal mounting clips and added an adhesive backing to them so the user 
can mount them in any room or location they frequent, giving them the 
ability to turn it into a smart surface.
Another great feature of this system is the MyMe Magnetic USB Cable. 
With its innovative Magnetic Joint, the user will never have to crawl under 
their night stand, desk or car seat in search of their cable.  Just attach it to 
the MyMe Unity Cradle or any metal surface and the user will never have 
to search for their cable again.  No metal surface?  No problem!  The cable 
comes with a Metal Mounting Plate that has an adhesive backing, once 
again giving the user the ability to turn it into a smart surface.
The MyMe Unity System has literally thought about uniting everything, 
down to the MyMe Unity Wall Charger and the MyMe Car Charger which 
will both have the ability to charge multiple devices at the simultaneously.
Best of all, users will have the ability to personalize these items by choosing 
from multiple colors and color combination the MyMe Unity System has.
The MyMe Unity System… A united family in perfect harmony.
The MyMe Unity System
28

Standard ERP is an enterprise resource planning system designed to manage 
businesses of all sizes in almost any industry. Account management, order pro-
cessing, inventory, manufacturing and job costing are among the core compo-
nents, but Standard ERP goes beyond the conventional functionality. Choose 
from a variety of comprehensive, industry specific modules fully integrated 
with all other related system functionalities, ensuring operational accuracy 
and enhanced productivity. 
Discover a wide range of Customer Relationship Management (CRM) features, 
such as email, document management, electronic conferencing, graphical cal-
endars and schedulers, all in one application.
Standard ERP uses an unrivaled range of technologies with the versatility to 
extend throughout an entire company, simultaneously reducing reliance on 
costly interfacing between separate third-party applications, thereby lower-
ing the overall cost of ownership. The system can be customized and tailored 
to individual business demands and run on all major platforms with almost  
any device.
The Cloud 
As the fastest modern business management solution on the market, it is easy 
to run Standard ERP from multiple locations, from home, the office or while 
mobile, without terminal emulation or other third-party solutions. If you want 
real-time management, reporting across many shops, offices or companies - 
look no further. Standard ERP runs on almost any mobile device, both smart-
phones and tablets, and all major operating systems.
Integrated Business Platform 
Standard ERP’s system architecture reduces the dependence on IT hardware 
and maintenance allowing for greater focus on your business instead of the 
technical infrastructure. As a fully integrated, modular program with verticals 
for almost any industry, Standard ERP accommodates nearly every depart-
ment within a small or midsize business. 
In a single application, users have an overview of data throughout the business 
and its operations, enhancing productivity and enriching the overall job expe-
rience. Credit controllers, for example, can review commitments made by the 
sales staff and detect issues with service management that might be delaying 
payments. Each department will find tools carefully designed to automate a 
variety of their respective tasks and routines. The marketing department, for 
example, can create and design mailshots targeting customers based on past 
purchases and buying patterns.
Full integration allows the system to run comprehensive reports, pulling data 
from every aspect of the business where Standard ERP is used. Run Profit and 
Loss reports, for example, and Balance Sheets that include committed costs 
and GRN accruals. Drill down functionality allows users to navigate through 
the database with precision, whether it’s for statistical analysis, or a real-time 
overview of operations; tracking customer activities, for example, or produc-
tion status and inventory movement.
The Engine
The core of Standard ERP includes your General Ledger, Accounts Receivable 
and Payable, Sales and Purchase Orders, Invoicing, Business Communicator, 
Cashbook, Document Manager and the Workflow Overview.
Using just the engine provides you with the tools to run the foundation of your 
business. Contact your customers and vendors with the Business Communi-
cator, for example, with VoIP, or use the Skype integration. Each call, inbound 
and outbound, will generate an activity record to manage contact information 
and log key points from your conversations, such as agreements, orders, deci-
sions, reminders, etc.
Document management allows you to store and attach files of any format to 
any record in the system. Organize your files in custom conferences, create li-
braries of information and determine to which conferences each of your em-
ployees has access to open, review and share. Attach images to projects, prod-
ucts and item records, contracts to sales orders, supplier invoices to purchase 
invoice records, and any other file to its relevant activity.
Organize your tasks and set reminders using business alerts in the task man-
ager and workflow overview. Coordinating projects, tasks and routines, and 
linking your notes, messages, contacts and assigned employees to the relevant 
task records will maximize productivity while providing a thorough overview 
of your business processes. 
Standard ERP’s graphical calendar and resource planner give you the ability to 
assign tasks to people and machines. View reservations for hotel rooms, rental 
assets and training courses, for example, or any other resource you track in 
the system.
Customer Relationship Management
CRM features in Standard ERP provides you the tools to store every detail 
about your contacts, whether they’re individual customers or business clients 
with multiple contacts, and maintain a full history of your communications. 
Track sales progress and leads to determine their status, source, probability, 
which salesman is following up and their notes.
At any time, new sales orders can be created from quotations with the same 
details, using an easy menu command. Projects can be created from a quota-
tion as well, along with the detailed budget for that project and its stages. Use 
Standard ERP’s integrated workflow to trigger conditional procedures, such as 
confirmations and approvals, with automated emails, SMS and on-screen mes-
sages. Automatically flag activities requiring authorization and notify project 
managers that the budget has been depleted or notify a customer when their 
order has been shipped.
Profile your customers with user-definable classifications, such as marketing 
sources and buy patterns. Use this information to quickly create effective sales 
campaigns with Standard ERP’s communication tools.
Implementation
Implementing the core engine of Standard ERP, when compared to compet-
itors, is a quick process with an average of one day per user for completion. 
Depending on the demands, only one or two consultants are needed for imple-
mentation, instead of the industry norm of three to five.
Mixed Platform 
The server application of Standard ERP runs on macOS, Linux and Windows 
servers while the client application runs on Linux, macOS, Windows and 
Chrome OS, as well as mobile devices running iOS, Windows and Android.
Verticals 
Using a proprietary programming language, HansaWorld has designed mod-
ules for specific industries, meaning each component is fully integrated with 
all Standard ERP and CRM features. Whether your in retail, hospitality, pro-
duction, logistics, rentals, services or almost any other industry, there is a ver-
tical  in Standard ERP designed for your business. Additionally, our system is 
integrated with a variety of third-party services such as Avalara for accurate 
tax calculations and reporting, Yodlee for bank reconciliation and interfacing 
with your accounts, SiteMinder for online hotel distribution and cloud channel 
management, CyberSource to connect with approximately 100 different credit 
card processing companies in over 190 countries.
In Review
One Application for All Business Processes 
29

In Review
OmniFocus is a task management app for Mac, iPhone, iPad and Apple 
Watch.  It uses “contexts” to help the user keep one’s life organized, sepa-
rating work from personal, allowing the user to stay focus and, in the pro-
cess, accomplish more.  OmniFocus is one of the many productivity apps 
available from the Omni Group which includes OmniGraffle, OmniOutlin-
er, OmniPlan and OmniPresence.  As an OmniPlan user since my Apple 
Newton days, I was very excited to see what OmniFocus offers.
OmniFocus provides many ways to view ones life, whether at work or play,  
using perspectives for specific tasks such as planning, action and checking 
what’s on tap for the upcoming day.  It offers reminders for a variety of 
tasks and actions such as the reminder to pick up an item at a store in the 
user’s reminders the user is alerted when walking past the store.  Location 
awareness and notifications facilitates this process.  Use Siri to check a lo-
cation and add it to the list of things to do or places to go on a specific day 
and receive alerts when near the given location,
Omnifocus is available in Standard ($39.99 per year iOS and Mac)  and Pro 
($59.99 per year iOS and $79.99 for Mac) options; each has a 14 day free 
trial and OmniFocus for each platform is sold separately.  Educational and 
business pricing are also available.  Unlike most apps, OmniFocus comes 
with a 30 day return policy.  The Omni Group website details bundled pric-
ing and pricing details.  The Pro version offers workflow automation using 
AppleScript for workflow additions like creating a new project from a tem-
plate or integrating OmniFocus with another app; Focus allows the user to 
focus on one item whether a project, a file, it moves the focus front home to 
work and back again.  New views can be created including custom sorting, 
filtering and grouping.  IOS allows sidebar and home screen customization. 
Concentrate on what matters at the moment whether it’s personal tasks or 
work projects.  OmniFocus provides a way to concentrate full attention on 
one area, one set of tasks or one task at a time, automates the process and 
makes the entries available across all Apple platforms.  
30

Meet the MacSales.com Enterprise Team.
Your Mac Enterprise Experts
Your business is different. Your business uses 
Macs. Your business needs enterprise support that 
understands the difference. Meet the MacSales.com 
Enterprise Team. We’re Mac experts — like you. From 
upgrading your current Mac ﬂ eet to building custom 
storage systems perfect for you, we’re dedicated to 
providing tailored solutions to maximize your tech 
investment. Contact our award-winning team today, 
and speak with a pro who understands the Mac 
platform and your needs.
www.macsales.com    |    1-866-692-8632    |    +1-815-338-4359 International

owcdigital.com/s/tb3    |    1-866-692-7100    |    +1-815-338-4751 International
OWC THUNDERBOLT 3 DOCK
Thunderbolt 3 Dock delivers more connectivity, more 
power, and more charging capability than ever before 
— all at the fastest speeds possible today. Drive two 4K 
displays, connect and charge up to six USB devices, 
work with legacy FireWire storage, enjoy pristine audio, 
wired networks, and read SD cards, all at speeds up to 
40Gb/s and all through a single cable.
The possibilities are endless.
SD Card Reader
Expanded Analog 
Audio In/Out
USB 3.1 Gen 1
FireWire 800
S/PDIF
USB 3.1 Gen 1
Thunderbolt 3 ports
mini DisplayPort
Gigabit Ethernet
13 PORTS.
ENDLESS POSSIBILITIES.

Working with new companies is exciting. Talking through 
the initial vision, setting goals, establishing core values, they 
all help guide an organization and its people from concept 
to success. It’s got me thinking about myself as a brand. 
With that mindset, I’m working to develop my own personal 
value proposition.
What do I bring to the proverbial table? What do I add to a 
task, project, or team, just by showing up ready to tackle a 
new challenge? We are all works in progress, but I think I’ve 
narrowed down my personal value proposition to these three 
things: my attributes, my expertise, and my connections.
As a naturally curious and analytical person, it’s no surprise 
that I love personality assessments. Myers-Briggs, Strength-
Finders, DISC, they all serve to shed light on what makes us 
tick. Why we shine in certain areas of strength, and why we 
struggle in areas of weakness. Who I am at my core, and how 
I face challenges, those come down to the basic attributes 
of my personality, those I’d list on a resume and those a bit 
more personally applicable. I’m a self-starter, a check-off-
the-list-er, a detail-oriented, identify the fonts used in adver-
tisements kind of person. I make my bed (almost) every day, 
even if it doesn’t get done until I’m home for the evening 
and it’s only hours until bedtime. I hate dirty dishes in the 
sink or leaving any task until later when I could just do it 
now. Those are the attributes I draw from in my professional 
endeavors, too.
My attributes serve to answer the “who I am” question, but 
it’s my expertise that answers the “what do I know” or “what 
can I do” query. There’s a line from the Morgan Freeman 
movie, Along Came a Spider, where he tells a fellow investi-
gator, “You do what you are.” I wholeheartedly agree—even 
if your expertise is in a field outside of your current occupa-
tion. Long before I found myself in the field of marketing, 
I was already doing it. I was helping craft the language for 
organization event invitations. I was designing content for 
patient education campaigns in the clinic I worked for during 
college. I was designing bulletin boards for my teacher friends 
in their classrooms. My expertise has been honed along the 
way. Just last month, I signed up for a new fitness program. 
While sitting at the gym, I texted a few of my friends to see if 
they wanted to try a free class with me. The trainer read my 
text while I was typing and said, “Wow, that text sounds like 
a great ad campaign! You should be in marketing.” I smiled 
and told her I am.
While I believe the intangible attributes and the marketable 
expertise we all possess are the cornerstones of any personal 
value proposition, I wouldn’t stop there. In addition to who 
we are and what we do, I think our connections complete 
the picture. You know the saying, “It’s not what you know 
but whom you know that counts.”? It’s true. I am part of a 
greater network of connections, those in my immediate cir-
cle and beyond. We are so accustomed to searching online di-
rectories for restaurants or service providers, but that wasn’t 
always the case. And while I’m a proponent of crowd-sourc-
ing online, when it comes to the best in venues, in offers, and 
in talent, I find the best resources from within my networks. 
I happen to think I provide those resources to others outside 
my networks as well. After all, I may never be a customer of 
my neighbor who does excellent custom motorcycle design, 
but if someone ever asks me for a recommendation, I know 
just the guy.
You may work for an organization with a clearly articulated 
value proposition or a brand new venture just starting to de-
fine one, either way, I encourage you to take some time to re-
flect on your personal value proposition. It’s a highly reward-
ing exercise. When you face your current goals keenly aware 
of your attributes, your expertise, and your connections, 
you’ll position yourself to apply your strongest resources.
Know Your Personal Value Proposition
SMB
Kari Gates
bit.ly/KariGates
Kari Gates is the Mar-
keting 
Manager 
for 
VIPorbit Software and 
a 
marketing 
consul-
tant for new brands.  
 bit.ly/KariGates
Read iBusiness Magazine 
digitally with our following 
partners on your favourite 
mobile devices
33

I don’t own a smart speaker, because neither Amazon Echo 
nor Google Home have yet convinced me of a need. My first 
reaction to Apple’s announcement of HomePod was, “Ho hum, 
another one?” But the longer I thought about it, the more it 
seemed to at least deserve a chance.
But more importantly, what will buyers think? In the horse race 
of smart speakers, how much of a comeback can the late-from-
the-gate Apple’s HomePod make?
Considering the market’s domination by the Echo and Goo-
gle Home, initial surveys of potential buyers following its an-
nouncement seem surprisingly optimistic. A sizable minority 
of respondents said they’d be interested in buying a HomePod. 
Whether or not that interest translates into sales will depend on 
multiple factors. But first, a brief overview of the HomePod in 
case you missed it.
HomePod Features
Physical & Audio
Compared to the competition, HomePod is beefy: 5.5 pounds, 
nearly 7” tall and 6” wide. It comes in white or space gray—a 
very dark gray, almost charcoal. Its A8 chip should handle any 
task required. HomePod is loaded with beamforming tweeters 
(7) and microphones (6) for optimum sound quality and voice 
recognition. To describe its woofer, Apple uses strong terms like 
“high-excursion”, which simply means its cone has excellent ver-
tical range. Perhaps the strongest selling point in HomePod’s au-
dio profile is  it dynamically reads its surroundings and adjusts 
output for optimal sound.
Interactivity
HomePod relies on Siri—a familiar friend to iPhone users. She 
can respond audibly and perform actions, such as playing mu-
sic or controlling smart home equipment. As HomePod learns 
your musical preferences, she behaves accordingly. Its top panel 
responds to touch, allowing a measure of control, and displays 
waveform feedback from Siri. Its shared Up Next feature allows 
multiple contributors to HomePod’s playlist.
Integration
By supporting Apple’s newly-announced Airplay 2 protocol 
<https://www.whathifi.com/advice/apple-airplay-2-every-
thing-you-need-to-know>, HomePod can stream audio to mul-
tiple devices over WiFi, even additional HomePods. It does not 
support Bluetooth, however.
It can also manage HomeKit-supported devices through the 
Home app on an iOS device. With over 50 brands supporting 
HomeKit, possibilities abound. See Apple’s website <https://
www.apple.com/ios/home/> for more detail on HomeKit.
HomePod ties directly into the Apple Music service. For addi-
tional services like Pandora and Spotify, HomePod will have to 
stream from a supported device.
Standing Apart
So what will bring HomePod to the forefront?
Siri? Probably not. While Apple broke ground with her years ago, 
the competition has almost inarguably lapped Apple on digital 
assistants. Siri now has to play catch-up just to make it a race.
HomeKit? Again, doubtful. Other smart speakers support a 
broader selection of smart home equipment, providing more 
competition on price. Apple may do it better, but that may not 
be enough.
The $349 price tag? Yes, but not for the better. With Echo cur-
rently at $140 and Home at $180, Apple will need some heavy 
marketing to upsell customers to HomePod.
Security? Perhaps. Although all three major smart speakers use 
encryption, only HomePod keeps communication with its serv-
ers anonymous. Apple’s reputation for resisting government 
intrusion may help here, as well.
Sound quality? Finally, we get to the heart of HomePod. Ap-
ple trumpets HomePod’s audio, and it certainly has features 
to boast about. Although I haven’t been privileged enough to 
hear its sound personally, by other accounts it equals or exceeds 
high-end wireless speakers.
The Apple brand is strong, and synonymous with some of the 
best hardware products in the market, even if they come at a 
premium. If HomePod delivers the best-in-class for smart 
speakers, it can still overcome its price and late showing. Con-
sumers will vote with their dollars.
Usefulness Outside the Home
What about applications for HomePod in business? If your com-
pany has already invested in Apple products and celebrates the 
hipness-factor they represent, HomePod may be a no-brainer. 
With its phenomenal sound, it should perform well in confer-
ence room presentations and training sessions. Keep in mind 
that a separate microphone solution might be required.
Connected to Apple Music or a managing device such as iPhone, 
iPad, or AppleTV, it should excel at providing ambient music for 
a professional space. It could also offer information in a com-
mon area, as well as give reminders for team-wide calendar 
events. Once Apple actually releases HomePod in December, 
owners may develop other creative uses for it.
Apple’s Motivation
So why is Apple selling HomePod? Joining the bandwagon just 
to make a buck on another product? Or could it be more than 
that?
Because of its close integration with the Apple Music service, it 
may be aimed at increasing subscriptions. Its audio edge over 
competitors certainly suggests it.
Likewise, its cooperation with HomeKit suggests sales will im-
prove there as well. AppleTV? It’s hard to imagine there not be-
ing meaningful connectivity between the two. Who knows what 
other products will benefit from HomePod, if it sells in appre-
ciable amounts?
Apple had to take AppleTV through several upgrades to make 
it useful enough to appeal to a wide population. HomePod may 
leave the gate strong and catch up to the leaders, or it may floun-
der like AppleTV until Apple realizes what the market really 
wants. Price isn’t everything; many prefer quality even when 
price reflects it, as the iPhone proves. Still, the burden is on Ap-
ple to prove HomePod is worth it. We’ll find out in December!
What’s the Appeal? - A Preview of Apple’s HomePod
SMB
Jens, the owner of a 
corporate 
Macintosh 
consulting business in 
Colorado Springs, CO, 
has carved out a niche 
corralling Apple prod-
ucts into playing nicely 
with others in enterprise 
environments. This has 
been his livelihood and 
area of expertise for 
years, whereas writing 
is his hobby and passion. 
Jens Lodholm
     @doctor_mac
34

In Review
Those whose success depends on effective workflow management un-
derstand the tine and effort involved to analyze workflow  and improve 
processes. The benefits of properly implemented lean management are 
enormous in terms productivity and efficiency gains  and workgroup co-
hesion.  Kanban, a Japanese concept inspired by Toyota, is a visual process 
management system that relies on “pulling” work according to capacity 
and resources rather than “pushing” it through the system in response to 
a request.  
KanbanFlow is an exciting mobile app which allows a team to view its prog-
ress and know when it can add work.  It is available in a free and premium 
plan ($5.00 per person per month with a 10% discount if paid annually 
and a 14 day free trial).  At the heart of the app is a customizable columnar 
overview which displays each part of a workflow from defining the task to 
delivering the product or service.  Status and those responsible for each 
part of the workflow are identified. Tasks assigned to specific individu-
als are can be drilled down to subtasks in a checklist format which can be 
ticked off when completed. 
Bottlenecks can be identified to limit tasks and support completion rath-
er than overloading capacity and resources by pushing additional work to 
assure on-time completion.   Monitoring workflow reduces multitasking.
which was shown in a 2005 Harvard Business Review study to reduce in-
dividual productivity by 40%. Time tracking capability is available in the 
premium version.
The ability to filter tasks by user, task or due take permits the manager and 
the team to focus on a specific process in the workflow.  Recurring tasks 
can be marked and “calendared” by the app by frequency of occurrence. 
Tracking completion allows teams to identify its productivity and log its 
successes. 
File attachment is supported in the premium plan including spreadsheets, 
presentations and narrative documents from  Dropbox, Box and Google 
Drive allows the team to view documents which support the workflow.  The 
premium plan also  includes a variety of analytics and reporting options 
to allow a manager and team to easily identify problem areas and identify 
successes.  Importing workflow information in the premium plan supports 
Excel or CSV to importand Excel, CSV, XML and ISON to export.  Kanban-
Flow’s premium plan also offers a variety of integrations including with 
Slack, Google Sheet, Evernote and others.  
Both the free and premium plans offer unlimited boards and tasks, show 
WIP limits, subtasks, filters and recurring tasks, stopwatch timer, Pomo-
doro timer and statistics and a print view.  The premium plan adds  swim 
lane view, file attachment, search capability, task numbering, time spent 
report, analytics, reporting and integration. 
35

One crucial trend for business that needs to be on your radar 
this year is mobile.  Are we asking ourselves, “What is the 
market doing and specifically my competition? “, or do we 
say ho hum and run out and develop mobile apps just be-
cause everyone seems to be talking about it? Before doing 
what looks cool or seems current, it is important to review 
your business to see what would help in your unique situa-
tion in the area of mobile marketing.  
Some focus questions to ask before you decide on where to 
put your money - What is my vision and mission?  What is 
the value proposition of my business? What are my most ef-
fective and efficient channels to reach my audience? What 
do I bring to the marketplace that is intrinsically different?  
What are my quantity and quality goals? Where do I plan to 
be in the next one, three, five and even, ten years? In our 
instant gratification culture we are unable to look into the fu-
ture or even invest time in planning or in developing process 
to address changes and stay connected with our customers 
and prospects. We see the devastation of not planning be-
yond our nose in almost every walk of life.
We all can agree that we need to stay in touch with the mar-
ketplace and engage with our markets on an ongoing basis 
to build relationships, seek out new customers and promote 
our firm’s services in order to survive in this uncertain econ-
omy. So it is a good idea to sit down and count the cost before 
you invest in anything.  Looking at some mobile engagement 
trends, according to Clutch – “We surveyed some of the lead-
ing mobile app development companies on the cost to de-
velop a mobile app, and found that the median cost range 
is between $37,913 and $171,450, but could climb up to 
$500,000 or higher”.  Then there’s the added cost of manag-
ing updates and maintenance and getting promoted in the 
several app stores. 
Moreover, how do you keep the developer continuously mo-
tivated to update and work on your app to improve commu-
nication, track analytics and keep secure? And what happens 
when the money runs out. An app might not be the best 
solution for everyone as it is quite invasive and can take up 
data on the customer’s mobile device.  And, for users, it can 
become tedious to be constantly reminded to update fixes or 
changes.  
According to a new survey by B2B research company Clutch, 
“in 2017 only 20 percent of small businesses have mobile 
apps today.”
“Three years ago, a small business might see 10 percent of its 
total traffic coming from mobile, but right now it’s closer to 
70 percent. Within the next couple of years, a shift to a mo-
bile app or mobile-friendly sites will become obvious,” says 
Viktor Marohnic, CEO of the app builder Shoutem.
How do you develop new revenue, build loyalty and take ef-
fective actions for growth, profit and survival in the midst of 
all this that’s going on? What does any small business owner 
do in light of these market and environmental factors? To-
day’s fast-paced world doesn’t reward a “wait-and-see” at-
titude and the best time for you to better engage with the 
changing demographics and needs of our world is now.
Ron Reddick, a visionary, saw a need to help the business, 
institutional and nonprofit communities with inexpensive, 
easy to understand, engaging new revenue and loyalty build-
ing marketing tools without breaking your marketing bud-
get.  It’s easy, user friendly and affordable and on the cloud 
– no apps no downloads into your phone and no hassles. 
Four years in the making with a tremendous amount of beta 
testing and research, he pioneered ZipDandy. 
The Mobile Marketing Revolution has be-
gun...
Most business owners already know they need to be engag-
ing consumers via their smartphones and mobile devices. 
However, until now purchasing mobile marketing solutions 
has been expensive and having mobile tools developed spe-
cifically for your company has been confusing with add-on 
costs that you are never sure off.  To use a proprietary soft-
ware application required someone with special skills along 
with an above average understanding of the technology in-
volved. That’s where Zip Dandy comes to your rescue!
Powerful Mobile Tools from less than a 
coffee per day!
As a marketing consultant, I have looked at several business-
es and I have not seen anything so simple and user friendly. 
The business and non-profit sectors have limited resources 
and in this economic milieu ZipDandy has come out with a 
package of services that are so doable and anti-spam compli-
ant that it will make you smile. Drop in here to check it out 
https://zipdandy.com/jeysmartmarketing.  
Packages start as low as $30 per month. The new ways to find 
and engage with your existing and potential consumers will 
be limited only by your imagination. As a Zip Dandy mer-
chant, you have unlimited access to the mobile marketing 
platform offering an extensive array of tools that really make 
a difference, including the latest mobile marketing technol-
ogy for: direct and two-way text messaging and having an 
immediate call to action for your ad campaigns.  QR code 
marketing, deals of the day, text-to-screen advertising, in-
ventory and special sales, loyalty tools and text-to-win. All 
plug and play, set it and forget it tools that work while you 
sleep. It’s a great value for any business, museum, science 
centre, institution or charity that wants to have real time in-
teractions with their own prospects and clients.  
Franchise Opportunities
In addition to the existing marketing products, Zip Dandy 
will continuously be adding more mobile services to their 
packages, so affiliate opportunities keep getting better and 
better. The company also is committed to keeping up with 
the most lucrative advertising trends and will continue to 
change and expand as the “consumer society” does. This 
way Zip Dandy will stay an amazing opportunity for busi-
ness owners, marketing affiliates and merchant affiliates as 
time passes. If you haven’t already made up your mind, visit 
https://zipdandy.com/jeysmartmarketing. Start exploring 
these unbelievable new tools! To join go to - Join Now tab un-
der merchant for sign up and pick the package you want. You 
can pick your business or franchise option. For more infor-
mation e-mail jmsinc1572@gmail.com
Mobile Marketing – Yes, It’s Instant,  And Effective, But Consider This!
SMB
Jey Dharmaraj is an 
accomplished 
inter-
national 
business 
& 
marketing professional 
with over 20 years in 
the public, private and 
non-profit sectors. He 
is based in Toronto and 
offers full service mar-
keting consulting and 
research 
with 
action 
steps and execution, if 
needed. LinkedIn profile 
at http://www.linkedin.
com/in/jdharmaraj/
Jey Raj 
jmsinc1572@gmail.com 
 
ca.linkedin.com/in/
jdharmaraj
36


so. When shorted, Li-ion delivers persistent current without abiding. This 
often leads to venting with flame, a violent self-destruction alike a rocket. 
Embedded safety components offer protection, but not all cells have such 
safeguards.
Many 18650 cells are carried as spares for vaping 
devices. E-cigarettes require high current to acti-
vate the heat element and only Li-ion has such a 
load capability. When carrying a spare, wrap bat-
tery in a plastic bag to prevent electrical short. 
Because of potential danger, lithium batteries 
can no longer be placed in checked baggage, but 
must be carried onboard an aircraft. Quick access 
to a fire extinguisher enables putting out a fire 
in the cabin. Each passenger can take two spares 
Li-ion that do not exceed 160Wh each; 320Wh 
total. An 18650 rated at 3,300mAh has about 
12Wh. (See BU-704a: Shipping Lithium-based 
Batteries by Air).  
From 1991-2016, 138 airport and flight inci-
dents involving lithium batteries occurred. These 
include 13 E-cigarettes, 7 mobile phones/tablets, 
7 spare batteries and 4 laptops. E-cigarette inci-
dents increased the most. 
According to published reports, 68 percent of battery failure in transit 
is caused by short circuit, and poor packaging is much to blame. Do not 
store and transport bare batteries in a metal box; do not mix batteries with 
coins, house keys in your jeans. Always put cells and batteries in clear plas-
tic bags.
The photo shows a pair of burned jeans in which a Li-ion cell came in con-
tact with loose coins in the pocket. It inflicted third degree burns on the 
man’s leg. Little can be done to stop the flaming event once it has begun.
Lithium Batteries
While Li-ion is rechargeable, there are non-rechargeable lithium batteries 
that exceed Li-ion in capacity. They contain a metallic anode and are of-
ten called lithium-metal. This increases volatility and these batteries are 
subject to tighter shipping regulations than the more benign lithium-ion. 
Primary lithium batteries come in many varieties and are mainly used for 
industrial uses. (See BU-106a: Choices of Primary Batteries.) 
Lithium iron disulfide (LiFeS2) is a replacement of the regular household 
alkaline with longer runtimes and better loading capabilities. Lithium bat-
teries normally deliver 3 volts and higher, LiFeS2 is 1.5 volts, making it 
compatible with the AA and AAA formats. They cost slightly more than 
alkaline and must follow transportation rules. 
Lithium thionyl chloride (LiSOCI2 or LTC) can withstand high heat and 
strong vibration. Thanks to the wide temperature operating range, LTC 
batteries are mainly used for horizontal drilling, also known as fracking 
that reaches head temperatures of 125°C (257°F). With a specific energy 
of over 500Wh/kg, they offer twice the capacity of the best Li-ion. Even 
though rugged and seemingly indestructible, this battery is one of the 
most potent if abused. Because of the potential danger, LTC is not permit-
ted in consumer products; it also requires training for handling.
Lithium manganese dioxide (LiMnO2 or Li-M) is another common me-
tallic lithium battery that is more benign than LTC. It comes with a lower 
capacity and is safe for public use. Typical uses are meter sensing, medical 
devices, road toll sensors and cameras. 
Effect of Aging
Li-ion batteries are safe but what may not be fully understood with a grow-
ing battery population is aging. Users ask: “Will my battery die quietly or 
depart with a bang?” Typical usage patterns that stress a Li-ion battery are 
excessive loading, rapid-charging and charging below freezing. Further-
more, storing Li-ion at a voltage below 2 volts per cell leads to dendrite 
growth that can damage the separator and cause a mild electrical short 
that can progress into a full electrical short, even if kept in storage. A small 
water leak in a faulty hydro dam can advance to a torrent and take a struc-
ture down, so also can separator damage lead to venting with flame. The 
temperature rises to 500°C (932°F), at which point the cell catches fire or 
explodes. 
If a Li-ion battery overheats, hisses, or bulges, immediately move the 
device with battery away from flammable materials and place it on a 
non-combustible surface. If at all possible, remove the battery from the 
device and put it outdoors to burn out. 
A small Li-ion fire can be handled like any other combustible fire. For best 
result use a foam extinguisher, CO2, ABC dry chemical, powdered graph-
ite, copper powder or soda (sodium carbonate). If the fire occurs in an air-
plane cabin, the FAA instructs flight attendants to use water or soda pop. 
Water-based products are most readily available and are appropriate since 
Li-ion contains very little lithium metal that could react with water. Water 
also cools the adjacent area and prevents the fire from spreading. (See BU-
304a: Safety Concerns with Li-ion). 
A large Li-ion fire, such as in an EV, may need to burn out as water is in-
effective. When encountering a fire with a lithium-metal battery, only use 
a Class D fire extinguisher. Lithium-metal contains of lithium that reacts 
with water and makes the fire worse. Do not use the Class D fire extin-
guisher for regular fires.
Continued from page 14
Read iBusiness Magazine digitally with our following partners on your favourite mobile devices

WorldWide Tracking 
IZUM allows you to track your 
belongings worldwide in real time 
from your smartphone 
Mobile Connected 
IZUM uses GSM connection with 
a virtualSIM technology 
that works worldwide 
KEY FEATURES
Long-Lasting Battery 
IZUM battery can last until 5000 
notifications without charging
RUA DA URBANIZAÇÃO DO CORRÊLO, 14
4585-331, GANDRA, PAREDES, PORTUGAL
+351 221 450 212
INFO@IZUM.IO
IZUM.IO
SECURE YOUR LUGGAGE 
SECURE YOUR 
TRACK YOUR CHILDREN
   RACK YOUR CAR
CONTROL YOUR S
SENSE
MONIT
MONITOR
PROTECT YOUR PER 
                    R VAULT
                YOUR HOUSE
SENSE 
PRESENCE 
SENSE PRESENCE ON YOUR 
SECURE YOUR LUGGAGE ON THE PLANE
SECURE YOUR LUGGAGE ON THE HOTEL
SECURE YOUR LUGGAGE ON THE AIRPORT
TRACK YOUR PET
TRACK YOUR CHILDREN
TRACK YOUR CAR
EVALUATE YOUR PERFORMANCE
CONTROL YOUR SPEED
TRACK YOUR PACE
MONITOR YOUR OFFICE ENVIRONMENT
MONITOR YOUR INDOOR GARDEN ENVIRONMENT
MONITOR YOUR HOME ENVIRONMENT
PROTECT YOUR PERSONAL BELONGINGS 
PROTECT YOUR VAULT
PROTECT YOUR HOUSE
SENSE PRESENCE ON YOUR STORE
SENSE PRESENCE ON YOUR HOUSE
SENSE PRESENCE ON YOUR COMPANY
SECURE YOUR LUGGAGE O
SECURE YOUR LUGGAGE ON THE HOTEL
SECURE YOUR LUGGAGE 
TRACK YOUR PET
TRACK YOUR 
      CK YOUR CAR
            TE YOUR PERFORMANCE
CONTROL YOUR SPEED
TRACK YOUR PACE
MONITOR YOUR OFFICE ENVIRONMENT
MONITOR YOUR HOME ENVIR
PROTECT YOUR VAULT
PROTECT YOUR HOUSE
SENSE PRESENCE ON YOUR STORE
SENSE PRESENCE ON YOUR 
                                          UR COMPANY
TRACK 
TRACK 
SECURE YOUR LUGGAGE O 
MONITOR YOUR INDOOR GARDEN ENVIRON
Available on:

I recently watched the movie “Steve Jobs” based on the 
biography by Walter Isaacson.  My iPad was on my lap, as 
usual, snapped into its keyboard case ready for action at a 
second’s notice.  Watching the movie, I thought about the 
Apple Newton 2100 on my home office desk, while glancing 
down at my iPad and appreciating the irony.
Although the Apple Newton failed for a variety of reasons, 
it was unarguably the first true PDA available for the mass 
market. Apple’s Newton sparked the imagination and finally 
left its mark indelibly in the iPad.  
The Newton packed a lot more power and potential than was 
understood at the time even though it had no more than 
8Mg of memory, expandable by PCMCIA memory cards 
up to 4Mg.  It was capable of running apps on cards and a 
surprising number internal apps owing to the efficiency of 
its operating system and the apps themselves. Full “office” 
suites occupied no more than 1Mg!  The Internet could be 
accessed by WiFi card or modem and Newton was eventual-
ly given an external keyboard.  This was a product ahead of 
its time and ahead of technological implementation.  It por-
tended the product we didn’t know we need it until it came 
to market:  The iPad.  In a sense the iPad was an evolutionary 
product when one considers the iPod, then the iPhone as the 
products that came in between but took users in different di-
rections.  The business case for the iPhone was clear, paving 
the way for the obvious acceptance of the iPad by business 
and its integration in the Enterprise setting.
Like many, I waited for the Newton successor which would 
certainly come.  When the iPhone was launched, an Apple 
tablet became a real possibility.  Even in 1993 there was the 
recognition that a less sophisticated Apple product still pro-
duced the “wow factor” that its competitors simply could not 
match.  That was the magic of Apple right from the start, and 
continues to be. It was also what some would eventually call 
“the Zen of Apple”.
In hindsight, the iPod and the iPhone and foretold the iPad.  
The iPad is, in my opinion, the best mobile product available 
for personal, business and Enterprise use. “Mobile” is the op-
erative word. The iPad was also Steve Jobs’ finest moment.  
It was the moment where he realized life lived truly unteth-
ered—life lived where we go and what we do. The iPad allows 
mobile professionals to work on their own terms, given em-
ployer flexibility.   Just as the Newton untethered many of us 
in the 1990s, the iPads untethered millions more from 2010 
on like no other product in between.  Jobs was right about 
the touch screen.  It provides the immediacy that a stylus 
cannot match, that a Mac or PC cannot match.  
Taken as a cohesive whole, Steve Jobs’ vision for untethered 
connectivity comprises the magic of Apple and are his on-
going legacy.  As long as Apple holds true to its end-to-end 
product and service ecosystem and continues to bring in-
novative technology to the end user, it should continue to 
“wow” us for decades to come.
The Genius Of Steve Jobs In The Apple Mobile Product Life-Cycle
Read iBusiness Magazine 
digitally with our following 
partners on your favourite 
mobile devices
Rene Siegel is a research 
administrator at a major 
hospital where she is re-
sponsible for the day to 
day operations of two 
clinical imaging research 
programs. She has been 
using mobile technolo-
gy since 1994, and has 
contributed to FoxPop.
com (a UK-based user  
oriented website).
SMB
Rene Siegal
siegelrj@mac.com
40

With indoor air quality up to 5 times more 
polluted than outdoor air quality, having 
clean air in your home or oﬃce is essential. 
Eliminating pollutants will create a cleaner 
and healthier environment for you and 
your family. AirSense is a smart Wi-Fi air 
quality monitor and ionic puriﬁer. Each 
time AirSense detects any VOCs, it will 
send an alert to your phone, and 
begin purifying the air by releasing 
negative ions. 
AirSense is also a personal air station; 
you can connect with others and view 
air quality across the globe. Additional 
features include two-way speakers, 
ambient lights, and the iBaby Care app 
to control settings. 
Better air for a better life
iBaby Monitor M2 Pro
The iBaby M2 Pro takes a photo when 
motion sensors are activated, so when 
your baby makes a move you’ll be 
alerted and see what happened. The 
newly designed iBaby app makes it easier 
than ever to set up mom, dad, grandma, 
and grandpa as viewers anywhere.
Learn more at
www.iBabylabs.com
Get 10% OFF all
iBaby monitors with 
code iBiz.
*iBaby Monitor M6T excluded
Download the 
iBaby Care app.


