A p p l e  S o l u t i o n s  f o r  B u s i n e s s
www.ibusinessmag.com
INSIDE THIS ISSUE:
PROTECT YOUR 
IPHONE IN THE 
MOST CHALLENGING 
CONDITIONS
ADLENS - ADJUSTABLE FOCUS COMPUTER EYEWEAR
ZIPZAP - BUSINESS PHONE SYSTEM FOR YOUR IPAD
iSTICK 
USB 
FLASH 
DRIVE
FOR iPHONE
TOP 25 
BUSINESS TRAVELERS
ACCESSORIES



Carmine De Santo
publisher@ibusinessmag.com
Publisher
Alex De Santo
Editor@ibusinessmag.com
Senior Editor
Ele Mansouri
assistant@ibusinessmag.com
Executive Assistant
JC Seymour
chiefeditor@ibusinessmag.com
Editor-In-Chief
Zoi Sotirakos
production@ibusinessmag.com
Production Manager
Giuliano Rosati
graphics@ibusinessmag.com
Creative Director
Jose Seymour
pr@ibusinessmag.com
Press Releases & Public Relations
Joe Galati
reviews@ibusinessmag.com
Product Review Specialist
Billy Trimble
info@inrich.me 
Product Review Specialist
Inside this edition
i.Business Magazine 
Apple Solutions for Business
i.Business Magazine ISSN (Print): 2157-6629 & 2157-6637 (Online) is
published bi-monthly by Loop USA Inc. If you would like to subscribe
to i.Business Magazine both print & digital Editions, please visit 
http://www.ibusinessmag.com/i.Business_Magazine/Subscribe.html
Opinions expressed are not necessarily the views of i.Business Mag-
azine or Loop USA Inc. All content are Copyright by Loop USA Inc. All 
rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced with-
out written permission. i.Business is a registered trademark of Loop 
USA Inc. Other trademarks and copyrights appearing in this magazine 
remain the property of their respective holders. From time to time 
we may rent our mailing list (emails, names and addresses only) to 
select third party whose products or services may be of interest to our 
readers. Please contact us should you wish to be excluded from these 
mailings using our contact information on this page.
We would love to hear from you! Please feel free and to contact us
here at i.Business with any feedback, suggestions or questions that
you may have about our magazine. Feel free to call us  at
1-416-907-8410 or write to info@ibusinessmag.com. 
Printed in U.S.A
DISCOVER THE WORLD OF i.BUSINESS MAGAZINE
The Only Apple-related Business to Business (B2B) & En-
terprise magazine in the market is published bi-monthly 
available in all news stands and on subscription
Monthly Newsletter
The i.Business Magazine is available monthly. You can join 
our newsletter at http://www.ibusinessmag.com/newsletter
Print on Demand
You can get our magazine print on demand with our part-
ner MagCloud.com - http://www.magcloud.com/browse/
magazine/133463
Newsstand Edition App
We’ve just launched our iPad version of the magazine, with 
digital enhancements, you can get it at the Apple news-
stand. www.ibusinessmag.com/newsstand
Kindle Edition - Now Available
i.Business Magazine is now available for the Amazon Kindle 
Tablet. You can purchase individual issues or subscription 
from the Amazon website. http://www.ibusinessmag.com/
amazon
Facebook, LinkedIn & Twitter
Keep up to date with i.Business Magazine, our digital offer-
ings and the latest news via our Twitter feed twitter.com/
ibizmag, facebook page facebook.com/ibusinessmag and 
our LinkedIn Page, find us under i.Business Magazine
Pinterest
Follow our pins at http://www.pinterest.com/ibusinessmag
Website
i.Businessmag.com - The website of i.Business Magazine 
www.ibusinessmag.com
SMB
In Review
3 SpiderCloud
11 Top 25 Business Travellers Apps 
12 Hdhat
13 MOFI
16 TextMyBiz
19 CrowdPlat
23 Adlens
24 HITCASE
26 iGear
27 Cooper Product
28 Kevo Locks
32 Amzer
34 ZipZap
4 When Is It Time To Get New Gear? 
 
Zachary Miller
5 7 Ways to Improve the User 
 
Experience of a Mobile App 
 
Alex Bratton
6 Evangelist File002 
 
Bill Hellman
8 Leather for Your Laptop 
 
David Holan
9 Introducing Print Shop 3 For Mac 
 
Dave Park
14 4 Branding Basics 
 
Marnï Melrose
17 iOS 8: The 5 Things I Like Best 
 
And Use Most 
 
Steve Overton
27 New iPhone and iOS Tips 
 
Michael Loewenberg
29 Apple Pay and the 
 
Payment Experience 
 
Kate Deutsch
33 Surface or Substance? 
 
Michael Muhney
37 Roughrider Bags 
 
Sean Laibovitz
38 Keeping Up and Staying Ahead 
 
Terry Jarrell
40 Mobility On The Road 
 
Rene Siegal

How often do you walk into your office or any building for that matter, 
while on the phone or surfing the Internet, and lose service? Maybe the 
service simply diminishes or weakens. First you have to understand that 
your mobile device is accepting this data, and sending it for that matter, 
through multiple layers of attenuation. Whether it is concrete walls or 
steel roofs it all effects the quality of signal that you send and receive. The 
higher the frequency, the higher the data rate and the more difficult it is to 
penetrate. The lower the frequency the more it can penetrate. This all being 
said, wireless technology is not perfect, however we have found a compa-
ny that can help solve those difficult environments indoors. Over 80 per-
cent of all mobile voice and data traffic occurs indoors which means that 
network resources are disproportionate requiring the outdoor network to 
assign more resources. These challenges can be reduced, and likely solved 
with SpiderCloud Wireless. If you have LAN access you can take advantage 
of SpiderCloud Wireless.
How does SpiderCloud Wireless work? SpiderCloud Wireless has built the 
world’s first scalable small cell system that actually works for enterpris-
es of any size regardless of building size. Typically this technology in the 
past has worked well in confined areas, but SpiderCloud has taken it to the 
next level. Coverage and capacity is now offered in a 3G and LTE scalable, 
multi-access, small cell system that can cover from 50,000 to 1.5M square 
foot venues including office space and arenas. With the unique self-orga-
nizing and self-optimizing software, design configuration and deployment 
is simplified, RF management is made easier, and it can handle up to 100 
Radio Nodes Powered over Ethernet (PoE). A system can be deployed 
in days.
The Radio Nodes support 16 to 32/64+ simultaneous voice or data chan-
nels with 3G, 4G or dual-band 3G and 4G (or dual-band4G). With the 
dramatic growth in smartphone and tablet use, customer satisfaction is 
a huge priority forcing mobile operators to improve coverage, capacity 
and support. Through a Signals Research Group study it was found that in 
many cases nearly 80 percent of an operators licensed spectrum was being 
underutilized in enterprise environments. Serving a large building with an 
outdoor macro network simply doesn’t cut it anymore, and the expecta-
tions of the consumer prove it. Frustrations with slow data, dropped voice 
calls and limited service force the hand of these providers to come up with 
a better solution – one that SpiderCloud does very well.
“Our team has created a unique and different product and our customers 
and partners have embraced us,” said Michael Gallagher, CEO of Spider-
Cloud Wireless. “We continue to be humbled by the industry reception 
and accolades we are receiving and are thankful for the recognition among 
many worthy and truly innovative companies.”
Current customers include Vodafone UK, Vodafone Netherlands and 
more. With the need for a better solution, customers can expect a quick 
installation and maximization of the licensed spectrum assets indoors. 
When you invest in an in-building solution such as this, you expect your 
employees to have priority over the bandwidth, and SpiderCloud gives 
you just that. With a “white” list, Enterprise IT has the option to deter-
mine who has access to the system and who doesn’t, giving a user mul-
tiple venue credentials allows employees to travel from site to site with 
 instant priority. 
With tremendous funding from the likes of Charles River Ventures, Ma-
trix Partners, Opus Capital and Shasta Ventures they have raised over 
$106M as of April 2012 giving them the resources to create a product 
that serves you, the customer. With quality and service at the forefront 
of this organization, there is really no need to look further than Spi-
derCloud when trying to solve the real problems faced each day in your  
medium-large environment. 
For more information be sure to contact your mobile operator about Spi-
derCloud today. Or, contact SpiderCloud here. 
3

Technology is ever changing and constantly in need of 
updating. Finding the balance between holding onto inef-
fective, outdated equipment and upgrading to something 
un-necessary, new and too expensive is the goal. It can be 
difficult to do! A colleague who used to provide support for 
a school district gave a perfect example of this. This district 
got a giant grant for computers. They were very much need-
ed. Though the school district was happy, the IT department 
knew it did not have infrastructure to accommodate a sin-
gle extra computer. This grant was not allowed to be used 
on anything other than computers. No money came in for 
the network, servers or wireless and these computers sat in a 
storage facility till their obsolescence. 
Having an unbalanced technological ecosystem is every IT 
manager and administrator’s worst enemy. Obviously you 
hire IT staff to maintain and fix your technology; therefore, 
I am suggesting that keeping a healthy balance between fix-
ing and bettering the companies technology is paramount. It 
is similar to only reorganizing the messy part of your house 
and never actually cleaning it. It would be easy to become 
overwhelmed and leave it as is for far too long. Great busi-
nesses project and monitor the growth of their finances, per-
sonnel and business plans. Why not also plan improvement 
for the tools in which they use to accomplish gain? I would 
argue that the majority of businesses are not guilty of having 
older equipment, but that they are guilty of failing to update 
when it is necessary for their success. 
Including your IT department in decisions does not guar-
antee that good or even reasonable decisions will be made, 
but having someone who understands the technical side of 
the picture while being able communicate with the organi-
zation’s financial decision-maker is critical. Challenge your 
IT department to have goals and improvements that they 
would like to make. Now granted, buying new things does 
not increase productivity automatically. It is hard to know 
when to replace your tires if you don’t pay attention to them. 
How bald do your tires get before you replace them? I would 
hope it depends on the kind of winters you have and the car 
you drive. Take a little extra time to learn about how the 
technology works together at your business. By ecosystem I 
mean the big picture. This means your printers, phones, TVs, 
network and computers. Depending on what kind of equip-
ment your business owns, they all tie in together. It is hard 
to stream content in a board meeting when your wireless is 
spotty in the board room. How long are you ok with your 
phones being down when your network hiccups? 
Now not every business has 4 floors and 15 printers or sev-
eral buildings and a huge phone system. Lets narrow it down 
a little more. Your employees perception of how reliable 
technology is, is important! They use these tools everyday 
and know how great or frustrating they are. Most businesses 
pay attention to downtime and loss of productivity. I would 
argue however, that they don’t pay attention to how the em-
ployees talk about the tools they use. You will always have 
someone who wants the latest and greatest so use wisdom 
and ask well crafted questions while getting feedback from 
your employees. Seemingly inconsequential decisions can 
have profound effects. This reminds me of a story from an 
economics class. A business owner took the water dispens-
er out of the office. A significant percentage of productivity 
suffered from a lack of communication that happened while 
people got water. The owner put the water back and produc-
tivity increased again. 
Commonly talked about but often overlooked is integration. 
Do your companies voicemails also get emailed to the recip-
ient? Can your iPads, not just your iMacs print? Streaming 
wirelessly with an Apple TV is not a requirement, but it 
could make the difference between only a few people shar-
ing content in 30 minutes, to many being able to share far 
more information. Where do you use technology the most? 
Is your biggest expense MacbookPros? Innovating here is a 
great place to start. Instead of paying for an expensive war-
ranty on each computer, start a contract with a reliable, local 
repair shop. Look at where you use technology the most and 
talk with a your IT department about efficiency. Lastly and 
maybe most importantly is to have some kind of metric to 
compare efficiency before and after a new purchase. Make 
sure and leave a grace period for the staff who are learning 
something new and finding a groove. 
Lets recap a few places to look while contemplating an up-
date to your gear.
 • Integration
 • Look at where do you use technology the most?
 • Take note of complaints about technology
 • Learn how things work
 • Challenge your IT department to have goals
 • Compare metrics before and after new equipment.  
  Allow time for learning.
Great companies often fine-tune and track their progress 
over long periods of time. You probably don’t need a com-
mittee before upgrading from macbooks to macbook airs, 
but many probably should spend more time planning for 
their next update. Perhaps a great way to end this is to quote 
Wayne Gretzky. He said “I skate to where the puck is going to 
be, not where it has been.”
When Is It Time To Get New Gear?
Zach works as a systems 
and network adminis-
trator for a school dis-
trict in Colorado. He has 
worked for an Apple sup-
port provider as well as 
Apple itself. Zach Miller 
zachary.w.miller@me.com
SMB
Zachary Miller
zachary.w.miller@me.com
4

The goal of any enterprise mobile app should be to make 
life easier for the user. Developing apps that effect real change 
in your organization relies on them being used, and in order 
to boost adoption it’s important to build an app that does 
what the user wants easily and reliably.
A few years back, the race began among software developers 
to add features to apps as a way enhance their app platforms. 
Unfortunately, many of these features were added at the ex-
pense of the user experience (UX).
Today, the pendulum has swung back to improving the UX. 
Great websites are built on a solid UX foundation, and the 
same is true for mobile apps.
It’s important not to confuse UX with user interface (UI). The 
UX is the flow of what the user is able to do and the steps for 
doing it. The UI is what it looks like while taking those steps. 
A great UX with a mediocre UI can still drive big value and 
ease of use. A great UI without the UX will be used once and 
then forgotten.
There are seven things you should know about UX for app de-
velopment before you start your mobile app project:
1. UX has a lot to do with the path an app user navigates 
from start to finish. The user experience is heavily defined by 
how your user gets from point A to point B. UX experts spend 
a lot of time understanding user motivations, building paths, 
testing apps, revising paths, and retesting apps. When your 
user asks, “What’s next?” your app should have an immediate 
answer. Otherwise, you risk losing the user’s attention. 
2. UX has a lot to do with touch. Have you ever tried to 
click a link on your mobile device and accidentally click a dif-
ferent link in the process? Websites and apps that aren’t op-
timized for mobile don’t take “touch” into account. UX strat-
egists understand that it’s more important to have accessible 
buttons than it is to cram a bunch of different pathways into 
a mobile app. 
3. Web designers often don’t have the right UX experi-
ence. A compelling UX should be left to app design profes-
sionals because web developers are accustomed to designing 
for the desktop experience. The web was fundamentally de-
signed to function with a mouse, and that’s how many de-
signers approach it. They haven’t been trained to focus on 
touch, information architecture or UX. Many web designers 
focus on visual design over user flow. 
4. Value and ease of use result in strong engagement. 
App users only care about two things: the value the app offers 
them and how easy it is to obtain that value. UX strategists 
are concerned with both of these elements and go through a 
strategic process to ensure the app delivers value. The perfect 
combination of value and simplicity results in apps with ex-
cellent engagement levels. 
5. More features result in weaker engagement. The 
more functionality added to an app, the more confusion for 
users. The adage “less is more” is true for UX. Members of 
your team may want more from your app, but it’s more im-
portant to focus on usability and add features later.
6. Eye-catching design is important, but it must be sim-
ple. Dull design robs your users of some excitement, but 
flashy design can be distracting, especially if it comes at the 
expense of a fluid UX. Eye-catching design falls somewhere in 
between, giving your app a sleek look without overshadowing 
its intended purpose.
7. UX encompasses everything, even less obvious app 
functionality. The user experience needs to take how the app 
is used into account. One great example of this is the impor-
tance of “ruggedizing” your app. A rugged app performs al-
most as well offline as it does online, storing information and 
housing enough data to help users do their jobs.
Excerpted from “Billion Dollar Apps: How to Find and Implement 
a Winning Mobile Strategy,” by Alex Bratton. A free chapter can 
be downloaded at returnonapp.com. The print book can be pur-
chased from amazon.com, and will be available soon as an e-book 
on Amazon and an iBook on iTunes.
7 Ways to Improve the User Experience of a Mobile App
SMB
Alex Bratton
     @ alexbratton
Alex Bratton is the CEO 
and Chief Geek of Lex-
tech Global Services, a 
mobile app development 
firm that helps business-
es reinvent processes 
with apps. Alex is a tech-
nology visionary, au-
thor, and entrepreneur 
who has helped 100+ 
organizations 
improve 
business processes and 
generate revenue with 
technology.
5

As previously mentioned your last episode, our passionate 
Mac Evangelist,  who was born in Latvia, was asked to jour-
ney behind the former Iron Curtain to the University of Riga 
in Latvia to lecture on North American Micro Computing 
developments.  He stated he would be glad to help as long as 
you didn’t have to say three letters IBM. 
In his world,  IBM meant:
 
IBM = I Bought a Mac
Or
 
IBM= I’ve Been Mislead
The university agreed to his terms and he proceeded to make 
travel plans.  Before leaving he called me and asked if my 
company (GCC), could donate a couple of hard drives for him 
to give to the university. I managed to obtain two 100mB 
external hard drives (largest at the time) for his cause.   One 
made it to the University of Riga, the other one somehow 
found it’s way to the offices of the FREE Latvia Underground 
Newspaper ( all run on Macs).   This was our unintentional 
contribution to bringing down The Iron Curtain. “  Our now 
deceased Evangelist was Mr. Juris Mazutis who was one of 
the most charismatic and passionate individuals I‘ve met 
during my career and I wish he was still here to read this ar-
ticle.  He would have thanked me and then spent the next 10 
minutes telling me what I should have said :)
Evangelist File002
We are happy to  have 
Bill on board as the con-
tributing Editor to our 
new column “ The Evan-
gelist Files” highlighting 
the contributions of Mac 
Evangelists 
who 
had 
dedicated their careers 
to promoting and pro-
tecting the Apple Mac-
intosh platform.  The 
founder of the iBusiness  
Magazine was and still 
is such an Evangelist.  
Submit your favourite 
Evangelist 
experience 
too bill@grabil.ca
SMB
Bill Hellman
i.Menu
EXPO
New 2015 Show Dates
Visit
for details

Copyright © 2014 Troy Apps Software. All rights reserved. iPad is a registered trademark of Apple, Inc.
Mobile Solutions for Field Employees
collaborate . design . engineer . support        troyapps.com        866.598.8001
“Troy Apps created an incredibly beautiful design and a full-featured application that truly demonstrates the creativity and high 
quality of Disguise costumes. And the cost savings of the iPad catalog app versus our printed catalog is astounding when we 
account for printing and postage.  Updates are also a real plus. Once you send the printed catalog to press, it’s essentially out of 
date. With our iPad catalog we can continually update SKUs, pricing and add new releases for our retail customers.”
— Bernice Nesbit, Director of Marketing at Disguise 
“The Troy Apps mobile learning tool creates a competitive advantage for ACE and for students that are studying to become an 
ACE-certified Personal Trainer. Used anywhere a student can take their iPad, the tool doesn’t require web connectivity to be fully 
functional which gives students the freedom to study in a fashion that mirrors their active lifestyle. The term game changer is 
defined as “an event, idea, or procedure that effects a significant shift in the current manner of doing or thinking about something”. 
I think the ACE Academy Elite App is a potential game changer that will significantly shift the way students prepare for a career as 
an ACE Certified Personal Trainer.”
— Scott Goudeseune President & CEO
NATIVE APPS FOR BUSINESS
Order Placement
Remote Update
Search
Notes
Videos
Page Zoom
Dealer Locator
Bookmarks
On-Demand Printing
Email
Navigation
Go Green
Quizzes
Remote Update
Search
Notes
Videos
Analytics
Highlighter
Bookmarks
Digital Glossary
Web Services
Navigation
Go Green

Most of the reviews I’ve written recently have been of iPad or 
iPhone cases. Presented here are five laptop cases, all in leather, 
and each distinct in its own way. There are three cases that fall 
roughly into the ‘rugged’ style, and all would equally suit an exec-
utive. Each case arrived with at least one accessory as described 
below. For those of us who still travel with a laptop, either from 
here to Switzerland, or just down to the local java hut, a bag that 
carries my MacBook Pro in style is always appreciated.  
The Mercer Messenger Bag, by Brenthaven
The Mercer has a few unique and nice surprises. It is constructed 
of a nice dark brown full-grain supple ‘glove’ leather. The interi-
or is a nice golden nylon with a quilted texture (inside the main 
compartment and the two pockets under the flap), and the color 
is a great contrast and makes it much easier to find things inside 
the bag. Although the bag won’t stand on it’s own, there are rub-
ber feet under the bottom of the bag. 
Brenthaven as very creative in its use of magnets for closures. 
The pocket for your water bottle, iPhone or keys on the end of 
the bag is held folded and flat when not in use, as is the bottom 
of the front flap, the curved side of the front flap, and the back 
outside pocket. Inside the main compartment is a padded pocket 
for both your MacBook and iPad (though it needs to have a mini-
mal cover or none), organizer pockets for power supplies, pens, a 
key loop, and a zippered compartment on the inside front of the 
bag. There is a non-removable, adjustable nylon shoulder strap.
Now for the two surprises: The Mercer comes with a serialized 
tag with a toll-free number to locate the owner if the bag is sto-
len or misplaced (although I couldn’t find where to input that 
number on their registration page). The other very useful sur-
prise was the inclusion of an internal integrated power supply by 
Joey Energy, model T1. The spec sheet says it will provide up to 
3 hours for an iPad, and can work in ‘pass-through’ mode when 
plugged into a wall outlet.
The BX2 iPad Folio has a hard plastic back, nylon cover, and fitted 
silicon internal frame for the iPad air. Though not bundled with 
the Mercer, and the iPad in the BX2 case won’t fit in the iPad 
pocket in landscape (it does fit in portrait) orientation, it’s worth 
the $60 MSRP if you value protection for your iPad. I would offer 
it in a brown that coordinates with the Mercer, though. The BX2 
also carries an ID# for return to the owner.
The only fault I could find with the Mercer is the handle on the 
back. It seems to need a bit more reinforcement so it doesn’t 
strain the stitching when the bag is loaded. Nicely done, Bren-
thaven. Available from brenthaven.com for $299.
The Premium Leather Shoulder Bag, by MacCase
The vintage leather Premium Leather Shoulder Bag bundle, with 
matching laptop sleeve, is the same style I reviewed last year for 
the iPad. I like the MacCase line, especially their vintage leather 
bags. The shoulder bag has the most pockets for organizing of all 
the bags in this review, so if you a brief case ‘neat freak,’ this is 
the bag for you.
The bag has a nice soft synthetic interior, with pockets galore. 
There’s a pocket on the right outside of the bag, perfect for 
your iPhone or iPod. There’s a zippered pouch on the back with 
a handle just above the zipper, and another zippered pocket in 
the main flap. Lift the flap and you’ll find three vertical divid-
ers or pockets; there are two full length slots - though they are 
not quite deep enough for file folders, and the front of the bag 
(under the flap) has three smaller pockets just the right size for 
power supplies, along with three pen loops. The interior of the 
bag’s main compartment has one divider to keep files; it’s rather 
thin, but deep enough for your MacBook Pro or Air, but not in 
the bundled sleeve. The bundled sleeve is cool with it’s plastic 
window for the Apple logo and the mesh cutout on the back for 
ventilation. The sleeve has the MacCase logo front and back and 
is well padded, however I would have preferred that the hook 
and loop flap had been a landscape rather than vertical flap. And 
there’s also a rigid bottom in the interior main compartment 
that gives the bag some structure and helps it stand. Hardware is 
all metal, stainless, and there’s no plastic fasteners to be found. 
I like the hardware. It looks nice and and the quality will ensure 
it lasts and works. The shoulder strap is all leather, though not 
removable, and has a rubberized should pad. 
Great bag for a great price, especially in the bundle. It’s available 
as a bundle from Mac-Case.com for $299. 
The Burnished Commuter Bag, by Sena
I’ve always been impressed by Sena products, and the Burnished 
Commuter Bag is no exception. The dark brown bag I reviewed 
comes with black chrome hardware, a removable shoulder strap, 
two leather handles, and a black and grey (ocean) shirt-print in-
terior. There’s a padded pocket for up to a 15” MacBook and iPad. 
There are matching ‘feet’ on the bottom of the bag, though it 
won’t stand on its own.
The zipper of the main compartment matches the black chrome 
hardware, and there’s a protective flap inside the bag that sepa-
rates and protects your MacBook from being scratched. Inside 
the main compartment you’ll find the pockets for MacBook, 
iPad, a larger area for files, etc., as well as pockets for power sup-
plies, iPhone, etc. The front pocket has 2 pen slots, business card 
slots, with two slightly larger pockets behind them, and a larger 
area. Plenty to organize and carry everything you need. The back 
pocket closes with a magnet, and has an internal zippered pocket 
as well. The only thing not there is a key loop, but I’ve never really 
been a fan and seldom use them. The outside corners of the bag 
are also reinforced with an additional layer of leather.
The Commuter Bag is remarkable for its small size and how much 
you can actually put in it. You won’t mind carrying this bag on 
the train, nor will you ever be less than pleased by the impression 
it makes. The Commuter Bag is finely crafted and will age well 
over time. $369 from Senacases.com.
The Pullman, by SkyTop Trading
There’s something about a saddle leather bag, especially one as 
nicely crafted as this one. Maybe it’s nostalgia for all those ear-
ly days I spent in the saddle. Maybe it’s the heft of it; this is a 
quality saddle leather brief, nicely moulded and crafted, and built 
to last generations. Seriously, it’s not hard to imagine that your 
grandkids will be fighting over it and making up stories about all 
the ‘scars’ of your life left on the bag.
Hand-crafted in Colorado, this isn’t just a briefcase, but a 
Continued on page19
Leather for Your Laptop
SMB
David Holan has been 
a Mac user since ’86, 
has an eye for uncover-
ing surprises, and for 
seeing the big picture 
before getting caught in 
the details. David has a 
Master’s in psychology, 
and has been a writer 
and IT consultant for 
20+ years. He has a bit of 
cowboy in him, and likes 
to call it like he sees it. 
David can be reached at 
kaosdoc@gmail.com, or 
www.kaosdoc.com
David Holan
kaosdoc@gmail.com 
www.kaosdoc.com
8

Big businesses need a marketing department with documents 
designed in Adobe’s or other professional desktop publishing 
tools.  For the smaller business owner, often signage or flyers are 
done in house.  If your business only needs flyers to hand out door 
to door, or perhaps a simple sign to post on a grocery message 
board, Print Shop 3 for MAC, is the perfect tool.
I installed the program and at first I was a little taken aback by the 
complete lack of instructions that came with it.  However after us-
ing it, between the built in help, and naturally intuitive nature of 
the program, instructions were not really needed.
When you start the program you are offered an array of project 
types, and then the option to either modify and existing template 
to your needs, or start your own project from scratch.  I modified 
a few of the existing projects at first to get the hang of things, and 
then started from a blank page to create a simply flyer for a friend’s 
used clothing store. Inserting objects and text is straight forward, 
and the program features something called Smart Snapping, which 
is a tool that shows you animated red lines when one object or text 
box is lined up with another.  This is so much easier than trying to 
line things up with an in program ruler.
After creating my document and setting it to landscape orientation, 
I cut the page in half down the center with a line.  The storeown-
er wanted her flyer created on a half page to cut down on paper 
costs.  So I was to mirror my creation on both halves of the page.  Af-
ter getting the layout and title down, I saved my work just to be pru-
dent.  The software picked up the text I used in the headline of the 
flyer and prompted me to use that text as the file name.  I have seen 
word processors like MS Word do this with the first few words of a 
document, but had never seen print software smart enough to pull 
the title out of context and I thought this was a thoughtful touch.
The Print Shop document creation screen is laid out with a tool  
palette on the left side, and an effects palette and text palette on 
the right.
The Tool Palette includes:
 • A Graphic Selection Tool 
 • A Headline Tool
 • A Text Box Tool
 • A Circle Text Box Tool
 • A Shape Tool with basic shapes and lines as well as the option to  
  create your own custom shapes
 • A Backdrop and Watermark Tool
 • A Border and Decorative Line Tool
 • A Photo-frame Tool (which brings up a backdrops 
  and borders submenu)
 • A Custom Graphics Tool 
 • A QR code generator Tool that can create sophisticated 
  QR Codes
The Graphic Selection Tool, allows you to use the clip art and pho-
tographs that come included with Print Shop 3 or pull in your own 
photographs from iPhoto.  The included graphics are searchable by 
keyword, color, category, clip art style and more.  Once you select a 
graphic and add it to your document it is easy to resize, and move 
about the page until placed exactly where you want it.
The Headline Tool allows you to create document Headlines in a va-
riety of styles with options for predetermined styles or a creation 
of your own.  One feature I found interesting was it allowed you 
to use a photograph as the interior of the letters and have them 
show up at full opacity whereas behind the outline of the letters it is 
lesser.  I played with this tool and created a stunning headline with 
a photograph of my wife and son apple picking that would make a 
great photo collection cover.
The Text box Tool is just that a click and place text box.
The Circle Text Box Tool is the same with circular text.
The Shapes Tool allows you to place basic shapes as well as placing 
custom shapes and lines in your document.
The Backdrop and Watermark Tool brings up the Backdrops and 
Borders submenu that allows you to pick and choose for your doc-
ument from a variety of options.  The Border and Decorative Line 
Tool is similar to this and allows you to insert these objects as 
well.  The Photo Frame Tool takes you to that section of the Back-
drops and Borders submenu as well, but specifically opens the pho-
to frame section.
The Custom Graphics Tool allows you to create Logos, Initial Caps, 
Time Pieces (allowing you to set what time the graphic clock shows), 
as well as a gimmicky option to insert some famous signatures.
The last tool is a QR code generator that allows you to create QR 
codes to convey contact information, websites, locations and more.
The right side of the screen includes a straightforward Text Palette 
that lets you adjust font and sizing, as you would expect.  It includes 
a surprising level of detail of control including kerning, spacing and 
more.
The Effects Palette allows you to Adjust Opacity, Change Colors 
and Backgrounds, add Drop Shadows, add Glows.  It also includes 
a Photo Workshop for photographs that allows you to edit photo-
graphs and either fix minor flaws such as Red Eye, Pet Eye, Remove 
Dust and Scratches and more.  As an added feature it includes a 
teeth-whitening tool for photographs.  This photograph features 
are in a submenu that also includes a variety of artistic filters for 
photographs.  Basic tasks such as cropping and adjusting hue and 
saturation are also included.
With this software I found it easy to create simple straight forward, 
but professional looking documents.  The software does not have 
the steep learning curve of high-end software that costs much 
more. 
Print Shop 3 runs on MAC OS 10.6.8 or later including the new 
Yosemite OS.
This software is available to purchase via download at: http://www.
mackiev.com
For wholesale inquiries on this product and over a thousand more 
please contact the author.
Introducing Print Shop 3 For Mac
SMB
Dave Park has been an 
avid computer hobbyist 
for over 30 years. For 
the past 10 years he has 
been selling all the great-
est computer products 
to retailers all over the 
world with Xcel Source 
Corp. Contact him at 
1-905-564-9235 ext.
Dave Park
dave@xcel.on.ca
9

Designed to help: 
REDUCE eye strain
IMPROVE clarity
ADJUST your focus
Adjustable focus
computer eyewear
Avoid eye fatique and improve
                               screen viewing

1. HDHat
2. HitCase Products
3. Adlens
4. RHA MA450i HeadPhones 
5. Mophie Juice Packs 
6. Buffalo MiniStation ThunderBolt
7. Business Card Reader App
8. Cooper Products
9. iGear Products
10. Targus Compact Rolling BackPack
11. ZipZap
12. WritePad App
13. PhatPad App
14. OfficeTime App
15. Expensify App
16. iPro Lens
17. GigSky
18. MOFI Router
19. KudoCase
20. Hyper Juice
21. STM Grip2
22. Brookstone Virtual Keyboard
23. Jawbone ICON HD Bluetooth Headset
24. TwelveSouth PlugBugv
25. CoulVue by TouCoul

The Makayama Movie Mount is a unique piece of hardware which al-
lows users to radically improve video capture with the iPad. It turns the 
iPad into a complete movie studio. A 37mm lens fitting and two hotshot 
mounts allow for use of tele and wide angle lens, attach microphones, vid-
eo lights and a tripod!
So how did the Universal Movie Mount product evolve?
Well early on HDhat had become a distributor of the Makayama Movie 
Mount and noticed that many of our clients wanted to also user their iP-
hones to shoot pro level photos and video. So we went to work in our shop 
and designed simple to use carbon fiber inserts that can be used to add 
any iPhone into the Movie Mount. In just seconds a user can snap in their 
iPhone and use the included wide lens as well as optional lights, micro-
phones, and tripod to create a full movie studio.
What makes the Universal Movie Mount really stand out is HDhat’s use of 
physically larger 58mm lenses that produce fantastic distortion free imag-
es and video.
So what other video accessories does HDhat.com make for 
the iPad and iPhone?
The Makayama Movie Mount created great demand for other accessories 
such as wireless microphones, shotgun microphones, dual microphones 
and various pro level lenses. So we began to engineer fantastic exclusive 
microphones which can be used to produce pro level video. The wireless 
systems in particular are priced under $100 have proven to be quite pop-
ular. !
Are there specific video apps that you recommend to users 
of the Makayama Movie Mount?
Yes there are lots of video specific apps but some certainly standout such as 
Filmic Pro, ProCamera 8, iMovie, Vizzywig, VideoGrade and Vidcaboodle. 
Vidcaboodle specifically is a great app for businesses that need to organize 
Youtube content into better categories that are more specific for their in-
dustry.
The Makayama Universal Movie Mount
by Makayama and HDHat.com
Mark Passerby is the founder of HDhat.com. HDhat is the US distributor of the Makayama
Movie Mount and the Universal Movie Mount. You can find their unique mobile video tools on
HDhatStore.com or contact Mark directly at mark@HDhat.com or 517-896-4376
12

Who doesn’t travel anymore? How many times do you wish you could have 
internet access on devices that either don’t support cellular networks or 
you simply didn’t by the cellular version? Wouldn’t it be nice to have a full-
on wireless router, WiFi, without being home tethered to your local cable 
internet or DSL service? MoFi network has created the ultimate solution. 
Imagine your wireless router that sits in your kitchen or office and pumps 
out those incredible speeds [insert laughter] but wait, you aren’t tied to 
your cable or DSL! I am seriously in love.
I can’t tell you that I have actually used this product however in theory this 
is what we have been waiting for. Do you ever switch off your WiFi on your 
iPhone and go straight to the LTE service so you can download something 
much quicker? I do it all the time and welcome the fast speeds. Now, lets be 
clear about something. You will be using data off of your data plan. Some 
carriers offer unlimited data and some offer data that gets throttled after 
certain periods, etc. but I still think this is a welcoming opportunity for 
higher and more reliable speeds.
Coming straight from the horses mouth, this wireless router is a super high 
performance mission critical router and can be used as a standard high per-
formance N 300 Mb/s router for us with any Cable or DSL service. That’s 
fine but we want LTE speeds. 
For home use it is simply plug and play. You will need a “stick” from your 
wireless carrier (AT&T, Verizon, etc.) which plugs into the back of the rout-
er. Data is streamed into the stick which broadcasts out over WiFi to all 
of your devices. If you prefer to hardwire devices into the back of it, like 
another switch, you can do that too.  If you play video games such as Xbox 
or PlayStation, the MOFI has optimized coding to ensure the best online 
experience possible.
Of course it offers advanced wireless security including 64/128-bit WEP, 
WPA and WPA2. To add icing to the cake, you can install multiple MOFI 
units so your network can be broadened to your needs. The MOFI can also 
act like a print server so you can share the printer across your network 
allowing all of your devices to print seamlessly.
Consider me out the door to pick one of these devices up. They are available 
on Amazon, along with Best Buy and many other retailers.
ENJOY your new high speed network!
13

Branding is the way your company makes your customers 
feel, here are 4 branding basics.
Let’s take Apple for instance, when I say that word, the 
feeling that comes to you is a classy, clean, easy high tech 
lifestyle. All of that just from the word Apple and the fun-
ny thing is, I didn’t even say Apple computers did I? I might 
have been talking about an actual Apple. That’s how strong 
their brand is.
So you are a small company and you may wonder where you 
start.
4 Branding Basics
1. Let’s start with some basics. Email
If Steve Jobs was emailing you and his email was steve@
gmail.com would you take him seriously as a business per-
son? Or would take him more seriously if his email was 
steve@apple.com. Probably the later right?
So job number 1 is to secure a domain for your company and 
set up email. 
I prefer google email to others, for all sorts of reasons, but 
any IMAP provider will do. I don’t recommend POP email 
anymore as it’s an old technology and doesn’t keep what 
you read in sync on all of your devices, which these days is 
just unacceptable. Why Google and not Apple iCloud? The 
bottom line is more apps can use Google Gmail than Apple’s 
iCloud. 
I also prefer to have my email provider to be different than 
my website hosting provider. The reason for this is that if the 
website or host goes down, I still want to be able to receive 
email.
2. Which leads us to domains
Before you can get email for your company, you need a good 
domain.
I’ve learned from my mistakes. First my company was xge-
nius.com because I was a former Genius at Apple. However, 
it was more important to me in my branding to be helpful 
than smart and aloof. Thus came MacAngel, which stuck for 
many years and is still my company name. However, it pi-
geonholed me into working with Macs so when I moved away 
from Daylite and to Podio, I tried to take a bigger leap with 
residualreach.com however, no one liked the name. Great. I 
decided the angel thing worked for me, so I became podioan-
gel.com which worked well for me until Podio decided that 
even though they had signed off on the name when I set it 
up, that they were no longer going to allow partners to use 
their name. Thus came a mad scramble to find something 
else. My next name was midasmarni.com which worked well 
until I realized that King Midas starved to death. Oh no an-
other doomed name. So again I went back to my angel.
What have I learned from all of this?
Pick an easy name that doesn’t constrict you but still com-
municates who you are and what you do and stick with it! 
From an SEO standpoint an older domain is far more valu-
able. Picking a good domain at the beginning is so important. 
3. Now for a website
Rainmaker
I have been a big proponent of wordpress for a few years af-
ter the debacle of expression engine. Expression Engine was 
super powerful and did everything I wanted but it cost me 
a fortune to develop and maintain. $18,000 to create our 
membership site. Then my site got attacked and it was game 
over. I didn’t have the time, the technical understanding or 
the resources to fight the attack.
WordPress didn’t quite do everything I wanted but it was 
way easier than Expression Engine. I hosted it with WP 
Engine. They were awesome. Great customer service. They 
helped with wordpress as well as the task of maintaining the 
back end, like wordpress updates and all of that. Because you 
know what, I am a business person and I didn’t have time to 
deal with that. However, having said that. I have still spent 
massive amounts of time on plugins trying to get my site just 
the way I wanted it to be. Tweaking it here, adjusting it there. 
And to be honest with you, I’ve spent way too much time on 
that and when I spend time on that, it’s not time spent on 
my business.
Enter Rainmaker it’s a new platform for content producers 
like me. I just want to communicate my message. I don’t 
want to be bogged down with the back end. In my opinion, 
technology should make my life easier, not harder. What I 
like about it is that gives me all the tools that I need to re-
set up my membership site, which is what we are doing right 
now. And it takes away all of the under-the-hood stuff so that 
I can focus on producing content. I can set up a membership 
forum, podcast, digital products & membership and landing 
pages. It’s pretty slick!
Pick a website platform that doesn’t become a time suck! 
4. Next up social media
Set up a social media presence on all of the major sites. For 
my business that meant, Twitter, LinkedIn, Google+ and 
Facebook. But it might be different for you. Each has a differ-
ent feel and community and audience. Just make sure that 
your voice and your brand is consistent across them all. Make 
sure that your domain is listed clearly. Use tools that space 
out your posts. Post consistently. Over the past 12 years I 
have amassed a social following of 13K+ across all social net-
works. I did that by consistently sharing my opinions, con-
tent and other people’s content.
Interacting and actually talking with people is key.
So there you have the 4 basics of branding, get going. 
4 Branding Basics
SMB
Marnï Melrose is the 
Managing Director & 
Chief Technology Evan-
gelist of MacAngel, LLC. 
Founder of the MacAn-
gel Academy. 
www.macangel.com
about.me/marnimelrose
Marnï Melrose
www.macangel.com
about.me/marnimelrose
14

Introducing the MOFI3500-3GN
TOLL FREE 24/7 TECHNICAL SUPPORT: 1-800-586-0345    WWW.MOFINETWORK.COM
www.MoFiNetwork.com
MOST ADVANCED 
4G/LTE ROUTER
Your 4G/LTE Internet modem or 
iPhone/Android cable  Goes Here
FOR BUSINESS
FOR THE HOME
  Failover Load Balancing (Multi-Wan & 3G/4G/LTE)
  Remote Cloud Management  Interface
  Monitor all your customers with 1 central interface
  Custom ﬁrmware with your logo & remote update
  Public IP Service from MOFI with any Connection
  VPN Services & Termination - Device to Cisco, 
 Linux, Juniper IPSec, L2TP, & PPTP  
  OpenVPN Server & Auto Port Forwarding Feature
  Share your 3G/4G/LTE Internet with Multiple 
 PC’s/Phones, Tablets  & more (wired & wireless)
  Simple Set Up with Nothing to Install and up to 
 1000 feet Wireless Range (Plug & Play)
  Works with Everything - Cable/DSL/Satellite
  Make your USB ink jet printer into a network
(Now everyone can print to same printer) 
 
XBOX & Playstation Optimized with auto 
port forwarding for best gaming experience
 
 Watch Netﬂix USA in Canada - MOFI Super DNS
 iPhone and Android USB tethering
Advanced Monitoring to Control Data Usage
Are you an installer?
Looking for a custom router?
We oﬀer custom ﬁrmware with an
initial order of 10 units 
Contact us to set up your dealer account
with iPhone
USB TETHERING

Innovative Technology: Text Enable Your Existing Business Number 
with TextMyBiz
In today’s fast paced business markets, messaging has surpassed all other 
forms as the preferred method of communication worldwide.  Clients and 
customers alike are already texting every day and most likely your business 
is not yet text enabled.  TextMyBiz now gives the consumer an efficient 
and quick way to connect with a business.   TextMyBiz has launched new 
technology which provides texting capability to an existing business, land-
line or toll-free number.  This messaging platform enables both customers 
and business operators to send and receive texts using the same number 
they typically call.  
So how does it work?  A customer sends a text message from their mo-
bile to an existing business number just like they are texting to their best 
friend.  The business is immediately notified and receives the message on 
a web browser or iOS device.  At that point, any designated staff member 
can respond and have a real, two-way chat.  This is not to be confused with 
mass text marketing services as TexyMyBiz is genuine communication be-
tween the consumer and the business operator.  Furthermore, the same 
business is able to initiate a chat with an outgoing text.  There is no app 
to download, no training necessary.  Customers only need to know the 
number and how to text message.  No more missed calls, voicemails and 
miscommunications.
This service has built-in features to make this solution even more simply 
including reminders, auto replies, group texts and keyword responses.  A 
popular feature is the canned messages which allows the user to quickly 
respond to customers with two clicks.  This application can accommodate 
multiple users, departments and phone numbers in a single interface.  All 
business chats are archived and may be monitored by management at any 
time.  
Signing up is as simple as going to the TextMyBiz website.  They offer a 
14 day trial and you can be up and running within minutes.  There are 3 
plans to choose from: Lite, Business and Professional.  The Lite ($19.95 
per month) and Business ($99.95 per month) plans will cover the majority 
of businesses in the US and Canada.  In addition, the service can provide 
international numbers in 25 other countries.
There are very few industries that won’t benefit from this service.  Cus-
tomer service and sales departments will see immediate engagement. 
Appointment requests, confirmations and reminders from physicians 
to beauty salons.  Reservations made easily at restaurants and concierge 
desks.  College and school staffs can now easily communicate with their 
students.  Businesses are using it for internal communication with their 
own employees.   Real estate brokerages, Insurance agents, retail, auto re-
pair shops, hotlines, finance, public safety, general inquiries, trade shows, 
libraries, etc.  The list goes on and on.
See it in action.  Try it now.  Send TextMyBiz a text message on their toll 
free number 844-GET-TEXT (844-438-8398) or head to their website 
www.textmybiz.com to sign up for a free trial.
Millions of texts were sent in the time you spent reading this review.  How 
many went to your business?
16

It’s been almost a month since I 
stood in line to get my new iPhone 
6. I have to say I really do love the 
larger form factor especially the 
larger screen. Although there are 
quite a few upgrades to the new 
phone, the biggest difference is IOS 
8. There has been some press about 
the new operating system bricking 
phones and having serious bugs, 
but my experience is very different. 
I have upgraded to 8.02, and have 
found it quite solid. Some apps do 
still crash but I think that’s more to 
do with the apps than the operat-
ing system. 
There are some things in IOS 8 that 
make my life much easier. The first 
has to do with Siri. Here in Ver-
mont, as of October 1 it’s illegal 
to hold a cell phone in your hand 
while you’re driving. Although I 
have been driving with my phone 
in a dock for some time, there have 
been times I’ve held it to do some-
thing, but now I know the state 
police are watching. As long as my 
phone is plugged in, I can say “hey 
Siri” and she will wake up and be 
ready for my command. If I need to 
make a phone call, all I have to do is 
say” hey Siri, call my wife at home” 
and she will begin to dial my wife’s 
telephone number. I don’t have to 
touch the phone at all. One of the 
other nice additions to Siri in IOS 8 
is that she translates what I say im-
mediately rather than waiting for 
me to stop speaking to translate. It 
makes a huge difference to be able 
to see what she’s translating as I’m 
speaking.
The second thing that I use all the 
time in IOS 8 is the custom key-
board feature. Android has for a 
long time had a keyboard called 
SwiftKey that allowed you to drag 
a finger along the keyboard to type. 
I was both jealous and disappoint-
ed that we didn’t have that ability 
on our iPhones. Now we do. Swift-
Key is indeed a timesaver, and it’s 
amazing how intuitive it actually is. 
I don’t have to be exact when drag-
ging my finger along the keyboard. 
It seems to understand just what I 
mean to type. 
While on the topic of keyboards, 
Apple added predictive typing to 
their own keyboard. Predictive typ-
ing has been around since the be-
ginning in a primitive form in that 
as I type a bubble would appear of-
fering a suggestion of what I might 
mean to be typing. It worked on a 
word by word basis. Now there’s a 
bar that appears above the Apple 
keyboard that offers up three sug-
gested words that I might mean to 
type in addition to suggestions for 
the next word I may want to type. It 
takes some getting used to, watch-
ing the bar above the keyboard as 
I type, but as I have become more 
familiar with it, it has sped up my 
typing dramatically. 
Interactive notifications is another 
addition then enhances productivi-
ty. It’s quite common to be working 
in one app when I get a notification 
or and imessage from someone. 
Prior to IOS eight I would have to 
leave the app that I was working 
in, open the app that was notifying 
me and perform whatever action 
was required. Now when the noti-
fication pops up on the top of my 
screen, I can simply tap on it, reply, 
and send it without ever leaving the 
screen I was working in. 
In addition, the notification win-
dow that appears by dragging a fin-
ger down from the top of the screen, 
now is customizable. There are apps 
that have things called widgets that 
can be added to this notification 
window. I have added Evernote and 
Weather Underground to my noti-
fication window. So, now instead of 
having to tap on my home button, 
find and open Evernote, all I have 
to do is drag down and tap on the 
icon of what I want to do within 
Evernote and I’m there. I also can 
see my favorite weather app and 
it’s information right in front of me 
as I am drag down the notification 
window. Now not every app has 
created a widget, but my guess is 
many more will get on board. 
If you haven’t downloaded IOS 
eight, I personally recommended it. 
I know many more people that love 
it then have had trouble with it.
SMB
Steve is a Realtor and 
technology coordinator 
at KW Vermont in Col-
chester, Vermont
Steve Overton
techandrealestate.com
     @wonder777
iOS 8: The 5 Things I Like Best And Use Most

Full iPhone
Functionality
Call, Text, Shoot
and Share.
Waterproof
10m/33ft
Railslide Mount
System
8 Available GoPro®
Compatible Mounts
Interchangeable
TrueLUX
TM  Lenses
3X Wide Angle and
Flat Lens Included
ShockWave
Audio
Shockproof
2m/6ft
Quick Latch 
Design
Easy In - Easy Out
With Bumpers for
Improved Shock
Resistance
BUY NOW AT HITCASE.COM
by HITCASE
Lightning Port
Access
Charge Your Phone
in the Case
Completely redesigned around the iPhone 6
TOUGHER. SLEEKER. BETTER.
VIDOMETER

Do you have a software project that is just burning in your heart to start? 
Do you hear about different developers around the world that can help 
you? Is funding an issue? Trust me, there are plenty of people out there 
looking to help. Whether it is funding, development or project mangage-
ment, CrowdPlat serves as your one-stop-shop for developing that dream 
piece of software.
CrowdPlat was started with the mission to reduce application development 
cost and cycle time while providing superior quality by leveraging talent 
from around the world. So, yes, now you don’t have to go out and search 
the world for your perfect team.
Let’s understand crowdsourcing a little more before we get started. Crowd-
sourcing is the CrowdPlat way. It is a business strategy which involves com-
panies completing tasks by combing different contributions from different 
parts of the world.  Crowdsourcing is what allows CrowdPlat to offer our 
services with such a high quality standard.  Face it, applications run the 
world. There is increased needs for custom apps to be built cheaper, fast-
er and better.  By utilizing the power of the crowd, CrowdPlat is able to 
achieve this.
Here is how it works.
Simple to use online software allows you to progress through 6 easy steps 
towards final production of your software or application. Step 1 includes 
customers posting an app development project. This includes details about 
the app and what it will do.  Step 2 is a CrowdPlat proposal sent back to 
you detailing all of the milestones necessary to achieve the perfect result. 
Step 3 is when the customer accepts the proposal and signs the agreement 
insuring all legalities are kept in tact throughout the project. Step 4 is when 
you get to meet your virtual project team, understanding whom you will 
work with throughout the project is important. Step 5 is when the magic 
starts to happen. The Virtual Project Team builds the application and de-
livers it back to the customer just as it was requested. Step 6 includes the 
customer making payments as each milestone is hit. This is the ultimate 
in crowdsourcing to achieve the software developments goals you had 
thought were so far off.
Dust off those notebooks and ideas and start making things happen. 
CrowdPlat is the perfect solution for the idea that “doesn’t have enough 
time, or doesn’t have enough money”.
Continued from page 8
well-designed bag (with snaps and D-rings everywhere) for attaching the vari-
ous complementary system of well-thought out accessories. The clasp is brass 
and lockable. This is some of the nicest hardware I’ve seen in a while. The shoul-
der strap is brown canvas with heavy removable clips (also in brass) and has a 
removable pad with a rubber (not rubberized) backing. I do wish the strap was 
a nice leather, though.
Starting from the solid “canoe handle” to the sewn strap that wraps all the way 
around the bottom of the bag, this case is well-thought out and meticulously 
crafted. The blocked leather gives the bag a solid construction, and loaded, it 
will stand on it’s own. The flap is moulded to wrap around the 3-compartment 
front pocket. All rivets are covered by a piece of felt on the inside to prevent 
scratching your iPad or MacBook. The two internal dividers of the main c om-
partment are also removable, and the whole compartment is lined with soft 
glove leather. The front pocket closes with a snap, has 3 compartments, as well 
as pen and business card slots and a key loop. The back of the bag has another 
moulded pocket with snap closure perfect for keeping your travel documents 
and passport close at hand. 
SkyTop Trading also sent their iPad Folio. It’s heavy. It’s luxurious. It stands 
incredibly well (and I’ve tried many folio cases and have not said this before). 
Probably due to it’s rigidity and weight. And it likely is upgradable since the 
clear polycarbonate snap-in backing also snaps out of the leather folio. Some 
bags will earn you points for swag. This bag is so well-made that, of such fine 
materials, swag is irrelevant. $1175 from SkyTopTrading.com. iPad Folio, 
$279.
The Rough Rider Messenger Bag, by WaterField Designs
The Rough Rider is unique in this review in a couple of different ways. You 
can pick the color of the front panel, the number of pockets is the least of the 
bags reviewed, and the design itself sports a shoulder strap system that pulls 
the bag into your body via two-angled connection points to the body of the 
bag.  You won’t see the Waterfield logo until you lift the front flap (secured by 
two-position snaps on each side), and there aren’t a plethora of tiny pockets 
everywhere. Truth is, I love the simplicity of it. Put your MacBook and iPad 
in an Outback sleeve (you’ll need them since the Rough Rider has no padding 
otherwise), drop them in the main compartment, with two half-width inside 
pockets, and you’re off. When I’m travelling light, though ‘light’ is relative, I 
carry my MacBook, my iPad, one charger, and maybe a book or magazine (or 
files, if I’m working). The Rough Rider is perfect for those days. There are two 
padded pockets under the flap for an iPad mini or iPhone/iPod. I love the qual-
ity of the leather, it comes with whatever markings happen to be there and has 
character right out of the box. The strap is non-removable with a slip pad of 
matching leather and a rubberized surface.
What else is there to say? The Rough Rider with it’s ‘urban wrangler’ leather 
and canvas trim, simplicity, quality materials, excellent construction. Made in 
San Francisco by folks who obviously care about what they’re doing. It’s like 
taking a street car to Fisherman’s Wharf: You know where you’re going, and 
you know how to get there. Straightforward. No pretence. No apology.  Crit-
icisms? None really. Though I keep debating about a leather shoulder strap 
vs. nylon. Did I mention the camouflage factor? With no obvious tech label, it 
looks like just an ordinary messenger bag. But there’s nothing ordinary about 
it. $335 for the 13” and $355 for the 15” size. Outback Sleeves are $59. See 
sfbags.com for more.
So, how would I rate them? Well, you can’t go wrong with any of the bags re-
viewed here.  If I wanted ‘urban chic,’ I’d definitely pick the Rough Rider from 
WaterField; it’s simple, packs and unpacks in seconds, and it’s going to last. 
It’s elegant in its simplicity. The Mercer from Brenthaven is very nice, and the 
internal power shot is a unique and practical difference.  The Burnished Com-
muter from Sena is classy and will impress anywhere you go, as well as keep you 
organized. The MacCase bundle is classy, rugged, well-made and the Apple logo 
window on the included sleeve is cool. And the Classic Pullman from SkyTop, 
if you don’t mind the heft, transcends. Period. You can carry this bag from the 
judge’s chambers to the train and back, and no one will ever question its fit. But 
then ‘cowboy’ is like that; it gets the job done, and won’t quit till it is.
19




New adjustable eyewear from Adlens assists eye focus and battles 
harmful blue screen light
Startling research from The Vision Council shows that many Americans 
put themselves under unnecessary strain every day. ‘Blue’ light is continu-
ally emitted by screens and could be a major factor behind eye strain – and 
screens are now in front of people’s eyes for more time each day than ever 
before. 
According to the research, the number of adults viewing screens for over 
10 hours a day rose by 4% in the last year alone, with some 70% saying they 
have experienced some form of strain using electronic devices. Neck pain, 
dry eyes, headaches and dizziness can all be traced back to eye strain1.
What can be done?
For many years ophthalmologists have provided guidelines for those using 
screens, for example:
 
•  20-20-20 rule encouraging people to take breaks every 20 minutes  
 
 to look at something 20 feet away for 20 seconds, giving your  
 
 focussing muscles a resta
 
•  Remembering to blink often and stay hydrated, with the intensity of  
 
 screen use contributing to dry eyes and often decreasing our natural  
 
 blink rate
 
•  Help your eyes to focus more easily on screens by getting corrective  
 
 glasses for the right distance; whether your work computer, home TV  
 
 or smartphone on your daily commute
Now we can add one more to the list: get eyewear that helps to limit trans-
mission of the most harmful wavelengths in the blue light spectrum.
How can Adlens help?
Adlens® has quickly reacted to this problem, creating Adlens Interface™ 
– adjustable focus eyewear with a blue light-filtering lens. Protect your 
eyes from harmful light, and prevent them from overworking to focus 
on screens at different distances with its adjustable focus technology: a 
no-compromise solution to an increasingly widespread problem.
On average, Adlens Interface eyewear has been shown to block 65% of 
light in the blue range, and an incredible 80% at the harmful 450mn. The 
lightweight frame style makes them easy to wear for long periods at the 
computer, TV or viewing a smartphone, and your eyes will be shielded at 
the same time.
The adjustable focus technology, controlled using two small dials on the 
corner of the frames, allows you to gradually adjust the power of each lens 
until you achieve near-perfect focus at any distance –  even as close as 
30cm! – making them the perfect tool for any screen in your daily life. For-
get buying multiple blue-light filtering pairs for every screen you have, and 
get one adjustable pair you can easily take with you whatever the occasion.
Adlens have been researching and producing the latest in adjustable 
focus eyewear since 2004. Find out more about Adlens Interface at  
www.adlens.com
Are you protected from Digital Eye Strain?
23

Cases, cases and more cases. We continue to see more and more cases come 
out each and every year. Some stack up in the category of normal with 
no special features and designed to lightly protect but more importantly 
provide fashion. Others serve very specific purposes for very specific situ-
ations. Anything from stands, to cameras to durability, they come in many 
shapes and sizes. Recently we came across a newer idea that brings multi-
ple uses together. Introducing Hitcase. Hitcase brings you three different 
models of cases for your iPhone 5s/5c/5. The iPhone 6 models are coming 
soon and you can sign up on their website to receive updates on their ar-
rival. 
The Hitcase PRO+ offers a rugged case design that can withstand up to 33 
feet of water for nearly 30 minutes. But its not just a rugged case. Built into 
the case you get a 3x super wide lens that is interchangeable depending 
on the situation. Even with this armor of a case you get 2x clearer sound 
and full functionality of your iPhone. Along side the case, Hitcase offers 
numerous accessories giving you a very GoPro experience. From mounts 
to stands and tripods, every photographic scenario is covered. Pricing is 
$149.99
The Hitcase SOLO, which also fits the iPhone 5s/5c/5, gives you the ulti-
mate durability and waterproofing of the PRO+ without the ability to in-
terchange lenses. It comes standard with the flat lens. It also shares a lower 
price point at $99.99.
The third and final Hitcase is the Hitcase Pro. Available only for the 5s/5. It 
doesn’t seem to carry quite the ruggedness of the other two using a patent 
pending ShockSeal technology. It also offers a fixed 3x wide angle lens and 
starts at a price of $129.99.
All of the Hitcase models work well with their free app in Apple’s App 
Store, called Vidometer App. You get things like Overlay Speed and Eleva-
tion that you can add right to your videos using the built in hardware from 
the iPhone.
As mentioned before, there are a plethora of accessories available of the 
Hitcase products. Each case uses the Railside Mounting Sytem allowing 
you to use things like a TubulR Mount, ChestR Mount, Telescopic  Exten-
sion poles and much more.
If you don’t want to invest in the extra hardware of the GoPro, Hitcase is 
definitely worth the look. We all know how powerful the onboard camera 
system is with the iPhone. Take advantage of it. For less than $200 you can 
be doing backflips off the side of a mountain or scuba diving like the pros 
shooting video that National Geographic would be jealous of.
HIT ME MORE THAN ONE TIME
24

Finally, a business phone system
for your iPad. ZipZap.    
ZipZap streamlines all of your communication needs onto one tool. Your iPad.
Simple conference calling, without special codes or dial-in numbers.
Text from your business phone number, eliminating the use of your personal phone for work.  
Social Media integrations keeps you socially up-to-date with your contacts.  
 
Pricing is simple. And you may add lines easily as your business grows.  
Plus it’s fun to use. Drag and drop technology and a pop up keypad are fool-proof.  
Visit www.zipzap.com/iBusiness for a free 30-day trial.
No credit card required. 
Copyright ©2014 ZipZap, LLC. All rights reserved.
 Why use this?
 When you can use this?
Or this?
Or this?
y

With so many cases and so many protectors out there, the number one 
part of your iPhone that serves as the most important tool is the screen. If 
the screen isn’t protected you may as well not have this great tool at your 
fingertips. There are many protective screen covers out there and we won’t 
be making any comparisons today but we will dive into a great product that 
protects your iPhone.
Not only is important to protect the screen of your iPhone but something 
that isn’t talked about much is the blue light that reflected off of the screen 
into your eyes that is posing as a harmful threat. iGear Glass tags their 
products as “sunglasses for your phone”. With the strength of sapphire iG-
ear Glass has been proven to protect your phone and your eyes. It is ultra 
hard, shatter proof, anti-impact, high transparency, anti-scratch and pro-
tect from UV.
Available for most phones past the iPhone you can find an Azul Series 
screen protector for virtually any phone.
The videos on their website do a tremendous job showing the incredible 
toughness of this product.  See those videos at: igearglass.com
26

The new iPhones, iPads and Mac Operating Systems let us 
tie things together in the Apple ecosystem better than ever 
before.  This month, I’ll tell you about a few things that I’ve 
discovered that make my iLife easier.
Handoff   I have an iPhone 6 (gold/64), an iPad 4 (128) and a 
MacBook Pro (mid 2010).  Each of the devices is running the 
latest version of its iOS and they are interconnected through 
my iTunes account.  I love the Handoff and Continuity func-
tions and they work seamlessly and intuitively.  When my 
iPhone rings, so does my iPad; I’ve answered calls on my iPad 
using it as a speakerphone.  iMessage works everywhere and 
that includes text messaging!  I can message on one device 
and continue to read and answer on any of the three. And if 
I start writing an email on my iPhone, I can put my phone 
down and open my iPad and continue to write that email 
without missing a beat. Go to Settings > General > Handoff 
and turn it on.
Make ‘em Buttons. You can make the links in iOS apps into 
buttons by changing Settings > General > Accessibility > But-
ton Shapes. Normally, the links are words you tap; changing 
that setting gives the words a background like a button and 
makes them easier to see. It can make your iPhone and iPad 
look distinctive and this feature, coupled with larger fonts 
and bolder text, can make the whole device easier to use and 
manage.
What’s Eating You?   Battery life has always been an issue 
with mobile devices. The iPhone 6 and 6+ are the best yet 
but it’s still helpful to know what’s eating your power.  You 
can see the programs that are the biggest consumers of bat-
tery power by going to Settings > General > Usage > Battery 
Usage. It lists the apps with the percentage of battery use for 
each one. You can see your battery usage, by app, for the last 
24 hours and for the last 7 days. Armed with that informa-
tion, you can take steps to close the battery heavy applica-
tions to increase your battery life. 
More Fingers  You can unlock your phone with a code or, if 
you have  a 5S or later, with your fingerprint.  You also need 
to use your fingerprint when you use Apple Pay.  You can set 
up 5 different fingerprints on your phone and I suggest you 
do that.  I find it extremely useful to have fingers on both 
hands set up on my phone.  On my right hand, I have my 
thumb, index and middle fingers and on my left hand, I have 
my thumb and index finger set up.  My phone sits to my left 
on my desk so I can unlock it with a touch without moving 
it.  Add more fingerprints to yours!
‘Til next month.
New iPhone and iOS Tips
SMB
Michael 
Loewen-
berg is the president 
of 
MESH 
Business 
Solutions, Inc., locat-
ed in New City, New 
York.  Michael writes 
a Technical Blog that 
teaches people to be 
more effective with 
their technology tools 
– 
blogmeshbiz.com 
You can contact him at  
mike@meshbiz.com.
Michael Loewenberg
mike@meshbiz.com
blogmeshbiz.com  
Now that you have that great tablet be it an IOS or Android device keep the 
screen clean with the patented iSlipTuFF or iSlip Lite cleaner from Coo-
per-Product.com. Remember that new screen feel, revive that jazzy appear-
ance each day by using an innovative iSlip Cleaner. iSlipTuFF or iSlip Lite 
cleaners use the softest 100% Microfiber and are offered at the best price, 
$4.99 each.
The iSlip elastic and rugged Microfiber cleaners from Cooper-Product.com 
were designed by a Los Angeles Firefighter who became intrigued by the 
variety of ways people were using to remove fingerprints from their tablet 
screens. He observed people using everything from shirt sleeves, blouses, 
skirts, neck ties, paper napkins, towels, and just about anything else except 
what the manufacturers recommend, Microfiber. 
Although many people do use a Microfiber towel, the cloth just never 
seems to be handy right when they need it to be. The elastic used on the 
iSlip is designed to seamlessly fit onto any folio style tablet case solving one 
challenge, while the Microfiber conquers the other challenge that tablet 
users face each day. Using an iSlip with your tablet ensures that you will 
always have an excellent cleaner ready for use. 
That’s right your Microfiber cleaner is not at home, or at work on your 
desk, or in your pocket picking up grit, or lost somewhere in your bag. The 
iSlip cleaner’s cleaning power is functionally paired up with your tablet, to 
be used right where you need it, when you need it the most. Nothing says 
prepared like a clean tablet screen. When your friends and colleagues see 
you use the iSlip to keep your  screen squeaky-clean they will be amazed at 
how easy the iSlip works.
With exclusive access to premium Microfiber and high 
quality elastic 
Cooper-Product.com not only creates the most efficient screen cleaners on 
the market but also the coolest. Available in a host of terrific colors and 
fashion forward patterns the iSlip cleaners are built to remove all of the 
days fingerprints, oil, grime or dust from not only your tablet but from all 
of your electronic devices screens. The iSlip works wet or dry and is the op-
timum partner when using any liquid based cleaner. A tablet isn’t complete 
until it is combined with an iSlip cleaner.
Cooper-Product.com ships all orders FREE within the continental USA. 
Satisfied customers have ordered over 30,000 iSlip cleaners. All iSlips 
are guaranteed for 15 machine-washing cycles, or six months of use  As 
a member of the Advertising Specialty Institute (ASI) Cooper-Product.
com fulfills promotional campaigns with the quantity orders. The iSlip is 
the ideal platform for promoting your firm, or fundraising for your school, 
team, or university.
Look for the Cooper-Product.com iSlip, case, and covers crowd source 
funding campaign winter/spring 2015 as Cooper-Product.com launches 
into tablet cases, and custom covers. 
COOPER PRODUCT 
Innovative Solutions 
www.cooper-product.com
27

No Key No Problem
Groceries in your hand. People coming to the house without you there. 
Kids opening the door when they shouldn’t. All of this sounds like familiar 
problems with any door that requires a key, doesn’t it? Meet the award win-
ning Kwikset Kevo lock. Installed as a standard lock on any door, this lock 
allows for normal key use as well as Smartphone entry. How does it work?
Your Smartphone is now your key. Keeping your phone in your pocket is 
perfectly fine. No more fumbling for keys in the dark or when your hands 
are full. Just touch the lock to open it for ultimate convenience. Compati-
ble with the iPhone 4s, 5, 5c, 5s, 6 and 6 plus. I don’t have a Smartphone. 
No problem. Kevo offers a key fob  that serves the same purpose and can 
reside in your purse or pocket. The key fob is pre-enrolled so there is no 
additional setup when you purchase the lock.
Now, lets get serious. You are still reading because you want to know more 
about the mobile app, where the real power lies.  The Kevo mobile app does 
many things. First download the free app and go through your typical ini-
tial setup. You never have to reopen the app unless there are changes to be 
made. It is always running in the background giving you full access to your 
home when you need it. That being said, lets come up with a fun exam-
ple. You are in Southern Australia on vacation looking at birds and soaking  
 
up the sun. Your sun, who 
attends North Dakota State 
University is coming back to the 
house in Fargo for the weekend. He 
doesn’t have a key and needs to get 
in. You can provide him an eKey. An eKey is an encrypted key that allows 
you to send your house key to anyone, anytime. You can disable the key, 
permanantely, delete users and they never expire so you can reassign them 
to other people as needed (like the house cleaning people after your son 
goes back to school). You can preset time constraints and control days and 
time of the week when the eKey is active.
With this powerful application you can also see usage tracking, under-
standing who is entering and leaving at the touch of a button.  
Kwikset prides itself on maximum security giving you peace of mind when 
you aren’t there to let someone in. While you are home you can trust the 
highest quality deadbolt systems on the market.
Enjoy safety, enjoy convienence and enjoy control with Kwikset’s Kevo 
deadbolt and app system. Pricing on Amazon starts at $199.00 and comes 
in different finishes to blend right in with your current door décor.
28

Apple introduced Apple Pay—a mobile-payments service—
during its September 9th keynote. The service will be avail-
able starting October in the U.S. for iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 
Plus users and in early 2015 for Apple Watch users.
One of Apple’s key achievements is simplicity of design facil-
itated by an ecosystem of products and services. Apple Pay 
is yet another example of Apple’s ability to bring together 
multiple stakeholders (merchants, developers and payment 
solution providers) to achieve a seamless experience for the 
user. In addition, Apple Pay incurs no charges to merchants, 
developers, or users.
Getting Started - Adding A Card
Apple Pay is supported by the Visa, MasterCard, and Ameri-
can Express networks for cards issued by American Express, 
Bank of America, CapitalOne, Chase, Citi, and Wells Fargo 
with more banks coming soon.
Users can import credit cards from iTunes simply by enter-
ing the card’s security code. In addition, users can add credit 
cards by scanning them with their phone’s camera. All cards 
are managed via Passbook. The actual card number is never 
stored on the phone. Rather, a Device Account Number is 
created and stored in the Secure Element, a dedicated chip 
on the phone.
Paying - Retail
To pay at retail locations, simply, place the phone next to a 
contactless payment terminal (identified by the icon at right) 
while pressing your finger on Touch ID. The user’s payment 
information is sent to the merchant using Near Field Com-
munication (NFC).
Paying - App
Apple Pay can also be used for the purchase of physical goods 
and services via an app, though users will continue to use 
In-App Purchase to buy virtual goods and digital content 
subscriptions.
Using Apple Pay is easy: simply tap the ‘Apple Pay’ or ‘Buy 
with Apple Pay’ button and the user is presented with what 
Apple refers to as the “Pay Sheet.” From here users can con-
firm or modify the details of their purchase (e.g. card, billing 
address, shipping address, shipping method, contact and 
price). The user then completes payment by pressing a finger 
on Touch ID.
User Experience
Now that we know what Apple Pay is, and how to use it, let’s 
explore how it improves the payment experience for custom-
ers in a manner that leads to increased sales and/or brand 
affinity.
With any payment experience the goal is reduction of fric-
tion, making the entire purchase process—whether a single 
item purchase or a checkout flow—as easy and simple as 
possible in order to maximize conversion and reduce cart 
abandonment.
Let’s now discuss the current user experience of popular 
apps and discover how Apple Pay might improve that experi-
ence when added as an alternate payment method.
Uber
On the left is a mockup from Apple’s newly published Apple 
Pay Identity Guidelines. On the right is a screenshot of the 
Uber app.
These screens illustrate basic payment-options screens 
where a user would add, edit, and remove payment prefer-
ences, typically in the form of individual cards.
In the mockup, Apple Pay is presented as a selected option. 
Since Uber launches with Apple Pay in October, it will be in-
teresting to see if Apple Pay will appear as a default payment 
option or if users will need to tap “Add Payment” and select 
Apple Pay to add it to their payment options. I’d recommend 
an opt-in because a default inclusion could spur user-confu-
sion and backlash. In the payments space, it’s important to 
allow users to actively make their own payment choice and 
to select which apps have access to which payment methods.
In this case, Apple Pay eliminates the need to add a credit 
card specifically for Uber (either by entering the card num-
ber manually or scanning it with the camera). The ability to 
select one payment type that pre-populates all of your pay-
ment info across the multiple apps on your device will reduce 
friction and save users a tremendous amount of time. In-
stead of thinking, “Do I really want to buy this?” while typ-
ing in a card number, the user simply selects Apple Pay and 
completes the transaction with Touch ID.
Target
On the left is a promo screenshot from Apple’s website of 
what the Target app may look like with Apple Pay and on the 
right is a device screenshot of the Target app displaying the 
same product.
In this case, Target may be launching a new “express check-
out” feature for users of iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus. Cus-
tomers would presumably click an Express Buy button and 
then have the option to immediately pay via Apple Pay or add 
the item to their shopping cart for additional consideration. 
Target’s typical mobile payment flow is a multi-step process 
that involves:
1) adding an item to the cart
2) viewing the cart
3) checking out
4) entering delivery info and shipping method
5) selecting payment method
6) entering payment info, including billing address
7) reviewing and tapping to complete the order.
With the new flow, these seven steps have been reduced to 
three:
1) tap to enter express checkout
Continued on page 30
Apple Pay and the Payment Experience
Kate Deutsch
SMB
29

Continued from page 29
2) tap Apple Pay button
3) confirm details on pay sheet then confirm and complete the transaction 
via Touch ID
Apple Pay makes the experience more seamless by relying on stored pay-
ment and address data, requiring fewer taps to purchase.
It will be interesting for companies that implement Apple Pay to compare 
sales of the same item in the same period for users with access to checkout 
via Apple Pay versus those using the traditional process.
It will also be an interesting metric to determine the number of users who 
have Apple Pay enabled devices but choose not to use it as a payment meth-
od. This can be done by tracking the device type in analytics and comparing 
to the final payment method across device types. Will users trust Apple as a 
single entry point for all of their payment data across apps or will they feel 
more comfortable providing it on a merchant by merchant basis?
Pay Sheet
Here’s a look at the pay sheet displayed when Apple Pay is chosen as the 
payment type. The pay sheet can be setup to display only the fields needed 
for a transaction. For example, for the Uber app, only Card & Billing, and 
Contact might display. It’s interesting that the user is able to approve a 
purchase with Apple Pay even when the price isn’t final. With Uber the 
final price isn’t determined until the ride is over so in this case Apple Pay is 
actually authorizing a future transaction for an unknown amount.
From the Pay Sheet, users can select and modify Card & Billing, Shipping, 
Method, and Contact and then pay with Touch ID—or simply confirm the 
info visually without making changes and then Pay with Touch ID.
Key Considerations for The Enterprise
If you have an app that accepts payments, consider the following when ex-
ploring implementing Apple Pay:
Does my payment solutions provider support Apple Pay?
Apple Pay is currently officially supported by Authorize.net, Chase Pay-
mentech, CyberSource, First Data, Stripe and TSYS. Many of these com-
panies provide SDKs that now include Apple Pay as an option, as well as 
implementation documentation.
Do I understand the Apple Pay - Human Interface Guidelines and 
do I have the right resources?
Apple has very specific requirements for how to present Apple Pay as 
a payment option as well as specific buttons required to invoke the pay 
sheet. More information can be found at: https://developer.apple.com/
apple-pay/
Has the development team obtained a Merchant ID, generated a 
Certificate Signing Request to obtain a key, and received a payment 
entitlement certificate from Apple?
All of these tasks can be accomplished via the Apple Developer portal as 
well as your respective payment provider’s dashboard.
Did I plan with my UX/UI team for the Apple Pay experience? Does 
Apple Pay provide additional shorter payment flow options I can 
test for better conversion? Am I going to treat Apple Pay as the sole 
payment option and present the Buy with Apple Pay button or offer 
it as a payment option amongst many?
Did I ensure my payment flow has both a standard and Apple Pay 
enabled workflow?
Companies need to provide an alternative workflow for users who do not 
have iPhone 6 or 6 Plus. How will this flow be setup and how will this 
affect conversion?
With these considerations in mind your organization can elegantly imple-
ment Apple Pay to improve the user’s payment experience by reducing fric-
tion, resulting in overall increased affinity and sales.
Vizzywig Video Editor
Search “Vizzywig” on the App Store today.
Vizzywig for iPhone® and 
iPad® ($29.99) invented 
real-time movie making. 
Watch your movie being 
formed in the timeline while 
you shoot. Apply smooth 
auto-zoom, snapshots and edit 
points while recording. Tap 
the done buttton to add 
background music, titles, 
intros and scrolling credits. 
Share online with one tap!
MOVIES IN MINUTES
SHARING IN SECONDS

HDhat Mobile Video Tools
Wireless Mics starting at $99.95
Dual Mic Systems
Video Lights
Movie Mounts for iPad/Air/Mini
Movie Mounts for iPhone
Use coupon code ibusiness for 10% off
ww
www.HDhatStore.com 

With all the talk about cases and all the talk about screen protectors we 
have finally found a case and a screen protector built into one. The screen 
protector is great and we will talk about that. I think we you go down this 
hybrid path you have to love the case too – which I think you will.
What the heck is Crusta? Amzer Crusta is the world’s first tempered glass 
embedded case. This is a multilayered smartphone case consisting of four 
functional layers all constructed of premium materials. Each layer serves 
its own purpose but collectively working together to provide style and pro-
tection.  Layer one is an Edge2Edge Glass Screen Protector using superior 
materials for scratch and impact protection. Layer 2 is an embedded tem-
pered glass hard shell case and the core of the protective layers.  Layer 3 
is a textured finish TPR ring that provides impact protection and unique 
texturing. The TPR ring has precise plugs for all the ports which double as 
dust protectors.
The rugged case obviously protects you from life’s drops, spills and resists 
dust and dirt preserving your smartphone (so you can sell it when the new 
one comes out).  The fourth layer includes a 360-degree functional belt clip 
holster and there are 42 different color combinations that will surely satis-
fy your fashion tastes.
If you are in the market for a new case or a new screen protector, look no 
further than the Amzer Crusta as it supplies all of your needs!
MULTI-CAMERA
RECORDING MADE SIMPLE
Vizzywig Video Editor
Search “Vizzywig” on the App Store today.
Vizzywig 5.0 for iPhone® and 
iPad® ($29.99) allows you to 
simultaneously record and 
live-switch betweeen up to 16 
iOS devices at the same time. 
When recording is complete, 
all high-resolution files are 
transferred to the Stage 
device. Perfect for capturing 
meetings, demos, experiments 
and special events from 
multiple angles in real-time.

3 Ways to Invest in a Relationship Past the In-
troduction
It seems as though a new software product or online net-
working platform emerges almost weekly. Often they entice 
users with effortless ways to find new “connections” by ac-
cessing address books and other social platforms to cull for 
people you “may know” or wish to know. But what are they 
offering, really? Are they providing just another aggregated 
list of names and profile pictures? So what.
What should you do from there? Should you call someone in 
your contact list to tell them that you saw the picture they 
just posted on their Facebook page and can tell them how 
cute their new puppy is? Or reach out on LinkedIn to ac-
knowledge that you both graduated from the same school? 
Or should you favorite their latest tweet that has nothing to 
do with anything pertinent to your newly formed “relation-
ship” with them? 
I’m not suggesting that social networking is a bad thing, per 
se. What I am pointing out, and hoping to spark some deeper 
thought about, is that like so many things in life, you get out 
of a relationship what you put into it. These superficial at-
tempts to build a relationship may give you a starting point, 
but only that. There are four main components that deter-
mine meaningful relationships:  time, intensity, reciprocity 
and consideration. 
What may be superficially acceptable on a social network 
with a new connection does not necessarily translate into 
a valuable business relationship without effort. In other 
words, just as businesses invest in many things to help them 
achieve the greatest return on investment, so too do each of 
us need to invest the time and effort it takes to build last-
ing business relationships. We must capture the hearts and 
minds of those we deal with to gain a competitive edge that 
goes beyond the globally-available-to-all information about 
people with whom we associate. 
Real relationships, and I am talking about where there really 
is a mutually satisfactory connection, move away from the 
“publically available” knowledge to “this-is-between-just-us” 
private state. That is where we actually begin to develop that 
all-important trust. It might be said that when it comes to 
“working” a contact, where there is no up-front work there is 
also little back-end value.
So, how do you build that substance with a new connection? 
Whether the introduction is virtual or in real-time, consider 
these three tips for investing in a newly formed connection:
Be “Them-Centric”
Think about what you can offer to the other person, not what 
you may want to get out of the relationship. Remember, the 
best way to invite reciprocity is by giving to others without 
expectation and without pressure. And keep in mind that 
one of the most valuable gifts you can give is your attention. 
By asking questions and listening attentively to the answers, 
you can get to know others better and show them true con-
sideration.
Meet In-Person, if Possible
When you get together, try to meet in person, so that you’re 
communicating on as many sensory channels as possible: 
eye contact, body language, and so on. If meeting in per-
son isn’t possible, choose a virtual method that allows more 
sensory channels, rather than fewer, for a higher-intensity 
connection. (For example, choose a videoconference over a 
phone call, and a phone call over texting.) 
Don’t Forget the Follow-Up
Keep the relationship moving forward by following up quick-
ly—ideally within 24 hours—with a note of appreciation. 
Let the other person know you enjoyed getting together and 
appreciated the time he or she spent with you. Don’t try to 
solicit a response. Simply offer a respectful “tip of your hat” 
and leave the decision of whether to respond up to the other 
person.
If you understand that professional success is tied to the 
strength of your networks, you probably also realize the 
need for real, deep and authentic relationships. Success is 
not achieved by amassing a list of contacts. Those introduc-
tions are only as valuable if you continue to invest and de-
velop them. We make meaningful relationships by making 
investments in others. Therein lays the potential for infinite 
opportunities and mutual rewards.
Surface or Substance?
Mike Muhney, co-in-
ventor of ACT!, is now 
the co-founder of vipOr-
bit, creators of mobile 
contact manager apps 
for iPhone, iPad & Mac.  
www.viporbit.com 
SMB
Michael Muhney
viporbit.com
     @MikeMuhney
i.Menu
EXPO
New 2015 Show Dates
Visit
for details
33

ZipZap Case Study: Vintage Vapours
Vintage Vapours is an exclusive retailer of vaping devices, liquids, and ac-
cessories. With an online presence as well as a brick and mortar storefront, 
the company was searching for a phone system that would meet their 
needs both in the back office and the retail environment. Owner Rob Zahr 
needed a system that could handle all of the company’s communication 
needs—including inbound calls to the store, conference calls for the corpo-
rate team, and transferring calls amongst employees—but he didn’t want 
to invest in a lot of extraneous business equipment. “As a small business 
owner, I’m always looking for ways to streamline our operations,” says Rob. 
“We were already using an iPad for inventory management and credit card 
processing, so adding our phone system to the iPad with the help of ZipZap 
was a natural fit for our company. It’s extremely convenient to have all of 
our essential business tools at our fingertips on the iPad.”
Vintage Vapours has now been using ZipZap for over a year. In addition 
to simplifying their business processes by consolidating everything on to 
the iPad, Vintage Vapours employees particularly appreciate ZipZap’s ease 
of use. The company has replaced cumbersome conference call and video 
chat programs with ZipZap—to coordinate a call, the meeting organizer 
can simply dial out to all of the conference call attendees directly and then 
drag and drop them into the call. Employees no longer need to remember 
or distribute troublesome conference call numbers or codes.
ZipZap’s functionality also allows the Vintage Vapours team to quickly 
transfer calls to employee cell phones if necessary. “Whether transferring 
a call to a colleague across the room or to a colleague working remotely, 
ZipZap gives my business the flexibility to communicate the way we need 
to,” explains Rob.
“When searching for a business phone system, I was initially attracted to 
ZipZap because it’s an app that I could easily access from the iPad I was al-
ready using,” says Rob. “Now that I’ve been using it for over a year, I’ve also 
really come to appreciate how easy it was to set up and now how seamlessly 
it fits into our everyday workflow. It meets far more of our needs than a 
traditional landline, and I truly believe it’s the best solution on the market 
for a small business like ours.”
34

o
360

JAN. 6-9, 2015
LAS VEGAS, NEVADA
CESWEB.ORG
 #CES2015
In other words, you really can’t. What you can do is make sure you don’t
miss what promises to be our most innovative and rewarding show ever. 
That and maybe take some pictures for the unfortunate cats left behind. 
Register at CESweb.org.
EXPLAINING CES TO SOMEONE WHO HASN’T
ATTENDED IS LIKE EXPLAINING PARTICLE PHYSICS
TO A HOUSECAT.

Gear reviews are all the rage. Did you know that users listen 
to other users reviews more then that of the industry or mar-
keting reviews. That is to say that a user reading another us-
ers review will hold more weight then the actual companies 
product marketing. When you think about it, it does makes 
sense. Someone who is like minded like me, enough to buy 
the product i’m looking at should have the same type of opin-
ion that I would have. With all that being said i’m going to 
review a product from a company called Water Field.
If you’ve never heard of Water Field you may have heard of 
SFBags.com
Water Field is an American company who prides themselves 
on making quality products locally in the USA. I’ve purchased 
multiple bags, cases and wallets from these guys. With each 
purchase being better then the last. This company continues 
to impress me with each new item, and each purchase. I’ve 
had email discussions with the owner, talked with people 
in marketing and support for product questions. This is an 
american made company that oozes pride for what they do 
and what they produce.
My latest purchase.
This is an all leather bag except for the colour inset under 
the flap. But hang on. Before I go over the bag let me first 
talk about the purchase. SFBags.com has fully revamped 
the site. With the help of their ambassadors, yes ambassa-
dors. Water Field has a group of users that have signed up 
as company ambassadors. This team was first on the new 
site. “Beta testers” checking it out and giving feedback. You 
See Water Field listens to their customers. Customers help 
inspire product improvements and even new products. Back 
to the site. The website is clean and easy to navigate. Go look 
for yourself. http://www.sfbags.com  I love the fact that 
each product has a video with Garry laying out some of the 
key features and usability tidbits that make the purchase so 
much easier. Watch a video and you can tell that Garry has 
passion for his products. 
Ok, back to the purchase. Once you’ve watched your video, 
selected your size and colour option you simply press Add to 
cart. Nothing earth shattering here but its simplicity is just 
that. Simple. With the thousands of options for purchasing 
WF product they have made sure that the purchase cycle is 
clean and easy. Shipping options are presented and nothing 
is hidden. Now the waiting begins. Waiting for your new 
product to arrive. 
I can’t begin to tell you how many things I’ve purchased from 
these guys. However, every time the product is delivered to 
my door, its quicker then expected. Your Water Field box ar-
rives and you know it’s going to be great.
For me, my new Rough Rider Messenger bag was just sitting 
in the box waiting to be used. It wasn’t waiting a long time 
mind you. I intercepted the shipment at the Fedex depot. I 
just couldn’t wait the full two days. In the car I ripped open 
the box and immediately admired the quality and workman-
ship of my new bag. It was tough looking like it was used by 
the cowboys in an old western. Exactly what I was looking 
for. Time was wasting. The urge to start transferring my stuff 
from my old bag to the new one was intense. I wanted to jam 
it full of stuff. Laptop, chargers, hard drives, pens and paper-
work. It all fit so nice.
The smell of the Rough Riders leather was awesome. This 
truly is a bag that has that been around the world a couple 
of times. It did just make the awesome crossing from west 
to east. It looks like it did on horseback and was ready for 
action in the urban jungle. The stitching was beautiful, the 
colour was tough, the durability of this bag looks like it will 
last forever. 
I use a macbook air 13 inch. This sits in an Water Field out-
back sleeve for protection from the urban elements. It fit 
perfect. With gear in all the pockets and room to spare for 
paperwork this is the perfect fit bag. 
If your looking for a bag that sets you apart from the stan-
dard nylon or computer bag community this is it. It’s not to 
big and not to small. It actually is the perfect size. I love it. 
Get you hands on any Water Field product and you will see 
exactly what I am talking about.
When you purchase that best laptops & tablets cary them 
around with the best cases. Water Field is the company to 
protect and carry your stuff. 
Roughrider Bags
SMB
Sean Laibovitz
Sean Laibovitz is a sea-
soned IT executive with 
a proven track record 
of 
successes 
building 
and managing complete 
technical infrastructures 
for  companies with 
sophisticated function-
ality, connectivity and 
security 
requirements. 
One of Sean’s keys to 
success is his ability to 
deliver solid solutions 
using new technology. 
“As an early adopter of 
technology you can leap-
frog your competition by 
years.” 
A p p l e  S o l u t i o n s  f o r  B u s i n e s s
New 2015 Show Dates
Visit ibusinessexpo.com for details
37

Everything changes. One thing you can count on is that time 
does not, ever stand still. Even though the clock ticks the sec-
onds away at the same pace all day every day, technology ad-
vancements just seem to come faster and faster. Remember 
way back when only a novel few people even had cell phones 
and those were the giant “Miami Vice’ style shoeboxes with 
a heavy coiled cable tethered to the car? It gives us a smile to 
think about those days but try to imagine how we ever got 
along without our MacBook Air or iMac. Shudder to think of 
a life without our iPhone and iPad.
Along with these advancements in technology, productivity 
and efficiency also comes new elements and complications. 
Upgrades, updates, different iOS and OS X versions and com-
patibility should make you ask:
Will my old software still work with the latest system? Is my 
computer or iPad/iPhone capable of running the new stuff? 
What are the best Apps for me to use in my business and 
personal life too? What can I do to get more out of my Mac, 
iPad or iPhone? Who has the time to figure all this out???!!!
You probably have asked yourself at least one of these ques-
tions before - and probably a few others too. The answer is 
simple, but not necessarily easy. The solution lies in being 
educated in a regular, efficient and easy to assimilate way by 
someone who has already done the leg work for you. Unless 
you are in the technology industry, you likely do not spend 
all day, every day working with these devices, apps and soft-
ware enough to filter through the so-so ones and get to the 
better tools. Much less see them used in the real world by nu-
merous users where you can monitor feedback and how well 
something actually works. With hundreds of thousands of 
apps now available in the iTunes App Store as well as the Mac 
App Store it is important to rely on professional resources to 
be your guide.
Online resources are always fairly good, again if you have the 
time to dig around for one answer at a time and sift through 
the forums while dodging all the off topic commentary and 
‘IMHO’s’ which may or may not reflect much accuracy. Then 
there are other more reputable websites such as Lynda.com 
which offer training on just about any subject you can imag-
ine. A reasonable subscription fee unlocks their library of 
videos so you can pick a subject and watch the videos at your 
leisure.
A more focused and tailored approach is through webinars 
or workshops. Both offer a more concentrated dose of infor-
mation usually pertaining to a specific area of interest than 
just a general overview website or a DIY/watch-the-video-
and-figure-it-out-on-your-own method. Our company, Max 
Your Macs, has been teaching in a variety of venues for years 
but our clients have begun to appreciate the convenience of 
webinars over coming to classes. Our webinars can be viewed 
at their convenience either at home or office, individually or 
as a group. Whether we are covering fundamental Mac or 
iOS usage for a regularly scheduled event or a personalized 
session for groups, this method works extremely well. This 
allows for specifically targeted webinars for different indus-
tries, such as our sessions for attorneys or general business 
on how best to use your iPad effectively and cover the most 
popular apps.
Webinars such as this give the viewers the opportunity to be 
flexible with their schedule and save time by not needing to 
travel to an outside venue or alter their work day in order 
to get the information they need. It also opens the door to 
interact with the presenter (not all presenters offer direct 
communication as we do) either during or after the session 
to put a laser beam point on what interests you specifically.
Technology isn’t going to be slowing down any time soon 
and neither is the need for you to stay up on the latest in-
formation you need to know to be the most productive and 
efficient you can. Just try not to forget to set aside a little 
time each week to learn something new in any way that
works best for you. Again, using online libraries, Google 
searches or focused webinars from many sources will help 
minimize those question marks that hover in the air over 
your desk and make your work much more productive and 
enjoyable.
Keeping Up and Staying Ahead
Terry Jarrell found-
ed Max Your Macs 
LLC in central Florida 
in 2004, serving the 
needs of Mac users in 
Daytona Beach, Orlan-
do and literally all over 
the state. As a long 
standing member of 
the Apple Consultants 
Network, Terry also 
served three years on 
the Apple Consultants 
Network 
Advisory 
Council. As a writer, he 
has authored various 
Apple training guides 
as well as articles 
for online and print 
publications 
includ-
ing MacsimumNews, 
Techware Labs, Cult of 
Mac, Daytona Beach 
News-Journal 
and 
many others.
SMB
Terry Jarrell
New 2015 Show Dates
Visit ibusinessexpo.com for details
A p p l e  S o l u t i o n s  f o r  B u s i n e s s
38

Download for FREE Today at www.directmailmac.com
jumpstart your small business
with powerful email marketing
• Professionally designed template gallery
• Real-time email open and click tracking
• Customizable subscribe forms
• Fast, reliable email delivery
• Integrates with the Mac apps you already use.
Direct Mail for OS X

Whether at work, around town on weekends or during ex-
tended travel, I always seek ways to support mobility, min-
imally tethered or untethered to wired power and Internet 
connections within current technological limits. An Apple 
iPad Air is my mobile device of choice, replacing a laptop for 
up to 60% of my workday day and up to 100% when I travel. 
Mobility needs have become easier to achieve over the past 
20 years and the load has gotten much lighter.  An iPad Air 
with a location-appropriate selection accessories is usually all 
I need to get me either through a work day or while traveling.  
Keyboard case.  Zagg makes excellent keyboard cases which 
provide various levels of protection from minimal to rugged. 
Logitech makes a fine keyboard case but it leaves the back of 
the iPad exposed. Belkin also makes one similar to Logitech’s. 
I use a Zaggkeys Folio; it protects my iPad Air while allowing 
rapid input and striking a good balance between protection 
and weight.  It is so integral to the way I work and communi-
cate that I consider a keyboard-case  an extension of my iPad.  
VPN Key—A VPN assures a secure connection whether to 
a corporate or private account and does not allow unautho-
rized “eavesdropping”, particularly when connecting to work 
resources.  I consider this one of the most essential accesso-
ries.
Cabled Power—I always travel with an Apple power adapt-
er and 2 meter and 3 meter USB power cables.  The 2 meter 
power cable is long enough to be useful in an airport or on 
an airplane without getting in the way.  A 3 meter power ca-
ble allows  about 9 feet between device and adapter allowing 
me to move around a hotel room with my iPad while keeping 
it continuously powered. USB Power Adapters.  Many can 
be found that accommodate multiple USB devices.  Belkin 
makes a compact two-port adapter with retractible prongs for 
two smaller devices such as an iPhone and iPod.  It can only 
accommodate one larger device like an iPad so I carry two.
Mobile Power/Stand-Alone Battery Packs.  Mophie makes a 
great USB-connected mobile battery pack with varying capac-
ities and which can charge either one or two mobile devices at 
once.  The two-device model can charge an iPhone and iPad 
simultaneously; It charges devices quickly and the battery 
pack recharges quickly.  The Mophie Power  has a standard 
USB port and a mini USB port which lets me keep my iPad 
connected to the Mophie Power while the battery pack is con-
nected to the USB port on my PC AC adapter.
Mobile Power Strip/Surge Protector.   Even though most ven-
ues now use digital power to which to directly plug mobile de-
vices, I am conditioned to plug in my devices through a surge 
protector wherever I am.  Road warriors were often warned 
that accidentally plugging into analog power without surge 
protection could “brick” a mobile device.  One of my favor-
ite mobile surge protectors  is made by Belkin and provides 
three AC outlets and 2 USB ports.  One model accommodates 
laptops and smartphones; another is made for smaller mo-
bile devices.  The prongs rotate in different directions and 
ground the connection.  It’s heavier than others by Monster 
or Philips; it’s only downside is a non-retractible plug.  A close 
second is a very lightweight, but hard to find, Philips mini 
power strip/surge protector which provides three AC out-
lets but no USB ports.  A short cable ending in a plug wraps 
around the surge protector when not in use. Monster makes 
one that is similar and works the same way but is heavier.
Mobile Hot Spot.  I use a mobile  hot spot compatible with my 
cellphone carrier.  The device is a lifesaver when in-room ho-
tel WiFi reception is an issue—it happens at least once every 
trip.  I increase my plan to the maximum for the month that 
I travel so I don’t end up with per Gigabyte overage charges. 
It’s expensive up front but a less disruptive than keeping 
track of overage charges.  Consistent WiFi accessibility was 
so suboptimal on a recent trip that the only ways to get a se-
cure  Internet connection were through a mobile hotspot for 
extended use or my iPad’s cellular data plan for limited use, 
coupled with a VPN key.
Stylus—Sometimes it’s just easier to “point and click” with 
a stylus on an iPad in “laptop” mode.  My current favorites 
for the iPad are made by Wacom—the Bamboo Fineline, the 
Intuos Creative.  The Fineline is best suited for writing in 
apps optimized for its use such as ArtRage, GoodReader and 
others.  The Intuos Creative 2, coming out in October (which 
replaces the original Creative stylus)  has a slightly wider nib 
and is better suited for doodling and drawing. I often use a 
stylus to create mindmaps and process flows on my iPad us-
ing one of many flowcharting apps that allow freehand input.
Laptop Bag—My favorites for travel are structured and pad-
ded for protection with enough room for both an iPad and 
a PC or tablet.  My accessories are organized into smaller 
pouches by function.  My iPad fits in a totebag for daily use 
when I have access to a friendly wireless network and don’t 
need much more than a stylus, notebook and pen and a set 
of earbuds.  
Office Apps—Whether a Microsoft Office user or an iWorks 
user, these apps are essential for continuous and seamless 
productivity no matter where one travels.
Moleskine App.  I used to carry Moleskine notebooks, one for 
each clinical trial on which my team works. Clinical trials have 
too many processes to trust all projects  to a single notebook. 
Moleskine now provides its core journals (ruled, square, plain) 
in an app optimized for the iPad.  The app replaces all but one 
hard copy book for general use.  The virtual journals on my 
iPad are far more secure and I have not encountered a page 
limit.  When the journals are full, I print them out, lock them 
away; after a period of time I delete the virtual journals.   The 
only downside of the app is having to copy journals to Pages 
or MS Word for iPad before printing.  Including an “Open In” 
feature with PDF conversion as well as the ability to AirPrint 
directly from the app would make printing much easier. Book 
and Magazine Apps—I have been collecting E-Books and 
audiobooks for years and my sizable collection of mystery 
novels is enough to keep me busy for years.  I also subscribe 
to a number of magazines and journals for professional and 
recreational use; my favorites are Harvard Business Review 
with its in-app interactive blog,  Wall Street Journal which 
now supports saving articles to PDF, and BusinessWeek.  My 
most frequently industry-based information sources now 
have apps, such as the Fierce Healthcare series.
Movies, Music, Audiobooks and Podcasts—I always down-
load a good selection of each to provide a break from work 
while flying or for downtime alternatives to television. The 
iPad allows us to work and play and has made extreme mobil-
ity feasible in a wide variety of circumstances when combined 
with a well-edited selection of accessories and apps.
Mobility On The Road
Rene Siegel is a research 
administrator at a major 
hospital where she is re-
sponsible for the day to 
day operations of two 
clinical imaging research 
programs. She has been 
using mobile technolo-
gy since 1994, and has 
contributed to FoxPop.
com (a UK-based user  
oriented website).
SMB
Rene Siegal
siegelrj@mac.com
40

Contact 
647-560-4290 x 102
info@igearglass.com

IS YOUR MOBILE STRATEGY  
IN NEED OF A RESCUE?
collaborate . design . engineer . support        troyapps.com        866.598.8001
Copyright © 2014 Troy Apps Software. All rights reserved.

