ICONOCLASM 
IN EUROPEAN 
CINEMA
T H E  E T H I C S  A N D  A E S T H E T I C S  
O F  I M A G E  D E S T R U C T I O N
C H I A R A  Q U A R A N TA


Iconoclasm in European Cinema


Iconoclasm in European Cinema
The Ethics and Aesthetics of Image 
Destruction
Chiara Quaranta

Edinburgh University Press is one of the leading university presses in the UK. We publish 
­academic books and journals in our selected subject areas across the humanities and social 
sciences, combining cutting-edge scholarship with high editorial and production values to 
produce academic works of lasting importance. For more information visit our 
website: ­edinburghuniversitypress.com 
We are committed to making research available to a wide audience and are pleased to be 
publishing an Open Access ebook edition of this title.
© Chiara Quaranta, 2023, under a Creative Commons 
Attribution‑NonCommercial‑NonDerivative licence
Cover image: © AB Svensk Filmindustri (1973) Photo: Sven Nykvist
Cover design: www.paulsmithdesign.com
Edinburgh University Press Ltd 
The Tun – Holyrood Road 
12 (2f) Jackson’s Entry 
Edinburgh EH8 8PJ
Typeset in 10/14 Warnock Pro by
Cheshire Typesetting Ltd, Cuddington, Cheshire, and
printed and bound in Great Britain
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN  978 1 4744 9445 8 (hardback)
ISBN  978 1 4744 9447 2 (webready PDF)
ISBN  978 1 4744 9448 9 (epub)
The right of Chiara Quaranta to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in 
­accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 and the Copyright and Related 
Rights Regulations 2003 (SI No. 2498).

Contents
List of Figures
vii
Acknowledgements
viii
Introduction
1
Prologue: The Eikōn-Eidōlon Dichotomy from Plato to Film
23
Part I:  Cinematic Iconoclasm as Critique: The Image as Eidōlon
1.	 Aural Cinema: Isidore Isou’s Traité de bave et d’éternité
37
2.	 An Aesthetics of Displeasure: Guy Debord’s Destructive Oeuvre
55
3.	 Towards a Radical Voice: Carmelo Bene’s Our Lady of the Turks
73
4.	 In Search of a True Image: Jean-Luc Godard’s Histoire(s) du cinéma
94
Part II:  Cinematic Iconoclasm as an Ethics of (In)visibility: 
The Eikōn as Iconoclastic
5.	 Impossible Encounters: Marguerite Duras’s Le Navire Night
115
6.	 Blind Vision, Aural Resonances: Derek Jarman’s Blue
136
7.	 Crumbling Faces: Ingmar Bergman’s Cries and Whispers
154
8.	 Blocks of Suffering: Krzysztof Kieślowski’s Three Colours: Blue
172
Conclusion: A Communal Vision through Broken Images
189

vi  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Notes
195
Glossary
201
Bibliography
205
Filmography
223
Index
226

Figures
1.1	
Chiseled image of Isidore Isou
48
1.2	
Chiseled image of military personnel
49
1.3	
Chiseled filmstrip
50
2.1	
Static shot of a photograph of a cinema audience
64
2.2	
Static shot of a photograph of Alice Becker-Ho and text ‘and the 
living re-encounters the living’
70
3.1	
Burnt medium close-up of Carmelo Bene
87
3.2	
Extreme close-up of Lydia Mancinelli and red filters
88
3.3	
Partially out-of-focus close-up of Carmelo Bene
90
3.4	
A breast disguised amidst the vegetation
92
4.1	
Text superimposed on a detail from Fra Angelico’s The Mocking of 
Christ superimposed on Godard in his study room
106
4.2	
Detail from Fra Angelico’s The Mocking of Christ
107
4.3	
Still frame of Brunella Bovo superimposing on the shot of Fra 
Angelico’s The Mocking of Christ
108
4.4	
Ingrid Bergman in absorbed prayer superimposed on a blue-tinted 
still frame of Birger Malmsten and Doris Svedlund
110
4.5	
Layered superimposition of green-tinted still frame of Birger 
Malmsten and Doris Svedlund, Godard in his study room, and text
111
5.1	
Actors in Le Navire Night (Marguerite Duras, 1979)
131
7.1	
Close-up of Agnes in pain
165
7.2	
Extreme close-up of Maria and David in front of the mirror
166
7.3–7.5	 From Karin’s facial close-up to the fade to the red screen
170
8.1–8.4	 The third black-out at the swimming pool
186

Acknowledgements
This book has developed from my PhD thesis on the topic of cinema and icono­
clasm, which would not have been possible without the constant guidance of my 
doctoral supervisor, David Sorfa, whom I would like to thank in particular also 
for strongly encouraging me to turn the thesis into a book and for his help and 
support throughout. My sincere thanks also go to my second supervisor, Daniel 
Yacavone, for his insightful comments and his hard questions which encour­
aged me to broaden the research; my PhD examiners, Libby Saxton and Marion 
Schmid, who provided helpful insights into various ways in which I could 
develop my thesis into a book; and my master’s supervisor, Ivelise Perniola, who 
was my first interlocutor on the topic of iconoclasm and cinema.
Once I set my mind to undertake the task of writing this book, I struggled 
with envisioning my thesis as a publishable work, and I am extremely grateful to 
Gillian Leslie at Edinburgh University Press for believing in my idea, even when 
it was not ready yet, for meeting with me and for explaining the ways in which 
I could have developed it for publication. Sincere thanks also go to Sam Johnson 
and the editorial team at EUP.
I would like to express my gratitude to Krister Collin at Svenska Filminstitutet 
for his help with the cover image and to Carl-Gustaf Nykvist for giving permis­
sion. Thanks to you, the cover image I had in my head is now on the cover of 
this book. I would also like to thank wholeheartedly Dan Harrison, Jack Walker 
and Nicholas Canny for their prompt help, and Davide Messina for his valuable 
advice on various aspects of the book.
This book has significantly benefitted from suggestions and conversations 
with friends and colleagues over the past few years; these include Silvia Angeli, 
William Brown, David Fleming, François Giraud, Pasquale Iannone and 

﻿ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  |  ix
Tyler Parks. Thank you for pushing me to question my ideas by providing feed­
back at conferences, or by sharing your thoughts in front of a friendly pint. I 
would like to thank especially Francesco Sticchi for reading drafts of some chap­
ters and discussing ideas with me. I am also grateful to the anonymous reader 
whose thorough feedback has helped me deepen the argument.
Finally, I wish to express my sincere gratitude to all those persons whose 
support, encouragement and love have left a mark on this work. I could not have 
endured the stress and self-doubts of writing this book without the comfort of 
my dear friends, who listened to my worries and brought a smile to my face. A 
special thought goes to my friend Francesco Roscino, for this work is at times 
haunted by his memory. I am profoundly grateful to my parents, Maria Adele 
and Nicola, and my sister, Lavinia, without whose support and love I would not 
have completed this book. Last but not least, warmest thanks to my wee neph­
ews Giulio and Davide, who have unknowingly restored my faith in this world.
Part of Chapter 1 previously appeared in a different form, as Chiara Quaranta, 
‘A Cinema of Boredom: Heidegger, Cinematic Time and Spectatorship’ (2020), 
Film-Philosophy, 24(1): 1–21.

But certainly for the present age, which prefers the sign to the thing signified, 
the copy to the original, fancy to reality, the appearance to the essence, [. . .] 
illusion only is sacred, truth profane. Nay, sacredness is held to be enhanced in 
proportion as truth decreases and illusion increases, so that the highest degree 
of illusion comes to be the highest degree of sacredness.
– Ludwig Feuerbach, Preface to the Second Edition 
of The Essence of Christianity
It was no ‘empty square’ which I had exhibited but rather the experience of 
non-objectivity.
– Kazimir Malevich, The Manifesto of Suprematism
I am Echo, dwelling in the recesses of your ears; and if thou wouldst paint my 
likeness, paint sound.
– Ausonius, In Echo Pictam

Introduction 
WE LIVE IN an age and society profoundly affected by visual images. From the 
screens of our phones to work computers, from advertising images scattered 
across towns to films and television programmes, the emphasis on sight and 
recorded images (both still and moving) is stronger than ever in our quotid­
ian life. And yet, this abundance of images has not brought about a greater 
awareness regarding their nature. The contemporary ‘iconocracy’, as Marie-José 
Mondzain (2019, 17)1 aptly defines it, allows anyone to become a producer of 
images but, at the same time, it has not made it any easier for individuals to 
understand the power and risk of our uses of images. What is more, and seem­
ingly paradoxically, this extremely visible society is characterised by an unprec­
edented and unnoticed destruction of images on a daily basis. Hardly anybody 
is immune to this dichotomic situation – for instance, we easily take pictures 
and make videos with digital technologies, but just as easily we delete them for a 
variety of reasons, such as the lack of hard drive space or because a beloved face 
has become intolerable. Hence, the destruction of images – that is, iconoclasm 
(etymologically ‘the breaking of images’)2 – constitutes a pervasive element of 
contemporary Western society and can, thus, be used as a way to investigate 
how we interact with and understand still and moving images. 
Western Europe represents an exemplary context for exploring iconoclastic 
attitudes since, historically and philosophically, it has been the ground for com­
peting interpretations regarding visual representations: bequeathed by Imperial 
Roman and Catholic iconophilia, it is simultaneously heir to Platonic, Biblical 
and Christian iconoclasm. Contradictory influences have contributed to the 
shaping of current European imaginary, within which a continuous production 
of images is accompanied by a sharp criticism and a mistrust thereof. There is 

2  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
indeed an omnipresence of, if not obsession with, visual images in contemporary 
Western societies, which has been variously addressed as ‘modern ocularcentric 
culture’ (Jay 1993, 44), ‘culture of images’ (Mitchell 1994, 5), ‘bulimia of images’ 
(Wunenburger 1999, 363), ‘flood of modern visibility’ (Mondzain 2005, 222) and 
‘civilization of images’ (Bettetini 2006, viii; Nancy 2005, 32). And yet, imagina­
tion is often relegated to the Platonic level of inferior knowledge. As a place of 
daily image production, Western Europe also stands out as a site for the critique 
of visual representations. In such a context, the idea of the image as a faithful 
reproduction of a portion of reality coexists with the conception of the image as 
a deceitful and false copy, originating seemingly incompatible attitudes. 
Catholic iconophilia, Christian and Biblical iconoclasm and the Platonic tradi­
tion are recognised as fundamental influences on contemporary stances towards 
images. Plato’s philosophical objection to artistic mimesis and the Byzantine 
iconoclastic controversy, on the one hand, and the Catholic legitimation of 
sacred icons, on the other hand, have significantly shaped Western intellectual 
history about images. As consequence, contemporary society is characterised 
by the paradox of a constant production of images which are looked at with a 
suspicious eye. Jean-Luc Nancy (2005) observes, 
for the duration of the West’s history, this motif [of the deceitful image] will 
have resulted from the alliance (and it is doubtless this that has so decisively 
marked the West as such) forged between the principle of monotheism and the 
Greek problematic of the copy or the simulation, of artifice and the absence of 
the original. Of course, this alliance is also the source of the mistrust toward 
images that continues unabated into our own time (and this in a culture that 
produces images in abundance), a mistrust that has, in its turn, produced a 
deep suspicion regarding ‘appearances’ or ‘the spectacle’, as well as a certain 
self-satisfied critique of the ‘civilization of images’. (31–32)
The history of Western thought about images is thus the contradictory result of 
two extremes: always on the verge of refusing sensible representations, echoing 
Platonic philosophy and Christian iconoclasm, it has nonetheless welcomed 
the image following the Christian legitimation of sacred icons. In a culture 
which constantly communicates through images and in which the individual 
is surrounded by elements addressing sight, iconoclasm and its opposite – 
iconophilia – find a place in the spectrum of possible attitudes towards images. 
The study of iconoclastic approaches to images can therefore contribute to 
our understanding of current visual culture, further exploring the ambiguous 
nature of representations. Destructive gestures in the visual arts constitute both 

﻿INTRODUCTION  |  3
a way to criticise the image’s illusory nature and a means for acknowledging 
the image’s ability to provide an alternative engagement with the world when it 
ceases to be a mere mimetic appearance. 
This book develops from the potential value of iconoclasm in the ambit of 
cinema. While the topic of iconoclasm has been at the centre of many scholarly 
works in philosophy, theology and history, it has been quite overlooked by the 
arts and film studies. The core of the book coils around cinematic iconoclasm 
and what can be termed broken images – both recalling the etymological mean­
ing of iconoclasm and because their relationship with the referent is broken. 
The audio-visual images analysed throughout are literally or metaphorically 
broken: no longer functioning as self-evident, mimetic images of reality, these 
images are either broken in their physicality (the film strip is literally dam­
aged), or broken in their ability to figuratively represent something (hence, 
monochromatic screens, fades to colour, disruptive sounds and altered motion). 
Accordingly, I have selected films characterised by an anti-mimetic aesthetics 
which responds to an iconoclastic understanding of the image-referent relation­
ship; namely, Isidore Isou’s Traité de bave et d’éternité (Treatise on Venom and 
Eternity, 1951), Guy Debord’s Hurlements en faveur de Sade (Howls for Sade, 
1952), The Society of the Spectacle (La Société du spectacle, 1973) and In girum 
imus nocte et consumimur igni (We Wander in the Night and Are Consumed by 
Fire, 1978), Carmelo Bene’s Our Lady of the Turks (Nostra signora dei turchi, 
1968), Jean-Luc Godard’s Histoire(s) du cinéma (1988–98), Marguerite Duras’s 
Le Navire Night (1979), Derek Jarman’s Blue (1993), Ingmar Bergman’s Cries 
and Whispers (Viskningar och rop, 1972) and Krzysztof Kieślowski’s Three 
Colours: Blue (Trois Couleurs: Bleu, 1993). 
The selected films effectively exemplify cinematic iconoclasm, which refers 
to the deliberate, literal or metaphorical, destruction of film images and which 
hinges on an interpretation of the relationship between the image and its ref­
erent in terms of alterity. That is, the image as copy is understood as inade­
quate for the representation of a specific model. My main contention is that the 
destruction of images in the cinema can be a breeding ground for an aesthetic 
and ethical investigation of the ways in which we understand and use moving 
images. Contrary to historical iconoclasm, which consists of a negation of the 
other’s point of view through the destruction of the other’s artefacts (an atti­
tude evident in iconoclastic gestures such as the smashing of sacred icons in 
Byzantium in the eighth and ninth centuries and the destruction of Catholic 
abbeys in Scotland during the Reformation; or, more recently, in the blowing 
up of the Buddhas of Bamiyan and the ancient city of Palmira [Besançon 2000; 
Bettetini 2006, 92–104, 142; Latour and Weibel 2002; Mondzain 2019, 314]), 

4  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
iconoclasm in the arts has the potential to be an aesthetic as well as an ethical 
approach. That is, destruction as an artistic gesture within an artwork can be a 
way to challenge traditional canons, as well as a means to respect reality, its com­
plexity and non-reducibility to a self-explanatory, mimetic reproduction. For 
example, when Kazimir Malevich creates monochromatic paintings or Robert 
Rauschenberg erases a de Kooning drawing, they are renewing the criteria for 
painting and, at the same time, reflecting on sight and mimesis. Similarly, when 
John Cage makes music with silence and noise or Pierre Schaeffer inaugurates 
concrete music, they are redefining the concept of music itself (see Belting 2002; 
Gamboni 1997; Weibel 2002, 570–684). In the cinema, iconoclastic approaches 
concretise in literal destructions of the film strip or in metaphorical negations 
of mimetic film images, which resonate with similar destructive gestures in 
the other arts. The films examined in the book display various iconoclastic 
gestures against the film image’s ability to mimetically represent the referent, 
thereby echoing philosophical and historical arguments on the deceptive nature 
of visual images. 
I develop my argument on cinematic iconoclasm from the dichotomy 
between two types of images, the Greek eikōn/εἰκών3 and eidōlon/εἴδωλον. 
While both terms can translate as image, they nonetheless refer to two quite 
different conceptions of the image, and as such they are found in philosophical 
and theological discussions regarding the nature of visual representations. The 
eikōn, which became the icon during the Christian controversy over the rep­
resentation of God in a material frame, stands for an image that references its 
model, whereas the eidōlon, which came to signify the heretic idol, consists of a 
deceitful image with no truthful relationship with the prototype. I have chosen 
to keep the Ancient Greek words rather than using the English equivalent for 
two main reasons. First of all, while the English ‘icon’ and ‘idol’ are strongly 
related to their usage in theology, where they refer to material representations 
of God, the Greek eikōn and eidōlon preserve their philosophical, and pagan, 
meaning. Secondly, the Greek terms maintain a richness of meanings which the 
English ‘image’ fails to convey. Indeed, the single term ‘image’ condenses a wide 
range of meanings, from those related to the sensible sphere to ones connected 
to the intelligible world. Hence, the word ‘image’ refers to something that can 
go from the extremely poor quality of appearance to the invisibility of ideas and 
thoughts. Any English translation of eikōn and eidōlon thus loses the etymolog­
ical and philosophical meaning that the two terms contain. 
Throughout the book, I rework the dichotomy between the eikōn and the 
eidōlon in the cinema, tracing a thread from Plato’s philosophy to contempo­
rary films. To better unfold my argument, I consider two main ways in which 

﻿INTRODUCTION  |  5
the opposition between the eikōn and the eidōlon can be thought of in cinema, 
depending on whether the attention is primarily on the eidōlon or on the eikōn. 
Accordingly, cinematic iconoclasm can concentrate on critiquing the image 
as illusory and deceptive copy (eidōlon), thereby bearing many similarities to 
the arguments made by the iconoclasts in the eighth and ninth centuries. Both 
theoretically and practically, cinematic iconoclasm as critique frequently occurs 
within the context of a Marxist criticism of commodities, mass media and cap­
italism’s fundamental values. In the films selected for Part I, a certain type of 
image, that of Hollywood-like cinema, is decried insofar as it produces an illu­
sory ‘impression of reality’ (Rodowick 1994, xvi), thereby concealing capitalist 
ideology under non-contradictory images. Particularly the exponents of leftist 
film theory in their arguments echoed the iconoclastic criticism of the image as 
a deceitful copy, which is matched practically in the audio-visually destructive 
works by the likes of Isidore Isou, Guy Debord, Carmelo Bene and Jean-Luc 
Godard. 
Another way of approaching cinematic iconoclasm and its ethical poten­
tial is through what I address as iconoclastic eikōn. By this term I define an 
image which retains the character of the eikōn of referencing the prototype, 
while being reflective of an iconoclastic understanding of the image-prototype 
relationship. That is to say, an iconoclastic eikōn maintains at once the quality 
of being a mediator between two elements otherwise separated and an icon­
oclastic aspect given by the negation of mimesis; hence, the visual image is 
in some way insufficient to figuratively represent its model. The theme of the 
image’s insufficiency to represent recalls the ongoing issue of mimesis, which 
has troubled aesthetics since its inception. How can an image, conceived as 
copy, represent a referent? And what if the referent lacks a phenomenal equiv­
alent (such that it can only be thought or experienced emotionally)? Assuming 
that the act of looking is never neutral and that there exists specific subject 
matter which more forcefully entails a taking of responsibility from producers 
and viewers of images, iconoclastic approaches to cinema often involve the 
ethical significance of moving beyond mimesis. The film image as iconoclastic 
eikōn constitutes a way of showing something without making it completely 
visible and aurally accessible, thereby encouraging an ethics based on the fragile 
equilibrium between visibility and invisibility. Poignant examples are found in 
the work of, among others, Marguerite Duras, Derek Jarman, Ingmar Bergman 
and Krzysztof Kieślowski, where a need to represent audio-visually is met with a 
striving for an ethical film form at the limits of intelligibility. 
The questions tying the book together therefore concern the ways in which 
iconoclastic film images establish a web of relationships with their models and 

6  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
the spectator. Can everything have a copy of itself? That is, can we make images 
of everything? This question, which is more of a quandary, also leads to interro­
gating the limits of our right to see and show something on a screen. Ultimately, 
when this right is challenged by iconoclastic gestures, we are left wondering 
what it is that we see when we see images of imagelessness.
Key Iconoclastic Sources and Methodology 
Because of the very nature of iconoclasm and the way in which I explore it 
in relation to philosophy and cinema, this book is characterised by a lively 
interdisciplinarity, bringing together works in continental philosophy, medieval 
theology, history, history of art and film studies. Iconoclasm, in fact, encom­
passes different ambits and cannot be ascribed to one field without referring 
to other disciplines. It is impossible, for instance, to discuss the iconoclastic 
value of a monochromatic image in a film without referencing the philosophical 
and historical interpretations of the copy-prototype relationship. Moreover, the 
multidisciplinary approach is also a consequence of the scarcity of scholarly 
work on iconoclasm and cinema. 
In a film context, only two main sources are available, and neither of them is 
in English. Marion Poirson-Dechonne’s Entre spiritualité et laïcité, la tentation 
iconoclaste du cinéma [Between Spirituality and Secularism, the Iconoclastic 
Temptation of Cinema] (2016) represents the only monograph on the topic to 
date. The book establishes conceptual links between certain aspects of Christian 
Catholic theology and the film medium, identifying some secularised iconoclastic 
tendencies in the cinema, and constitutes an important source for approaching 
the issue of iconoclasm in film. The author discusses iconoclasm in the cinema 
in a broad sense, taking into account a variety of films, many of which are not 
iconoclastic stricto sensu. While also touching on two potentially iconoclastic 
devices (the black screen and cacophony), Poirson-Dechonne focuses more on 
the films’ content, investigating cinematic representations of Christian themes, 
such as the father-son resemblance and the incarnation, in both religious and 
secularised terms. Her book does however contain an overview of films which 
directly put into crisis the relation between images and their referents, differen­
tiating among aesthetic, political and ethical iconoclasm. It is in particular her 
addressing questions on our right to show and see everything on a screen that 
is significant to my discussion of cinematic iconoclasm. Nevertheless, my treat­
ment of the topic considerably differs from Poirson-Dechonne’s since I develop 
my argument from a more philosophically focused notion of iconoclasm, con­
centrating on the film form by means of the two opposing notions of eidōlon and 

﻿INTRODUCTION  |  7
eikōn. The other fundamental text on iconoclasm in cinema, to which I often 
turn throughout the book, is the special issue ‘Cinema e iconoclastia’ [Cinema 
and Iconoclasm] (Perniola 2013), which collects essays ranging from iconoclas­
tic and iconophilic interpretations of the cinematic close-up to the anti-mimetic 
significance of monochromatic screens. It is an extremely useful introduction to 
the issue of iconoclasm in the cinema and one of my main sources for discussing 
an iconoclastic film style. 
Dario Gamboni’s The Destruction of Art: Iconoclasm and Vandalism since 
the French Revolution (1997) and Bruno Latour and Peter Weibel’s Iconoclash: 
Beyond the Image Wars in Science, Religion and Art (2002) constitute essential 
sources on iconoclastic approaches in modern and contemporary arts. While the 
former is a fascinating study of destructive gestures in the visual arts as opposed 
to vandalistic acts at historical turning points, the latter edits together essays on 
anti-mimetic artworks in painting, video art, music and happenings, as well as 
on contemporary iconoclastic attitudes in religion and science. I draw on these 
contributions to highlight an iconoclastic thinking running through Western 
arts, thus establishing a dialogue between cinema and the other arts based on 
their shared tendency towards image destruction. What is more, Gamboni’s 
and Latour and Weibel’s works are useful for further differentiating iconoclas­
tic gestures within artworks from iconoclastic acts directed against cultural 
artefacts. Both gestures, however, attest to the political, ethical and emotional 
charge of images: from the literal or metaphorical dismantling of figuration in 
the arts to the physical destruction of sacred icons in the eighth and ninth cen­
turies up to recent decolonisation and the BLM movements’ efforts to remove 
statues of supporters of slavery, images rarely leave us indifferent and can often 
prompt visceral responses. Stacy Boldrick’s recently published Iconoclasm and 
the Museum (2020) builds on this idea, expanding on Gamboni’s argument and 
reinforcing the importance of iconoclasm – as artistic practice, institutional 
attitude and ethico-political approach – at the present moment, focusing on 
notions of loss broadly understood. 
Quite contrarily, there is a wealth of sources on iconoclasm available in 
philosophy, theology and history. A crucial text discussing the eikōn-eidōlon 
dichotomy in ancient philosophy is Suzanne Saïd’s ‘Deux noms de l’image en 
grec ancien: idole et icône’ [Two Names of the Image in Ancient Greek: Idol 
and Icon] (1987), which also hints at the consequences of this opposition on 
contemporary interpretations of the image. Gerhart B. Ladner’s ‘The Concept 
of the Image in the Greek Fathers and the Byzantine Iconoclastic Controversy’ 
(1953) offers a detailed analysis of the eikōn-eidōlon dichotomy in medieval 
theology, presenting the conflicting arguments of Christian iconophiles and 

8  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
iconoclasts. Among the essential works on philosophical and historical icono­
clasm is Marie-José Mondzain’s Image, Icon, Economy: The Byzantine Origins of 
the Contemporary Imaginary (2005), which effectively explains the iconoclastic 
and iconophilic perspectives in the eighth and ninth centuries by tracing the 
influence of Byzantine thought on current interpretations of images. In this 
work, as well as in Le Commerce des regards [The Commerce of the Gazes] (2019) 
and Homo spectator (2013), Mondzain elaborates on the constitutive relational 
character of the image as eikōn, building on its etymological meaning as well as 
ancient and medieval philosophy’s interpretations. While my understanding 
of iconoclasm in an artistic context diverges from Mondzain’s (because she 
rejects an iconoclastic interpretation of anti-mimesis), I nevertheless share her 
definition of the eikōn as relational. Other invaluable sources on which I base 
my understanding of iconoclasm are Alain Besançon’s The Forbidden Image: 
An Intellectual History of Iconoclasm (2000), a detailed study encompassing 
iconoclasm from the seventh century BCE to early-twentieth-century Russian 
abstract art, and Maria Tilde Bettetini’s Le radici dell’iconoclastia [The Roots 
of Iconoclasm] (2006), which thoroughly discusses iconoclasm in history and 
philosophy, emphasising its enduring effects on contemporary society and the 
entertainment industry. 
As it is clear from these few titles, my approach to iconoclasm is philo­
sophically inflected – not only because iconoclasm originated as a philosoph­
ical stance concerning the relationship between images and their models, but 
also because it has been overlooked by other disciplines, including film studies. 
Therefore, in developing and defending my argument, I have tried to maintain 
philosophical iconoclasm in close dialogue with the metaphorical, and at times 
literal, destruction of images in the cinema. The intertwining of philosophy and 
cinema on the issue of iconoclasm has also led me to circumscribe the scope of 
this book to Western European films made after World War II. The choice of 
Western Europe is a direct consequence of the fact that the currently available 
works on iconoclasm primarily investigate the topic in the philosophical and 
historical context of Western Europe, which is also significantly characterised 
by an increased emphasis on and a contradictory attitude towards the visual 
sphere. As such, the Western European context is particularly suitable for dis­
cussing both the pervasiveness of reproduced moving images and the potential 
of iconoclasm. The decision to take World War II as a temporal watershed for 
the book comes from its being one of the defining historical events of modern 
and contemporary Europe and its cinematic production, as many scholars have 
pointed out (among others, Aumont 2003, 145–46; Bellour 2012, 133; Daney 
2004a; Deleuze 1997a, xi; Grespi 2013, 41; Sinnerbrink 2016, 56; Witt 2013, 130). 

﻿INTRODUCTION  |  9
This does not mean that films made before World War II cannot be iconoclastic 
(for instance, there is an argument to be made about the iconoclasm of the 
historical avant-gardes of the 1910s and 1920s). However, I believe that the war, 
the Shoah and the Liberation have brought some of the already present issues of 
images to the limit and have accentuated the feeling of disorientation regarding 
reality, which find a new expression in the cinema. Moreover, the Shoah has 
marked an unprecedented crisis in Western representation, famously expressed 
in Theodor W. Adorno’s (1967, 34) then retracted claim on the barbarism of 
writing poetry after Auschwitz. Rather than placing the Shoah under such an 
extreme and dangerous ban, it should be considered as one of those historical 
‘objects’ that lack a direct image and yet demand to be made visible (see, Nancy 
2005, 27–50; Saxton 2007; 2008; Wajcman 1998). 
Following this thread of thought, it would seem that films on the Shoah 
constitute the most appropriate works for discussing iconoclasm in the cinema, 
and in a way they are. Nonetheless, I have chosen not to consider such films 
for several reasons. Firstly, the Shoah is a broad and extremely complex theme 
which would have taken most of the book if it were to be appropriately con­
sidered. My aim, however, is to delineate a wider notion of cinematic icon­
oclasm and its possible applications. Secondly, the issue of representing the 
Shoah in films, the absence of images of the event per se and its status beyond 
mimetic reproduction have already been thoroughly discussed by film scholars 
such as Joshua Hirsch (2004), Oleksandr Kobrynskyy and Gerd Bayer (2015) 
and Libby Saxton (2007; 2008). Lastly, the issue of iconoclasm in relation to 
the cinematic representation of the Shoah has been considered, albeit not 
systematically, in Ivelise Perniola’s L’immagine spezzata: Il cinema di Claude 
Lanzmann [The Broken Image: Claude Lanzmann’s Cinema] (2007) and Gérard 
Wajcman’s L’Objet du siècle [The Object of the Century] (1998). Therefore, 
while my framework can be used to further discuss the problem of representa­
tion in relation to the Shoah, I have selected films which deal with a variety of 
topics, from self-­reflexivity to others’ suffering. Moreover, the initial selective 
criteria regarded the film form. Rather than being concerned with depictions of 
iconoclasm at the level of content, my exploration of the topic focuses on icon­
oclastic aesthetic forms in the cinema. Accordingly, the film images analysed 
throughout are characterised by the breaking of a mimetic audio-visual form: 
I look at monochromatic screens, freeze-framed shots, slow-motion sequences 
and scenes where sound is disruptive or disjointed from the visual element. 
Such stylistic devices result from an iconoclastic understanding of the copy-­
prototype relationship, opening up sudden audio-visual hiatuses that require 
spectators to fill them with meaning. 

10  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Since the book consists of an introduction to the issue of iconoclasm in the 
cinema, I have selected films that best epitomise deliberate destructive gestures 
against mimesis to bear witness to the distance existing between reality and 
its possible audio-visual representation. Accordingly, cinematic iconoclasm as 
critique of the eidōlon is discussed via directors who share an undermining 
of the film image as referential copy, short-circuiting the harmonic relation 
between aural and visual elements. Isidore Isou, Guy Debord, Carmelo Bene and 
Jean-Luc Godard have all been vocal about the film image’s deceptive power, 
explicitly advocating for the destruction of cinema in one way or another. Their 
critique of artistic mimesis resonates with ancient and medieval arguments 
against the lure of images, establishing a connection between philosophical and 
historical roots of iconoclasm with modern understandings of the film medium. 
Isou’s Lettrist film Traité de bave et d’éternité, Debord’s oeuvre and Bene’s Our 
Lady of the Turks are born out of an urgency to literally and metaphorically 
destroy cinema as a reproductive medium, as attested by their physically manip­
ulating of the film strip and their metaphorically dismantling of audio-visual 
images as mimetic copies of reality. Godard’s entire work oscillates between a 
critique of the capitalist image (the eidōlon) of Lettrist and Situationist tradition, 
and a liminal ethics when it comes to representing the ineffable and the invisi­
ble. Therefore, his magnum opus Histoire(s) du cinéma constitutes a fascinating 
link between the cinematic eidōlon and the iconoclastic eikōn. In considering 
in greater detail the ethics of cinematic iconoclasm, I have chosen films where 
the rejection of mimesis is inextricably bounded to ethical concerns regarding 
visibility. Marguerite Duras’s Le Navire Night, Derek Jarman’s Blue, Ingmar 
Bergman’s Cries and Whispers and Krzysztof Kieślowski’s Three Colours: Blue 
are exemplary of an iconoclastic approach to ethically charged topics (such as 
sexual desire, homosexuality, pain and death), metaphorically destroying an 
easy audio-visual access to the either invisible or ineffable events of the film. 
Although I discuss only one woman film-maker, I believe that the selected 
works and directors engage with a variety of aesthetic and ethical issues that 
involve diversity in terms of gender, culture and language; therefore, they are 
conducive to an exploration of cinematic iconoclasm which transcends a patri­
archal perspective. Isou, by means of iconoclastic style (montage discrépant, as 
he himself will term it), develops a critique of French foreign policy, especially 
of the First Indochina War (1946–54); Debord condemns the alienating society 
of the spectacle through a dismantling of intelligible relationships between the 
image track and the sound track; Bene engages with the hollowness of Catholic 
religion and the motherly essence that it attributes to women by way of unin­
telligible voices; Godard investigates a number of issues concerning cinema and 

﻿INTRODUCTION  |  11
history through multiple images; Duras explores sexual desire via the severing 
of any tie between aural and visual elements; Jarman operates a subversion of 
the negative representation of the person with AIDS by employing a monochro­
matic screen as the constitutive image track of the film, thus denouncing the 
status of homosexuality in 1980s UK; finally, Bergman and Kieślowski destroy 
female faces through fades out, recalling a long iconographic tradition con­
cerning the face of Holy Mary and women’s suffering. The films thus share not 
only an iconoclastic understanding of cinema and an anti-mimetic approach to 
film style, but also a lively interest in social, cultural and political issues, which 
actively contributes to making these works excellent examples of the ethical 
relevance of iconoclastic gestures.
Iconoclasm in Film Studies
Notwithstanding the scarcity of material on cinema and iconoclasm, there are 
nonetheless some works in film studies that touch on the issue. Much film 
scholarship on iconoclasm focuses on three core ideas: (1) the iconoclastic qual­
ity of political modernism; (2) iconoclastic and iconophilic interpretations of 
the face in the close-up; and (3) anti-mimesis as an iconoclastic gesture carrying 
ethical concerns. I build on such contributions to develop the eikōn-eidōlon 
dichotomy in cinema and explore how film can represent ethically charged 
topics and stimulate the viewer’s imaginative capacity via a disruptive aesthetics. 
The Iconoclastic Aspect of Political Modernism 
Albeit never explicitly referencing iconoclasm, political modernism’s critique 
of classical cinema resonates with Platonic and Christian arguments on the 
condemnation of sensible images. The exponents of political modernism, in fact, 
rejected cinema as a window onto the world in an attempt to ‘erode identifica­
tion with the image as real’ (Rodowick 1994, xiii), placing classical cinema and 
its reproduction of the dominant (namely, capitalist) version of ideology at the 
core of their critique. Reiterating arguments from philosophical and religious 
iconoclasm, political modernism and Marxist-influenced film theory contend 
that the more mimetic the image is the more it lies, misleading the spectator to 
believe in the objective reality of what is represented on screen. Accordingly, 
they advocate for the destruction of the cinematic image as deceptive copy (the 
eidōlon) through images that lay bare their artificial nature.
Ann Kibbey, in Theory of the Image: Capitalism, Contemporary Film, and 
Women (2005), identifies an iconoclastic understanding of cinema in leftist film 

12  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
theorists’ opposition between the deceptive images of classical narrative cinema 
and the true images of counter-cinema. She delineates similarities between the 
iconoclasm of Calvin’s Protestantism and that of Marxism and theories akin to 
it. It is in particular Calvin’s rejection of sacred images as false representations 
and his welcoming of the sacramental objects as true images which allow for a 
parallel with leftist film theory’s opposition between false and true images in the 
cinema. Kibbey (2005) maintains that the theories of the image developed in the 
period from 1960 to 1980 are inherently iconoclastic: ‘This era of film theory 
was fueled by an iconoclastic assault on the false images of Hollywood film, from 
the theorists of the cinematic apparatus to Laura Mulvey’s famous essay’ (2). 
Kibbey likens Guy Debord’s spectacle, Jacques Lacan’s mirror stage, Jean-Louis 
Baudry’s cinematic apparatus and Laura Mulvey’s gendered approach to the 
iconoclastic distrust in images. In her view, these theorists committed the sin of 
reiterating the Calvinist precepts of false images in their speculations, without 
however providing an alternative to the iconoclastic paradigm.
Drawing on Kibbey’s argument, Richard Rushton’s The Reality of Film: 
Theories of Filmic Reality (2011) expands on the reality-illusion dichotomy 
in cinema. Exponents of political modernism are understood as ‘modern-day 
iconoclasts’ (39), because of their differentiating between the deceptive (false) 
images of Hollywood-like cinema and the self-reflexive (true) images of 
­counter-cinema. For Rushton, the issue lies in the oppositional logic between 
reality and illusion, which is grounded in a representational understanding of 
cinema; that is, phenomenal reality pre-exists the reality of cinema, establishing 
at least a chronological hierarchy between the two realities of the referent and 
the image. While decrying this binary logic as limited and limiting, Rushton 
explains the iconoclastic character of political modernism, for there is a divide 
between the cinematic image as a visual replica of a portion of reality which 
alleges to be transparent for its high mimetic potential (i.e., eidōlon), and the 
image of counter-­cinema which ‘denounce[s] the representation of reality and 
all cinematic attempts at verisimilitude’ (28). 
Such a perspective is reminiscent of Plato’s ontological hierarchy between the 
world of ideas and the world of things, wherein images of art’s deceptive poten­
tial hinges on their inadequacy to represent intelligible models. Rosalind Galt 
likens the Platonic ‘denigration of the image’ (2011, 180) to Marxist film theory’s 
rejection of Hollywood cinema and defines both perspectives as iconoclastic. In 
discussing the Platonic eidōlon, she identifies the same conception of the image 
in the cinema, specifically in the work of post-World War II leftist theorists. As 
Plato distinguished between perfect, true beings and false, illusory copies, so do 
leftist film theorists differentiate between the illusionism of classical cinema and 

﻿INTRODUCTION  |  13
the reality of counter-cinema. Galt (2011) effectively claims that ‘in this model 
of the image [i.e., the eidōlon], Plato lays the foundations for an iconoclasm that 
grounds much modern image theory’ (181). 
In their critical analysis of the iconoclasm of Marxist-influenced film theory, 
Kibbey, Rushton and Galt reject an iconoclastic perspective for its supposed 
reduction of cinema to an opposition between illusionistic images and self-­
critical images, exhibiting analogies between the Platonic and Christian suspi­
cion of visual images and some of the arguments of leftist film theory. While I 
agree with their reading of leftist film theory as iconoclastic, I endorse an icon­
oclastic perspective in the arts, grounding my argument on a representational 
understanding of the cinema within which images do not stand on their own but 
relate to a world they re-present and re-produce. In this scenario, the eidōlon 
escapes a reduction to a simple false image. In his poetical delineating of the 
ancient meaning of eidōlon, Régis Debray (1992, 28–30) emphasises its phan­
tasmatic status as a shadow and therefore as a double, connecting the birth of 
the image to death (via mortuary rites as well as the image’s potential to mortify 
reality). Indeed, the main issue with the image as eidōlon is its being a double, a 
copy that replicates the visible features of its model, to the point of being always 
on the verge of replacing it, and that retains a power of influencing thought 
and making someone believe in a falsity. As in Plato and Christian iconoclasm, 
where the eidōlon distracts from the contemplation of intelligible ideas and God, 
respectively, relating itself only to the sensible realm, so in the cinema the eidōlon 
is an image which overshadows the original and aims at substituting it. In the 
work of Isou, Debord, Bene and Godard, the eidōlon is the kind of film image that 
hides its character of artificial copy through the naturalism of mise-en-scène and 
continuity editing, and this carries ethico-political consequences. The limit of 
this critique, however, is its trouble in overcoming the logic of self-reflexivity and 
bringing the discourse beyond the criticism of the image as illusory copy. As both 
Kibbey and Rushton observe, caught in the urge of dismantling the impression 
of reality of Hollywood-like cinema, some of the exponents of iconoclasm as 
critique risk remaining trapped in their own criticism.
Iconophilic and Iconoclastic Interpretations of the Cinematic Close-up
The cinematic close-up has been succinctly discussed as a way of exploring 
the distinction between iconoclasm and iconophilia, opposing the film image 
as revelation of a human essence and as the place of inhumanity par excel­
lence. While various scholars have considered conflicting interpretations of the 
close-up (among others, Aumont 2003; Doane 2003; Turvey 1998), Angela Dalle 

14  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Vacche (2003) and Barbara Grespi (2013) explicitly address the issue of the 
face in the close-up as a field of debate between iconoclastic and iconophilic 
interpretations in the cinema. They dwell particularly on the iconophilic stance, 
identifying a sacred conception of the cinematic medium as a tool for revealing a 
human essence that finds its most suitable expression in the magnification of the 
close-up – a position exemplified by early film theorists Louis Delluc’s ([1920] 
1985, 34–36, 50–61) and Jean Epstein’s ([1921] 1977; [1926] 2012) notion of 
photogénie, and Béla Balázs’s ([1945] 1970, 52–88; [1924] 2010, 27–51) concept 
of physiognomy. Accordingly, Dalle Vacche’s and Grespi’s notion of iconoclasm 
suggests a disbelief in the revelatory capacity of the cinematic medium and in 
the close-up’s viability as a mediator between a visible, exterior surface and 
a purported invisible, inner depth. It is ‘the face in close-up and the close-up 
as the face of objects’ (Dalle Vacche 2003, 15) that elicits a division between 
iconophilic and iconoclastic stances in the cinema. The opposition originates 
from the interpretation of the face, whether as a door to the soul or as a surface 
of inhumanity. 
Grespi is the only scholar theorising a proper opposition between iconoclasts 
and iconophiles in cinema with specific reference to the face in the close-up, 
in her article ‘L’immagine sfregiata: Il cinema e i volti del sacro’ [The Scarred 
Image: Cinema and Sacred Faces] (2013). On the one hand, she discusses the 
trust in film images in the work of Epstein and Balázs, and their understanding 
of the facial close-up as a site for the surfacing of the soul and a manifestation of 
inner life; on the other hand, she considers Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari’s 
concept of cinematic close-up as a dehumanising device, consequently under­
standing the defacement of such a close-up as an iconoclastic gesture – a con­
troversial and imprecise perspective that does not take into account Deleuze’s 
rejection of Platonism and duality. 
In Grespi’s view, the notions of photogénie and physiognomy bespeak an 
iconophilic attitude, since they hinge on the strong bond between the cinematic 
close-up and its phenomenal referent. Magnified by the close-up, the face inten­
sifies its expressive power by filling up the whole screen and by connecting inte­
riority and exteriority. In Epstein and Balázs, mystics ‘of the 1920s close-up, the 
filmic face simply constitutes the place of interception of the sacred concealed in 
man’4 (Grespi 2013, 42). The face in the close-up is therefore eikōn insofar as it is 
capable of establishing a truthful link with the phenomenal referent in a mimetic 
manner. This stance is corroborated by other accounts of the privileged role 
accorded to the face in cinema. For instance, Mary Ann Doane (2003) addresses 
photogénie as a form of cinephilia, and Jacques Aumont defines Epstein’s and 
Balázs’s perspectives as idealistic since they presuppose the very possibility of a 

﻿INTRODUCTION  |  15
nexus between reality and its filmic representation. Aumont (2003) remarks that 
photogénie and physiognomy ‘outline an aesthetic of the face in film. Idealistic 
aesthetic that is, it is based on the hope of a revelation that it believes is possible 
because it believes fundamentally in the face as organic unit, infrangible, total. 
The form of this revelation is [. . .] the close-up’ (139). 
Grespi sets Epstein’s and Balázs’s iconophilic position against Deleuze and 
Guattari’s account of the facial close-up, erroneously defining the French philos­
ophers as iconoclasts. While sharing some of Epstein’s and Balázs’s arguments, 
Deleuze and Guattari conceive of the face as a surface, hence pure exteriority. 
That is, the connection between the face and interiority is severed, and the 
face becomes the result of a process of abstraction called ‘faciality’ [visagéité] 
(Deleuze and Guattari 1987, 168). This process of ‘making a face’ alludes to the 
frontal part of the head where the eyes and mouth are, but more importantly 
comes to signify a reference to any surface that functions as the cultural and 
political construct of face. The process of facialisation designates the imposi­
tion of a face onto a subject and is codified by the binary system white wall/
black holes which produces the face as a politics. The facialised face is a politics 
because it consists in the acquisition of a standardised face, that of the ‘white 
man’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987, 176). Deleuze and Guattari claim that ‘the 
face is [. . .] White Man himself, with his broad white cheeks and the black 
holes of his eyes. The face is Christ. The face is the typical European’ (176). As a 
socio-political construct, the face is closely linked to Christianity; however, the 
Christological reference acquires a political connotation rather than a religious 
one, in the sense of Christianity as the socio-political machine of meaning in 
Western Europe. Accordingly, the face in itself contains the seeds for racism 
since it suppresses the other’s differences and aims at conforming all faces to its 
own. As Deleuze and Guattari explain, the face of the other than the white man 
‘must be Christianized, in other words, facialized’ (178). Instead of establishing 
a relation with the other, the face produces a distance with the specific purpose 
of ascribing every face to the dominant face, the standardised ‘white man’; the 
facial close-up accordingly becomes the vehicle for the revelation of inhumanity:
The face, what a horror. It is naturally a lunar landscape, with its pores, planes, 
matts, bright colors, whiteness, and holes: there is no need for a close-up to 
make it inhuman; it is naturally a close-up, and naturally inhuman. (Deleuze 
and Guattari 1987, 190) 
In the face’s status as entity disconnected from reality in its hic et nunc lies 
the core of Deleuze and Guattari’s interpretation of the cinematic close-up. 

16  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Complete in itself, the face does not contain the traces of its relationship with 
the world. Thus, the face in the close-up, far from being the site of human revela­
tion, like in Balázs and Epstein, turns into a means for revealing ‘the inhuman in 
human beings’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1987, 171). The facial close-up is stripped 
of any connecting capacity and presents, instead, the very void at the core of 
humanity, the fact that there is nothing to be shown and revealed. 
As a result, Deleuze and Guattari advocate for the dismantling of the 
face, making it a pockmarked face that ceases to respond to the facialisation 
machine  – the white wall/black holes system. Indeed, if the facial close-up 
responds to a logic of eliminating differences in the uniqueness of the Christ-
face, the defacement of this close-up would allow for a deviation from the stand­
ard and, consequently, for the expression of a face other than that of the ‘white 
man’. However, defacing the close-up does not correspond to a return to the 
human head, but constitutes a politics itself. In both cases – the Christ-face and 
the dismantled face – Deleuze and Guattari’s facial close-up ceases to configure 
itself as the Epsteinian and Balázsian mediator between the individual and the 
social life in the rising metropolis of the early twentieth century. In the view of 
Deleuze and Guattari, who write in the context of a globalised, post-war world, 
the face comes to signify the very impossibility of the encounter with the other. 
It is possible to trace here a specific change in the vision of the world, taking 
World War II as the separating event. Both the iconophilic interpretation and 
that of Deleuze and Guattari assign to the facial close-up a revelatory power. 
However, in the iconophilic perspective there is always something interior (a 
soul) to reveal, an invisible life of humans and things that the film medium is 
able to record and reproduce on the screen. Quite differently, in Deleuze and 
Guattari’s interpretation, the cinema lays bare the absence of revelation in real­
ity, the fact that there is nothing to be unconcealed. 
Grespi (2013, 45–49) proposes an iconoclastic interpretation of the inhu­
man and defacement in Deleuze and Guattari, understanding the facial close-up 
as a de-humanising device and its defacement as an iconoclastic gesture. For 
Grespi, erasing the facialised face becomes the iconoclastic re-appropriation of 
the face, which would allow for the overcoming of the faciality process: from 
a facial twitch to a deformed or scarred face, the attack towards the unity of 
the facialised face would enable a breaking with the politics of the faciality 
process. That is, by interpreting Deleuze and Guattari’s concept of inhumanity 
as something that ought to be escaped, she identifies in the defacement of the 
close-up an iconoclastic intent to break with a false image of a true model. 
However, Deleuze and Guattari never mention the possibility of a humanity in 
humans. Rather, it is inhumanity itself which is constituent of human beings. 

﻿INTRODUCTION  |  17
Therefore, inhumanity would be the true essence instead of a false appearance. 
Nevertheless, it would be a mistake to discuss Deleuze using the binary opposi­
tion true-false, since he overcomes, or at least aims at overcoming, this Western 
dichotomy in his philosophy. 
In ‘Plato and the Simulacrum’ (1983), Deleuze elaborates on his critique of 
Plato’s oppositional logic between model and copy, namely between what is 
intelligible and what is sensible. He draws a distinction between two types of 
images: the eikōn – which he calls copy or icon – and the eidōlon – which he 
addresses as simulacrum. However, Deleuze’s simulacrum does not correspond 
to the image as eidōlon in the way in which it is considered in this book. After 
using the term simulacrum with the Platonic meaning of eidōlon – namely, a 
false image, hence an image in a relationship of alterity with a model – he then 
continues his criticism of the Platonic representational system by employing the 
same word (simulacrum) with the meaning of an image without a model. Deleuze 
leaves unexplained the transition from one meaning to the other, employing the 
same term for two quite dissimilar conceptions of the image. More to the point, 
what Deleuze reproves to Plato is his representational logic, the enclosing of the 
image in a relationship with a model. Deleuze rejects this dualism in favour of 
the simulacrum without model. His overturning of Platonism, therefore, con­
sists of the abolishment of the copy-prototype dichotomy to the exaltation of 
the image without prototype. Consequently, Deleuze cannot be addressed as 
iconoclast insofar as his philosophy positions itself beyond the representational 
paradigm necessary for both the iconoclastic and the iconophilic perspectives: 
the metaphysical requirement of a true(r) model and the binary vision of the 
world collapse. In Deleuze, there is no place for images referencing their model, 
but only for surfaces – phantasmata, or the exteriority of the facial close-up. 
Without adopting a Deleuzian approach, I build on these contributions 
about the facial close-up, emphasising the significance of the face for icono­
clastic gestures. Indeed, both the destruction of the cinematic eidōlon and the 
creation of iconoclastic eikones often involve the human face: in an attempt 
to break the mimetic relationship between phenomenal reality and its audio-
visual representation, faces are physically or metaphorically dismantled. As 
during the Byzantine controversy, when icons representing the face of Christ 
were physically smashed, so in the cinema the face in the close-up becomes 
the privileged site for iconoclastic gestures – from Isou’s and Bene’s liter­
ally scraping of human faces to Bergman’s and Kieślowski’s poetic fade-outs 
which plunge the characters’ faces into a blank screen. While I consider the 
significance of the Western concept of the face and its destruction throughout 
the book, the facial close-up is particularly relevant for the analysis of Cries 

18  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
and Whispers and Three Colours: Blue, where iconoclastic gestures occur on 
the magnified faces of the female characters. The figurative destruction of the 
women’s faces in these films represents a clear passing from a mere rejection 
of the cinematic eidōlon (namely, a mimetic image incapable of represent­
ing interiority) to the creation of iconoclastic eikones (that is, anti-­mimetic 
images which maintain a relationship with the invisible model). The human 
face, which is the most emotionally charged part of the body, becomes the locus 
for an interrogation of visibility and its limits, also developing a criticism of the 
mimetic representability of the female face and women’s ­suffering – from the 
iconography of the Holy Mary, the quietly suffering mother, to the iconoclastic 
rendering of Liv Ullmann’s, Ingrid Thulin’s and Juliette Binoche’s raw pain. 
Paradoxically, the destruction of the women’s figurative faces becomes a way 
to account for a much more realistic, disorderly pain that rejects a spectacular­
isation of suffering.
Iconoclasm of Anti-Mimesis
Iconoclasm has been bounded to anti-mimesis since its inception – the biblical 
ban on any graven image and the Platonic condemnation of images of art, for 
instance, were fuelled by a rejection of the eidōlon’s excessive visual similar­
ity with the referent. Artistic anti-mimesis does not always correspond to an 
iconoclastic intent, whereas the opposite is true; namely, that iconoclastic ges­
tures within the arts are directed against mimesis. From Russian abstract art’s 
attempts at representing the Absolute via monochromatic paintings to Lucio 
Fontana’s cut canvases aimed at reaching the unrepresentable reality beyond 
the painting’s surface, from avant-garde cinema’s and video art’s disrupting of 
habitual engagements with images and sounds to contemporary audio-visual 
media’s uses of blank screens and off-screen sounds, anti-mimetic aesthetics 
hinge on the distance between copy and prototype, thereby implying that the 
image cannot truthfully reproduce the model. While intelligible models may 
appear to place mimetic representation more decidedly in a moral maze (how 
to figuratively render the invisibility at their core?), also sensible phenomena 
challenge a seemingly uncomplicated reproduction of reality, especially follow­
ing an understanding of the visual field as ethically laden. Libby Saxton (2010c) 
convincingly ties the issue of mimesis to that of ethics, observing that it is from 
cinema’s ‘privileged bond with reality’ (26) – namely, from its possibility to 
mimetically reproduce people, animals, objects (their appearance, sounds and 
movement) – that ethical questions arise. Similarly, Asbjørn Grønstad (2016) 
stresses the ethical weight deriving from the close nexus between cinematic 

﻿INTRODUCTION  |  19
reproduction and phenomenal reality, commenting that ‘to capture images is 
“an ethos, a disposition, and a conduct in regard to the world”’ (3). Nevertheless, 
if the filming of reality is thus far from being a neutral, objective recording 
of the world, then ethically charged models more forcefully question mimesis 
because mimetic reproduction potentially risks concealing the unbridgeable gap 
between the image and its model. 
In this respect, the possibility of representing the Shoah is one of the most 
controversial and debated issues, opposing those in favour of its mimetic re-­
enactment to the advocates of more subtle ways to represent it without dou­
bling it (Hirsch 2004; Kobrynskyy and Bayer 2015; Perniola 2007; Saxton 2008; 
Wajcman 1998). Gérard Wajcman (1998) and Ivelise Perniola (2007) elaborate 
on the issue with specific reference to Claude Lanzmann’s oeuvre, understand­
ing his refusal of archival material and re-enactment as responding to an icon­
oclastic ethics. The eidōlon’s doubling of the model is what Wajcman most 
vehemently condemns in discussing the role of mimesis in art after World War 
II. He decries and rejects figurative representations of the Shoah insofar as they 
constitute an ‘affirmation of presence. [. . .] Thus, any image is a negation of 
death and loss. A negation of absence’ (1998, 242). Wajcman is explicitly against 
artistic mimesis since it presupposes the very possibility of duplicating an orig­
inal. While mimesis can be acceptable for some models, it becomes unethical 
when confronted with what does not (or should not) have a double, such as God 
for the Christian iconoclasts or death in the concentration camps for Wajcman. 
The image as figuration, hence imitation as duplication – the peculiar feature 
of the eidōlon as the double – constitutes an affirmation of presence because it 
implies the reproduction of the model’s visual features and, consequently, the 
loss of the prototype’s uniqueness. However, from an iconoclastic perspective, 
some models should be affirmations of absence: absence of images of the invis­
ible God; absence of images of genocidal events themselves. Perniola (2007) 
draws from Wajcman’s (1998) argument on ‘militant iconoclasm’ (228), ana­
lysing how Lanzmann’s documentaries preserve the invisibility at the core of 
the Shoah by negating any access to the event per se. Through the breaking 
with figuration and mimesis, there is a shift from the Shoah as a spectacle for 
the eyes – the eidōlon consumed in the visible realm – to the Shoah as ethical 
interrogation – the eikōn turned to the invisible sphere. 
The link between an anti-mimetic aesthetics and iconoclasm is also present 
in Marion Poirson-Dechonne’s (2016) book on iconoclastic tendencies in the 
cinema, Daniele Dottorini’s (2013) article on the use of black screens in art 
house films and Luca Venzi’s (2006; 2013) work on colour and the dissolution of 
the film image. These scholars consider the use of black screens and ­cacophony 

20  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
as potentially ethical responses to issues regarding visibility and as ways to 
disrupt traditional engagements with a cinematic world. Accordingly, the black 
screen translates a visual impossibility – namely, something that lacks or should 
lack a visual equivalent, producing a halting of the spectator’s look – whereas 
cacophony, conceived as the aural counterpart of the black screen, renders 
what is ineffable; that is, something that cannot be said or can only be said by 
means of unintelligible sounds. Via the black screen and cacophony, cinematic 
iconoclasm sets limits for the eyes and the ears: not everything can be clearly 
seen or heard. 
These contributions on iconoclasm, anti-mimesis and ethics are essential 
for my argument on cinematic iconoclasm as an ethics of (in)visibility. Similar 
to some of the scholars who have delved into ethics and aesthetic forms 
in cinema (such as Downing and Saxton 2010; Grønstad 2016; Sinnerbrink 
2016), I conceive of cinema as a potentially highly ethical medium, for not 
only does cinema present ethical quandaries in its content, but it can also 
produce an ethical form in respect to its content and can elicit the spectator’s 
ethical imagination. It is in this perspective that the iconoclastic eikōn can at 
once embody an ethics of film-making and solicit an ethics of film-viewing by 
circumventing mimetic forms of representation. I propose an ethics of (in)
visibility echoing Wajcman’s (1998) expression ‘ethics of visibility’ (292). In 
his account, artistic iconoclasm constitutes such an ethics because it aims 
at ‘“showing” (faire voir) and “making present”’ (219) unrepresentable and 
ineffable subject matter by means other than mimetic reproduction so as to 
preserve their uniqueness. 
I have added the parenthetical (in) to underline the significance of invis­
ibility for the ethics encouraged by iconoclastic gestures in the cinema, an 
ethics which is possible only insofar as what is visually accessible on the screen 
stretches towards invisibility, incessantly evoking it through an anti-mimetic 
aesthetics which overflows representation. The iconoclastic eikōn offers itself 
to sight – it is an image – and perturbs the spectator’s look by presenting 
an absence which has become the real subject of the representation; in this 
way, an imaginative effort towards the unrepresentable model is aesthetically 
encouraged. Whether the absence with which we are presented is an absence 
of figurative images or the absence of our quotidian perception of movement, 
sound and colour, the iconoclastic eikōn forecloses mimetic reproduction, thus 
troubling our more habitual modes of consuming what is visible. Accordingly, 
this type of image promotes a liminal ethics that sinks its roots in what is visible 
while reaching out to the invisibility that inhabits, and haunts, every visible 
image. 

﻿INTRODUCTION  |  21
Structure of the Book
The book is comprised of a prologue and two parts, which are further divided 
into four chapters each. The prologue provides a brief philosophical and his­
torical background to the discussion on cinema and iconoclasm, delineating 
the main turning points in the iconoclastic debate, from Plato’s and Plotinus’s 
ambiguous understanding of artistic mimesis to early Christian theology of the 
image and the Byzantine controversy. Engaging with the eikōn-eidōlon dichot­
omy, the prologue also outlines how cinema reworks such an opposition, argu­
ing for the aesthetic and ethical potential of artistic destruction. 
Part I dwells on cinematic iconoclasm as critique of the eidōlon via the work 
of directors Isidore Isou, Guy Debord, Carmelo Bene and Jean-Luc Godard. 
The films analysed in this part metaphorically and literally proceed to destroy 
mimetic audio-visual images to counter their illusory power, thereby reiterating 
the criticism of the image found in philosophical iconoclasm. The first chapter 
looks at Isou’s explicitly iconoclastic project and his avant-garde film Traité de 
bave et d’éternité, which heralds the destruction of cinema and presents sev­
eral iconoclastic devices. The second chapter considers the iconoclastic use of 
monochromatic screens, sound-image disjunctions and freeze-frames in some 
of Guy Debord’s films. Specifically, I take into account Hurlements en faveur de 
Sade, The Society of the Spectacle and In girum imus nocte et consumimur igni, 
which exacerbate Isou’s iconoclastic perspective. The third chapter examines 
Carmelo Bene’s project to destroy cinema as a medium able to communicate 
meaning by way of linguistic and sonic disruptions. Through an analysis of his 
film Our Lady of the Turks, I explore how the negation of intelligible images via 
destructive editing chimes with the elimination of intelligible speech in favour 
of the voice as logos-less sound. To conclude this part, the fourth chapter goes 
over some of Jean-Luc Godard’s narrative films, specifically Une Femme mariée 
(A Married Woman, 1964), Alphaville, une étrange aventure de Lemmy Caution 
(Alphaville: A Strange Adventure of Lemmy Caution, 1965) and Slow Motion 
(Sauve qui peut (la Vie), 1980), as well as the destructive works made with the 
Dziga Vertov Group, before engaging with Histoire(s) du cinéma, which consti­
tutes the work ideally bridging Part I and Part II. In Godard’s magnum opus, in 
fact, are found both the critique of the film image as eidōlon and the production 
of iconoclastic eikones, those images capable of establishing a relationship with 
the model by going beyond mimesis.
Part II focuses on iconoclastic eikones in the cinema, exploring their ­ethical 
quality, and conceptualises cinematic iconoclasm as an ethics of (in)visibility. 
Addressing questions concerning our right to show and see something on a 

22  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
screen, Part II revolves around the problematics of representing others’ inner 
world and suffering and considers ethically charged films which are also icono­
clastic in their aesthetic form. The fifth chapter centres on Marguerite Duras’s 
subversion of the traditional hierarchy between sound track and image track in 
narrative cinema. I look at the contraposition between aural and visual dimen­
sions in her film Le Navire Night, an imageless love story based on the impos­
sible encounter between two lovers, arguing that such an aesthetic choice is 
conducive to a visually inaccessible, ethical representation of sexual desire and 
alterity. The sixth chapter analyses Derek Jarman’s monochromatic film Blue, 
focusing on its radically iconoclastic approach to colour and sound in recount­
ing stories of suffering, death and love, as well as its denouncing of 1980s British 
gender politics. The seventh chapter examines the iconoclastic use of red fade-
outs and red monochromatic screens in Ingmar Bergman’s Cries and Whispers 
which are iconoclastic devices to visually express what goes beyond mimetic 
reproduction – grief and suffering. Chapter 8 concludes with a detailed analysis 
of Krzysztof Kieślowski’s Three Colours: Blue, with particular attention to the 
black screens that punctuate the narrative and the ethics of film-making and 
film-viewing that they promote. 
Throughout, I trace the thread of an iconoclastic thinking which goes from 
Plato’s suspicion about images of art, through Plotinus’s theory of emanation 
and the Byzantine iconoclastic controversy, up to film theorists’ and film-mak­
ers’ investigation of the limits and ethical implications of mimesis in the cinema. 
Iconoclasm, as both theoretical approach and artistic practice, has proven to 
be a useful tool for exploring the aesthetics and the ethics of the film image. 
It embraces issues concerning the visible and the sayable, bringing attention 
to potentialities and risks of the film image, and underlines the importance 
of taking responsibility for the images which we decide to make, look at and 
share. Ultimately, the study of iconoclasm in cinema, by focusing on difficult 
images (namely, images which resist an easy and direct attribution of meaning), 
becomes an exercise in thinking about the ways in which we interact with and 
communicate through images. From Plato to cinema, our relationship with 
images is ambiguous and often conflicting: visual images are always on the verge 
of being considered deceitful appearances; and yet, we continue to interrogate, 
produce and look at them.

Prologue: The Eikoˉn-Eidooˉlon Dichotomy 
from Plato to Film
THE HISTORY OF the Western image, substantially marked by Platonic scepti­
cism, Plotinian ambivalence and Christian iconoclasm, is the story of the human 
relating to the (sensible and supersensible) world and the human capacity to 
establish links with absence (the physical absence of God, or of the dead, but 
also the absence of figurative equivalents for thoughts and emotions). Up to 
contemporaneity, the image has been oscillating between truth (of the eikōn) 
and falsehood (of the eidōlon), between the ability to vivify (the dead flesh of 
the God-made man, for instance) and the capacity to mortify through doubling. 
Such an ambiguity of the status of the image, which hinges on our complexified 
relationship with reality and its possible representation, persists in the cinema, 
in which the seemingly closer relationship with reality (because of the indexical 
bond of mechanical recording) makes it all the more compelling to understand 
the relation between film image and referent. 
Iconoclastic stances traverse ancient and medieval debates up to current 
attitudes about visuality. This prologue briefly traces some of the essential 
turning points in the debate on the Western image, with particular empha­
sis on the germinating of an iconoclastic perspective, which provides the 
background for destructive gestures in the cinema. In the film medium, the 
reality-illusion binary is significant for developing an iconoclastic rejection 
of artistic mimesis in an attempt to avoid the perils of the eidōlon and its 
consequent impoverishment of reality via its mimetic doubling. The political 
and ethical potentialities of an iconoclastic approach to cinema reside in the 
tension between a need to represent and a will to avoid duplication, between 
the extreme visibility and richness of the mimetic image and the opaque vision 
of the iconoclastic eikōn.

24  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Main Turning Points in the Debate on Images
Platonic philosophy constitutes an essential point of reference in the debate on 
images and has influenced both iconoclastic and iconophilic thought (Besançon 
2000, 25–37; Bettetini 2006; Halliwell 2007; Ladner 1953; Mondzain 2005; Saïd 
1987). Although the more widespread interpretation is of a negative conception 
of images (primarily based on The Republic), which makes Plato a sort of fore­
runner of iconoclasm, there are nonetheless conflicting views on mimesis in 
his dialogues that challenge the over-simplified idea of Plato as utterly against 
images. Plato distinguishes between two separate worlds, that of intelligible 
ideas – the eternal and immutable beings, accessible through the intellect – 
and that of sensible things. The phenomenal world is a copy (mimesis) of the 
intelligible world, so that Plato’s cosmology can be read as a descent from the 
perfection of ideas to the lowest copies of copies thereof. There are the ideas, 
eternal models; then, there are sensible things, copies of the ideas; lastly, there 
are images and works of art, reproductions of sensible things, images of images. 
Thus, everything that exists, except for intelligible ideas, is in a mimetic relation 
with something else. 
In this context, mimesis in art tends to assume a negative connotation because 
it implies an act of producing a tertiary mode of being. Since the sensible world 
is already a reproduction of the world of ideas, or a secondary mode of being, 
images and works of art as mimesis of reality are reproductions of a reproduc­
tion, three times removed from truth (ideas). Plato explains this logic via the 
example of a bed: there are three types of bed; namely, the intelligible idea of 
bed, the material bed made by the artisan and the bed depicted by the painter. 
While the artisan directly copies the idea of bed, the painter copies the physical 
bed, which is a copy itself (Republic, 596b–598d). Therefore, the issue with 
images of art lies in their model: rather than imitating intelligible ideas, artworks 
consist of imitations of sensible things. Accordingly, art can be apprehended 
exclusively through the senses, and images of art are eidōla belonging to the 
phenomenal world of appearances. Art deceives insofar as it can only reproduce 
sensible things while claiming to imitate intelligible realities; hence, the more 
the image visually resembles the sensible model, the more it potentially misleads 
the viewer. As Suzanne Saïd (1987) remarks, ‘eidōlon appears every time that 
Plato wants to underline the degradation that accompanies the passage from the 
intelligible to the sensible or from a degree of the sensible to another thereof’ 
(318). Plato’s worries about images of art, which resonate with modern and con­
temporary concerns regarding visual representations, stem from their ‘psycho­
logical power’ (Halliwell 2002, 73); that is, images’ power of influencing thought 

﻿PROLOGUE  |  25
and making someone believe in a falsity. Such an attitude is a direct conse­
quence of ‘Plato’s approach to the psychology of mimesis [which] is grounded in 
the assumption that there is continuity, even equivalence, between our relations 
to people and things in the real world and the people and things presented in 
mimetic art’ (Halliwell 2002, 76). Because of this continuity, Plato maintains 
an ambiguous perspective on images, now repudiating them as deceptive, now 
granting them some dignity.
Some Platonic dialogues (especially, the Timaeus, the Symposium and the 
Laws), in fact, provide a more positive view on mimesis within which the image 
as eikōn is slightly rehabilitated insofar as it establishes a connection with what 
is intelligible. Although the Platonic eikōn does not acquire the value reserved 
for intelligible ideas and remains apprehensible only via the senses, it nonethe­
less ceases to be a mere visual replica of a physical appearance by addressing the 
super-sensible sphere. Stephen Halliwell (2002) unpacks some of the intricacies 
in Plato’s thought regarding mimesis, contending that 
such complexity is connected to a characteristic tension between discrepant 
impulses in Plato’s thinking. The first, a kind of ‘negative theology’, which leads 
sometimes in the direction of mysticism, is that reality cannot adequately be 
spoken of, described, or modeled, only experienced in some pure, unmediated 
manner (by logos, nous, dianoia, or whatever). The second is that all human 
thought is an attempt to speak about, describe, or model reality – to produce 
‘images’ (whether visual, mental, or verbal) of the real. On the first of these 
views, mimesis, of whatever sort, is a lost cause, doomed to failure, at best a 
faint shadow of the truth. On the second, mimesis – representation – is all 
that we have, or all that we are capable of. In some of Plato’s later writing this 
second perspective is expanded by a sense that the world itself is a mimetic 
creation. (70–71)
In Plato’s philosophy, both the image as eidōlon and the image as eikōn coexist, 
paving the way for the future opposition between the Christian idol and icon. 
However, Plato alone is insufficient to account for the influence of Hellenic 
thought on the Christian theology of the image. Another essential source 
includes Plotinus’s philosophy, which constitutes a significant link between the 
Platonic interpretation of the eikōn and the Christian understanding of the icon. 
Plotinus’s more positive notion of image derives from his hierarchical cos­
mology, within which the image becomes an intermediary between the con­
creteness of sensible matter and the abstraction of the intelligible sphere. For 
Plotinus, both the sensible and the intelligible worlds derive by emanation 

26  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
from the first principle of all, the One, which in a downward movement creates 
everything that exists (Ennead V.1[6]). There is therefore continuity between 
the intelligible realm and the sensible sphere which breaks with the immeasur­
able Platonic distance between the two worlds. This conception, where every­
thing exists in a single world, shapes the overall Plotinian understanding of 
the image. While what is intelligible continues to form the highest level of 
being and sensible matter is the last thing created by the One, images none­
theless belong to, and thus are in a connection with, the same world of what is 
super-sensible, only at a lower ontological degree (Ennead V.8[1]). On the one 
hand, sensible matter – the lowest level of the hierarchy – corresponds to the 
eidōlon insofar as it is a formless reflection of the One; on the other hand, the 
image, when it is elevated to the role of intermediary between the sensible and 
the intelligible spheres, becomes eikōn; namely, the first means for carrying 
out the inner journey towards the One. Such partial rehabilitation of the image 
hinges on the continuum between the sensible and the intelligible worlds: no 
longer condemned to the sensible sphere only, the image as eikōn positions 
itself between the two. 
However, Plotinus, too, maintains an ambiguous attitude towards mimetic 
art, now praising it as a means for passing from the sensible to the intelligi­
ble world, now diminishing it to a ‘plaything’ that ‘produce[s] a simulacrum 
[eidōlon] of nature’ (Halliwell 2002, 318). Art and the image as eikōn acquire 
value as the starting point for the soul’s journey towards the One, mediating 
between sensible and intelligible realms; and yet, the representation of the point 
of arrival – the One – is interdicted. Christian Catholic thought about images 
will, however, ignore Plotinus’s iconoclastic aspect, instead conceiving of the 
icon as a way to diminish the distance between humans and God. 
The Christian theology of the image intertwines Platonic, Plotinian and 
Neoplatonic perspectives with the Biblical prohibition of any graven image 
and the Christian notion of the incarnation of God (Besançon 2000, 81–146; 
Halliwell 2002, 314, 334; Ladner 1953; Mondzain 2005, 73; Wunenburger 1999, 
154). While early Christian theologians (second to fifth century) did not neces­
sarily provide an aesthetics regarding sacred representations, they nonetheless 
offered two opposite ways of interpreting the sensible world which were to 
play a fundamental role in the development of iconophilic and iconoclastic 
arguments. There were conflicting views on the legitimacy of sacred images 
deriving from different interpretations of, especially, the incarnation, whether as 
a positive event or, at the opposite end, as an act ontologically inferior to God.1 
In favour of icons were those theologians who interpreted the incarnation 
in a positive manner, for God himself had taken a visible, perishable form, and 

﻿PROLOGUE  |  27
who promoted a rehabilitation of sensible matter to which the body belongs. 
Conversely, theologians against sacred representation had an overall distrust in 
sensible matter and the human body, while they highly valued the intelligible 
part of humans – the soul. They discredited the body in all its aspects and inter­
preted sensible matter as lacking being, conceiving of corporeal things as a result 
of human sin. Moreover, in this iconoclastic perspective, Christ was recognised 
as the only image of God, sharing the same divine nature, whereas man was ‘in 
the image of the image’. Thus, following a Platonic approach, any representation 
of Christ would be an image having a tertiary mode of being; namely, as Alain 
Besançon (2000, 94) notes, sacred images would be images of an image (Christ) 
of the image (God). The Christian issue of ‘in the image of’ was thus implicated 
in a complex web of relations among God the father, Christ the son, humans 
and sensible matter. Theologians who positively interpreted the sensible world 
viewed sacred images as possible intermediaries between people on earth and 
God in heaven (eikones); conversely, theologians holding a negative concep­
tion of the corporeal sphere could not possibly allow the reproduction of the 
intelligible God in a material frame. Gradually, two main conflicting attitudes 
became fundamental in the Christian debate on images, that of iconophilia and 
iconoclasm, openly and physically clashing in the eighth century. 
The iconoclastic crises taking place in Byzantium during the eighth and 
ninth centuries started with the destruction of an icon of Christ at the com­
mand of Emperor Leo III and a ban on sacred images in 726 CE. Existing icons 
were smashed, and the dispute between iconoclasts and iconophiles within 
Christianity began. It was to last until 843. The causes were not exclusively 
religious, but also political and economic (Besançon 2000, 114; Bettetini 2006, 
92–93; Mondzain 2005, 76); however, it is the theological debate accompanying 
the Byzantine crises which concerns the relationship between image and proto­
type. At the core of this debate was the figurative representation of Christ, and 
the main points in dispute consisted of the circumscribability of the divine God 
in the icon and the question of consubstantiality (identity of substance between 
image and model). 
Regarding the issue of circumscribability, the iconophiles denied that the 
icon circumscribes the divine essence, affirming that only Christ’s human 
nature is depicted in the image. This is directly linked to the incarnation, which 
constitutes the event through which God has circumscribed himself, assuming a 
body of flesh. Christ is both man and God, having human nature together with 
divine essence; therefore, in manifesting God’s human essence, the incarnation 
allows for the production of icons that are in relationship with the human Christ 
but not with his divine nature, which remains invisible and unrepresentable. 

28  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
More importantly, the icon is ‘not the object of a passive fascination’ (Mondzain 
2005, 90) but aims at taking the viewer’s look beyond the visibility of the rep­
resentation; that is, at transcending the materiality of the icon to reach the 
intellectual contemplation of God. In iconophilic thought, what differentiates 
the icon from the idol resides in the relationship they have with the sensible and 
the intelligible spheres: while the icon exists as an intermediary between the two 
realms, the idol purely addresses the world of corporeal things. 
Conversely, in iconoclastic thought, the icon is far from diminishing the 
distance separating humans and God and assumes, instead, the connotations 
of the idol, a false god that consequently has to be destroyed. The iconoclasts 
rebutted the iconophilic theses, decrying them as heretic because (1) the icon 
cannot be consubstantial to the model since what is sensible cannot share the 
same nature as what is intelligible;2 (2) the icon circumscribes both human 
and divine essence of Christ because the two are inseparable – God is the 
invisible, unlimited and un-circumscribable par excellence. In the iconoclasts’ 
view, the gap between the divine model and its material image is therefore 
unbridgeable. 
The same image was thus at once icon and idol, depending on the interpre­
tation of the image-model relationship. Icon and idol, coming from eikōn and 
eidōlon, respectively, reiterate the same opposition found in Plato and Plotinus. 
Accordingly, the idol inherits the negative connotations of the Greek eidōlon as 
something that reproduces exclusively a sensible appearance, thereby address­
ing only sight, and as an image that implies the possibility of producing a visually 
identical double of the prototype. The image of God as idol/eidōlon is idolatrous 
because it offers itself as the direct object of adoration, without being a means 
for passing from the visible contemplation of the image to the intellectual con­
templation of God.
While both iconophilic and iconoclastic stances rejected the idol, their con­
ception of the icon differed. The iconophiles attributed to the icon the meaning 
of the eikōn as that which mediates between the here below and the there above, 
whereas for the iconoclasts the icon as conceived by the iconophiles was nothing 
other than an idol. The same image, therefore, was caught between two diamet­
rically opposed interpretations. 
The iconoclastic crisis of the eighth century eventually led to the second 
Council of Nicaea in 787 and the victory of the iconophilic thesis. The icon 
of Christ was legitimated and recognised as an image having a privileged link 
with the divine model. The sacred icon thus became the intermediary between 
humans and God, albeit not reproducing divine nature. To look on the visible 
sacredness ideally leads to the imageless contemplation of God. This ­legitimation 

﻿PROLOGUE  |  29
was to play a key role in the future of Western thought about images: once the 
praise of images was detached from the religious context, any type of image 
began to enjoy an ever-increasing power in the social imaginary that still per­
sists today. Therefore, it is possible to trace a pathway that goes from ancient 
Greek philosophy to the Byzantine controversy up to contemporary Western 
­imaginary and cinema. As Maria T. Bettetini (2006) insightfully observes, 
there is no doubt that the second Council of Nicaea played a role in Western 
medieval, modern and postmodern civilization. The legitimation of sacred 
images drawn up in 787 by the council Fathers is universally recognised as the 
theoretical and political origin of our civilization of images: from Byzantium 
to Hollywood. (103) 
The history of the Western European imaginary is marked by Platonic and 
Plotinian philosophy, then re-elaborated from a Christian perspective, leading 
to the paradoxical and ambiguous status of the image. As consequence, the 
image has acquired a central role, attested by the daily production of images; and 
yet, the status of the visual image is still often that of a secondary representation 
incapable of truthfully expressing reality. Such antagonistic perspectives are also 
present in the cinema, where both faith and distrust in the film image’s ability to 
reproduce reality coexist. 
Iconoclasm in the Cinema
My argument develops from the assumption that the binary between the eikōn 
and the eidōlon can be found in the cinema as well, generating conflicting 
stances. More specifically, different interpretations derive from a dichotomy 
between reality and illusion, which opposes cinema’s claim to a mimetic restitu­
tion of reality and cinema’s deceptive nature. Such antagonism goes back to the 
beginning of film theory and involves clashing views about the film image (Allen 
1993; Andrew 1976; 1984, 37–56; Perniola 2013; Pezzella 2011; Rushton 2011; 
Thomson-Jones 2008). There are various stances in the spectrum of the reality-­
illusion dichotomy in the cinema, which range from a quasi-religious faith in the 
revelatory capacity of the film medium, such as in the writings of Louis Delluc 
([1920] 1985), Jean Epstein ([1921] 1977; [1926] 2012), Béla Balázs ([1945] 1970; 
[1924] 2010) and Siegfried Kracauer (1960), to a fierce disdain for the cinematic 
image as a deceitful representation, as in the work of the exponents of political 
modernism (Comolli and Narboni 1971; Fargier 1971; Heath 1974; MacCabe 
1974; Rodowick 1994; Wollen 1976). This picture is further complicated by the 

30  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
formalist position according to which the fundamental aesthetic value of cinema 
resides in the film image’s deviation from reality (Arnheim 1958; Eisenstein 
1949; 1957; Münsterberg 1916; Sesonske 1974). 
As in religion and philosophy, in cinema too there is a division between a 
true(r) reality (phenomenal reality or the intelligible sphere of thoughts and 
emotions), which functions as the prototype, and a less true sensible sphere, that 
of film images, which stands for the copy. Following a representational under­
standing of the cinema, it is possible to distinguish between the proponents of 
cinema as a trustworthy, mimetic reproduction of phenomenal appearances and 
the advocates of the film image as deceptive and illusory. The first perspective, 
also referred to as photographic realism, finds its most influential represent­
atives in André Bazin (1967; 1972) and Kracauer (1960), who share a positive 
account of the indexical relationship between film images and phenomenal 
referents (reminiscent of the relationship of likeness distinctive of the eikōn). 
Accordingly, the film image has a privileged bond with its model because, by 
mechanically recording it, it attests that something has been there in front of 
the camera. An extreme and quite negative case of photographic realism is 
Roger Scruton’s (1981) argument on the transparency of photographic and 
cinematic images, which are deemed surrogates of reality and excluded from 
­representational arts – and therefore from aesthetics. On the other side of the 
spectrum, the exponents of political modernism best exemplify the interpreta­
tion of a particular type of film image as an illusory copy of the real (eidōlon) 
and thus as a means for providing a seemingly objective worldview rather than 
granting spectators access to an augmented knowledge of reality.
Underlying these various stances there is an understanding of cinema as a 
re-presentational medium. That is, cinema is a medium which records a reality 
existing prior to and independently from it; therefore, the film image defines 
itself according to the relationship it establishes with its phenomenal referent. 
Among the possible interpretations of this relationship there are the film 
image that reaches a quasi-complete likeness with its referent (for instance, 
Scruton’s utterly negative transparency of the film image) and the image that 
distances itself from its referent to the point of great difference. In both limit 
cases, as in the many stretched between them, the relationship between image 
and model remains fundamental, whether it is carried out in terms of similar­
ity or alterity. 
The copy-prototype relationship, in fact, constitutes the basis for both icono­
clastic and iconophilic conceptions, in philosophy as in the cinema. Iconoclasm 
and iconophilia share the same metaphysical requirement; namely, they posit 
the existence of a true(r) prototype to which any copy has to be compared. 

﻿PROLOGUE  |  31
In the cinema, this metaphysical postulate can be found in the relationship 
between phenomenal reality and the film image, where the former functions 
as the prototype for the latter. What is more, the division between sensible and 
intelligible spheres is also present in a film ambit, although with a slightly differ­
ent connotation. The sensible stands for what is visible and audible, namely what 
can be physically seen and heard in phenomenal experience; the super-sensible 
becomes that which can be shown only through metaphors because it lacks an 
audio-visual form in phenomenal reality (for instance, emotions and thoughts), 
or because it consists of something which resists mimetic doubling (for example, 
the Shoah). The issue of iconoclasm in cinema, then, concerns the problematic 
relationship between reality and its representation; it explores how emotional 
and intelligible contents can be transferred into audio-visual images. 
What underpins cinematic iconoclasm is an understanding of the relation­
ship between certain film images and their referents in terms of alterity, or at 
least inadequacy – the image being somewhat insufficient for the representation 
of the model. Resonating with philosophical interpretations of the eidōlon/idol, 
the cinematic eidōlon carries connotations of illusion and deception: it belongs 
to the sensible sphere only and reproduces the model following a mimetic par­
adigm. The image as eidōlon stands for a figurative image which replicates its 
model in such a way as to produce an impression of reality. That is, by doubling 
the appearance of the model, the eidōlon has the potential to present itself as 
if it were the model – which is not tantamount to say that spectators could be 
tricked into thinking that a moving image of a thing is the thing itself; rather, 
it refers to the perilous psychological power that images of art can have (see 
Plato’s critique). The image as figuration, hence imitation as duplication – the 
peculiar feature of the eidōlon as the double – constitutes an affirmation of 
presence because it implies the reproduction of the model’s visual features and, 
consequently, the loss of the prototype’s uniqueness. However, from an icono­
clastic perspective, some models should be affirmations of absence: absence of 
images of the invisible God; absence of images of genocidal events (hence, for 
instance, Claude Lanzmann’s iconoclastic refusal of re-enacting the Shoah or 
using photos and materials from archives for his Shoah [1985]). 
Moreover, the eidōlon in the cinema can come to signify the image of classical 
or mainstream entertainment cinema. Particularly in Marxist-inflected critique, 
the eidōlon corresponds to a self-evident, seemingly coherent image whose con­
stitutive elements are reasoned (sound is in synch with the visual; the elements 
of the mise-en-scène are logically linked; the editing is invisible; and so on). The 
critique of the illusory nature of classical cinema echoes the Platonic condem­
nation of images of art and resonates with theological iconoclastic discourses. 

32  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
The cinematic eidōlon is problematic, from an iconoclastic perspective, because 
it retains a highly psychological power and is likely to produce an impression 
of reality in the spectators. It does so by posing itself as objective representa­
tion of an uncomplicated reality depicted as if simply being there, beyond the 
screen. Thus, the cinematic eidōlon consists of the seemingly transparent image 
of the kind of cinema purported as a window into the world. Accordingly, 
iconoclastic leftist film-makers attack these images to dismantle the worldview 
they ­promote – for instance, in Isidore Isou’s cinema, eidōla often correspond 
to images of oppressive power; in Guy Debord’s films and theoretical works, 
eidōlon is any image produced by consumer society. What distinguishes the cin­
ematic eidōlon is, therefore, its capacity to mimetically double the model which 
constitutes a threat to the uniqueness of certain prototypes and to challenging 
representations of reality. Everything is perfectly visible on the screen – Christ 
and its martyred body of flesh; the bodies and corpses in the concentration 
camps; the other’s suffering. However, these images, the content of which is 
visually consumable in the clarity of figuration, are defective in evoking a rela­
tionship with the invisibility and alterity proper to their models, more often pro­
ducing an unperceived distance between the viewer and the reality represented.
Quite the contrary, the iconoclastic eikōn, which incorporates aspects of the 
eikōn without resorting to mimesis, consists of a refusal of certain audio-visual 
images out of respect for reality, for its complexity and elusiveness. It thus 
bespeaks a withdrawal of our representational capacities before specific models. 
I draw the concept of iconoclastic eikōn from Alain Besançon’s (2000, 319–82), 
Gérard Wajcman’s (1998) and Jean-Jacques Wunenburger’s (1999, 357–59) dis­
cussion of iconoclasm in non-figurative art. According to these scholars, non-­
figurative art reiterates the criticism of the image deriving from the arguments 
of religious iconoclasm. In abstract painting, for example, the image ceases to 
imitate nature because the representation of the Absolute, whether religious or 
secularised, cannot pass through the reproduction of sensible forms of reality. 
The status of the model as that which is beyond the sensible world determines 
the rejection of images as mimesis of nature. In this respect, non-figurative art 
recalls a conception of the image and of the copy-prototype relationship akin 
to that of the iconoclasts during the Byzantine controversy: the inadequacy 
of the material means for the reproduction of the model and the consequent 
rejection of any mimetic principle for representing such prototype distinctly 
bring to mind iconoclastic arguments against sacred images. Additionally, 
Wunenburger (1999) discusses how, in non-figurative art, the knowledge of the 
divine (whether intended in religious or agnostic-spiritual terms) is impossible 
by sensible means. He concludes:

﻿PROLOGUE  |  33
Iconoclasm, religious or secularised, thus defines not so much a practice of 
deprivation or prohibition of images as the aspiration not to settle for an image 
that would claim to exhaust the being, especially when the being posits itself 
as absolute being. (359)
Abstract painting thus assimilates an iconoclastic component in its refusal to 
circumscribe an intelligible prototype in a sensible frame, thereby breaking with 
artistic mimesis. However, the outcome of this process (namely, the negation 
of the eidōlon as a visual double of the model) does not remain grounded in 
the sensible sphere only. Besançon (2000, 356) delineates the odd peculiarity 
of certain non-figurative art as retaining some iconoclastic aspects together 
with the iconophilic intent to represent the absolute being, which was strictly 
opposed by the iconoclasts. Similarly, Wajcman (1998, 180, 195) addresses as 
iconoclastic icon an image that deals with both visibility and invisibility with­
out mimetically reproducing the model. This type of image represents some­
thing that the eyes can see without however figuratively limiting the intelligible 
model. While the iconophilic icon uses mimesis to represent the absolute being, 
reproducing features retraceable in phenomenal reality and thereby enclosing 
the intelligible prototype in a sensible frame, the iconoclastic eikōn respects the 
unrepresentability of certain models. It is eikōn because it mediates between a 
visual form and its intelligible model, and it is iconoclastic because it refuses 
mimesis insofar as it would constitute an attempt to reduce what is invisible or 
unrepresentable to a figurative form; the material means are inadequate for the 
representation of the model, and yet the model somehow needs to be shown. 
Hence, the iconoclastic eikōn comes to define an image capable of maintaining 
the unrepresentability and ineffability at the core of those models which lack a 
visible and audible equivalent in phenomenal reality.
The types of images involved – eidōlon, eikōn, iconoclastic eikōn – are 
­therefore interpretations rather than fixed categories; that is, an image can be 
eidōlon for some viewers and eikōn for others (as in the case of Christian icons 
and idols). Cinematic iconoclasm does not consist in rejecting every image, but 
only those images deemed deceitful and illusory. The interpretation of certain 
images as false or inadequate depends on the prototype, on whether it can be 
apprehended via the physical senses or, quite differently, can only be thought 
through the intellect or experienced emotionally. Cinematic iconoclasm thus 
challenges mimetic reproduction rather than censoring images. It questions the 
Western obsession with mimesis and extreme visibility, contrasting them with 
images and sounds that undermine our capacity to represent, see and hear; in so 
doing, it can nurture our ethical imagination. 

34  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Concluding Remarks
There is a contradictory thinking that connects Platonic discourses about the 
deceptive potential of artworks, Plotinus’s partial rehabilitation of images and 
the Byzantine iconoclastic controversy over sacred icons with cinema’s dichot­
omy between illusion and reality. What ties together these seemingly distant 
arguments is the issue of mimesis, which concerns the relationship between 
an image as copy and its sensible or intelligible referent. Cinema addresses and 
reworks the eikōn-eidōlon dichotomy which has haunted Western understand­
ings of the image since at least Plato: the eikōn is in a relationship with both 
the sensible world (of the image and the viewer) and the intelligible realm (of 
the model), whereas the eidōlon is exclusively grounded in the sensible sphere. 
Drawing on philosophical and theological accounts of the nature of images, I 
propose to investigate the issue of iconoclasm in the cinema using the eikōn-ei­
dōlon binary, differentiating between theories and films mainly concerned with 
the destruction of the illusory image of mainstream entertainment cinema and 
others more focused on overcoming the level of critique to produce iconoclastic 
eikones. The criticism of the cinematic eidōlon grounds any iconoclastic gesture 
in the cinema and is emphatically present in the destructive works of the direc­
tors discussed in Part I. There are also iconoclastic approaches which aim at a 
further shift away from cinema as a spectacle for the eyes and ears – the eidōlon 
consumed in the visible and audible realm – to cinema as a sensible stimulus 
for actively reflecting on the object of our look – the iconoclastic eikōn turned 
to the invisible sphere – which is at the core of the films analysed in Part II. 
Never a rejection of images tout court, cinematic iconoclasm constitutes a way 
to critique a certain morbid fascination with extreme visibility and to probe our 
(ethical) ­relationship with the visual field.

Part I: Cinematic Iconoclasm as 
Critique: The Image as Eidōlon 


1	
Aural Cinema: Isidore Isou’s Traité de bave 
et d’éternité
PART I EXPLORES the iconoclastic criticism of the cinematic eidōlon – namely, 
a film image understood as deceptive and illusory – in Marxist-inflected works 
within which mainstream narrative cinema would reiterate capitalist ideology’s 
perspective via highly mimetic images. Leftist film theorists, theoretically, and 
film-makers such as Isidore Isou, Guy Debord, Carmelo Bene and Jean-Luc 
Godard, practically, develop a criticism of the cinematic eidōlon which bespeaks 
a fundamentally iconoclastic understanding of the relationship between the film 
image and phenomenal reality. Echoing Plato’s worries about the perceptual 
power of artworks and the Byzantine iconoclasts’ refusal of potentially idolatrous 
images of God, these iconoclastic directors fiercely reject cinema’s impression 
of reality because of the film image’s inability to reproduce the model and its 
connivance with capitalist ideology. When the model is deceptive in itself (as in 
Isou’s, Debord’s and Bene’s films), or is far too complex (as in Godard’s oeuvre), 
iconoclastic gestures become a way to challenge habitual forms of film-making 
and film-viewing. 
This chapter focuses on Isidore Isou, the founder of the French avant-garde 
movement of Lettrism, who is a neglected yet essential figure for theorising 
cinematic iconoclasm because of his explicit programme to destroy cinema, 
both literally and metaphorically. In his cinematic project, Isou grants sound a 
fundamental role while undermining the image as a mimetic copy. His critique 
of mimesis stems from the consideration that the film image has exhausted its 
imitative value, namely that there already exist films which have shown an effec­
tive use of mimetic images; it is now time for cinema to become something else. 
Accordingly, Isou proposes a cinema where sound becomes the constructive 
principle of the film and images acquire significance only from their opposition 

38  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
to the sound track. The privileging of the sonorous grounds much of Lettrist 
artistic practices, in which the political critique of words and images is part 
of a more widespread scepticism about language and representation and their 
ability to express reality. Thus, the criticism of artistic mimesis encompasses 
the aural, visual and linguistic dimensions, in an overall rejection of the sounds 
and images that had accompanied fascist propaganda before and during World 
War II. Lettrist cinema becomes one of the diverse ways through which this 
avant-garde expresses its attempts at overcoming the limitations imposed by 
figurative representation and logocentric speech. 
The chapter first locates Lettrism within the broader context of 
­twentieth-century Europe, with particular attention to the crisis of language and 
representation in philosophy, literature and the arts. It then delineates Isou’s 
cinematic project, known as ‘discrepant cinema’ (cinéma discrépant), which 
aims at dismantling cinema as spectacle by way of breaking with mimesis and 
granting a privileged role to sound. Such an undermining of the visual image 
is also discussed through a detailed analysis of Isou’s only film, Traité de bave 
et d’éternité (Treatise on Venom and Eternity, 1951).1 The film’s iconoclastic 
quality emerges from an account of the disruptive devices of discrepant edit­
ing (montage discrépant), which destroys synchronous sound, and the chiseled 
image (image ciselante),2 which results from the literal scraping of and aggres­
sions against the filmstrip. 
Lettrism, or the Struggle of Ordinary Language
Lettrism is the cultural avant-garde founded in 1946 by Isou, a Romanian commu­
nist Jew who had moved to Paris a year earlier. The context is post-World War II 
France, a country exhausted by the Nazi invasion and the Vichy regime during 
the war. A general sense of meaninglessness spreads from this post-war situation 
through diverse areas of life and especially the arts. Isou founded Lettrism as a 
reaction to the existential and identity crisis that the war had provoked. The feel­
ing of powerlessness and overall senselessness in the face of war and the Shoah 
manifests itself in the Lettrists’ rejection of words in favour of the letter. In their 
view, words are always already imbued with, and thus convey, a meaning. But 
in a world that has lost any meaning and where language itself is found guilty of 
having colluded with fascist propaganda, Isou and the Lettrists rejected words 
and articulated speech to return to the pure aural dimension of the letter. 
As the name suggests, Lettrism excludes words in favour of the letter (lettre) 
as the basis for a type of poetry founded on sounds able to transcend the limits 
of national boundaries (Feldman 2014, 78, 85). That is, while words are always 

﻿AURAL CINEMA  |  39
in a specific language, letters maintain a much wider inclusive power, thereby 
contrasting the exclusionary quality of words. Abandoning the semantic con­
straints of language, the Lettrists explore the possibilities of single letters by 
recovering their aural dimension, creating poems made up of human noises. 
In such an anti-realist approach, Sami Sjöberg (2014) observes that ‘language 
no longer names nor objectifies, neither does it separate or mediate’ (222). 
Lettrism thus opposes the abstract sonic quality of letters to the meaning that 
words always bear. Immanent anti-language, Lettrist poetry allows for convey­
ing individual experience in a manner appropriate to its fragmented and utterly 
subjective nature. 
As both sound and visual poetry, Lettrism from its inception participated 
in the broader distrust of artistic mimesis which further intensified following 
World War II. The close bond between reality and its representation broken, 
post-war twentieth-century arts resorted to destructive, anti-mimetic gestures 
to express the inarticulated, new perception of the real. The arts withdrew into 
an inner dimension, where the Platonic tradition of the work of art as mimesis of 
the sensible world was replaced by the arbitrariness of the image/sound-model 
relationship as a means for expressing the intelligible, the unrepresentable and 
the ineffable. Although the divorce between reality and its mimetic representa­
tion had already begun at the end of the nineteenth century, World War II 
and the Shoah represent an essential caesura. Benjamin H. D. Buchloh (2016) 
discusses how certain artistic practices partially lost their raison d’être following 
the trauma of World War II and the Holocaust. That is one rift, a major chasm, 
whether explicitly or only latently expressed. Another is the realization that 
this historical situation needed redefinition, not only in geopolitical terms 
or in terms of a new national identity, but also in terms that were specifically 
tragic. [. . .] There was a sense of loss, of destruction, of utter inaccessibility to 
prewar culture [. . .]. (376)
Accordingly, in the aftermath of the war, visual arts further exacerbated the 
‘ontology of absence and lack’ (Wajcman 1998, 109), as inaugurated by Wassily 
Kandinsky’s and Kazimir Malevich’s iconoclastic paintings in the first half of the 
century.3 In the first decades of the twentieth century, Russian abstract art was 
concerned with the representation of the super-sensible (whether religious or 
secularised) and, in an approach reminiscent of Byzantine iconoclasm, opted for 
anti-mimesis to express that which is beyond the visible realm, making absence 
itself the subject of painting. After World War II, however, artists were not so 
much interested in the Spiritual/God/the Absolute but rather in the ways in 

40  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
which an ineffable and unrepresentable human experience could be the subject 
of artistic expression. The crisis of representation – namely, the loss of faith in 
the human ability to reproduce something audio-visually or verbally of the real 
in recognisable forms – involves questions regarding the spectacularisation of 
the model. The experience of the war and the news about the concentration 
camps led to enquire ‘how can one, in art, respond to the Nazi reign of terror 
without spectacularizing it?’ (Foster et al. 2016, 397). Visual arts, having lost 
trust in artistic mimesis, retreated into the realm of the unfigurable, the ugly and 
the extremely material (for example, informal art in France and Italy; the Cobra 
group in Denmark, Belgium and the Netherlands; Brutalism in Britain). Jean 
Fautrier’s series of paintings Otages (1944–46), for instance, is paradigmatic of 
post-war art: inspired by the aural (the sound of bombs, rifles, cries) rather than 
visual dimension of the war, the paintings undermine sight to the point that only 
the title remains to guide the viewer to the formless lump on the canvases. ‘This 
dichotomy between alleged theme and frustration of vision’ (Foster et al. 2016, 
397) would become a common trait of post-war visual and sound arts, including 
the Lettrist avant-garde.
The mistrust of visual representation is accompanied by a mistrust of lan­
guage (Sjöberg 2013b; Weller 2018) in an understanding of the experiential as 
that which lies beyond the domains of the representable and the utterable. In 
contextualising Lettrist poetry within the broader criticism of language, Sjöberg 
(2013b) defines early-twentieth-century language crisis in literature and philos­
ophy as ‘in essence a crisis of representation’, which was ‘characterized by a dis­
trust of language in general and skepticism about the correspondence between 
language and the world in particular’ (53). Visual arts’ slow abandonment of 
mimesis is matched by ordinary language’s failure to express the complexity of 
experience in literature and philosophy. Shane Weller (2018) contends that
The history of the West has been marked by a recurrent sense that, in the face 
of certain thoughts, feelings, objects, or experiences, words fail us. For Plato, 
the Ideas that constitute the real (of which human beings can capture only 
the shadows on the cave wall) may be described, but they remain in a more 
profound sense beyond the grasp of language, even the Greek language, con­
sidered by its possessors to be superior to all others, with non-Greek speakers 
falling into the category of the barbarian. Similarly, the long tradition of nega­
tive theology is shaped by a profound sense of the limited power of language, 
insisting, as it does, that God can be expressed linguistically only in terms of 
what he is not, any positive articulation of the divine essence being at best a 
reduction, if not an outright distortion, of that essence. [. . .] This skepticism 

﻿AURAL CINEMA  |  41
toward language becomes particularly acute, however, in the modern period, 
casting its long shadow over European literature and philosophy. (15)
There is a loss of faith in the ability to ‘utter the world’ which is at the centre of, 
among others, Fritz Mauthner’s4 iconoclastic critique of language.5 Mauthner 
exacerbates the philosophical stance on the identity of language and thought, 
proposing an impossible critique of language via its own self-destruction (Pisano 
2016, 95–122; Sjöberg 2013b; Weiler 1970, 269–306; Weller 2018, 23–29). 
Language, which is our only way to order experience, is purely metaphorical or 
suggestive, thereby imprisoning us in an unescapable missaying. It follows that 
knowledge is impossible since language is incapable of describing (our experi­
ence of) reality. Hence, as Weller (2018) remarks, ‘liberation from the tyranny of 
language can be achieved, according to Mauthner, only through an annihilation 
of language’ (27). Such a critique of language is ultimately unattainable because 
its goal is to utter the unsayable. Mauthner’s radical approach culminates, rather 
logically, in a praise of mystical silence (Weiler 1970, 274, 291–96). Mysticism, 
in both theistic and non-theistic tradition, designates an experience character­
ised by an ineffable and unrepresentable component, because both language 
and image fail to adequately express it. Drawing from negative theology, which 
postulates that God can be known only negatively, by means of what God is not 
because of his ultimate ineffability, Mauthner adopts a secularised approach to 
mysticism – what he describes as ‘godless mysticism’ (quoted in Weiler 1970, 
294). God, like any other word, is only a metaphor (an image of), a verbal and 
therefore destroyable god. The outcome of Mauthner’s philosophy is a mys­
ticism without language and God: to destroy language as metaphor is also to 
destroy God.
Mauthner’s philosophical project is thus based on an iconoclastic under­
standing of the world-word relationship in which language is inadequate for 
the expression of reality. As Libera Pisano (2016) notes, ‘the main feature of 
Mauthner’s critique of language is the unbridgeable gap between word and 
object’ (104). Words are, at best, an approximation of reality and ‘the only two 
available modes of language use, then, become missaying [. . .] and unsaying’ 
(Weller 2018, 29). Accordingly, Mauthner proposes a dismantling of language 
through and within language itself, which is tantamount to visual and sound 
arts’ efforts to destroy their own illusionism from within. Like visual images, 
words are an epistemological failure in the face of reality.
Literature similarly participates in the language crisis: Hugo von 
Hofmannsthal’s The Lord Chandos Letter (1902), which Mauthner suggested 
was influenced by his critique of language (Nordmann 2005, 117–18),6 attests 

42  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
to language’s incapacity to grasp experiential reality and otherness. Symbolist 
poetry, in particular Stéphane Mallarmé’s, rejects ordinary language to express 
the mystery beyond the surface of known reality by severing the relationship 
between the world and words’ capacity to describe it; and various avant-gardes 
explore the limits of language and the potential of sounded words.7 It is in this 
context that Lettrism originates, drawing inspiration from Dadaism’s disruption 
between words and meaning, Surrealism’s creative anarchism, Futurist poetry’s 
use of onomatopoeia and Symbolist poetry’s attention to silence and the visual 
arrangement of words on the page. Lettrism thus participates in the period’s 
visual and verbal distrust, adopting a marked iconoclastic approach to reality 
and the arts: language first and visual images later are conceived as inadequate 
for conveying the experience of reality. In the impossibility to verbally, or vis­
ually, render individual experience, the Lettrists turned to iconoclastic gestures 
as the only way to communicate the inherent incommunicability of experience.
According to Isou (1947), Lettrism ‘initiates the destruction of words through 
the letters’ (15), finding one of its major influences in Mallarmé’s negative aes­
thetics composed of silences, empty spaces, the arbitrariness of words and their 
musicality. Lettrist sound poetry further exacerbates Mallarmé’s approach, 
destroying ordinary as well as poetic language’s ability to signify, while spatial­
ising emptiness and gaps of meaning on the page. Moreover, Lettrist poetry, 
because of its being an aural performance, emphasises the musical quality of 
letters and of bodily noises such as hiccups and deep breaths. Several Lettrist 
sound poems are a rewriting (that is, a destruction) of Symbolist verses by the 
likes of Mallarmé and Paul Verlaine, in which only the rhythm and richness 
in auditory sensations of the original are preserved, while words as intelligible 
units are destroyed. 
Lettrism revolves around the aural dimension of poetry (and later cinema), 
placing emphasis on single letters, guttural sounds and bodily noises. But despite 
the focus on the sonorous quality of letters, Isou (1947) identifies art’s ultimate 
goal as to ‘concretise the silence; write the nothingness’ (17). In such a mystical, 
iconoclastic understanding of art, which places at its core silence (ineffability) 
and blankness (unrepresentability), Isou was also influenced by Judaism and 
the Kabbalah. Sjöberg (2013a), who has extensively written on Isou’s Jewish 
­mysticism,8 argues:
The interdependence of divinity and unknowing is derived from Kabbalah 
and is crucial for the Isouian world-making, the means of which is language. 
Isou adopts a kabbalistic definition of God as the unknown (l’Inconnu), which 
asserts God beyond rational inquiry [. . .] Firstly, the Jewish God is invisible 

﻿AURAL CINEMA  |  43
and conceptually unattainable. Secondly, due to God’s hidden nature, culmi­
nated in the second commandment, the role of language in Jewish exegesis, 
both rabbinic and mystical, is emphasised. These factors are favourable for the 
avant-gardist desire to ‘transgress’ language. (371)
Because of the strict Biblical ban on images, language is invested with a remark­
able power to sustain and reinforce the relationship between God and his 
people. Such relationship finds its privileged means in the sense of hearing 
rather than sight, since God is a Deus absconditus [hidden God] (Isaiah 45:15) 
and seeing him corresponds to a death sentence (Exodus 33:20). The God of the 
Old Testament is not only unknowable and hidden but also jealous and venge­
ful. As a precaution against idolatry, the ban on sacred images (Exodus 20:4–6) 
was interpreted to include all images: ‘Every image of a living being, even a mere 
ornamental motif, was strictly banned. It was prohibited to bow before a pagan 
statue even to drink, to pick up a fallen object, or to pull a thorn from one’s 
foot’ (Besançon 2000, 67). It is thus necessary to maintain a clear separation 
between the hidden God and sensible reality; the divine can never be visually 
represented because representation always carries the risk of idolatry. To this 
visual ban corresponds a verbal one; that is, ‘the Jewish prohibition and gram­
matical impossibility to pronounce God’s Name’ (Bettetini 2006, 64).9 While 
the spoken word is a privileged means in the relationship between God and his 
people (God intelligibly speaks to his people, who then take care of translating 
the spoken into the written word of the law), in Jewish mysticism, God’s name 
progressively became unpronounceable, thereby sonorously matching his visual 
unrepresentability. 
Lettrism, particularly through Isou, inherits the iconoclastic tendencies of 
Jewish mysticism: the Biblical ban on images and the importance of aurality in 
the God-man relationship, on the one hand, and mystical silence, on the other 
hand. While initially focused on sound poems, Lettrism turned to visual poetry 
(hypergraphics) in the 1950s. Here, silence progressively substituted the broken 
sounds of the early poems, while emptiness acquired growing importance as 
material visualisation of silence. The poems ‘Lettrie Blanche’ and ‘Lettrie Vide’ 
(Isou 1958, reproduced in Curtay 1974, 190), for instance, reject the seductive 
power of both figurative representation and language – something which will 
be present also in Lettrist cinema in the frequent use of the blank screen. The 
empty page and the blank page at once configure themselves as spaces of pure 
imaginative potentiality and attest to a total refusal of mimesis. Reduced to 
minimal elements, Lettrist visual poetry stresses the materiality of the text. The 
tension – and impossible encounter – between knowledge and expression is 

44  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
rendered either through blankness or excessive presence. In both cases, image 
and word are emptied of their capacity to provide a picture of reality and the 
experience thereof. This practice, based on void and extreme fullness, becomes 
a key feature of Lettrism, one which characterises the variety of Lettrist gestures 
in diverse artistic contexts, including cinema: from the empty page to the blank 
screen, from the letter-filled pages to aural verbosity. 
Lettrist Cinema: Glory of Sound and Martyrdom of the Image
The exploration of the possibilities of sound and image continues in Lettrist 
cinema, although language as a constructor of meaning is reinstated as an ele­
ment of the sound track. First theorised by Isou in his film and then devel­
oped more coherently in Esthétique du cinéma [Aesthetics of Cinema] ([1952] 
1953), Lettrist cinema refers to a cluster of films realised in Paris in the Lettrist 
ambit during 1951–52. Isou’s Traité de bave et d’éternité inaugurated it in 1951 
and was followed by Maurice Lemaître’s Le Film est déjà commencé? (Has the 
Film Already Started? 1951), Gil J. Wolman’s L’Anticoncept (The Anti-Concept, 
1951), François Dufrêne’s Tambours du jugement premier (Drums of the First 
Judgement, 1952) and Guy Debord’s Hurlements en faveur de Sade (Howls for 
Sade, 1952). The defining feature of Lettrist cinema consists of the privileged 
role assigned to sound and an overall depreciation of the image, which can go 
from Isou’s physical scraping of the film celluloid to Dufrêne’s complete forsak­
ing of the film strip.
Like its poetry, Lettrist cinema grants a significant role to the sonic dimension 
of film. Sound ceases to be a supplement to the visual component and becomes, 
instead, the primary, organising element of the film. By contrast, images, con­
demned for their deceptive character, are physically attacked: the filmstrip is 
soaked in water, scratched, over- or under-exposed to light, or simply aban­
doned. The Lettrists thus problematise the relationship between sound and 
image to counter previous forms of cinema, in particular the illusionism of nar­
rative cinema and immersive modes of film viewing. Kaira M. Cabañas (2014) 
observes: ‘[E]ach Lettrist film defie[s] cinema’s established conventions (e.g., 
continuity editing, synchronized sound, screen), and sometimes the necessity 
of its image support (i.e., film), in order to generate new conditions and com­
munities of viewing’ (3). Lettrist cinema, therefore, pursues the twofold aim 
of destroying cinema as it had been conceived until then and promoting more 
critically active ways to experience film. To this end, theoretically in Esthétique 
du cinéma and practically in Traité, Isou formulates the notions of discrepant 
editing and chiseled image.

﻿AURAL CINEMA  |  45
Discrepant editing is the main and most innovative feature of Isou’s film and 
his cinematic project, and it consists of the disjunction between the sound track 
and the image track which are treated as independent from each other. Marion 
Poirson-Dechonne (2016, 181) goes over the Latin origin of the term ‘discrep­
ant’ and its kinship with music vocabulary to emphasise the centrality of sound 
in Isou’s montage. Composed of dis-, which indicates separation, and crepāre, 
which translates as ‘to make something sound’, discrepant editing points to a 
cinema that emits a deviant sound; namely, a sound which does not adhere to 
the norm. Theoretically, it invokes the breaking apart of any logical relation­
ship between what is heard and what is seen; practically, there is a disjunction 
between the sound track and the image track which, however, does not always 
exclude a possible relation between the two. Undoubtedly, the then traditional 
status of sound in cinema as an addition to the image no longer exists in Lettrist 
films. Sound acquires an unprecedented autonomy, becoming the most signif­
icant element in Lettrist cinema and the primary tool to criticise the privileged 
status of the film image and the spectator’s (supposed) passivity. 
Isou and the Lettrists are vehemently critical of narrative cinema, for it pro­
motes immersive spectatorship and a certain fascination with the images on 
screen. Accordingly, Lettrist sound does not correspond to the clearly articu­
lated speech of narrative cinema but is built up from disjointed voices and bodily 
noises that do not necessarily bear any specific meaning. Moreover, Lettrist 
poetic practices such as ‘mégapneumie’ (Cabañas 2014, 80) and ‘crirhythmes’ 
(Feldman 2014, 92) – types of physical poetry which use breathing and cries, 
respectively, as their constitutive elements – are integrated in the sound tracks 
alongside spoken, intelligible speech. Together with the concept of discrepant 
editing, Isou proposes the production of a chiseled image, which results from a 
series of aggressive manipulations of the filmstrip. The film celluloid is, among 
other things, scratched, written on, immersed in water and over- or under-­
exposed. Consequently, it is often difficult to discern what the images represent 
because of the tampering that they have undergone. Hanna Feldman (2014) 
explains the significance of such damages and their role in disrupting immersive 
spectatorship, contending that ‘the marks made on the film’s celluloid reduce its 
capacity to capture and register an image in its most primary quality as material 
ground to an imposed figure’ (89). That is, the chiseling process mars the image 
as a reproduction or visual copy of a referent. Because of the disfigurements, 
the image’s content becomes difficult to distinguish, and the image loses the 
relationship with the referent that has produced it in the first place. The chiseled 
image thus causes a rupture with mimesis and the idea of the image as a faithful 
copy of a model. It does so by exhibiting the film image in its materiality, since 

46  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
it is cinema’s corporeality that allows the scratches and other physical manipu­
lations to occur. 
The word ‘chiseled’, used to define the marred images in Lettrist cinema, is 
reminiscent of Isou’s partition of poetry first and cinema later into two phases, 
the amplique (amplifying) and the ciselante (chiseling), which he outlines in 
Introduction à une nouvelle poésie et à une nouvelle musique [Introduction 
to a New Poetry and a New Music] (1947, 83–148). Applied to cinema, the 
amplique phase denotes the beginning of cinema and the development of sty­
listic conventions, whereas the ciselante phase designates Lettrist cinema and 
its employing of the film medium to destroy cinema as it had been conceived 
until then. Both discrepant editing and the chiseled image are the products of a 
radicalisation of non-mimetic approaches to cinema and are directed towards 
a reconfiguration of the relationship between sound and image, in an overall 
assault on cinematic transparency. The Lettrist problematising of such relation 
also aims at disrupting any possible immersive experience of the film. These 
ideas about cinema assume a visible and audible form in the first Lettrist film, 
Isou’s Traité.
Announcing the Destruction of Cinema
Isou’s Traité inaugurated Lettrist cinema in 1951 and configured itself as an 
experimental essay-film theorising the destruction of cinema. The film explicitly 
aims to counter the illusionistic image of narrative cinema and the pleasure it 
arouses in the audience; but it also wishes to break with all previous forms of 
cinema, promoting a new way of making and viewing films. Accordingly, Isou 
employed discrepant editing and chiseled images as the constructive principles 
of the film. By rejecting the referentiality of images and sounds, Isou explored 
cinema’s possibilities beyond the illusionism of mimetic reproduction. 
Traité is a 120-minute film divided into three sections labelled as chap­
ters, whose unifying thread consists of Isou’s reflections about cinema. The first 
chapter, titled ‘The Principle’, is a manifesto of discrepant cinema; the second 
chapter, ‘The Development’, follows the love story between a girl named Ève 
(Blanchette Brunoy) and the protagonist Daniel, played by Isou himself, which 
leads to a reminiscence of the past love story between Daniel and another 
woman, Denise (Danièle Delorme); the third chapter, ‘The Proof ’, framed by 
the love story with Ève, focuses on Lettrism and Isou’s ideas on cinema. At 
the film’s premiere as a fringe event of the Cannes Film Festival in 1951, the 
image track of the second and third chapters, which in the final version contain 
figurative images, consisted of a black screen. However, as Cabañas (2014, 25) 

﻿AURAL CINEMA  |  47
explains, the absence of images in the Cannes version did not correspond to 
an aesthetic choice but was more simply due to Isou’s running out of time to 
complete it.10 
The film’s most striking feature is the disjunction between image track 
and sound track, which not only audio-visually develops Isou’s theories on 
cinema, but also prevents any immersive experience of the film because of the 
lack of connections between what is heard and what is seen. This is evident 
from the opening, where spectators are faced with a black screen and hear an 
unintelligible bodily sound, similar to a rasp intertwined with guttural choral 
noises, which Feldman (2014, 86) identifies as a Lettrist symphony. While the 
black screen lasts twenty-four seconds, the Lettrist symphony continues, like 
a tormenting spell, through the opening credits, the intertitles and the begin­
ning of the first chapter, for a total duration of four minutes and thirty-four 
seconds. This symphony returns in intervals throughout Traité, punctuating 
the whole film obsessively. Alongside this Lettrist motif, the sound track is 
an intertwining of human voices and bodily noises that include the protago­
nist Daniel’s diatribe about cinema,11 a narrator’s (Bernard Blin) monotonal 
voice-over commenting on Daniel’s thoughts, the shouting and whistling of 
the audience at a ciné-club, now insulting Isou’s film, now praising it, and 
recitals of Lettrist poems. The image track consists of a similar layering struc­
ture, composed of shots of Daniel/Isou’s slow wandering in the streets of 
Paris, building facades, boulevards congested with traffic, texts, found footage 
images of soldiers, military marches in Southeast Asia, Vietnamese fishermen 
and temples, photographs of Ève and Denise, black screens and shots of 
Lettrists reciting poems. 
These extremely diverse images are intentionally indifferent to both each 
other and the sound track. That is, almost every image is not causally or logically 
related to the ones preceding or following it, and images are disjointed from 
what is heard, according to Daniel/Isou’s intention ‘to make the flow of images 
indifferent to the sound story’. In Daniel/Isou’s view, by disconnecting the image 
track from the sound track, words could ‘reveal the limitations and the possibil­
ities of the image’. Moreover, from the second chapter of the film onwards, the 
chiseled image makes its appearance. The filmstrip has been physically manip­
ulated and defaced by literal attacks, thereby presenting deleted faces, painted 
figures, scraped blank screens and deformed images (Figures 1.1–3). 
Isou’s iconoclasm resides in the physical and metaphorical attack against 
images, in an ‘attempt to destroy the false transparency of its [the cinema’s] 
images’ (Dottorini 2013, 54). Feldman’s (2014) insightful reading of Traité’s 
chiseled images brings forth the iconoclastic quality of the film: 

48  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
The implications of this [the chiseling process] and the multitude of marred 
frames that follow are crucial. First, the scratching undermines the representa­
tional function of the original image. Instead of an image of a carpenter at work, 
we are presented with the fragments of what had been that image. These frag­
ments can only begin to suggest what they had stood to signify before. Indeed, 
the image is quite literally defaced, as the visage of the carpenter falls victim 
to Isou’s violent scrapes. It bears repeating here that most of the scratches in 
Traité de bave et d’éternité are made over the faces of individuals. (89)
Faces of carpenters, fishermen, soldiers and officers, as well as those of some 
Lettrists including Isou himself, have been scratched. In a sort of democratic 
destruction, no face is immune from the chiseling process. These defaced images 
posit themselves as a both literal and metaphorical attack against the mimetic 
image, against its being a faithful reproduction of a phenomenal referent. But 
they also constitute a further impediment to an immersive engagement with 
the film because spectators are often deprived of the most evocative and emo­
tionally charged image, that of the human face. In this way, Isou ‘provok[es] a 
dismantling of realist expectations with regard to the images one sees’ (Cabañas 
Figure 1.1  Chiseled image of Isidore Isou

﻿AURAL CINEMA  |  49
2014, 31). Furthermore, the dismantling of faces carries out Isou’s critique of 
French foreign policy and the First Indochina War (1946–54), which Feldman 
(2014, 80–108) likens to the Lettrist overall condemnation of war. The weaving 
of shots of Paris with that of Vietnamese temples and fishermen establishes a 
political link between two geographically distant places, a link which is further 
emphasised via the scratching of armed forces’ faces. In this way, the critique 
of the war unfolds as a violent attack against the images of those who are 
responsible for political violence, who are de-individualised through the chis­
eling process. 
Discrepant editing and chiseled images are therefore the two fundamen­
tals of Isou’s cinematic project, which he addresses throughout the film and 
most clearly in the first chapter. The programmatic exposition of Isou’s ideas 
about cinema is realised, visually, via shots of Daniel/Isou’s slow wandering in 
the streets interspersed with shots of building facades and Parisian boulevards 
and, aurally, through Daniel/Isou’s intelligible speech, which alternates with the 
nervously excited outcries of the audience of the ciné-club and the monotony 
of the narrator’s voice-over. Here Daniel/Isou condemns cinema, for it keeps 
repeating the same story instead of exploring new possibilities for images and 
Figure 1.2  Chiseled image of military personnel

50  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
sounds. While he acknowledges some films as cinematic artworks, such as that 
of the directors to whom the film is dedicated (D. W. Griffith, Abel Gance, 
Charlie Chaplin, René Clair, Sergei Eisenstein, Erich von Stroheim, Robert J. 
Flaherty, Luis Buñuel and Jean Cocteau), he nonetheless provides a harsh cri­
tique of imitation – both the imitation of reality and of previous films – because 
it prevents cinema from evolving. This evolution passes through the destruction 
of the cinema that had been until then and, especially, narrative cinema which is 
characterised by a concord between images and sounds. The voice-over asserts:
I’d like to separate the ear from its cinematic master, the eye. [. . .] The films 
they make these days have a completed, perfect and calm quality. It is a result 
of the harmony between the components, the classic unity between the consti­
tutive elements: word-image.
Discrepant editing and the chiseled image are manifestly in contrast with nar­
rative cinema where shots are linked to each other via continuity editing and 
coupled with sound to convey an easily comprehensible story. And, indeed, 
Isou deliberately dismantles narrative cinema’s images and sounds because he 
Figure 1.3  Chiseled filmstrip 

﻿AURAL CINEMA  |  51
notes a fundamental problem with images; namely, that ‘it is possible to make 
them say whatever one wants and that which they do not say’. To subvert this 
perceptual power of images, Traité mars not only the images themselves but 
also the relation they have with the sound track. It is no longer the image which 
originates sound, but sound which constructs the film: ‘The word would no 
longer come from the screen, in order to coincide with its sequences, but would 
always come from an elsewhere, as if concretely and visibly it were an excess 
without any relationship with the organism’. 
However, images still count since Isou does not entirely do away with them. 
He butchers the filmstrip, but these tortured images remain an essential com­
ponent of discrepant cinema. Without images (namely, without a filmstrip), 
there would be no discrepant editing because it presupposes the presence of 
images with which sound can establish a disjunctive relation. Albeit devalued in 
comparison to sound, images therefore continue to retain significance in Isou’s 
cinematic project. Daniel/Isou reels off his plan for the filmstrip on several 
occasions, claiming that ‘I will blow up the filmstrip with rays of sun’, ‘I will take 
pieces of films, and I will scratch them so that unknown beauties will come into 
light’, and ‘I will engrave flowers on the filmstrip’. Discrepant cinema can be 
summarised as the disjunction of sound and image and the slaughtering of the 
filmstrip. 
The Sadism of Discrepant Cinema 
Besides suggesting a new mode of film-making, discrepant cinema proposes 
a new way of viewing films. It presents itself as most forcefully opposed to 
narrative cinema, not only to its film form and content, but also to the kind of 
spectatorship it promotes, so much so that Allyson Field (1999, 57–58) explicitly 
identifies a sadistic quality in Isou’s cinematic project.12 Indeed, throughout 
Traité Isou not only literally warps the filmstrip, but also recurrently voices 
his intention to inflict metaphorical pain on spectators. Thus, the film, and the 
notion of discrepant cinema as a whole, is imbued with violence and animated 
by a destructive thrust, which goes from the physical aggressions against the 
filmstrip to the metaphorical harm to spectators. Moreover, the referentiality 
of the image and its relationship with the sound track destroyed, Traité prob­
lematises the relationship between spectators and the film, making immersive 
reception unachievable and the audience continuously aware of their status. 
Isou himself provides references to de Sade in Traité and contemplates physi­
cal repercussions of his film on spectators. The voice-over associated with Isou’s 
character on screen proclaims:

52  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
I would like a film that could really hurt the eyes. [. . .] One has to leave the cinema 
with a headache. [. . .] I prefer to give you neuralgias rather than ­nothing. [. . .] 
I prefer to ruin your eyes rather than leave them indifferent. [. . .] It is necessary 
that the spectator leaves blind, the ears destroyed, lacerated in this disjunction of 
the word and the image and numb in any of these distinct zones.
Isou partially appropriates de Sade’s rhetoric to articulate his destructive fury 
against the film medium and the experience of film-viewing. As Field (1999) 
points out, the character of ‘Daniel remarks that he would like “a film that 
hurts your eyes”, connecting sadistic pain to his manifesto for the destruction 
of cinema. [. . .] Indeed, the entire concept of discrepant cinema is analogous to 
an aesthetic sadism’ (58). It is in particular by means of black screens and voice-
overs that Isou’s ‘aesthetic sadism’ exhibits itself.
A significant instance of the film’s ‘aesthetic sadism’ takes place in the second 
chapter. Unlike the first and third chapters of Traité, this chapter presents a 
loose narrative – the love story between Daniel and Ève, and the reminiscence of 
Daniel’s past romance with Denise. However, this narrative is constantly inter­
rupted by reflections on a variety of topics, such as politics, the communist party 
and religion, which prevent any immersive consumption of the love story. The 
sound track alone articulates this romance, which however does not find a visual 
correspondence in the image track, except on those rare occasions when short 
shots or photographs of the three characters appear on screen. The sound thus 
constructs a visual desire that remains unsatisfied because spectators are con­
tinuously deprived of the image that could create a harmonious unity between 
what is heard and what is seen. 
Two black monochromatic images effectively display the sadistic quality of 
Isou’s discrepant cinema. The frenzy of chiseled images, which have made their 
appearance in this chapter, comes to a halt on two occasions. The first time 
happens when Daniel/Isou, while recounting his romantic involvement with 
Ève, whom he does not love, reminisces of Denise, a woman with whom he was 
formerly in love. In recalling the night that he spent with Denise, the screen 
remains completely black, without scratches or drawings. Intimacy remains 
beyond the realm of visibility, and spectators are faced with blankness and the 
eroticism of the ear. However, this monochromatic image does not bear any 
ethical value, but rather consists of a direct, metaphorical attack against view­
ers. Unlike, for instance, Godard’s use of black screens (see Chapter 4), Isou’s 
negation of figurative images does not originate out of a respect for reality, nor 
a recognition of the incommensurability between an ineffable sentiment such as 
love and its visible reproduction on screen. Quite simply, Isou sadistically wishes 

﻿AURAL CINEMA  |  53
to deprive spectators of visual pleasure. It is no coincidence that the black screen 
occurs in this moment of the narrative: the image of the pivotal event of narra­
tive cinema – the formation of the couple, the kiss – is entirely negated to the 
audience and their expectations frustrated. 
The second time a monochromatic black image sadistically invades the screen 
happens just before the end of the second chapter, when Isou directly addresses 
spectators as follows:
The author knows that spectators go to the cinema to ingest their Sunday and 
weekly dose of tenderness and, although he does not give a damn about this 
[love] story, he tells it with the hope of a well-deserved success. The author 
doesn’t love this kind of legends because it is a personal matter of taste, and 
the systems and forms that go beyond these stories are the only things that 
matter to him.
This black screen, too, qualifies as a metaphorical assault against spectators. 
After having deprived viewers of figurative images of the love story, Isou mocks 
them by condemning their taste. His statement that he has inserted a love 
story to please spectators seems, at first glance, a sort of kindly concession to 
fulfil their appetite for narrative pleasure. However, this aural flattery is visually 
expressed through a completely black screen. Therefore, while sound makes 
itself accessible to spectators, images – the figurative impressions of reality – are 
once again fully negated. On both occasions, by using a black screen, Isou delib­
erately deprives spectators of cinematic illusion. The spectators’ look is twice 
blocked by a complete non-chiseled (or completely chiseled) blackness, which 
becomes emblematic of the critique of the illusory nature of film images.
There is, however, a moment in the film wherein Isou makes some conces­
sions to the audience. In the last chapter, he introduces the spectator as an 
active producer of meaning, counterbalancing the more pronounced sadism of 
the previous chapters. Here, Ève and Daniel’s love story becomes the framework 
for a discussion on Lettrism and cinema. Having lovingly praised Lettrism, Isou 
provides a succinct summary of discrepant cinema, laying out the spectators’ 
contribution to the film’s construction: 
As of today, the character turning towards the partner was shown, his gestures 
were seen. From now on, [spectators] will hear: ‘Daniel has turned’, without 
seeing him turning. Imagination is incorporated in the cinema because the 
real, the concrete, is destroyed. The spectator will be able to invent his charac­
ter like he has never been allowed to do before in the history of cinema.

54  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Viewers are encouraged to participate actively in the film production during 
reception, by bringing about something very personal; namely, their capacity to 
imagine what is not shown on the screen. Hence, Isou is invoking a thoughtful, 
imaginative spectatorship in which viewers cease to be exclusively receivers of 
images and sounds. Traité stimulates spectators to more critically active modes 
of looking at film by destabilising the mimetic relationship between sound and 
images and remains a most fascinating work on the disconcerting encounter 
with an iconoclastic aesthetics.
Concluding Remarks 
Isou’s cinematic project participates in the broader artistic scepticism which 
followed World War II, concretising in a literal and metaphorical iconoclasm. 
Not only does he physically attack the filmstrip, invoking its destruction, but 
he also metaphorically dismantles the image as illusory copy of a phenomenal 
referent. Reiterating the gesture proper to religious iconoclasm, the material 
breaking of images, Isou proceeds to destroy what cinema had been until then. 
Here the cinematic eidōlon corresponds to any image that has already been used 
in cinema, as well as most figurative images. Film images are stripped of any 
intermediary role – there is no place for the eikōn in Isou’s cinema – and of any 
possible imitative value by means of the chiseling process. While invoking the 
destruction of cinema, Traité is also a love declaration to the cinema that can be 
and contains some of the most insightful claims on film images’ potentialities – 
first and foremost, their power to liberate the spectator’s creative imagination. 
Guy Debord and Jean-Luc Godard, among others, were particularly receptive to 
Isou’s cinematic theory and its iconoclastic drive, albeit reaching quite divergent 
outcomes: whereas Debord developed an aesthetics of displeasure which nega­
tively targets viewers, Godard demonstrated a profound belief in the spectators’ 
ethical imagination.

2	
An Aesthetics of Displeasure: Guy Debord’s 
Destructive Oeuvre 
GUY DEBORD IS perhaps the film-maker most associated with iconoclasm in 
the cinema because of his anti-cinematic aesthetics, which coils around the 
notion of the spectacle and its critique. His uncompromising attitude is evident 
throughout his turbulent intellectual history, from his enthusiastic joining of 
Lettrism under the wing of Isidore Isou to his breaking with it, in order to found, 
first, the Lettrist International in 1952 and then, the Situationist International 
(SI) in 1957. Such a winding artistic journey was also punctuated by harsh 
invectives against Jean-Luc Godard, launched via a number of articles in the 
SI journal.1 The SI’s iconoclastic impetus, conveyed in both their articles and 
aesthetic practices, partially loses Isou’s poetic approach to destruction, turning 
into corrosive gestures against spectators.
Debord’s project, further exasperated during and after the SI years, to 
­‘undermine [. . .] the dominant visual order’ (Jay 1993, 243) developed as harsh 
critique of consumer society (termed ‘the society of the spectacle’) follow­
ing a Marxist framework. He identifies as eidōla those images which retain a 
highly seductive and alienating power affirming the values of the bourgeoisie. 
Accordingly, Debord’s (ab)use of images and sounds stems from his political 
analysis of contemporary consumer society and is primarily aimed at disman­
tling spectatorial pleasure. However, his excessive self-reflexivity prevents 
the discourse on images from attaining the creation of iconoclastic eikones: 
Debord’s oeuvre, heavily affected by an almost complete loss of belief in images, 
remains enclosed in a critique of the eidōlon. 
The contention shaping the chapter is that Debord’s iconoclasm hinges 
on a Marxist critique of commodity and capitalist (spectacular) society and 
a Lukácsian-inflected conception of consumers/spectators. It argues for an 

56  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
­iconoclastic understanding of some cinematic devices used in his films, par­
ticularly that of blank screens, sound-image disjunctions, still images, altered 
motion and the destructive device of détournement for their breaking with an 
aesthetics of mimesis – conceived as that which serves dominant ideology via 
the illusion of realism, entrapping individuals in a contemplative state. Key films 
are examined, with specific attention to iconoclastic sequences which demon­
strate Debord’s vivid contempt for the seductive images of bourgeois society and 
the vision of the world they carry. 
Critique of the Spectacle 
The concept of the spectacle is at the basis of Debord’s philosophical worldview 
and is developed in both films and written works. In his perspective, the specta­
cle does not refer to spectacular media such as cinema and television, but rather 
is at once the product and producer of a specific historico-economic age. In The 
Society of the Spectacle ([1967] 1994), Debord contends that ‘the spectacle is not 
a collection of images, but a social relation among people, mediated by images’ 
(thesis 4). The spectacle thus qualifies a society founded on appearance which 
has perfected the Marxist separation between producer and product: from the 
alienation of the proletariat from the product of their work to the alienation of 
citizen-spectators from the images they see. The situation further worsens, in 
Debord’s account, because citizen-spectators are not even the producers of such 
images, thereby being twice separated from the objects of their sight. What is 
more, Debord insightfully contends that alienation in consumer society takes 
place most effectively in leisure time, which retains only the appearance of free 
time while actually having been commodified to a degree that renders alienation 
an all-encompassing phenomenon. The attention therefore shifts from factory 
workers to consumers and from Marxist devaluation of being into having to 
Debordian appearing. The variety of images regulating leisure time, such as 
advertising images and television and film images, are eidōla which actively 
contribute to modern alienation. 
In his analysis of the spectacle, Debord inherits Marxist doctrine’s icono­
clasm in its critique of the illusionism of ideology and fetish objects. Karl Marx 
and Friedrich Engels ([1846] 1970) define ideology by using the metaphor of 
the ‘camera obscura’ (47), which effectively expresses the very illusionism of the 
images of ideology. As in the camera obscura images appear upside-down, so 
the images of ideology are a distortion of reality; however, both types of images 
are perceived as objective representations of such a reality – in other words, they 
are eidōla, illusory doubles retaining a highly deceptive psychological power. 

﻿AN AESTHETICS OF DISPLEASURE  |  57
William J. T. Mitchell (1986) accordingly reads Marx and Engels’s metaphor of 
the ‘camera obscura as a figurative descendant of Plato’s Cave’ (163) since, in 
both cases, images are shadowy copies of phenomenal reality which, however, 
individuals experience as if they were objectively real. Shifting from ideas to 
material objects, the illusionism of ideology concretises in the fetish; namely, the 
commodities of capitalist society. Commodity fetishism reproposes ideology’s 
deception insofar as the fetish objects present themselves as if they were the 
objects for which they are standing. As Mitchell (1986) poignantly observes, 
‘ideology and fetishism are both varieties of idolatry, one mental, the other 
material, and both emerge from an iconoclastic critique’ (187). The images of 
ideology and fetishism are reminiscent of the notion of idol in Christian theol­
ogy, which is a false, material image of God that presents itself as true god. The 
issue resides in the images’ concealing of their status as representations, the fact 
that they stand for something else, deceiving believers and consumers alike. 
Debord builds on the Marxist critique of commodity fetishism, thereby 
also appropriating its iconoclastic thrust, and identifies the spectacle as that 
which determines alienating relationships between individuals via a continuous 
mediation of images (see especially theses 35–53). Since spectacle’s abode is 
leisure time, individuals-turned-consumers have their free time expropriated; 
that is, the society of the spectacle’s citizen is a consumer of images (illusory 
appearances) which assail them during their free time, minimising any possi­
bilities (time) for critical thinking. According to Debord, ‘the real consumer has 
become a consumer of illusions. The commodity is this materialized illusion and 
the spectacle is its general expression’ (thesis 47). Because it is no longer a tan­
gible commodity, but an immaterial one – the image – which enacts spectacular 
separation (that is, alienation), Debord elaborates a thorough critique of sight 
understood as ‘the most abstract and easily deceived sense’ (thesis 18).
The society of the spectacle is, indeed, characterised by a privileging of any­
thing visual – hence the term spectators in reference to citizens – and sight 
becomes the primary means for spectacular separation and the favoured sense 
in the process of knowledge. The relationship between individuals and reality 
is mediated by images which have been produced by a third party; therefore, 
the sensible world becomes known by means of abstraction, through an unin­
terrupted flux of spectacle-images which is ‘entirely independent of what the 
spectator might understand or think of it’ (Debord [1988] 1990, 28). Individuals 
are no longer responsible for their imaginative horizon, having been stripped 
of the capacity to produce their own images; consequently, spectacular sepa­
ration impoverishes the imaginative capacity which participates in the process 
of alienation, so that the alienated subject of consumer society is also deprived 

58  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
of the ability to imagine actively and independently. A process of de-realisation 
of reality is also derivative of the spectacle’s exploiting of sight insofar as only 
those events which are mediatically reproduced acquire real consistency, in an 
alienating process in which images construct reality itself. What is more, these 
spectacle-images, because they present themselves as utterly decontextualised 
and a-historical, talk exclusively about what is convenient to societal power, 
thereby actively contributing to the maintenance of the status quo in offering 
the (version of) reality which suits capitalist/spectacular power. In this scenario, 
individuals are placed in a contemplative state which qualifies them as passive 
consumer of appearances. Debord ([1967] 1994) emphasises: 
The alienation of the spectator, which reinforces the contemplated objects that 
result from his own unconscious activity, works like this: the more he contem­
plates, the less he lives; the more he identifies with the dominant images of 
need, the less he understands his own life and his own desires. The spectacle’s 
estrangement from the acting subject is expressed by the fact that the individ­
ual’s gestures are no longer his own; they are the gestures of someone else who 
represents them to him. (thesis 30)
There is an aspect of contemplation which involves not only the physical act 
of looking but also the dimension of agency and specifically, the forsaking of 
action. Debord (via the epigraph which opens the second chapter of The Society 
of the Spectacle) explicitly draws on György Lukács’s argument in History and 
Class Consciousness (1971) on contemplation and its role in (hindering) political 
action (praxis). Decrying the divided state of theory and practice, Lukács invokes 
their unity as a ‘precondition of the revolutionary function of the theory’ (3); 
however, this unity can only occur with the emergence of class consciousness. 
That is, only when the class becomes conscious of itself, of its historical situ­
ation, becoming ‘both the subject and object of knowledge’ (2) instead of an 
object of contemplation, can theory and practice unite and the contemplative 
attitude be overcome in favour of praxis. What Debord aims to do, then, is first 
and foremost to awaken citizen-spectators’ consciousness, to show them their 
misery of contemplated objects. Unable to understand their situation and their 
society, individuals in the society of the spectacle have abandoned themselves to 
a contemplation which blocks any possibility of change. Through contemplation 
(as both physical act and mental attitude) citizen-spectators thus experience a 
totalising alienation which occurs primarily in leisure time, giving rise to the 
illusion of personal free time which, instead, is no longer free nor intimately 
belongs to the individual.

﻿AN AESTHETICS OF DISPLEASURE  |  59
Debord’s critique of sight is in keeping with a long tradition in Western 
scepticism, particularly Marxist philosophy. He exasperates the debate on the 
status of images, rejecting them as possible intermediaries: the sensible world 
is no longer directly apprehensible through the senses because of the contin­
uous, deceptive mediation (separation) carried out by images. Sight and visual 
media are at the centre of political critique because of their significance in 
furthering spectacular separation and preserving individuals as contemplated 
objects, which prompts Debord to practically carry out his criticism by means 
of one such media: cinema. The way in which historical materialism aims at 
overthrowing dominant ideology and its false images is by exhibiting its very 
process, which is what Marxist film theory attempts to do – show the hands 
at work, reconstruct the production processes and make explicit the artificial 
nature of cinematic images. Debord thus appropriates the film medium to artic­
ulate his critique of the spectacle and incite the awakening of citizen-spectators’ 
consciousness, resorting to an iconoclastic approach which refutes mimetic 
representation insofar as it had become an effective tool for spectacular separa­
tion. Indeed, ‘the cinema, too, must be destroyed’, so Debord invokes in Sur le 
passage de quelques personnes à travers une assez courte unité de temps (On the 
Passage of a Few Persons Through a Rather Brief Unity of Time, 1959). But what 
he sets out to destroy is a certain way of making films: as spectacle, entertain­
ment, pleasure. In his critical project against the spectacle, cinema becomes a 
means for dismantling the illusory unity of individual and reality by presenting 
images as such; namely, images as constructed representations which societal 
power employs to maintain the status quo. According to Benjamin Noys (2007), 
What Debord aimed to do was to put the ‘unmaking’ of cinema in the cause 
of the ‘unmaking’ of capitalism, and so to unmake the world. These two tasks 
had to be carried out simultaneously, as the history of cinema cannot be dis­
tinguished from the history of modern capitalist society. (395)
The inescapable bond between cinema and history also stems from what 
Giorgio Agamben (2002) identifies as ‘the specific function of the image and 
its eminently historical character’ (314). In Agamben’s account, montage is 
that through which history can return, thereby permitting to comprehend his­
torical past in a new light. He identifies repetition and stoppage as the two 
transcendentals of montage which Debord cinematically exploits: repetition, 
like memory, ‘restores possibility to the past’; stoppage ‘pulls it [the image] 
away from the narrative power to exhibit it as such’ (Agamben 2002, 316, 
317). Inseparable, repetition and stoppage allow Debord to show the image as 

60  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
a ­constructed representation; namely, ‘the image as a zone of undecidability 
between the true and the false. [. . .] The image exhibited as such is no longer 
an image of anything; it is itself imageless’ (Agamben 2002, 319). In Agamben’s 
view, imagelessness refers to ‘the fact that there is nothing more to be seen’ (319) 
rather than to a figuratively empty image; contra the concealed imagelessness 
of pornography and advertising, Debord’s cinema qualifies as ethico-political 
because it unconceals the ideological abuses of images. By using a variety of still 
and moving images produced by consumer society which he then manipulates 
through repetition and stoppage, Debord shows how the same image, which at 
the hands of dominant ideology looks like truth, if détourned, becomes reve­
latory of its deceitful usage. Thus, instead of immersive consumption, illusory 
narratives and transparent images, Debord’s films deliberately aim at provok­
ing constant awareness about the act of watching. 
Such critical approach to cinema concretises in a rejection of mainstream 
films as well as auteur cinema because, in Debord’s perspective, they both fail 
to effectively dismantle the spectacle in their preserving a pleasure of and for 
images. Debord’s disruptive aesthetics destroys cinematic pleasure through 
what Thomas Y. Levin (2002) defines as ‘mimesis of incoherence: the film is 
unsatisfying because the world is unsatisfying; the incoherence of the film 
reflects that of the reality; the poverty of the film’s materials serves to emphasize 
the poverty of its subject’ (360). Similarly, Noys (2007) contends that Debord’s 
films ‘are not anti-pleasure but they are opposed to the false pleasures offered 
us by capital, including the false “aesthetic pleasures” of existing cinema’ (397). 
From his first film realised in a Lettrist ambit to his last work, Debord’s cinema 
offers an iconoclastic aesthetics which unequivocally diverges from narrative 
cinema in an effort to arouse political conscience in spectators. The form of this 
critique deliberately undermines the pleasures associated with the narrative 
film, whether it be mainstream entertaining cinema or auteur cinema.
Almost Nothing to See 
Among the stylistic techniques used with an iconoclastic intent in the visual 
arts, the monochromatic image constitutes perhaps the most radical one. It is, in 
fact, the gesture against figuration most emblematic of the crisis of mimesis in 
Western arts. Like in abstract painting (Besançon 2000, 319–77; Gamboni 1997; 
Lowe 2002; Poirson-Dechonne 2016, 163–79; Wajcman 1998), in cinema, too, 
the monochromatic image consists in a rejection of mimetic representation and 
concretely manifests the tension between the invisible and the visually accessible. 
The monochromatic screen qualifies as an interruption and negation of vision, an 

﻿AN AESTHETICS OF DISPLEASURE  |  61
image of imagelessness in which the look is denied entry to the world of mimetic 
representation. Debord extensively exploits such a device in all his films to frus­
trate viewers’ expectations and dismantle any attempt at cinematic transparency. 
In Cinema 2 (1997a, 189–224), Gilles Deleuze considers the role of the black 
and white screens in contemporary cinema. Drawing on Noël Burch (1981), 
Deleuze emphasises the blank screen’s relevance for contemporary cinema and 
its being a threshold between presence and absence. The white or black screen 
disconcerts the spectator’s look, which is compelled to confront an absence of 
figurative images and colours. While blank screens in cinema do not necessarily 
acquire an iconoclastic value,2 Debord employs them as an area in which to 
question the experience of film viewing and the image’s status. The monochro­
matic screen in Debord’s films thus constitutes a deliberate iconoclastic gesture 
which, by opening visual vacua in the cinematographic space, requires a concep­
tual operation to be translated into a system of meaning. 
Debord structures his first film, Hurlements en faveur de Sade (Howls for Sade, 
1952), based on the alternation between black screen and white screen. The film 
was realised within a Lettrist context and is indebted to previous Lettrist films, 
especially Isou’s Traité de bave et d’éternité (1951), in its iconoclastic negation 
of any figurative image. Both Kaira M. Cabañas (2014, 98) and Levin (2002, 342) 
define Hurlements as a ‘sound film without images’. More precisely, what is 
absent from the film are representational images since Hurlements is composed 
of twenty-six monochromatic screens of different lengths, thirteen white and 
thirteen black, for a total duration of seventy-five minutes. When the screen 
is black there is silence,3 when the screen is white there is speech. Only twenty 
minutes of the overall running time contain human voices, with the film ending 
with twenty-four minutes of silent black screen. 
Hurlements opens with a white screen accompanied by a wheezing and rasp­
ing sound, which is Gil J. Wolman, an exponent of Lettrism and a Lettrist film-
maker, reciting a ‘mégapneumie, what Wolman elsewhere describes as a poésie 
physique (physical poetry) that is based on breath, rather than on the letter as 
with Isou, and that explores the use of “all human sounds”’ (Cabañas 2014, 80). 
Although this sound differs from that of Isou’s film, it nonetheless resonates with 
Traité’s motif of the guttural, unintelligible human sound heard throughout the 
film. Wolman’s mégapneumie is followed by intelligible speech in which Debord 
outlines his personal history of cinema, providing the cinematic influences for 
his film, which include Dadaism, Surrealism and Lettrism. He lists Le Voyage 
dans la Lune (Georges Méliès, 1902), The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (Das Cabinet 
des Dr. Caligari, Robert Wiene, 1920), Entr’acte (René Clair, 1924), Battleship 
Potemkin (Bronenosets Potëmkin, Sergei Eisenstein, 1925), Un Chien Andalou 

62  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
(Luis Buñuel and Salvador Dalí, 1929), City Lights (Charlie Chaplin, 1931), 
Traité de bave et d’éternité (Isidore Isou, 1951) and L’Anticoncept (The Anti-
Concept, Gil J. Wolman, 1952) and concludes with his own film, Hurlements. 
During the remaining twelve white screens, we hear the monotonal voice-overs 
of Debord, Isou and other Lettrists reading bits and pieces taken from various 
texts, such as the civil code and James Joyce’s work, together with seemingly 
nonsensical conversations.
In Hurlements, Debord applies to sound the device of détournement, which 
will become the constructive principle of all his subsequent films and a par­
adigmatic device of the SI (Debord and Wolman [1956] 2006; Internationale 
situationniste [1959] 2006b, 67–68). Détournement, meaning ‘diversion’ or 
‘hijacking’, is the practice of appropriating visual or aural elements from their 
context – in this case that of consumer society – and investing them with 
a meaning often antithetical to their original one. That is, by subverting the 
context, the détournement produces anti-spectacular meanings. In Hurlements, 
détourned sounds intensify the overall negative aesthetics of the film already 
produced by the white screens: the sound track of inexpressive voices works 
together with the halting of figurative vision in rendering the viewing experience 
displeasing. Divested of their original context and pronounced almost without 
changes in tone, the spoken words lose the reference to their original meaning; 
thus, for instance, individual sentences taken from the civil code, now separated 
from larger paragraphs that would provide a meaningful context, ‘are made 
ridiculous’ (Field 1999, 64). It is hardly possible to feel involved in these voice-
overs due to both their tone and content, and even less when faced with the 
double negation of images and sounds when the screen is black: it is no longer 
possible to see anything but blackness, it is no longer possible to hear anything 
but noisy silence. In Levin’s (2002) passionate and at times hyperbolical reading, 
this film is an attack against ‘the spectators [who], confronted with their desires 
and expectations for a (the) spectacle, are provoked to the point of screams 
(hurlements) when it is revealed to what extent they themselves are an integral 
part of this spectacular economy’ (348). 
Hurlements does dismantle more traditional modes of film spectatorship, 
testing the viewers’ patience and actively promoting aesthetic displeasure to 
counter contemplation.4 The complete absence of figurative images, annulled 
in the black and white screens, together with silence and détourned sounds, 
manifests a radical distrust in audio-visual images and a disbelief in the view­
ers’  capacity to critically engage with cinema unless deprived of pleasure. 
Accounts of the first screenings of the film highlight the purposeful arousal 
of unpleasant reactions in spectators as a means for dismantling the spectacle. 

﻿AN AESTHETICS OF DISPLEASURE  |  63
Levin (2002) notes that ‘the audience has become bored and nervous, if not 
violent, long before the twenty-four minute black silence that makes up the 
final sequence’ (342), and Jay (1993) similarly comments that, ‘not surpris­
ingly, the event ­produced the scandal that Debord expected – those hurle­
ments elicited by sadistically subjecting the audience to so mind-numbing an 
­experience – when it was first shown to a non-Lettrist audience in London [. . .] 
in 1952’ (245).	
Debord’s aesthetics of displeasure aims at countering the alienating pleas­
ures of spectacular film images, which perpetuate the logic of the specta­
cle by entrapping viewers in a passive state – what Boris Groys (2002, 287) 
addresses as the ‘vita contemplativa’ (contemplative life) of immersive cinema 
in opposition to the ‘vita activa’ (active life) encouraged by Debord’s films. 
According to Groys, mainstream cinema promotes active life on screen while 
relegating spectators to a state of (mental) immobility (namely, contempla­
tion), whereas Debord’s films would restore the spectator as an active subject. 
Likewise, Allyson Field contends that Hurlements challenges habitual modes 
of film viewing through the use of monochromatic screens, détourned sounds 
and long silences. In her reading, ‘Debord makes the film difficult to watch, to 
hear, and to sit through, thereby making a film that aims to revolutionize the 
relation of spectator to film’ (Field 1999, 64). It is through this difficult, poten­
tially unpleasant watching that Debord pursues the overcoming of spectatorial 
contemplation, forcing viewers to face the emptiness of their alienated life 
which is disclosed to them once contemplation is no longer possible. While 
reintroducing figurative images in his subsequent films, Debord never ceased 
to employ the monochromatic screen as a direct attack against contemplative 
reception and spectacle-images, which is at the core of his last film, palindro­
mically titled In girum imus nocte et consumimur igni (We Wander in the Night 
and Are Consumed by Fire, 1978).
In girum explores issues of film spectatorship as an impoverished living 
mode equivalent to contemplative life in the society of the spectacle, meta­
phorically attacking viewers for a running time of ninety minutes. Like pre­
vious Debord works, it is composed of détourned found footage images, film 
extracts, personal photos and the unusual addition of shots expressly recorded 
for this film, accompanied by the director’s voice-over as the unifying ele­
ment. From the opening,  the film makes manifest its subject, that of alien­
ated spectatorship, by presenting a static image of an audience at the cinema 
(Figure 2.1). Here the détournement disallows any possible contemplative iden­
tification between images and spectators: viewers are at once observing sub­
ject and observed object since they metaphorically watch themselves ­watching 

64  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
­themselves. The film continues with an intermingling of photographs and shots 
of urban views, film spectators and citizens in their daily life to establish a 
parallel between living in the society of the spectacle and going to the cinema 
to watch films that promote a ­contemplative – and therefore unreceptive to 
contemporary ­alienation – experience. 
The metaphorical assault on spectators manifests itself more vehemently 
towards the end of the film, when Debord inserts a black screen on which a 
white text aggressively addresses the audience as follows: ‘Here the spectators, 
having been deprived of everything, will even be deprived of images’. Then, 
the screen becomes white for about two minutes, while Debord’s voice-over 
launches into a defence of his work, emphasising his status as exiled and mis­
understood. The choice of a monochromatic screen is an explicit provocation 
to the audience, in line with Debord’s theoretical view, as it is systematically 
expressed in the texts The Society of the Spectacle ([1967] 1994) and Comments 
on the Society of the Spectacle ([1988] 1990) and is exemplary of his claimed 
attack against existing cinema. Moreover, the monochromatic screen also 
serves his denouncing of the socio-economic, historical fabric within which 
cinema operates; thus, dispossessing viewers of familiar images is a way to 
Figure 2.1  Static shot of a photograph of a cinema audience 

﻿AN AESTHETICS OF DISPLEASURE  |  65
encourage an awakening from the numbness of their alienated life in consumer 
society. As his monotonal voice-over argues, 
It is a particular society, not a particular technology, that has made the cinema 
like this. It could have consisted of historical analyses, theories, essays, mem­
oirs. It could have consisted of films like the one I am making at this moment. 
While this quote most evidently expresses Debord’s destructive anti-illusionism 
and his critique of the socio-historical context as that which determines spec­
tacular cinema, it also interestingly affirms a separation of the technology of 
image-making and image-viewing from socio-cultural ideology. This conception 
contrasts, for instance, with Stephen Heath’s (1976) argument on the ideological 
dimensions of Western perspective; that is, the technology of cinema, as a devel­
opment of that of photography which, in its turn, reproduces the Quattrocento 
perspective, is ideologically coded. In Heath’s view, then, it is impossible to sep­
arate the technology and the socio-cultural context/ideology. In Debord’s social 
analysis of the contextual spectacular employment of images and in his project 
of awakening consciousness through a détourning of images of consumerism, 
formal interest in the medium itself is instead secondary. 
To contrast the illusionism of the spectacle and to articulate its critique, 
Debord privileges sound over image and, specifically, speech over other sounds. 
Both in his first and last films, as well as in the rest of his cinematic works, 
‘Debord uses language to counter the purported truth of an image’ (Cabañas 
2014, 114). And indeed, Debord’s distant and monotonal voice-over is the very 
foundation of all his films. The distrust in the image is compensated by a faith in 
the word – in its ability to communicate meaning. Such belief in the word over 
the image, reminiscent of Lettrist mysticism, also echoes the Biblical rejection 
of the eye in favour of the ear. Debord’s pronounced iconoclasm stems from his 
considering images only in their ability to deceive rather than believing in any 
redemptive power. According to Levin (2002), 
Debord contends that, in fact, images as such can prove nothing, save per­
haps the reigning deception. By misusing images however, by subjecting 
the cornerstones of the cinematic edifice to détournement, something may 
perhaps be revealed about the medium itself, Debord suggests, even if only 
negatively. (407)
Rejecting the fascination of the image, Debord has shown that the cinema ‘can 
be reduced to this white screen, then this black screen’ (Debord 1994, Guy 

66  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Debord, son art et son temps). The monochromatic screen is therefore sympto­
matic of a disbelief in the image, in its ability to represent the model veraciously. 
In Debord’s view, there is no space for doubts about the deceptiveness of images 
and his conclusion on the impossibility of a true or trustworthy image (eikōn) is 
categorical. 
Decomposing Cinematic Flow
Alongside the absence of figurative images of the monochromatic screen, other 
techniques can lead to the nullification of the referential, self-evident image 
without entirely renouncing figuration. This can be achieved via the intensive 
manipulation of figurative images and of film movement because the dissection 
of cinematic flow mars the nexus between images and the models that have 
produced them. Debord utilises visual and aural détournements to dispossess 
images of their alienating value and to show the logic of the spectacle, most 
effectively in the filmic rendition of The Society of the Spectacle (1973), which is 
constructed on the alternation between stasis and movement. Whether through 
stillness, blank screens or détourned images and sounds, Debord’s method qual­
ifies as negative-affirmative insofar as his anti-cinematic films make seemingly 
incontrovertible statements (individuals have become passive consumers of 
images; cinema is a tool of the spectacle; images are false; only Lettrist and 
Situationist cinema can make a considerable change), leaving little or nothing to 
the benefit of doubt. 
Like the monochromatic screen, the interruption or manipulation of filmic 
movement is not iconoclastic per se. It acquires an iconoclastic value when 
used as a way to redirect the look: through stillness or slowness the attention 
is brought to the absence of regular motion which, in turn, should stimulate an 
interrogation of this stasis’ meaning. The abolition or alteration of movement 
counters cinematic illusion and, in establishing a distance between images and 
viewers, allows spectators to think about cinema while at the cinema. Therefore, 
these images of decomposed movement aim at producing what Raymond 
Bellour (2012) defines ‘pensive spectator’ (86), inasmuch as they break the pos­
sibility of a totally immersive consumption of the film. 
In his analysis of filmic movement, Bellour (2012) identifies the freeze-frame 
as ‘the often unique, fugitive, yet perhaps decisive instant when cinema seems 
to be fighting against its very principle’ (130); that is, movement. While Bellour 
remarks several times that movement is not a necessary condition for cinema, it 
is also undeniable that, since its origin, cinema has had close ties with it. Films 
have celebrated motion in multiple ways, both through the movement of the 

﻿AN AESTHETICS OF DISPLEASURE  |  67
pro-filmic and via camera movements and editing. And indeed, ‘moving images’ 
is a fundamental part of the very definition of cinema, as its etymology makes 
clear.5 Although it is of course possible to make films without images that move, 
movement is nonetheless a constant possibility for cinema, as Noël Carroll’s 
(1996) definition of ‘moving image’ underlines: ‘Movement in a film image is 
an artistic choice which is always technically available’ (64). Accordingly, the 
interruption of motion contains an anti-cinematic quality. 
Taking movement as a defining feature of cinema, Groys (2002) examines 
stillness as a potentially iconoclastic technique. First considering mainstream 
cinema, he opposes the contemplative state promoted by narrative films in 
spectators to the movement celebrated on screen. In mainstream films, the 
vita activa so intensively lauded on screen is negated, at least partially, to the 
audience who cannot directly intervene in the film and are asked to contemplate 
the action happening on the screen. Conversely, Groys contends, the abolition 
of film flow can become an iconoclastic device able to return agency to viewers. 
The interruption of motion on screen would thus stimulate spectators to engage 
with the film in more thoughtful ways. Similarly, Bellour (2012) identifies in the 
halting of cinematic movement the potential to provoke a more active response 
from the audience, claiming that, ‘as soon as you stop the film, you begin to 
find the time to add to the image. You start to reflect differently on film, on 
cinema’ (92). To this very end, Debord decomposes cinematic flow in his films. 
By deliberately thwarting the mimetic movement of images,6 he intends to dis­
concert viewers so as to elicit a critical response. While it is undeniable that 
Debord’s use of stillness and voice-over interrupts the possibility of immersive 
film viewing, the spectators’ taking notice of their own alienation in the society 
of the spectacle stems primarily from his verbally and verbosely providing a 
meaning for this altered motion.
The Society of the Spectacle illustrates how the logic of the spectacle has 
permeated any social aspect of life, turning individuals into spectators. The film 
originates from Debord’s 1967 book, a collection of theses on the concept of 
the spectacle in contemporary capitalist society, and is entirely composed of 
found footage and pre-existing material. Stylistically, it is exemplary of Debord’s 
aesthetics of displeasure in that it prevents any contemplative viewing and 
exhibits the cinematic image as constructed representation through repetition 
and stoppage. The Society of the Spectacle’s anti-cinematic quality deliberately 
produces a ‘violation of the syntax and economy of pleasure characteristic of 
spectacle’ (Levin 2002, 396) and ‘breaks with the conventional forms of aesthetic 
“pleasure” associated with cinema. Debord’s cinema is a cinema of “unpleasure”, 
at least in terms of what we might usually think of as the pleasures of cinema’ 

68  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
(Noys 2007, 396). Such an aesthetics results from visual and aural détourne­
ments, citations and repetitions, stillness and motion, which disclose the film 
image’s ordinary status as a tool of the spectacle. However, in his attempt to 
negate the capital, and thus spectacular cinema as its integral component, 
Debord’s dismantling of spectatorial pleasure renders his critique significantly 
difficult to access. 
The Society of the Spectacle formally applies Debord’s ([1967] 1994) under­
standing of ‘the spectacle in its generality [. . . as] a concrete inversion of life, and, 
as such, [as] the autonomous movement of nonlife’ (thesis 2). Film movement 
becomes an allegory of spectacular nonlife, whereas the paralysed film image 
functions as a space of re-appropriation, for spectators, of their time to think. By 
freezing images, Debord suppresses any possible identification between them and 
viewers, thereby promoting the arousal of critical thoughts on consumer society 
and the world of commodities. Such alternating between stasis and movement 
qualifies as Debord’s iconoclastic method to critique the eidōlon, the false image 
produced by the spectacle which has acquired real consistency – like the religious 
idol worshipped as a real god, spectacular eidōla appear as true presence. The 
film thus carries out an explicit and bitter critique of capitalist society by means 
of its own images, which are understood as direct expressions of the spectacle. 
Debord’s monotonal voice-over, accompanied by a single, repeated musi­
cal motif, articulates the critique by reading some of the theses from his book 
together with extracts from other authors. This un-modulated voice is counter­
balanced by the rhythm of the image track, which is structured on the continual 
alternation between movement and stasis. The images’ sources range from adver­
tising to television, film and Debord’s photos of friends and his life partner Alice 
Becker-Ho (to whom the film is dedicated). With the exception of the personal 
photos, the film’s images are emblematic of the consumer society and the alien­
ating society of the spectacle: footage and pictures of naked pin-ups and models 
recur throughout the film, alongside that of serialised factory work, world politi­
cians, soldiers and armies, stock market, the accumulation of waste, urbanism’s 
devastation, concerts and ecstatic crowds. Debord also détourns excerpts from 
Hollywood films such as Josef von Sternberg’s The Shanghai Gesture (1941), John 
Ford’s Rio Grande (1950) and Nicholas Ray’s Johnny Guitar (1954), as well as 
films ‘from so-called socialist countries’ (as the film credits them), such as Sergei 
Eisenstein’s Battleship Potemkin and October: Ten Days That Shook the World 
(Oktiabr’ ili Desiat’ dneĭ, kotorye potriasli mir, 1928). De- and re-contextualised 
via détournement, the variety of images composing The Society of the Spectacle 
are unconcealed as spectacular eidōla. That is, the practice of détournement 
extrapolates images and sounds from their original context and provides them 

﻿AN AESTHETICS OF DISPLEASURE  |  69
with a different meaning by positioning them in a new situation. Thus, for exam­
ple, the extracts from the fictional films that Debord incorporates in The Society 
of the Spectacle no longer retain the meaning they might have had as part of 
their original film, but ‘are used [. . .] to represent the rectification of the “artistic 
inversion of life”’. Denouncing the spectacle’s ‘deport[ing of] real life behind the 
screen’, the détournement applied to existing fictional films constitutes a way to 
restore those aspects of life which the films may recall in their new context – 
hence, ‘Johnny Guitar evokes real memories of love, Shanghai Gesture [evokes] 
other adventurous places [. . .]. The Western Rio Grande can evoke all action and 
historical reflection’ (Debord [1989] 2003, 223). 
The de-/re-contextualisation which détournement operates also serves to 
unconceal the shared spectacular quality of diverse images. Debord’s montage, 
in fact, reveals that what at first sight may have appeared as a disparate amalgam 
is actually the product of the same spectacular logic; therefore, the film’s aes­
thetics expressly counters such logic. While the spectacle separates and isolates 
images to maintain the status quo, Debord links seemingly unrelated images 
to show how they all participate in the perpetuation of spectacular discourse. 
Accordingly, footage of the Beatles and photos of Marilyn Monroe can coexist 
alongside political news-reels, images of soldiers and armies, and shots of urban 
waste. Through the détournement, what may look different reveals itself as the 
product of the same alienating logic. 
The critique of contemporary society also develops from the variation 
between movement and stasis of these varied images: the immobility of photos 
and freeze-frames constitutes the negation of the false movement of spectacular 
images. Cinematic flow, reiterating spectacular flow, is a reactionary movement 
which suppresses the time and distance necessary for viewers to reflect on 
the images before them; thus, illusory filmic flow, which mirrors the endless 
movement of the spectacle, is a paradoxical movement for the maintenance 
of the status quo. For instance, the critique of urbanism, which was a central 
motif of the SI’s criticism for its reproduction of the spectacle’s separation by 
dividing and rationalising space,7 unfolds through the motion/stillness binary 
of détourned images. The image flux of cities, new residential neighbourhoods 
and building materials’ waste is supplanted by the stillness of Bruegel the Elder’s 
painting Tower of Babel (c. 1563). A gloomy, spiral-shaped construction domi­
nates the space of the canvas: divine punishment has already occurred, making 
human communication impossible because of the lack of a shared language; 
the incoherence of the architecture thus reflects linguistic incomprehension. 
Likewise, human incommunicability governs in the society of the spectacle. 
Therefore, the still image of the painting and the image flux of urbanism’s 

70  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
­devastation are not set in opposition but paralleled through the sameness of 
their subject matter; namely, the impossible communication between individ­
uals. The seemingly innocuous images of urban constructions are therefore 
nothing other than spectacle-images of human alienation. 
Throughout the film, the arrest of movement restores the possibility of crit­
ical thinking without however rehabilitating the image as eikōn. In a sequence 
on the consumption of leisure time, moving images of women at the seaside 
are punctuated with still images of body details to articulate the critique of 
the commodification of female bodies and their assimilation to spectacular 
desire. Similarly, the criticism of the star as incarnation of the spectacle unfolds 
through a frenzy of moving images of the Beatles suddenly halted by still photos 
of Marilyn Monroe. Both moving and still images are eidōla, and the power of 
stoppage consists in extrapolating one image from the flux and exhibiting it 
more clearly as spectacular. Only the film’s incipit provides a few instances in 
which Debord seems to concede a somewhat positive connotation to the image. 
Photos of Alice Becker-Ho (Figure 2.2), broken once by the spectacle-image of 
two models, are paired with a rendition of Johann Sebastian Bach’s Sonata for 
Cello and Harpsichord in G major, allegro moderato and the following subtitle: 
Figure 2.2  Static shot of a photograph of Alice Becker-Ho and text ‘and the living re-encounters 
the living’

﻿AN AESTHETICS OF DISPLEASURE  |  71
Since each particular sentiment is only a partial aspect of life and not the 
entirety of life, life burns to pour out through the diversity of sentiments, and 
thus rediscover itself in the sum of diversity. In love, the separate still exists, 
but not as separated, as united: and the living re-encounters the living.
The last sentence is taken from Hegel ([1798] 1971, 305),8 according to whom 
love overcomes individual separation. Becker-Ho’s photos configure themselves 
as possible locus of unity opposed to spectacular separation, which is repre­
sented through the spectacle-image of naked models. The film’s incipit therefore 
introduces the critique of the spectacle as ‘inversion of life’, which is the subject 
of the entire film, while also leaving open for the image the unlikely possibility 
of being something other than eidōlon. Cabañas (2014) points out that, ‘with 
the exception of the opening still images of his partner Alice Becker-Ho, the 
remainder of the film bespeaks the same reality: “our existence separated from 
ourselves, transformed by the machine of the spectacle into dead images before 
us, against us”’ (117).
In Debord’s oeuvre, the film image, whether figurative or blank, is constantly 
negated as truthful representation because of its belonging to the pervasive logic 
of the spectacle. According to Monica Dall’Asta and Marco Grosoli (2011), 
‘the trust in the (possible) authenticity of reproduction is that which ceases to 
exist in Debord’s vision’ (14). Via the détournement, Debord shows that even 
those images apparently closest to their phenomenal referent constitute an 
illusion, a false surrogate of reality. There is no belief in cinematic and photo­
graphic images’ capacity of a veracious representation of reality insofar as ‘in 
a world that has really been turned upside down, truth is a moment of false­
hood’ (Debord [1988] 1990, 50). Debord takes the reflection on the status of the 
image to its extreme, negating any possibility for the image as intermediary – as 
eikōn. The sensible world, turned into spectacle, becomes unknowable through 
direct experience and can be apprehended only via the continuous mediation of 
spectacle-images. However, this mediation establishes a nexus neither between 
these images and their models – since images posit themselves as if they were 
the models – nor between individuals and the sensible world, which is primarily 
lived passively through sight. Broken the eidōlon, Debord displays the image as 
a tool of the spectacle, marked by its illusory appearance.
Concluding Remarks
Debord exasperates the devices of blank screen, altered motion and sound-­
image disjunction, imbuing them with iconoclastic value to metaphorically 

72  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
attack passive spectatorship. What is more, he develops the détournement 
through which to dismantle the images of capitalist society, in an attempt to 
defang the alienating power that subjugates citizens and spectators alike. Thus, 
Debord offers a lucid critique of the film image without however providing a way 
forward, because he remains entrapped in an extremely self-reflexive paradigm. 
Following the iconoclastic tendency of Marxist critique, Debord’s destruction 
of images derives from a distrust in the image’s ability to represent the model. 
Spectacle-images are eidōla because they feign their referents with which they 
have severed any relationship; hence, they are reduced to pure appearances 
with no possible redemption. Enclosed in an absolute critique of the cinematic 
eidōlon, from Hurlements to In girum there is no place for the eikōn in Debord’s 
perspective. Such a sharp critique of representation and iconoclastic approach 
to cinema are also present in the films of Carmelo Bene, who recuperates fiction 
only to further dismantle it. However, while Debord is anxious to convey his 
political perspective via intelligible speech, Bene embraces an absurd world­
view, disrupting language through a voice which has become incomprehensible 
phoné.

3	
Towards a Radical Voice: Carmelo Bene’s Our Lady 
of the Turks
A LARGER-THAN-LIFE FIGURE, yet overlooked by scholars, Carmelo Bene 
experimented with a destructive aesthetics in a variety of media, from theatre to 
cinema, television and literature. (In)famous for his surly manners and narcis­
sistic self-referentiality, he was author, director and main actor of his plays and 
films, which were tailored to his remarkable vocal and physical abilities. Theatre 
first, and cinema and television later, are beset by Bene’s frenzied iconoclasm, 
which dismantles intelligible narrative, language and mise-en-scène. He favours 
a ‘removing from the scene’ [togliere di scena] (Bene ([1995] 2002b, xiii),1 which 
is part of a complex aesthetics of subtraction conducive to what Gilles Deleuze 
(1997b) defines as Bene’s ‘theatre of nonrepresentation’ (241). Artistic mimesis 
is utterly rejected in pursuit of plays and films as purely aesthetic events, in 
which comprehensibility is always on the verge of surrendering to nonsense. 
Bene iconoclastically exploits style and content, establishing visual and aural 
dissonances, as well as narrative inconsistencies, in an overall refusal of cinema 
and theatre as mimetic representations of reality. Like Isidore Isou and Guy 
Debord, he privileges the sonorous dimension of cinema as a way to attack its 
visual lure; however – unlike the verbo-centric Debord and, to a lesser extent, 
Isou – Bene grounds his films in the voice as phoné wherein sense and com­
munication cease to have a stable place. The voice becomes the centre around 
which his poetic of destruction unravels: through aural juxtapositions and dis­
junctions, marred elocution, neologisms and exasperated sound levels, Bene 
makes sonorous intelligibility often impossible to achieve while also hindering 
visual comprehension.
This chapter explores Bene’s project to destroy theatre first and cinema 
later, as media able to communicate meaning by way of linguistic and sonic 

74  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
­disruptions. It considers the significance of the voice as phoné for the overcom­
ing of cinema’s logo-video-centrism and for the uncoupling of a harmoniously 
conceived relationship between body and voice, which further dismantles cin­
ematic mimesis. Bene’s first film, Our Lady of the Turks (Nostra signora dei 
turchi, 1968), is exemplary of an iconoclastic understanding of cinema in its 
eschewing of mimetic images and intelligible narrative. Via a paradoxical use 
of language and sound, the film also articulates a critique of Catholic religion, 
and specifically of codified religious rites as opposed to the mystical experience 
of the sacred, well exemplified by the character of a priest incapable of intelli­
gibly speaking, who ends up vomiting sounds, and an extremely earthly Saint 
Margaret obsessively repeating ‘I forgive you’. This chapter thus engages with 
a remarkably destructive approach to cinema, through a film wherein iconic 
unrepresentability chimes with sonic unintelligibility.
An Aesthetics of Subtraction and Amplification
Bene’s artistic project aims at negating theatre first, and cinema and television 
later, as meaningful representational media via an overcoming of logo- and 
­video-centrism. Because mimesis in the visual arts often aids in the commu­
nication of an intelligible meaning, it becomes a core target in Bene’s longing 
for a theatre and cinema that could qualify as ‘inhumane refusal to express 
anything’ (Bene [1995] 2002b, xxxv). To this end, he abolishes narrative content, 
dismisses comprehensible acting and relinquishes dialogue, thereby grounding 
his theatrical events in aphasia (the inability to communicate through language) 
and apraxia (the inability to execute coherent movements and gestures). Actors 
are forced to repeatedly fall and stagger, vocalising a text performed in spasms 
and broken sentences, often played-back or rendered inaudible to the audi­
ence. What is more, Bene dissects the written text through acts of subtraction 
which allow for minor elements to be amplified, contributing to a ‘theatre of 
nonrepresentation’ in which the spectator’s identification with and understand­
ing of what is happening on the stage is neutralised. Responding to the same 
iconoclastic drive, his films further exasperate incoherent bodily gestures and 
destructive approaches to language while also taking the mimetic image apart 
so that it can no longer function as (pretended) intermediary, relational entity.
In his iconoclastic approach to the arts, Bene is profoundly influenced by 
Christian mysticism of both the apophatic and cataphatic traditions (Chillemi 
2011; Furno 2014, 206; Paiano 2020), insofar as they maintain, albeit with sub­
stantial differences (which go well beyond the scope of my argument), that the 
ecstatic experience of God cannot be adequately expressed in its entirety. In his 

﻿TOWARDS A RADICAL VOICE  |  75
written, theatrical and cinematic works, Bene extensively references cataphatic 
mystics such as Saint Teresa of Avila and Saint Joseph of Copertino (on whose 
life Bene centres his unfilmed screenplay A boccaperta [With mouth wide open] 
[1976] 2002a) who allow him to explore the peculiar place of the personal expe­
rience of God in positive theology and specifically, in Catholicism – the religion 
of icons. Cataphatic mystical experience brings to the surface a subtle tension 
between image and word, wherein the former seems to retain its capacity to 
represent while the latter reveals itself as partially deficient. Negative theology 
resolves this tension because of its positioning of the sacred in the domain of 
the ineffable and the unrepresentable, conceiving of both image and word as 
insufficient for the rendering of the divine and the human experience thereof. 
Echoes of apophatic mysticism, particularly that of Meister Eckhart, are palpa­
ble in Bene’s works (explicitly in Un dio assente: Monologo a due voci sul teatro 
[An Absent God: A Two-Voices Monologue about Theatre] [2006], but also in 
his plays and films, up to the rhetorically saturated poem ‘L mal de’ fiori [The 
Evil of Flowers] [2000]). Fundamental in Meister Eckhart’s (2009) ruminations 
is the intimate relationship with God, whose most overwhelming manifesta­
tion occurs in mystical experience, which transcends the human capacity to 
represent (through words or images) and constitutes a breach of quotidian 
perception. There is no mediation between the subject experiencing mystical 
vision and God but only overwhelming immediacy, which is possible insofar 
as the subject is liberated from images. Not only does mystical experience take 
place without the interference of images, but also accounting for such an experi­
ence through language or image is doomed to failure (see, for instance, sermons 
1, 7, 9, 14(b), 32(a), 41, 42)2. Much like the apophatic experience of God implies 
a rupture with everydayness and the human capacity to exhaustively express 
it, so Bene seeks an art which could sever any comprehensible communication 
with a given reality, attesting to the poverty of supposedly meaningful images 
and words in the rendering of experience; an experience, therefore, that could 
leave spectators with their mouth wide open in ecstatic bewilderment. 
Language’s failure to utter experience concretises in Bene’s consistent 
recourse to aphasia (stammering, dis/assonances, warped elocution) and is vis­
ually paralleled with mimesis’s inadequacy. In its deceptive guise of a trustwor­
thy intermediary agent, the mimetic image corresponds to the eidōlon, which 
accordingly impoverishes the phenomenal world (which is enframed), the arts 
(which are reduced to a reproduction) and the artistic experience (which loses 
its ecstatic potential). Since there is no possibility for the image to be eikōn in 
Bene’s perspective, the only available option remains the breaking of the eidōlon, 
of the image mistakenly conceived as a relational entity able to ­communicate, 

76  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
to produce instead an incommunicable artistic experience which could be tan­
tamount to mystical ecstasy – hence, the conspicuous resorting to aphasia and 
apraxia, which permit the possible nearing of such an experience.
Explicitly praising the Byzantine iconoclastic emperor Leo, the destroyer of 
icons, Bene ([1978] 2011f) claims that ‘the image is death. Leo, the iconoclast, 
was right. The image is death, the image is mortal, but it is not the act of dying. 
Dying is a continuum, agony is the crisis, the impasse’ (146). Visual (and aural) 
mimesis configures itself as locus of immobility for its de/limiting of reality and 
our experience thereof. In Bene’s theatre and cinema, instead, everything is set 
in a state of constant variation; even when something appears to be still, there is 
always – as imperceptible as it may be – movement (there is no death but the 
act of dying). The attention is brought to a-finalistic gestures and unintelligible 
voices which develop towards and around aphasia and apraxia. Actors are com­
pelled to staggering movements and repeated, meaningless gestures, hampered 
by the objectual world and dressed in unwieldy costumes which prompt them to 
inexorably fall. Such bodily impediments are paired with a language which has 
ceased to communicate anything, since actors stutter, mumble and lose their 
ability to articulate speech. The voice as phoné becomes the vehicle for disman­
tling the image as relational entity because, as a logos-less voice, it constitutes an 
attack against language and, therefore, an attack against language’s capacity to 
represent and communicate. Stuttering, mumbling, rumbling are placed at the 
forefront of the sound track for their rendering of the inability to say something 
clearly and intelligibly, thereby echoing the inexpressible quality of mystical 
experience.
What is under attack is any possible attempt at meaningful representation, 
which consequently involves spectatorship – what to do with the audience? 
How to unsettle them ecstatically and aesthetically? In a narcissistic move, Bene 
distances himself from traditional theatre and mainstream cinema, which elicit 
immersive fruition, but also from Brecht’s epic theatre and avant-garde cinema 
for their mistaken focus on the audience. Bene, instead, claims to neglect specta­
tors, who are ‘constantly sandwiched between fatigue of the eye and frustration 
of the soul’ (Bachmann 1972–73, 21). While Bene reiterates, in writing and 
interviews, his disregard for the viewers, his poetic is obsessively haunted by 
the recipients of his oeuvre; the will of dismantling meaning has its reason for 
being in the spectator, the focal point around which Bene’s iconoclastic prac­
tices develop. In the theatrical version of Our Lady of the Turks (1966, 1973), 
for instance, Bene literally walls up the fourth wall with a glass panel to make it 
impossible for spectators to properly distinguish images or understand speech 
(the logos), in a move which at once rejects the illusionism of traditional theatre 

﻿TOWARDS A RADICAL VOICE  |  77
and shuns Brecht’s destruction of the fourth wall. The iconoclastic furor against 
mimesis and spectatorial engagement (whether contemplative or critical) even 
intensifies in the cinema because of the medium’s realistic pretence. In L’orecchio 
mancante [The Missing Ear] (1970), he enquires: ‘How come that in all the other 
“artistic speculations” the old, realistic polemic is extinguished, crashed by well-
known evidence, and only in cinema it continues in such asinine, deaf mute and 
blind obstinacy [. . .] on the miserable pretext of FRUITION?’ (47–48). Instead 
of focusing on either entertaining or critically stimulating spectators, Bene frus­
trates audience expectations by exasperating the rupture between audio-visual 
images and phenomenal reality through an anti-mimetic style, and he exacer­
bates narrative unintelligibility via the excision of several elements.
Bene’s aesthetics, indeed, proceeds from subtraction (Blau 2011; Chiesa 2012; 
Chillemi 2015; Deleuze 1997b; Kowsar 1986), eliminating elements of stability 
in favour of variations, hindering action to focus on acts. While action delineates 
a trajectory, thereby pointing to a (possible) meaning, acts lack purpose and 
sense insofar as they consist in meaningless immediacy which ‘de-realises action 
instead of realising it’ (Bene [1998] 2011b, 178). Bene’s iconoclasm concretises 
in an oxymoronic process of amputation which leads to something else being 
amplified. In his theatrical adaptations, he subtracts one or more key elements 
from the source text while paradoxically enlarging a relatively minor compo­
nent. For example, in his rendition of Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet, Bene 
subtracts Romeo and amplifies Mercutio, who now refuses to die and demands 
to remain on stage until the end; similarly, in Richard III, Bene eliminates almost 
all characters and actions, amplifying the king’s solitude and the female char­
acters’ ghostly presence. His ‘theatre of nonrepresentation’ surgically subtracts 
aural, visual and narrative elements in an attempt to short-circuit meaning: 
there is no diegetic stability or continuity, no spatio-temporal logic, no dialogue. 
Such an aesthetics can be read as political insofar as the elements subtracted 
are those in which power incarnates. According to Deleuze (1997b), ‘what is 
subtracted, amputated, or neutralized are the elements of power, the elements 
that constitute or represent a system of power: Romeo as representative of 
familial power, [. . .] kings and princes as representative of state power’ (241). 
Through subtraction, major characters become powerless and their actions 
meaningless; hence, there is no longer consistency in the actors’ gestures 
and  voice, or in the text itself. Among the elements through which power 
exercises its homogenising control, such as main characters, narrative actions 
and teleological gestures, dialogue has a most relevant role ‘because it transmits 
elements of power into speech and causes them to spread’ (Deleuze 1997b, 
245). Thus, Bene amputates power in both language and gesture, producing a 

78  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
theatre based on aphasia and impediments within which any meaningful action 
is expelled in favour of a-teleological acts of immediacy. Gestures and vocal 
sounds are often repeated to the point of meaninglessness, like the priest’s 
mumbled soliloquy in Our Lady of the Turks, or Desdemona’s continuous dying 
in Othello, or the Deficiency of Women (1979, 1985). 
There is a specific interest in destroying ordinary language and, as conse­
quence, gestures which bodily reflect language’s inability to articulate meaning. 
To this end, Bene employs language in a paradoxical manner, which Deleuze 
(1997b) defines as ‘be[ing] a foreigner, but in one’s own tongue’ (246):
Every linguistic and sonorous component, inseparably language [langue] 
and speech [parole], are put in a state of continuous variation. [. . .] Bene 
brings together a work of ‘aphasia’ on language (whispered, stammered, and 
deformed diction, barely audible or deafening sounds), and a work of ‘obstruc­
tion’ on objects and gestures (costumes limiting movement instead of aiding it, 
props thwarting change of place, gestures either too stiff or excessively ‘soft’). 
(248–49)
Bene’s theatrical works unfold around the two lines of aphasia and impedi­
ments, which set everything in ceaseless variation and precarious (im)balance 
– of things, people and meaning. While the timbre, intensity and pitch of voices 
often render them unintelligible, actors walk falteringly, tripping over their 
cumbersome costumes. Such incessant, non-repeatable variations on gesture 
and voice are also at the basis of Bene’s approach to cinema, wherein he exasper­
ates the iconoclastic potential of recorded images and sounds.
His cinematic journey from 1968 to 1974, self-described as ‘an “heroic” 
parenthesis’ (Bene [1995] 2002b, 1132), allowed Bene to further his iconoclas­
tic approach already applied to theatre. In his Autografia [Autography] ([1995] 
2002b), he proudly lists his destructive gestures against theatre, cinema and tel­
evision which include the ‘tearing of language and sense in the scenic diswriting’, 
a ‘removing from the scene’ as opposed to the logic of mise-en-scène and the 
‘sampling of sounds and re-conversion of the voice’ to arrive at ‘cinema as acoustic 
image = in-con-sequence of shooting and surgical indiscipline of editing’ (xiii–xiv). 
Montage, performance, sound and colour sever the relationship between audio-
visual images and their referents, irreparably destabilising the film medium’s 
indexical bond with reality. In Bene’s films, the recording of the phenomenal 
world ceases to correspond to a reproduction thereof to counter the medium’s 
realistic pretence, which does nothing other than concealing the very unrepre­
sentability of reality. It is not therefore a matter of finding an image that could be 

﻿TOWARDS A RADICAL VOICE  |  79
eikōn, because that consists of an impossible task; the only possible alternative is 
to dismantle images in their intelligible appearance. The destruction of images, 
since it has its starting point in the image, always engages the visual field; but 
while Isou and Debord privilege the blank screen to articulate their critique of the 
cinematic eidōlon, Bene proceeds towards blindness via a visual and aural excess, 
exploiting the aesthetic potentialities of the film medium.
Like in theatre, so in the cinema, too, speech and dialogue are abolished in 
favour of nonsensical, often juxtaposed soliloquies, which dissolve any possible 
relation and mutual understanding. Such loss of sense is further exacerbated by 
uncoordinated, self-harmful gestures, which nullify the actors’ body as meaning­
ful entity. Bene uses the range of stylistic devices that cinema offers to excessively 
multiply images and sounds – and indeed, what better way to destroy cinema 
than an aural and visual frenzy which incessantly disorients, neutralising any 
possible sense? Every formal element participates in the iconoclastic undoing of 
cinema: colour is used in an anti-naturalistic and often ironic manner, fragment­
ing bodies and gestures; out-of-focus images undermine sight; the blowing up of 
the film strip (Bene shoots in 16mm and then blows up to 35mm) contributes to 
pushing the image at the edge of the visible frame; a frenetic editing vivisects the 
film’s body (up to Don Giovanni’s [1970] 4,500 cuts and Salomè’s [1972] 4,200 
cuts); extreme close-ups, far from Epstein’s and Balázs’s granting access to an 
enhanced knowledge of reality, dissolve the face which is now so close to the 
point of being indecipherable. But Bene’s cinematic iconoclasm is also grounded 
in a sonorous dimension which, similarly to its visual counterpart, erupts in a 
vocal, musical and noisy frenzy often abruptly interrupted by silence. 
This visible and audible excess destroys the film image as meaningful unit 
because there are only fragments of sounds and images, which work towards 
neutralising spectatorial engagement. In particular, visual and aural close-ups 
qualify as the most effective iconoclastic means for dismantling what is heard 
and seen by rendering the audio-visual image unintelligible. Objects and actors 
are so close that it becomes difficult to discern figures and contours; likewise, 
the amplification of certain sounds, such as a few letters of a single word, 
complicates the understanding of the verbal. As a result, viewers are caught 
between enchanting audio-visual images and a bewildering loss of sense. This 
visual and aural enlargement is conducive to a sort of blindness and deafness 
whereby sensuous proximity is directly proportional to intelligible distance. 
What is more, such amplification initiates a process of de-individuation of the 
human through a dismantling of the unity between body and voice. That is, 
the human voice is set in opposition to the physical body which produces it, 
achieving a disconcerting effect: 

80  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
At this point, representation and meaningful words no longer exist. The logos 
no longer exists. Loved ones, feelings, the native land, God, grammar, the 
soul, spirit, no longer exist. It is the never-said [mai-detto] and the unsaid 
[non-detto], which speak to interiority. We are in [the realm of] perception 
[sensazione]. And finally, even the body vanishes. I have tried to achieve all this 
in the cinema, through the image (which I detest), butchering it via editing, 
working on the tilting of faces, in an attempt to find a visual melody. (Bene 
[1998]b 2011, 177)
Aphonia and apraxia carry out the de-individualising process, which affects the 
actor’s body, and contribute to conjuring up the film’s musicality – the entwined 
beautiful images and sounds that can be seen and heard but which are unable 
to provide access to a controllable, fixed meaning. In Bene’s films, rather than 
voice-off, there is body-off; as Deleuze (1997a) underlines, ‘it is no longer the 
characters who have a voice, it is the voices, or rather the vocal modes of the 
protagonist (whisper, breathing, shout, eructation . . .) which become the sole, 
true characters in the ceremony in what has become a musical setting’ (191). 
An audio-visual, perplexing rhythm invests spectators, who are abandoned to a 
myriad of logos-less voices.
Against Logocentrism
Like Isou and Debord, Bene focuses on the aural/oral dimension to carry out 
his iconoclastic project against cinema; however, while the two French directors 
resort to intelligible speech in their films, what interests Bene is the voice once 
liberated from logos; namely, as pure phoné. Bene’s attempt at overcoming 
logocentrism, which is also a refusal of its videocentrism, and privileging of the 
voice as phoné hinges on a critique of Western metaphysics. Contra a tradition 
in philosophy which has made speaking secondary to thinking, ‘Bene seeks a pri­
mordial φωνή [phoné], prior to any dialectic, logical system or code, even before 
the mediation of rational subjectivity’ (Chillemi 2015). In the sonorous and 
visible unrest and in the absence of a sensical narrative, the voice as phoné gives 
rhythm to films which have ceased to coherently communicate with spectators.
The relationship between phoné and Western logocentrism, whether devel­
oped in terms of conflict or accord, is philosophically indebted to the work of 
Jacques Derrida, who initiated an explicit philosophical engagement with the 
voice in Western metaphysics in his deconstruction of logocentrism. To put it 
simply (and rather simplistically), in Speech and Phenomena (1973), Derrida’s 
sophisticated analysis results in an argument on metaphysical logocentrism as a 

﻿TOWARDS A RADICAL VOICE  |  81
phonocentrism within which the voice corresponds to ‘pure auto-aﬀection’ (79). 
Derrida’s binding of phoné with the history of metaphysics (as a history of ide­
ality) is grounded in a critique of the (Husserl’s) phenomenological voice which 
is tantamount to an inward soliloquy – and indeed, Derrida (1973) concludes 
that ‘the voice is consciousness’ (80). That is, logocentrism is phonocentric, inas­
much as the voice is conceived as an inner monologue, a ‘hearing oneself speak’ 
[s’entendre parler] (78) which necessarily implies presence and self-proximity. 
The peculiarity of this ‘auto-affection’ lies in its self-enclosedness, for in ‘hearing 
oneself speak’ there is no ‘pass[ing] through what is outside of the sphere of 
“owness”’ (78).3 Such deconstruction of the phenomenological voice is inscribed 
in Derrida’s work on the anti-metaphysical value of writing as différance; hence, 
accounts of phoné as sonorous voice with the potential to trouble metaphysics 
are to be found elsewhere. 
Adriana Cavarero’s For More than One Voice: Toward a Philosophy of Vocal 
Expression (2005), Mladen Dolar’s A Voice and Nothing More (2006) and Slavoj 
Žižek’s ‘The Eclipse of Meaning: On Lacan and Deconstruction’ (2006) position 
Derrida as the essential point of reference for their arguments on the voice as 
that which destabilises metaphysical presence, therefore rebutting his thesis 
on phonocentrism. Dolar’s and Žižek’s countering of Derrida’s argument is 
rooted in Lacanian psychoanalysis, through which they identify a voice that 
withstands logos and argue for an incongruity between voice and meaning. 
In Žižek’s (2006) words, there exists an ‘excessive voice which stands for the 
eclipse of meaning. [. . . an] uncanny voice’ (197), which is what Dolar (2006) 
terms ‘the voice against logos, the voice as the other of logos’ (52). Rather 
than producing (self-)presence, this voice carries an absence of subjectivity; 
it is structurally ambiguous: it neither fully belongs to me nor to another. 
Accordingly, such ‘excessive voice’ is also incongruous with the body. As Brian 
Kane (2014) comments, the Lacanian subject can never overcome ‘the acous­
maticity of the Voice’ (207) – something on which Dolar extensively elabo­
rates. Recuperating Michel Chion’s (1999, 21) notion of acousmêtre and the 
disconcerting tension between sonorous voice and its non-visible, corporeal 
source, Dolar (2006, 60–81) concludes that de-acousmatisation is an impos­
sible phenomenon, because the acousmatic voice is an excessive voice which 
can never quite match the body. According to both Žižek (2001a, 57–58) and 
Dolar, this occurs not only in cinema, but also characterises the status of the 
voice in the everyday since, even when we see the body from which the voice 
emanates, body and voice maintain an uncanny relationship which is funda­
mentally defined in terms of a gap – consequently, the voice always involves 
ventriloquism (I am spoken) (Dolar, 2006, 70; Žižek, 2001a, 58). 

82  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Quite differently, Cavarero develops an argument on the essential bond 
between voice and body wherein phoné as sonorous embodied vocality is irre­
ducible to (exclusively) intelligible speech. She rejects Derrida’s argument on 
the phonocentrism of Western metaphysics, claiming that Western philosophy 
has historically devocalised logos, rendering it a silent inner monologue, while 
assigning a privileged role to the visual dimension of sight, eidos/ideas, theoria; 
thus, logocentrism is essentially videocentric. Consequently, Cavarero proposes 
to overcome Western logo(video)centrism through the voice as phoné, advanc­
ing a fascinating ontology of plurality based on the uniqueness and relationality 
of the voice. She conceives of the voice as different from speech and accordingly 
engages with a variety of instances in which such a voice has disturbed Western 
metaphysics and arts. As a corporeal sound emanating from within a body 
to the external space, the voice refers to, and therefore identifies, a unique, 
physical subjectivity that produces it; moreover, the voice is inextricably rela­
tional because of its positing of an embodied subject who speaks and another 
embodied subject who listens (it is an invocation) – Cavarero poignantly writes 
that ‘each voice, as it is for the ear, demands at the same time an ear that is for 
the voice’ (170). Contra Western logocentrism which has marked metaphysics 
as a self-referential, fundamentally male, act of thinking, the voice is always a 
dialogue, even in the physical absence of a listener, because it is directed towards 
the exterior (of the body, thereby investing the dimension of others) and not, as 
in Derrida (1973, 76), towards the interior of the subject.
Cavarero’s claim about the voice as that which identifies a unique corpore­
ality is sometimes treated as a given; she does not, for instance, engage with the 
voice’s ability to dissimulate and deceive, which is instead central for Dolar’s and 
Žižek’s complex voice-body relationship and for Chion’s notion of acousmêtre 
(see Kane’s [2014, 152–56] excellent critique of Cavarero). Yet, I take her work 
as a starting point to explore the voice as phoné in Bene’s oeuvre because of its 
character of bodily sound which resists logos, the emphasis placed on the act of 
listening and the voice’s essential relational quality, which Bene iconoclastically 
dismantles. In privileging phoné as the tool for surmounting Western logo-­
video-centrism, Bene’s approach resonates with some of Cavarero’s ideas. Like 
Cavarero, Bene focuses on the voice, tying it to the body and forsaking logos in 
favour of a pure phoné; however, he reaches an opposite outcome: the voice, 
instead of attesting to the uniqueness of the individual body which has produced 
it and to its relational quality, becomes the primary means for carrying out 
the de-individualising process through which both inter- and intra-personal 
communication cease to exist. That is, both Cavarero and Bene use the voice 
as phoné to critique Western metaphysics, but while the former develops an 

﻿TOWARDS A RADICAL VOICE  |  83
embodied ontology of intimately relational uniqueness, the latter disassociates 
voice and body to frustrate any possible attempt at communication and indi­
viduation. The concern with the voice implies an interest in the body which, 
in Bene’s case, concretises in an interest in disintegrating the body; however, 
contra the Lacanian gap, Bene’s dismantling of the body derives from the unity 
of body and voice.
Thus, his films display a predilection for deformed and injured bodies and an 
obsessive focus on the act of eating as a source of (a taste for) disgust, in an over­
all replacing of the heroic body of mainstream cinema with a ridiculous body 
which has lost any ability to purposefully move – hence, the repeated, nonsensi­
cal self-harm gestures in Our Lady of the Turks, Herod Antipas’s (Carmelo Bene) 
voracious eating and dribbling of saliva in Salomè, or the old men’s coughing up 
and regurgitating beer in Capricci (Carmelo Bene, 1969). What Bene constantly 
seeks is a ridiculous body in lieu of the heroic or tragic body (see, Morreale 2011, 
11–15) of mainstream and auteur cinema. The actor’s jerky, stumbling, injuring 
movements are nothing other than the bodily result of the assault against lan­
guage through the voice. No longer imbued with logos, the voice as phoné slowly 
and uncannily detaches itself from the body, short-circuiting language:
The voice is the body. But be careful: the voice does not vocalise the word; the 
voice is sound, not word. Therefore, it does not reproduce literary text, but 
elaborates on them and, more importantly, disposes of them. The voice begins 
with the goodbye to language. The word is always meaningful, whereas the 
voice is the dismantling of the word, namely the end of any meaning. (Bene 
[1995] 2011c, 167)
The voice no longer articulates intelligible speech; namely, it is no longer at 
the service of logos but becomes that through which to overcome purposeful 
language. Bene separates the voice from its body in multiple ways, thereby gen­
erating a disquieting effect – whose voice is this? And what is this body doing? 
The bewilderment caused by the voice-body dissonance is further exasperated 
via Bene’s ‘be[ing] foreigner in [. . . his] own language’, as well as through 
the play on sound levels and the mixing of music and noise, which result in 
the spectator’s wondering about what is being said. Bene’s films thus necessi­
tate of a hearkening and heeding to make sense of the stratified aural dimen­
sion which invests the viewer. According to Gideon Bachmann (1972–73), ‘he 
[Bene] demands attention while refusing collaboration’ (21). And Bene himself 
distinguishes between ‘good and bad spectators’ based on their ability to listen 
to what is being said: while bad spectators lose themselves in the visual and 

84  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
aural frenzy, incapable of grasping words, good spectators pay attention to the 
voice without turning their gaze away from distasteful or puzzling images. For 
instance, in Our Lady of the Turks, the priest who mutters while continuously 
eating and vomiting spaghetti provides a ‘test [to distinguish] between the 
good and the bad spectator: the latter looks away and hears nothing, whereas 
the former even listens’ (Bene [1968] 2011d, 26). The uncanny use of play­
back, de-synchronisation, dubbing and exasperated sound levels are among the 
devices which contribute to the splitting of voice and body, which are never 
harmoniously or familiarly coupled. Even though the visible body on screen is 
often that of Bene and the plurality of voices heard are most frequently Bene’s 
polyphonic voice, there seems to be a gap between corporeal image and vocal 
sound. The grain of this multiple voice contains traces of Bene’s body and yet, 
even in the rare instances in which the voice is in synch with the image, it cre­
ates a monstruous couple.
The voice becomes the uncontested means for abolishing the sense of what 
one sees and hears in Bene’s ([1995] 2002b) self-declared ‘anti-humanistic 
research on disfunctions and defects of language’ (ix). Unlike Isou’s focus on the 
letter, Bene concentrates on the word to dismantle intelligible speech through 
a complex play of harmony and dissonance (among others, paronomasias, allit­
erations, onomatopoeias and anagrammatic assonances). Thus, the word is 
complexified through dis-/as-sonances (see Bachmann 1972–73; Martin 2010) 
and rendered an indecipherable or meaningless sound by the voice uttering it. 
Adrian Martin (2010), commenting on the ‘be[ing] foreigner in one’s own lan­
guage’ which permeates Bene’s films, tentatively suggests that word and voice 
used in this way could ‘liberate [. . .] from [a text . . .] a chora, perhaps’. Like the 
Platonic chora, which withstands logos and therefore qualifies as that about 
which it is difficult to talk, Bene’s use of language resists intelligibility not only 
through the words he selects but also via deliberate phonetic errors, repetitions 
and dis-/as-sonances. If, on the one hand, the voice as phoné tampers language, 
on the other hand, it generates a rhythm which is also modulated by other aural 
elements of film – music, silence, noise. Above all other sounds, one competes 
more forcefully with the voice to dominate: music.
What interests Bene is rhythm, musicality, of every cinematic component 
which also allows for subtracting what is superfluous. It is no coincidence that 
the only two film-makers whom Bene defends (not without mercilessly criti­
quing them) are Sergei Eisenstein and Jean-Luc Godard (Bene [1968] 2011d, 27), 
who placed rhythm at the core of their cinematic oeuvre. Bene, however, is far 
more radical in his approach because he yearns for neither the political nor the 
ethical, but rather the purely aesthetic:

﻿TOWARDS A RADICAL VOICE  |  85
The cinema is a matter of ears [. . .]. One has to hear things. Whether it is 
opera, theatre or cinema, seeing is not enough; what counts is rhythm. When 
we look at things, we never really see them. [. . .] When montage occurs at 
the same time as the shooting, it is then possible to obtain a film-music. [. . .] 
One needs to be as much as possible in harmony with the event and not with 
the understanding of a meaning that this event has. [. . .] Cinema should be 
destroyed. (Bene [1970] 2011e, 59–60)
Opera music, in particular, recurs throughout his films, imbuing them with a 
perplexing erotism and exoticism.4 The musicality of amorous songs jarringly 
encounters the musicality of images which have nothing to do with sexual­
ity, thereby producing a new kind of erotism, a becoming erotic of what is 
usually foreign (exotikos/ἐξωτικός) to its dimension; at the same time, what 
is ordinarily conceived as erotic is rendered exotic; that is, alien to erotism. 
And indeed, in Bene’s films, there is nothing less erotic than naked bodies, 
which are frequently ridiculed through the full range of stylistic devices to 
comment on cinema’s obsession with the eroticisation of bodies. At the core 
of the inverse process – namely, the becoming erotic of the exotic (that is, 
what is foreign to erotism) – there is often the sacred, whose Christian link 
with love as caritas or agapē strikingly intertwines with love as eros. It is no 
longer humans who attempt to elevate themselves above earthly love to a 
wholly spiritual one, but it is saints and Madonnas who become incarnated 
and experience eros. 
Such a process of turning the erotic into the exotic and vice versa con­
tributes to the othering of the representation; that is, it precludes images, 
even in the case of figurative images, from constituting themselves as doubles; 
namely, as eidōla. Bene decisively eliminates the mimesis of reality: what we 
see is no longer ascribable to a reproduction of the phenomenal world because 
images are frequently underlit or overexposed, scratched, extremely blurred 
or opaque; but even when the image is figuratively clear, the absurdism of 
the narrative acts and gestures, paired with an inconceivable voice, destroys 
any possibility for the audio-visual image to be a double. Bene’s cinema thus 
upsets quotidian understanding (of film and language) and perception (of 
images and sounds). Shared cultural references and cinematic canons are sub­
verted, thereby rendering the film an alien object (perhaps an exoticisation of 
cinema) wherein elements of content and style lose their traditional meaning. 
Intelligibility ceases to have something to cling on, and the film becomes an 
utterly aesthetic experience. According to Bene ([1995] 2002b), his ‘cinematic 
parenthesis’ produced

86  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
five films in which silence reigns and logos is decisively expelled. [. . .] Instead 
of a narrative, [there is] this bricolage of sounds and images destined to cite 
a narrative; [there is] this myriad of signs drifting away on the sound wave, 
which dictates movement. Everything [is] played in a perfectly asynchronous 
manner, in the idiosyncrasy between ‘musicality’ and ‘music’, which do not 
always coincide. Therefore, if you like, Our Lady of the Turks. (1133)
Erotism of the Sacred and Exoticism of Sense
Bene began his brief cinematic career in 1968 with Our Lady of the Turks, which 
was preceded by a homonymous novel (1966) and theatrical play (1966, 1973) 
and which is deliberately iconoclastic in style and content. The diegesis eschews 
a simple, fully intelligible summary and could be vaguely described, in Bene’s 
([1995] 2002b) words, as ‘amused and cruel parody of “inner life”’ (5). There 
are continuous variations on onerous gestures, aborted actions and stratified 
‘foreign’ voices in the absence of any spatial, temporal, logical, or narrative 
continuity. Bene’s attack against cinema and subjectivity unfolds via the parody 
of what ordinarily contributes to give life a meaning; namely, love and religion. 
Throughout the film, a desecrating taste for distaste invests the audio-visual 
representation of the sacred, the erotic and the heroic, at last achieving Bene’s 
longed-for absurd sense of ridiculousness. 
Set in a temporally short-circuited Otranto, a small town in southern Italy 
which was invaded by the Ottomans between the fifteenth and sixteenth 
­centuries (Devereux 2016) and which Bene introduces via the retelling of the 
Ottoman massacre of over 800 Christian in 1480, the film has a nameless 
male protagonist (Carmelo Bene) who is visited by Saint Margaret (Lydia 
Mancinelli). Throughout, Bene gives life to a ridiculous anti-hero who car­
ries out a variety of non-sensical gestures via body and voice, multiplying his 
identity only to destroy it. At the end of the film, while the saint turns into 
a statue over an altar, the male character finally dies at her feet. This loose 
plot unfolds in a disconcerting yet spellbinding orgy of colour, movement and 
sound. According to Emiliano Morreale (2011), in Our Lady of the Turks, ‘tra­
ditional mise-en-scène is broken apart in a violent conflict between words and 
images, between music and voice, by means of a montage which recreates and 
destroys every shot, underlining the artificiality and physical presence of the 
film’ (13). Bene’s iconoclastic fury encompasses everything visible and audible, 
in an audio-visual ecstatic and aesthetic excess that allows for the vanishing of 
any easily accessible sense. 

﻿TOWARDS A RADICAL VOICE  |  87
Both stylistically and content-wise, the film plays with variations on repeti­
tion: some sequences are played twice with differences in either the image track 
or the sound track (for instance, the opening monologue is repeated towards 
the end of the film but on a different sequence of images; similarly, an amo­
rous sequence is visually repeated twice, however with a different sound track), 
and characters repeat gestures and sentences with phonetic changes (the most 
evident being Saint Margaret’s obsessive ‘I forgive you’). Moreover, the audio-
visual tumult provides no aid to comprehension because images and sounds 
become undecipherable via the exploiting of the anti-mimetic potential of style. 
The film celluloid is blown up to 35 mm and burnt, stepped on, cut and crum­
pled, thereby producing tactile plays of light which also deface figurative images 
(Figure 3.1); camera movements and shots are extremely jarring, creating a 
vertiginous effect which is further enhanced by the numerous close-ups and 
extreme close-ups (Figure 3.2); colour is employed in an anti-mimetic manner 
which privileges bright red in both colour filters and mise-en-scène; mirrors 
are positioned in front of the camera or within the mise-en-scène to distort the 
pro-filmic, which appears as if fluctuating; superimpositions abound, rendering 
the image difficult to grasp and, even when in focus, images retain an estranging 
quality because of their sometimes unnaturally geometric composition. The 
Figure 3.1  Burnt medium close-up of Carmelo Bene

88  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
aural counterpart heightens such visual unrest through incomprehensible words 
and sentences, which are frequently layered with extremely loud opera music 
and exasperated ambient and bodily noises, thereby producing a rich sonorous 
dimension which silence uncannily interrupts every so often. Through such an 
iconoclastic approach, the audio-visual image no longer accessibly doubles the 
phenomenal referent with which is constantly at war; nonetheless, there is no 
beyond, no invisibility evoked through this dismantling of the eidōlon (that is, 
there is no place for the eikōn). 
The non-sensical content of the film intensifies the stylistic iconoclasm, con­
tributing to the cancelling of cinema as a medium of (meaningful) communica­
tion. Particularly the male protagonist articulates through body and voice the 
demolition of a narrative by carrying out a-teleological or a-logical ­gestures – 
for instance, wrapped in bandages in a burning room, he clumsily grabs books 
with his mouth and throws them into a fire to fuel it; having duplicated himself, 
one double shoots the other, who however is unable to die (or perhaps continu­
ously dies); half naked, mildly covered with bandages and casts, he gives himself 
an injection in the middle of a busy public square. Throughout the film, he 
continuously falls and repeatedly hurts himself in a series of attempts to tear the 
body apart, reducing it to a de-individualised body whose voice and ­movements 
Figure 3.2  Extreme close-up of Lydia Mancinelli and red filters

﻿TOWARDS A RADICAL VOICE  |  89
are defective. In keeping with this, the protagonist’s multiplications into various 
characters (the priest, a Renaissance clown, a suited gentleman, to name a few) 
work towards subjective annihilation: he changes costumes, make-up and roles, 
deforming his face through grimaces and clownish look; only his voice remains. 
However, the voice also pursues the dismantling of the subject since Bene 
speaks asynchronously, whispers, regurgitates mumbled sounds, emits disturb­
ing bodily noises and obsessively repeats nonsensical sentences at varying sound 
levels. Alessandro Cappabianca (2012) pointedly notes that 
here, Bene ultimately secures for himself an inglorious body, an unhealthy 
body, which is deliberately fractured. Since he cannot realise his dream of 
becoming one of the Christian martyrs of the Otranto massacre, since that 
opportunity is forever lost, since he cannot achieve martyrdom, he searches 
at least for injury.
Although haunted by a fascination with mystical experience, with an existence 
whose most fundamental sense is achieved only via a paradoxical suspension of 
sense – or better, via a renouncing to intelligibly grasp this sense with images or 
words – Bene forsakes the search for a ‘beyond’ characteristic of mysticism. But 
if there is no divinity which could bring about salvation (that is, meaning) to our 
existence, if, in other words, there is no mystical experience of God, the ecstatic 
overcoming of understanding reality is entirely located in the human. Francesco 
Chillemi (2011) accordingly argues that, in Bene’s poetic, ‘between man and 
the human existential wound there is the defective man’ (265). Such ‘defective 
man’, who endlessly ‘searches [. . .] for injury’, is the vehicle for attaining an 
absurd sense of ridiculousness which could provide something tantamount to 
mystical experience contra the pretence of meaning of codified religious rites.
The mocking of religious inner life and the desecrating critique of 
Christianity are a leitmotif throughout Our Lady of the Turks. This is notably 
evident not only in the continuous verbal references to martyrs and visual 
images of their skulls, in the beseeching appeals and in the character of a priest, 
but also in the sensuous character of Saint Margaret who, among other things, 
abandons herself to the pleasures of the flesh, prays to the human instead of 
God and smokes, undressed, while reading a pop magazine, in an extremely 
earthly imagery. Less manifestly, Bene’s parody of religion concretises in his 
character’s deliberate falls and self-harm acts which qualify as (failed) attempts 
at becoming like a saint. The monologue of the imbeciles (cretini) in the first 
half of the film provides such an explanation. Bene’s soothing, slow-paced 
voice-over comments: 

90  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
There are imbeciles who have seen the Madonna and there are imbeciles 
who have never seen the Madonna. I am an imbecile who has never seen the 
Madonna. Everything consists in this, to see or not to see the Madonna. 
	
[. . .] 
	
The imbeciles who see the Madonna have sudden wings, can also fly and 
return back to land like a feather. The imbeciles who don’t see the Madonna 
do not have wings, are denied flying and yet they fly nonetheless but, instead 
of landing, they fall down like someone who, wanting to get rid of lead weights 
around the ankles, decides to cut his [sic] feet and drags himself towards sal­
vation, in the midst of the swineherds’ scorn who are sure about the imminent 
haemorrhage that will stop him. But those who see do not see what they see, 
those who fly are they themselves the flying. One does not know who flies. This 
miracle destroys them: rather than seeing the Madonna, they are themselves 
the Madonna they see.
The scene’s opening close-up shot of Bene’s face staring at the camera 
(Figure 3.3) is slowly replaced by a poorly lit space wherein the character, with 
casts on his legs and bandages around the body, painfully drags himself. This 
imagery represents the male protagonist’s failure at becoming like the saints 
Figure 3.3  Partially out-of-focus close-up of Carmelo Bene 

﻿TOWARDS A RADICAL VOICE  |  91
about which he talks, because there is no holy flying but only human falling. 
Darkness progressively consumes the image to construct the act of seeing (of 
both the saints and the spectator) as an empty look, while Bene’s voice contin­
ues: ‘But the imbeciles who see the Madonna do not see her, like two eyes which 
stare at two eyes through a wall’. What follows is a list of some of the ways 
in which Catholic believers and Saints delude themselves into adulatory self-­
perceptions instigated by faith. The parody of Christianity (the religion of the 
turning of the other cheek) thus begins with Bene’s representation of religion 
as a remarkably subjective experience which can easily become a narcissistic 
mirroring and continues throughout the rest of the film with the eroticisation 
of the sacred. 
According to Jean-Luc Nancy (2005), ‘religion is the observance of a rite that 
forms and maintains a bond [. . .]. The sacred is what, of itself, remains set apart, 
at a distance, and with which one forms no bond (or only a very paradoxical 
one). It is what one cannot touch (or only by a touch without contact)’ (1). 
While Bene ridicules religion by severing the bond, which is rendered as a 
self-referential delusion, he eroticises the sacred as the exotic par excellence 
through a touch with contact. In the film, there is no privileged, religious bond 
but a variety of sensuous bonds with the sacred, primarily expressed via the 
protagonist’s amorous encounters with Saint Margaret – a sacrilegious violation 
of the sacred through an extremely carnal touch. However, even the physical 
bond with the sacred is undermined by the male character’s equally flirting with 
the saint, a man dressed up as an early-twentieth-century explorer (Salvatore 
Siniscalchi) and a young woman (Ornella Ferrari). Bene eroticises the exotic 
via the intercourse with the sacred (Saint Margaret); but he also exoticises the 
erotic in multiple instances as a further way through which to increase the loss 
of sense and the film’s unintelligibility.
One poignant example occurs in the second half of the film and consists of the 
love-making between two young lovers in a luxuriant garden. The sequence is 
twice replayed and variously de-eroticised to accomplish its exoticisation. The first 
time, amidst an uncanny silence, the camera jerkily moves behind colourful flow­
ers and verdant leaves, repeatedly tilts and frames the lovers obliquely and from 
below, making it difficult to distinguish human bodies from their ­surroundings – 
a breast among plants can easily be mistaken for a flower (Figure 3.4); a light, 
pink dress fluttering on the vegetation seems like an enlarged, delicate petal. Sex 
becomes a purely aesthetic matter with no narrative, erotic or ethico-­political 
function. The scene is then replayed from the beginning with an altered sound 
track, which carries out the becoming exotic of what is ordinarily erotic. Sound 
is reintroduced; however, it is not synchronous with the images, with which it 

92  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
has no coherent relation. Ambient noises seem to be loosely emanating from 
the absurd content of Bene’s voice-over: when he talks about a priest who has 
a passion for eating, the banging of pots and pans emerges together with the 
sound of heavy rain and occasional thunder; when he bursts into sudden, furious 
screams and guttural noises intermittently intertwined with incomprehensible 
words, the sound of plates being crashed to the floor can be heard. It will become 
clear only later that this sound track is actually a partial sound flash-forward to 
the following sequence of a priest cooking spaghetti. Such screeching sonorous, 
which brings together religious references (the priest) and a sensuous imagery 
(the young lovers), decisively removes any remaining erotism from the scene, 
which is now an indecipherable audio-visual melody. 
The exoticisation of the erotic through visual and aural elements is also at 
the core of a sequence close to the film’s end in which the erotic and the heroic 
become explicitly ridiculous. The male protagonist, now dressed as a medieval 
knight, enters on horseback into the priest’s kitchen where a young woman is 
cleaning the spaghetti mess caused by the priest. The dish-washing slowly turns 
into love-making, while the air ‘Salut, demeure chaste et pure’ (I Greet You, 
Home Chaste and Pure) from Charles Gounod’s opera Faust permeates the 
scene. Instead of creating an atmosphere of grandeur, the music contributes 
Figure 3.4  A breast disguised amidst the vegetation

﻿TOWARDS A RADICAL VOICE  |  93
to the scene’s ridiculousness, welcoming the protagonist’s unheroic entrance 
and accompanying the beginning of the intercourse, which is de-eroticised also 
via the sound of clashing plates. While he slowly undresses the woman, who 
continues to unabatedly clean the dishes, the tomato sauce spreads from the 
dirty plates to the characters’ bodies. Here the erotic is rendered exotic by 
means of the bright red tomato sauce and the leftovers, which stain surfaces and 
bodies, as well as by the presence of the horse in a modern kitchen, and by the 
armour, which clashes both visually and aurally with the love-making act. No 
kisses, sighs, or words that the characters seem to exchange can be heard, only 
the extremely loud metallic sounds of the armour. The erotic, becoming exotic, 
trespasses into the ridiculous, which is Bene’s ultimate goal: instead of the hero’s 
return and a dramatic love encounter, there is their absurd parody. This scene, 
and the film as a whole, exhibit the audio-visual image’s rupture with a graspa­
ble reality; images, sounds and gestures deliberately work against signification, 
destroying the eidōlon – of what, in fact, are these film images the shadow/
double? Bene exoticises the tragic, the heroic and the erotic, at last reaching an 
ecstatic sense of ridiculousness beyond any fully intelligible meaning. 
Concluding Remarks
Bene’s longing for a secularly mystical blindness is achieved through a paradoxi­
cal visual over-abundance paired with aural excess. The voice as logos-less phoné 
constitutes the primary way through which to trouble Western metaphysics and 
to overcome its logo-video-centrism. If logos has historically developed as deaf, 
inner monologue with a coherent narrative and intelligible images (even Plato, 
while often mistrustful about images, could not forsake them), Bene’s critique 
develops through a logos-less voice which consumes any coherent sense, favour­
ing a disharmonic rhythm of things, bodies and sounds. Dismissing the idea that 
the audio-visual image could be a trustworthy representation of reality, Bene 
strives to break the eidōlon while never acknowledging that the image could 
be eikōn. Hence, ridiculous bodies and phantasmatic voices inhabit his films, 
where an iconoclastic aesthetics purposefully dissolves intelligibility. At the core 
of the cinematic critique of the eidōlon, the voice/word is extremely significant 
also in Jean-Luc Godard’s work, in which logos is reinstated to elaborate on the 
image’s struggle between insufficiency and salvific potential.

4	
In Search of a True Image: Jean-Luc Godard’s 
Histoire(s) du cinéma
JEAN-LUC GODARD’S ICONOCLASM, too, takes the form of a critique, his 
initial experimentations largely concerned with film aesthetics. But he is also 
committed to creating iconoclastic eikones, those images capable of establishing 
more truthful relationships – between each other as well as with spectators – 
which will become the core elements of his magnum opus Histoire(s) du cinéma 
(1988–98). Much like Isidore Isou, Guy Debord and Carmelo Bene, Godard puts 
into crisis the mimetic image, but he does so to favour relationships between 
images. His films call into question the cinematic and phenomenal world, giving 
visibility to the space in between images via primarily the blank screen and 
the interruption of mimetic film flow. While in his earlier films these devices 
are more symptomatic of an aesthetic renewal of cinema, in his later films, above 
all in Histoire(s), they constitute an explicit gesture against the plenitude of the 
image.
A belief in images as relational, and redemptive, entities is paradoxically 
sustained through a suspicious attitude about mimesis since it entails a relation­
ship between an image and a model rather than relationships between images. 
This results in the coexistence of diverse and at times conflicting tendencies in 
Godard’s cinema. In Histoire(s), as in other films of his, there is a sharp critique of 
consumer society and a desire to destroy its illusory images, which reiterate cap­
italist ideology; but there is also a sheer, mystical love for cinema and its images, 
and a belief in their redemptive power. Such contradictory leanings prevent a 
fixed categorisation of Godard’s cinematic perspective. Neither radically icon­
oclastic nor fully iconophilic, Godard, like his images, is in-­between: between 
destruction and creation, between iconoclasm and iconophilia, between the 
breaking of eidōla and the search for iconoclastic eikones. 

﻿IN SEARCH OF A TRUE IMAGE  |  95
This chapter investigates Godard’s intricate iconoclasm, discussing the eth­
ical significance of his aesthetic choices. It emphasises the complexity of his 
approach to cinema within which a criticism of the insufficiency of film images 
to represent specific models exists alongside a belief in the image’s ability to 
convey something about reality, albeit in an iconoclastic manner. While briefly 
considering various Godard films, the following pages concentrate on Histoire(s) 
du cinéma, where he puts into crisis the mimetic image to favour relationships 
between multiple images. 
A Faltering Belief in the Image
Godard’s paradoxical positioning as iconophilic iconoclast hinges on the coex­
istence of a belief in film images, together with the urgency to destroy certain 
images. His films often exhibit the image as in some ways insufficient for rep­
resentation, which has led to conceiving of his oeuvre as iconoclastic (Bergala 
1986, 58; Brenez 1998; Poirson-Dechonne 2016, 151–63); and yet, moving and 
still images, once manipulated and entangled, can be adequate for representa­
tion, thereby permitting an iconophilic interpretation of Godard’s cinema 
(Rancière 2002, 118; 2007, 41; Williams 2016, 13). Such competing understand­
ings of Godard’s films revolve around the issue of belief, which is a central 
notion for any argument on iconoclasm or iconophilia.
A belief in a truthful relationship between copy and prototype or a lack 
thereof is, indeed, what leads towards either iconophilia or iconoclasm. Given 
that generally ‘beliefs are “truth-directed”’ (Lengbeyer 2009, 75), ‘to believe’ con­
cerns the act of understanding something as being true. This act occurs between 
a subject who believes and an object that is believed to be true. Contrary to 
knowledge, belief does not necessarily require tangible proofs; thus, while belief 
is objectively located in the sphere of possibility – for the lack of proof – it is 
subjectively situated in the domain of certainty by the social actors who expe­
rience it as true. As an example, we may consider belief in God. Belief in a 
religious context is faith (although faith is not necessarily a belief).1 People 
believing in God consider God as a true existing entity, even though they cannot 
physically and incontrovertibly prove his existence. Accordingly, while objec­
tively impossible to demonstrate, God’s existence is experienced as subjectively 
true by believers.
By something being true I refer to the correspondence theory of truth and, 
specifically, Thomas Aquinas’s metaphysical version. This theory entails ‘the 
idea that truth consists in a relation to reality, i.e., that truth is a relational 
property involving a characteristic relation (to be specified) to some portion 

96  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
of reality (to be specified)’ (David 2016). Thomas Aquinas (1923) defines truth 
as ‘adaequatio rei et intellectus’ [equation of thing and intellect] (126), which 
points to an accordance between a given reality and one’s thought about that 
portion of reality. More precisely, as Fabrizio Amerini (2009) explains, this 
accordance occurs between a copy and its ideal model:
According to Thomas Aquinas, a true thing is a thing that exists; but a thing 
exists inasmuch as it exemplifies an ideal form, that is, inasmuch as it com­
plies with the model. Being true, for a thing, expresses exactly the relation of 
conformity that that thing establishes with its ideal model. [. . .] Hence, for 
Aquinas, something is true when it is related to an ideal model, whether that 
model is the divine intellect (which is thought as anterior to and cause of the 
being of a thing) or the human intellect (which is thought as subsequent and 
subdued to the causality that the thing exercises on it). (38)
Truth is a relational concept and not a quality of the thing itself. In the case of 
images (understood as images of  ), belief concerns the image’s capacity to ref­
erence its model; namely, to posit itself as eikōn rather than eidōlon. Such belief 
originates different attitudes towards images, including that of iconophilia and 
iconoclasm. The iconophiles believe that the image is true – that it represents 
the human essence of God, referencing his divine nature (it is eikōn) – whereas 
the iconoclasts believe that the image is not true (it is eidōlon). In cinema, 
this belief deals with the film image’s relational capacity;2 namely, it involves 
believing in the image as a relational entity capable of establishing a link with 
its model, be it sensible or intelligible. In iconoclastic directors of the likes of 
Isou, Debord, Bene and Godard, the confidence in the possibility for the image 
to be a truthful representation of the referent is lost, not only because of the 
status of the model itself, but also because of the cultural and socio-economic 
context within which cinema operates (that is, bourgeois capitalist society). 
What becomes of primary importance, instead, is the relationship that images 
can establish with each other. But while for Isou, Debord and Bene almost any 
link between images also qualifies as deceitful, with only rare instances of feeble 
truth persisting in a beloved face or a blank screen, Godard maintains that belief 
in the film image can be restored via truthful relationships between images. 
Single images may be eidōla, but there remains the possibility of redemption in 
the superimposition of images or in the in-between images, those invisible zones 
that make it possible for images to become visible.3 
Godard shifts the focus from the impossible relationship between image 
and model, which is doomed to incur in the deficiencies of the eidōlon, to the 

﻿IN SEARCH OF A TRUE IMAGE  |  97
­relationship between an image and another image as that which can convey 
a sense of the real. In this context, spectators are encouraged to identify 
these image relationships – a task which also involves the becoming aware of 
an invisible space that permits the existence of any visibility. This invisibility 
made visible is the in-between images; namely, the editing cut that glues images 
together and that entails a number of consequences which shall be discussed 
later in the chapter. Godard’s spectators, like Isou’s, Debord’s and Bene’s, are 
called upon to recognise the illusory nature of film images. But they are also 
challenged to confront themselves with a small lump of invisibility which is 
more than just what remains of the destroyed eidōlon. There is, in fact, a delicate 
interplay of visibility and invisibility at work in Godard’s oeuvre which has the 
potential to renew our relationship with the world.
Such an interplay concretises in Godard’s use of blank screens, sound-­image 
disjunctions and altered motion. The blank screen takes on two functions that 
Godard himself develops theoretically in Scénario du Film ‘Passion’ (1982) 
through the metaphors of the white page (page blanche) and the white beach 
(plage blanche). Ágnes Pethő (2011) suggests that ‘both metaphors emphasise 
the underlying, “primordial” emptiness of the screen’ (269). The screen as a 
white or blank page functions as a blackboard (Deleuze 1997a, 185; Pethő 2011, 
271–76), or ‘a page for writing’ (Bellour 2012, 387). That is, as a surface where 
the director can unfold the relation between image and text – a method that 
resonates with a Lettrist quality, as Pethő (2011, 272) notes. Accordingly, the 
screen as a white page is a way to develop the aesthetic possibilities of cinema in 
relation to the dynamic between image and text.
The screen as a metaphorical white beach points instead to the interstitial 
space between images. This liminality consists of the space between the shots, 
which is usually hidden by the movement of the film (Bellour 2012, 168–73; 
Deleuze 1997a, 179–81; Pethő 2011, 276). It is the editing cut which, sealing 
images together, conceals the process of editing through the flow of images. 
However, as Deleuze (1997a) observes, ‘if the cut [. . .] grows larger, if it absorbs 
all the images, then it becomes the screen’ (215). Godard’s in-between, what 
Deleuze (1997a) describes as ‘Godard’s intersticial [sic] method’ (214), is this 
enlargement of the cut which becomes visually and temporally present. As such, 
it opens hiatuses in the film space, hinting at something that resists figura­
tion and yet seems to battle for some visibility. Thus, Godard’s black screen 
as in-between, by undermining the completeness of mimetic representation, 
bespeaks a constitutive deficiency, namely the impossibility of seeing and saying 
everything; equally, it allows invisibility to surface on the visible screen via an 
image of imagelessness.

98  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Nicole Brenez (2004) terms Godard’s black screen ‘the ultimate Question-
Image’, attributing to it four possible meanings:
Firstly, a black image is an image that one does not want to make; secondly, a 
black image is an image that one must not accept [. . .]; thirdly, a black image 
takes the place of a just image; and fourthly, a black image indicates what is 
outside the film. (174)
The black screen, in its apparent simplicity, harbours the evocative, imagina­
tive power, as well as the unsettling potential of a visual blockage. In Godard’s 
cinema, so Brenez (2004) continues, ‘the dialogue between different kinds of 
images accords an essential place to the virtual, to the conditional, to the absent, 
to the negative, to the unacceptable – in a word, to the problematic’ (174). The 
monochromatic image, and specifically the dark void of the black screen, is the 
most evident visual rendering of that which is uncertain, questionable, difficult; 
it functions as a tool to stimulate spectators’ ethical imagination while also 
maintaining the complexity of reality, its non-reducibility to a single, mimeti­
cally accessible image.
Godard employs the black screen in this way in various films throughout his 
career. In Une Femme mariée (1964), for instance, the dissolution of a love affair 
is developed also through the visual decomposition of the lovers’ bodies via black 
screens. The opening sequence introduces the female protagonist, Charlotte 
(Macha Méril), the married woman of the title, and her lover, Robert (Bernard 
Noël), during one of their encounters. In a hotel room we see fragmentary shots 
of the two lovers tenderly getting dressed. However, the bodies seem unable to 
reach for each other for a prolonged amount of time, because soon after every 
time they touch one another, their image fades to a black screen. In this way, 
the human body is twice fragmented: by the framing which shows only pieces 
of hands, legs and faces, and by the enlarged cut between the shots. This black 
screen, while also foreboding the final break-up between the characters, refer­
ences the cinematic process since it gives visibility to the editing cut, thus bearing 
witness to the space between film images. Moreover, the black screen in between 
the shots of the protagonists’ piece-meal bodies hints at the irreducibility of this 
love affair through the surfacing of a zone of invisibility and ineffability. 
A similar use of the black screen is also present in Alphaville (1965), a film 
set in a dystopian society where emotions and illogicality have been banned. 
An agent from another planet, Lemmy Caution (Eddie Constantine), encoun­
ters and falls in love with Natacha von Braun (Anna Karina), an inhabitant of 
Alphaville unaccustomed to emotions. Natacha’s unawareness of emotions is 

﻿IN SEARCH OF A TRUE IMAGE  |  99
particularly evident in a sequence in which Lemmy Caution questions her about 
the definition of love. Her mellow voice-over, almost a sibylline whisper, tries to 
give an oral form to love; however, language fails to express the complexity and 
mystery of such a sentiment. While chunks of sentences – a lyrical collage of 
verses from different Paul Éluard poems – evoke the irreducibility of love, Anna 
Karina’s face intermittently plunges into and emerges from a black screen. The 
fragmentary nature of love and, as consequence, of any discourse on love is thus 
conveyed through the incompleteness of visual and aural elements. 
Both in Une Femme mariée and Alphaville, Godard does not entirely negate 
a figurative depiction of sentimental relationships but, by enlarging the editing 
cut between the figurative images, renders them highly partial. What is denied, 
then, is an exhaustive representation insofar as the visual and aural complete­
ness would remove, or at least undercut, love’s ungraspable nature. As Deleuze 
(1997a) puts it in discussing Godard’s black screen, ‘that void [. . .] is the radical 
calling into question of the image’ (180). By fragmenting the figurative rep­
resentation via black screens, Godard is alluding to something that cannot be 
said or seen. That is, the monochromatic screens punctuating the interaction 
between characters show that not everything can have a fully visible or express­
ible form. There remains a portion of reality which is unrepresentable and to 
which the black screen respectfully alludes. Hence, the bodies in Une Femme 
mariée seem to be constantly prevented from encountering each other, and the 
protagonists in Alphaville oscillate between figuration and blankness. 
Godard progressively radicalises the use of the black/blank screen as a locus 
whereby invisibility takes visible form, gradually pairing it with a disruptive 
sound. While in his New Wave films the monochromatic screen has a pri­
marily poetic function, in his later films, such as those realised with the Dziga 
Vertov Group, the blank screen assumes an explicitly political meaning. Le 
Vent d’est (1970), for example, separates the sound track (history lesson on 
proletariat; critique of Hollywood cinema) from the image track (parody of a 
spaghetti western) and further frustrates spectatorial engagement via sixteen 
red monochromatic screens, which have been scratched in a reference to Isou’s 
chiseling process. Over these red screens, a female voice discusses communism 
and Marxism; towards the end of the film, the same voice-over continues her 
political account on a series of black monochromatic screens. A consistent use 
of black screens also recurs in Vladimir et Rosa (1971) and Lotte in Italia (1971) 
as a way to counter bourgeois cinema. Such disruptive aesthetics is enhanced 
via asynchronous sound, dubbing and layering of voices, as in Un Film comme 
les Autres (1968), in which various voices of characters not frontally framed are 
stratified to the point of unintelligibility, or in Lotte in Italia, where an actress 

100  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
(Cristiana Tullio-Altan) speaks in Italian while being simultaneously over-
dubbed in French, thereby complicating the understanding of what is being said. 
The exploitation of the creative potential of the aural dimension in its divorce 
from the visual image reaches one of its peaks in Godard’s later film Sauve qui 
peut (la Vie) (Slow Motion, 1980), where the director iconoclastically plays also 
with cinematic movement. What manifestly characterises Slow Motion, from its 
English title to its film form, is the sudden yet recurrent alteration of motion, to 
the point that the film breaks ‘the pact that links its movement to the spectator’ 
(Bellour 2012, 147). Viewers usually expect to see film images moving at the 
velocity that mimics the way in which we perceive movement in phenomenal 
reality; here, instead, Godard makes repetitive use of slow motion as a tool for 
investigating and breaking down film movement. Instead of the recourse to the 
black screen, Slow Motion proceeds to dismantle cinematic images via disorderly 
movement and sound, which produces at once fascination and unsettlement.
Composed of five parts, each introduced by a title – ‘Life’, ‘The Imaginary’, 
‘Fear’, ‘Commerce’ and ‘Music’ – the film is centred on an incestuous fantasy 
shared by almost all the male characters. In terms of style, the film frequently 
opposes the jamming of the visual elements to the naturalism of sound. While the 
image track is slowed down or intermittently freeze-framed, the sound continues 
naturalistically, producing an estranging effect, as if something was hampering 
vision. In the progressively slow-motioned sequence of Denise (Nathalie Baye) 
cycling through the Swiss countryside, the altered movement, paired with a nat­
uralistic sound track, causes a certain bewilderment. In other cases, the effect of 
combining slow motion with natural velocity is disturbing, such as in a slap scene 
where a man is slapping a woman now in slow motion – ‘at the same speed of a 
kiss’ (Stam 1981–82, 196) – now at a natural pace, which releases an even harsher 
violence by directly and suddenly following the slowed-down caressing slap. 
The relationship between stasis and movement, as well as that between sound 
and image, is problematised throughout the film, but one sequence epitomises it. 
It takes place towards the end of the film and revolves around the secondary plot 
of Denise and Paul’s (Jacques Dutronc) break-up. Denise and Paul are sitting in 
front of each other at the kitchen table in the apartment which they once shared 
and which is now up for rent. Suddenly, in slow motion, Paul throws himself 
onto Denise and, entwined, they fall to the floor. While the image track shows 
the anti-naturalistic slow-motioned fall, the sound progressively dissociates itself 
from the visuals. The first part of the scene is characterised by an alienating 
electronic music and the realistic noise produced by objects breaking – those on 
the table that Paul crushes in his lunge at Denise. The co-presence of these two 
elements produces a highly disturbing effect, heightened by the slow-motioned 

﻿IN SEARCH OF A TRUE IMAGE  |  101
images; nonetheless, the first part of the scene maintains an overall legibility 
because of the domestic and naturalistic sound of broken objects. Conversely, the 
second part of the scene undergoes a process of abstraction provoked by the van­
ishing of ambient noise and the resulting dominance of the music. Denise’s and 
Paul’s interlaced bodies slowly and jerkily fall to the ground. No diegetic sound 
accompanies this fall which, through slow motion, assumes the proportion of a 
true and proper crash. Only the obsessive electronic music remains, and for an 
instant the spectator loses awareness of what is happening in and to the image. 
What is constantly invalidated here is the completeness of the representa­
tion, even in the presence of figurative images. Raymond Bellour (2012), in his 
poetic analysis of the film, comments on the creation of an impossible image 
through the decomposition of movement:
The images seem to hit each other, musically, pictorially, striking each other 
admirably and thus making impossible any continuity of movement which 
would produce – when it becomes a matter of bodies and sexes – an imaginary 
ideality that has simply ceased to exist. (125)
The fragmentation of cinematic movement, like the monochromatic screen, 
interrupts an immersive consumption of the film – every time the spectator 
might yield to the temptation to contemplate, a new disjunction occurs to pre­
vent it. The temporal and spatial discontinuance produced by freeze-frames and 
slow motion alludes to something that escapes mimetic reproduction, or some­
thing whose complexity would be partially downplayed by mimesis. Rather than 
in single images, meaning resides in these ‘halts on the image in Slow Motion 
(Where does the caress end and the slap begin? Where does the embrace end 
and the struggle begin?)’ (Deleuze 1997a, 195). These interrupted images hint at 
an in-between zone, which progressively acquires more and more importance 
in Godard’s films, to the point of becoming the locus where meaning is at stake. 
The Redemptive Potential of Film Images
Godard dedicates 266 minutes to his own, highly personal cinematic histori­
ography in Histoire(s) du cinéma, wherein a criticism of the insufficiency of 
images to represent certain models coexists alongside a belief in the image’s 
ability to establish a relationship with its prototype, albeit in an iconoclastic 
manner. Histoire(s) is an enigmatic opus realised over a period of ten years and 
represents a summa of Godard’s thinking about cinema, the world and their 
intertwined history. The film condenses the stylistic devices used in his narrative 

102  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
and experimental films which here work towards a further investigation of the 
status of images. 
The film is composed of eight chapters of different length which, while rever­
berating (especially stylistically) with one another, nevertheless differ in their 
themes. Chapter 1A, ‘Toutes les histoires’ [All the Histories], constitutes an 
introduction to the audio-visual history of cinema and the twentieth century 
that is Histore(s), with particular emphasis on World War II and Hollywood 
cinema, and contains the main ideas developed in the other sections. Chapter 1B, 
‘Une histoire seule’ [A Single History], focuses on cinema’s main features and 
explores sex and death as the two spectacular themes that have taken over cin­
ema’s documentary potential since its inception. Chapter 2A, ‘Seul le cinéma’ 
[Only Cinema], opens on Godard in conversation with Serge Daney; they dis­
cuss the many histories contained in Histoire(s) and draw attention to cinema’s 
peculiarity and superiority in comparison to other art forms because films are 
projected. Chapter 2B, ‘Fatale beauté’ [Fatal Beauty], examines the cinematic rep­
resentation of beauty and its most frequent expression through female beauty. 
Chapter 3A, ‘La monnaie de l’absolu’ [The Currency of the Absolute], centres on 
the ways in which cinema has dealt with the topic of war, with specific attention 
to Italian Neorealism and its influence on the French New Wave, which is the 
main subject of Chapter 3B, ‘Une vague nouvelle’ [A New Wave]. Chapter 4A, ‘Le 
contrôle de l’univers’ [The Control of the Universe], is a reflection on the nature 
of power, which then progresses into observations on cinema by means of Alfred 
Hitchcock’s mastery of the film medium. Chapter 4B, ‘Les signes parmi nous’ 
[The Signs among Us], briefly and fragmentarily overviews the main themes of 
Histoire(s), discussing notions of ineffability and unrepresentability. 
Except for Michael Witt’s 2013 monograph, which thoroughly examines 
Histoire(s), analyses primarily focus on one or two fragments, or a specific topic. 
One of the most examined fragments is taken from Chapter 1A and presents 
in the same frame shots of Elizabeth Taylor’s serene face in A Place in the 
Sun (George Stevens, 1951), juxtaposed with footage shot by the same director 
at concentration camps in 19454 and Giotto’s Noli me tangere rotated ninety 
degrees. This fragment has been variously used to discuss the seminal idea of 
Histoire(s) as an audio-visual account of the entwined relationship between 
cinema’s stories (histoires) and twentieth-century history (Histoire) (MacCabe 
2003, 299; Rancière 2002, 113–19), as well as cinema’s potential to redeem the 
traumatic past (Rancière 2004, 225–26; Saxton 2004, 366–79; 2008, 49–51; Witt 
2013, 130–34). The film image’s redemptive potential is Histoire(s)’s leitmotif, 
which this fragment exhibits in the clashing juxtaposition of the concentration 
camps and Elizabeth Taylor, whose image is later superimposed onto Giotto’s 

﻿IN SEARCH OF A TRUE IMAGE  |  103
fresco. Libby Saxton (2004) observes how ‘an image of separation, absence, an 
empty tomb, is transfigured, becoming an act of resurrection’ (366). Cinema 
‘resurrects’ historical reality by projecting the past in a disjunctive, layered mon­
tage, allowing for the image to become eikōn:
Sequences such as the Auschwitz/Taylor/Giotto encounter, where the falsity 
of the eidōlon recruits to itself the truth of the eikōn, testify to a faith in the 
‘bleeding’, intrinsically multiple ‘Image’ (with a capital ‘I’) produced at the 
interstice as a vehicle not only of resurrection but also of truth and redemp­
tion: ‘I believe in images’, the director proclaims quite simply. (Saxton 2004, 
366–67)
Multiple images such as the Taylor/camps/Giotto sequence can thus redeem 
cinema from the crime that Godard assigns to it – namely, its failure to record 
the Shoah – by projecting the past in the present while maintaining the absence 
that is at its very core. However, Godard’s j’accuse is somewhat problematic, 
because it is not so much a sin of omission (we could have filmed the Shoah 
but failed to do so), but one that is systemic (we could never have adequately 
filmed it).5 
Cinema’s redemptive potential is also linked to Christianity, which takes on 
an allegorical function (Hori 2004, 334–49; Rancière 2002, 113–19; Williams 
2004, 288–311). In Godard’s oeuvre, the significance of the sacred shifts from 
religion to aesthetics, to arrive at Histoire(s)’ conceiving of cinema as a sec­
ularised mystery whose images transcend our most habitual experience of 
film (Daney 2004a, 71; Poirson-Dechonne 2016, 151–57; Witt 2013, 133). In 
Histoire(s), in fact, we are presented with diverse still and moving images coex­
isting in a single frame rather than a serial succession of moving images. Such 
multiple images, which result from superimpositions and layering, aesthetically 
and ethically concretise Godard’s iconoclasm.
No Image for Itself
Among other things, Histoire(s) is a reflection on images, on their nature and 
power. Ironically, it is also a demonstration of Isidore Isou’s claim against 
images, for ‘it is possible to make them say whatever one wants and that which 
they do not say’ (Traité de bave et d’éternité). Indeed, Godard makes images 
do whatever he wants so that his history of cinema consists of a collision of 
disparate visual and aural elements. The multitude of images that compose 
the visual track comes from different sources, such as films, paintings, books, 

104  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
photographs and lithographs, which are repeatedly manipulated and reassem­
bled. Still and moving images are superimposed on one another, as if lacerating 
the screen, frozen in stills, framed in close-ups, slowed down or speeded up, 
obsessively replayed and covered with text. Likewise, the sound track results 
from the layering of aural elements coming from a variety of sources. Godard’s 
own voice-over, which is the dominant and unifying element of the sound track, 
is accompanied by excerpts from films’ sound tracks and dialogue, music, pop­
ular songs, ambient noises and silence. As a result of this collage, images and 
sounds are removed from their original context, and their meaning becomes 
increasingly ambiguous. 
Histoire(s) thus proceeds by tearing apart a variety of disparate images and 
simultaneously layering them in a single frame, thereby emphasising the impor­
tance of the audio-visual image as a relational construct. While taken individ­
ually, images cannot disclose any truth about the world (namely, they cannot 
‘resurrect’ the traumatic past), they acquire a possible redemptive power when 
entangled in multifarious relationships with each other. The generative power of 
images, so Brenez (1998, 348) observes, is a constant feature of Godard’s oeuvre 
and constitutes the supreme principle at work in this film. In Histoire(s), no 
image exists for itself, but only in relation to other images and sounds. A single 
frame can reach a denseness of meaning due to the superimpositions of different 
images and sounds which precariously coexist, thus giving life to an image made 
up of many images. Interviewed, Godard (1996) explained his layering of images 
and his use of ‘very fast superimpositions so that there is only one image, but we 
understand there are two’. Instead of a serial succession of images, which is none­
theless present in Histoire(s), Godard creates stratified images composed of dif­
ferent images, both still and moving, thereby ‘constructing the world of “images” 
as a world of general co-belonging and inter-expression’ (Rancière 2007, 63). 
Saxton (2008) contends that ‘the images establish disruptive new relationships 
which begin to produce a compelling logic of their own’ (50). It is the logic of ‘no 
image for itself ’; namely, the logic of superimposition which allows Godard to 
create a profound entanglement among cinema, the other arts and the history of 
the twentieth century, which all coexist in the space of a single frame. 
Consequently, it is possible to claim with Jacques Rancière (2004) that, in 
Histoire(s), ‘being an image still means being a link’ (224). But an image as a link 
is eikōn – an intermediary between two elements. In this sense, Godard’s film 
images, and especially those in Histoire(s), can be addressed as eikones; however, 
they are iconoclastic because in their entanglement, they break their mimetic 
bond with the reality that has produced them in the first place. Isolated from 
one another, Histoire(s)’ images are appearances unable to convey a truthful 

﻿IN SEARCH OF A TRUE IMAGE  |  105
sense about the world and its past because reality is irreducible to a single 
image. Conversely, in the superimposition of diverse images, reality’s ambiguity 
can transpire. The iconoclastic interaction among images is that which makes 
possible for a true image to surface (namely, an image capable of expressing 
something true about cinematic and phenomenal world). Witt (2013) argues 
that ‘a true image [. . .] is always the result of the combination, tension, and 
dynamic interplay among a number of component elements’ (180). Similarly, 
Godard himself defines the relational status of images as follows:
The image is a relationship. It’s either two distant things that we bring together, 
or two things that are close together that we separate. ‘As thin as a hair, as vast 
as the dawn’. A hair is not an image; dawn is not an image; it’s their relation­
ship that creates an image. (quoted in Witt 2013, 180)
Accordingly, in Godard’s films a true image is not a single image; it is always 
at least two entangled images. Moreover, the enlarged cut already present in 
Godard’s previous films here acquires the status of image in its own right. It is 
the image of cinematic editing, which is the constitutive principle of Histoire(s), 
but it also becomes an image of blindness which punctuates the film and 
remarks cinema’s limits: film cannot record or show everything. The expanded 
cut is therefore fundamental to the making of Histoire(s) as a work between the 
audio-visual frenzy of the superimpositions and the blind ecstasy of the black 
screen which at once contains all images and none. 
The relational status of images is evident throughout Histoire(s). I will focus 
on two fragments which explicitly deal with the nature of images and their close 
connection with Christianity in the West. The reference to Christianity is of par­
ticular importance for discussing the status of Godard’s use of images because of 
the redemptive power that the film-maker attributes to them. Like Christ in the 
theology of the image is eikōn tou Theou/εἰκών τοῦ Θεοῦ – that is, eikōn [i.e., true 
image] of God (2 Cor. 4:4c) – and thus the mediator who has redeemed human­
ity, so the film image as eikōn is that which contains the potential to redeem the 
past. In Histoire(s), redemption can be attained via a continual superimposition 
of sounds as well as still and moving images. On these composite film images, 
the director spells out his comparing of cinema with Christianity through the 
concept of belief. According to Histoire(s), belief in the image and, specifically, 
in the images of cinema, like belief in God, requires something akin to religious 
faith on the part of the spectator. Mingling the sacred and the profane, Godard’s 
montage is reflective of both cinema’s general suspension of disbelief and the 
faith in the revelatory power of images for which Histoire(s) calls.

106  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
‘That the Image Is in the Domain of Redemption – That of Reality’
As the title ‘Une vague nouvelle’ suggests, Chapter 3B is both a lyrical evocation 
of the New Wave (nouvelle vague) and a vague short story (une vague nouvelle) 
on cinema’s creative power. The disquisition on cinema is developed through 
the persona of Henri Langlois, founder of the Cinémathèque Française and 
a key figure for many directors of the French New Wave. The fragment that 
I have chosen takes place roughly at two-thirds of the section and lasts seven 
seconds. It opens with a black screen over which Godard’s voice-over begins 
the sentence: ‘That the image . . .’ This blank screen almost immediately cuts 
to a shot of Godard in his study room finishing the sentence in synch: ‘. . . is 
in the domain of redemption’. Superimposed over this shot of Godard is the 
text ‘CINÉMA HISTOIRE(S)’ and a still image which begins its superimpo­
sition from the centre of the frame and radially takes over the whole frame 
(Figure 4.1). This still image is a detail from Fra Angelico’s fresco The Mocking 
of Christ (ca. 1438–40). Godard frames Christ’s blindfolded face in an extreme 
close-up, while his voice-over specifies that the domain of redemption is ‘that 
of reality’ (Figure 4.2). The image remains still for two seconds, before it, too, 
Figure 4.1  Text superimposed on a detail from Fra Angelico’s The Mocking of Christ 
superimposed on Godard in his study room

﻿IN SEARCH OF A TRUE IMAGE  |  107
is lacerated by the superimposition of the following image, a still frame of an 
ecstatic Brunella Bovo from Vittorio De Sica’s Miracle in Milan (Miracolo a 
Milano, 1951) (Figure 4.3). 
The superimpositions in this fragment convey the sense of generative power 
that the images in Histoire(s) have. Every image, whether moving or still, opens 
up like a wound from the centre of the frame and promptly expands itself 
to fill the entire frame: the still detail of Christ’s face is generated from and 
covers the moving image of Godard in his study room; the still image from 
Miracle in Milan, in its turn, is generated from the fresco and ends up taking 
its place. This editing method continues throughout Histoire(s), giving life to an 
interplay of images which at once are generated from and destroy each other, 
thereby ­communicating the idea of a multiple and composite film image. At 
the same time, this montage carries a somewhat violent component given by 
the continuous lacerating of images – the images momentarily coexisting in a 
single frame seem to be literally tearing each other apart, like an open wound 
lacerates the skin, showing the flesh beneath. These continually superimposed 
images, which exist in a reciprocal entanglement, are however forced to met­
aphorically destroy one another in their competing for some visibility in the 
frame. 	
Figure 4.2  Detail from Fra Angelico’s The Mocking of Christ

108  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
In terms of content, everything in this fragment is rife with Christian refer­
ences, from the visual elements to the spoken words. The face of Christ from 
the fresco refers to both the incarnation, which has legitimised sacred images in 
iconophilic understanding, and his martyrdom, which, according to Christian 
theology, together with the Resurrection has led to human salvation (redemp­
tion). While linking the nature of images to Christianity, thereby acknowledg­
ing the influence of Christian thought over Western interpretations of images, 
Godard also explicitly indicates that redemption should be pursued in the ter­
restrial world rather than in a distant celestial sphere (‘the domain of redemp­
tion [is] that of reality’). This fragment’s mixing of references to the sacred and 
phenomenal reality well expresses Godard’s atheistic mysticism, which exudes 
everywhere from Histoire(s). The idea of a magic or sacred aspect of reality is 
also skilfully conveyed via the superimposition of the still frame from De Sica’s 
film on Christ’s face: on the one hand, the reference to one of the most eminent 
exponents of neorealism remarks that ‘the domain of redemption [is] that of 
reality’, which is also expressed through the contrast between a painted Christ 
and a photographic image of the Piazza; on the other hand, the choice of using 
a still frame from Miracle in Milan, a magic neo-realist fable where the ­fantastic 
Figure 4.3  Still frame of Brunella Bovo superimposing on the shot of Fra Angelico’s The Mocking 
of Christ

﻿IN SEARCH OF A TRUE IMAGE  |  109
element is quite predominant, is a way of acknowledging the presence of a 
­mystical aspect inherent in phenomenal reality. 
‘The image is in the domain of redemption – that of reality’, Godard enigmat­
ically affirms. The world incarnates in an image which, in turn, has the potential 
to redeem. However, a single moving or still image cannot bring about this 
redemption; it is in the intertwining of images that some solace can be found, 
as the continuous superimpositions reveal.6 In this fragment, as in a good part 
of Histoire(s), there is little or no time to arrest the look on a single image in 
the frame, because diverse still and moving images are so profoundly entwined 
with each other. Meaning, thus, resides in the interrelationship between these 
fleeting, multifarious images. 
‘Cinema, like Christianity . . .’
Links between cinema and Christianity abound in Histoire(s), so much so that 
some religious notions can be used as tools for an understanding of Godard’s 
conception of cinema. A fragment from Chapter 1B, ‘Une histoire seule’, is 
particularly significant for discussing his likening of cinema and Christianity 
via the concept of belief. In a rapid montage which alternates and juxtaposes 
a variety of images, we see the shot of a train cutting to a black screen, a white 
screen with the text ‘L’IMAGE’ appearing and disappearing in the blink of an 
eye, the black screen cutting to the still image of a detail from Giotto’s Flight 
into Egypt (ca. 1303–5) which then cuts back to the black screen, a still image 
of Ingrid Bergman in absorbed prayer from Roberto Rossellini’s Joan of Arc at 
the Stake (Giovanna d’Arco al rogo, 1954) intermittently superimposed on a 
blue-tinted still frame of Birger Malmsten and Doris Svedlund from Ingmar 
Bergman’s Prison (Fängelse, 1949) (Figure 4.4), then the same still image from 
Prison, now tinted in green, intermittently superimposed on a shot of Godard in 
his study room, to which the still image of the text ‘L’IMAGE’ on a white back­
ground is continuously superimposed; that is, various still and moving images 
compete for their visibility in the frame (Figure 4.5); however, they all succumb 
to the black screen upon which the text ‘I CONFESS’ rapidly appears. Such a 
bewildering montage is aurally accompanied by Arthur Honegger’s symphonic 
movement Pacific 231 (1923) and Godard’s voice-over declaring twice ‘cinema, 
like Christianity, is not founded on historical truth’, then repeating for two times 
‘cinema, like Christianity’ and finally concluding with ‘it [cinema] supplies us 
with a story and says: Now, believe!’ 
Here Godard’s generative-destructive montage articulates a reflection on 
belief that both cinema and Christianity entail. It does so by alternating the 

110  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
various superimposed images, which all contain explicit or hidden references to 
Christian religion, with eight black screens, as if remarking that for everything 
that we see there is always also something else which remains hidden. Cinema 
demands that viewers believe in something which does not exist (such as the 
fictitious cinematic world), or something which is not tangible or physically 
accessible. As such, cinema, like Christianity, requires a belief in an absence, 
be it the terrestrial absence of God or the characters, the physical absence of 
the pro-filmic during reception (images of absents), or the absence of figurative 
images (the blank screen as an image of imagelessness). Belief in film images thus 
acquires a religious, yet secularised, connotation. Following Godard’s argument 
on images in Histoire(s), cinema has the potential to redeem historical reality by 
resurrecting the past and projecting it into the present on the screen. However, 
redemption and resurrection necessitate faith – if one does not believe in res­
urrection, one will fail to recognise it. Witt (2013) highlights the ‘leap of faith 
required in religious (and, for Godard, cinematic) belief ’ (132). Godard’s belief 
thus results from two seemingly clashing perspectives: the metaphysical one of 
Christianity and the immanent one of atheism. A secularised, mystical faith in 
Figure 4.4  Ingrid Bergman absorbed in prayer, superimposed on a blue-tinted still frame of 
Birger Malmsten and Doris Svedlund

﻿IN SEARCH OF A TRUE IMAGE  |  111
film images can re-establish a relationship between spectators and reality; that 
is, cinema can restore belief in this world and in what happens to us in it. 
The Christian, specifically mystical, yet atheist quality of Godard’s belief in 
film images is also evident in the recurrent statement of cinema as mystery. 
In Christian theology, mystery is a supernatural truth which can be grasped 
neither through sensible experience nor via the intellect. It is, however, revealed 
to humans who can accept it by means of an act of faith (see First Vatican 
Council 1868, Sess. III, De fide et ratione; Pohle 1912, 194–95). If we apply the 
Christian understanding of mystery to Godard’s claim, cinema would be that 
which cannot be grasped in its entirety and whose images require from viewers 
something akin to Christian faith. That is, it requires to believe in entities or 
events – the incarnation, the Holy Trinity, historical reality, film images – the 
meaning of which cannot be visually or verbally exhausted.7 Junji Hori (2004) 
aptly observes:
It is not a question, therefore, of any religious doctrine but of having faith in 
the invisible image and in the cinema that cannot be seen. [. . .] [W]hat enables 
Figure 4.5  Layered superimposition of green-tinted still frame of Birger Malmsten and Doris 
Svedlund, Godard in his study room and text

112  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Godard to redeem reality through the image is precisely his secular faith in 
images. (2004, 341)
Godard manipulates images and sounds, stratifying them, to transcend the 
limits of mimetic reproduction since it cannot account for the complexity of 
reality. Hence, he destroys the single image as a copy of, articulating an ele­
gant critique of mimesis. In Histoire(s), destruction and creation precariously 
cohabit with one another: a love for images, evident in the density of the image 
track, coexists alongside a montage that breaks them into pieces. Irreparably 
distancing the image from its model, Godard creates multiple images which, by 
challenging mimesis via a complexified figuration, have the potential to restore 
belief in the sensible world.
Concluding Remarks
Godard’s is a cinema of secularised faith – faith in cinema’s capacity to disclose 
something about the real; faith in the film image’s potential to preserve the 
memory of what has been. However, such faith also testifies to the image’s 
insufficiency to directly represent reality – at least if one wants to avoid falling 
into the eidōlon. Thus, a disruptive audio-visual aesthetics underpins Godard’s 
oeuvre, politically and ethically commenting on the power and limitations of 
mimetic images and intelligible sounds. The investigating of the visible and the 
sayable and their respective limits grounds much of Histoire(s), manifesting the 
struggle between a belief in images and a need to overcome the ethico-­political 
constraints of mimesis. The composite images that Godard creates break with 
the Christian tradition of the icon, in which the copy figuratively encloses 
the model, thereby responding to an iconoclastic understanding of the copy-­
prototype relationship; they are reminiscent of mystical tradition in that they 
comprise an ineffable and unrepresentable quality. There is no true image, but 
only more or less truthful relationships between images which make it possible 
to approach the complexity of reality. But a zone of unseen and unsaid underlays 
these transient images, constituting the premise for their existence.

Part II: Cinematic Iconoclasm 
as an Ethics of (In)visibility: 
The Eikōn as Iconoclastic


5	
Impossible Encounters: Marguerite Duras’s 
Le Navire Night
PART II FOCUSES on the ethics of cinematic iconoclasm, illustrating how an icon­
oclastic aesthetics can carry ethical concerns (on the part of film-­makers) and 
promote an ethics of looking (among spectators). The premise for my argument 
is that the acts of making and looking at images are never neutral, but ethically 
implicate both image-makers and viewers. Mimesis is, once again, the central 
issue for investigating the ways in which contents at the verge of the unrep­
resentable and the unsayable can be shown cinematically. The films discussed 
in this part share a disquieted attitude about mimetic representation, which 
goes from Marguerite Duras’s separation between sound and image, over Derek 
Jarman’s absolute negation of figuration, to Ingmar Bergman’s and Krzysztof 
Kieślowski’s anti-mimetic use of colour and fades. An iconoclastic perspective 
subtends these films’ rejection of mimesis without however renouncing the ref­
erence to the image’s model; thus, the iconoclastic eikones inhabiting the films 
stretch towards the invisible and the ineffable, audio-visually acknowledging the 
image’s insufficiency to reproduce everything mimetically.
Chapter 5 first considers the ethical turn in film studies, with an emphasis 
on Emmanuel Levinas’s ethics and its import for film-philosophical approaches 
to morality, and it engages with the relationship between ethics and aesthet­
ics in cinema. It then elaborates on Marguerite Duras’s disruptive aesthetics, 
through which the sonic quality of desire emerges while alterity is preserved as 
mimetically irrecoverable. In her cinematic oeuvre, there is an interplay of an 
aurally possible and visually impossible representation of the other(’s desire) 
which is carried out through a privileging of the vocal dimension, particularly 
the disembodied female voice, which also provides a means of expression for 
the director’s feminist and anti-colonialist stance. Albeit heavily relying on the 

116  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
aural/oral aspect of film, Duras’s is nevertheless an extremely corporeal cinema 
which solicits an embodied spectatorship while also continually frustrating the 
viewer’s desire to see.
Such a frustration of spectatorial desire is achieved by subverting the tradi­
tional hierarchy between sound track and image track, and by irreparably dis­
joining them. Le Navire Night (1979), which develops as an imageless love story 
based on the impossible encounter between two lovers, exemplarily illustrates 
the separation between sound and image, in which visibility cannot account 
for the unrepresentable nature of desire without running the risk of rendering 
it obscene. The chapter’s main contention is that the contraposition between 
aural and visual dimensions, in which the protagonists’ bodies become invisible 
containers of desiring voices, is conducive to a visually inaccessible, ethical 
­representation of (the other’s) sexual desire and love. 
A Liminal Ethics
In The Ethics of Visuality: Levinas and the Contemporary Gaze (2013), Hagi 
Kenaan provides an engaging link between ethics and vision by means of 
Emmanuel Levinas, introducing his argument via a well-known biblical 
image: the aftermath of Adam and Eve’s eating of the fruit from the tree 
of knowledge. Knowledge opens their eyes and makes their gaze reflective; 
indeed, for the first time they notice their nudeness and feel shame. Kenaan 
(2013) writes: 
After eating from the tree of knowledge, good and evil have turned into the 
essential poles, the actual coordinates of the visual field. Henceforth, the visual 
field can no longer be understood as a neutral, transparent, formal domain that 
simply contains the totality of what encounters the eye. (xi) 
Thus conceived, the visual field, which we share with others and in which we 
establish relationships, carries ethical implications for both producers and con­
sumers of images: what we let in and partake in the visual field provides ethical 
perspectives and involves ethical judgements. Like an ever-present mist, images 
surround us in the everydayness, often presenting themselves as unproblematic 
representations through which, however, the alterity of the other tends to be 
reduced to a consumable image. Kenaan explores how Levinas’s inseparableness 
between vision and ethics offers a fruitful framework for reflecting on images in 
contemporaneity; the idea of ethics as optics can also be conducive to approach­
ing alterity in cinema – to the extent, however, that one is willing to consider 

﻿IMPOSSIBLE ENCOUNTERS  |  117
films against the iconoclasm of Levinas’s work, which is significantly affected by 
Judaism and the notions of the divine and transcendence. 
Succinctly, Levinas conceives of the image as eidōlon because it doubles 
the thing represented and, far from establishing a closer bond with reality, 
it distances itself from the represented object (of which it is only a shadow), 
thereby producing a distance between viewers and reality. In Existence and 
Existents ([1974] 2001), Levinas claims that ‘this way of interposing an image 
of the things between us and the thing has the effect of extracting the thing 
from the perspective of the world’ (45–46). The image thus understood not only 
degrades the thing represented but also impoverishes our relationship with 
the world, because it consists in an enclosing which interrupts any possibility 
of transcendence. Notwithstanding Levinas’s negative account of the image as 
idolatrous copy and of art as a degradation of the infinite in texts like Existence 
and Existents and ‘Reality and Its Shadow’ (1989), his philosophy, specifically 
the notion of the face-to-face, has become a point of reference for many of the 
studies in film ethics (to name a few, Cooper 2006; 2007; Girgus 2010; Grønstad 
2016; Lamberti 2020; Saxton 2010a, 95–106).
The concept of the face-to-face is developed in Totality and Infinity: An 
Essay on Exteriority (1969) as part of Levinas’s conceptualisation of being and 
of ethics as first philosophy. To be is essentially to be exterior (290–91), and 
to exist is a proper ex-sistere, from ex which denotes ‘out of ’ and sistere which 
means ‘to be placed’, thus translating as ‘to step out or forth’ and ‘to come forth’. 
Exteriority is infinity in the sense of that which is exterior to totality, otherwise 
it would be finite. According to Levinas, ‘being is exteriority, and exteriority is 
produced in its truth in a subjective field, for the separated being’ (299). There 
is only exteriority, which significantly emerges in the face-to-face; namely, in 
the ethical encounter between the same1 and the other. However, the face of 
the other cannot be directly thought or seen because that would be tantamount 
to reducing the other to the same, to enclose infinity. In Levinas’s words, ‘the 
face is present in its refusal to be contained’ (194); that is, the face of the other 
is the manifestation of an infinite exteriority, of something that is and remains 
exterior to the subject, without the possibility of being reduced to the same, 
otherwise it would be contained and become finite. To reduce the other to the 
same would correspond to negating the uniqueness of the other by means of a 
mental image or a thought about the other person – a sort of cognitive copy of 
the other. Levinas continues:
To manifest oneself as a face is to impose oneself above and beyond the mani­
fested and purely phenomenal form, to present oneself in a mode irreducible 

118  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
to manifestation, the very straightforwardness of the face to face, without the 
intermediary of any image, in one’s nudity, that is, in one’s destitution and 
hunger. (200)
The face-to-face relationship configures itself as imageless and as that which is 
beyond thought since thought can think only of the same. It is an irreducible 
epiphany (from epiphaneia/ἐπιφάνεια, ‘appearance’, ‘coming into view’, ‘man­
ifestation’, often referred to deities) that in manifesting itself somehow also 
conceals itself. Because Levinas situates meaning in the responsibility towards 
the other, knowledge (and ontology) is secondary to the ethical appeal which 
grounds the relation with the other. As Seán Hand (1989) aptly explains, ‘the 
communication which must be established in order to enter into relation with 
the being of the Other means that this relation is not ontology, but rather reli­
gion, a place where knowledge cannot take precedence over sociality’ (4). And 
indeed, Levinas (1969) writes: ‘Man as Other comes to us from the outside, a 
separated – or holy – face’ (291). The term ‘separated’, while also indicating that 
the two entities involved in the relationship are maintained as irreducible to 
sameness, references the Latin etymology of ‘sacred’ as the separate (see Nancy 
2005, 1–14). The Levinasian other as separated/sacred is an entity independent 
from that of the same, an irreducible, infinite entity, and an encounter with it is 
reminiscent of the epiphanic manifestation of the sacred – to encounter the face 
of the other is to establish a paradoxical bond which eschews conceptualisation. 
The face-to-face relation is thus transcendence for it is impossible to reduce the 
other to a thought or an image. And in this impossibility of fully grasping the 
other lies the foundation for a relationship in which both terms – the same and 
the other – are respected. Levinas (1969) remarks: ‘Expression, or the face, over­
flows images, which are always immanent to my thought, as though they came 
from me. [. . .] Because it is the presence of exteriority the face never becomes 
an image or an intuition’ (297).
The transcendental conception of the face-to-face belongs to Levinas’s broader 
argument on ethics as first philosophy. The face of the other transcends any prior 
knowledge and appeals instead to my endless responsibility towards the other, 
marking a relationship that exceeds any totalising effort: ‘the epiphany of the face 
is ethical’ (Levinas 1969, 199). The imageless encounter with the other calls for 
personal responsibility towards the other because the other’s face, in its vulnerabil­
ity and nudity, corresponds to the commandment ‘you shall not commit murder’ 
(Levinas 1969, 199). That is, in Levinas’s philosophy, the other’s right to exist and 
the other’s ethically summoning me take precedence, in an overall conceiving of 
being as being for the other (‘to be oneself is to be for the other’ [Hand 1989, 5]).

﻿IMPOSSIBLE ENCOUNTERS  |  119
Levinas’s philosophy resonates with Biblical iconoclasm in its account of 
the face-to-face and its praise of speech as that which ‘refuses vision’ (Levinas 
1969, 296) and is superior to the image. While speech respects the exteriority 
of the face-to-face, the image is always on the verge of reducing exteriority to 
the interiority of the same because ‘vision is essentially an adequation of exteri­
ority with interiority’ (Levinas 1969, 295). Jean-Luc Nancy (2005), commenting 
on the iconoclastic connotation of Levinas’s account, affirms: ‘Levinas gives a 
striking example of a thinking that is mostly inspired by iconoclasm [. . .], even 
if it is dominated by a motif of the face’ (146 [note 17]). Indeed, in Levinas’s 
argument, images – visual or mental – would reduce the alterity of the other 
in much the same way as religious iconoclasm has understood the enclosing of 
God’s infinity and the consequent loss of his uniqueness in the image. À propos 
of this Françoise Armengaud (2004) observes that ‘the face is essentially non 
duplicable; it has no double’, for otherwise it would glide into the idol (eidōlon). 
However, since perception already involves a commencing of ­duplication – 
namely, the temptation of rendering the face of the other an image – ‘it is not 
by abstaining from “making” images that we will escape idolatry’ but through 
an ‘ethical attitude towards others’ (Armengaud 2004). The face of the other – 
irreducible and non-duplicable – stretches ‘at the limit of holiness and carica­
ture’ (Levinas 1969, 198). Thus, Levinasian ethics seems to open to either an 
idolatrous aesthetics (the caricature of the other’s face) or to an aesthetics of the 
invisible (the holiness of the face) in which the face of the other can be eikōn only 
via a renouncing of representation. 
How then can Levinas’s philosophy be conducive to an ethical reflection on 
film images? It can be a starting point to discuss films wherein form maintains 
the other and our encounter with alterity as irreducible to indifferent consump­
tion; that is, films whose form encourages a non-indifferent participation to 
difference. Libby Saxton (2010a) cogently argues: 
Viewing ﬁlms with Levinas always involves a degree of viewing against the 
iconoclastic thrust of his writings. This negotiation is essential if we are to 
avoid downplaying the speciﬁcity of the medium in the service of an autono­
mous and in some ways conﬂicting theoretical agenda. Levinas’s denigration 
of vision, so intimately bound up with his conception of the ethical, provokes 
us to look differently at the images on the screen, to seek out those ﬁssures in 
their being through which alterity intrudes. (105) 
Thus, in film scholarship which explicitly draws on Levinasian ethics – such 
as Sarah Cooper’s Selfless Cinema? Ethics and French Documentary (2006), 

120  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Asbjørn Grønstad’s Film and the Ethical Imagination (2016) and Edward 
Lamberti’s Performing Ethics Through Film Style (2020) – as well as in works 
which incorporate Levinas’s thinking in broader film-philosophical approaches 
to ethics – such as Lisa Downing and Libby Saxton’s Film and Ethics: Foreclosed 
Encounters (2010) and Robert Sinnerbrink’s Cinematic Ethics: Exploring Ethical 
Experience through Film (2016) – the attention is brought on the ways in which 
aesthetic choices can be conducive to an ethics of film-making and film-­viewing 
based on the irreducible alterity of the other. Such contributions place the 
accent on how certain contents could be responsibly represented in cinema, 
reframing the debate on the limits of the film image and also reading Levinas 
against the grain of his iconoclastic conception of images – it is not a matter of 
censoring contents, but of recognising and imaginatively exploiting the ethical 
weight of form.
These works are part of a wider interest in film and ethics which has resulted 
in a considerable increase in scholarship on the topic in recent years, in what 
has been termed the ethical turn in cinema. The relationship between film and 
moral issues has been variably discussed as regarding narrative and charac­
ters, style and spectatorship, stretching from film as a medium through which 
to understand ethical systems to film as a medium of ethical experience. In 
addition to numerous contributions which primarily focus on the ethical sig­
nificance of characters, plot and the narrative-viewership relationship (among 
others, Choi and Frey 2014; Jones and Vice 2011; Kupfer 2012) and scholarship 
which thoroughly examines style by means of Levinas, there are works that une­
quivocally reject binary-based perspectives and ethical approaches grounded 
in alterity in their engagement with film. Overtly opposing a Levinasian ethics, 
Lúcia Nagib’s World Cinema and the Ethics of Realism (2011) is attentive to a 
realist ethics encompassing film style and ‘modes of production and address’ (3); 
David Martin-Jones’s Cinema Against Doublethink: Ethical Encounters with the 
Lost Pasts of World History (2018), also distancing itself from Levinas, adopts 
a Deleuzian approach combined with Enrique Dussel’s transmodern ethics of 
liberation to explore the tension between forgetting (the many lost histories) 
and remembering, maintaining the time-image’s capacity to resist double-think 
and to produce a hesitant ethics; engaging with, among others, Dussel’s account 
of ‘barbarian philosophy’ and his notion of non-being, William Brown’s Non-
Cinema: Global Digital Film-Making and the Multitude (2018) theorises 
non-cinema in reference to aesthetically and geo-politically peripheral films, 
carefully emphasising their ethical potential, their involving a ‘becoming oth­
erwise’ (3); and David H. Fleming’s Unbecoming Cinema: Unsettling Encounters 
with Ethical Event Films (2017) employs a Deleuzian approach to probe the 

﻿IMPOSSIBLE ENCOUNTERS  |  121
significance of negative affects and sad passions in and through narratively and 
aesthetically unsettling films, from whose encounter an ethics of becoming can 
thrive.
Despite the diversity of approaches and cinemas involved, these titles, which 
are in no way comprehensive of the burgeoning scholarship on ethics and film, 
attest to the growing interest in issues of responsibility regarding our capacity 
to audio-visually represent and consume, inextricably linking ethics with optics. 
My own approach to the topic is affected by Levinas’s ethics of alterity and 
shares with some of the above-mentioned scholarship a focus on ethical film 
forms; that is, aesthetic forms which carry ethical value. Much like Downing 
and Saxton (2010), whose premise is that ‘every aesthetic decision has an eth­
ical dimension’ (18), and Grønstad (2016), who claims that ‘film [. . .] provides 
an ethical experience not primarily on the level of narrative but on the level 
of form’ (85), I argue that the iconoclastic eikōn is an image (that is, an aes­
thetic form) resulting from an ethical choice: a figurative image is negated out 
of respect for its model – for its non-reducibility to mimetic reproduction. 
Also drawing on Sinnerbrink’s (2016) notion of cinematic ethics as ‘the idea of 
cinema as a medium of ethical experience with the power to provoke emotional 
understanding and philosophical thinking’ (x), the contention which shapes the 
remaining chapters is that the iconoclastic eikōn founds an ethics of (in)visibility 
which involves both producers and consumers of images. Throughout, I use 
ethics/ethical interchangeably with morality/moral – not to be confused with 
­moralism – and conceive of ethics in cinema as ‘a process of questioning’ and 
‘a way of responding to the encounter between the self and other/s’ (Downing 
and Saxton 2010, 3). Thus, cinematic ethics involves issues of responsibility 
and desire in regard to the images one decides to show and look at; follow­
ing Sinnerbrink, cinema can provoke ethical experience, thereby eliciting from 
spectators a challenging of their moral beliefs. 
While research on ethics and aesthetics in a film ambit has flourished more 
recently, accounts on the ethical charge of formal choices have been traversing 
film criticism since its inception. Particularly, two articles critiquing a now (in)
famous shot in Kapò (Gillo Pontecorvo, 1960) have significantly contributed 
to reconceptualising the notion of beauty in its relationship to ethics. Jacques 
Rivette’s ‘De l’abjection’ [On Abjection] (1961) and Serge Daney’s ‘The Tracking 
Shot in Kapò’ ([1992] 2004b) argue against the binding of the good and the beau­
tiful (a philosophical ideal found, among others, in the Ancient Greek concept 
of kalokagathia/καλοκαγαθία, ‘the beautiful and the good’, Plato [Republic] and 
Kant [CJ 225–230]), claiming that the aestheticisation of atrocities is unethical. 
Kapò, a film about the concentration camps, includes a highly ­aestheticised 

122  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
tracking shot of Emmanuelle Riva’s suicide which abjectly lingers on her dead 
body on the camp’s barbed wire. Commenting on this shot, Rivette (1961) 
insists on the immorality of realism regarding death in concentration camps 
(which echoes Gérard Wajcman’s [1998] critique): ‘Total realism, or what serves 
as realism in cinema, is impossible here; any attempt in this direction is neces­
sarily unachieved (therefore immoral), any attempt at re-enactment or derisory 
and grotesque make-up, every traditional approach to “spectacle” partakes in 
voyeurism and pornography’ (54). The issue with a realistic and beautiful rep­
resentation derives from the model, which resists mimetic doubling insofar as 
the spectacle of realism, in this case, would render the intolerable (death in the 
concentration camp) tolerable. There can be ugly forms which are morally good, 
and contra Kapò’s extreme visibility, impossible contents can be rendered via 
gaps and holes in the representation. Daney ([1992] 2004b) also remarks on 
the immorality of Kapò’s tracking shot because ‘one should never put himself 
[sic] where one isn’t nor should he speak for others’. Therefore, both critics put 
forward the idea that certain ethically problematic contents should determine a 
film form which could maintain them as at least partially inaccessible. 
This is valid not only for a content such as death (and specifically death in 
the concentration camps), but also for some representations of pain, intimacy 
and desire to avoid their becoming obscene. Of uncertain etymology, obscene 
here refers to a representation that makes what pertains to the intimate, invis­
ible sphere utterly mimetically accessible. In this regard, Slavoj Žižek (2001b) 
discusses representations which constitute ‘obscene violations of the “No tres­
pass!” sign; the only proper thing to do is to maintain a distance towards the 
intimate, idiosyncratic, fantasy domain – one can only circumscribe, hint at, 
these fragile elements that bear witness to a human personality’ (73). For its 
very nature of being visible, the film image always runs the risk of trespassing 
into the obscenity of the showing it all. The boundary between hinting at and 
exhibiting something is thin, and yet ethically and aesthetically immense. As 
André Bazin (1972) reminds us, ‘the cinema can say everything, but not show 
everything’ (174). However, cinematic iconoclasm challenges even the medi­
um’s ability to say (clearly and intelligibly), as it will become clear throughout 
the remaining chapters.
While at first sight producing images may seem more ethically implicated, 
the choice of keeping our eyes open in front of certain images bears a similar 
ethical weight. In Spectatorship: The Power of Looking On (2007), Michele Aaron 
contends that ‘spectatorship is ethically loaded’ (88), because it is not solely 
the act of image-making, but also the act of looking that implies responsibility 
for what one decides to look at. The terms and methods within which what is 

﻿IMPOSSIBLE ENCOUNTERS  |  123
audible and visible are produced and consumed, especially in a society where 
sight and images have acquired a fundamental role in the everyday, call into 
question the ethical dimension. As in Christian iconoclasm, also in the cinema, 
it is the content which raises ethical concerns regarding form; therefore, the 
form needs to be adequate to the content. The Christian iconoclastic ban on 
images occurred because of the model – the content of the image – and was not 
extended to other types of representation; similarly, iconoclasm in the cinema 
does not target every type of image. Iconoclastic eikones originate from ethically 
charged models that not only the physical senses but also thought has a hard 
time processing and that can never be fully cognised. The others’ suffering, loss, 
grief, death and desire are some of the contents at the edge of representability 
that I will discuss in the following chapters. I will look at film images which, by 
rejecting mimesis and the idea of the film’s content as figuratively accessible, 
open audio-visual gaps that spectators are called upon to fill with meaning; 
namely, images whose form can grant viewers the freedom to imagine and make 
ethical judgements. 
What I have termed iconoclastic eikōn is thus a coalescing of apparently 
conflicting features. On the one hand, it retains the philosophical meaning 
of the eikōn as that which mediates between the sensible and the intelligible 
sphere – in other words, between a visual form and its model. On the other 
hand, it attains so by breaking with mimesis. This anti-mimetic aesthetics, which 
hinges on the distance between copy and prototype, is iconoclastic because 
it implies that the image cannot truthfully reproduce the model. There are 
models, in fact, that transcend physical reality and can thus be represented only 
metaphorically. For instance, love can be thought or felt, but we lack a specific 
phenomenal prototype of love per se; therefore, love can be visually reproduced 
only metaphorically, for example, through images of people kissing or hold­
ing hands. Some models, however, question mimesis itself because mimetic 
reproduction  – whether metaphorical or not – potentially risks concealing 
the unbridgeable gap between the image and its model. My contention is that 
the iconoclastic eikōn constitutes a way to represent intelligible and ethically 
problematic subject matter without spectacularising them. What changes is the 
relationship between the cinematic world and phenomenal reality: to preserve 
the complexity of the latter, the former ceases to have a mimetic relation with it. 
In addition to interrogating the limits of our right to show everything, icono­
clastic eikones also question our right to look at every image. What, indeed, does 
it mean for spectators to look at extremely intimate or painful events in the lives 
of others? Do we have the right, just because we have the technology, to ento­
mologically scrutinise the lives of others? Iconoclastic eikones destabilise this 

124  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
right from both a film-making and spectatorial perspective; as such, they con­
figure themselves as ethical, appealing as much to reflection as to emotion. An 
emotional response alone would be insufficient for spectators to make sense of 
the audio-visual aporia produced by these images and to take responsibility for 
what they see and hear. Aaron emphasises the necessity of a reasoning response 
regarding ethical spectatorship when it comes to the representation of others’ 
suffering. According to Aaron (2007), who draws on Susan Sontag’s (2003) argu­
ment on being moved by photographs of others’ pain, ‘being moved [. . .] marks 
the experience as moral but not ethical: involuntary emotion is the opposite of 
reflection and implication’ (116).2 Aaron continues by pointing out that an emo­
tional response alone, such as crying in front of scenes of others’ suffering, does 
not imply a conscientious act of responsibility from the spectator because ‘these 
involuntary or visceral reactions symbolise a requisite, defensive denial of the 
profundity or implications of the representation. [. . .] we are denying our part 
in what we are watching’ (116–17); eventually, ‘when we are moved [. . .] we are 
not taking responsibility for’ (117) what we are watching. Saxton (2010b, 62–75) 
also considers reflective responses to images of others’ suffering. Engaging with 
Aaron’s reading, as well as with that of Sontag, Lilie Chouliaraki (2006) and 
Luc Boltanski (1999), she stresses the idea that an emotional response alone is 
insufficient to stimulate viewers towards actively questioning the meaning and 
implications of what they are looking at. What is more, Saxton (2010b) explores 
spectatorial responsibility in regard to images of others’ real or fictional suffer­
ing in films, concluding that ‘what and how we view has consequences, [. . .] 
spectators are not isolated from the spheres of ethical action and accountability, 
but [. . .] our privileges – including the privilege of looking – are linked to others’ 
suffering in ways we need to actively interrogate’ (74). 
Although iconoclastic eikones are not limited to the representation of others’ 
suffering, they nevertheless deal with similarly complex issues which pose ethical 
challenges to mimetic representation. Like the real or fictional images of others’ 
pain that Aaron and Saxton discuss, iconoclastic eikones require a reflective 
response from the spectator to become fully intelligible. Reasoning is essential 
for the constitution of a pensive, ethical spectatorship and for reflecting on the 
questions opened by iconoclastic eikones. Spectators, in fact, are invited to fill 
the visual and aural gaps on screen if they are to make any sense of what they 
(do not) see and hear. Therefore, the iconoclastic eikōn assumes an additional 
relational character: not only does it establish a relation with its model – it is 
eikōn following philosophical tradition – but also mediates with the spectator. 
That is, it configures itself as a relational entity.3 Meaning resides in the encoun­
ter between spectators and iconoclastic eikones, in the relation which they can 

﻿IMPOSSIBLE ENCOUNTERS  |  125
potentially establish together. What I set out to explore, then, is the web of 
relationships that the iconoclastic eikōn has the potential to encourage and that 
concern the ethics of producing, looking at and sharing images. 
A Desire Beyond Mimesis
Marguerite Duras’s work on desire, displacement and intimacy (intended not 
solely as sexual intimacy but also as intimacy of affections, thoughts and emo­
tional states) is apt for exploring the ethical limits of filmic representation and 
the spectator’s troublesome place, thanks to her disruptive aesthetics. Duras 
articulates desire – both the desire experienced by the characters within the 
diegesis and the spectator’s desire – and maintains it as irretrievable through 
a consistent use of de-synchronisation and an increased undermining of figu­
ration. A questioning of representation, already evident in her early films, pro­
gressively turns into a destruction thereof via a radical use of the black screen. 
The later films display a disillusionment with the film medium which unfolds in 
terms of separation – of actor and character; of image and sound; of body and 
voice. Concomitantly, moments of imagelessness augment following a progres­
sive mistrust about cinema’s representational capacity. 
Le Camion (1977) initiates, in Duras’s cinema, ‘the end of representation as 
we know it’ (Günther 2002, 77) because instead of the film, we watch Duras 
and Gérard Depardieu reading a draft of the script of the film that will never 
be shot, which further develops a separation between actors and characters 
already present in previous works such as India Song (1975). Le Camion man­
ifests a radicalisation of Duras’s approach to cinema also through its conclud­
ing sixteen-second black screen, the use of which becomes more prominent 
in subsequent films, from Le Navire Night to Les Mains négatives (1978) and 
L’Homme atlantique (1981). Les Mains négatives, whose image track consists 
of unused shots from Le Navire Night and an opening black screen, expands on 
issues of race, colonialism and sexuality through a visually marginal aesthetics 
that rests on the evocative power of the aural dimension while undermining 
that of the visual. L’Homme atlantique further exacerbates some of her aesthetic 
and thematic concerns, subjecting viewers to a final fourteen-minute black 
screen on which Duras reads from her text L’Homme atlantique. The black/
blank screen – a favourite image in Duras’s later production – is ‘a reminder 
of a longer-standing anti-spectacular and non-representational drive’ (Cooper 
2019, 144) and functions as a means for encouraging the spectator’s imaginative 
possibilities through its halting of the spectator’s look. Emptiness, blankness 
and sound-image disjunctions can in fact elicit the viewer’s imagination by 

126  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
nurturing a ­continually frustrated desire to see. Elaborating on the imaginative 
potential of Duras’s aesthetics, Jean Cléder (2014) contends: 
To say that the image is emptied in Duras’s films (up to L’Homme atlantique’s 
black screen) is true to some extent, beyond which we can still sing the refrain 
of the unrepresentable [. . .], but certainly not account for the spectator’s expe­
rience: freed by the dispositifs designed by the film-maker, the exercise of the 
gaze is suddenly mobilised towards ‘a space of clairvoyance [voyance]’ which 
multiplies the ways to see and the possibilities of the narrative. (10)
If, on the one hand, the overcoming of figuration and synchronisation com­
ments on mimesis’s problematics of representation and truth, of image as truth, 
on the other hand, it potentially liberates spectatorial imagination: faced with 
a considerably empty image, the viewer is often encouraged to sustain an ethi­
cally charged imaginative effort. In Film and the Imagined Image (2019), Sarah 
Cooper develops a compelling argument on mental image-making, exploring 
the capacity of non-representational images to engage the spectator’s imagina­
tion and trigger the formation of imagined images. Duras’s films are thoroughly 
discussed as exemplary for stimulating spectatorial imagination via a disruptive 
relationship between voice and image (Cooper 2019, 140–55). Indeed, her films 
appeal to the imagination not solely through the more jarring black screen, but 
also by means of figurative images which no longer offer a mimetic rendering of 
the story that the voice-over articulates. Thus, characters visually disappear, and 
empty rooms accumulate throughout Duras’s cinematic oeuvre, to the point 
of becoming the film itself: the ghostly spaces of the palace in India Song, the 
deserted rooms in Son nom de Venise dans Calcutta désert (1976), the places 
emptied of bodies in Le Navire Night. 
In such context, sound, and specifically the voice, qualifies as that which con­
structs and sustains desire, preserving alterity as irreducible to sameness. The 
voice in Le Navire Night, for example, is conducive to the expression of diegetic 
desire while also producing spectatorial desire – there is the lovers’ desire for 
each other, which lies exclusively in the aural dimension, and there is the specta­
tor’s (unachievable) desire to match the voices heard together with their bodies. 
De-synchronised sound, therefore, becomes a vehicle for expressing the unrep­
resentable, and more specifically issues of desire and sexual difference, via the 
interplay of absence and presence. But it also serves a critique of colonialism 
and Western (French) foreign policy, which intersects with Duras’s feminist 
politics through her work on language and speech. There is a work against the 
French language which signifies a work against patriarchal, colonising language 

﻿IMPOSSIBLE ENCOUNTERS  |  127
via elliptical sentences, a scarcity of verbs paired with an abundance of nouns, an 
ambiguous use of feminine and masculine pronouns, the adoption of languages 
other than French without the aid of subtitles and the exploitation of noise. 
Thus, Duras not only employs the voice as a means for intelligible speech, but 
she also uses it beyond semantic signification. 
Such aurally disruptive aesthetics is particularly apt for a feminist politics and 
the portrayal of non-hegemonic subjectivities, exemplified in the voice-off of 
the Laotian beggarwoman in India Song, whose singing, laughing and screaming 
at once literally give a voice to the colonised woman and refuse to make her 
visually accessible and therefore controllable. According to Laura McMahon 
(2012), ‘in ocular terms, the beggarwoman’s exclusion from the image signifies 
her marginalization by colonial society, yet in acoustic terms, she exceeds the 
spectacle, gesturing to a disruption of both visual mastery and political control’ 
(88). The lack of a visual image of the beggarwoman runs the risk of reinforcing 
her lack of societal visibility and agency; however, it can also be read as a move 
to provide her with a politically disruptive agency through a voice which is 
maintained as semantically irrecoverable. Moreover, the non-becoming image 
of the beggarwoman complicates a reduction of alterity to sameness (to what I 
know or may think of the other), framing the spectatorial encounter with this 
woman in terms of a listening (and openness) to difference. In this way, instead 
of an eidōlon which would visually enclose alterity via mimetic reproduction and 
therefore degrade the holiness/infinity of the other in such visual containment, 
we are faced with an imageless, aurally unsettling other who exposes us to con­
front alterity affectively and reflectively; in other words, we are presented with 
an iconoclastic eikōn which evokes alterity through an aesthetic foreclosing of 
clarity and, in so doing, may disturb our ethical stances. What we hear are bodily 
noises and, except for spectators who understand Laotian, a speech which delib­
erately remains a noise because of the absence of any translation. Used in this 
way, noise also relates to rejection, interruption, resistance and transgression, 
and it configures itself as politically disruptive.4 
In Noise: An Essay on the Political Economy of Music (1985), Jacques Attali 
illustrates noise’s subversiveness, thereby contending that society’s repression 
of noise corresponds to a political repression of social bodies. If, in fact, noise is 
culturally perceived as something that disturbs and therefore needs to be regu­
lated, it qualifies as a potentially effective tool to critique the power system which 
sustains a harmonious sonority purified of noise. Attali (1985) observes that ‘the 
entire history of tonal music, like that of classical political economy, amounts to 
an attempt to make people believe in a consensual representation of the world’ 
(46). Accordingly, societal control of noise is a de facto control exercised upon 

128  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
individuals for the maintenance of the status quo – thus, the political primacy of 
‘the right to make noise’ (123). Paul Hegarty, in Noise/Music: A History (2008), 
advances a fascinating, and in some respects similar, argument. Because ‘noise 
is cultural’ (3), the understanding of a sound as noise varies according to the 
context and intersects with power dynamics: ‘Certain types of noise are to do 
with the sounds of “other people”, and these are the ones that are most complicit 
with power, and lead to noise control regulations’ (4). Noise is something that 
disturbs our hearing and resists meaning; in so doing, however, noise can lead to 
an uncontrolled listening within which the sonorous outweighs (a fixed, accessi­
ble) meaning, thereby upsetting the regulatory containment of sound. That is, if 
a comprehensible sound or a sound which at least does not disturb is implicated 
in dominant power dynamics, then noise as a negatively accented sound can be a 
means for criticising that very same dynamics. Thus, the beggarwoman’s voice-
off maintained as noise in India Song emphasises her oppression at the hands 
of colonial and patriarchal powers (the ‘double colonization’ of women [Tyagi 
2014, 45]) while also expressing her ‘right to make noise’; namely, her right to be 
listened to and therefore exist as a subject. 
The disembodied female voice thus serves to challenge Western representa­
tions of colonised women in the use of noise as a vehicle for the expression of 
non-hegemonic identities. Duras exploits the ambiguous gap between sounds 
and their source images (bodies and places) to comment on power structures 
and subjectivities excluded from hegemonic discourse. Such a voice also pro­
vides a feminist perspective insofar as it defies a tradition in Western visual arts 
wherein woman is a beautiful image with no voice (Cavarero 2005, 107; Karpf 
2017, 27–28), as well as mainstream cinema’s convention of ‘join[ing] image 
and sound together in a relation of hierarchical mimetic unity’ (Hill 1993, 113). 
Although the disembodied female voice is very much an essential component 
of Duras’s critique of patriarchal and colonising powers, there is also a feminist 
exploitation of silence. The coupling of woman and silence has a long history 
in Western thought (Cavarero 2005; Karpf 2017) and consequently cinema, 
where the silent woman can both attest to a lack of agency and bespeak a strat­
egy of resistance (Dalton and Fatzinger 2003; Kaplan 2009). In Duras’s films, 
silence, in the cultural form of female silence, is used dialectically in relation to 
male speech to explore and articulate issues of sexual difference (see, for exam­
ple, Heathcote’s [2000] and Kaplan’s [2009] analyses of silence and violence 
in Nathalie Granger [Marguerite Duras, 1972]). A criticism of patriarchal and 
colonising language thus emerges from the aural tension between female voice 
and female silence, between articulated speech and noise, and between female 
silence and male speech.

﻿IMPOSSIBLE ENCOUNTERS  |  129
This feminist critique is carried out through a criticism of Western main­
stream cinema since this has frequently been used for perpetuating a patriarchal 
and colonising perspective. Duras does so by exploiting blankness and the dis­
embodied female voice, thereby dismantling synchronisation, through which 
sound’s transgressive potential is tamed and the viewer reassured. Michelle 
Royer (2019) explains:
Duras thought the conventions of mainstream cinema, with its hierarchical 
divisions and oppositions between sound and image, represented the filmic 
equivalent of Western power and patriarchal structures that had to be totally 
abolished before a new, egalitarian society and culture could exist. Hence her 
films had to be experimental and innovatory, create new forms of expression 
and provide a different experience for her spectators by replacing the focus of 
Western cinema on the explicit and the visible with a cinema that privileges 
sounds and gives a larger place to viewers’ imagination. (3)
The sonorous dissonances which dominate her films are purposefully developed 
in opposition to mainstream cinema’s sound techniques through which the 
illusory harmonious coupling of sound and image is made possible. The aural 
dimension as developed by Duras appeals to senses other than sight, in particular 
touch, eliciting an embodied spectatorship (see McMahon 2012, 74–113), while 
also fostering the viewer’s imagination. Duras uses the full gamut of sound-­
image disjunctions, as well as sounds themselves and silence to create a sense 
of corporeal intimacy, both among characters within the diegesis and between 
spectators and the film. Far from being immaterial or de-­individualised, the vis­
ually body-less voices are always referring to the embodied singularities which 
have originated them (most often that of Duras herself), thereby evoking the 
sensuous sphere of the carnal. Moreover, in contrast to mainstream cinema’s 
impression of reality, Duras’s voices, bodily noises, music and silence, now sep­
arated from their source images, increase the spectator’s imaginative capac­
ity which is called upon to actively produce meaning. Le Navire Night builds 
on these premises, unfolding desire as a lovers’ dialogue while maintaining it 
­visually inaccessible.
An Imageless Love Story
Le Navire Night is a ‘love story’ and, more specifically, a ‘story without images’ 
and a ‘story of black images’, as Duras’s voice-over makes clear early in the 
film. As an impossible love story between two lovers who never meet, the film 

130  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
explores issues of desire through a disjunctive aesthetics which heavily relies on 
listening as the possibility of being with another. The film’s narrative verbally 
unfolds on an image track comprised of empty places, black screens and shots 
of the actors (Dominique Sanda, Bulle Ogier and Mathieu Carrière) silently 
sitting at a table or undergoing make-up. This stylistic choice recalls and con­
tinues a tradition of negative aesthetics in French cinema, from Isidore Isou to 
Guy Debord and Jean-Luc Godard; however, in Duras’s work, the effacing of 
characters and the irreconcilable separation between body and voice is far from 
dismantling individuality or from a nihilistic intent, evoking instead the carnal­
ity of the unseen bodies, also and especially because the female voice we hear 
is distinctly the director’s own voice. While the image can no longer produce 
and sustain desire, a disembodied yet sensuous voice becomes the vehicle to 
overcome such visual impasse. 
Duras’s disillusionment with cinema forcefully erupted in the early days of Le 
Navire Night’s shooting, leading her to abandon the making of the film which 
would resume, albeit dramatically changed, after a sleepless night. Instead of 
shooting the film that was supposed to be, Duras decided to ‘shoot the disaster 
of the film. [. . .] Little by little, the film came out of death. [. . .] We turned the 
camera backwards and we filmed what entered of the night, the air, the projec­
tors, the roads, the faces too’ (Duras 1979, quoted in Alazet 1992, 146). Slow, 
wandering travelling shots of empty places and film equipment, fixed shots of 
the stone-faced actors, black screens and a blue sky caught between mimesis 
and abstraction provide the visual substratum for an aural love story which 
however never finds a correlative in the image track. The narrative develops 
exclusively through Duras’s and Benoît Jacquot’s voices off-screen, alternating 
direct and indirect discourse and switching between genders. 
One night a man, J. M., who works for a telecommunication company in 
Paris, dials a random number out of boredom and begins to talk with a woman, 
F. The two initiate an aural love story lasting several years, during which they 
never physically meet. Duras’s and Jacquot’s voices provide the only access to 
the story, since we hear about J. M. and F. but never see them; in fact, we see 
no character from the narrative but only the three actors. McMahon (2012) 
observes that, ‘in Le Navire Night, Duras thus makes invisible what would nor­
mally be visible (the story of J. M. and F.) and makes visible what would con­
ventionally remain invisible (the technical workings of film)’ (99). Such extreme 
disjunction between sound track and image track is conducive to the expression 
of sexual desire as that which can only be sustained by a work of the imagina­
tion. To the exception of rare shots in which some sounds are visually embodied 
in their sources, specifically that of a man playing the piano and the sound of the 

﻿IMPOSSIBLE ENCOUNTERS  |  131
piano, the film maintains the gap between sound and image as insurmountable 
for both characters and spectators. A few times, the places to which the voices 
refer find a visual correspondence in the images of the Père Lachaise cemetery 
and the villa in Neuilly, but for the most part there is a dialectical tension 
between what is heard and what is seen. 
The separation between voice and image is further reinforced through the 
separation between actors and characters. Actors, who are no longer charac­
ters, move slowly and stare at each other or at something in front of them, 
which is precluded to viewers, without ever uttering a word (Figure 5.1). The 
­characters – F., J. M., the father, the two mothers, the priest – exist exclusively 
in the aural dimension, in the story recounted by Duras’s and Jacquot’s voices. 
Thus, Le Navire Night continues a process of ‘suppressing the actors, and the 
very presence of bodies, of the characters’ incarnation in the image’ (Coureau 
2014, 132) already at work in Duras’s previous films. Marion Poirson-Dechonne 
(2016) talks about an ‘aesthetics of de-incarnation’ (194) in regard to Duras’s 
cinema and this film in particular, where ‘in the absence of bodies, the impres­
sion of de-incarnation manifests itself but, paradoxically, absence imbues the 
characters with extraordinary force’ (195). While in some of Duras’s previous 
films, imagination could rejoin voice and body since actors were also charac­
ters, in Le Navire Night it is no longer possible to reconcile the voices heard 
with their source images, because Duras and Jacquot are never visually present 
and because Sanda, Ogier  and Carrière are never aurally available. And  yet, 
Figure 5.1  Actors in Le Navire Night (Marguerite Duras, 1979)

132  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
the unseen characters acquire consistency through their sensuous sonorous 
presence, even though they never incarnate in bodies visually accessible to the 
spectator.
Le Navire Night is a film on desire (the desire of the other and the desire 
for the other), which the voice elicits, and its destruction, which the image 
produces: desire emerges in darkness (at night; on a black screen; without faces 
or reciprocal touch), maintained by disembodied voices which appeal to the 
imagination; it will succumb to images mimetically depicting F. Halfway into 
the film, F. sends two photographs of herself to J. M., who reacts in startled 
disgust at such a sight.‘Desire is dead. Killed by an image’, the voices pronounce. 
The coupling of a lover’s sight and death has been present in Western arts 
since ancient times and finds one of its most popular examples in the myth of 
Orpheus and Eurydice. In the traditional interpretation of the myth (from Ovid’s 
Metamorphoses), Orpheus’s desire to see his beloved literally kills Eurydice; in 
Le Navire Night, the sight of F. kills J. M.’s desire for her. Throughout the film, 
desire is steeped in death – the death hovering over F., who suffers from leukae­
mia; the recurring shots of tombs at the Père Lachaise cemetery. A mortiferous 
atmosphere is also evoked stylistically, via the stillness of objects and empty 
spaces which contrasts with the mobility of desire and the voice.
There is a tension between the liveliness of the sonorous (articulating desire) 
and the deathliness of the mimetic image (depicting the desired subject). From 
the film’s inception, the mimetic image of reality – shots of a metropolis which 
the voice-over identifies as Athens – is broken by black screens. The dark blank­
ness not only violates figuration but also stimulates the imagination, which is 
further enticed by an utterly desynchronised sound. While images (de)limit – 
physically, the visual field; metaphorically, the imaginative capacity – sound 
enfolds and pervades the whole body while also appealing to imagination. In 
his work on listening, Jean-Luc Nancy (2007) argues that ‘the visual is ten­
dentially mimetic, and the sonorous tendentially methexic’ (25); that is, sound 
can more easily establish a relationship of (co-)participation for it is charac­
terised by contemporaneity – of things which are happening at the same time 
(see Nancy 2007, 31). Moreover, sound’s experiential duration outweighs the 
physical hearing of a sound, as Steven Connor (2003) contends: ‘The nature of 
sound is to occupy a passage rather than an instant of time, a duration rather 
than a moment. To hear a sound, one must have already heard it start to decay, 
or come to an end; one must already have started finishing hearing it. One hears 
very largely analeptically’ (112).
Accordingly, the aural dimension is particularly significant for the arousal 
and maintenance of desire because it corporeally envelops the subject, appeals 

﻿IMPOSSIBLE ENCOUNTERS  |  133
to the imagination and lingers long after the physical sound has ceased. Through 
the withholding of visual images of the other and the dominance of the dia­
logical voices, the film is also addressing us, first and foremost, as listeners. In 
The Other Side of Language: A Philosophy of Listening (1990), Gemma Corradi 
Fiumara advocates for a recovering of logos’s aural dimension as essential for 
listening as being-with. In her critique, Western philosophy has halved logos 
into speaking and listening wherein only the former has a philosophical right, 
thereby rendering logos a ‘saying-without-listening’ (3). However, if the two 
halves are rejoined, the relational valence of aurality powerfully emerges, and we 
can become aware that ‘there could be no saying without hearing, no speaking 
which is not also an integral part of listening, no speech which is not somehow 
received’ (1). The resulting saying-with-listening has an ethical import since 
it points to a relation which can expose us to a being-with others in terms 
not reducible to possession. Corradi Fiumara emphasises the significance of a 
‘germinative listening’ (60) in the construction of a communal, transformative 
culture which, by being able to listen and therefore being open to the other, is 
capable of change. Authentic listening is always interactive because it presup­
poses an openness towards the other and is thus defined in terms of reciprocity 
and co-existence.
Via the voice, Le Navire Night engages with listening as the possibility of 
being-with another, which the mimetic image shatters. The sound-image sep­
aration which grounds the film is apt for the creation of iconoclastic eikones 
which prevent alterity to become a consumable, controllable image. While the 
eidōlon impoverishes the content of the image as much as the viewer of such 
image, Duras’s iconoclastic eikones permit the accessing of alterity in manners 
which attest to the irreducible quality of the other person and their desire, 
constantly stimulating the ethical potential of spectatorial imagination. Alterity 
overflows visual representation and is indirectly evoked via the voices in their 
disjunctive relation with the images, through a style which marks the encounter 
with the other in ways irreducible to figuration, clarity, possession – in a word, 
irreducible to sameness. Even when the voices seem to encourage us to imagine 
the faces, the bodies and the carnal pleasure of this desire, the possible resulting 
mental images are likely to remain opaque, blurred by the lack of any visual 
rendering of the characters, thereby making the figurative containment of the 
other impossible also at an imaginative level. Duras’s iconoclastic style thus 
preserves the other person as intractable to mimetic representation, shielding 
them from the control of the gaze. Equally, this aesthetic form, which shapes an 
incomplete, ambiguous representation of love and desire, insistently urges the 
spectator to an imaginative effort.

134  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
The voice’s evocative power incites imagination, setting it free in the absence 
of figurative images of the other person; thus, F. can assume any physical appear­
ance in the freedom that the disembodied voice and listening accord to individ­
ual imagination (that of J. M. as well as the spectator). However, this imaginative 
liberty collapses in the face of figurative images. Duras maintains the spectator’s 
imagination free while disappointing J. M.’s: the two photographs which kill 
J. M.’s desire by providing an image of F. devoid of imagination (that is, by pull­
ing F. away from the multifarious possibilities of the virtual) are never shown 
to the viewer, who is therefore able to continue imagining F., albeit fragmen­
tarily. Conversely, J. M. finds himself experiencing the gap between the imagined 
woman (F.’s disembodied voice) and the actual woman (the two photographs); 
a gap so unbridgeable that, at first, he is even unable to recognise F.’s voice. Her 
voice no longer belongs to the body imagined by desire; thus, desire itself crum­
bles in the face of two mimetic images which remain beyond the possibilities 
offered to the spectator: we never participate in the sight of the photographs but 
instead see slow pans of a park, while Jacquot’s voice remarks: ‘It is too late for her 
to have a face’. This iconoclastic interdiction against looking (which involves the 
characters, who cannot see each other, and the spectators, who cannot see the 
characters) and the primacy of the voices are conducive to evoke the experience 
of alterity, leading to iconoclastic eikones of the other(’s desire). And thus, when 
this prohibition is violated, when the face of the other becomes a figurative image 
accessible to the gaze and imagination has little left to cling on to, something is 
broken: J. M. no longer encounters – existentially, desirously – F.
Differently, viewers are kept safe from the face of F. in the film’s privileging of 
voice over image and in its interpellating us as listeners. The love story to which 
we are aurally granted access is imageless throughout, and the film demands 
that we listen to the sounds of a desire which can never be assimilated to same­
ness. Hence, the voices unfold the amorous relationship; yet, the carnal intimacy 
of the characters remains inaudible, protecting (the other’s) intimacy from the 
obscenity of the showing it all. Thus, for instance, the orgasm that Duras offers 
to her characters is aurally inaccessible to spectators – we hear of it, but we do 
not hear it. Throughout the film, a listening beyond visual mimesis opens up 
the possibility of being-with, the sharing of a desirous experience – whether for 
a prolonged amount of time or only an instant. The imaginative and evocative 
potential of this aesthetics, in which the other is irreparably located beyond the 
image, offers an experience of alterity (of the individual and of desire) which 
encourages an ethical encounter between us spectators and the film, also com­
pelling us to confront our desire to see (the other) at the moment in which such 
a vision is invariably frustrated.

﻿IMPOSSIBLE ENCOUNTERS  |  135
Concluding Remarks
Duras’s cinema bestows value on the voice as that which is capable of express­
ing what is forbidden to the image; thus, the voice becomes the constructor of 
meaning amidst the loss of faith in the image’s representational capacity. Such a 
preference for sound, and specifically the sound of the voice, to the detriment of 
the visual image resonates with ancient iconoclastic discourses which also built 
on the Biblical account of God as that who cannot be seen but can be heard. 
The voice in Duras’s films compensates for the figurative image’s insufficiency 
which degrades alterity and interrupts the spectator’s imaginative possibilities 
– if everything is plainly visible on the screen, what is left to spectatorial imagi­
nation? Instead, the audio-visual hiatus produced by separating voice and body 
creates the conditions of possibility for the spectator’s imaginative and ethical 
engagement with the film. Based on such potential of the voice and the sono­
rous, Derek Jarman constructs his testament-film Blue, within which the voice is 
at once a means to communicate meaning and an irrecoverable echo. 

6	
Blind Vision, Aural Resonances: Derek Jarman’s Blue
DEREK JARMAN THROUGHOUT his career maintained a consistent distrust in 
images which reached its apex in his last feature film, Blue (1993) – an intimate, 
lyrical sound-story of the director’s experience of living with AIDS. While he 
worked with highly visual media such as painting and cinema, realising vis­
ually mesmerising films, there remains in his oeuvre a search for something 
beyond the mimetic surface of the image. A visual pleasure for images, in fact, 
accompanies a taste for anti-mimetic aesthetics, which ranges from the poetic 
superimpositions in The Tempest (1979) to the more pronounced sound-image 
disharmonies in The Angelic Conversation (1985), the angry montage and aural 
collage in The Last of England (1987) and the consistent, disruptive use of the 
black screen in Edward II (1991).
Such ambivalent attitude towards images was also fuelled by Jarman’s inter­
est in Renaissance occult philosophy, which brought together ideas from the 
Hellenic, Christian and Jewish traditions (see Wymer 2005). The Neoplatonic 
trust in sensible beauty as a means for reaching intelligible beauty is relentlessly 
bedevilled by Plato’s condemnation of images of art and the Biblical ban on 
graven images. Blue abounds with verbal admonitions about visual images and 
literally visualises the second commandment by completely rejecting figura­
tion. In this film, Jarman’s enduring scepticism about the mimetic image inter­
sects with the ethics and politics of representing the person with AIDS (PWA). 
Characterised by a negative over-determination, the portrayal of the PWA con­
sists of a spectacular image of the suffering body which bears no similarity to the 
actual experiences of the disease. In a fierce subversion of such representational 
code, Jarman employs a blue monochromatic screen as the constitutive image 
track of the film, thereby placing great emphasis on the significance of abstract 

﻿BLIND VISION, AURAL RESONANCES  |  137
colour while rejecting stereotypical depictions of the PWA. What is more, the 
highly evocative, queer sound track, which alternates clarity with unintelligibil­
ity, further intensifies the irreducible quality of Jarman’s account of AIDS. This 
chapter thus considers a radically iconoclastic approach to cinema whereby 
mimetic, self-explanatory film images are conceived as unethical means for 
trespassing into obscene representation. It argues that Blue’s lack of figurative, 
easily understandable images and its acousmatic aurality between sound and 
sense are conducive to the rendering of the experience of AIDS, while also stim­
ulating the viewer’s imaginative and empathic capacity.
The Issues of Representing AIDS 
After his HIV diagnosis in 1986 and the slow worsening of his condition, 
including his vision, Jarman ‘yearned to make a film about the illness, [. . .] but 
according to biographer Tony Peake, he was held back, in part, by “the impos­
sibility of visualizing an unseen virus”. But Jarman began to realize that the 
film could embody that very impossibility’ (Remes 2015, 112). In addition to 
the virus’s invisibility, other issues became inextricably implicated in the prob­
lematic representation of AIDS: the negative portrayal of the PWA, mediatic 
misinformation and Thatcherism’s homophobic moralism. How, then, could 
the personal experience of AIDS be audio-visually rendered without, how­
ever, reiterating its spectacular representational mode? Jarman’s thoughtful 
approach to the topic eventually led to a monochromatic film which consists 
of a lyrical meditation encompassing the politics of vision and the ethics of 
representation.
In the 1980s and 1990s, when HIV was often a death sentence, the PWA 
was the object of a stereotypical mode of representation: the subjects were 
de-­sexualised and stripped of their personal identity, with no reference to 
the  actual politics of AIDS (Ellis 2009, 242–44; Lawrence 1997). The overall 
image of the PWA that emerged not only in the media and politics, but also in 
the works of those artists who claimed to support the AIDS cause, was negative 
and tended to equate HIV/AIDS inescapably with white male homosexuality, 
implying that the virus was a punishment for moral depravity (Crimp 2002, 
83–107; Higginson 2008, 78; Watney 1987). Accordingly, AIDS was cultur­
ally mediated and represented as a metaphor (see Sontag 2002, 89–180). The 
perception of AIDS as a single disease, which results from the merging of the 
range of illnesses consequent to the infection, and the identification of a group 
to blame stem from the ‘the language of political paranoia, with its character­
istic distrust of a pluralistic world’ (Sontag 2002, 103). As Susan Sontag (2002) 

138  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
highlights, ‘authoritarian political ideologies have a vested interest in promoting 
fear, a sense of the imminence of takeover by aliens – and real diseases are useful 
material’ (147). In a British context, Thatcherism used a moralistic rhetoric of 
fear regarding AIDS, which factually promoted the social construction of homo­
sexuality as alien to society. And the visual representation of the PWA built on 
this negative mythology.
In mediatic representation, the PWA is usually male, white and portrayed 
as the living dead, his body carrying the visible marks of a life sexually active 
outside the heterosexual paradigm. Simon Watney (1987) calls such images ‘the 
spectacle of AIDS’ (78), the function of which is to erase the plurality of experi­
ences of people with AIDS and to hinder empathic engagement. These images 
are aimed to induce both fear and relief in their target audience (heterosoc)1 via 
the equation of the disease and homosexuality; that is, AIDS and the sexuality – 
mediatically, politically, popularly – associated with it are frightening and, yet, 
heterosexuality is safely removed from the picture. This ‘slippage from corrup­
tion theories of homosexuality to contagion theories of AIDS’ (Watney 1987, 77) 
determines the exclusionary aesthetics of the mediatic representation of AIDS 
as well as the political rhetoric of fear surrounding the disease. Ellis Hanson, 
writing in 1991, decries: 
Typically, in media representations of AIDS, I find neither people who are 
living with AIDS nor people who have died with AIDS. What I find, rather, 
are spectacular images of the abject, the dead who dare to speak and sin and 
walk abroad, the undead with AIDS. I find a late Victorian vampirism at work, 
not only in media constructions of AIDS now, but in the various archaic 
conceptions of same-sex desire which inform the present ‘Face of AIDS’. 
(324)	
‘Spectacular images of the abject’ well renders the main issue with the rep­
resentation of the PWA; that is, the effacement of reality in favour of a depic­
tion that could at once maintain the PWA as abject (namely, homosexual 
and bodily disfigured), therefore producing a reassuring gap with heterosoc, 
and that could at the same time tame homosexuality, rendering it ‘harmless’ 
through the de-sexualisation of the subject. The representation of the PWA is 
thus characterised by a euphemistic approach which attenuates the unpleas­
ant reality of the disease. By concealing the reality of AIDS (for instance, by 
distancing AIDS from heterosexuality) and the identity of people with AIDS, 
such a mode of representation reinforces the negative stereotypical images 
which Watney (1987) aptly defines as ‘tableaux mourants’ (79). Only the 

﻿BLIND VISION, AURAL RESONANCES  |  139
body spectacularly consumed by the disease remains visible, while the PWA 
is ­de-sexualised and de-subjectivised. Douglas Crimp (2002), commenting on 
such images, remarks: 	
Certainly we can say that these representations do not help us, and that they 
probably hinder us, in our struggle, because the best they can do is elicit 
pity, and pity is not solidarity. We must continue to demand and create our 
own counter-images, images of PWA self-empowerment, of the organized 
PWA movement and of larger AIDS activist movement [. . .]. But we must also 
recognize that every image of a PWA is a representation, and formulate our 
activist demands not in relation to the ‘truth’ of the image, but in relation to 
the conditions of its construction and to its social effects. (100)
The issue with images eliciting pity but not a reflective response is at the core 
of several works on the ethics of visual representation (see Chapter 5), which 
criticise spectacular images aimed at provoking an immediate yet fleeting emo­
tional reaction without prompting a taking of responsibility from viewers or an 
unsettling challenging of their moral beliefs. Hence, there is a need for counter-­
images, which could give visibility to the PWA without falling into the category 
of the tragically spectacular. Such representations were particularly advocated 
for in the West in the 1980s and 1990s to oppose mediatic misinformation, 
which reinforced the identification of the PWA with white, male homosexuality 
and spread alarmist, homophobic messages, as evidenced by some of the head­
lines that Jarman (1992) cites in his autobiography: 
AIDS BLOOD IN M&S PIES PLOT
[. . .]
18 VICE BOYS IN AIDS REVENGE
PULPIT POOFS CAN STAY
VILE BOOK IN SCHOOL – PUPILS SEE PICTURES OF GAY LOVERS
[. . .]
AIDS MENACE: HE CARRIES KILLER VIRUS YET WORKS WITH SICK 
KIDS
POLL VERDICT ON GAY VICARS: KILL ‘EM OUT
[. . .]
HOLIDAY ISLE IN AIDS TERROR
[. . .]
GAY SENATOR SHAME
[. . .]

140  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
MORE CHANNEL 4 SHOCKERS: THEY BUY TWO GAY FILMS FOR 
SHOWING UNCUT
[. . .]
I’D SHOOT MY SON IF HE HAD AIDS, SAYS VICAR
(91–97)
These headlines illustrate how the British press contributed to the spreading 
of misinformation about the virus transmission, on the one hand, and pro­
moted discrimination and hatred, on the other hand. In their over-emphasis 
on exclusively spectacular images of AIDS, in which the physical degradation 
corresponded to moral corruption, the media diverted the attention from real 
norms of prevention and transmission. A lack of information about AIDS thus 
accompanies ‘a medicalized dream of the prevention of gay bodies’ (Sedgwick 
2008, 43). Jarman (1992) comments:
AIDS showed up an inheritance for a confusion. Faced with the prospect of 
writing about it, I faltered; there were too many stories I wanted to record. 
There had been no disease since syphilis so trapped in preconception and 
sexual stigma; exaggerated by the (erroneous) perception that it was only 
transmitted between homosexual men – ‘AIDS, AIDS, AIDS’, shouted the kids 
in the playground, ‘Arse Injected Death Syndrome’. (83)
In addition to the mediatic distortion of the disease, the Thatcher government 
actively endorsed the marginalisation of the gay community, especially through 
Section 28 of the Local Government Act of 1987–88, which explicitly prohib­
ited the promotion of homosexuality while implicitly promoting homophobia 
(see Thorp and Allen 2000). In this way, Thatcherism championed conserv­
ative values, such as heterosexual marriage and nationalism, while depriving 
homosexuals of their civil rights, forcing them into behavioural constraints and 
considering them an abjection. British politics staged an interplay of AIDS, 
homosexuality and morality, constructing homosexuality as an external, and 
abject, other to public society. 
Gay communities, while removed from the social sphere as active agents, were 
thrown into the public arena via the equation of homosexuality, immorality and 
AIDS. When Jarman decided to make a film about AIDS in the first person – as 
a white, gay, British man with AIDS – he could not ignore the ­problematics 
of representing AIDS and the mediatic and political twisting of the disease. In 
the media, the representation of the PWA is based on the absence of the first 
person, of the scandalous ‘I/We’, to maintain a reassuring distance between 

﻿BLIND VISION, AURAL RESONANCES  |  141
image and heterosoc, the illusory belief that the disease does not concern 
‘me/us’ but ‘them’. In his confronting heterosoc, even before the making of Blue, 
Jarman (1992) describes as fundamental his resolution ‘to start putting in the “I” 
rather than the “they”; and having made the decision about the “I” to show how 
things related to me so that I wasn’t talking of others – they were doing this and 
they were doing that’ (27). In Blue, the choice of the first person configures itself 
as a taking on of responsibility to break the ignorant silence surrounding AIDS, 
as well as Jarman’s way of becoming an invisible yet subjectivised witness. In this 
sense, Blue can be understood as an ethico-political form of testimony. 
With Blue and its absence of figurative images, Jarman is therefore doing 
two things at once: he is subverting the negative representation of the PWA 
and forcing spectators into experiencing his own blindness due to the disease. 
Indeed, Jarman gives a personal identity back to the ill subject – himself – by 
leaving the AIDS body invisible through the use of a blue monochromatic screen 
as the only image track of the film. Blue is a negation of the spectacularised 
image of the PWA, whose identity is restored through the sound track, and 
obliges spectators to experience the same blindness as Jarman. Not least, it is 
also Jarman’s way to acknowledge the inexhaustible nature of AIDS:
No ninety minutes could deal with the eight years HIV takes to get its host. 
Hollywood can only sentimentalise it, it would all take place in some well-
heeled west-coast beach hut, the reality would drive the audience out of 
the cinema and no one viewpoint could mirror the 10,000 lives lost in San 
Francisco to date, so we are left with documentaries and diaries like mine and 
even they cannot tell you of the constant, all-consuming nagging, of the aches 
and pains. (Jarman, quoted in Peake 2011, 514)
Thus, the blue monochromatic screen as that which annuls any figurative 
image constitutes an ethical rejection of a stereotypical and comprehensive 
representation of the PWA. What is more, the film’s iconoclastic aesthetics, in 
its withholding of a reassuring visual or aural depiction of AIDS, unsettles spec­
tators, encouraging them to acts of empathic, imaginative engagement.
At the Limits of the Visible and the Audible
Blue operates a subversion of stereotypical images of the PWA through an ethics 
of representation based on invisibility. The non-representational choice of the 
monochrome bears witness to figuration’s failure to represent AIDS and death, 
thereby tracing ethical limits for artistic mimesis. Jarman explicitly endorses the 

142  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
second commandment, longing for an iconoclastic aesthetics which he achieves 
with Blue’s ultramarine screen: ‘For accustomed to believing in image, an abso­
lute idea of value, his world had forgotten the command of essence: “Thou Shall 
Not Create Unto Thyself Any Graven Image”, although you know the task is to 
fill the empty page. From the bottom of your heart, pray to be released from 
image’.
The film’s iconoclasm hinges on the rejection of spectacle-images of the PWA 
as well as on the unrepresentable and ultimately unspeakable nature of death 
connatural to the disease. In the face of a euphemistic over-determination of 
the PWA, Jarman withdraws from the realm of mimesis to open a space of 
imaginative potentiality, within which the medium’s inadequacy to figuratively 
represent certain models emerges. If mediatic images of the PWA are eidōla, 
false and harmful mimetic representations which can at best elicit pity, the film’s 
non-representational image encourages a relationship between figuratively 
unrepresented content and spectator in terms of openness and unsettlement. 
The lack of mimetic images in Blue visually renders an absolute rejection of the 
image as deceptive copy, in an overall understanding of figuration as inescapably 
affirmative – which is reminiscent of Gérard Wajcman’s (1998) argument on 
artistic mimesis as ‘a negation of death and loss. A negation of absence’ (242). 
Moreover, while mimetic reproduction necessarily excludes, monochromes 
retain a much more inclusive potential. Rather than limiting, by figuratively 
delimiting, the experience of AIDS and suffering, Jarman’s blue screen refer­
ences its model without however reducing it to a consumable mimetic image 
and invites spectators to engage with the imaginative power of colour.2 
In the seventy-six minutes of ultramarine blue screen that constitutes Blue’s 
image track, Jarman develops a stratified, partially unintelligible sound track 
made up of four voice-overs (Nigel Terry, Tilda Swinton, John Quentin, Derek 
Jarman), residual whispers, music, environmental and electronic noises, silence 
and the obsessive leitmotifs of a tolling bell and the injured melody of a broken 
music box. The visual blankness, paired with such highly layered aural dimen­
sion, complexifies the viewers’ engagement with the film and elicits the expe­
riencing of ‘empathic unsettlement’ (Ellis 2009, 244), whereby the sharing of 
someone else’s suffering leaves spectators disturbed and displaced, in this way 
also maintaining alterity as irreducible. Additionally, the collage narrative struc­
ture further complicates the viewers’ access to the film for its interweaving of 
Jarman’s personal recount of living with AIDS with socio-political critique and 
reflections on the problematics of representation. 
According to Andrew Moor (2000), Blue is an example of ‘a cinema of denial’ 
and ‘achieves for queer cinema what Laura Mulvey had advocated for feminist 

﻿BLIND VISION, AURAL RESONANCES  |  143
film practice in the mid-70s, namely an ascetic denial of visual pleasure’ (49). 
The film, in its hindering of a mimetic access to the PWA, denies the pleasure 
that may derive from the spectacular image of the queer body. Jarman com­
pletely subverts the negative portrayal of the PWA by refusing figuration and 
exploiting the aural dimension: the ill body disappears (into the monochro­
matic blueness), and only subjectivity remains (in the sonorous articulation). 
Rather than an aesthetics of displeasure, however, Blue’s colour and sounds 
allow for the pleasure of the imagination, which balances the possible displeas­
ure of the eye.
Into the Blue
Blue brings the discussion on cinematic iconoclasm and colour to the extreme 
by employing a blue monochromatic screen as the only image track of the 
film. What is more, Jarman selects a deep, ultramarine blue hue patented by 
the French artist Yves Klein, who named it International Klein Blue (IKB) and 
whose work is strongly related to monochromes. In Klein’s Neoplatonic view, 
this hue expresses the unity between what is intelligible and what is sensible 
(Bois 2007, 87–88) and represents the colour of harmony between every existent 
as opposed to division and conflict (Solnit 2005). Jarman purposely employs 
the IKB because of its connotations and uses it to express a tension between 
the negation of mimetic forms (the monochromatic image) and the access to 
an intellectual vision (the interrogation and understanding of AIDS and homo­
sexuality in heterosoc, blindness, solitude and death). In this single, ultramarine 
blue screen, Jarman conveys his total refusal of the film image as spectacle, 
abolishing the image’s limits imposed by mimesis and figuration. 
Different from the blank screens analysed in the book so far, Jarman’s blue 
monochromatic screen results from a ‘chromatic cancellation’ (Venzi 2013, 61) 
of images which configures itself not as a destructive void (as it occurs, for 
instance, in Guy Debord’s black and white screens), but as a surface of pure 
potentiality. Vivian Sobchack’s phenomenological engagement with the film in 
‘Fleshing Out the Image: Phenomenology, Pedagogy, and Derek Jarman’s Blue’ 
(2011) elaborates on the peculiarity of the image track, refusing to describe 
it as a blank screen or a non-visual image. Blue, she contends, does offer a 
clear image, if only ‘referentially indeterminate’; namely, it offers a ‘plenitude 
of blueness’ (197) which permits ‘a sensually-enhanced mode of audiovisual 
experience’ (193). Indeed, colour’s omnipresence slowly seeps into the viewer 
and is even reinforced by the continual aural references to blue: we see blue, we 
hear blue, we can potentially feel this blue. Blue’s non-representational image 

144  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
track qualifies as iconoclastic eikōn, for it maintains a relationship with the 
­unrepresentable model without providing a mimetic access to it: the individ­
ual experience of AIDS is omnipresent, articulated via an extremely evocative 
sound track, and yet visually irrecoverable.
The blue monochrome also reproduces Jarman’s subjective point of view: 
rendered blind by the AIDS-related cytomegalovirus, he literally places viewers 
into his own visual impossibility, forcing them to share a perceptual hiatus. 
Peter Wollen (2004) explains: 
Blue was the colour Jarman saw when eye-drops were put in his eyes, in the 
hope of alleviating his blindness. Paradoxically, blindness allowed Jarman to 
see beyond the distraction of images, directly into the realm of colour, as Yves 
Klein had wished. Aids was too important to Jarman for it to be represented 
by images. (118) 
For both director and spectators, the halting of sight opens up the possibility 
of vision as a way to interrogate the realm of images – something which Klein’s 
ultramarine blue deliberately encourages. Klein abandoned the reproduction of 
figurative features of the sensible world to favour an iconoclastic expression of 
the infinite. In delineating his ‘indefinable pictorial sensibility’, the French artist 
recounted an episode from his childhood:
Once, in 1946, while still an adolescent, I was to sign my name on the other 
side of the sky during a fantastic ‘realistico-imaginary’ journey. That day, as I 
lay stretched upon the beach of Nice, I began to feel hatred for birds which flew 
back and forth across my blue, cloudless sky, because they tried to bore holes 
in my greatest and most beautiful work.
Birds must be eliminated. (Klein [1961] 2013)
Declaring the blue sky as his own artwork, Klein endorsed anti-mimetic art 
to bridge the gap between the material here and the infinite there. Klein’s blue 
monochromes thus concretise the dichotomy between what is sensible and what 
is intelligible: on the one hand, the incorporeality of the monochrome is the ulti­
mate expression of the breaking with mimesis in search for the super-sensible; 
on the other hand, the materiality of colour renders the visceral connection with 
the sensible sphere. In establishing an intimate relationship between transcend­
ence and immanence, the IKB allowed Jarman to position his film between ‘the 
sublime and the relentlessly physical’ (Wymer 2005, 178). The blueness of the 

﻿BLIND VISION, AURAL RESONANCES  |  145
screen at once abstracts from physical reality and is vividly material – a tension 
which the sound track further emphasises, alternating lyrical fragments with 
painstaking descriptions of bodily deteriorations, in an inextricable entangle­
ment of the spiritual and the carnal. 
As a colour expressing a tension towards the heavenly infinite, the IKB also 
qualifies as a unifying principle able to transcends borders and divisions, epito­
mised by Klein’s monochromatic world maps. Grenoble, Nice, as well as France 
and Algeria lose their political borders in the transcending blue colouring. The 
visually beautiful signs of colonising powers – the ships, the flags, the dragons 
in the rough seas – the ‘known world’ of the colonisers and the ‘unknown’ of 
the colonised, the Terra Incognita, are covered by colour. Rebecca Solnit (2005) 
comments: ‘Painting the world blue made it all a terra incognita, indivisible 
and unconquerable, a ferocious act of mysticism’ (179). Jarman builds on the 
powerful unifying force and anti-war value of the IKB, remarking that ‘[b]lue 
transcends the solemn geography of human limits’ and, later in the film, ‘[f]or 
Blue there are no boundaries or solutions’. In its omnipresence, the IKB permits 
the transcending of political borders and of the limits of figurative representa­
tion, which Jarman articulates through the binary between physical sight and 
intelligible vision.
Polysemous colour, the IKB in Blue tinges everything, constantly oscillating 
between positive and negative connotations – blue is the colour of love and 
nature (‘Blue of my heart’, ‘Blue of my dreams’, ‘Slow blue love’, ‘Blue skies’), but 
also of AIDS, death and Jarman’s blindness (‘Blue drags black with it’, ‘The Blue 
Bearded Reaper’, ‘Empty sky blue after-image’, ‘I place a delphinium, Blue, upon 
your grave’). Such a ‘semiotic slipperiness’ (Remes 2015, 116) of the colour blue, 
which eschews a single meaning in both Klein’s and Jarman’s use, progressively 
increases. If early in the film blue retains a more positive valence, it slowly inter­
weaves with the names of Jarman’s dear dead ones and his hospital treatments. 
In line with Klein’s understanding of ultramarine blue, Blue’s monochromatic 
screen consists of a space of pure potentiality, within which negative and positive 
meanings coexist in the dissolution of mimesis. What Jarman decidedly adds to 
his understanding of colour is its identification with queerness (Galt 2011, 75–96; 
Jarman 1994; Remes 2015, 115). As opposed to the rigidity of line and form, 
colour is a destabilising force in its materially impregnating of surfaces with an 
image not ascribable to an aesthetics of transparency. In Chroma (1994), Jarman 
traces a queer history of colour, from queer artists’ and intellectuals’ interest in 
colour to the Nazi use of pink, each time emphasising the interconnectedness of 
colour, queerness and politics. Rosalind Galt (2011) asserts that ‘colour is where 
Jarman’s films make their stand against hetero culture, where they propose 

146  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
­utopian spaces, and where they locate a valuable queer life’ (81). Thus, colour in 
Blue is also a fundamental component of the film’s queer aesthetics.
The film visually opens on a black screen which rapidly changes to the IKB, 
requiring spectators to look at the visual gap left by an inaccessible image – a 
gap which figurative representation can no longer occupy. Jarman puts to test 
the relationship between sight and vision throughout Blue, in a progressive 
distancing of the two faculties. While earlier in the film, he fears the loss of 
his capacity of creative insight as consequence of the loss of eyesight (‘If I lose 
half my sight will my vision be halved?’), later he acknowledges the autonomy 
of vision from sight, to the point of wondering whether the two might be 
inversely proportional. Like Tiresias in the Oedipus Rex (Sophocles 429 BCE) 
who, blinded for having seen the unseeable, obtains the ability to foresee as 
well as to see the present with more clarity, Jarman accesses an augmented 
vision with the gradual worsening of his physical sight. Variously addressed 
as ‘blind bard’ (Wymer 2005, 176), ‘gifted magus’ (Moor 2000, 64) and a seer 
(Higginson 2008), Jarman, like a modern Tiresias, guides the spectator in the 
blue blindness of the film through sound. Joining the twentieth-century suspi­
cion of sight, Jarman acknowledges the discrepancy between physically seeing 
and knowing:
One can know the whole world 
Without stirring abroad
Without looking out of the window 
One can see the way of heaven
The further one goes
The less one knows
[. . .]
If the doors of perception were cleansed then everything would be seen as 
it is.	
Such poetic reflections on expanded vision are interwoven with painstaking 
descriptions of Jarman’s hospital visits, medical treatments and worsening 
health. According to Kate Higginson (2008), the ‘utilization of the logic of sac­
rificial blindness is circumscribed, tempered, by the film’s frequent turns to the 
corporeal’ (88). While the film negates access to any figuration of the PWA, it 
nonetheless conveys the body in pain with extraordinary vividness. Like Klein’s 
Neoplatonic approach, Jarman’s IKB brings together sensible matter – the body, 
here in its most earthly manifestation as ill body – and the intelligible realm of 
blind vision. Patrizia Lombardo (1994) effectively notes:

﻿BLIND VISION, AURAL RESONANCES  |  147
With a violent leap, the most bodyless film ever produced projects the human 
body in its most cruel and unspeakable presence: pain, illness, suffering at the 
borderline between the physical and the mental, the conscious and the uncon­
scious, life and death. Blue comes from the most extreme philosophical reflec­
tion upon the conditions themselves of twentieth-century art, and radicalises 
the form of cinema, renouncing it, abstracting the essence of seeing from the 
concrete shapes where sight can dwell. (133)
Corporeality paradoxically impregnates a monochromatic film. There are no 
representational depictions of the yellowish pus in the eye or the irritated skin; 
yet, the detailed descriptions evoke a vivid image of the wasting away of the 
body. These accounts not only belong to Jarman’s autobiographical experience, 
but also are an integral part of his critique of the spectacularisation of AIDS. 
Instead of reassuring depictions of the PWA which spectacle-images provide 
by maintaining an exclusively mimetic relationship with the referent, there is a 
disturbingly fleshy yet unfigurable image, which intelligibly references its model. 
Colour echoes Jarman’s blindness and renders the invisibility proper to the 
virus, which not only becomes visible in the utterly individual manifestations of 
AIDS-related complications, but also significantly alludes to the forced invisibil­
ity of the gay community within the visible socio-political context (see Ashton 
2012). AIDS’s and homosexuality’s problematic relation to visibility (that is, 
the invisibility of pain and the disease and homosexuality’s societal invisibil­
ity) finds a non-spectacularised mode of expression in Blue’s iconoclastic focus 
on the body: omnipresent but never exhibited. The body, always positioned at 
the centre of Jarman’s cinematic oeuvre – from the sun-drenched bodies of 
Sebastiane (1976) to the violently entangled bodies of Jubilee (1978) and the 
abundant male nude bodies of Edward II (1991) – continues to exert its priv­
ileged role even in the absence of its own image. With Blue, ‘we learn to stop 
looking and to start listening instead’ (Smith 1993, 19). That which provides a 
sensuous, meaningful yet fragmented access to the visually inaccessible body 
is, indeed, the film’s sound track, through the plurality of voices and sounds it 
offers. 
Aural Resonances
Blue’s aural dimension partially balances the film’s halting of mimetic vision, 
giving access to the invisibility at the core of the film. However, the stratified 
aural pastiche of voices, noises, silence, choral singing and music is ultimately 
irreducible to meaning. A slow-paced, almost idyllic sonorous (of music, singing, 

148  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Nigel Terry’s soothing voice) restlessly alternates with the violence of quotidian 
noises, the uniform beeping of hospital machines, the sound of bombs and war. 
The contrast is discomforting, both when the change is sudden and when it 
occurs progressively – for instance, in the slow, menacing shifting of the music 
from instrumental to electronic. In addition to the aural tension between the 
heavenly ethereal and the darkly material, silence and voices alternate clarity 
with evocative unintelligibility. As much as Jarman develops his film around the 
potentialities of the aural dimension, there remains nonetheless an inaudible spot 
which chimes with the blind spot that is the film itself. Even the most meticulous 
description shuns comprehensive mimesis, thereby returning aural fragments.
As the monochrome sets limits for the eyes, so does sound for the ears, negat­
ing the possibility of hearing everything in the philosophical sense that Jean-Luc 
Nancy develops in Listening (2007). According to Nancy, there is a significant 
difference between ‘to hear’ (entendre) and ‘to listen’ (écouter). While ‘to hear’ 
corresponds with understanding the textual or contextual meaning of some­
thing aurally conveyed, ‘to listen is to be straining toward a possible meaning, 
and consequently one that is not immediately accessible’ (6). In the latter sense, 
sound produces a tension towards meaning:
To be listening is always to be on the edge of meaning, or in an edgy meaning 
of extremity, and as if the sound were precisely nothing else than this edge, 
this fringe, this margin – at least the sound that is musically listened to, that is 
gathered and scrutinized for itself, not, however, as an acoustic phenomenon 
(or not merely as one) but as a resonant meaning, a meaning whose sense is 
supposed to be found in resonance, and only in resonance. (7)
Nancy’s resonance refers not only to the quality of sound to reverberate, but 
more importantly to sound’s ability to evoke a response in the listening subject, 
and specifically a response to something irreducible to meaning. Listening pro­
motes an ontological openness – to the world, to others – and therefore exposes 
to the possibility of being-with. Paul Hegarty (2008), expanding on Nancy’s 
account, argues that ‘this type of listening subject is in the process of creating 
a community with all that is around and whoever is around’ (198). Understood 
as such, listening, as that which occurs before meaning, is conducive to the 
formation of a community of listeners who share in an openness brought about 
by the lack of exhaustive meaning – an openness, therefore, to the irreducible 
alterity of the other. 
Blue encourages spectators to an ‘attentive listening’ (Corradi Fiumara 1990, 
11; see Chapter 5), to a being open to the sounds of the other, articulating 

﻿BLIND VISION, AURAL RESONANCES  |  149
the sonorous in both Nancean hearing and listening. That is, sound is the 
only means for expressing what remains without images, which resonates with 
Nancy’s entendre; and yet, throughout the film, sound also echoes the image’s 
insufficiency, incapable of expressing a meaning placed beyond intelligibil­
ity, and encourages openness, which recalls Nancy’s écouter. Thus, we hear 
Jarman’s account of his hospital visits, the excruciating list of side effects of 
DHPG, the denouncing of the spectacularisation of AIDS. However, music, 
noises, silence, voices and the whispered names of Jarman’s loved dead ones 
point to the impossible rendering of subjective experience and death a hear­
ing. The repeated whispering of ‘David. Howard. Graham. Terry. Paul . . .’, 
for instance, parallels the absence inscribed in the blue screen, because the 
spectator is penetrated by blueness and the evocative yet un-hearable sono­
rous, thereby tending towards meaning but never able to intelligibly grasp it 
in its fullness. The irreducible nature of part of Blue’s sonorous opens to the 
possibility (and potentiality) of listening, in which sound and sense continu­
ously miss the encounter with each other but nonetheless strive towards it. The 
aural dimension thus refuses access to complete intelligibility and exhaustive 
description because of the ultimately uncommunicable nature of suffering – 
especially a suffering that has been so overly spectacularised. Nancy (2007) 
emphasises the significance of 
an insurmountable and necessary – even desirable – distance between sound 
and sense, a distance without which sonority would cease to be what it is. 
Even by continuing to use a dated vocabulary, one would have to say that 
the ‘ineffable’ does not constitute an oversignification, but, on the contrary, 
a beyond-significance [outre-signifiance] that it is not possible to enter and 
analyze under any kind of code. (58–59)
The non-correspondence between sound and sense endows listening with 
the potential for resonance in which something is always lost to intelligibility. 
‘David. Howard. Graham. Terry. Paul . . .’ reverberate throughout Blue, but only 
an irreducible pain resonates. The names are repeated several times with a pro­
gressive lowering of the whispering voice to the point of almost silence. In this 
distressing echo, Jarman, via Nigel Terry, is both the producer of the original 
sound and the one who repeats it, because he is the only one left alive with a 
voice to remember and, in so doing, witness. 
Adriana Cavarero, in her philosophical account of the voice, elaborates on 
the resonance of the voice through the mythic figure of Echo – the nymph 
condemned to repeat others’ sounds, who falls in love with Narcissus and who, 

150  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
consumed by her unrequited love, physically disappears. The myth also suggests 
the conflicting relationship between voice and image:
As a pure voice that refracts another voice, Echo makes the musicality of 
­language sing. The poet Ovid wisely places her alongside Narcissus. The eye and 
the voice, which so tormented Plato, thus encounter one another in the Latin 
fable. And as with Plato, in Ovid’s text there is no shortage of mirroring effects 
or produced copies – Narcissus’ reflected image, and Echo’s ­reverberating 
voice. The story tells of their impossible reconciliation. (Cavarero 2005, 165)
The ‘impossible reconciliation’ of image (Narcissus) and voice (Echo) stems 
from the cultural self-referentiality of the former contra the relationality of the 
latter. Nancy, too, elaborates on such discrepancy, defining the image as mostly 
mimetic and sound as primarily methexic. That is, while the visual is always 
on the verge of yielding to the temptation of mimetic reproduction, of a visual 
doubling complete in itself, sound tends towards a relation, ‘participation, shar­
ing, or contagion’ (Nancy 2007, 25). If sound is more often methexic – namely, 
it involves a relationship (although of unintelligible resonance in the liminal 
case of listening) – it follows that there cannot be aurality without some form 
of co-participation. (When Narcissus – the image – ceases to talk, Echo com­
pletely loses her voice because of the lack of the other’s sounds to repeat.) It is 
in this sense that Blue allows for establishing a relationship between film and 
spectator: we participate in someone else’s suffering, without ever being able to 
reduce it to a fully intelligible image or concept.
In the absence of figurative images, sound – and especially the human voice – 
is entrusted with evoking visuality in its attesting to a unique corporeality: there 
is a physical being who is emitting this vocal sound. But the sound of a voice, 
while referencing the body which has produced it, also appeals to other bodies 
(to other ears), thereby qualifying as potentially highly relational; that is, a voice 
is in search of a body who can listen. According to Cavarero (2005), 
destined for the ear of another, the voice implies a listener – or better, a 
reciprocity of pleasure. [. . .] it is no longer a question of intercepting a sound 
and decoding or reinterpreting it, but rather of responding to a unique voice 
that signifies nothing but itself. There is nothing ulterior behind this voice that 
would make it into a mere sonorous vehicle, an audible sign. (7)
Here Cavarero’s position resonates with that of Nancy: in both philosophers, 
when the sonorous ceases to be a question of semantic, it becomes ­irreducibly 

﻿BLIND VISION, AURAL RESONANCES  |  151
relational. In Echo and Narcissus: Women’s Voices in Classical Hollywood 
Cinema (1991), Amy Lawrence develops an argument relevant to my approach 
to Blue’s aurality. Like Cavarero, Lawrence employs Ovid’s fable to account for 
the unbalanced relationship between sound and image in the cinema, inter­
preting Echo’s loss of her own voice (that is, the possibility of articulating her 
own thoughts) as the prerequisite for Narcissus’s unrestrained fascination with 
himself. Accordingly, ‘sound’s absence [is] established as a precondition for the 
image’s irresistible allure’ (Lawrence 1991, 2). It is no wonder, then, that in a 
film explicitly against the beguiling temptation of images such as Blue, sound 
is that which makes the film possible in a move to contrast the image’s seduc­
tive power. Jarman removes the body from the visible realm, returning instead 
an imaginative, carnal aurality which attests to his individual experience with 
AIDS; furthermore, he renders the voice a listening which at once presupposes 
someone who listens and marks its own insufficiency in the face of suffering. 
Thus, ‘David. Howard. Graham. Terry. Paul . . .’ haunt the blue screen and the 
spectator’s ears with their paradoxical a-visual corporeality. Higginson (2008) 
observes:
The obsessive repetition of this nominal mantra marks it as unresolved; the 
names standing as an indicator of the fact that the other (the beloved one 
grieved for) the proper name (inadequately) denotes remains incompletely 
internalized. Sarah Brophy has observed that in ‘attempting to embrace those 
he has lost, [Jarman] finds that although he may repeat their names, their 
persons are somehow not tractable to representation’. (91)
What we listen to are sounds of absence – not only a visual (figurative) 
absence, but a corporeal, phenomenal absence of the dear dead ones. Their 
status ­parallels that of sound in cinema, which ‘is itself a kind of echo, re-­
presented and ­reproduced, never actually “there”’ (Lawrence 1991, 3). A sense 
of ­incommensurate loss resounds throughout Blue: sounds of absence, sounds 
about the absents. Jarman’s whispered invocation remains a self-referential 
echo, thereby marking his role as witness – the one still alive, who still has a 
voice. 
Blue’s aurality is therefore essential for the film’s overcoming of the spectac­
ularisation of the PWA. It is not only the monochromatic screen but also the 
irreducible nature of the sonorous which allow for transcending spectacular 
images of the disease, in an unfathomable echoing of the invisibility and silenc­
ing of the gay community. In Blue, Jarman ‘creates an anonymous acoustic space 
that maintains its sounds and voices as irrecuperable – or rather, it bears witness 

152  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
to a sonic ambience that cannot be transmuted back into spectacularization and 
intelligibility’ (Khalip 2010, 97). The spectacular representation of the PWA also 
involved the aural dimension, which Jarman references most emblematically 
when he decries: ‘I shall not win the battle against the virus – in spite of slogans 
like “Living with AIDS”. The virus was appropriated by the well, so we have to 
live with AIDS while they spread the quilt for the moths of Ithaca across the 
wine dark sea’. The condemnation of the AIDS spectacularisation inexorably 
intersects with the misinformation surrounding the disease and with queerness 
(‘Three quarters of the AIDS organisations are not providing safer sex informa­
tion. One district said they had no queers in their community, but you might try 
district X – they have a theatre’). Echoing the queer visuality of the blue mon­
ochromatic screen, Blue’s sound track is distinctly queer in its exploitation of 
noise, silence and stratified voices (see, for instance, Khalip’s [2010] compelling 
analysis). 
In its challenging of fixed, heteronormative conceptions of sexual identity 
and representations of the PWA, Blue resists the audio-visual aesthetics that has 
traditionally supported them. While queerness is obviously not fixedly located 
in either the sound track or the image track, but depends on context, interpre­
tation and use, it is nonetheless evident that Blue employs sonic devices and 
practices which facilitate the understanding of a sound as both disruptive of 
(hetero)normative codes and indicative of non-normative desire, such as dis­
sonances, noises and silences.3 Refusing to reduce the experience of AIDS to a 
hearing and therefore to an exhaustive sense, Blue uncomfortably compels us to 
an opening to listen to alterity, providing us with a cinematic iconoclastic eikōn 
which encourages an empathically unsettling encounter with AIDS, suffering 
and death.
Concluding Remarks
Blue is an example of a radically iconoclastic approach to cinema in which both 
figurative images and intelligible sounds are conceived as inadequate for the 
representation of the model. Jarman realises an IKB monochromatic film where 
the necessity to show his personal experience with AIDS meets an ethical and 
political need to not trespass into obscenity. The non-representational image 
track rejects spectacular images of the PWA and any attempt at a mimetic 
rendering of pain and suffering via colour which, in a paradoxical move, sub­
tracts the ill body from the visible field to preserve it as individualised subject. 
What is more, the aural dimension echoes the inaccessible quality enshrined 
in the image track in that it alternates the clarity of hearable sounds to those 

﻿BLIND VISION, AURAL RESONANCES  |  153
­irreducible to ­meaning. Blue’s poetics is thus framed within a broader onto­
logical blindness and ineffability, which evidence the limits of artistic mime­
sis. Composed of a single, flickering image and haunted by aural resonances, 
Jarman’s Blue, however, does not show the exclusively cinematic process by 
which an iconoclastic eikōn is produced. Ingmar Bergman’s Cries and Whispers 
and Krzysztof Kieślowski’s Three Colours: Blue, instead, display via fades how a 
figurative shot is progressively destroyed by means of colour.

7	
Crumbling Faces: Ingmar Bergman’s Cries 
and Whispers 
INGMAR BERGMAN’S OEUVRE, from theatre to cinema and television, is aes­
thetically captivating and ethically fraught. Stylistic and thematic concerns 
recur in his plays and films, blurring the edges between reality and illusion, and 
eliciting the spectator’s active participation through emotion and imagination. 
Illusion, in particular, acquires an ever-growing significance in its close link with 
issues of authenticity, to the point of becoming ‘necessary’ (Michaels 1999, 1), 
or even ‘inevitable’ (Hubner 2007, 3); that is, illusions allow individuals to cope 
with a potentially meaningless life. Thus, places and faces are troubled by unre­
solved dilemmas and irrational desires.
The search for glimpses of sense concretises more powerfully in the faces 
during the extreme close-ups, enigmatically lit by Sven Nykvist and Gunnar 
Fischer. In Cries and Whispers (Viskningar och rop, 1972), the intense facial 
close-ups, which disclose something about the characters’ painful interiority, 
are also the target of destruction by means of an equally intense colour – red. 
While the film is overall figurative, it nonetheless contains several images which 
go beyond mimesis through an iconoclastic use of the colour red. Colour there­
fore becomes fundamental for complicating a simple reproduction of the phe­
nomenal world, in an attempt to produce an ethical representation of the other’s 
pain. What is more, the film offers an exquisitely cinematic passing from the 
moving image as iconophilic icon – the facial close-up – to the moving image as 
iconoclastic eikōn – the monochromatic red screen.
This chapter thus proposes an interpretation of Bergman’s Cries and Whispers 
as emblematic of an iconoclastic ethics. It argues that the recurrent fades to red 
which punctuate the film are a way of representing the others’ suffering in 
a manner respectful of its, at least partially, invisible and ineffable character. 

﻿CRUMBLING FACES  |  155
Through an overview of the importance of colour and an in-depth analysis 
of the film and its central themes of grief and lack of empathy, the chapter 
demonstrates that the fades and the resulting red monochromatic screens are 
examples of iconoclastic eikones in which a mimetic, potentially spectacular 
image is replaced by an image that hints at its model without exhibiting it in 
a figuratively accessible manner. The film therefore supports an iconoclastic 
perspective because the gap between the intelligible content and its visible form 
is unbridgeable.
The Figurative Image Disappears into Sheer Colour
Like Derek Jarman’s Blue and Krzysztof Kieślowski’s Three Colours: Blue (see 
Chapter 8), one of the most striking features of Bergman’s Cries and Whispers 
is colour. While Jarman makes colour the constitutive image track of the film, 
Bergman and Kieślowski punctuate theirs with fades to colour and monochro­
matic screens, thereby exhibiting how a mimetic image slowly vanishes into 
colour. All three films are significantly built around a consistent, anti-­naturalistic 
use of a dominant colour, which assumes connotations and meanings independ­
ent from the coloured objects. Bergman’s recurrent fades to red which sus­
pend figuration, decomposing the magnified female faces, demonstrate colour’s 
potential for the iconoclastic rendering of a cinematic world. 
While early film theorists such as Béla Balázs ([1945] 1970, 242–45) and, 
more emphatically, Sergei Eisenstein (1957, 117–53) stressed the importance of 
colour as autonomous element of film, very few narrative films have used it in 
this way. More often, colour in film is rendered and thus perceived matter-of-
factly, as something belonging to the mimetic reproduction of the world and as a 
means for heightening the impression of reality.1 In Bergman’s film, however, as 
in Kieślowski’s, colour is essentially separated from the thing represented and, 
therefore, is fundamentally liberated from mimesis. In saying this, I do not mean 
that colour exists in a fluctuating state – it is, in fact, embodied in the screen; 
thus, it phenomenally exists as the colour of a physical object. But in the film’s 
economy and its overall experience, colour is abstracted from visible forms to 
produce a dominant-colour-feeling experience; that is, in our experience of the 
film, we suddenly experience red or blue (the being-red or being-blue of the 
screen). 
The idea of a colour-feeling experience, which may or may not be dependent 
upon a colour-representing experience, is a key notion in the ­philosophical 
debate over colour. Such ongoing issue originates from and addresses 
two problematics concerning colour: colour seems to be both a property of 

156  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
objects – something is in a specific colour – and a property of someone’s 
­experience – I perceive something as being in a specific colour (Byrne and 
Hilbert 2001; Levine 1998; Maund 2012). Various philosophical approaches 
tackle the issue in different manners, and the overall debate is complex and goes 
considerably beyond the scope of the present book. It suffices to consider how 
the debate centres on colour-feeling experience (how one experiences a colour) 
and colour-representing experience (how a colour is embodied in a physical 
object), as well as the ways in which these two kinds of experiences (mind-­
dependent and mind-independent) occur (Byrne and Hilbert 2001, xii–xix). For 
instance, if we consider a red apple, there are a number of questions that could 
be raised in relation to the red-feeling experience and the red-representing 
experience (on which I will not dwell), such as: if one, under normal conditions, 
is having a red-representing experience (a red apple), does this imply that one is 
also having a red-feeling experience? Is this proposition reversible (red-feeling 
→ ­red-representing)? Is it possible for one to have, for instance, a blue-feeling 
experience while having a red-representing experience? And so on. 
There is no conclusive outcome to the philosophical debate on colour. In 
cinema, I conceive of colour as both a property of objects of the mise-en-scène 
and as absolute entity; namely, colour as loosened from any tie with the objec­
tual world. In this latter usage, colour is employed as autonomous and, thus, 
its chromatic presence on the screen acquires meanings that go beyond those 
related to the mimetic reproduction of such colour in phenomenal reality. 
Accordingly, Bergman’s red and Kieślowski’s blue are not mere attributes of 
the coloured objects because the red of an apple is not just an apple being red, 
in much the same way as a blue lollipop is not just a lollipop being blue; rather, 
they chromatically resonate with the being red and being blue of the films. That 
is, red and blue objects, as well as filters and lighting, enhance and create the 
possible meanings that these two colours assume in the films. Bergman’s red 
and Kieślowski’s blue2 recur not only in the totalising monochromatic screens, 
but also in the objects of the mise-en-scène – from the burning red of the walls 
to the bright red of the blood; from the slightly dark blue of the room to the 
clear blue of the swimming pool’s water. In both films, therefore, colour is also 
employed with autonomous value and becomes ‘an abstract, un-objectual [inog­
gettuale] entity that flows in the film through things’ (Venzi 2006, 25). Colour 
thus exhibits itself in two ways: by concretising in objects of the mise-en-scène, 
which can already produce a first departure from mimesis to something more 
symbolic and at times anti-naturalistic, albeit remaining in the figurative realm; 
and by offering itself as colour separated from any object, in a monochromatic 
screen. 

﻿CRUMBLING FACES  |  157
Consequently, the experience of a film wherein one specific colour is 
employed in such manner is likely to elicit a dominant-colour-feeling experi­
ence. Bergman’s Cries and Whispers encourages red-feeling experiences, even 
though not every object of the mise-en-scène allows for a red-representing 
experience. This overall red-feeling experience of the film is evoked by the con­
tinual and insisted recurrence of the colour red, not only in physical objects, 
but also and especially in the fades and the monochromatic screens. On the 
one hand, scenes are lit in a way that tends towards a single dominant colour, 
and props are also chosen in red, thus producing a slightly anti-naturalistic 
mise-​en-scène; on the other hand, there are several fades to red and red mon­
ochromatic images, in which the anti-naturalism of the mise-en-scène turns 
into explicit abstraction. Such autonomy of colour carries out the metaphorical 
destruction of the mimetic shot, thereby creating iconoclastic eikones in the 
encounter between the film and the spectator. 
A Film of Red and Faces
Cries and Whispers is Bergman’s only film where colour is treated as essentially 
autonomous. Colour is also at the basis of the film’s seminal idea, as evident 
in Bergman’s own telling about the haunting images which pushed him into 
making the film: ‘the first image kept coming back, over and over: the room 
draped all in red with women clad in white’ (Bergman 1994, 83). This is Cries 
and Whispers reduced to its minimal form. In its use of colour, this film is also 
Bergman’s most cinematic work. Contra Hubert I. Cohen (1993) who claims 
that ‘Cries and Whispers is [. . .] novelistic and theatrical’ (250), I argue that the 
film’s force resides in the facial close-ups and extreme close-ups, which do not 
exist in theatre, and in the tearing apart of these faces by the fades to red, which 
is impossible in both literature and theatre. Cries and Whispers is, therefore, 
only apparently ‘novelistic and theatrical’, given that it is profoundly based on 
inherently cinematic techniques. While for Cohen (1993) ‘the film’s fabric is 
woven of mise-en-scène more than giant close-ups’ (250), I contend that the 
extreme close-ups and their destruction in the fades to red construct the most 
powerful sense of the film; namely, the impossibility to fully express, in both 
visible and audible terms, a person’s inner life and inner inferno. 
The film follows two sisters, Maria (Liv Ullmann) and Karin (Ingrid Thulin), 
taking care of a third, Agnes (Harriet Anderson), who is dying of womb cancer. 
Anna (Kari Sylwan), a servant devoted to Agnes, is however the person physically 
and emotionally looking after Agnes. To accompany Agnes in her final days, the 
women find themselves together in the manor of their childhood: outside, there 

158  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
is the large park lit by a faint Nordic sun; inside, where most of the story occurs, 
there are the claustrophobic, intensely red rooms. While Agnes embraces her 
pain, maintaining compassion and gratitude, her sisters remain entrapped in 
their inability to empathise. Both unhappily married, Maria indulges in fleeting 
moments of superficial tenderness, and Karin hides her overwhelming hatred 
behind a stiff coldness. Agnes dies, and the sisters dismiss Anna in a heartbeat, 
before harshly departing from each other. 
The film is structured around a continuous alternation between present and 
past, in which the boundaries between reality and its distortion are increasingly 
thin. Three flashbacks and a dream interrupt the unfolding of the events in the 
present, and a last flashback concludes the film. Each of these interruptions 
belongs to one of the female characters, conveying a sense of their ­personality – 
Agnes’s capacity to love unconditionally, Maria’s narcissistic egotism, Karin’s 
inability to overcome the hatred for both herself and others, Anna’s compas­
sionate love. Maria’s and Karin’s flashbacks and Anna’s dream are shot and 
edited in the same manner. A figurative shot fades to red and the screen turns 
into a red monochromatic image. Then, an extreme facial close-up of the char­
acter, in which only one half of the face is lit, appears. This face slowly decom­
poses into another fade to red, leaving the screen completely red for a second 
time. Then the flashback, or the dream, begins. At the end of the flashback, 
the same transition is repeated backwards: the figurative shot fades to red; the 
screen becomes a red monochromatic image; an extreme facial close-up of the 
character, in which this time the other half of the face is lit, appears and then 
plunges into a fade to red; then the screen becomes completely red for a fourth 
time. Accompanying these transitions from the face to the monochromatic red 
screen are indecipherable whispers and, from time to time, the feeble sound of a 
distant bell. Agnes’s flashbacks, however, differ from Maria’s, Karin’s and Anna’s 
because they are not introduced by a fade to red, but by a dissolve,3 and for the 
fact that there are no extreme close-ups of Agnes’s face in between the fades. 
The sisters’ flashbacks and Anna’s dream, in which the fades to red signal the 
transition to and from the past, are the most cinematic scenes in the film and 
those which lead to iconoclastic eikones, as I shall explain. 
The first flashback belongs to Agnes; differently from the ones that will follow, 
it is dominated not only by the colour red but also white, and it partially occurs 
in the well-lit, open space of the manor’s park. After we are introduced to the 
character and her pain in the present, Agnes reminiscences about her childhood 
and her beloved mother, played by Liv Ullmann. During a magic lantern show 
on the Twelfth Night, Agnes gazes at her mother’s blithe enjoyment of Maria’s 
company, remembering how the mother could be, instead, ‘playfully cruel’ with 

﻿CRUMBLING FACES  |  159
Agnes. From Agnes’s past emotional discomfort, we are taken back to her cur­
rent physical agony. The presence of a doctor, David (Erland Josephson), called 
to assist Agnes, leads to Maria’s flashback. While in the present David refuses 
Maria’s advances, in the past, when he was called for Anna’s dying daughter, 
he spent the night with Maria. In an intense monologue in front of a mirror, 
Maria and David acknowledge their shallowness and selfishness. The day after, 
Maria’s husband, Joakim (Henning Moritzen), who has returned from a work 
trip and, having sensed the cheating, is caught stabbing himself with a paper-
knife by an uncaring and slightly repulsed Maria. Back in the present, Agnes 
dies, and the priest recites a surprisingly agnostic sermon for her, before Karin 
closes the chamber’s doors and everything fades to red. Karin’s flashback coils 
around the disgust for her husband, Fredrik (Georg Årlin), twenty years her 
senior, and her self-harm. In a loveless atmosphere of tension and uneasiness, 
Karin and Fredrik are dining when she accidentally breaks a glass, spilling red 
wine over an immaculate white sheet. After she has returned to her room, Karin 
uses the shard of glass broken at dinner to cut her vagina and then smears her 
face with the blood, defiantly smiling at a repelled Fredrik who has come to 
claim his matrimonial rights. Finally, there is a dreamlike sequence of Agnes’s 
resurrection, shot as if it were a flashback of Anna. Hearing someone crying, 
Anna rushes into the bedroom where Agnes supposedly lies dead. Caught in a 
liminal state, Agnes resurrects, beseeching her sisters to assist her trespassing. 
First Karin enters the room but, overcome by repulsion, she runs away. Then 
Maria approaches Agnes with seeming tenderness. However, when the dead 
sister begins to touch the living sister, who is capable of only superficial displays 
of affection, Maria screams in disgust and hastily leaves the room. Only Anna 
remains beside the unrested dead, taking Agnes in her arms in the manner of a 
pietà. Additionally, there is a further flashback which concludes the film. Like 
the first flashback, it belongs to Agnes, is introduced by a dissolve, is white-­
dominated and shot in the sunny park. It is a reminiscence of Agnes’s joyous 
day with her sisters and Anna. The sisters, dressed in white gowns, with Anna 
in grey, share a startling moment of grace in the warmly lit park of the manor.
While there are a variety of possible themes to explore in relation to Cries 
and Whispers, my analysis will primarily focus on the magnified female faces 
consumed by the fades to red and their value as iconoclastic eikones. Existing 
scholarly analyses discuss a cluster of topics: there is the idea, supported by 
Bergman himself (1977), of the female characters as representing different 
aspects of Bergman’s mother (Cohen 1993, 249; Cowie 1992, 277; Gado 1986, 
409–22; Sitney 1989), the possible interpretations of the dreamlike sequence 
of Agnes’s resurrection (Hubner 2007, 108–16; Törnqvist 1996, 157–58), the 

160  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
­analogy between Christ and Agnes (Cohen 1993, 257–60; Gado 1986, 409, 
­416–19; Kalin 2003, 134–41, 145; Törnqvist 1996, 153) and the significance 
of the extensive presence of the colour red in both mise-en-scène and editing 
(Cohen 1993, 250–51; Kalin 2003, 147–49; Misek 2010, 63–64; Törnqvist 1996, 
149; Venzi 2013). 
One of the most examined sequences is that of Agnes’s resurrection, which 
incorporates some of Bergman’s stylistic and thematic concerns. While estab­
lishing a parallel between Agnes and Christ as both agni Dei (Kalin 2003, 
­134–62; Törnqvist 1996, 146–59), the scene also provides a lyrical blurring of 
reality and illusion through its style. Laura Hubner (2007) considers the scene’s 
contradictory status of a dream which is stylistically shot as if it were real – it is, 
in fact, shot in the same manner as the previous flashback sequences. According 
to Hubner, the opposition between content and style contributes to making 
Agnes’s resurrection the most startling and horrific scene in a film where the 
boundaries between reality and hallucination are incredibly thin. However, 
while in her account ‘this image of the corpse rising has to be seen as truly 
horrific’ (Hubner 2007, 114), I find it instead tender and disarmingly lonely. 
Agnes’s skeletal hands are not the brutal hands of a zombie, but a desperately 
poetic metaphor of the loneliness of death. It is instead the white-dominated 
flashback that concludes the film which consists of the most dreamlike sequence 
of Cries and Whispers because of its style and overall atmosphere. This scene 
is stylistically at odds with the rest of the claustrophobic, intensely red film, 
in which resentment and selfishness regulate most of the relationships among 
characters – except for that between Anna and Agnes. This concluding image 
of the four female characters dressed in white, harmoniously spending time 
together, seems a shared fantasy, or an impossible image, because of its light 
colours, outdoor spaces and unexpected peacefulness which are absent from 
the rest of the film. The white is so candid and the calm so sweet that it seems 
impossible for them to exist in the harshly red reality that dominates the film. As 
Frank Gado (1986) notes, ‘this idyllic finale’ is a ‘gentle illusion’ (421). 
Indeed, while this final flashback is drenched in luminous white, the rest of 
the film visually reverberates in ominous red. Such colour becomes an objective 
correlative of the grief and pain which dominate the film and whose representa­
tion is however never obscene. The reality of the others’ suffering is preserved 
and respected in the cries on the magnified faces and in the whispers on the red 
screens. Physical pain does take a visible form in Agnes’s body writhing in agony, 
Joakim’s suicide attempt and Karin’s self-harm. However, the presence of the 
fades to red and the red screens, in which we sense that something deeply and 
painfully violent is invading the screen, functions as a means to safeguard the 

﻿CRUMBLING FACES  |  161
invisible and inexpressible quality of a person’s interiority, thereby refusing to 
spectacularise suffering. The obsessive presence of the colour red – in the mise-
en-scène, the fades and the monochromatic screens – and its autonomy from 
mimetic reproduction or conventional meaning constitute the most astonishing 
and innovative element of the film.
Bergman (1994) conceived of ‘the color red as the interior of the soul. When 
I was a child, I saw the soul as a shadowy dragon, blue as smoke, hovering 
like an enormous winged creature, half bird, half fish. But inside the dragon 
everything was red’ (90). Following Bergman’s likening of red and soul, the red 
in Cries and Whispers has been variously connected to the character’s troubled 
inner life as representing ‘raw emotion’ (Hubner 2007, 114), or ‘some mood of 
rawness or passion or anger, some feeling of interiority’ (Harcourt 1974, 252). It 
is also linked to blood, thereby becoming ‘symbolic of the widespread physical 
and mental wounds’ (Mosley 1981, 161), as well as ‘of life but also of sacrifice, 
of death. It is the color of erotic love, passion’ (Törnqvist 1996, 149). The close 
association of red and interiority leads Jesse Kalin (2003) to claim that, ‘when 
we enter the manor at the film’s beginning, we thus enter the human soul with 
all its mysteries’ (149), while Peter Cowie (1992) elaborates on the unsettling 
red-­feeling experience that the film elicits, paralleling ‘Bergman’s vision of the 
interior of the soul-monster [. . .] with the sensation of bloodletting that the film 
transmits’ (280). Resonating with aspects of the philosophy of colour, Richard 
Misek (2010) also emphasises the totalising presence of red in the film, sug­
gesting to ‘watch the film in an unlit room with white walls, and these walls 
too become drenched in red’ (63). That is, someone’s experience of Cries and 
Whispers is likely to produce an overall red-feeling experience, even if the spec­
tator is not having a red-representing experience (for instance, the white walls). 
Besides the absolute redness of the monochromatic screen and the progres­
sive one of the fades, red objects infest the film’s mise-en-scène, impregnating 
everything to the point that ‘the film emerges from red, returns to red in the 
spaces between scenes, and concludes with red’ (Misek 2010, 64). 
What is however remarkable about Cries and Whispers are the fades to red, 
which are unusual in film, where such transitions are mainly by means of fades 
to black. There is something in the fades to red which goes beyond the con­
ventional meaning of the fade as signalling a passage of time. Clearly, the fades 
to red in Cries and Whispers are associated with a passage of time, since they 
precede and conclude the flashbacks. However, because of the autonomy which 
the colour red acquires throughout the film, such fades also point to something 
else: a subtly violent force that surfaces on the screen. The redness seems to 
swell while the figurative image recedes, as if, in a blushing triggered by inner 

162  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
disquiet, blood was rising to the surface of the screen. Thus conceived, the fade 
to red assumes an iconoclastic value, troubling the spectator’s look, as opposed 
to the more widespread conventional sense of the fade to black. Luca Venzi 
(2013) observes: 
In the first case [fade to black], spectators read the black as a purely syntactical 
scan and fill in, without disorientation, the absence of image confronting them: 
what they encounter is a discursive convention rather than a visual transfor­
mation; in the second case [fade to colour], the spectators’ capacity to detect a 
discursive note in the film, which the film is continuously asking them, has to 
be replaced by the fact that a figurative image has gradually become a colour. 
(62–63)
Venzi goes on to briefly outline the use of the fade to red in Cries and Whispers 
as that which destroys the figurative image, concretely manifesting ‘the wide, 
amorphous lump of a suffering not fully representable’ (68). Similarly, Cohen 
(1993, 250) dwells on the film’s fades to red and their violent character. The 
fade to red both tries to give visibility to a hidden, brutal impulse and chal­
lenges the spectator’s look through the sudden destruction of figuration. Tied 
to a disquieted interiority, which arises in its unfigurability in the red screens, 
the colour red concretely dismantles figurative shots, producing iconoclastic 
eikones. Furthermore, the fade to red replaces the figurative facial close-up of 
female characters with the iconoclastic close-up of their tormented interiority. 
What we experience in the red’s swelling is an inner life, with its demons and 
unilluminated corners, slowly emerging on the surface of the screen.
From Iconophilic Icon to Iconoclastic Eikoˉn
While there are numerous fades to red in the film, I will primarily consider those 
which precede and follow the flashbacks, because these transitions, where faces 
crumble in a red screen, concretely illustrate the passage from the iconophilic 
icon to the iconoclastic eikōn. In these fades to red, we pass from the moving 
image as iconophilic icon – the facial close-up – to the moving image as icono­
clastic eikōn – the red monochromatic screen. As in Jean Epstein’s ([1921] 1977) 
and Béla Balázs’s ([1945] 1970, 52–88; [1924] 2010, 38–45, 100–11) accounts, 
in which the face in the close-up is that through which interiority surfaces on 
an exterior, visible means, the facial close-ups in Cries and Whispers attempt 
to convey something of a person’s inner life. Concurrently, however, this pos­
sibility is partially negated by the fades to red which dismantle the figurative 

﻿CRUMBLING FACES  |  163
shot, giving rise to iconoclastic eikones: the intensely red screens. Sound sim­
ilarly remarks on language’s failure to express a human being’s inner state. 
Thus, we pass from the cries on the magnified faces to the whispers on the red 
screens; in both cases, we are confronted with sounds which ultimately remain 
indecipherable.
The status of the film’s disquieted interiorities, their being beyond fig­
urative representation and intelligible expression, is directly linked to suf­
fering, which constitutes that place of our interiority where we never go 
back easily. Cries and Whispers is a film of decomposing faces apt for a 
non-­representational rendering of physical pain and inner suffering. From 
the film’s inception, close-ups of Agnes’s face contorted in a grimace of pain, 
followed by her literally writing and underlining that she is in pain, fill the 
screen. Physical pain recurs also through Joakim’s stabbing and Karin’s muti­
lation. However, pain in the film is not solely physical, but includes emotional 
pain to which none of the main characters is immune – from the most super­
ficial of Maria’s disappointment for her unfulfilled desire for David, over 
Karin’s failed attempts to face her deepest emotions, to Anna’s grief for her 
daughter. Being a film on pain, it is also a film on empathy and its absence. 
Empathy is here intended in its etymological meaning of ‘to suffer with’ and 
refers to an individual’s capacity to find in themselves that place of sorrow 
which enables them to suffer with someone else; namely, to imaginatively 
share the pain of others. Robert Sinnerbrink (2016) observes that ‘empathy is 
feeling with’ (92) another person and consists in ‘the capacity to imaginatively 
adopt the other’s perspective [. . .] from a first-person point of view’ (93). In 
her thorough account of film and empathy, Jane Stadler (2017) also stresses 
the relevance of ‘moral imagination’ together with ‘embodied resonance’ 
(325) in empathic processes and delineates how narrative and stylistic cues 
can attune us to others’ emotional state. For instance, cinematic close-ups, 
both visual and aural, can cognitively and affectively move us, move some­
thing in us, through the powerful encounter with a magnified face or sound 
of the other which invests our eyes or ears. In Cries and Whispers, in addition 
to the narrative and the giant facial close-ups, also the non-representational 
red screen insistently urges spectators to confront the other’s pain, inviting to 
an empathic effort. The empathy which the film encourages is uncomfortable, 
because it demands us to affectively imagine someone else’s pain through a 
resonance with the pain that we ourselves may have experienced, without 
however reducing the other’s suffering to our own. That is, the empathy we 
may feel for these characters is disconcerting, also because the pain which is 
surfacing on the screen is not our pain.

164  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Cries and Whispers shows a wide spectrum of behaviours towards others, 
from Agnes’s unworldly compassion to Fredrik’s complete inability to feel with 
others. Agnes is physically in pain because of her cancer and emotionally capa­
ble of empathising with others. Anna utterly empathises with Agnes, yet she 
seems unable to understand or relate to Karin’s suffering, refusing to forgive her 
after being slapped. The late mother blissfully spends time with Maria, reserving 
a cold and un-empathic attitude to Agnes as a child. Maria and Karin both lack 
empathy and recoil at Agnes’s imploration of love during the resurrection scene. 
However, while Karin is at least practical when it comes to Agnes’s illness, Maria 
is visibly uncomfortable in front of Agnes’s physical pain. Finally, David does 
not hesitate to humiliate Maria both in the present and in the past, and Fredrik 
is selfishly indifferent to everybody. Therefore, to the exclusion of Agnes, who 
is a true sacrificial agnus Dei, a general inability to empathise affects all the 
characters at different levels: more clearly Fredrik, David and Maria, who is not 
afraid of physically touching because she remains at the epidermal surface of 
things, as well as Karin, who abhors being touched because she understands its 
profundity, and Anna, who can empathise with Agnes but ‘refuses even to make 
a gesture or an attempt to recognise what Karin feels or see how wounded she 
is’ (Kalin 2003, 141). 
Agnes, Maria and Karin are the most fascinating characters because of their 
painfully conflicted interiority, the complexity of their personality and the 
intensity of their facial close-ups. The face in the close-up as iconophilic icon – 
namely, the figurative image of the face as that which can reveal something of 
a person’s interiority – recurs throughout the film. According to Irving Singer 
(2009), Cries and Whispers, like other Bergman’s films, ‘rel[ies] extensively upon 
close-ups of faces that disclose what is happening in a character’s innermost 
feelings’ (83). The characters’ tormented inner life undoubtedly surfaces in the 
facial close-ups through the often-subtle epidermal changes of expression; how­
ever, the film also acknowledges the limits of the figurative representation of 
interiority. The facial close-ups which plunge into a red screen are symptomatic 
of the impossibility to figuratively reveal such ‘innermost feelings’. Bergman 
searches the magnified faces which, by means of progressive changes in the 
expression, convey a sense of the character’s inner state. However, a person’s 
inner suffering eventually remains beyond mimetic reproduction. 
The Face as Icon
Cries and Whispers is rife with close-ups of faces, and each of these close-
ups does express something about the character, thereby constituting what 

﻿CRUMBLING FACES  |  165
can be addressed as iconophilic icon. The facial close-up as iconophilic icon is 
present from the beginning of the film when we are first introduced to Agnes 
(Figure  7.1). Agnes’s face writhing in pain, her eyes closed tight, the mouth 
curved into an excruciating grimace and the head slowly turning in distress, as 
if looking for some solace somewhere, effectively disclose the character’s state. 
Here, an internal, invisible pain surfaces in the exteriority of the face and offers 
itself to viewers. In much the same manner, the moving image concluding the 
film before the last pouring of red is a close-up of Agnes’s serene face during 
a moment of grace. Such peacefulness is enhanced by its being at odds with 
Agnes’s aching face in the rest of the film; on this peaceful face, which seems 
more angelic than terrestrial, we read the serenity of her soul. 
Maria’s facial close-ups also disclose something about her character. Her 
uncomfortable smirks and unrested eyes give a glimpse into her nervous beguile­
ment and overall shallowness: she shuns seriousness and seemingly cannot focus 
on anything but for a fleeting moment. In her flashback, there is a mirror scene 
which at once affirms and negates the possibility of expressing a person’s interi­
ority through the exteriority of the face. Maria and David are reminiscing about 
the past when David puts her in front of a mirror. With Maria’s face occupying 
most of the frame in an extreme close-up (Figure 7.2), David starts listing the 
almost imperceptible changes that have occurred on her face as evidence of her 
inner alterations: 
Figure 7.1  Close-up of Agnes in pain

166  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
DAVID: I want you to see that you’ve changed. Now you cast rapid, calculating 
sidelong glances. You used to look directly, openly, undisguisedly. Your 
mouth, once soft, has an expression of discontent and hunger. Your com­
plexion is pallid, you use make-up. Your fine, broad forehead now has four 
wrinkles above each eyebrow. You can’t see them in this light, but you can 
in daylight. Do you know where they come from? 
MARIA: No.
DAVID: Indifference, Maria.
[David’s lower face, primarily his lips, enters the frame beside Maria’s face]
DAVID: And this fine contour, from ear to chin-point, is no longer so implicit. 
It shows that you’re easy-going and indolent. Look here, at the nostrils: why 
do you sneer so often? You sneer too often; do you see, Maria? Beneath your 
eyes the sharp, barely visible wrinkles of boredom and impatience.
MARIA: Can you see all that?
DAVID: No, but I feel it when you kiss me.
Throughout the scene, Maria’s expression, at first curiously amused, slowly 
changes into an uncomfortable smile. We follow David’s account while search­
ing Maria’s face for these signs. And we see them. We notice the faint wrinkles, 
we become aware of the make-up covering her cheeks. The micro movements 
of Maria’s face, which allow for her inner state to become visible, recall Balázs’s 
physiognomy and Epstein’s photogénie. As if following Balázs’s claims about the 
Figure 7.2  Extreme close-up of Maria and David in front of the mirror

﻿CRUMBLING FACES  |  167
power of physiognomy to disclose a character’s emotions, or Epstein’s account 
of the close-up as that which augments our knowledge of the magnified real­
ity, Maria’s continuous and subtle changes of expression from an apparent 
self-­confident smile to a self-conscious smirk reveals her uneasiness at David’s 
words. However, Bergman investigates the limits of this epidermal, cognitive 
enhancement throughout the film. In this scene, the faith in the facial close-up 
as that which discloses a person’s interiority is verbally dismissed. David cannot 
read this inner state on Maria’s face, but he can feel it when they kiss. While 
formally Ullmann’s face remains to dominate the frame, the facial close-up as 
iconophilic icon is partially negated by David’s words; thus, interiority seems to 
resist mimetic rendering even in the presence of figuration. 
Finally, Karin’s facial close-ups are soaked in intense distress; in a way, they 
complement Agnes’s: while the latter’s close-ups are mainly expressions of a 
physical pain, the former’s give a visible shape to an emotional suffering. From 
the extreme close-up of her face in doleful bewilderment introducing her flash­
back (Figure 7.3), over her face smeared with blood, to that following an attempt 
at intimacy with Maria, Karin’s close-ups reveal her status as wounded beast. 
Shortly after Karin’s flashback, there is a sequence for the most part composed 
of facial close-ups and extreme close-ups against a red wall, which displays a 
first failed attempt at a more profound bond between Karin and Maria. The two 
sisters look for each other, Maria tenderly caressing Karin, who at first refuses 
to be touched before dolefully abandoning herself to the caresses. It seems as if 
an emotional bond has been established. But suddenly Karin jumps away from 
Maria with a desperate cry, throwing herself against the wall. Her cries act as a 
counterpart of Agnes’s: there, it is a physical pain devouring the character; here, 
it is an emotional suffering trying to find an outflow. On Karin’s face, where 
everything is deformed by a profound and sharp anguish, we read her soul’s 
disquietude. While she relentlessly repeats ‘don’t touch me’, first in a cry, then 
in whispers, her face slowly disappears, swallowed by a fade to red.
The Becoming Red of the Face
Indeed, the sisters’ facial close-ups as iconophilic icons are, in some instances, 
consumed by fades to red. In the fades to red and in the red screens which follow, 
interiority is denied a figurative form. Something interior can be expressed 
in the face, but there always remains something else which is impossible to 
mimetically bring to the surface. Thus, the fade to red progressively covers what 
is figurative, and the soul – Bergman’s red – invades the screen. The subtle 
yet palpable violence of the monochromatic screen is also enhanced by other 

168  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
reds which occur throughout the film: first and foremost, the red of blood – of 
Joakim, who stabs himself and bleeds onto his white shirt; of Karin, who cuts 
her vagina and then rubs blood on her sadly satisfied face. It is also the red of 
the suffocating house, which itself seems to be bleeding, and the dark red of the 
wine that stains the candid sheet. It is, therefore, a violent, intense red, tied to 
destructive impulses – not a red belonging to a soul at rest, but the colour of a 
disquieted interiority. 
Given that, in Bergman’s view, red is the colour of the soul, the fade to red 
can be read as a fade to the soul, the soul surfacing on the red monochromatic 
screen. As such, the soul is at once that which can transpire from the changes 
of expression occurring on a face and that which remains, at least partially, 
unrepresentable in mimetic terms. Cinema’s failure to figuratively express a 
person’s interiority is rendered both visually and aurally: the red monochro­
matic screen bears witness to that which lies beyond mimetic reproduction and 
intelligible words. Thus, whispers accompany the red screens without articu­
lating the clear meaning that intelligible sentences have. À propos of Cries and 
Whispers, Bergman (1994) states: ‘Words will ultimately become meaningless, 
and the behavior will be out of sync; illogical forces that one cannot account 
for will come into play’ (89). While in quotidian, social life individuals are most 
often expected to live according to logic, as the characters in the film strive to 
do, interiority follows its own, not necessarily logical laws of desire. Words, like 
figurative images, fail to express such inner life. Echoing Bergman’s account of 
language, Törnqvist (1996) explains: ‘Bergman distrusts language as a means of 
establishing contact. On the contrary, he maintains, language is normally used 
to build walls between people behind which they may hide’ (15). The characters 
in Cries and Whispers do not establish a profound bond through words, and the 
most powerful scenes in which they manage to express something about their 
troubled interiority occur without words being spoken. Cohen (1993) remarks: 
‘Bergman knows that words cannot convey what humans feel or what feelings 
do’ (258–59). Thus, we hear evocative whispers in the transitions from a face to 
a red screen, which hint at both something obsessively tormenting the character 
and the possibility of a sincere emotional bond beyond the misunderstandings 
brought by words. 
Moreover, in the fade to red transitions, there is the passage from an image as 
iconophilic icon to an image as iconoclastic eikōn. We first see a facial close-up 
that augments our knowledge of the character, and then we are confronted with 
an image beyond mimesis; we hear whispers, at times accompanied by stifled 
cries and the tolling of a bell. The extreme facial close-up being decomposed 
by the fade to red thus exhibits the very process of destruction of the icon 

﻿CRUMBLING FACES  |  169
(Figures  7.3–5). What is most striking in terms of iconoclasm in Cries and 
Whispers is the fact that we see the process of the un-making of the giant faces, 
not only the result. That is, an iconoclastic eikōn is concretely produced before 
the spectator’s eyes. Most importantly, cinema can show this process because of 
its being movement. As Balázs ([1945] 1970) had realised, 
the filming of colours in movement [. . .] could open up a vast domain of 
human experience which could not find expression in any other art, least of all 
in painting. For a painter may paint a flushed face but never a pale face slowly 
being warmed to rose-red by a blush; he can paint a pale face but never the 
dramatic phenomenon of blanching. (242)
A monochromatic painting, for instance, can only display the result of destruc­
tion, but not how something has been progressively destroyed. Cinema, instead, 
can film how a face gradually vanishes into colour. In Bergman’s film, we first see 
a figurative, magnified face, and we can almost ‘taste the [character’s] tears’ à la 
Epstein ([1921] 1977, 13); then, progressively, tragically, we witness the decom­
position of this face, its slowly dissolving into a red screen. The showing of this 
process also attests that, while a face can expose something of a person’s inte­
riority, inner life exceeds our capacity to give it a fully figurative and intelligible 
form. Interiority and intimate suffering cannot be exhausted by mimetic images 
or comprehensible words because they also comprise an inexpressible part, 
which nonetheless exists and demands to be acknowledged as such. This is what 
takes place in the transitions to and from the flashbacks, and more generally 
in the fades to red. It is here where the inherently cinematic force of Cries and 
Whispers rests: not only do we see an iconoclastic image (the red screen), but we 
also witness the process of destruction of iconophilic icons and of production of 
iconoclastic eikones. In front of our eyes, a figurative shot crumbles because of 
the unbridgeable gap that separates it from its referent. 
The magnified faces decomposed by the fades to red are icons shattered into 
red fragments; then the fragments recompose themselves into a red screen. 
Introducing Maria’s and Karin’s flashbacks, as well as Anna’s dream, we see an 
enigmatic, vivid close-up of one of the female characters: Maria’s lips forming a 
self-conscious smirk, her eyes incapable of settling on anything; Karin’s straight 
look, her eyes and mouth wide open in fear, before she shuts them in sorrow and 
resignation (Figures 7.3–5); and Anna’s blank expression, as if incapable of having 
thoughts of her own. Then, each time, the red swallows the sisters’ troubled 
faces and Anna’s inscrutable face, and the screen becomes a red ­monochrome. 
Each face offers a fleeting glimpse into the character’s ­interiority  – we can 

170  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Figures 7.3 to 7.5  From Karin’s facial close-up to the fade to the red screen 

﻿CRUMBLING FACES  |  171
almost feel Maria’s discomfort, Karin’s emotional wounds and Anna’s saintly 
devotion. But we can only gain access to a minuscule fragment of their doleful 
state, which remains beyond visual or aural representation. The fades to red and 
the red screens which intermittently interrupt the narrative, thereby destroying 
figurative shots, as well as the whispers accompanying them, express the fail­
ure to audio-visually represent a person’s inner life. These monochromatic red 
screens qualify as iconoclastic eikones for they are the iconoclastic close-ups of 
that which is viscerally private and unrepresentable. Ultimately, interiority – 
with all its demons and desires – is located beyond mimesis, in a blinding vision 
of red surrounded by wistful whispers.
Concluding Remarks
Cries and Whispers displays the very process of destruction of the icon and 
production of iconoclastic eikōn through the female faces first consumed by the 
red and then hesitantly reconstructed from the red. In an exclusively cinematic 
manner, a movement from the iconophilic icon to the iconoclastic eikōn is 
produced via colour: from a figurative face on which something interior reveals 
itself to a monochromatic red screen where the unrepresentable face of the soul 
appears. The depiction of the others’ suffering, always in danger of falling into 
obscenity, is respected in these movements from a restless face to a red screen; 
and in the unfolding of such process, we read at once the possibility to evoke 
something on a face and the insufficiency of mimetic images to account for a 
person’s intimate suffering. The face, and particularly the female face, qualifies 
as a privileged site for both the sacralisation and destruction of the image, for 
the face is the most emotionally charged part of the human body. Kieślowski’s 
film, the analysis of which concludes this book, similarly produces a dismantling 
of the female face via an iconoclastic usage of colour and fades, echoing Marian 
iconography in that it binds the feminine to the maternal and sorrow, as well as 
an iconoclastic tradition fearful of the Holy Mary icon.

8	
Blocks of Suffering: Krzysztof Kieślowski’s Three 
Colours: Blue
KRZYSZTOF KIEŚLOWSKI HAS explored in cinema the boundaries between 
what can be figuratively shown and what does not have a visible equivalent 
in phenomenal reality. Profoundly interested in intimate stories in both doc­
umentary and fiction, he concluded his film-making career with a trilogy that 
investigates, through the extremely physical medium of film, ideals and con­
cepts that pertain to the domain of metaphysics. This chapter focuses on the 
first film of the trilogy, Three Colours: Blue (Trois Couleurs: Bleu, 1993), which 
is a narrative, overall figurative film four times interrupted by fades to black. My 
contention is that these four fade-outs constitute iconoclastic eikones because 
they are a visible negation of mimetic reproduction in the face of an unfigurable 
and uncognisable grief. 
As in Ingmar Bergman’s film, in Kieślowski’s, too, the dismantling of the 
mimetic image occurs on the face of the female character, recalling the Christian 
iconoclastic tradition which targeted, among others, icons representing Holy 
Mary. The face of the grieving mother is also a significant motif in Marian 
iconography, in which womanhood is primarily understood as motherhood 
and inextricably tied to suffering (Mondzain 2013, 187–231). Thus, through­
out Three Colours: Blue, there is an interplay of the face as that which allows 
emotions to surface and an iconoclastic refusal to render maternal sorrow an 
accessible, uncomplicated image. In the four fade-outs, spectators see what the 
protagonist’s feel: a grief beyond thoughts or figurative images.
This chapter first introduces some ideas on the Western concept of the face, 
engaging with its representation in the cinematic close-up and in Marian ico­
nography. It then provides an overview of Kieślowski’s shift from documen­

﻿BLOCKS OF SUFFERING  |  173
tary to fiction since it had to do with the ethical risk of mimetically recording 
another person’s intimacy. The forsaking of documentary, which originated 
from questions regarding the possibility of filming everything, brings Kieślowski 
to explore in fiction the tension between cinema’s ability to visually represent 
that which cannot be seen, and its ultimate insufficiency attested by the pres­
ence of undecipherable images in his films. The investigation of such a strain is 
at the centre of Three Colours: Blue, a film caught between the aestheticism of 
mimetic images and the blankness of monochromatic screens. The thread that 
ties this chapter together thus concerns the limits of mimetic representation 
and the ethical implications of showing the intimate suffering of others.
Notes on the Western Concept of Face
The Western concept of face is dense with meaning and has undergone various 
semantic shifts throughout history. Camille Chamois, Daphné Le Roux and 
Benjamin Levy (2012) identify some of the main shifts and define the face as 
a ‘semiotic construction’; namely, as something that constitutes itself through 
culture and changes meaning accordingly, rather than as a natural given. An 
essential shift in the Western interpretation of the face occurred in the seven­
teenth century when ‘the face is not anymore the effect of an external impres­
sion but becomes the place of revelation of a peculiar interiority’ (Chamois 
et al. 2012). That is, the face became the place for the revelation of the soul 
(âme), although it was characterised by an essentially one-way movement from 
interiority to exteriority, rather than an interchange between the two dimen­
sions. Another important change took place in the nineteenth century when 
the face configured itself as dual: it was at once the place for the expression of 
individuality and the manifestation of a type (Chamois et al. 2012). The face 
was that which not only allowed individuality to surface through facial expres­
sions, but also permitted the often-harmful categorisation of human beings 
into different types.1 Then, at the beginning of the twentieth century the face, 
albeit maintaining its duality, shifted from individuality-type to interiority-­
exteriority, or individuality-universality. The face, thus, becomes the locus 
where the universal and the particular meet, an interpretation that can be 
found in Jean Epstein’s ([1921] 1977) and Béla Balázs’s ([1924] 2010) accounts; 
their engagement with the facial close-up maintains an iconophilic quality 
given by the correspondence between an invisible inner life and its visual sur­
facing on the magnified face. 
Both Epstein’s and Balázs’s work on the cinematic close-up have a mystical 
tone that intersects with an idealistic perspective which conceives of the face 

174  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
as a totality belonging to a complete being. While Balázs identifies as facial 
close-up primarily the human face and its micro movements, Epstein recog­
nises any object of a close-up as belonging to the category of face, including 
landscapes, body parts and inanimate objects. Through the notions of pho­
togénie and physiognomy, they develop a religious vocabulary of the face in film 
and a theory of the cinematic close-up as that which allows for an enhanced 
knowledge of reality. Epstein expands on Louis Delluc’s concept of photogénie, 
maintaining its ambiguity. Delluc ([1920] 1985) vaguely presents ‘photogénie 
[. . . as] the agreement between cinema and photography’ (36) and develops it as 
a somewhat mysterious rite between a referent and the film medium. There are 
things which are photogenic in themselves (such as the flesh or light-coloured 
eyes [53]), but an agreement between objects and the film medium is required 
for photogénie to occur (56, 59). Likewise, Epstein ([1926] 2012) defines as ‘pho­
togenic any aspect of things, beings, or souls whose moral character is enhanced 
by filmic reproduction’ (293). Despite the vagueness of definitions, both theo­
rists stress photogénie’s essential capacity of enhancing aspects of phenomenal 
reality. Photogénie thus expresses a correspondence between the qualities of an 
object/person and the properties of the cinematic medium; that is, it bespeaks 
‘an accordance between reality [. . .] and its representation’ (Carluccio 1992, 59). 
Described as such, photogénie would be a property of specific objects and beings 
that the film medium can record and reveal but is unable to create from scratch. 
It remains ambiguous insofar as it is a quality belonging to certain phenomenal 
referents – not everything can be photogenic – that cinema can make visible (or 
more visible).2
In this scenario, the close-up is that which increases the photogenic aspect of 
living things and inanimate objects by virtue of its dimension, thereby produc­
ing a sensory and cognitive magnification. Enlarged on the screen, the object of 
the close-up intensifies the viewer’s perception of that portion of reality, estab­
lishing a close link between spectator and phenomenal world. Epstein ([1921] 
1977) outlines the overwhelming power of the close-up to display and amplify 
emotions as follows:
The close-up modifies the drama by the impact of proximity. Pain is within 
reach. If I stretch out my arm I touch you, and that is intimacy. I can count the 
eyelashes of this suffering. I would be able to taste the tears. Never before has a 
face turned to mine in that way. Ever closer it presses against me, and I follow 
it face to face. It’s not even true that there is air between us; I consume it. It is 
in me like a sacrament. Maximum visual acuity. The close-up limits and directs 
the attention. As an emotional indicator, it overwhelms me. I have neither the 

﻿BLOCKS OF SUFFERING  |  175
right nor the ability to be distracted. (13)
The close-up has the capacity to bring onto the epidermal surface of the face 
an inner life which affectively addresses the viewer. As a secular sacrament, it 
opens a new dimension of reality, positing itself as a visible mediator between 
interiority and exteriority. 
Similarly, Balázs discusses the revelatory power of cinema and the emotional 
amplification produced by the close-up, focusing on the notion of physiognomy. 
This concept refers to cinema’s capacity to reveal the multi-faceted dimension of 
human beings through the continuous changes of facial expressions. The body 
and its movements convey inner life and, by virtue of cinema and the magnifica­
tion of the close-up, ‘the whole of mankind is now busy relearning the long-for­
gotten language of gestures and facial expressions’ (Balázs [1924] 2010, 10). Like 
Epstein, Balázs conceives of the close-up as a mediator between the individual 
and the universal and emphasises its capacity to unconceal a forgotten, hidden 
life. At the core of this renewed visibility there is the gesture, even the almost 
imperceptible movement of the face’s skin. Inner life, to become visible, needs 
to acquire a corporeal form in the facial expression which takes the form of a 
proper revelation in the magnification of the close-up: ‘close-ups are often dra­
matic revelations of what is really happening under the surface of appearances’ 
(Balázs [1945] 1970, 56). The face in the close-up visually expresses inner trans­
formations and manifests a human essence, configuring itself as a place for the 
interchange between an individual inner life and a universal external dimension.
Delluc, Epstein and Balázs often employ a quasi-liturgical vocabulary in 
their discussions of the facial close-up (for instance, their consistent yet vague 
use of the terms ‘soul’ and ‘revelation’), which is indicative of the influence of 
Christianity on the Western concept of face and therefore on Western accounts 
of the face in the cinematic close-up. The recourse to a religious, primarily 
Christian, lexicon is also distinctive of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari’s (1987, 
167, 172, 176–79, 182) argument on the face and is found in scholars comment­
ing on these primary sources (Aumont 2003, 134, 145; Dalle Vacche 2003, 15; 
Grespi 2013, 41–42, 46–47; Turvey 1998, 35). Barbara Grespi (2013) poignantly 
observes that ‘the Christological icon [. . .] is fundamental for the entire path of 
sacralisation of the filmic image’ (46), because the concept of face in Western 
culture is profoundly linked to Christ’s face and Christ as face. Christianity 
represents one of the main cultural roots of Western Europe and has exercised 
its influence also through the sacred icon of Christ. The Christological icon is 
significant not only for iconophilic approaches to the cinematic close-up but 
also for non-iconophilic accounts, which maintain the reference to the face of 

176  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Christ and Christ as the quintessential Western face (see, for example, Deleuze 
and Guattari 1987, 176–84). 
Indeed, an important aspect concerning the Western notion of face is its link 
with religion, primarily that of the Old and New Testament, found in, among 
others, Georg Simmel’s ([1901] 1959, 276–81) and Emmanuel Levinas’s (1969) 
analyses, which have considerably influenced film studies. Simmel ([1901] 1959, 
278–79) attributes the process by which the face is associated with the expres­
sion of the soul to Christianity, since it promoted the chaste covering of the 
body, leaving the face as the only unveiled body part. As such, the face became 
that which allowed for an exchange between the individual and others; namely, 
it came to constitute the primary and most immediate tool for social interaction. 
In Simmel’s perspective, as in the iconophilic interpretation of the cinematic 
close-up, the face is a means for reciprocating the other’s gaze and for revealing 
the soul – a quite positive understanding which hinges on Simmel’s overall 
conception of the face as belonging to a complete being, which is far from the 
fragmented subjectivity of the post-World War II period. While also in Levinas’s 
account (1969) the face becomes the tool for the encounter with the other, the 
meaning of this encounter radically changes, assuming an iconoclastic quality 
reminiscent of the Biblical ban on any graven image (see Chapter 5). 
While less often discussed, the face of Holy Mary in the icon has also influ­
enced Western depictions and understandings of images. In binding moth­
erhood to suffering, Marian iconography reworks the troublesome issue of 
maternal sorrow. Marie-José Mondzain (2013) explores the relevance of the 
mother for Christian and later Western conceptualisations of images, claiming 
that ‘the mother, phantasmatic site of original fusion, was the most dreaded 
figure by the adversaries of the image’ (190). In her fascinating study, Mondzain 
traces how Holy Mary’s relation to the incarnation has been rendered as a rela­
tion with death. While God the father assumes a super-sensible function, that 
of the mother is grounded in the sensible; namely, to give God a carnal, hence 
perishable body. Accordingly, ‘without woman God cannot make himself visi­
ble. But, if he becomes visible through her, he also becomes mortal’ (Mondzain 
2013, 197). Thus, the incarnation brings about the mother’s and Christ’s sorrow; 
that is, Christ suffers on the cross because of his mortal body given to him by 
the mother. After the resurrection, the mother and her grief no longer have a 
place in the Scriptures; such unbearable sorrow instead becomes the subject of 
plastic arts from the eleventh century: ‘it is up to art alone to make her visible, 
problematic icon of an idolatrous moment’ (Mondzain 2013, 203).
There is indeed a strand of Marian iconography which focuses on Holy Mary’s 
maternal, incommensurable grief: the more explicit Our Lady of Sorrows and 

﻿BLOCKS OF SUFFERING  |  177
the Virgin of the Passion types, as well as the Eleousa icon, in which the mother’s 
grief for her son’s death is tragically experienced proleptically.3 In Three Colours: 
Blue, the mimetic depiction of maternal sorrow is set in tension with its figura­
tive cancellation. The face is an exterior surface capable of expressing something 
of a person’s inner state; however, when grief becomes most acute, the protago­
nist’s painful interiority is visually rendered through an anti-mimetic form. Like 
with Bergman, so with Kieślowski, too, the female face is the target of figurative 
destruction; here, however, the iconoclastic gesture is directed towards not only 
a female face, but a mother’s face (Julie [Juliette Binoche] suffers insofar as she is 
a mother who no longer has a living daughter). While Christian iconophilia fig­
uratively celebrates the mater dolorosa, Kieślowski’s film uses monochromatic 
screens to render too sharp a grief. Such grief refuses mimesis because it refuses 
a form which could – visually and metaphorically – contain it.
From Real Tears to Glycerine
Kieślowski began his career as a documentarist filming a Polish social reality 
foreclosed by official media. His documentaries mainly focus on the lives of indi­
viduals ‘working for, or fighting against, State institutions’ (Andrew 1998, 13), 
such as factory workers or surgeons on exhausting shifts. Polish politics and 
social issues play an essential role in Kieślowski’s documentary oeuvre since 
they shape the lives of individuals, thereby determining their choices. Such an 
attention to the socio-political climate continues in his early Polish fiction films, 
where the context influences and interferes with the lives of the characters. In 
his later European co-productions, however, explicit socio-political issues are 
placed in the background of highly intimate stories, which follow emotionally 
fragmented female characters. 
The passing from documentary to fiction and from Polish fictional films to 
European co-productions has triggered various readings, which range from 
interpreting this shift as an abandonment of political engagement in favour of 
metaphysical dilemmas (Haltof 2004, 108–14; Sobolewski 1999) to understand­
ing it as a continuation of Kieślowski’s attention to individuals and their quotid­
ian struggles (Andrew 1998, 13–14; Coates 1999, 32–53; Reyland 2012, 81–89). 
Slavoj Žižek (2001b, 72) proposes a compelling interpretation which identi­
fies Kieślowski’s forsaking of documentary for fiction as primarily ethical, and 
Kieślowski’s own account of his turning to fiction lends itself to such a reading:
Not everything can be described. That’s the documentary’s great problem. It 
catches itself as if in its own trap. The closer it wants to get to somebody, the 

178  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
more the person shuts him or herself off from it. And that’s perfectly natural. 
It can’t be helped. If I’m making a film about love, I can’t go into a bedroom 
if real people are making love there. If I’m making a film about death, I can’t 
film somebody who’s dying because it’s such an intimate experience that the 
person shouldn’t be disturbed. And I noticed, when making documentaries, 
that the closer I wanted to get to an individual, the more the subjects which 
interested me shut themselves off. That’s probably why I changed to features. 
There’s no problem there. I need a couple to make love in bed, that’s fine. Of 
course, it might be difficult to find an actress who’s willing to take off her bra, 
but then you just find one who is. Somebody’s supposed to die. That’s fine. In a 
minute, he’ll get up again. And so on. I can even buy glycerine, put some drops 
in her eyes and the actress will cry. I managed to photograph some real tears 
several times. It’s something completely different. But now I’ve got glycerine. 
I’m frightened of those real tears. In fact, I don’t know whether I’ve got the right 
to photograph them. At such times I feel like somebody who’s found himself in 
a realm which is, in fact, out of bounds. That’s the main reason why I escaped 
from documentaries. (Kieślowski, quoted in Stok 1993, 86; my emphasis)
Kieślowski’s abandonment of documentary seems to be responding more to an 
ethical urgency rather than a will to exclude politics and social issues from his 
work. The director questions the rightfulness of recording and reproducing real, 
highly intimate experiences such as sex, death and sorrow. He does not, how­
ever, renounce the filming of fictional experiences – we are, for instance, shown 
Weronika’s (Irène Jacob) death on a stage, and Véronique and Julie making 
love and crying, in The Double Life of Véronique (La Double Vie de Véronique, 
Krzysztof Kieślowski, 1991) and Three Colours: Blue, respectively. Elaborating 
on the above quote, Žižek (2001b) inquires: ‘How, then, is Kieślowski’s ban on 
real tears related to the Old Testament ban on images?’ (74). The philosopher 
concludes that Kieślowski’s fictional works are characterised by an aesthetics in 
contrast to the dictates of Christian iconoclasm:
Kieślowski seems to share the Old Testament injunction to withdraw the 
domain of what really matters from degrading reality. However, in a spirit 
which runs counter to Old Testament iconoclasm, he supplements the pro­
hibition to depict intimate moments of ‘real’ life with, precisely, fiction, with 
‘false’ images. While one should not show ‘real’ sex or intimate emotional 
moments, actors can feign them, even in a very ‘realistic’ way (as they definitely 
do in Kieślowski’s films). (Žižek 2001b, 74)

﻿BLOCKS OF SUFFERING  |  179
Žižek continually opposes Kieślowski’s fictional works to Christian iconoclasm 
for their realistic (figurative) representation of intimacy. Undoubtedly, at first 
glance it seems that the director has no issue in showing fictional intimacy 
in a decidedly mimetic manner. And yet, even in the arthouse European co-­
productions, where bodies are exhibited in both pleasure and pain, there is 
always at least one out-of-focus image, a blurred image, an undecipherable 
image that suspends mimesis. Above all, in Three Colours: Blue, via the annulling 
of any possible figurative image in the four black-outs, Kieślowski acknowledges 
that not everything can be mimetically represented, even in fiction. 
One essential aspect for an understanding of Kieślowski’s work as ethical is 
the importance given to that which cannot be seen but can only be hinted at. 
The director himself has stated:
The moment something is named, the possibility of free interpretation is cut 
off. The moment you leave something unnamed, and leave the place of the 
name open, that place can be filled by anyone [. . .]. If I fill that space, it cannot 
be filled by the viewer. (Kieślowski, quoted in Coates 1999, 169) 
Kieślowski neither tells nor shows it all; rather, he leaves it to the spectator to 
make sense of the fragmentary or missing images, encouraging through the 
incompleteness of form the exercise of our ethical imagination. He now has 
glycerine, films entwined naked bodies and shows life suddenly leaving a human 
being. But he never trespasses into the obscenity of the showing it all. This capac­
ity for rendering visible – without stepping into excessive mimesis – that which 
pertains to the invisible sphere brings together iconoclastic reminiscences with 
an iconophilic approach to visibility. While issues of invisibility/unrepresenta­
bility run through Kieślowski’s entire oeuvre, rendered through gaps encom­
passing the narrative, visual and aural levels, they are most clearly present in 
the Colours trilogy, in which ‘very often everything that’s most important takes 
place behind the scenes, you don’t see it. Either it’s there in the actors’ play, or 
it isn’t. Either you feel it, or you don’t’ (Kieślowski, quoted in Stok 1993, 216). 
Indeed, in the trilogy, dialogue is thinned out, at times reduced to the minimum, 
and images alternate mimetic clarity with out-of-focus, blurring or destruction 
of figuration. There are fictional tears (all three films end with one of the main 
characters crying), there is sex, there is death; and yet, the point remains that 
not everything can be filmed because ‘not everything can be described’. This 
impasse – which concerns not only the film medium (can/should everything be 
filmed?), but also reality (can everything be cognised and made intelligible?) – is 
that which the Colours trilogy set to explore.  

180  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
A Trilogy on Entangled Love
The Three Colours trilogy is a French, Polish and Swiss co-production and marks 
Kieślowski’s last film-making efforts before his retirement. Kieślowski’s long-
time collaborator, Krzysztof Piesiewicz, suggested the basic idea for the trilogy; 
namely, exploring the ideals of the French Revolution – liberty, equality and 
fraternity – from an intimate, personal perspective. Accordingly, the first film, 
Three Colours: Blue, deals with personal freedom and its limits; the second, 
Three Colours: White (Trois Couleurs: Blanc, 1994), investigates the precarious 
equilibrium between individuals who are supposedly equal but practically one is 
more equal than the other; and the last one, Three Colours: Red (Trois Couleurs: 
Rouge, 1994), engages with the ways in which people can touch and positively 
change each other’s lives through acts of kindness. 
Albeit grouped in a trilogy and replete with mutual references, the three films 
are to be considered, in the director’s words, as ‘individual, [. . .] separate films’ 
(Kieślowski, quoted in Stok 1993, 220). Each film focuses on the protagonist’s per­
sonal experience of liberty (Julie in Blue), equality (Karol in White) and fraternity 
(Valentine in Red) and how these ideals intersect with the concept of love, specif­
ically love as agapē/ἀγάπη. This specific type of love makes its literal appearance 
at the end of Three Colours: Blue, in the chorus sung in Ancient Greek where the 
word agapē recurs several times. In the New Testament, agapē primarily refers 
to Christ’s deeds, the love of God towards humankind and God himself, therefore 
maintaining the meaning of a gratuitous love par excellence (see, 1 Corinthians 
13:1–13; 1 John 4:8). In the Colours trilogy, agapē, free of any religious connota­
tion, comes to signify a love which stems from ‘the acceptance of others’ (Žižek 
2001b, 161); that is, from accepting that one cannot live far removed from the 
world and is inextricably entwined with the lives of others. Accordingly, Nicholas 
W. Reyland (2012) argues that ‘[t]he films propose, in their tales and their tell­
ings, a journey one might take to live better in late-modern times: the transition 
from solipsistic individualism to the mutually beneficial practises of agapē’ (3). 
This resonates with Žižek’s (2001b) claim that ‘each part of the trilogy focuses on 
the voyage from a certain mode of radical self-withdrawal to the acceptance of 
others’ (161), as well as with that of Dave Kehr (1994), who observes how ‘three 
films that seemed to have been carefully distinguished by tone, content and 
appearance turn out to be the same film, telling the same story of [. . .] isolation 
subsumed by a sense of infinite interdependence’ (20). The Colours trilogy can, 
thus, be understood as an ode to love in all its subtle and peculiar manifestations. 
In particular, the montage coda at the end of Three Colours: Blue expresses the 
mutual entanglement which ties together the three films. 

﻿BLOCKS OF SUFFERING  |  181
Three Colours: Blue follows Julie’s life after she survives a car accident in 
which her husband Patrice (Hugues Quester), a famous composer, and her 
daughter Anna lose their lives. Consumed by grief, she sells everything and 
moves to a flat in Paris where nobody knows her. However, Olivier (Benôit 
Régent), her husband’s collaborator who is desperately in love with her, finds 
her and tries to convince her to finish Patrice’s Concerto for a Unified Europe. 
At first Julie refuses, in an attempt to shut herself from the world; but grad­
ually she begins to establish relationships with the people around her: she 
befriends Lucille (Charlotte Véry), a prostitute and stripper who lives in her 
building, and leaves her house to Sandrine (Florence Pernel), Patrice’s mis­
tress now pregnant with his child. Slowly accepting that she cannot withdraw 
herself from the world, Julie finishes the Concerto and makes love with Olivier. 
The film ends with Julie finally breaking into tears, followed by an extremely 
evocative coda. Four shots, each showing one character who has inevitably 
affected Julie, are linked through fades and accompanied by a chorus sung 
in Ancient Greek. The lyrics are taken from Saint Paul’s First Letter to the 
Corinthians, which proclaims the primacy of love above all things, thereby 
tying together the shots forming the film’s coda. As Žižek (2001b, 175–78) 
and Tammy Clewell (2000, 204) observe, Julie’s tears signal her acceptance 
of others. She is able to cry only after having come to terms with the fact that 
she cannot live without others, shutting herself from the world because of her 
fear of losing (and therefore suffering for) someone else again. The four con­
secutive shots are paired with music in B minor (a key fraught with anticipa­
tion and nostalgia), whose fragments were heard throughout the film, either 
played by a single or a few instruments. Now, instead, the orchestral and 
choral version of the Concerto aurally renders Julie’s journey from isolation 
and withdrawal to entanglement and communion, conveying the lovingly 
painful sense that one’s life is in mysterious and inextricable ways connected 
to the life of others. 
When Blue Turns Black: A Grief Observed
A most striking feature of Three Colours: Blue is the presence of four fade-
outs, which are visible black-outs that punctuate the otherwise figurative film, 
interrupting the flow of images. Anticipating and accompanying such inter­
ruptions is a funereal music which is a variation of the funeral march in G 
minor heard during Anna and Patrice’s funeral early in the film. This ghostly 
music concretely overwhelms the protagonist, plummeting her into the core of 
her unbearable grief which takes the shape of a monochromatic black screen. 

182  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Significantly, the four black-outs occur in those moments when Julie’s thought 
is brought to the death of her husband and daughter. However, even thought 
refuses to think these deaths. Thus, the four black-outs can be understood as 
iconoclastic eikones which, bearing witness to the unthinkable nature of these 
deaths (especially Anna’s), allow for the representation of grief without making 
it obscene. The questions underlying the analysis concern if and how it is pos­
sible to represent in images and words such a grief: is it ethical to mimetically 
reproduce others’ grief, and specifically a mother’s grief for her child? (After all, 
even language lacks a term for a parent who has lost a child.) How can grief be 
represented without running the risk of making it obscene? To explore these 
issues, I will first touch on the significance of the colour blue and music as the 
fundamental elements for the representation of the protagonist’s sorrow. I will 
then look at the four black-outs, spelling out their ethical value as iconoclastic 
representations of grief. 
Although scholarly approaches and arguments may differ, existing literature 
nevertheless share the idea of Three Colours: Blue as being strongly related 
to the theme of mourning (Andrew 1998, 37; Clewell 2000; Haltof 2004, 129; 
Reyland 2012, 176; Venzi 2006, 124–29; Wilson 1998, 350; Žižek 2001b, 167). 
Whether the film is understood as a journey through mourning or towards 
mourning, it is undoubtedly centred on the protagonist’s grief for the tragic 
loss of her husband and daughter. Throughout, Patrice is primarily embodied 
in music and Anna in colour, both of which are achingly melancholic; together, 
the musical cues and the colour blue represent the becoming audible and visi­
ble of Julie’s grief.
While Ingmar Bergman’s Cries and Whispers was bathed in red, 
Kieślowski’s Three Colours: Blue is haunted by blue, from its title to its open­
ing (blue filters, blue objects). Due also to its being a cold primary colour, 
blue is commonly associated with moods of melancholy and sadness (Andrew 
1998, 25; Haltof 2004, 129; Reyland 2012, 111–12; Žižek 2001b, 164). In addi­
tion  to  this general connotation, blue in this film is profoundly linked to 
the past, embodied in objects that once belonged to either Patrice or Anna, 
thereby  recurring  throughout the film as a painful reminder of the past 
and as a visual correlative of Julie’s grief. According to Luca Venzi (2006), 
blue is
the most immediate and insisting symbolic-expressive manifestation of Julie’s 
grief and, more generally, of the past that she obstinately tries to remove from 
her existence. But the past stays close to her: in Trois couleurs: Blue the past 
preserves itself in the colour. (128) 

﻿BLOCKS OF SUFFERING  |  183
Through the use of blue filters and blue objects, the whole film is pervaded 
by this colour. Most evidently, blue is the colour of Anna’s candy wrapper in 
the opening scene, Anna’s bedroom, Anna’s crystal lamp (which is the only 
object that Julie brings with her in the Parisian apartment), Anna’s lollipop 
(which Julie dolefully and furiously devours), Patrice’s book binders, the notes 
written on Patrice’s musical sheets and the swimming pool where Julie takes 
refuge from the world. Thus, the colour blue becomes the ‘indelible trace of 
an absence, [the] cristallisation of a lack [. . . and] of an unfillable void, [. . . as 
well as] the past which preserves itself and the grief which renews itself’ (Venzi 
2006, 128–29). 
However, the four fade-outs punctuating the film are black, not blue. Venzi 
(2006, 125–29) proposes a convincing reading of the colour black in these four 
fades as an intensified blue. That is, while the fade-outs are figuratively black, 
they are symbolically blue and express the extreme point of grief – that in 
which blue turns black. Similarly, Emma Wilson (1998), quoting the abstract 
painter Wassily Kandinsky, argues that ‘when it [blue] sinks almost to black, 
it echoes a grief that is hardly human’ (350). In the film’s economy, black can 
indeed be understood as an intensification of the colour blue; namely, as the 
point in which grief and the doleful past (blue) are so intolerably present that 
they become black. Defined as such, blue stands for a clotted grief located inside 
Julie – the four fades to black – and around her – in the omnipresent blue objects. 
‘Blue is the invisible becoming visible’, Yves Klein (quoted in Weitemeier 2001, 
19) once argued. In Three Colours: Blue, the painful past concretises itself in the 
blue objects of the mise-en-scène, and Julie’s unfigurable grief becomes visible 
in the four blue-turned-black fade-outs. 
While the blue objects mostly embody the memory of Anna, Patrice comes 
back through music, which is the other element haunting Julie throughout 
the film. Not only does music play a fundamental role in the narrative (Patrice 
was a composer; Olivier tries to complete the unfinished Concerto commis­
sioned by the European Council; Julie completes the Concerto), but it is also an 
essential stylistic component which meta-diegetically evokes the painful past. 
The music, which seems to be coming from an elsewhere, de facto blurring 
the boundaries between diegetic and non-diegetic sound, bursts suddenly, 
like a fragilely dormant grief, provoking Julie’s black-outs. Reyland (2012) 
remarks that, ‘throughout Blue, Julie is haunted, terrified and, occasionally, 
beguiled by the music from the Concert[o] and elsewhere’ (119). Whether a 
variation of the funeral theme or fragments from the Concerto, music perme­
ates Julie’s experience of reality and comes to signify the aural equivalent of 
the fades to black. 

184  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
The four interruptions that bring back the past and its grief, plunging Julie 
in a state beyond words or mimetic images, are composed of fades to black, 
visually, and music, aurally. The music precedes, accompanies and follows the 
fades, thence disappearing when the scene resumes. Besides the black-outs, 
in which a figurative shot is destroyed, there are also two moments in which 
images are on the verge of disappearing. The first time occurs when Julie is at 
the hospital, asleep on an armchair, when suddenly the music erupts, waking 
her up, and the figurative shot falters under an almost-fade to blue. That is, 
Julie almost disappears swathed in the blue. The second time a figurative shot 
seems to be disappearing (now in an almost-fade to black), and yet resists such 
fading, occurs in the Parisian café where Julie habitually goes. Here, too, it is 
music which firstly threatens the image. While in the previous case the music 
was meta-diegetic, on this occasion it is diegetic: a mendicant outside the café 
plays with the flute the melody from the Concerto that Patrice was composing. 
Julie’s coffee cup is traversed by black shadows that seem on the verge of swal­
lowing it in a fade to black which, however, does not happen. Both cases display 
the fragility of the figurative image when confronted with the eruption of grief. 
In the four black-outs, however, the figurative image collapses, devoured by a 
blue-turned-black. 
The first black-out occurs at the hospital, soon after the almost fade to blue, 
while Julie is watching her husband and daughter’s funeral on a TV. Julie sits 
in an armchair, when suddenly a voice off-screen says ‘Hello’, and Julie turns 
and looks with hollow eyes at the off-screen space. The funeral music erupts 
with Julie’s facial close-up, the scene fades to black, the screen remains black 
for six seconds, and then the scene resumes from the moment in which it was 
interrupted. Julie replies, ‘Good morning’, and has a quick and unpleasant 
exchange with a journalist who wants to exploit her tragedy. The second black-
out happens when Julie meets Antoine (Yann Trégouët), the hitch-hiker who 
witnessed the fatal accident at the beginning of the film. He has contacted her 
to give her back a golden necklace which he found near the car and which 
belonged to Anna. Antoine asks Julie if she has any questions since he got to 
the car just after the accident. She replies with a blunt ‘no’, and the music from 
Patrice and Anna’s funeral bursts onto screen. The scene fades to black, and 
the screen remains black for nine seconds, before the scene continues with 
Antoine asking a question to Julie regarding Patrice’s last words (which, as we 
find out, were the conclusion of a joke he was telling Julie and Anna before the 
accident). The third black-out occurs in the swimming pool where Julie takes 
refuge from the world. Julie is swimming when she sees Lucille by the pool. 
Surprised to find her there, Julie swims towards her. To Lucille’s question, ‘Are 

﻿BLOCKS OF SUFFERING  |  185
you crying?’ the music erupts, followed by a fade to black on Julie’s blankly 
stunned face. While the screen remains black for nine seconds, ‘two separate 
and, in both symbolic and musical sense, opposed themes are brought into con­
flict’ (Reyland 2012, 220): the funeral march in G minor and the memento from 
the Concerto in B minor intersect. Then the scene resumes with Julie replying: 
‘It’s the water’ (Figures 8.1–4). The fourth and last black-out takes place in 
Olivier’s apartment when Julie finds confirmation of Patrice’s long-term mis­
tress. Olivier questions Julie about her intentions now that she has found out 
about the adultery – and hence that Patrice was not the irreprehensible and 
perfect husband she had built in her head. The music from the Concerto erupts, 
and the scene blackens for eleven seconds. Then, surprisingly smiling, Julie 
replies: ‘I’m going to meet her’. 
The black-outs take place either soon after or while Julie is exposed to some­
thing regarding the past, which demands her to confront it. In the first case, it is 
a voice from the outside world: ‘Hello’ (the journalist, who knew both Julie and 
Patrice before the accident). In the other three cases, it is a question that antic­
ipates the black-outs: ‘If you want to ask me something . . .’ (Antoine); ‘Are you 
crying?’ (Lucille); ‘What are you going to do?’ (Olivier). It is not solely something 
from the past that plunges Julie into this black stillness of time (memory only 
needs a sound or an image to awaken, violently), but it is also the request to con­
front such a past that triggers Julie’s black-outs. Unable to express her grief in 
verbal or image form because that would be tantamount to accepting what has 
happened as incontrovertibly real, Julie abandons herself to thought’s incapacity 
to deal with a reality too painful. 
An Unfigurable and Ineffable Grief
Like the fades to red in Bergman’s Cries and Whispers, the fades to black in 
Three Colours: Blue transcend the conventional function attributable to the 
fade – that of signalling a considerable passage of time. In Bergman, it was 
the fading to colour, specifically to red, which broke the traditional usage of the 
fade, thereby troubling the spectator’s look; in Kieślowski, it is a convention – 
the fade to black – which is made out to be other than itself. That is, instead of 
signalling the passage of a substantial calculable time, the fade to black is here 
employed to express the stillness of experiential time of the individual in the 
face of grief. The fades to black in Three Colours: Blue, thus, represent something 
akin to a suspension of time: they interrupt a scene which then continues as if 
nothing had happened. Kieślowski himself has explained the meaning of these 
four fade-outs as follows:

186  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Figures 8.1–8.4  The third black-out at the swimming pool

﻿BLOCKS OF SUFFERING  |  187
There are various fade-outs. There’s the typical elliptical fade-out: time passes. 
A scene ends, there’s a fade-out and a new scene begins. And there are four 
fade-outs which bring us back to exactly the same moment. The idea is to 
convey an extremely subjective point of view. That is, that time really does pass 
but for Julie, at a certain moment, it stands still. (quoted in Stock 1993, 215–16)
In the black-outs, therefore, spectators see what Julie feels. In the face of a grief 
which she cannot, at this point, cognise, we see Julie experiencing the shutting 
down of her thought. The becoming black of the image is nothing other than the 
intensification of the blue, with all its implications, and therefore bears witness 
to Julie’s raw, unthinkable and unfigurable grief. The first black-out imposes 
itself, unfathomably, upon spectators, who experience a halt of vision and the 
cancellation of a figurative shot without being able to attribute a meaning to it. 
The repeating of the black-outs, however, allows viewers to ‘comprehend that it 
is a colour which they see recurring in the becoming black of the image’ (Venzi 
2006, 127). Thus, spectators can progressively read in the destruction of the 
figurative shot Julie’s inner state, her incommensurable grief, becoming visible. 
It is no coincidence that the black-outs occur on Julie’s petrified facial close-
ups, something which resonates with Bergman’s fades to red. Like in Cries and 
Whispers, in Three Colours: Blue, mimetic reproduction cannot account for the 
most intimate and painful states of a person. Julie never explicitly talks about 
her grief, only mentioning matter-of-factly her husband and daughter’s death on 
rare occasions (with the journalist; with her mother). She might say that they are 
dead, but she avoids expressing how she feels or what she thinks because hers is 
an unspeakable and unrepresentable grief. Only in the removal of mimesis can her 
feeling acquire a visible form. Notwithstanding Kieślowski’s claim about the lack 
of problems posed by fiction because actors feign, he nevertheless does not put 
Julie’s grief into words or show her thoughts by means of figurative images. The 
four black-outs can thus be understood as iconoclastic eikones in the sense I have 
attributed to this term. They are, indeed, images of Julie’s impossibility to cognise 
her grief, and they are iconoclastic because they refuse to spectacularise suffering; 
namely, to transform something extremely intimate into a visual spectacle. In 
Three Colours: Blue, the destruction of figurative shots by means of fade-outs is 
of ethical nature. The sudden fade-outs that interrupt the regular narrative flow 
are a way to express and respect the unrepresentability of Julie’s grief, as well as a 
refusal to spectacularise death and grief, making them inaccessible to the world 
of mimetic representation. Rather than concealing the unbridgeable gap between 
grief and its depiction by means of figurative images and intelligible words, 
Kieślowski inserts four fade-outs, leaving it to the viewer to make sense of them. 

188  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
According to Wilson (1998), ‘this is a film caught in contradiction between 
representation and its refusal’ (351). While making an overall figurative film, 
Kieślowski challenges the film medium’s capacity to represent: he now has glyc­
erine and actors who feign; yet, shots are destroyed by fades to black, and 
intelligible speech is replaced by a funereal, evocative music. A medium such as 
cinema, which is based on moving images of recorded phenomenal referents, is 
therefore employed to represent that which cannot be seen – a mother’s grief 
and the memory of her dear dead ones. Kieślowski could have used figurative 
metaphors to illustrate Julie’s mournful mind state; instead, he opts for the 
destruction of any figuration, turning grief/the past into one colour that covers 
everything. In an interview, the director commented: ‘Film is very materialistic: 
all you can photograph, most of the time, is things. You can describe a soul but 
you can’t photograph it; you have to find an equivalent. But there isn’t really 
an equivalent’ (quoted in Andrew 1998, 82). There exists a gap between certain 
aspects of reality and their possible representation which an iconoclastic aes­
thetics can make visible without rendering mimetically accessible, in this way 
appealing to the viewer’s ethical imagination. An image of imagelessness thus 
replaces any figurative metaphor of grief, thereby preserving the invisible nature 
of that which lacks a sensible counterpart, to attest that not everything can enter 
the world of mimetic representation without complications. 
Concluding Remarks
There is a tension, in Kieślowski’s work, between cinema’s capacity to mimet­
ically reproduce reality and its ability to hint at that which does not have a 
phenomenal equivalent. In Three Colours: Blue, Julie’s uncognisable grief 
is embodied in the blue objects of the mise-en-scène, the actress’s petrified 
face and the funereal music; but it also finds powerful expression in the visual 
black-outs that allow the audience to see what she feels. The four black-outs, 
therefore, constitute the becoming present of a grief which cannot find a fig­
urative form, iconoclastically displaying Julie’s thought in its refusal to think 
about Patrice’s and Anna’s deaths. Accordingly, the four interruptions configure 
themselves as iconoclastic eikones insofar as they represent their unfigurable 
model without spectacularising it. In so doing, they also leave the spectator 
free to fill the gaps, imagine and attribute meaning. The negation of mimetic, 
self-­explanatory images, thus, contributes to the creation of a ‘pensive spectator’ 
(Bellour 2012, 86) by fostering ethical imagination and providing the conditions 
for a ­communal sharing of sense.

Conclusion: A Communal Vision through 
Broken Images
‘NO ONE EVER writes something meaningful that is not [also] a love letter’ (2019, 
308), Marie-José Mondzain writes. This book is my love letter to cinema, espe­
cially to its images and sounds at the edge of representability and its potential as a 
means for sharing complex and challenging experiences. It is also a reflection on 
the power of images to create or destroy a communal vision. Images can create 
it by hinting at that which cannot become a completely accessible image and 
destroy such a vision through excessive mimesis and the obscenity of the show­
ing it all. In this scenario, iconoclasm has proven to be a particularly suitable tool 
for investigating the ways in which we conceive and relate to images. While 
historically iconoclasm carries a violently destructive drive directed against the 
other’s point of view, in the arts it can become a stimulating, potentially ethi­
cal perspective to challenge more habitual forms of image-making and image-­
viewing. In positing the existence of an unbridgeable gap between an image and 
its model, iconoclastic stances highlight the ethical limits of artistic mimesis and 
the persistence of a contradictory attitude, among others, in the West: a yearning 
for an easily accessible representation which, however, most often ends up being 
interpreted as an appearance far removed from truth. Entangled in an ancient 
dichotomy, the contemporary image at once enjoys the status accorded to the 
eikōn and suffers the deficiencies of the eidōlon. 
Examining a tendency which sinks its roots in ancient philosophy and medi­
eval theology, this book has instantiated the potentialities and ethical corre­
spondences that the cancellation of film images can have, thereby contributing 
to current debates on images and the technologies of vision through the fasci­
nating prism of iconoclasm. The existence of a conflicting attitude about cinema 
which recalls the eikōn-eidōlon dichotomy constitutes the premise of this book. 

190  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Throughout, I have established an iconoclastic aesthetics of cinema that com­
prises various gestures and techniques, which range from the literal manipula­
tion of the film strip to the metaphorical dismantling of film as mimetic moving 
images of a recorded reality. What had started as an exploration of iconoclastic 
acts directed towards the visual image in the cinema eventually also developed 
into my becoming enamoured with disruptive approaches to film sound. The 
films discussed, in fact, accompany a reflection on the visual image with a priv­
ileging of the aural dimension – a privileging which can develop in terms of 
intelligible voices to counterbalance the falsehood proper to the image, as in the 
works of Guy Debord, Jean-Luc Godard, Marguerite Duras and, to some extent, 
Isidore Isou, or it can unfold as language’s failure to articulate meaning, thereby 
aurally paralleling the visual destruction of figuration, as in the films of Carmelo 
Bene, Derek Jarman, Ingmar Bergman and Krzysztof Kieślowski. Hence, the 
study of cinematic iconoclasm progressed as an investigation of the lacerating, 
intimate yet conflicted relation that the film image can establish with sound.
This iconoclastic aesthetics also carries ethical concerns, which include Isidore 
Isou’s chiseled images against war, Guy Debord’s détourned images of consumer 
society, Carmelo Bene’s absurdist critique of moralist standards via a frenzy of 
anti-mimetic images and sounds, Jean-Luc Godard’s composite images apt for the 
expression of the unrepresentable, Marguerite Duras’s de-­synchronised images 
of desire, and Derek Jarman’s, Ingmar Bergman’s and Krzysztof Kieślowski’s 
monochromatic screens for a non-spectacular rendering of the other’s suffering. 
In all these cases, an imaginative effort is required from spectators to overcome 
and make sense of the audio-visual impasse displayed in the films. 
This book has also emphasised that cinema (and, in general, any visual 
medium) cannot account, always and in all cases, for every possible reality. 
While cinema should be able to consider everything, it needs, nonetheless, to 
match its images and sounds to its content. Accustomed to images’ perva­
sive presence and our distracted viewing, the halting of a mimetic, accessi­
ble audio-vision that cinematic iconoclasm provokes can elicit more pensive 
engagements with images and can promote a taking on of responsibility in 
regard to the visual field – to what we allow to enter and therefore share. Issues 
of image-making and image-consuming go back to ancient philosophy and find 
one of their most forceful, literal expressions in the destruction of icons of 
Christ during the Byzantine controversy. Significantly, many of the iconoclastic 
destructions in the analysed films occur on the face – faces literally destroyed 
through the physical aggressions against the film strip (Isou, Debord, Bene); 
faces slowly plunging into blankness (Godard, Bergman, Kieślowski); visually 
absent faces (Duras, Jarman); faces lacerated by superimpositions (Godard). 

﻿CONCLUSION  |  191
In all these cases, ­iconoclasm echoes its historical roots: from Christ’s icon to 
cinematic close-up, the face remains the privileged site for destruction.
From Christ’s Icon to Film Images: A History of Destroyed Faces
This book has explored some iconoclastic approaches to cinema and cinema’s 
ability to subvert historical iconoclasm’s violently destructive force against the 
other into a means for reflecting on film images and their ethical potential. More 
specifically, the emphasis on the dichotomy between the image as eikōn and 
the image as eidōlon has allowed me to investigate different facets of the film 
image in its relationship with a model, situating the image at the centre of a web 
of relations: What does an image represent? Who makes film images of what? 
Who watches these film images? 
Visual images are the object of intense debate because of their being placed 
within such a relational system (involving model, image, image-maker and 
image-consumer), which I have briefly unfolded in the Prologue. Plato’s con­
cerns about images of art as copies of a copy (Idea → sensible thing → image) 
and their consequent potential for deception originate from the series of rela­
tions in which the image finds itself and which involve the model, the maker 
of images (imitator), the image (imitation of an imitation) and the viewer. In 
a similar manner, the Plotinian revaluation of images, which become inter­
mediaries between humans and the One, derives from their relational char­
acter; that is, images and the One, as well as the viewer, belong to the same 
realm, only at a different ontological level. However, in both Plotinus and Plato, 
the image is ultimately inadequate to represent intelligible models – Plato’s 
ideas and Plotinus’s the One are, in fact, beyond any possible mimetic render­
ing. Subsequently, the Christian theology of the image reworks Platonic and 
Plotinian philosophy, together with the Biblical ban on graven images and the 
Christian concept of the incarnation of God. As a result, a division opposes 
those who allow the material image to figuratively represent God to those who 
fully reject such a position, interpreting it as idolatrous. Therefore, the image 
can be an intermediary between two elements otherwise separated (eikōn), but 
it can also be inadequate, blasphemous or obscene (eidōlon) – a binary which 
persists in some contemporary Western attitudes about visual representations. 
Cinema, for its being founded on moving images, is a privileged medium for 
the study of the image in its troublesome relationship with a referent. Cinema’s 
original contribution to the debate on iconoclasm is its possibility of showing 
the very process of image destruction and not solely the result of destruction 
thanks to its being in motion. That is to say, cinema has always the option of 

192  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
temporalising the eidōlon and the eikōn and, as such, it provides a variety of 
devices to destroy images. Techniques such as slow-motion and freeze-frame 
can be used to dismantle mimetic movement; similarly, through fades, colour 
and monochromatic screens, cinema can display the sudden disappearance of 
figurative images into a monochromatic screen (an image of imagelessness). I 
have therefore focused my analysis on cinema’s broken images – broken in their 
mimetic relation with a model that eschews figurative reproduction. Cinematic 
iconoclasm, thus, constitutes a possible answer to the modern and contempo­
rary iconic overload so reliant on a mimetic aesthetics. 
Part I centred on explicitly destructive approaches to cinema, which are rem­
iniscent of philosophical and Christian iconoclasm in their fierce critique of the 
film image as deceptive copy. The cinema of Isou, Debord, Bene and Godard 
consists in a questioning of the film image’s status, its complicity with dominant 
ideology and its ability to represent reality. Their iconoclastic aesthetics under­
lies ethico-political concerns and an overall distrust about certain self-evident, 
mimetic images which are understood as illusory eidōla. Already in the playful 
and anarchic spirit of Isou’s Traité de bave et d’éternité is it possible to find 
defaced images expressing a condemnation of war and French foreign poli­
tics, as well as an attention to cinematic iconoclasm’s potential for a refreshing 
relationship between film images and spectators. Political critique is the main 
thrust behind Debord’s films, which aim at demolishing a capitalist worldview 
and promoting critically active forms of spectatorship via a consistent use of 
détournement. From his first to his last film, Debord subverts the images of capi­
talism (and consequently, also that of narrative and auteur cinema for their sup­
posed connivance with dominant ideology), making films that are difficult to sit 
through because of their aesthetics of displeasure. Bene’s ecstatic embracing of 
non-sense, which encompasses the narrative, visual and aural domains, carries 
out a fierce attack against society and moralism. Thus, in Our Lady of the Turks, 
aphasia and apraxia proceed to tear apart Catholic precepts, social decorum and 
the idea of subjectivity itself. Finally, in Godard’s oeuvre, political and ethical 
preoccupations mingle not only to complexify those film images which reiterate 
a capitalist ideology, but also to interrogate cinema’s ability to represent reality. 
In his films, a critique of the illusionism of certain film images – the eidōla of 
capitalism – is accompanied by a belief in relationships between images able to 
convey something about the world – the iconoclastic eikones of a cinema ‘that 
can’t be seen’ (Histoire(s) du cinéma, 1988–98). 
From Isou’s appeal for the destruction of cinema to Godard’s multi-layered 
images, in Part I, I have engaged with some of the most explicit stances against 
the film medium: ‘I proclaim the destruction of cinema’, Daniel/Isou argues in 

﻿CONCLUSION  |  193
Traité; ‘the cinema, too, must be destroyed!’ Debord insists in Sur le passage 
(1959); ‘Cinema should be destroyed’, Bene emphatically declares ([1970] 2011e, 
60); ‘let us destroy that [i.e., of the bourgeoisie] image’, Godard urges in British 
Sounds (1969). What is more, through the analysis of Isou’s Traité de bave et 
d’éternité, Bene’s Our Lady of the Turks and some of Debord’s and Godard’s 
films, I have discussed the major iconoclastic devices at work in the cinema, that 
of the blank screen, which consists in an image of imagelessness and can qualify 
as a metaphor for an impossible image, altered motion, which goes against 
cinema’s reproduction of habitual perception of movement, image-sound dis­
junctions, which mar the harmonious, comprehensible relation between the 
image track and the sound track, and the voice as phoné, which hinders the more 
traditional status of the verbal in film as that which conveys meaning.
Such disruptive aesthetic forms are also found in the films discussed in Part II, 
where the film image’s complex relation with reality is further tested through 
invisible and unrepresentable referents which resist mimesis and strongly call 
into question the domain of ethics. Duras’s Le Navire Night disassociates image 
and sound because of the threat that figuration poses to the sharing of desire; 
thus, the film unfolds the impossible relationship between desiring voices and 
desired bodies. Jarman’s Blue articulates an utter rejection of spectacular images 
of persons with AIDS by means of a monochromatic ultramarine blue screen to 
preserve the individual experiences of the disease as irrecoverable to mimetic 
representation. Bergman’s Cries and Whispers and Kieślowski’s Three Colours: 
Blue insert sudden audio-visual hiatuses in their overall figurative fabric to 
render the otherwise unrepresentable experience of suffering. In all these cases, 
mimesis results insufficient to represent the others’ emotional life without run­
ning the risk of producing an obscene representation. 
In Part II, I have paid particular attention to the ethical value of iconoclastic 
eikones, arguing for an ethics of (in)visibility that such images encourage. It is an 
ethics of both image-making and image-viewing which insists on the importance 
of interrogating our complicity in the construction and destruction of a shared 
vision. On the one hand, Le Navire Night, Blue, Cries and Whispers and Three 
Colours: Blue refuse a mimetic, accessible representation in favour of images at 
the edge of invisibility that could preserve the partially unrepresentable char­
acter of the model. On the other hand, spectators of these films ‘share the 
invisibility of a sense’ (Mondzain 2019, 177) in the absence of self-­explanatory 
images and are therefore free to imaginatively fill the visual gaps on screen. 
Part II complements the analyses of Isou’s, Debord’s, Bene’s and Godard’s films 
in Part I, making explicit the ethical charge that, in cinema, iconoclasm can 
present as a way to challenge uncomplicated representations of reality. That is, 

194  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
cinematic iconoclasm puts into crisis the value of those images which, through 
mimesis and distracted attention, contribute to the destruction of a communal 
vision. The broken images of cinematic iconoclasm, instead, have the potential 
to elicit more reflective, ethically imaginative responses by giving space to the 
invisibility required for a shared vision. At the edge of the unrepresentable and 
the ineffable, iconoclastic film images are powerful means at our disposal to 
actively engage not only with the cinema, but also with the current visual sphere 
in which we live and build relationships.

Notes 
Introduction
1.	 For French scholarship not available in English, translations are mine. 
2.	 Unless otherwise specified, all translations from Latin and Ancient Greek are mine. 
I have used Lewis and Short’s A Latin Dictionary: Founded on Andrews’ Edition of 
Freund’s Latin Dictionary; Revised, Enlarged and in Great Part Rewritten (1900), and 
Liddell and Scott’s A Greek-English Lexicon (1966).
3.	 Following house style, Ancient Greek terms have been transliterated without 
diacritics.
4.	 For Italian scholarship not available in English, translations are mine.
Prologue
1.	 The debate is far more complex and involves the key concepts of ‘image’ (the issue 
of Christ as the image of God and of man as in the image of God) and ‘similarity’ 
(the man-God relationship of likeness echoing that between copy and prototype). 
For a thorough discussion of this debate in early Christianity, see Besançon (2000, 
81–148), Ladner (1953) and Mondzain (2005).
2.	 For the iconophiles, too, there is no consubstantiality between the icon and the 
divine model. However, while iconophilia does not require identity of substance 
between image and prototype, iconoclasm demands consubstantiality as a necessary 
condition for any image.

196  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Part I
Chapter 1
  1.	 I have maintained the original French title throughout the book because of ‘the 
unfortunate series of (mis)translations to which the film has been subjected’ 
(Uroskie 2011, 23). The French bave can translate as ‘slobber’ or ‘saliva’, the latter 
being more appropriate for Isou’s film. Thus, a possible translation for the title 
could be Treatise on Saliva and Eternity. However, the most widespread English 
translation of the film is Treatise on Venom and Eternity.
  2.	 Following academic tradition for the spelling of ‘chiseled’ with one ‘l’.
  3.	 For an analysis of Kandinsky’s and Malevich’s art in terms of iconoclasm, see 
Besançon (2000, 330–73) and Wajcman (1998).
  4.	 Because of the lack of translations of Mauthner’s work on language, I base my over­
view on the following scholars commenting on it: Bredeck’s Metaphors of Knowledge: 
Language and Thought in Mauthner’s Critique (1992), Pisano’s ‘Misunderstanding 
Metaphors: Linguistic Scepticism in Mauthner’s Philosophy’ (2016), Weiler’s 
Mauthner’s Critique of Language (1970) and Weller’s ‘The Language Crisis: From 
Mallarmé to Mauthner’ (2018).
  5.	 While there is affinity between Mauthner and one of the most eminent philosophers 
of language, Ludwig Wittgenstein (Pisano 2016, 98–99; Weiler 1970, 299–306), I 
engage exclusively with the former, for his radical critique of language is closely tied 
to the literature of the unword to which Lettrist poetry belongs. In the Tractatus 
Logico-Philosophicus (1968), Wittgenstein at once agrees with Mauthner’s postu­
late and dismisses his method (4.0031). According to Wittgenstein, there exists 
a language capable of describing the world; that is, there is a relation between 
language and world (4.014) which allows for propositions to be a picture/image of 
reality (4.01) – something absent from Mauthner’s radical language scepticism. 
  6.	 For a discussion of Mauthner’s and von Hofmannsthal’s perspectives as opposed to 
Wittgenstein’s, see Nordmann’s ‘Thought Experiments’ (2005).
  7.	 For a thorough account of literary and philosophical approaches to language in the 
twentieth century, see Weller (2018).
  8.	 For an in-depth account of the influence of Jewish mysticism on Lettrism, see also 
Sjöberg (2015). 
  9.	 Judaism displays some affinities with scepticism, as Mauthner himself had noticed 
(see Pisano 2016, 118–19), for God is ultimately unknowable, unnameable and 
unrepresentable.
10.	 For the present analysis, I have used the 1951 final version of Traité which contains 
figurative images in every chapter.

﻿NOTES  |  197
11.	 Although the protagonist is played by Isou and the commentary exposes his ideas 
on cinema, the voice-over associated with the character of Daniel is not Isou’s, but 
that of Albert J. LeGros, which produces a further disassociation between what is 
seen – Isou – and what is heard – LeGros (see Traité’s opening credits).
12.	 It should be noted that the sadism of Isou’s discrepant cinema differs from Aaron’s 
(2007, 51–52) discussion of 1970s film theory’s understanding of cinema as sadis­
tic. In the latter, sadism stands for classical cinema’s depriving the spectator of 
agency. Conversely, Isou’s sadism consists of his desire to metaphorically and 
physically hurt spectators. More importantly, Isou’s sadism implies an actively 
engaged spectator as opposed to the allegedly fixed, passive spectator of classical 
cinema.
Chapter 2
1.	 See Debord ([1961] 2006) and Internationale situationniste ([1969] 2006a; [1966] 
2006c). For a detailed account of this invective, see also Dall’Asta and Grosoli (2011, 
20–27).
2.	 For instance, the monochromatic screen can have a diegetic function (Ugenti 2013, 
75–76) or a conventional punctuation function, signalling a passage of time primarily 
in the form of the fade to black (Burch 1981, 57; Venzi 2013, 62).
3.	 I use silence in the meaning of deliberately devoid of voices, noises, or music; never­
theless, there are still ‘involuntary’ sounds such as the projector’s.
4.	 For an analysis of Hurlements’ eliciting of an iconoclastic mental cancelling of images, 
see Cooper (2019, 135–40).
5.	 The term cinema, short for the French cinématographe, comes from the Ancient 
Greek words of kinēma/κίνημα, which means movement, and grafō/γράφω, which 
translates (among other possible meanings) as ‘I write’. Additionally, the term 
kinēma derives from the stem of the verb kineō/κινέω, which means ‘I move’, and the 
suffix –ma/–μα which designates the result of the action of the verb, thus translating 
as that which has moved. Therefore, cinema etymologically translates as writing of 
that which has moved.
6.	 I address as mimetic the film movement which mimics our most habitual perception 
of movement. 
7.	 For a discussion of the SI’s critique of urbanism, see Plant (1992, 56–61). 
8.	 ‘In love the separate does still remain, but as something united and no longer as 
something separate; life [in the subject] senses life [in the object]’ (Hegel [1798] 
1971, 305).

198  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Chapter 3
1.	 Unless otherwise specified, the translations from Bene are mine. I have tried to 
render at best his ideas, which he often expressed through invented neologisms and 
aural re-/dis-sonances.
2.	 There are inconsistencies with the numbering of the English translations of Eckhart’s 
German sermons; see McGinn’s Foreword to The Complete Mystical Works of 
Meister Eckhart (2009). I have used Walshe’s numbering.
3.	 For a critical appraisal of Derrida’s argument on Western logocentrism as phonocen­
tric, see Cavarero (2005, 213–41), Dolar (2006, 36–43) and Kane (2014, 186–93).
4.	 For a further account of Bene’s exoticism/eroticism, see Simsolo ([1973] 2011, 
119–20).
Chapter 4
1.	 There are several models of faith which do not necessarily entail belief; see Bishop 
(2016).
2.	 The issue of belief and cinema has been developed by several scholars using different 
approaches. For a discussion of cinematic belief as a way to recover a belief in the 
phenomenal world, see, for instance, Bazin (1967, 9–16), Deleuze (1997a), Rushton 
(2011, 42–78), Cavell (1979) and Sinnerbrink (2012). For an argument on cinematic 
belief as emotion, see Sorfa (2017).
3.	 For further accounts of images as relational entities, see Mondzain (2019).
4.	 While Godard and most scholars identify the shots of the concentration camps in 
this fragment as filmed in Auschwitz and Ravensbrük, Witt (2013, 132) sustains that 
they were filmed in Dachau instead.
5.	 For a thorough discussion of Histoire(s) and the representation of the Shoah, see 
Saxton (2004; 2008).
6.	 The discourse on a possible redemptive power of film images resonates with 
Kracauer’s (1960) argument on cinema’s power to reveal aspects of physical reality 
that otherwise would go unnoticed. However, while in Kracauer’s theory cinema can 
redeem reality by mechanically reproducing it – namely, by indexically bearing the 
traces of the recorded reality – in Godard’s Histoire(s) cinema’s revelatory capacity 
derives from the possibility of establishing new relationships between diverse images 
which coexist in a single frame. That is, Kracauer’s trust in cinema’s ability to mimet­
ically reproduce phenomenal referents as a way to redeem the otherwise concealed 
reality is put to the test by Godard’s multiple images.
7.	 Godard’s images of and claims on Christianity in Histoire(s) are close to some argu­
ments of mysticism (especially that of Meister Eckhart) and apophatic theology. 

﻿NOTES  |  199
For instance, while Godard in Histoire(s) is claiming for an audio-visual representa­
tion of the Shoah, he nonetheless preserves its void through incomplete, stratified 
film images.
Part II
Chapter 5
1.	 Levinas delineates the difference between ‘like’ and ‘same’. While to be like implies 
an identification coming from outside, because ‘like’ needs a second term of com­
parison, to be the same is instead an identification coming from within. Levinas 
(1969) affirms that ‘the identity of the individual does not consist in being like to 
itself, and in letting itself be identified from the outside by a finger that points to it; 
it consists in being the same – in being oneself, in identifying oneself from within’ 
(289).
2.	 In Aaron’s discussion there is a distinction between ethics and morality, wherein the 
former involves issues of responsibility and requires a reflective response, while the 
latter refers to a socially coded emotional response aimed at reassuring the spectator 
rather than unsettling their moral beliefs.
3.	 Mondzain (2013; 2017; 2019) elaborates on the constitutive relational character of 
the image as eikōn, building on its etymological meaning and ancient and medieval 
philosophy’s interpretations. While my understanding of iconoclasm in an artistic 
context diverges from Mondzain’s, I nevertheless share her definition of the eikōn as 
relational.
4.	 For further accounts of noise as interruption, disturbance and transgression, see 
Attali (1985) and Hegarty (2008; 2020).
Chapter 6
1.	 Jarman’s term for moralistic heteronormative society.
2.	 For a further account of Blue’s imaginative potential, see Cooper (2019, 76–87).
3.	 For an account of the queer potential of film sound-track, see Buhler (2013); for a 
discussion of sonic practices for a queering of the sound-track, see Davis (2008) and 
Suárez (2017).
Chapter 7
1.	 The more frequent use of colour in cinema is that of which Arnheim (1958, 
­154–60) and Münsterberg (1916, 146–48) were critical, for a mimetic use of colour 

200  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
­threatens cinema’s art status by reducing the distance between the film image and its 
­phenomenal referent.
2.	 While the monochromatic images in Three Colours: Blue are black, I sustain Venzi’s 
(2006, 129) claim that, in this film, black acquires the symbolic value of an intensified 
blue. Pastoureau (2009), too, points out the closeness between black and blue, argu­
ing that ‘for a long time, blue, an unobtrusive and unpopular color, remained a sort 
of “sub-black” in the West or a black of a particular kind. Thus, the histories of these 
two colors can hardly be separated’ (12).
3.	 While a fade signals the passage from an image to a blank screen, thereby implying a 
stark interruption of figuration, a dissolve indicates the gradual transition from one 
shot to another. As Bordwell (1985) explains, ‘visually, the dissolve is simply a variant 
of the fade – a fade-out overlapped with a fade-in – but it is a fade during which the 
screen is never blank’ (46). In this film, dissolves are used only for Agnes’s flashbacks 
to partially deprive her character of the violence proper to the fades to red.
Chapter 8
1.	 For example, Cesare Lombroso’s ([1876] 2006) study on the correlation between 
physiognomy and criminology, where he identifies criminal types based on their 
bodily, especially facial, appearance.
2.	 While the relationship involving the referent, its cinematic image and the photogenic 
aspect remains ambiguous in Delluc and Epstein, in the Russian formalists’ appro­
priation of the term, photogénie is developed in a more defined manner. Photogénie 
becomes a quality entirely given by the film medium through the stylistic manipu­
lations of the phenomenal referent, which is not photogenic in itself (Eikhenbaum 
[1927] 1982, 5–31; Tynyanov [1927] 1982, 32–54). Conversely, in Delluc and Epstein, 
cinematic devices can only accentuate the photogenic aspect, which remains distinc­
tive of certain objects and subjects.
3.	 Interestingly, there is a historical association with Holy Mary and the colour blue in 
religious painting, which has been variably interpreted; see for instance, Gage (2009, 
129–30) and Murray, Murray and Devonshire Jones (2014, 65).

Glossary
Circumscribability: literally ‘draw a line around’. In the Christian theological 
debate over sacred images, it refers to the inscription of God’s divinity into a 
material frame and expresses the act of defining, enclosing or limiting the divine 
nature of God by means of his figurative representation in the icon. During the 
Byzantine iconoclastic controversy, circumscribability constituted one of the 
major conflicting points between iconophiles and iconoclasts: while the former 
denied that the icon circumscribes the divinity, the latter contended that depict­
ing Christ in figurative terms corresponds to enclosing the nature of the divine, 
which is unlimited by definition, inside a material medium.
Consubstantiality: the identity of substance between copy and prototype. In 
the case of sacred images, the relationship of identity involves the divine nature 
of the model (God) and the artificial nature of the copy (icon). Accordingly, 
there is the natural image, which is generated and is by nature (for instance, 
Christ the son is the natural image of God the father), and the artificial image, 
which is created by imitation (for example, the icon). During the Byzantine 
iconoclastic controversy, both iconoclasts and iconophiles agreed on the impos­
sibility of identity of substance between the icon and Christ. However, while the 
iconophiles excluded any relationship of consubstantiality between the artificial 
image and the natural image, the iconoclasts conceived consubstantiality as 
being essential for any image, whether natural or artificial.
Copy-Prototype Relationship: the ambiguous relationship between the image 
as copy and its prototype which is at the basis of the iconoclastic and the icono­
philic positions. The diverging interpretations of this specific relationship leads 

202  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
to the two opposing stances – in iconophilia, the relationship is of likeness, 
whereas in iconoclasm, it is of alterity (the copy being inadequate for the rep­
resentation of the prototype).
Eidōlon (Εἴδωλον): from eidos/εἶδος, ‘that which is seen’. An image exclusively 
grounded in the visible sphere with no truthful connection with its prototype. 
Particularly in Plato, it translates as ‘phantom’ and ‘image reflected in a mirror 
or water’, therefore carrying connotations of illusion and deception. The eidōlon 
consists in an excessive similarity with its referent, thereby assuming a highly 
deceptive quality given by its resembling too much of the appearance of the 
prototype.
Eikōn (Εἰκών): from eoika/ἔοικα, ‘to be like’, and eikos/εἰκός, ‘like truth’. An 
image in a relationship of likeness with its prototype. It functions as an interme­
diary between the sensible (visible) world and the intelligible realm.
Icon: Latinisation of the Greek eikōn. Used in Christian theology to define a 
sacred representation of God. It retains the same quality of the eikōn, of being 
an intermediary between the terrestrial world (humans) and the celestial sphere 
(God). Not to be confused with Charles S. Peirce’s semiotic use of this term to 
mean a sign which mimetically resembles in its features the physical appearance 
of the referent. While in Peirce’s use the relationship between icon and refer­
ent is imitational, in Christian theology (from an iconophilic perspective) it is 
relational. 
Iconoclasm: from eikōn and klaō/κλάω, ‘I break’; etymologically ‘the breaking of 
icons’. From an iconophilic perspective, attitude against sacred representations 
of God (icons). From an iconoclastic perspective, attitude against a certain type 
of images understood as false copies of the referent (idols). Had the iconoclasts 
won the controversy over sacred images in the eighth and ninth centuries, it 
would have been addressed as ‘idoloclasm’.
Iconoclastic eikōn: an image retaining the quality of the eikōn as that which 
mediates between a visual form and its model, but which does so by break­
ing with mimesis on the ground of an iconoclastic interpretation of the copy-­
prototype relationship. 
Iconophilia: from eikōn and phileō/φιλέω, ‘I regard with affection’, ‘I love’; ety­
mologically ‘love for icons’. Historically, the Christian attitude in favour of visual 

﻿GLOSSARY  |  203
representations of God. In some texts on the Byzantine controversy, the term 
iconoduly is used in place of iconophilia (from eikōn and douleia/δουλεία, ‘slav­
ery’ or ‘servitude’).
Idol: Latinisation of the Greek eidōlon. Used in Christian theology to address a 
false and deceptive representation of God; also, an image presenting itself as if 
it were a god.
Image: in this book, a referential representation perceivable through the 
senses; namely, a copy of something else (image of something). Within the 
Western Platonic tradition, the image as a secondary mode of being presup­
poses, as a direct consequence, a prototype that pre-exists it. On the one hand, 
the copy has to resemble its prototype to be recognisable as the image of such a 
prototype; on the other hand, the image has to be sufficiently different from the 
prototype in order to be its representation instead of positing itself as presence. 
The uniqueness of the prototype ceases once it is possible to transpose it into 
an image, hence a copy, at least at the level of the visible form. Contra the pro­
totype, which by definition is one of a kind, a copy is always potentially plural. 
As consequence, whatever is conceived as unique – Platonic ideas; God in the 
monotheist religions of Judaism, Islam and Christianity – cannot be shaped 
into a sensible form, otherwise the uniqueness of the being would be lost. This 
is at the core of the Jewish and Muslim prohibition of sacred images, while also 
constituting the basis for the distinction between iconophiles and iconoclasts 
in Christianity.
Figurative: used in the sense employed in figurative arts as opposed to abstract 
and non-figurative art. That which reproduces recognisable aspects of phenom­
enal reality.
Mimesis: from mimēsis/μίμησις, ‘imitation’. In art, it implies a relationship of 
likeness with a world, be it phenomenal or fictitious. In this book, I follow a 
‘world-reflecting’ model of artistic mimesis according to which ‘mimesis incor­
porates a response to a reality [. . .] that is believed to exist outside and inde­
pendently of art’ (Halliwell 2002, 23).
Model: the original used for subsequent copies; namely, ‘an object of imita­
tion’ (Oxford English Dictionary 2022, II). Here interchangeable with prototype, 
original and referent since they all stand for the original type used for possible 
copies.

204  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Prototype: from prōtos/πρῶτος, ‘first’, and typos/τύπος, ‘mould’, ‘form’, ‘model’, 
therefore ‘original model’ for subsequent copies. 
Spectacularise: to produce something which exclusively addresses the eyes 
of the viewer. More generally in this book, to reduce something invisible/­
intelligible/unrepresentable to an object grounded in the visible sphere only. 
Drawn from the Latin spectaculum, which comes from the stem of the verb 
spectāre, intensive form of specere, which translates as ‘to look at something’.

Bibliography
Aaron, Michele. 2007. Spectatorship: The Power of Looking On. London: 
Wallflower.
Adorno, Theodor W. 1967. ‘Cultural Criticism and Society’. In Prism, translated 
by Samuel and Shierry Weber, 17–34. London: Spearman.
Alazet, Bernard. 1992. Le Navire Night de Marguerite Duras: Écrire l’effacement. 
Lille: Presses Universitaires de Lille.
Allen, Richard. 1993. ‘Representation, Illusion, and the Cinema’. Cinema 
Journal, 32(2): 21–48.
Agamben, Giorgio. 2002. ‘Difference and Repetition: On Guy Debord’s Films’. 
In Guy Debord and the Situationist International: Texts and Documents, 
edited by Tom McDonough, 313–19. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Amerini, Fabrizio. 2009. ‘Tommaso d’Aquino, la verità e il Medioevo’. Annali 
del Dipartimento di Filosofia, 15: 35–63.
Andrew, Dudley. 1976. The Major Film Theories: An Introduction. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Andrew, Dudley. 1984. ‘Representation’. In Concepts in Film Theory, 37–56. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Andrew, Geoff. 1998. The ‘Three Colours’ Trilogy. London: British Film 
Institute.	
Aquinas, Thomas. 1923. ‘Chapter LIX. That God Is Not Ignorant of the Truth 
of Enunciations’. In The Summa Contra Gentiles, translated by the English 
Dominican Fathers from the latest Leonine edition, 126–28. London: Burns 
Oates & Washbourne.
Armengaud, Françoise. 2004. ‘Faire ou ne pas faire d’images. Emmanuel Levinas 
et l’art d’oblitération’. Noesis, 3. doi.org/10.4000/noesis.11.

206  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Arnheim, Rudolf. 1958. Film as Art. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ashton, Jenna C. 2012. ‘Derek Jarman’s Blue: Negating the Visual’. Journal of 
Applied Arts & Health, 3(3): 295–307.
Attali, Jacques. 1985. Noise: An Essay on the Political Economy of Music, 
­translated by Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Aumont, Jacques. 2003. ‘The Face in Close-Up’. In The Visual Turn: Classical 
Film Theory and Art History, edited by Angela Dalle Vacche, translated 
by Ellen Sowchek, 127–48. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 
Bachmann, Gideon. 1972–73. ‘Salomé by Carmelo Bene’ [Review]. Film 
Quarterly, 26(2): 20–23.
Balázs, Béla. [1945] 1970. Theory of the Film: Character and Growth of a New 
Art, translated by Edith Bone. New York: Dover Publications.
Balázs, Béla. [1924] 2010. Béla Balázs: Early Film Theory, edited by Erica Carter, 
translated by Rodney Livingstone. New York; Oxford: Berghahn Books.
Bazin, André. 1967. What is Cinema? Vol. 1, translated by Hugh Gray. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Bazin, André. 1972. What is Cinema? Vol. 2, translated by Hugh Gray. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Bellour, Raymond. 2012. Between-the-Images, translated by Allyn Hardyck. 
Zurich: JRP Ringier.
Belting, Hans. 2002. ‘Beyond Iconoclasm: Nam June Paik, the Zen Gaze and 
the Escape from Representation’. In Iconoclash: Beyond the Image Wars in 
Science, Religion and Art, edited by Bruno Latour and Peter Weibel, 390–411. 
Karlsruhe: ZKM Center for Art and Media; Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bene, Carmelo. 1970. L’orecchio mancante. Milan: Feltrinelli.
Bene, Carmelo. 2000. ‘L mal de’ fiori. Milan: Bompiani.
Bene, Carmelo. [1976] 2002a. ‘A boccaperta’. In Opere: Con l’Autografia d’un 
ritratto, 423–533. Milan: Bompiani.
Bene, Carmelo. [1995] 2002b. ‘Autografia d’un ritratto’. In Opere: Con l’Autogra­
fia d’un ritratto, v–xxxvii. Milan: Bompiani.
Bene, Carmelo. [1969] 2011a. ‘Capricci’. Interview by Noël Simsolo. In Carmelo 
Bene: Contro il cinema, edited by Emiliano Morreale, 29–35. Rome: Minimum 
Fax.
Bene, Carmelo. [1998] 2011b. ‘Che i vivi mi perdonino . . .’ Interview by Thierry 
Lounas. In Carmelo Bene: Contro il cinema, edited by Emiliano Morreale, 
172–86. Rome: Minimum Fax.
Bene, Carmelo. [1995] 2011c. Interview. By Goffredo Fofi. In Carmelo Bene: 
Contro il cinema, edited by Emiliano Morreale, 166–71. Rome: Minimum 
Fax.

﻿BIBLIOGRAPHY  |  207
Bene, Carmelo. [1968] 2011d. Interview. By Jean Narboni. In Carmelo Bene: 
Contro il cinema, edited by Emiliano Morreale, 21–28. Rome: Minimum Fax.
Bene, Carmelo. [1970] 2011e. Interview. By Noël Simsolo. In Carmelo Bene: 
Contro il cinema, edited by Emiliano Morreale, 56–63. Rome: Minimum Fax.
Bene, Carmelo. [1978] 2011f. ‘L’estetica del dispiacere’. Interview by Maurizio 
Grande. In Carmelo Bene: Contro il cinema, edited by Emiliano Morreale, 
136–60. Rome: Minimum Fax.
Bene, Carmelo, and Umberto Artioli. 2006. Un dio assente: Monologo a due voci 
sul teatro, edited by Antonio Attisani. Naples: Medusa.
Bergala, Alain. 1986. ‘La Beauté du geste’. Cahiers du Cinéma, 385: 57–58.
Bergman, Ingmar. 1977. ‘Cries and Whispers’. In Four Stories, translated by Alan 
Blair, 57–94. London: Boyars.
Bergman, Ingmar. 1994. ‘Cries and Whispers’. In Images: My Life in Films, trans­
lated by Marianne Ruuth, 83–103. London: Bloomsbury.
Besançon, Alain. 2000. The Forbidden Image: An Intellectual History of 
Iconoclasm, translated by Jane M. Todd. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Bettetini, Maria T. 2006. Le radici dell’iconoclastia. Bari: Laterza.
Bishop, John. 2016. ‘Faith’. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://
plato.stanford.edu/entries/faith/#FaiBel.
Blau, Herbert. 2011. ‘Performing in the Chaosmos’. In Reality Principles: From 
the Absurd to the Virtual, 89–102. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Bois, Yve-Alain. 2007. ‘Klein’s Relevance for Today’. October, 119: 75–93.
Boldrick, Stacy. 2020. Iconoclasm and the Museum. London: Routledge.
Boltanski, Luc. 1999. Distant Suffering: Morality, Media and Politics, translated 
by Graham D. Burchell. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bordwell, David. 1985. ‘Time in the Classical Film’. In The Classical Hollywood 
Cinema: Film Style and Mode of Production to 1960, co-edited with Janet 
Staiger and Kristin Thompson, 42–49. London: Routledge.
Bredeck, Elizabeth. 1992. Metaphors of Knowledge: Language and Thought in 
Mauthner’s Critique. Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
Brenez, Nicole. 1998. ‘Le Film abymé’. In De la figure en général et du corps 
en particulier: L’invention figurative au cinéma, 339–60. Paris: De Boeck 
Supérieur.
Brenez, Nicole. 2004. ‘The Forms of the Questions’. In Forever Godard, edited 
by James S. Williams, Michael Temple and Michael Witt, 160–77. London: 
Black Dog Publishing.
Brown, William. 2018. Non-Cinema: Global Digital Film-Making and the 
Multitude. New York: Bloomsbury Academic.

208  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Buchloh, Benjamin H. D. 2016. ‘Roundtable: Art at Mid-Century’. In Art since 
1900: Modernism, Antimodernism, Postmodernism, edited by Hal Foster, 
Rosalind E. Krauss, Yve-Alain Bois, Benjamin H.D. Buchloh and David Joselit, 
375–84. London: Thames & Hudson.
Buhler, James. 2013. ‘Gender, Sexuality, and the Soundtrack’. In The Oxford 
Handbook of Film Music Studies, edited by David Neumeyer, 367–82. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Burch, Noël. 1981. ‘The Repertory of Simple Structures’. In Theory of Film Practice, 
translated by Helen R. Lane, 51–69. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Byrne, Alex, and David R. Hilbert. 2001. Readings on Color: The Philosophy of 
Color. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cabañas, Kaira M. 2014. Off-Screen Cinema: Isidore Isou and the Lettrist Avant-
garde. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Cappabianca, Alessandro. 2012. Carmelo Bene: Il cinema oltre se stesso. Cosenza: 
Pellegrini Editore. Kindle edition.
Carluccio, Giulia. 1992. ‘La naissance du Cinéma ou la naissance de l’amour du 
Cinéma: Forfaiture’. Cinema & Cinema, 64: 53–72.
Carroll, Noël. 1996. ‘Defining the Moving Image’. In Theorizing the Moving 
Image, 49–74. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cavarero, Adriana. 2005. For More than One Voice: Toward a Philosophy of 
Vocal Expression, translated by Paul Kottman. Palo Alto: Stanford University 
Press.
Cavell, Stanley. 1979. The World Viewed: Reflections on the Ontology of Film. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Chamois, Camille, Daphné Le Roux and Benjamin Levy. 8 September 2012. 
‘Visage et Subjectivité’. Seminar at Collège International de Philosophie, 
Paris. https://visageetsubjectivite.wordpress.com.
Chiesa, Lorenzo. 2012. ‘A Theatre of Subtractive Extinction: Bene without 
Deleuze’. Mimesis, 1(2). doi.org/10.4000/mimesis.248.
Chillemi, Francesco. 2011. ‘Carmelo Bene and the Overcoming of Logocentrism: 
Epiphany of the Primordial Voice in the Eclipse of Meaning’. Annali d’Ital­
ianistica, 29: 253–67.
Chillemi, Francesco. 2015. ‘Filming Nothingness: Invisibility, Ineffability, and 
the Inviolable Absence of God in Carmelo Bene’s Hamlet’. Mimesis, 4(2). doi.
org/10.4000/mimesis.1085.
Chion, Michel. 1999. The Voice in Cinema, translated by Claudia Gorbman. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Choi, Jinhee, and Mattias Frey (eds). 2014. Cine-Ethics: Ethical Dimensions of 
Film Theory, Practice, and Spectatorship. London; New York: Routledge.

﻿BIBLIOGRAPHY  |  209
Chouliaraki, Lilie. 2006. The Spectatorship of Suffering. London; Thousand Oaks; 
New Delhi: SAGE Publications.
Cléder, Jean. 2014. Introduction to Marguerite Duras: Le cinéma, 3–12. Paris: 
Lettres modernes Minard.
Clewell, Tammy. 2000. ‘The Shades of Modern Mourning in “Three Colours” 
Trilogy’. Literature/Film Quarterly, 28(3): 203–9. 
Coates, Paul (ed.). 1999. Lucid Dreams: The Films of Krzysztof Kieślowski. 
Wiltshire: Flicks Books.
Cohen, Hubert I. 1993. Ingmar Bergman: The Art of Confession. New York; 
Oxford: Twayne Maxwell Macmillan International.
Comolli, Jean-Luc, and Paul Narboni. 1971. ‘Cinema/Ideology/Criticism’, trans­
lated by Susan Bennett. Screen, 12(1): 27–38.
Connor, Steven. 2013. ‘Sounding Out Film’. In The Oxford Handbook of New 
Audiovisual Aesthetics, edited by John Richardson, Claudia Gorbman and 
Carol Vernallis, 108–20. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cooper, Sarah. 2006. Selfless Cinema? Ethics and French Documentary. London: 
Legenda.
Cooper, Sarah (ed.). 2007. ‘The Occluded Relation: Levinas and Cinema’. [Special 
Issue] Film-Philosophy, 11(2).
Cooper, Sarah. 2019. Film and the Imagined Image. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.
Corradi Fiumara, Gemma. 1990. The Other Side of Language: A Philosophy of 
Listening, translated by Charles Lambert. London; New York: Routledge.
Coureau, Didier. 2014. ‘Les Mains négatives, Césarée, Aurélia Steiner: La voix 
sans visage’. In Marguerite Duras: Le cinéma, edited by Jean Cléder, 117–35. 
Paris: Lettres modernes Minard.
Cowie, Peter. 1992. Ingmar Bergman: A Critical Biography. New York: 
Limelight.	
Crimp, Douglas. 2002. Melancholia and Moralism: Essays on AIDS and Queer 
Politics. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Curtay, Jean-Paul. 1974. La Poésie lettriste. Paris: Éditions Seghers.
Dall’Asta, Monica, and Marco Grosoli. 2011. Consumato dal fuoco: Il cinema di 
Guy Debord. Pisa: Edizioni ETS.
Dalle Vacche, Angela (ed.). 2003. ‘Introduction’. In The Visual Turn: Classical 
Film Theory and Art History, 1–29. New Brunswick: Rutgers University 
Press.	
Dalton, Mary M., and Kirsten James Fatzinger. 2003. ‘Choosing Silence: Defiance 
and Resistance without Voice in Jane Campion’s The Piano’. Women and 
Language, 26(2): 34–39.

210  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Daney, Serge. 2004a. ‘The Godard Paradox’. In Forever Godard, edited by James 
S. Williams, Michael Temple and Michael Witt, 68–71. London: Black Dog 
Publishing.
Daney, Serge. [1992] 2004b. ‘The Tracking Shot in Kapò’, translated by Laurent 
Kretzschmar. Senses of Cinema. https://www.sensesofcinema.com/2004/
feature-articles/kapo_daney/.
David, Marian. 2016. ‘The Correspondence Theory of Truth’. In The 
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
truth-correspondence/.
Davis, Glyn. 2009. ‘Hearing Queerly: Television’s Dissident Sonics’. In Queer 
TV: Theories, Histories, Politics, edited by Glyn Davis and Gary Needham, 
172–88. London: Routledge.
Debord, Guy. [1988] 1990. Comments on the Society of the Spectacle, translated 
by Malcolm Imrie. London; New York: Verso.
Debord, Guy. [1967] 1994. The Society of the Spectacle, translated by Donald 
Nicholson­-Smith. New York: Zone Books.
Debord, Guy. [1989] 2003. ‘The Use of Stolen Films’. In Guy Debord: Complete 
Cinematic Works, translated and edited by Ken Knabb, 222–23. Oakland: AK 
Press.
Debord, Guy. [1961] 2006. ‘For a Revolutionary Judgement of Art’. In Situationist 
International Anthology, edited and translated by Ken Knabb, 393–97. 
Berkeley: Bureau of Public Services.
Debord, Guy, and Gil J. Wolman. [1956] 2006. ‘A User’s Guide to Détournement’. 
In Situationist International Anthology, edited and translated by Ken Knabb, 
14–21. Berkeley: Bureau of Public Services.
Debray, Régis. 1992. Vie et mort de l’image: Une histoire du regard en Occident. 
Paris: Gallimard.
Deleuze, Gilles. 1983. ‘Plato and the Simulacrum’, translated by Rosalind Krauss. 
October, 27: 45–56.
Deleuze, Gilles. 1997a. Cinema 2: The Time-Image, translated by Hugh 
Tomlinson and Robert Galeta. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, Gilles. 1997b. ‘One Less Manifesto’. In Mimesis, Masochism, and Mime, 
edited by Timothy Murray, translated by Eliane dal Molin and Timothy 
Murray, 239–58. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. 1987. ‘Year Zero: Faciality’. In A Thousand 
Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, translated by Brian Massumi, 
­167–91. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Delluc, Louis. [1920] 1985. ‘Photogénie’. In Écrits cinématographiques I, 31–77. 
Paris: Cinémathèque Française.

﻿BIBLIOGRAPHY  |  211
Derrida, Jacques. 1973. Speech and Phenomena, translated by David B. Allison. 
Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Devereux, Andrew W. 2016. ‘“The Ruin and Slaughter of . . . Fellow Christians”: 
The French as Threat to Christendom in Spanish Assertions of Sovereignty 
in Italy, 1479–1516’. In Representing Imperial Rivalry in the Early Modern 
Mediterranean, edited by Barbara Fuchs and Emily Weissbourd, 101–25. 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
Doane, Mary Ann. 2003. ‘The Close-Up: Scale and Detail in the Cinema’. 
Differences, 14(3): 89–111.
Dolar, Mladen. 2006. A Voice and Nothing More. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Dottorini, Daniele. 2013. ‘Punto cieco: Isou, Debord, Monteiro e la negazione 
dell’immagine’. Ágalma, rivista culturale e di estetica, 26: 50–58. 
Downing, Lisa, and Libby Saxton. 2010. Film and Ethics: Foreclosed Encounters. 
London: Routledge.
Eikhenbaum, Boris M. [1927] 1982. ‘Problems of Cine-Stylistics’. In Russian 
Poetics in Translation, Volume 9: The Poetics of Cinema, edited by Richard 
Taylor, translated by Richard Sherwood, 5–31. Oxford: RPT Publications in 
Association with Department of Literature, University of Essex.
Eisenstein, Sergei. 1949. Film Form: Essays in Film Theory, edited and translated 
by Jay Leyda. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Eisenstein, Sergei. 1957. The Film Sense, edited and translated by Jay Leyda. New 
York: Meridian Books.
Ellis, Jim. 2009. Derek Jarman’s Angelic Conversations. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press.
Epstein, Jean. [1921] 1977. ‘Magnification and Other Writings’, translated by 
Stuart Liebman. October, 3: 9–25. 
Epstein, Jean. [1926] 2012. ‘On Certain Characteristics of Photogénie’. In Jean 
Epstein: Critical Essays and New Translations, edited by Sarah Keller and 
Jason N. Paul, 292–96. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Fargier, Jean-Paul. 1971. ‘Parenthesis or Indirect Route’. Screen, 12(2): 
131–44.
Feldman, Hannah. 2014. ‘Sonic Youth, Sonic Space: Isidore Isou and the Lettrist 
Acoustics of Deterritorialization’. In From a Nation Torn: Decolonizing Art 
and Representation in France, 1945–1962, 77–108. Durham: Duke University 
Press.
Field, Allyson. 1999. ‘Hurlements en faveur de Sade: The Negation and Surpassing 
of “Discrepant Cinema”’. SubStance, 28(3): 55–70.
Fleming, David H. 2017. Unbecoming Cinema: Unsettling Encounters with 
Ethical Event Films. Bristol; Chicago: Intellect.

212  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Foster, Hal, Rosalind E. Krauss, Yve-Alain Bois, Benjamin H. D. Buchloh 
and David Joselit. 2016. Art since 1900: Modernism, Antimodernism, 
Postmodernism. London: Thames & Hudson.
Furno, Raffaele. 2013. ‘Carmelo Bene’s Phonè: Radical Renovation or Reinvented 
Tradition’. In The Italian Method of la drammatica: Its Legacy and Receptions, 
edited by Anna Sica, 205–19. Milan: Mimesis.
Gado, Frank. 1986. The Passion of Ingmar Bergman. Durham: Duke University 
Press.
Gage, John. 2009. Colour and Culture: Practice and Meaning from Antiquity to 
Abstraction. London: Thames & Hudson.
Galt, Rosalind. 2011. Pretty: Film and the Decorative Image. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Gamboni, Dario. 1997. The Destruction of Art: Iconoclasm and Vandalism since 
the French Revolution. London: Reaktion Books Ltd.
Girgus, Sam B. 2010. Levinas and the Cinema of Redemption: Time, Ethics, and 
the Feminine. New York: Columbia University Press.
Godard, Jean-Luc. (March-April) 1996. Interview. By Gavin Smith. Film 
Comment. https://www.filmcomment.com/article/jean-luc-godard-inter​
view-​nouvelle-vague-histoires-du-cinema-helas-pour-moi/.
Grespi, Barbara. 2013. ‘L’immagine sfregiata: Il cinema e i volti del sacro’. 
Ágalma, rivista di studi culturali e di estetica, 26: 40–49.
Grønstad, Asbjørn. 2016. Film and the Ethical Imagination. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Groys, Boris. 2002. ‘Iconoclasm as an Artistic Device: Iconoclastic Strategies 
in Film’. In Iconoclash: Beyond the Image Wars in Science, Religion and Art, 
edited by Bruno Latour and Peter Weibel, 282–95. Karlsruhe: ZKM Center 
for Art and Media; Cambridge: MIT Press.
Günther, Renate. 2002. Marguerite Duras. Manchester: Manchester University 
Press.
Halliwell, Stephen. 2002. The Aesthetics of Mimesis: Ancient Texts and Modern 
Problems. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Haltof, Marek. 2004. The Cinema of Krzysztof Kieślowski: Variations on Destiny 
and Chance. London: Wallflower.
Hand, Seán. 1989. ‘Introduction’. In The Levinas Reader, 1–8. Oxford: Blackwell
Hanson, Ellis. 1991. ‘Undead’. In Inside/Out: Lesbian Theories, Gay Theories, 
edited by Diana Fuss, 324–40. London; New York: Routledge.
Harcourt, Peter. 1974. ‘Ingmar Bergman’s Cries and Whispers: A Discussion’. 
Queen’s Quarterly, 81(2): 247–57.
Heath, Stephen. 1974. ‘Lessons from Brecht’. Screen, 15(2): 103–28.

﻿BIBLIOGRAPHY  |  213
Heath, Stephen. 1976. ‘Narrative Space’. Screen, 17(3): 68–112.
Heathcote, Owen. 2000. ‘Excitable Silence: The Violence of Non-violence in 
Nathalie Granger’. In Revisioning Duras: Film, Race, Sex, edited by James S. 
Williams, 75–91. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Hegarty, Paul. 2008. Noise/Music: A History. New York: Continuum. 
Hegarty, Paul. 2020. Annihilating Noise. New York; London: Bloomsbury.
Hegel, G. W. F. [1798] 1971. ‘Love’. In Early Theological Writings, edited by T. M. 
Knox and Richard Kroner, 302–8. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press.
Higginson, Kate. 2008. ‘Derek Jarman’s “Ghostly Eye”: Prophetic Bliss and 
Sacrificial Blindness in Blue’. Mosaic, 41(1): 77–94.
Hill, Leslie. 1993. Marguerite Duras: Apocalyptic Desires. London: Routlege.
Hirsch, Joshua. 2004. Afterimage: Film, Trauma, and the Holocaust. Philadelphia: 
Temple University Press.
Hori, Junji. 2004. ‘Godard’s Two Historiographies’. In Forever Godard, edited 
by James S. Williams, Michael Temple and Michael Witt, 334–49. London: 
Black Dog Publishing.
Hubner, Laura. 2007. The Films of Ingmar Bergman: Illusions of Light and 
Darkness. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Internationale situationniste. [1969] 2006a. ‘Cinema and Revolution’. In 
Situationist International Anthology, edited and translated by Ken Knabb, 
378–79. Berkeley: Bureau of Public Services.
Internationale situationniste. [1959] 2006b. ‘Détournement as Negation and 
Prelude’. In Situationist International Anthology, edited and translated by 
Ken Knabb, 67–68. Berkeley: Bureau of Public Services. 
Internationale situationniste. [1966] 2006c. ‘The Role of Godard’. In Situationist 
International Anthology, edited and translated by Ken Knabb, 228–30. 
Berkeley: Bureau of Public Services.
Isou, Isidore. 1947. Introduction à une nouvelle poésie et à une nouvelle musique. 
Paris: Gallimard.
Isou, Isidore. [1952] 1953. Esthétique du cinéma. Paris: Ur.
Jarman, Derek. 1992. At Your Own Risk: A Saint’s Testament. London: Hutchinson.
Jarman, Derek. 1994. Chroma: A Book of Colour – June ‘93. London: Century.
Jay, Martin. 1993. Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-
Century French Thought. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Jones, Ward E., and Samantha Vice (eds). 2011. Ethics at the Cinema. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Kalin, Jesse. 2003. The Films of Ingmar Bergman. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.

214  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Kane, Brian. 2014. Sound Unseen: Acousmatic Sound in Theory and Practice. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kant, Immanuel. [1790] 1987. ‘On Beauty as the Symbol of Morality’. In Critique 
of Judgement, translated by Werner S. Pluhar, 225–30. Indianapolis: Hackett 
Publishing.
Kaplan, Ann. 2009. ‘Women, Trauma, and Late Modernity: Sontag, Duras, 
and Silence in Cinema, 1960–1980’. Framework: The Journal of Cinema and 
Media, 50(1/2): 158–75.
Karpf, Anne. 2017. ‘Speaking Sex to Power? The Female Voice as a Dangerous 
Instrument’. Imago: Studi di cinema e media, 14: 27–36. 
Kehr, Dave. 1994. ‘To Save the World: Kieślowski’s THREE COLORS Trilogy’. 
Film Comment, 30(6): 10–13, 15–18, 20.
Kenaan, Hagi. 2013. The Ethics of Visuality: Levinas and the Contemporary 
Gaze, translated by Batya Stein. London; New York: I. B. Tauris.
Khalip, Jacques. 2010. ‘The Archeology of Sound: Derek Jarman’s Blue and 
Queer Audiovisuality in the Time of AIDS’. Differences: A Journal of Feminist 
Cultural Studies, 1(2): 73–108.
Kibbey, Ann. 2005. Theory of the Image: Capitalism, Contemporary Film, and 
Women. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Klein, Yves. [1961] 2013. ‘Manifeste de l’Hôtel Chelsea’. Yves Klein Archives. 
https://www.yvesklein.com/fr/ressources?sh=chelsea#/fr/ressources/view/
document/19721/yves-klein-manife​ste-de-l-hotel-chel​sea?sh=chel​sea&​
sb=_created&sd=desc.
Kobrynskyy, Oleksandr, and Gerd Bayer (eds). 2015. Holocaust Cinema in the 
Twenty-First Century: Memory, Images, and the Ethics of Representation. 
New York: Wallflower Press.
Kowsar, Mohammad. 1986. ‘Deleuze on Theatre: A Case Study of Carmelo 
Bene’s “Richard III”’. Theatre Journal, 38(1): 19–33.
Kracauer, Siegfried. 1960. Theory of Film: The Redemption of Physical Reality. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Kupfer, Joseph. (2012). Feminist Ethics in Film: Reconfiguring Care through 
Cinema. Bristol: Intellect.
Ladner, Gerhart B. 1953. ‘The Concept of the Image in the Greek Fathers and 
the Byzantine Iconoclastic Controversy’. Dumbarton Oaks Papers, 7: 1–34.
Lamberti, Edward. 2020. Performing Ethics Through Film Style. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press.
Latour, Bruno, and Peter Weibel (eds). 2002. Iconoclash: Beyond the Image Wars 
in Science, Religion and Art. Karlsruhe: ZKM Center for Art and Media; 
Cambridge: MIT Press. 

﻿BIBLIOGRAPHY  |  215
Lawrence, Amy. 1991. Echo and Narcissus: Women’s Voices in Classical 
Hollywood Cinema. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lawrence, Tim. 1997. ‘AIDS, the Problem of Representation, and Plurality in 
Derek Jarman’s Blue’. Social Text, 52/53: 241–64. 
Lengbeyer, Lawrence A. 2009. ‘Belief (Philosophical Perspectives)’. In The 
Oxford Companion to Emotion and the Affective Sciences. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Levin, Thomas Y. 2002. ‘Dismantling the Spectacle: The Cinema of Guy Debord’. 
In Guy Debord and the Situationist International: Texts and Documents, 
edited by Tom McDonough, 321–453. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Levinas, Emmanuel. 1969. Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority, trans­
lated by Alphonso Lingis. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.
Levinas, Emmanuel. 1989. ‘Reality and Its Shadow’, translated by Alphonso 
Lingis. In The Levinas Reader, edited by Seán Hand, 129–43. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Levinas, Emmanuel. [1974] 2001. Existence and Existents, translated by 
Alphonso Lingis. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.
Levine, Joseph. 1998. ‘Colour and Qualia’. Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
https://www.rep.routledge.com/articles/thematic/colour-and-qualia/v-1.
Lewis, Charlton T., and Charles Short (eds). 1900. A Latin Dictionary: Founded 
on Andrews’ Edition of Freund’s Latin Dictionary; Revised, Enlarged and in 
Great Part Rewritten. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Liddell, Henry G., and Robert Scott. 1966. A Greek-English Lexicon, revised and 
augmented by Henry S. Jones and Roderick McKenzie. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
Lombardo, Patrizia. 1994. ‘Cruellement bleu’. Critical Quarterly, 36(1): 
131–33.
Lombroso, Cesare. [1876] 2006. Criminal Man, edited by Mary Gibson and 
Nicole H. Rafter. Durham: Duke University Press.
Lowe, Adam. 2002. ‘To See the World in a Square of Black’. In Iconoclash: 
Beyond the Image Wars in Science, Religion and Art, edited by Bruno Latour 
and Peter Weibel, 544–67. Karlsruhe: ZKM Center for Art and Media; 
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lukács, György. 1971. History and Class Consciousness: Studies in Marxist 
Dialectics, translated by Rodney Livingstone. London: Merlin.
MacCabe, Colin. 1974. ‘Realism and the Cinema: Notes on Some Brechtian 
Theses’. Screen, 15(2): 7–27.
MacCabe, Colin. 2003. Godard: A Portrait of the Artist at 70. London: 
Bloomsbury.

216  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Martin, Adrian. 2010. ‘Surgically Imprecise Notes on the Great Carmelo Bene’. 
Film Critic. http://www.filmcritic.com.au/essays/bene.html.
Martin-Jones, David. 2018. Cinema Against Doublethink: Ethical Encounters 
with the Lost Pasts of World History. London: Routledge.
Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. [1846] 1970. The German Ideology: Part One, 
with Selections from Parts Two and Three, Together with Marx’s ‘Introduction 
to a Critique of Political Economy’, edited by C. J. Arthur. London: Lawrence 
& Wishart.
Maund, Barry. 2012. ‘Color’. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://
plato.stanford.edu/entries/color/#PrimSimpObjeViewColo.
McMahon, Laura. 2012. Cinema and Contact: The Withdrawal of Touch in 
Nancy, Bresson, Duras and Denis. London: Legenda.
Meister Eckhart. [fourteenth century] 2009. The Complete Mystical Works of 
Meister Eckhart, translated and edited by Maurice O’C. Walshe; revised with a 
Foreword by Bernard McGinn. New York: The Crossroad Publishing Company.
Michaels, Lloyd. 1999. ‘Bergman and the Necessary Illusion: An Introduction 
to Persona’. In Ingmar Bergman’s Persona, 1–23. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Misek, Richard. 2010. Chromatic Cinema: A History of Screen Color. Malden: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Mitchell, William J. T. 1986. Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology. Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press.
Mitchell, William J. T. 1994. Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual 
Representation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mondzain, Marie-José. 2005. Image, Icon, Economy: The Byzantine Origins of 
the Contemporary Imaginary, translated by Rico Franses. Palo Alto: Stanford 
University Press. 
Mondzain, Marie-José. 2013. Homo spectator. Paris: Bayard.
Mondzain, Marie-José. 2017. ‘Spettacolo: La fine dello spettatore’. Paper 
presented at the Festival of Philosophy [festivalfilosofia], Carpi, Italy, 15 
September. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lFAydo-3aZE.
Mondzain, Marie-José. 2019. Le Commerce des regards: Postface inédite. Paris: 
SEUIL.
Moor, Andrew. 2000. ‘Spirit and Matter: Romantic Mythologies in the Films 
of Derek Jarman’. In Territories of Desire in Queer Culture: Refiguring 
Contemporary Boundaries, edited by David Alderson and Linda Anderson, 
49–67. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Morreale, Emiliano (ed.). 2011. Carmelo Bene: Contro il cinema. Rome: 
Minimum Fax.

﻿BIBLIOGRAPHY  |  217
Mosley, Philip. 1981. Ingmar Bergman: The Cinema as Mistress. London: Boyars.
Münsterberg, Hugo. 1916. The Photoplay: A Psychological Study. New York; 
London: D. Appleton and Company.
Murray, Peter, Linda Murray and Tom Devonshire Jones. 2014. ‘Blue’. Dictionary 
of Christian Art and Architecture, 65. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Nagib, Lúcia. 2011. World Cinema and the Ethics of Realism. New York: 
Continuum.
Nancy, Jean-Luc. 2005. The Ground of the Image, translated by Jeff Fort. New 
York: Fordham University Press.
Nancy, Jean-Luc. 2007. Listening, translated by Charlotte Mandell. New York: 
Fordham University Press.
Nordmann, Alfred. 2005. ‘Thought Experiments’. In Wittgenstein’s Tractatus: 
An Introduction, 92–125. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Noys, Benjamin. 2007. ‘Destroy Cinema!/Destroy Capital!: Guy Debord’s The 
Society of the Spectacle (1973)’. Quarterly Review of Film and Video, 24(5): 
395–402.
Oxford English Dictionary. 2022. ‘Model’. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
https://www-oed-com.ezproxy.is.ed.ac.uk/view/Entry/120577?​rskey=​INv​
QBH&result=1&isAdvanced=false#eid.
Paiano, Alessio. 2020. ‘Carmelo Bene poeta del vuoto: Tracce di letteratura 
mistica’. L’Ulisse, 23: 450–70.
Pastoureau, Michel. 2009. Black: The History of a Color. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Peake, Tony. 2011. Derek Jarman: A Biography. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press.
Perniola, Ivelise. 2007. L’immagine spezzata: Il cinema di Claude Lanzmann. 
Torino: Kaplan.
Perniola, Mario (ed.). 2013. ‘Cinema e Iconoclastia’. [Special Issue]. Ágalma, 
rivista di studi culturali e di estetica, 26.
Pethő, Ágnes. 2011. ‘From the “Blank Page” to the “White Beach”: Word and 
Image Plays in Jean-Luc Godard’s Cinema’. In Cinema and Intermediality: 
The Passion for the In-Between, 265–83. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge 
Scholars Publishing.
Pezzella, Mario. 2011. ‘Fatti dal nulla: Considerazioni sul digitale e il reale’. 
Rivista di Estetica, 46: 137–49.
Pisano, Libera. 2016. ‘Misunderstanding Metaphors: Linguistic Scepticism 
in  Mauthner’s Philosophy’. In Yearbook of the Maimonides Centre for 
Advanced Studies: 2016, edited by Giuseppe Veltri, 95–122. Berlin; Boston: 
De Gruyter.	

218  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Plant, Sadie. 1992. The Most Radical Gesture: The Situationist International in a 
Postmodern Age. London: Routledge.
Plato. 2008. Republic, translated by Tom Griffith. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Plotinus. 1984. Ennead V, translated by A. H. Armstrong, edited by Jeffrey 
Henderson. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Pohle, Joseph. 1912. ‘The Dogma in Its Relation to Reason’. In The Divine Trinity: 
A Dogmatic Treatise, edited by Arthur Preuss, 194–201. Freiburg; London: 
B. Herder.
Poirson-Dechonne, Marion. 2016. Entre spiritualité et laïcité, la tentation icon­
oclaste du cinéma. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Rodowick, David N. 1994. The Crisis of Political Modernism: Criticism and 
Ideology in Contemporary Film Theory. Berkeley: University of California 
Press.
Rancière, Jacques. 2002. ‘The Saint and the Heiress: Apropos of Godard’s 
Histoire(s) du cinéma’. Discourse, 24(1): 113–19.
Rancière, Jacques. 2004. ‘Godard, Hitchcock, and the Cinematographic Image’. 
In Forever Godard, edited by James S. Williams, Michael Temple and Michael 
Witt, 214–31. London: Black Dog Publishing.
Rancière, Jacques. 2007. The Future of the Image, translated by Gregory Elliott. 
London; New York: Verso.
Remes, Justin. 2015. ‘Colored Blindness: Derek Jarman’s Blue and the 
Monochrome Film’. In Motion(less) Pictures: The Cinema of Stasis, 111–36. 
Irvington: Columbia University Press.
Reyland, Nicholas W. 2012. Zbigniew Preisner’s Three Colors Trilogy: Blue, 
White, Red: A Film Score Guide. Lanham; Plymouth: Scarecrow Press.
Rivette, Jacques. 1961. ‘De l’abjection’. Cahiers du cinéma, 120: 54–55.
Royer, Michelle. 2019. The Cinema of Marguerite Duras: Multisensoriality and 
Female Subjectivity. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Rushton, Richard. 2011. The Reality of Film: Theories of Filmic Reality. 
Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Saïd, Suzanne. 1987. ‘Deux noms de l’image en grec ancient: idole et icône’. 
Comptes rendus des séances de l’académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, 
2: 309–30.
Saxton, Libby. 2004. ‘Anamnesis and Bearing Witness: Godard/Lanzmann’. In 
Forever Godard, edited by James S. Williams, Michael Temple and Michael 
Witt, 364–79. London: Black Dog Publishing.
Saxton, Libby. 2007. ‘Fragile Faces: Levinas and Lanzmann’. Film-Philosophy, 
11(2): 1–14.

﻿BIBLIOGRAPHY  |  219
Saxton, Libby. 2008. Haunted Images: Film, Ethics, Testimony, and the Holocaust. 
New York: Wallflower Press.
Saxton, Libby. 2010a. ‘Blinding Visions: Levinas, Ethics, Faciality’. In Film and 
Ethics: Foreclosed Encounters, by Lisa Downing and Libby Saxton, 95–106. 
London: Routledge.
Saxton, Libby. 2010b. ‘Ethics, Spectatorship and the Spectacle of Suffering’. In 
Film and Ethics: Foreclosed Encounters, by Lisa Downing and Libby Saxton, 
62–75. London: Routledge.
Saxton, Libby. 2010c. ‘“Tracking Shots Are a Question of Morality”: Ethics, 
Aesthetics, Documentary’. In Film and Ethics: Foreclosed Encounters, by Lisa 
Downing and Libby Saxton, 22–35. London: Routledge.
Scruton, Roger. 1981. ‘Photography and Representation’. Critical Inquiry, 7(3): 
577–603.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. 2008. Epistemology of the Closet. Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
Sesonske, Alexander. 1974. ‘Aesthetics of Film, or a Funny Thing Happened on 
the Way to the Movies’. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 33(1): 
51–57.
Simmel, Georg. [1901] 1959. ‘The Aesthetic Significance of the Face’. In Georg 
Simmel, Essays on Sociology, Philosophy and Aesthetics, edited by Kurt H. Wolff, 
translated by Lore Ferguson, 276–81. Columbus: Ohio State University Press.
Simsolo, Noël. [1973] 2011. ‘Carmelo Bene o della responsabilità di un’arte 
critica’. In Carmelo Bene: Contro il cinema, edited by Emiliano Morreale, 
107–26. Rome: Minimum Fax.
Singer, Irving. 2009. Ingmar Bergman, Cinematic Philosopher: Reflections on His 
Creativity. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Sinnerbrink, Robert. 2012. ‘Cinematic Belief ’. Angelaki, 17(4): 95–117.
Sinnerbrink, Robert. 2016. Cinematic Ethics: Exploring Ethical Experience 
through Film. London: Routledge.
Sitney, P. Adams. 1989. ‘Color and Myth in Cries and Whispers’. Film Criticism, 
13(3): 37–41.
Sjöberg, Sami. 2013a. ‘From Material Meaningless to Poetics of Potentiality: 
The Religious Dimension of Lettrist Visual Poetry’. In Aesthetics of Matter: 
Modernism, the Avant-Garde and Material Exchange, edited by Sarah 
Posman, Anne Reverseau, David Ayers, Sascha Bru and Benedikt Hjartarson, 
370–79. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Sjöberg, Sami. 2013b. ‘Mysticism of Immanence: Lettrism, Sprachkritik, and the 
Immediate Message’. Partial Answers: Journal of Literature and the History 
of Ideas, 11(1): 53–69.

220  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Sjöberg, Sami. 2014. ‘Fragments of Multilingualism and Anti-Realism: Paul 
Celan and Isidore Isou as Proponents of Romanian Jewish Experimental 
Literature’. Philologica Jassyensia, 10(1): 215–28.
Sjöberg, Sami. 2015. The Vanguard Messiah: Lettrism between Jewish Mysticism 
and the Avant-Garde. Berlin: De Gruyter. 
Smith, Paul Julian. 1993. ‘Blue and the Other Limits’. Sight and Sound, 
3(10):18–19.
Sobchack, Vivian. 2011. ‘Fleshing Out the Image: Phenomenology, Pedagogy, 
and Derek Jarman’s Blue’. In New Takes in Film-Philosophy, edited by Havi 
Carel and Greg Tuck, 191–206. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sobolewski, Tadeusz. 1999. ‘Ultimate Concerns’. In Lucid Dreams: The Films of 
Krzysztof Kieślowski, edited and translated by Paul Coates, 19–31. Wiltshire: 
Flicks Books.
Solnit, Rebecca. 2005. ‘Yves Klein and the Blue of Distance’. New England 
Review, 26(2): 176–82.
Sontag, Susan. 2002. Illness as Metaphor & AIDS and Its Metaphors. London: 
Penguin.
Sontag, Susan. 2003. Regarding the Pain of Others. London: Penguin.
Sorfa, David. 2017. ‘Belief in Film: A Defence of False Emotion and Brother Sun, 
Sister Moon’. Film and Philosophy, 22: 36–57.
Stadler, Jane. 2017. ‘Empathy and Film’. In The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy 
of Empathy, edited by Heidi L. Maibom, 317–26. New York: Routledge.
Stam, Robert. 1981–82. ‘Jean-Luc Godard’s Sauve Qui Peut (la Vie)’. Millennium 
Film Journal, 10–11: 194–99.
Stok, Danusia (ed.). 1995. Kieślowski on Kieślowski. London: Faber.
Suárez, Juan A. 2017. ‘The Sound of Queer Experimental Film’. In The Music 
and Sound of Experimental Film, edited by Holly Rogers and Jeremy Barham, 
234–56. New York: Oxford University Press.
Thomson-Jones, Katherine. 2008. Aesthetics and Film. London: Bloomsbury 
Publishing.
Thorp, Arabella, and Gillian Allen. 2000. ‘The Local Government Bill [HL]: The 
“Section 28” Debate’. Library House of Commons Research Paper 00/47.
Törnqvist, Egil. 1996. Between Stage and Screen: Ingmar Bergman Directs. 
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Turvey, Malcolm. 1998. ‘Jean Epstein’s Cinema of Immanence: The Rehabilitation 
of the Corporeal Eye’. October, 83: 25–50.
Tyagi, Ritu. 2014. ‘Understanding Postcolonial Feminism in Relation with 
Postcolonial and Feminist Theories’. International Journal of Language and 
Linguistics, 1(2): 45–50.

﻿BIBLIOGRAPHY  |  221
Tynyanov, Yury. [1927] 1982. ‘The Fundamentals of Cinema’. In Russian Poetics 
in Translation, Volume 9: The Poetics of Cinema, edited by Richard Taylor, 
translated by Lawrence M. O’Toole, 32–54. Oxford: RPT Publications in 
Association with Department of Literature, University of Essex.
Ugenti, Elio. 2013. ‘I limiti del visibile nel cinema di Abbas Kiarostami’. Ágalma, 
rivista culturale e di estetica, 26: 70–78.
Uroskie, Andrew V. 2011. ‘Beyond the Black Box: The Lettrist Cinema of 
Disjunction’. October, 135: 21–48.
Vatican Council I. 1868. Sess. III, De fide et ratione. Vatican.va. https://w2.vat​
ican.va/content/pius-ix/it/documents/constitutio-dogmatica-dei-fil​ius-24-
aprilis-1870.html.
Venzi, Luca. 2006. Il colore e la composizione filmica. Pisa: Edizioni ETS.
Venzi, Luca. 2013. ‘Tinte brucianti: Colore e cancellazione dell’immagine’. 
Ágalma, rivista culturale e di estetica, 26: 59–69.
Wajcman, Gérard. 1998. L’Objet du siècle. Paris: Éditions Verdier. 
Watney, Simon. 1987. ‘The Spectacle of AIDS’. October, 43: 71–86.
Weibel, Peter. 2002. ‘An End to the “End of Art”? On the Iconoclasm of Modern 
Art’. In Iconoclash: Beyond the Image Wars in Science, Religion and Art, 
edited by Bruno Latour and Peter Weibel, 570–670. Karlsruhe: ZKM Center 
for Art and Media – Cambridge: MIT Press.
Weiler, Gershon. 1970. Mauthner’s Critique of Language. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Weitemeier, Hannah. 2001. Yves Klein 1928–1962: International Klein Blue. 
Cologne: Taschen. 
Weller, Shane. 2018. Language and Negativity in European Modernism: Toward 
a Literature of the Unword. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, James S. 2004. ‘Music, Love, and the Cinematic Event’. In Forever 
Godard, edited by James S. Williams, Michael Temple and Michael Witt, 
288–311. London: Black Dog Publishing.
Williams, James S. 2016. ‘Introduction’. In Encounters with Godard: Ethics, 
Aesthetics, Politics, 1–18. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Wilson, Emma. 1998. ‘Three Colours: Blue: Kieślowski, Colour and the 
Postmodern Subject’. Screen, 39(4): 349–62.
Witt, Michael. 2013. Jean-Luc Godard, Cinema Historian. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1968. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus e Quaderni 
­1914–1916, translated by Amedeo G. Conte. Turin: Einaudi.
Wollen, Peter. 1976. ‘“Ontology” and “Materialism” in Film’. Screen, 17(1): 
7–25.	

222  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Wollen, Peter. 2004. ‘Blue’. In Paris Manhattan: Writings on Art, 113–27. 
London; New York: Verso.
Wunenburger, Jean-Jacques. 1995. La Vie des images. Strasbourg: Presses 
Universitaires de Strasbourg.
Wunenburger, Jean-Jacques. 1999. Filosofia delle immagini, translated by Sergio 
Arecco. Turin: Einaudi.
Wymer, Rowland. 2005. Derek Jarman. Manchester: Manchester University 
Press.
Žižek, Slavoj. 2001a. On Belief. London; New York: Routledge.
Žižek, Slavoj. 2001b. The Fright of Real Tears: Krzysztof Kieślowski between 
Theory and Post-Theory. London: BFI Publishing.
Žižek, Slavoj. 2006. ‘The Eclipse of Meaning: On Lacan and Deconstruction’. In 
Interrogating the Real, edited and translated by Rex Butler and Scott Stephens, 
190–212. London; New York: Continuum.

Filmography
A Place in the Sun, George Stevens, 1951.
A Trip to the Moon / Le Voyage dans la Lune, Georges Méliès, 1902.
Alphaville: A Strange Adventure of Lemmy Caution / Alphaville, une étrange 
aventure de Lemmy Caution, Jean-Luc Godard, 1965.
Battleship Potemkin / Bronenosets Potëmkin, Sergei Eisenstein, 1925.
British Sounds, Dziga Vertov Group, 1969.
Blue, Derek Jarman, 1993.
Capricci, Carmelo Bene, 1969.
City Lights, Charlie Chaplin, 1931.
Cries and Whispers / Viskningar och rop, Ingmar Bergman, 1972.
Don Giovanni, Carmelo Bene, 1970.
Edward II, Derek Jarman, 1991.
Entr’acte, René Clair, 1924. 
Guy Debord, son art et son temps, Guy Debord and Brigitte Cornand, 1994.
Histoire(s) du cinéma, Jean-Luc Godard, 1988–98.
Hurlements en faveur de Sade / Howls for Sade, Guy Debord, 1952.
In girum imus nocte et consumimur igni / We Wander in the Night and Are 
Consumed by Fire, Guy Debord, 1978.
India Song, Marguerite Duras, 1975.
Joan of Arc at the Stake / Giovanna d’Arco al rogo, Roberto Rossellini, 
1954.
Johnny Guitar, Nicholas Ray, 1954.
Jubilee, Derek Jarman, 1978.
Kapò, Gillo Pontecorvo, 1960.
L’Anticoncept / The Anti-Concept, Gil J. Wolman, 1951.

224  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
L’Homme atlantique, Marguerite Duras, 1981.
Le Camion, Marguerite Duras, 1977.
Le Film est déjà commencé? / Has the Film Already Started? Maurice Lemaître, 
1951.
Le Navire Night, Marguerite Duras, 1979.
Le Vent d’est, Dziga Vertov Group, 1970.
Les Mains négatives, Marguerite Duras, 1978.
Lotte in Italia, Dziga Vertov Group, 1970.
Miracle in Milan / Miracolo a Milano, Vittorio De Sica, 1951.
Nathalie Granger, Marguerite Duras, 1972.
October: Ten Days That Shook the World / Oktiabr’ ili Desiat’ dneĭ, kotorye 
­potriasli mir, Sergei Eisenstein, 1928.
Our Lady of the Turks / Nostra signora dei turchi, Carmelo Bene, 1968.
Prison / Fängelse, Ingmar Bergman, 1949.
Rio Grande, John Ford, 1950.
Salomè, Carmelo Bene, 1972.
Scénario du film ‘Passion’, Jean-Luc Godard, 1982.
Sebastiane, Derek Jarman, 1976.
Shoah, Claude Lanzmann, 1985.
Slow Motion / Sauve qui peut (la Vie), Jean-Luc Godard, 1980.
Son nom de Venise dans Calcutta désert, Marguerite Duras, 1976.
Sur le passage de quelques personnes à travers une assez courte unité de temps / 
On the Passage of a Few Persons Through a Rather Brief Unity of Time, Guy 
Debord, 1959.
Tambours du jugement premier / Drums of the First Judgement, François 
Dufrêne, 1952.
The Angelic Conversation, Derek Jarman, 1985.
The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari / Das Cabinet des Dr. Caligari, Robert Wiene, 1920.
The Double Life of Véronique / La Double Vie de Véronique, Krzysztof Kieślowski, 
1991.
The Last of England, Derek Jarman, 1987.
The Shanghai Gesture, Josef von Sternberg, 1941.
The Society of the Spectacle / La Société du spectacle, Guy Debord, 1973. 
The Tempest, Derek Jarman, 1979.
Three Colours: Blue / Trois Couleurs: Bleu, Krzysztof Kieślowski, 1993.
Three Colours: Red / Trois Couleurs: Rouge, Krzysztof Kieślowski, 1994.
Three Colours: White / Trois Couleurs: Blanc, Krzysztof Kieślowski, 1994.
Traité de bave et d’éternité / Treatise on Venom and Eternity, Isidore Isou, 
1951.	

﻿FILMOGRAPHY  |  225
Un Chien Andalou, Luis Buñuel and Salvador Dalí, 1929.
Une Femme mariée / A Married Woman, Jean-Luc Godard, 1964. 
Un Film comme les Autres, Dziga Vertov Group, 1968.
Vladimir et Rosa, Dziga Vertov Group, 1971.

Index
Note: Films are indexed under directors, who can be identified from the 
Filmography. ‘n’ indicates note. 
Aaron, Michele, 122, 124, 197n, 
199n
Adorno, Theodor W., 9
Agamben, Giorgio, 59–60
altered motion, 66–70, 100–1
Amerini, Fabrizio, 96
anti-mimesis, 8, 11, 18–20, 39, 87, 
116, 123, 136, 144; see also 
mimesis
Aquinas, Thomas, 95–6
Armengaud, Françoise, 119
Attali, Jacques, 127–8
Aumont, Jacques, 14–15 
Bachmann, Gideon, 76, 83–4
Balázs, Béla, 14–15, 155, 162, 166–7, 
169, 173, 175
Bazin, André, 30, 122
belief, 54, 65, 71, 94–6, 101, 105, 
109–12, 192, 198n
Bellour, Raymond, 66–7, 97, 100–1
Bene, Carmelo, 3, 5, 10, 13, 17, 21, 37, 
72–80, 82–6, 89–94, 96–7, 190, 
192–3
	 Capricci, 83
	 Don Giovanni, 79
	 Othello, or the Deficiency of 
Women, 78
	 Our Lady of the Turks / Nostra 
signora dei turchi, 3, 10, 21, 74, 
76, 78, 83–4, 86, 89, 192–3
	 Richard III, 77
	 Romeo and Juliet, 77
	 Salomè, 79, 83
Bergman, Ingmar, 3, 5, 10–11, 17, 22, 
115, 153–7, 159–61, 164, 167–9, 
172, 177, 182, 185, 187, 190, 
193
	 Cries and Whispers / Viskningar 
och rop, 3, 10, 17, 22, 153–5, 157, 
159–64, 168–9, 171, 185, 193
	 Prison / Fängelse, 109
Besançon, Alain, 8, 24, 26–7, 32–3, 
43, 195n

INDEX  |  227
Bettetini, Maria T., 2, 8, 24, 27, 29, 43
black-out, 179, 181–5, 187–8; see also 
fade
blank screen
	 general, 18, 61, 193, 200n; and 
Bene, 79; and Debord, 56, 66, 71; 
and Duras, 125; and Godard, 97, 
99, 110; and Isou, 43–4, 47
	 all black, 6, 19–20, 61; and Debord, 
61–2, 64–5; and Duras, 125–6, 
130, 132; and Godard, 97–9, 
105–6, 109–10; and Isou, 47, 
52–3; and Jarman, 136, 146; and 
Kieślowski, 22, 181
	 all blue see Jarman, Blue
	 all red see Bergman, Cries and 
Whispers
	 all white, and Debord, 61–2, 65
	 see also monochromatic screen
Boldrick, Stacy, 7 
Brenez, Nicole, 95, 98, 104
Brown, William, 120
Bruegel the Elder, 69
Buchloh, Benjamin H. D., 39
Buñuel, Luis and Dalí, Salvador
	 Un Chien Andalou, 61–2
Cabañas, Kaira M., 44–6, 48, 61, 65, 
71
Cage, John, 4
Cappabianca, Alessandro, 89
Carroll, Noël, 67
Cavarero, Adriana, 81–2, 128, 
149–51
Chamois, Camille, Le Roux, Daphné 
and Levy, Benjamin, 173
Chaplin, Charlie, 50
	 City Lights, 62
Chillemi, Francesco, 80, 89
Chion, Michel, 81–2 
chiseled image, 38, 44–50, 52, 190
Clair, René, 50
	 Entr’acte, 61 
Cléder, Jean, 126
Clewell, Tammy, 181
close-up, 11, 13, 14–17, 79, 87, 90, 
104, 106, 154, 157–8, 162–5, 
167–9, 171–6, 184, 191
Cohen, Hubert I., 157, 162, 168
colour, 19, 115, 155–7, 192, 
199n–200n; and Bene, 78–9, 
86–7; and Bergman, 154, 157–8, 
160–2, 168–9, 171; and Jarman, 
137, 142–7, 152; and Kieślowski, 
182–3, 185, 187–8
	 blue see Jarman, Blue and 
Kieślowski, Three Colours: Blue
	 red see Bergman, Cries and 
Whispers
Connor, Steven, 132
Cooper, Sarah, 119, 125–6, 197n, 
199n
copy, 2–3, 5, 10–11, 13, 17–18, 24, 30, 
34, 37, 45, 54, 96, 112, 117, 123, 
142, 191, 195n
copy-prototype relationship, 4–6, 
17–18, 27–8, 30–3, 95–6, 123, 
195n
Corradi Fiumara, Gemma, 133, 148
Coureau, Didier, 131
Cowie, Peter, 161
Crimp, Douglas, 137, 139
Dall’Asta, Monica and Grosoli, 
Marco, 71
Dalle Vacche, Angela, 13–14
Daney, Serge, 121–2
David, Marian, 96

228  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
De Sica, Vittorio
	 Miracle in Milan / Miracolo a 
Milano, 107 
Debord, Guy, 5, 10, 12–13, 21, 32, 37, 
44, 54–73, 79–80, 94, 96–7, 130, 
143, 190, 192–3
	 Hurlements en faveur de Sade / 
Howls for Sade, 3, 21, 44, 61–3, 
72
	 In girum imus nocte et consumimur 
igni / We Wander in the Night 
and Are Consumed by Fire, 3, 21, 
63, 72 
	 Sur le passage de quelques 
personnes à travers une assez 
courte unité de temps / On the 
Passage of a Few Persons 
Through a Rather Brief Unity of 
Time, 59, 193
	 The Society of the Spectacle / La 
Société du spectacle, 3, 21, 
67–9
	 and Cornand, Brigitte, Guy 
Debord, son art et son temps, 66 
Debray, Régis, 13
Deleuze, Gilles, 17, 61, 73, 77–8, 80, 
97, 99, 101
	 and Guattari, Félix, 14–16, 175
Delluc, Louis, 14, 29, 174–5, 200n 
Derrida, Jacques, 80–2
destruction, 1, 3–4, 7–8, 10–11, 
17–18, 21, 27, 34, 41–2, 46, 48, 
50, 52, 54–5, 72–3, 79, 94, 112, 
125, 154, 157, 162, 168–9, 171, 
177, 179, 187–8, 190–2
de-synchronisation see sound-image 
disjunction
détournement, 56, 62–3, 66–5, 68–9, 
71–2, 192
discrepant cinema, 38, 46, 51–3, 197n
discrepant editing, 44–6, 49–51 
Doane, Mary Ann, 14
Dolar, Mladen, 81–2
Dottorini, Daniele, 19, 47
Dufrêne, François
	 Tambours du jugement premier / 
Drums of the First Judgement, 
44
Duras, Marguerite, 11, 22, 115–16, 
125–31, 133–5, 190, 193
	 India Song, 125–8
	 L’Homme atlantique, 125–6 
	 Le Camion, 125 
	 Le Navire Night, 3, 10, 22, 116, 
125–6, 129–33, 193
	 Les Mains négatives, 125 
	 Nathalie Granger, 128 
	 Son nom de Venise dans Calcutta 
désert, 126
Dziga Vertov Group
	 British Sounds, 193
	 Le Vent d’est, 99 
	 Lotte in Italia, 99 
	 Un Film comme les Autres, 99
	 Vladimir et Rosa, 99 
Eckhart, Meister, 75
eidōlon, 4–6, 10–13, 17–19, 23–6, 
28–34, 37, 54–6, 68, 70–2, 75, 85, 
88, 93, 96–7, 103, 117, 119, 127, 
133, 142, 189, 191–2
eikōn, 4–5, 8, 14, 17, 23–9, 33–4, 96, 
103–5, 123–4, 189, 191, 199n
eikōn-eidōlon dichotomy, 4, 7, 11, 17, 
23–9, 33–4, 189, 191
Eisenstein, Sergei, 50, 84, 155
	 Battleship Potemkin / Bronenosets 
Potëmkin, 61, 68 

INDEX  |  229
	 October: Ten Days That Shook the 
World / Oktiabr’ ili Desiat’ dneĭ, 
kotorye potriasli mir, 68 
Ellis, Jim, 142
Epstein, Jean, 14–16, 166, 173–5, 
200n
ethics, 10, 18–20, 22, 115–21, 125, 
137, 139, 141, 154, 193, 199n 
face, 11, 14–18, 48–9, 79, 106–8, 
117–19, 134, 154–5, 157–9, 
162–9, 171–7, 185, 188, 190–1
fade, 98, 162, 172, 181, 183–4, 187, 
192, 200n
	 to red, 154–5, 157–62, 167–9, 171, 
185
Feldman, Hannah, 38, 45, 47, 49
Field, Allyson, 51–2, 62–3
Fleming, David H., 120
Fontana, Lucio, 18
Ford, John
	 Rio Grande, 68–9
freeze-frame, 66, 69, 100–1, 192; see 
also altered motion
Gado, Frank, 160
Galt, Rosalind, 12–13, 145
Gamboni, Dario, 7
Godard, Jean-Luc, 10, 13, 37, 54, 
93–112, 190, 192–3, 198n 
	 Alphaville: A Strange Adventure 
of Lemmy Caution / Alphaville, 
une étrange aventure de Lemmy 
Caution, 21, 98–9
	 Histoire(s) du cinéma, 3, 10, 21, 94, 
101–10, 112, 192, 198n
	 Slow Motion / Sauve qui peut (la 
Vie), 21, 100–1
	 Scénario du film ‘Passion’, 97
	 Une Femme mariée / A Married 
Woman, 21, 98–9
Grespi, Barbara, 14–16, 175 
Grøndstad, Asbjørn, 18, 120–1
Günther, Renate, 125
Halliwell, Stephen, 24–6
Hand, Seán, 118
Hanson, Ellis, 138
Harcourt, Peter, 161
Heath, Stephen, 65 
Hegarty, Paul, 128, 148
Hegel, G. W. F., 71
Higginson, Kate, 137, 146, 151
Hill, Leslie, 128
Hofmannsthal, Hugo von, 41
Hori, Junji, 111
Hubner, Laura, 154, 160–1
icon, 4, 17, 25–8, 33, 175–6, 195n
	 in cinema, 154, 162, 164–5, 167–9, 
171
iconoclasm, 1–2, 6–8, 18–19, 24, 27, 
32, 39, 96, 117, 119, 178, 189, 
191, 195n
	 cinematic, 3–5, 9–14, 20–2, 29–31, 
33–4, 47, 54–5, 65, 73, 77, 79, 88, 
95, 115, 122–3, 142–3, 169, 190, 
192–4
iconoclastic controversy, 2, 4, 17, 
27–9, 32, 34
iconoclastic eikōn, 5, 18, 20, 32, 34, 
94, 115, 121, 123–5, 127, 133–4, 
152, 155, 157–9, 162–3, 168–9, 
171, 173, 182, 187–8
iconophilia, 2, 13, 27, 30, 95–6
idol, 4, 25, 28, 31, 33, 57, 68
imagination, 20, 53–4, 98, 125–6, 129, 
132–4, 154, 163, 179, 188

230  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Isou, Isidore, 10, 13, 32, 37–8, 42–54, 
61, 96, 130, 190, 192–3, 197n
	 Traité de bave et d’éternité / 
Treatise on Venom and Eternity, 
3, 10, 21, 44, 46–8, 51–2, 54, 
61–2, 103, 192–3, 197n 
Jarman, Derek, 11, 115, 135–7, 
139–49, 151–2, 155, 190
	 Blue, 3, 10, 22, 135–7, 141–3, 
145–53, 155, 193
	 Edward II, 136, 147
	 Jubilee, 147
	 Sebastiane, 147
	 The Angelic Conversation, 136
	 The Last of England, 136
	 The Tempest, 136
Jay, Martin, 2, 55, 63
Kalin, Jesse, 160–1, 164
Kandinsky, Wassily, 39, 183
Kane, Brian, 81–2
Kehr, Dave, 180
Kenaan, Hagi, 116
Khalip, Jacques, 152
Kibbey, Ann, 11–13
Kieślowski, Krzysztof, 5, 11, 17, 115, 
155–6, 171–3, 177–80, 182, 185, 
187–8, 190
	 The Double Life of Véronique / La 
Double Vie de Véronique, 178 
	 Three Colours: Blue / Trois 
Couleurs: Bleu, 3, 10, 18, 22, 155, 
172–3, 176–83, 185, 187–8, 193, 
200n 
	 Three Colours: Red / Trois 
Couleurs: Rouge, 180
	 Three Colours: White / Trois 
Couleurs: Blanc, 180
Klein, Yves, 143–6, 183
	 IKB, 143–6
Kracauer, Siegfried, 29–30, 198n
Ladner, Gerhart B., 7, 26 
Lamberti, Edward, 120
Lanzmann, Claude, 19, 31
	 Shoah, 31
Latour, Bruno and Weibel, Peter, 7 
Lawrence, Amy, 151
Lemaître, Maurice
	 Le Film est déjà commencé? / 
Has the Film Already Started?, 
44
Lengbeyer, Lawrence, 95
Lettrism, 37–9, 42–4, 46, 53, 56, 61 
Levin, Thomas Y., 60–3, 65, 67
Levinas, Emmanuel, 116–20, 176, 
199n
listening, 82, 127–8, 130, 132–4, 
147–51
Lombardo, Patrizia, 146
Lukács, György, 58 
Malevich, Kazimir, 4, 39
Mallarmé, Stéphane, 42
Martin, Adrian, 84
Martin-Jones, David, 120
Marx, Karl and Engels, Friedrich, 
56–7
Mauthner, Fritz, 41, 196n
McMahon, Laura, 127, 129, 130
Méliès, Georges 
	 A Trip to the Moon / Le Voyage 
dans la Lune, 61
Michaels, Lloyd, 154
mimesis, 2, 4–5, 10, 18–19, 21–5, 
32–4, 37–40, 43, 45, 56, 60, 73–7, 
85, 94, 101, 112, 115, 123, 125–6, 

INDEX  |  231
130, 134, 141–5, 148, 154–6, 168, 
171, 177, 179, 187, 189, 193; see 
also anti-mimesis 
Misek, Richard, 161
Mitchell, William J. T., 2, 57
Mondzain, Marie-José, 1–2, 8, 28, 
176, 189, 193
monochromatic screen, 22, 52–3, 
60–1, 63–4, 66, 98–9, 141, 143, 
145, 151, 154–8, 161, 167–8, 171, 
173, 177, 181, 190–1, 193, 197n; 
see also blank screen 
Moor, Andrew, 142–3
Morreale, Emiliano, 83, 86
Mosley, Philip, 161
Münsterberg, Hugo, 30, 199n
mysticism, 25, 41, 89, 145
	 atheistic mysticism, 108
	 Christian mysticism, 74–5
	 Jewish mysticism, 42–3
Nagib, Lúcia, 120
Nancy, Jean-Luc, 2, 91, 118–19, 132, 
148–50 
negative theology, 25, 41, 75
Noys, Benjamin, 59–60, 68
Perniola, Ivelise, 19
person with AIDS (PWA), 136–43, 
146–7, 151–2
Pethő, Ágnes, 97 
phoné, 73–4, 76, 80–4, 93, 193; see 
also voice
photogénie, 14–15, 166, 174, 200n; see 
also Delluc, Louis and Epstein, 
Jean
physiognomy, 14–15, 166–7, 174–5; 
see also Balázs, Béla
Pisano, Libera, 41
Plato, 2, 12–13, 17, 22, 24–5, 28, 34, 
40, 121, 191
Plotinus, 22, 25–6, 28, 34, 191
Poirson-Dechonne, Marion, 6, 19, 45, 
131
political modernism, 11–12, 29–30
Pontecorvo, Gillo
	 Kapò, 121–2
Rancière, Jacques, 104
Rauschenberg, Robert, 4
Ray, Nicholas
	 Johnny Guitar, 68
Remes, Justin, 137, 145
Reyland, Nicholas W., 180, 183, 185
Rivette, Jacques, 121–2
Rodowick, David N., 5, 11
Rossellini, Roberto
	 Joan of Arc at the Stake / Giovanna 
d’Arco al rogo, 109
Royer, Michelle, 129
Rushton, Richard, 12–13
Saïd, Suzanne, 7, 24
Saxton, Libby, 9, 18, 103–4, 119–21, 
124 
Schaeffer, Pierre, 4
Scruton, Roger, 30 
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky, 140
silence, 4, 41–3, 61–3, 79, 84, 86, 88, 
91, 104, 128–9, 142, 147–9, 
152
Simmel, Georg, 176
Singer, Irving, 164
Sinnerbrink, Robert, 120–1, 163
Sjöberg, Sami, 39–40, 42
Smith, Paul Julian, 147
Sobchack, Vivian, 143
Solnit, Rebecca, 145

232  |  ICONOCLASM IN EUROPEAN CINEMA
Sontag, Susan, 124, 137
sound-image disjunction, 45, 47, 
51–2, 56, 71, 84, 97, 125–6, 
129–30, 132
spectacle, 2, 19, 34, 38, 122, 127, 138, 
143, 187
	 and Debord, 10, 55–60, 62–71
Stadler, Jane, 163
Stam, Robert, 100
stasis, 66, 68–9, 100
Sternberg, Josef von
	 The Shanghai Gesture, 68–9
Stevens, George
	 A Place in the Sun, 102
stillness, 66–9; see also stasis
Törnqvist, Egil, 161, 168
Tyagi, Ritu, 128
Venzi, Luca, 19, 143, 156, 162, 182–3, 
187, 200n
Verlaine, Paul, 42 
voice, 21, 47, 62, 68, 72–4, 76–86, 
88–9, 91, 93, 115, 126–32, 
134–5, 147–52, 190, 193; see also 
phoné 
Wajcman, Gérard, 9, 19–20, 32–3, 39, 
122, 142 
Watney, Simon, 138
Weiler, Gershon, 41, 196n
Weller, Shane, 40–1
Wiene, Robert
	 The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari / Das 
Cabinet des Dr. Caligari, 61
Wilson, Emma, 183, 188
Witt, Michael, 102, 105, 110 
Wollen, Peter, 144
Wolman, Gil J., 61–2 
	 L’Anticoncept / The Anti-Concept, 
44, 62
Wunenburger, Jean-Jacques, 2, 32
Wymer, Rowland, 144, 146
Žižek, Slavoj, 81–2, 122, 177–8, 
180–1







