I
d
e
a
 
a
n
d
 
O
n
t
o
l
o
g
y
A
n
 E
ss
a
y 
in
 E
a
rl
y 
M
o
d
er
n 
M
e
ta
p
h
ys
ic
s 
of
 I
d
e
as
Marc A. Hight

Idea and Ontology


Idea and Ontology
an essay in early modern metaphysics of ideas
marc a. hight
the pennsylvania state university press
university park, pennsylvania

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hight, Marc A., 1969–
Idea and ontology : an essay in early modern metaphysics of ideas / Marc A. Hight.
p.
cm.
Summary: ‘‘Provides an interpretation of the development of the ontology of ideas from
Descartes to Hume that reafﬁrms the vital role metaphysical concerns played in early modern
thinking’’—Provided by publisher.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 978–0-271–03383–9 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. Ontology.
2. Idea (Philosophy).
3. Metaphysics.
I. Title.
BD301.H54
2008
110.9—dc22
2008002466
Copyright  2008 The Pennsylvania State University
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Published by The Pennsylvania State University Press,
University Park, PA 16802–1003
The Pennsylvania State University Press is a member of the
Association of American University Presses.
It is the policy of The Pennsylvania State University Press to use
acid-free paper. This book is printed on Natures Natural, containing 50% post-consumer waste,
and meets the minimum requirements of American National Standard for
Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed
Library Material, ansi z39.48–1992.

For ict and snj
and
in memory of rene`e elizabeth hight
(1968–2006)


contents
Acknowledgments
xi
List of Abbreviations
xiii
Introduction:
Idea Ontology and the Early Modern Tale
1
1
the traditional ontology
11
1.1 Substance
12
1.2 Modes
20
1.3 What Is an Idea?
22
1.4 Stretching Idea Ontologies
34
2
descartes
37
2.1 Representation
38
2.2 Perception, Ideas, and Images
41
2.3 Innate Ideas, Dispositions, and Causes
47
2.4 The Complications of the Passions
51
3
the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
55
3.1 Malebranche’s Theory of Ideas
56
3.2 Substantializing Ideas
61
3.3 Attacking Modes
66
3.4 A New Ontology?
70
3.5 Arnauld’s Theory of Ideas
72
3.6 Critique of Malebranche
75
3.7 The Cartesian Debate
78

viii
contents
4
locke
79
4.1 Locke ‘‘Deontologized’’
81
4.2 Lennon’s Locke
88
4.3 Locke’s Contemporaries
94
4.4 Locke’s Implicit Ontology
99
5
leibniz
116
5.1 Resolving a ‘‘Tension’’
117
5.2 Ideas as Dispositions
120
5.3 Reading Leibniz
121
5.4 Ideas: Being One vs. Having One
124
5.5 Innate Ideas
126
5.6 Difﬁculties with Dispositions
129
5.7 Ideas as Modes
136
6
berkeley
138
6.1 Minds and Ideas
139
6.2 Ideas as Objects
141
6.3 Ideas as Modes
148
6.4 Qualities
155
6.5 Unperceived Existence
159
6.6 Phenomenalism
161
6.7 Berkeley and the Early Modern Tale
172
7
divine ideas
177
7.1 Divine Ideas and Archetypes
178
7.2 ‘‘In’’ the Mind of God
181
7.3 Permutations
189

contents
ix
7.4 Defending Berkeley’s Theory of Divine Ideas
193
7.5 Fleeting Ideas
209
8
abstraction and heterogeneity
218
8.1 Abstract Ideas
218
8.2 Kinds of Abstraction
219
8.3 Berkeley’s Attack
223
8.4 Berkeley’s Solution: General Ideas
231
8.5 Perceptual Heterogeneity
233
8.6 The Molyneux Thought Experiment
236
8.7 The Argument from Difference in Content
237
8.8 Adding Visible and Tangible Lines
238
8.9 Heterogeneity and the Nature of Ideas
240
8.10 Ontology to Heterogeneity
241
9
hume and idea ontology
246
9.1 Perceptions as Substances
248
9.2 Dependent Perceptions
258
9.3 Concluding Remarks: The Demise of the Early Modern Tale
265
References
269
Index
275


acknowledgments
Work on this book was generously supported by a Mednick Memorial Fel-
lowship through the Virginia Foundation for Independent Colleges and sev-
eral Summer Faculty Research Grants from Hampden-Sydney College.
During the course of writing the book I incurred many debts to colleagues
and scholars. I am grateful in particular to Robert Muehlmann, Daniel
Flage, Tom Stoneham, Michael LeBuffe, Tom Lennon, and several anony-
mous referees whose comments and discussions have improved the quality
of this endeavor. I owe a special debt of gratitude to Ian and Diana Tipton,
who in the summer of 2004 provided me with a place to stay, excellent food,
and days of stimulating discussion about matters early modern.
Some parts of the book are based on earlier publications of mine. Parts
of chapter 4 are based on ‘‘Locke’s Implicit Ontology of Ideas,’’ The British
Journal of the History of Philosophy 9, no. 1 (2001): 17–42. Section 6.6.1 is
based on ‘‘The New Berkeley,’’ with Walter Ott, Canadian Journal of Philoso-
phy 34, no. 1 (2004): 1–24. Portions of chapter 7 draw on my ‘‘Defending
Berkeley’s Divine Ideas,’’ Philosophia 33, nos. 1–4 (2005): 97–128. Sections
8.5–8.10 are based on ‘‘Why We Do Not See What We Feel,’’ Paciﬁc Philo-
sophical Quarterly 83, no. 2 (2002): 148–62. All of these materials are used
with the gracious permission of the journals, and I express my gratitude to
them for their use.


abbreviations
Full bibliographic information may be found in the reference list. References
to works that employ paragraph or section numbers (e.g., most of Berkeley’s
works) are to those paragraph and section numbers; otherwise, they are
given by volume and page number. Thus ‘‘PHK 49’’ refers to Berkeley’s
Principles of Human Knowledge, par. 49, and ‘‘CSM II:120’’ refers to The
Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. II, p. 120. The following abbrevia-
tions have been used for various primary source texts cited in the book,
sorted by author. (Note: Because the Nidditch edition of Hume’s Treatise
has been replaced by the newer Norton edition, I also provide references to
the Norton for the convenience of readers.)
Arnauld
TF
On True and False Ideas
Berkeley
IPHK
Introduction to the Principles of Human Knowledge (vol. 2 of
The Works of George Berkeley)
MI
George Berkeley’s Manuscript Introduction
NTV
An Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision (vol. 1 of The Works
of George Berkeley)
PC
Philosophical Commentaries (vol. 1 of The Works of George
Berkeley)
PHK
The Principles of Human Knowledge (vol. 2 of The Works of
George Berkeley)
S
Siris (vol. 5 of The Works of George Berkeley)
TVV
The Theory of Vision Vindicated and Explained (vol. 1 of The
Works of George Berkeley)
3D
Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous (vol. 2 of The
Works of George Berkeley)
Descartes
CSM
The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vols. I and II
CSM/K
The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. III

xiv
abbreviations
Hume
N
A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. David F. and Mary J. Norton
T
A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge, revised by
P. H. Nidditch
Leibniz
G
Die philosophischen Schriften von G. W. Leibniz
L
Philosophical Papers and Letters
NE
New Essays on Human Understanding
PE
Philosophical Essays
SSB
Samtliche Schriften und Briefen
Locke
ECHU
An Essay Concerning Human Understanding
EM
‘‘An Examination of P. Malebranche’s Opinion of Seeing All
Things in God’’ (vol. 2 of Locke’s Philosophical Works)
Malebranche
DMR
Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion
LO
The Search After Truth, with Elucidations of the Search After
Truth
OC
Oeuvres comple`tes de Malebranche
Spinoza
CWS
Collected Works of Spinoza

introduction:
idea ontology and the early modern tale
Traditional metaphysics has not fared well since its glory days in the early
modern period. Gone is the fascination with developing an ontology that
can account for our experiences in the world. Cartesian dualism, Leibnizian
monads, Berkeleian immaterialism, and similar metaphysical investigations
have been replaced by discussions of language, conﬁdent assertions that
epistemology alone is ﬁrst philosophy, and pronouncements that ontology
is dead. Hilary Putnam has even delivered a talk in a distinguished lecture
series entitled ‘‘Ontology: An Obituary’’ (2004, 71–88). It is not that meta-
physics is no longer studied or held in historical esteem; rather the guiding
assumption today seems to be that we have advanced far enough to recog-
nize that ontology is an exhausted—perhaps useless—enterprise. It seems
we have nothing left to learn from ontological speculation and metaphysical
system building.
Whence this antimetaphysical attitude? John Heil argues that an implicit
adherence to a Wittgensteinian picture theory is to blame, but I suspect the
roots are spread more broadly and deeply.1 The dominant view is that ontol-
ogy has relatively little to offer contemporary philosophers. The early mod-
erns generally had robust, rich ontologies, but this robustness became an
embarrassment when it was discovered that no ontology appeared to ﬁt well
with the powerful new theory of ideas. Here we ﬁnd a historical pedigree for
contemporary antimetaphysical views. If one wants to undercut the impor-
tance of metaphysics and ontology, then pointing to historical developments
that support this attitude can be a potent tool. This is, in fact, precisely
what has been happening. Early modern scholarship (often unconsciously
1. ‘‘My contention is that metaphysics as it has been conceived at least since Kant has been
inﬂuenced by an implicit adherence to a Picture Theory of representation’’ (Heil 2003, 5).

2
idea and ontology
inﬂuenced by contemporary thinking) had, so the argument goes, developed
strains of thought bent on establishing the primacy of epistemology by the
time philosophers like Berkeley became active. Thus one lesson that history
is supposed to teach us is that, between the time of Descartes and Berkeley,
the early moderns learned that ontology could not provide the answers we
seek about the world. The point is made by targeting the concept most vital
to all of these discussions: that of an idea. If the early moderns abandoned
ontology with respect to ideas (so that we need not ask ontological questions
about them because they are idle or do not apply), then today we are on
ﬁrmer ground setting aside metaphysics and ontology generally. A story has
thus been developed and told so often that it is now routinely thought of as
the traditional view of what transpired in the early modern period. I call this
the early modern tale.
The tale told about seventeenth- and eighteenth-century philosophy runs
roughly as follows. Descartes broke free of the fetters of Scholasticism by
simultaneously advancing a new mechanistic theory of the physical world
and a new concept of the mental that relegated many of the features of
ordinary experience to the mind. To facilitate the latter move, he reached
up and brought ideas down from the heavens—historically, ideas had been
understood to be purely divine entities—and applied them to ﬁnite crea-
tures in the mundane world. Ideas thus spread in meaning to cover
thoughts, images, concepts, and sensations. Ideas played the crucial role in
early modern epistemology; to discover how they functioned and repre-
sented the world was to discover the mechanism by which everything could
be known. The new way of ideas promised scientiﬁc access to a universe the
old Aristotelian system could not imagine, much less explain. But alas, as
the story goes, the new system did not work. The way of ideas was a poor
ﬁt with the traditional ontological categories of substance and mode. Des-
cartes and his earliest followers did not completely grasp this fact. There
were good reasons both for denying that ideas could be modes of the mind
and for denying that ideas could be substances. In light of this, subsequent
thinkers, though following Descartes’ lead, slowly eroded the Cartesian
metaphysical framework. The promise of idea philosophy was too strong to
be fettered by ontological chains. At its core, Descartes’ philosophy still ad-
hered to the traditional substance/property ontology of its predecessors.2
2. On my account, ‘‘traditional ontology’’ includes both the ancient substance/property dis-
tinction and the narrower ‘‘Cartesian’’ substance/modiﬁcation division that developed from it. I
see the Cartesian ontology as a natural outgrowth of Aristotle’s own ontology and therefore
regard it as ‘‘traditional.’’

introduction: idea ontology and the early modern tale
3
Thus when the Cartesian system began to break down, its ontology did as
well. Yet perhaps its most crucial element, its theory of ideas, ﬂourished, and
it dominated the philosophical scene long after the heyday of Cartesianism.
Why did idea philosophy ﬂourish when its ontology was allegedly falter-
ing? Our early modern tale tells us that advances in the philosophy of ideas
led the moderns not only to reject the old ontology but also to abandon
ontology altogether with respect to ideas. This is not to say that ontology in
general was abandoned. Yet ideas in particular were not deemed susceptible
to ontic analysis because they had no ontological status at all. Thus scholars
like Richard Watson and John Yolton argue that the main ﬁgures of the
early modern period undermined the exclusive and exhaustive nature of
substance and mode.3 Here is one representative example of the tale in ac-
tion, as told by Yolton:
The point of this last remark [made by Locke in reply to Norris] is
that Locke did not consider ideas to have an ontological status; he
wanted to concentrate upon their role in perception and knowl-
edge. Having Malebranche’s theory as an example of a theory that
gave to ideas an ontological status, Locke had a twofold reaction: he
rejected Norris’s attempts to ﬁt ideas into the standard ontological
categories of substance or mode, and he stressed the cognitive,
awareness features of ideas. The language of ‘‘having ideas’’ is iden-
tiﬁed with being aware, with perceiving.4 (1984, 94, emphasis in the
original)
What it means to deny that ideas have an ontological status is a matter open
for discussion and analysis. What matters for the present is that this tale is
being told at all. Locke allegedly starts the assault on substance by attacking
our conception of it. Perhaps the problem with characterizing the nature of
ideas lies with the very notions we have about ontological categories. Sub-
stance is, in Locke’s famous phrase, an ‘‘I know not what.’’ Locke is not
merely setting aside a discussion of ontology in the Essay Concerning Human
Understanding; according to the early modern tale, when it comes to ideas,
he is abandoning it. Most scholars, of course, do not jump immediately to
this radical conclusion. But its basic thrust pervades a lot of the work done
3. Some moderns use the term ‘‘accident’’ instead of ‘‘mode.’’ I will use ‘‘mode’’ or ‘‘modiﬁ-
cation’’ exclusively for clarity and consistency. See Yolton 1975, Yolton 1984, Yolton 1985, Yolton
1996a, and Watson 1987.
4. For Locke’s comments on John Norris, see Acworth 1971.

4
idea and ontology
on the early moderns. If Locke does not abandon ontology for ideas, he is
at least pointing us in that direction. Thus D. J. O’Connor writes: ‘‘In Berke-
ley’s words, he [Locke] ‘bantered [i.e., challenged] the idea of substance’
and though he himself did no more than point the way to his successors,
the traditional theory never recovered from the attack which he led’’ (1967,
73). O’Connor himself does not take the step of alleging that Locke aban-
doned ontology with respect to ideas. Yet even in accounts that deal squarely
with the ontologies of various early modern philosophers, there is an under-
current that pushes one to think either that the ontology is of historical
interest only or that it is being scrutinized solely for the purposes of revising
its emphases to give it more contemporary relevance. This undercurrent
may be felt more keenly with respect to the nature of ideas. Thus even where
the presence of the early modern tale is not explicit, its inﬂuence often lurks
nearby.
The famous immaterialist George Berkeley is the key to the early modern
tale. He denies that we can have any reasonable conception of material sub-
stance and his own ontology of ideas allegedly reveals either that the way of
ideas reduces to epistemology alone or that the modern penchant for ontol-
ogy is sadly, if imaginatively, misguided. Some ascribe roles to other philoso-
phers (most notably Hume), but once Berkeley is folded into the tale the
story is essentially complete. Hume’s primary contribution in this context is
that he continues the story already implicit in Berkeley’s system. To use
Yolton’s expression, ideas in the early modern period are ‘‘deontologized’’
by the time we reach Berkeley.
The problem, however, is that the early modern tale is actually a fairy
tale. The early moderns did not abandon ontology when it came to their
reasoning about the nature of ideas. They preserved an idea ontology. As-
serting that there must be an ontology of ideas does not imply, however,
that there were no tensions between the way of ideas and the traditional
substance/mode ontology. The friction between the epistemological roles of
ideas and their ontic status is one of the key elements driving developments
in metaphysics in the modern period. A core traditional ontology was never
abandoned but instead occasionally ‘‘stretched’’ owing to the new pressures
that the introduction of ideas brought to bear on it. This work aims to
establish that the early moderns remained committed to a more or less tra-
ditional ontology with respect to ideas and that reading the early moderns
as idea ontologists results in better philosophy and more accurate history.
What, then, was the early modern conception of ideas that our key ﬁg-
ures—philosophers such as Descartes, Arnauld, Malebranche, Locke, Leib-

introduction: idea ontology and the early modern tale
5
niz, Berkeley, and Hume—inherited, and how did it contribute to the
destabilization of the substance/property (mode) ontology without leading
to its abandonment? What were the effects of this interplay between ideas
and the traditional ontology? These questions frame this project and lead to
its conclusion. I discuss this ‘‘breakdown,’’ ﬁrst by exploring the nature of
the traditional ontology and then by examining how select philosophers,
emphasizing Berkeley, struggled to place ideas within it. In the end, I con-
clude that the moderns did not abandon the substance/mode ontology for
ideas. The radicalization of early modern metaphysical systems (the adop-
tion of more unusual metaphysical positions, like immaterialism and Hu-
mean skepticism) is attributable primarily to the poor ﬁt between the
epistemological roles played by ideas and the substance/mode ontology. This
radicalization, however, is evidence of how the moderns sought to retain
the traditional ontological categories, even if their attempts were not always
successful. Hume’s work demonstrates the point, since he embraced much
of Berkeley’s thinking about the nature of ideas but could not avail himself
of Berkeley’s unusual solution. The moral is clear: insofar as one wants to
understand early modern thinking, especially about ideas, one needs to use
the traditional ontological distinctions as a framework. The lesson is espe-
cially true for Berkeley, who will correspondingly take center stage in this
study; it is also true, to a lesser extent, for Hume, with whom this study will
conclude.
In order for this endeavor to make sense, we ﬁrst need to explore the
basic concepts and categories I employ. I start with an analysis of substance
and mode as used by the moderns.5 Created substances (God is a special
case) have to satisfy two key requirements: endurance and independence. Any
entity that endures and underlies change without requiring any other kind
of thing to exist is itself a substance. Modes are dependent modiﬁcations of
substances. The analysis in the ﬁrst chapter is important not only because it
frames the discussion of subsequent chapters but also because it helps iden-
tify clues that will reveal whether a given philosopher treats ideas as sub-
stances or as modes. The issue is not always clear. Many historians of
philosophy have sought to replace the language of substance and mode with
talk about reiﬁcation. Although the concept of reiﬁcation is perhaps useful
for some contemporary discussions, I argue that it is not when one is seek-
5. One might wonder about a potential third category, relations. Locke, for instance, talks
about three kinds of complex ideas: modes, substances, and relations (ECHU II.12.3). Relations,
however, do not constitute a fundamental ontological category for the early moderns. Relations
are a kind of complex idea reducible ultimately to substance(s) and mode(s).

6
idea and ontology
ing to determine the ontological commitments of early modern philoso-
phers.
The main part of the book offers a careful discussion of a select history
of the ontology of ideas in the early modern period. This select history in
turn is divided into two large sections. The ﬁrst, mainly exegetical, part
engages the perceptual theories and theories of ideas of Descartes and the
early Cartesians. They are foundational ﬁgures in the development of the
ontology of ideas and are not generally alleged to have abandoned ontology
with respect to them; instead, they did important work in this area, work
with which later philosophers were familiar. The inconclusive confrontation
between Malebranche and Arnauld over the ontology of ideas led Locke
and even contemporary commentators today to take the unusual step of
sidestepping questions about ontology with respect to ideas. My task in
these chapters is only to be clear about what these theories of ideas were and
what sorts of problems confronted them; the aim is to provide a context for
our more pressing analyses of later theories of ideas. Therefore it is not my
intention to give a systematic history of the philosophy of ideas but only a
history relevant to the development of the ontology of ideas.
Our ﬁrst important early modern ﬁgure is of course Descartes, whose
philosophy of ideas I engage in the second chapter. Descartes is important
not only because he introduces the concept of idea that most of the moderns
will essentially adopt but also because he has a rather difﬁcult time ﬁtting
this concept of idea into his ontology. Descartes initially ﬂirts with views
that make ideas rather like corporeal substances. The problems with this
early position are sufﬁciently obvious that he later adopts the familiar theory
that makes ideas modes of the mind. Ultimately he endorses the interesting
position that all ideas must be innate to the mind. The tangle of problems
he leaves is inherited by the ﬁrst generation of Cartesians, especially Male-
branche and Arnauld, whose views I examine in the third chapter. The fa-
mous dispute between Malebranche and Arnauld over the status of ideas is
all the more intriguing because both of them otherwise claim to be good
Cartesians. The nature and quality of their arguments occupy my attention
for most of the chapter, although I am forced to conclude that neither
achieves a clear victory in their dispute.
The discussion through Arnauld sets the stage for the second part of the
historical investigation, where I really begin to make my case for an ontolog-
ical reading of the early moderns. Starting with the fourth chapter, which
concerns Locke, I argue that key early modern ﬁgures remained committed
to a traditional substance/mode ontology with respect to ideas. To this end,

introduction: idea ontology and the early modern tale
7
I employ both textual and philosophical arguments, since I also hold that,
ceteris paribus, readings that make the early moderns both historically plau-
sible and philosophically stronger are to be preferred.
Locke is our ﬁrst central ﬁgure in the early modern tale, for it is with him
that many advocates of the early modern tale believe that we can see the
start of the ‘‘abandonment’’ of ontology with respect to ideas. In particular,
I engage such scholars as Thomas Lennon and John Yolton, who argue that
Locke has an exclusively epistemological understanding of ideas. In the
fourth chapter I argue that although Locke did want to set aside certain
questions of ontology, he nonetheless had an underlying implicit ontology
of ideas. There are formidable textual and philosophical reasons for thinking
that Locke reasoned within the conﬁnes of a substance/mode ontology even
as he consciously preferred to explore issues more connected with episte-
mology than ontology. My analysis places considerable emphasis on the
much-neglected ‘‘An Examination of P. Malebranche’s Opinion of Seeing
All Things in God,’’ where Locke engages Malebranche and John Norris. I
conclude that Locke does not abandon ontology with respect to ideas and
thus cannot play the role allotted to him in the early modern tale.
I have elected not to include a chapter on Spinoza, primarily because he is
not considered a vital ﬁgure in our fairy tale. Spinoza’s striking metaphysics
dominates the rest of his philosophy and leaves little doubt that ideas—
whatever their roles—are ultimately grounded in the ontology of substance
and mode. In Ethics II-D3 Spinoza tells us, ‘‘By idea I understand a concept
of the Mind that the Mind forms because it is a thinking thing.’’6 In the
explanation he goes on to point out that all ideas involve mental activity
(which is why he says ‘‘concept’’ instead of ‘‘perception’’). Spinoza also dis-
tinguishes the idea from its object (ideatum), preserving the Cartesian dis-
tinction between objective and formal reality. Ideas are a particular kind of
mode of the one substance, God. The distinction between an idea and its
object (and other uses to which Spinoza puts the term ‘‘object’’) makes the
analysis cloudy and difﬁcult, but for my purposes here the core claim is not
controversial: Spinoza does not contribute to the early modern tale nor am
I aware of anyone who has attempted to make a case for his inclusion in it
(CWS 1:447).
Like Spinoza, Leibniz generally has not been considered a vital ﬁgure in
the development of the way of ideas. Recent work on Leibniz, however, has
introduced novel understandings of his theory. Benson Mates and Nicholas
6. See Kashap 1978 and Wilson 1996, esp. 89–96.

8
idea and ontology
Jolley in particular have each argued on separate grounds that Leibniz thinks
of ideas as mere dispositions.7 Although their analyses (rightly) do not push
them to argue that Leibniz’s theory of ideas lies outside of the traditional
ontology, the possibility remains that one might so argue. Therefore I engage
in some preventative analysis in the ﬁfth chapter by examining Leibniz’s
theory, demonstrating that his innovations with respect to ideas remain
within the traditional ontology.
The most important of the early moderns for this study is Berkeley, and
thus his philosophy takes center stage. Trumpeted by several scholars as
representing the ﬁnal break from the traditional ontology of ideas, Berkeley
is often said to be the key philosopher who completes the transition to epis-
temology as ﬁrst philosophy. Such scholars do not assert that Berkeley lacks
a metaphysical system; instead, the claim is that Berkeley’s theory of ideas
liberates them (ideas) from the conﬁnes of ontology entirely. Consequently
it is particularly important to resist the trend in contemporary scholarship
toward the early modern tale with respect to Berkeley.
In the sixth chapter I seek to establish that although Berkeley did stretch
the traditional ontology of substance and mode by introducing a new cate-
gory for ideas, he did so as part of an attempt to preserve that basic ontology.
Careful investigation of Berkeley’s texts reveals that he thinks that ideas are
like modes in that they are essentially dependent beings but that they are
also like substances insofar as they are distinct from the minds on which
they depend without being modiﬁcations of them. They thus have charac-
teristics of both substances and modes, requiring the positing of a new hy-
brid ontological category I call quasi substance. Mine is, of course, a
controversial reading of Berkeley that has important consequences for the
rest of his philosophical system. Nonetheless, I argue that there is signiﬁcant
textual and philosophical evidence that pushes the careful reader of Berkeley
to this conclusion.
In order to more thoroughly defend this reading of Berkeley’s theory of
ideas, I explore some of its consequences. In the seventh chapter I apply
this understanding of ideas to his much-maligned theory of divine ideas,
demonstrating that there is a plausible and textually consistent reading of
the theory. Divine ideas, like ideas generally, are quasi substances in that
they depend on the mind of God for their existence but also are nonetheless
distinct from (i.e., not a part of) God’s mind. This move allows Berkeley to
employ the theory of divine ideas to solve a wide range of problems, espe-
7. See Jolley 1990, esp. 132–35, and Mates 1986, esp. 171, 246.

introduction: idea ontology and the early modern tale
9
cially those concerning our perception of a continuous and unfragmented
world, without it producing disastrous conﬂicts with the rest of his meta-
physics. Given the demands of philosophical charity and the beneﬁts that
emerge from my reading, I conclude that we have excellent evidence to read
Berkeley in this way.
The eighth chapter takes up two additional important features of Berke-
ley’s metaphysics and applies my new interpretation of his ideas to them.
First, I seek to reconcile his theory of ideas with his rejection of abstract
ideas. When we understand that Berkeley considers ideas to be distinct from
minds but also dependent on them, we discover a new and more compelling
reason for him to dislike abstraction. Abstract ideas, again like ideas gener-
ally, must be entities that exist in a two-place relation with the mind. Thus,
in one important sense, ideas are ‘‘external’’ to the mind. They are neither
modes of the mind nor parts of it. As such, abstract ideas are particular
entities. Berkeley holds the not unreasonable view that all particulars must
be fully determinate. That is, for every property, a particular existing thing
must either have that property or its complement. There are no such things
as particular objects that are indeterminate with respect to their properties.
As a result there can be no such things as abstract ideas, which are described
by Locke and others as ideas (things) that are indeterminate with respect to
at least one property. Thus my reading of Berkeley has the additional virtue
of providing a more charitable understanding of Berkeley’s resistance to the
existence of abstract ideas.
Second, and still in the eighth chapter on Berkeley, I engage his contro-
versial heterogeneity thesis. Berkeley alleges that we do not see the very same
objects we feel. More generally, the objects of any one particular sense mod-
ality are different in kind from those of every other sense modality. The
moderns, however, inherited the concept of common sensibles from Aris-
totle, where one particular object is perceived by multiple sense modalities.
Berkeley accordingly denies what was a commonly held and intuitive posi-
tion about sensible objects. The main oddity surrounding the heterogeneity
thesis is not the veracity of the claim itself but instead why Berkeley came to
be such an apparently passionate advocate of it. Here I provide an explana-
tion that again relies on the (ontological) nature of ideas developed in chap-
ters 6 and 7. After considering and rejecting the main rival accounts, I argue
that Berkeley’s overidentiﬁcation of the content of ideas with their ontologi-
cal status explains the depth and certainty of his conviction that ideas are
heterogeneous.
The ninth and ﬁnal chapter examines Hume’s ontology of perceptions.

10
idea and ontology
Frequently read as abandoning the concept of substance, or as at least rele-
gating the concept to the bin of meaningless terms, Hume is often placed
alongside Berkeley as a philosopher who ‘‘deontologized’’ ideas. Like Locke,
Hume was not speciﬁcally interested in many ontological themes; nonethe-
less, that his focus was elsewhere does not entail that he thought ideas lacked
an ontological foundation. Contrary to the anti-ontological tradition, I
argue that Hume fairly straightforwardly thought of perceptions as tradi-
tional substances. That said, he also believed that the notion of substance
was conceptually thin. That is, learning that perceptions are substances does
not do much work in any philosophical system. I maintain that Hume was
driven by the same sorts of concerns as Berkeley and demonstrate that he
never abandoned the traditional ontological categories with respect to per-
ceptions. Reading Hume as a philosopher minimally sensitive to certain
metaphysical concerns actually helps us make better sense of his recantation
in the appendix of the Treatise and helps us resolve other textual difﬁculties
in his philosophy. My engagement of Hume is admittedly controversial but
arguably provides him with a more consistent and plausible system.
The lesson from our extended engagement with Berkeley and Hume is
twofold. First, neither Berkeley nor Hume can properly be understood out-
side the constraints of their ontological commitments. And because of their
ontological commitments neither can play their assigned role in the early
modern tale. Each is a philosopher thoroughly in the grips of the early mod-
ern ontology. Berkeley is most clearly a traditional idea metaphysician, de-
spite developing an unusual hybrid ontological category. Second, an
unreﬂective adherence to the early modern tale may blind us to some of the
insights of the early moderns, obscuring these thinkers’ philosophical
power. In particular, accepting the tale makes it more difﬁcult to be charita-
ble to them, especially Berkeley, in a historically sensitive way. The early
moderns are of both historically antiquarian and genuinely philosophical
interest. Diligently pursuing the moderns charitably reveals in a particularly
clear way the poverty of the early modern tale.

1
the traditional ontology
Philosophers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries operated within
a substance/property ontology, narrowed to a substance/mode distinction,
inherited from Aristotle via the Scholastics. Thus to ask after the ontological
status of ideas among the early moderns is, at least initially, to ask where
ideas fall within this traditional classiﬁcation. Unfortunately, the issue is not
as easy as asking whether particular individuals treated ideas as substances
or as modes. The substance/mode ontology was ‘‘breaking down’’ in the
early modern period under the stress of difﬁculties generated by theorizing
about the nature of ideas, and this makes it hard to delineate conceptual
categories easily. Nonetheless, I argue that the early moderns adhered to a
core conception of substance (and modiﬁcation) that remained essentially
consistent over time. Motivating this claim is a principal aim of this chapter.
I am not arguing that there was only one conception of substance in general;
there were, in fact, substantial variations. Yet all these variations were sup-
ported by two core features. When I refer to the ‘‘traditional’’ conception of
substance I intend only these minimal criteria.
Initially, the substance/mode distinction employed by the early moderns
was rigid, exhaustive, and exclusive.1 According to that model, whatever is
not a substance is a mode, and vice versa. Leibniz is particularly clear on
this point, taking as an obvious premise in an argument concerning transub-
stantiation that ‘‘[w]hatever is not substance is accident or appearance’’ (L,
116). Apparently the premise is so self-evident as not to require any justiﬁ-
cation at all. Descartes likewise deftly reduces the universe to substances and
modes, arguing that universals and numbers ﬁt the model (CSM I:210–12;
1. As I subsequently argue in chapter 6, Berkeley stretches the ontology such that it becomes
decidedly less rigid and exclusive, although it remains identiﬁably traditional.

12
idea and ontology
Principles I:52–58, esp. 58; Principles I:58). Spinoza, using the Euclidean geo-
metrical method, even makes the exhaustive nature of the distinction an
axiom. ‘‘Whatever is, is either in itself [i.e., a substance] or in another [i.e.,
a mode]’’ (CWS 1:410, I-A1).2 We should expect, then, that ideas are either
substances or modes. What it actually means, however, for an idea to be a
substance or a mode is not obvious; this necessitates my laying out the con-
ceptual geography of substance and mode before engaging some of the is-
sues that surround the question of what ideas actually are.
1.1 Substance
Aristotle writes in the Categories, ‘‘A substance—that which is called a sub-
stance most strictly, primarily, and most of all—is that which is neither said
of a subject nor in a subject, e.g. the individual man or the individual horse’’
(2a12–13). The essential thought behind this deﬁnition is the notion of sub-
stance as a thing. Here he means ‘‘thing’’ in the sense that a horse and a
table are things, whereas wisdom and irritability are not. The key feature
Aristotle highlights is endurance: that which survives and underlies change
without itself changing or is able to have contrary properties at different
times without sacriﬁcing its identity. A wise but irritable man is still a man,
even if he becomes less sagacious and more pleasant. ‘‘It seems most distinc-
tive of substance that what is numerically one and the same is able to receive
contraries. In no other case could one bring forward anything, numerically
one, which is able to receive contraries’’ (4a10–12). Substances are also im-
portantly the subjects of predication, the ‘‘this’’ that receives and supports
qualities and in which change is registered. In a basic sense, Aristotle’s no-
tion of substance is equivalent to that of particular ‘‘thingness,’’ where sub-
stances ultimately underlie everything. This Categories conception of
substance is the one adopted by the early moderns, even though Aristotle
did attempt to clarify his understanding of substance in the Metaphysics by
introducing the notion of substantial forms (Frede 1987, 73–80). The early
moderns, however, did not typically follow the later complications of the
Metaphysics (one might think Leibniz a partial exception). The changes in-
troduced by Aristotle need not concern us, for even if Aristotle did change
his mind about what he had originally thought were clear cases of sub-
2. For my parenthetical insertions, see CWS I-D3 (why ‘‘in itself’’ means a substance) and
CWS I-D5 (why ‘‘in another’’ means a mode).

the traditional ontology
13
stances, his essential conception of substance did not undergo signiﬁcant
revision (Frede 1987, 78–79).
Substances, as particulars, are ‘‘thises.’’ Universals, on the other hand, are
‘‘suches.’’ Things are said of substances, or are ‘‘in’’ them, and Aristotle
most often uses this conception to classify things as substances. Immedi-
ately, however, a complication arises. A genus frequently can be predicated
or said of its species. For instance, we can say of dogs that they are animals,
thus making the kind ‘‘dog’’ technically a substance. Aristotle calls these
substances ‘‘secondary.’’ ‘‘The species in which the things primarily called
substances are, are called secondary substances, as also are the genera of these
species. For instance, the individual man belongs in a species, man, and
animal is a genus of the species; so these—both man and animal—are called
secondary substances’’ (2a15–18). Secondary substances are those of which
other things are predicated (making them substances) but are also them-
selves predicable of other things. The key difference between primary and
secondary substance, then, is that only primary substances are not predica-
ble of anything. This distinction allows things to be substances so long as
something is predicated of them and underscores the point that Aristotle’s
main concept for substance is the ‘‘thing-thought.’’ Nonetheless, when the
moderns referred to substance simpliciter, they nearly always meant primary
substance only, and thus, despite Aristotle’s distinction, qualiﬁcations were
added to the core notion of substance that ultimately excluded secondary
substances from being genuine substances.
In particular, it was thought that the notion of substance was meant to
capture more than mere thingness. Aristotle can sometimes be read as con-
ﬁrming this as well. I believe that part of the problem arises from an intrinsic
ambiguity in how the word ‘‘thing’’ is used. We use the word, as it were, on
different ‘‘levels.’’ Consider the following example I borrow from William
Kneale (1939, 105). The Athenian state is a thing in colloquial usage. But it
is also a substance given Aristotle’s deﬁnition. The state is not predicable of
anything else nor present in anything else. (This analysis assumes, plausibly,
that states are not identical with their organizations or their citizens. The
nonidentity prevents one from arguing that a state is predicable of an aggre-
gate of persons, although as we will quickly see, states might be otherwise
dependent on them. Leibniz might be seen as denying this nonidentity when
he argues that armies are simply aggregates of soldiers, but the point is
preserved since Leibniz does not think armies are substances.)3 Nonetheless,
3. See Leibniz’s letter to Arnauld of 30 April 1687 (PE, 86).

14
idea and ontology
I suspect Aristotle might not have been comfortable with this result. Cer-
tainly those who followed him were not. The problem is that ‘‘thing’’ in
Aristotle’s most basic sense implies nothing more than that which endures
through change.4 Since change can occur on many levels of analysis, there
will be many different levels of things. One might want to deny that the
Athenian state is a substance because, although it is a thing, it is not a basic
thing. Arguably, states depend on their citizens and perhaps their laws for
their existence. Thus the concept of ‘‘state’’ can be further analyzed. In a
real sense, therefore, it is not ultimately ‘‘thingy,’’ as changes occur ‘‘under-
neath’’ it. The citizens, on which the existence of the state depends, change,
both as a collection and individually, thus casting doubt on the supposition
that states are substances. Aristotle himself seems to support this analysis
with one brief remark: ‘‘It is because the primary substances are subjects for
everything else that they are called substances most strictly’’ (2b38–3a1). The
moderns took this problem seriously and in effect were seeking to deny that
secondary substances are genuine substances at all.
A second element is therefore crucial to a proper understanding of sub-
stance. In addition to endurance, one needs independence. The nature of the
independence of substances may be expressed in several ways. Some early
moderns used simplicity while others relied on a causal notion of indepen-
dence. The most common move, however, was to attach the notion of onto-
logical independence to substance. All of these variants are trying to capture
that feature that separates primary from secondary substances. Thus we
should not be surprised to see some philosophers endorsing more than one
expression of the independence thought. Leibniz, for instance, tries to artic-
ulate the independence thought both in terms of simplicity (aggregates can-
not be substances) and causality (substances are causally independent of all
other things). Typically these views are not mutually exclusive.
Consider ﬁrst the most typical understanding of independence as onto-
logical independence. If x is ontologically dependent on y, then it is neces-
sary that y exists at all times that x exists. If an idea is a modiﬁcation of a
substantial mind, then that particular idea is ontologically dependent on
that mind. Mental modes do not exist without the minds they modify. A
child, however, is not ontologically dependent on its parents for its existence,
even though the child may be causally dependent on them (more on causal
dependence shortly). Something is ontologically independent when it
4. Some might insist it implies nonpredicability as well, but that is true only of primary
substance. Part of the reason for allowing secondary substances to be substances at all is to
account for the intuition that there are ‘‘levels’’ of thinghood, an intuition I engage shortly.

the traditional ontology
15
requires nothing other than itself in order to exist (at a time). By extension,
a substance is a thing that requires nothing else for its existence. When we
turn to examine Descartes’ descriptions of substance, one can detect both
the ‘‘thing-thought’’ and the independence criterion in play. ‘‘By substance
we can understand nothing other than a thing which exists in such a way as
to require nothing else to exist.’’5 Substances are things that are ontologically
independent. What he means is made clearer when he argues that the word
‘‘substance’’ applies multivocally to God and created substances. Techni-
cally, the only genuinely independent substance is God, but since created
substances depend only on God, for human purposes they are otherwise
independent in the requisite sense. Even Locke, who emphasizes the thing-
ness of substance more than most, weds a notion of independence to sub-
stance as well. The following are typical of his descriptions of substance:
Because, as I have said, not imagining how these simple Ideas can
subsist by themselves, we accustom ourselves, to suppose some
Substratum, wherein they do subsist, and from which they do re-
sult, which therefore we call Substance.
The Idea then we have, to which we give the general name Sub-
stance, being nothing, but the supposed, but unknown support of
those Qualities, we ﬁnd existing, which we imagine cannot subsist,
sine re substante, without something to support them, we call that
Support Substantia; which, according to the true import of the
Word, is in plain English, standing under, or upholding. (ECHU
II.23.1, 2; II.23.2)
Locke’s conception of substance is clearly one that is closely tied to that of
a substratum; substances are the unknown supports for qualities. Such a
conception is one of endurance—there must be some thing that persists to
underlie, support, and unify the qualities we perceive. Locke stresses this
understanding of substance, yet when he describes the nature of these sup-
ports about which we do not know much, all he says is that they satisfy the
independence criterion: ‘‘The Ideas of Substances are such combinations of
simple Ideas, as are taken to represent distinct particular things subsisting by
5. I read ‘‘require’’ instead of Cottingham’s ‘‘depends on’’ for ‘‘indigeat’’ (CSM I:210, Princi-
ples 51).

16
idea and ontology
themselves’’ (ECHU II.12.6).6 Thus, even though I grant that Locke concerns
himself primarily with the thingness of substance (substratum account), he
recognizes the necessity of independence. At least created substances are
independent supports of qualities.
As hinted earlier, simplicity is often used to capture independence, since
ultimate simplicity guarantees that the ‘‘thing’’ being considered will be of
the lowest level. Generally, this version of independence is thought of in
terms of part-whole relations. Thus Leibniz writes:
It also seems that what constitutes the essence of a being by aggre-
gation is only a mode of the things of which it is composed. For
example, what constitutes the essence of an army is only a mode of
the men who compose it. This mode therefore presupposes a sub-
stance whose essence is not a mode of a substance. Every machine
also presupposes some substance in the pieces of which it is made,
and there is no plurality without true unities. To put it brieﬂy, I
hold this identical proposition, differentiated only by the emphasis,
to be an axiom, namely, that what is not truly one being is not truly
one being either. (PE, 86, emphasis in original)
Substances must be unities, or ultimate simples, to truly exist. Independence
here is garnered through irreducible simplicity. The thing-thought remains,
but only simple things are genuine substances.
Descartes would seem to challenge the idea that only simple things are
bona ﬁde substances since he takes matter to be a substance yet attributes
inﬁnite divisibility to it. But since it is matter ‘‘all the way down,’’ we actu-
ally never reach a lower (logical) level for the parts. Recall that in his deﬁni-
tion of a substance, matter qualiﬁes because it requires nothing other than
itself to exist. For matter, parts are parts, and all parts are essentially homo-
geneous in their properties except for those associated with size and motion,
and those are only accidental. In the synopsis to the Meditations, Descartes
suggests that matter is a substance but only when considered as a whole
(when ‘‘taken in a general sense’’ [CSM II:10]). I submit that the main issue
for Descartes was not simplicity per se but rather the need for a continuant.
Matter underlies change as a whole, regardless of how far down one needs
to go to get an appropriate explanation. The need for ultimate simplicity in
6. See ECHU II.12.4, where he distinguishes modes from substances in virtue of the fact that
the former cannot subsist by themselves.

the traditional ontology
17
the notion of substance grew out of inadequacies in the Cartesian program.
So, returning to our analysis, if a substance is not a unity, then it is not a
thing of the lowest level, and it depends in some sense on its constituent
parts. Now I say ‘‘in some sense’’ as ontological dependence is not the only
one invoked by the moderns. At least one philosopher prefers to marry
the narrower conception of causal independence to the notion of substance
instead of the broader notion of ontological independence. Causal depen-
dence concerns the nature of being rather than the brute fact of existence
itself. A stone I placed on a table might be causally dependent on me for its
current state even though it is not ontologically dependent on me (for its
existence per se). Thus philosophers who emphasize causal dependence are
imposing additional restrictions on the nature of substance, restrictions that
specify the nature of the (in)dependence of the item in question.
Leibniz, as we have seen, defends the view that substances are partless
unities but denies that mere ontological independence is sufﬁcient to capture
independence on the grounds that such a view drives one to Spinozism. God
is the only substance that can be thought of as truly ontologically indepen-
dent (despite Descartes’ protests that this still leaves room for created sub-
stances). This recognition in turn might lead one to conclude that God is
the only substance and humans are but modiﬁcations of Him. On the other
hand, Leibniz protests, if we accept Descartes’ suggestion and restrict sub-
stance to created things, then we might have to admit that other things that
seem ontologically independent yet ought not to be considered substances
are in fact substances.
For example, active force, life, and antitypy [the resistance of mat-
ter to penetration, associated with solidity] are something essential
and at the same time primitive, and one can conceive of them inde-
pendently of other concepts, even of their subjects, by means of
abstractions. Subjects, on the contrary, are conceived by means of
such attributes. Yet these attributes are different from the sub-
stances of which they are attributes. So there is something which is
not at all substance, yet which cannot be conceived as any more
dependent than substance itself. Hence this independence on the
part of its concept is not at all the mark of substance, since it must
apply also to what is essential to substance. (L, 620)
Leibniz’s replacement is causal independence. He deﬁnes substance as
‘‘being which subsists in itself’’ but explains that by ‘‘subsists in itself’’ he

18
idea and ontology
means ‘‘that which has a principle of action within itself’’ (L, 115). That is,
substances are those things that determine their own states of being. Hence
if a thing is such that it requires no external cause for its being, then it is a
substance.7 Interestingly, Leibniz has a precedent for this view, namely Aris-
totle’s doctrine of the unmoved mover (which is a substance for Aristotle,
though not the only one). Substances are uncaused generators of activity,
and this eventually gets translated into causal independence.
Note that, according to Leibniz’s analysis, there are no material sub-
stances (recall our earlier problem of classifying Descartes’ conception of
matter). Since matter is essentially divisible, there can be no lowest level of
thingness for bodies. This claim happens to correspond with the equally
telling point that no particular body can be causally independent, bodies
being nothing more than aggregates dependent on their smaller parts for
their properties. The analysis here underscores the fact that some believed
that ultimate simplicity captured the independence thought. Every sub-
stance is indivisible and simple. For Leibniz, this means that genuine sub-
stances lack parts, that is, they are the most simple things (L, 526; see also L,
344). Although Leibniz’s description of the requirements for substancehood
stands out as among the most clear, virtually every philosopher in the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries shared the conviction that endurance (thing-
ness) and independence complete the minimal concept of created substance.
Hume, at the end of the early modern period, reveals the persistence of the
conception when he describes what he takes the common understanding of
a substance to be in his own era: ‘‘My conclusion from both is, that since all
our perceptions are different from each other, and from every thing else in
the universe, they are also distinct and separable, and may be consider’d as
separately existent, and may exist separately, and have no need of any thing
else to support their existence. They are, therefore, substances, as far as this
deﬁnition explains a substance’’ (T, 233/N, 153 [1.4.5]). Perceptions are inde-
pendent and endure.8 In light of these features, Hume tells us that, accord-
ing to the understanding of his contemporaries, perceptions (which for
Hume includes ideas and impressions) are therefore substances. The core
traditional conception of a substance remains remarkably consistent.
An important caveat must be inserted at this juncture. As I have noted
7. If we are being careful, that there is no external cause for being might perhaps only be a
necessary condition for substancehood. Leibniz, however, apparently thinks it sufﬁcient as well.
8. One might worry that Hume’s conception of perceptions makes them ﬂeeting and hence
nonenduring beings. Such a concern is unfounded. I address the point explicitly with respect to
Hume in section 9.1.3.

the traditional ontology
19
without emphasis above, the traditional conception of a substance in fact
primarily applies to created substances. There are two obvious possibilities
for complication. First, one might object that endurance is a temporal no-
tion. God, a per se substance, typically does not satisfy the endurance crite-
rion. God is an eternal, atemporal being and hence does not persist through
change in the requisite manner. Endurance, however, can be construed
more broadly as simply some kind of continuant underlying change. Even
if we stipulate a ‘‘God time,’’ such that the entirety of human existence
occurs within an instant of God time, there remains a sense in which God
endures relative to our judgments. Independently, as Descartes notes, God
is thought of as a special case separate from considerations that apply to
created substances. Since the issue concerns the ontology of ideas and ideas
are created things, we can restrict our analysis to the created world without
doing violence to early modern understandings of ontology. Second, some
early moderns have conceptions of even created substances that might make
them atemporal as well. Berkeley, for instance, deﬁnes time in terms of a
succession of ideas, placing even created substances like minds outside the
human temporal order. Again, in these cases the endurance criterion argua-
bly nonetheless applies, given that there is still something that underlies the
changes that take place with respect to the substance (the mind). Even if
time is identiﬁed with the changes in ideas a mind perceives, there is none-
theless some continuing thing that ‘‘remains.’’ Such cases are difﬁcult pri-
marily because little careful attention is paid to these kinds of complications
by our historical authors. Berkeley’s theory of time, for instance, is not well
developed with respect to the rest of his philosophical system. What is im-
portant to keep in mind here is that the endurance criterion is not strictly a
human temporal requirement, even if some sense of temporality is otherwise
necessary.
If in fact most early moderns share this minimal core conception of sub-
stance, this is not to say no one ever sought to narrow or enrich this under-
standing. Two additional points are worth mentioning here. First,
philosophers in the Platonic tradition emphasize immutability over (or in
addition to) endurance. For instance, Malebranche characterizes ideas as
immutable archetypes in God, following Augustine. Yet despite the percepti-
ble shift in emphasis, the underlying core conceptions of substance are
roughly the same. Some form of endurance and independence must be pre-
served. A second consideration is what I call ‘‘epistemic priority.’’ Some
argue that our knowledge, or understanding, of substance is epistemically
prior to our understanding everything else. Descartes explicitly endorses this

20
idea and ontology
view, arguing that modes cannot be understood without adequate knowl-
edge of the substance in which they inhere (CSM I:213–14). Modal distinc-
tions are unintelligible until we have knowledge of the substance that
underlies the modes in question.
1.2 Modes
From Descartes onward, philosophers narrowed the substance/property dis-
tinction until it became a substance/mode distinction. In terms of the onto-
logical status of existents, everything is either a substance or a modiﬁcation
of a substance. Later this dichotomy would not be strictly exhaustive, but it
consistently frames modern discussions of ontology. As a result I am going
to restrict my analysis here to modes as counterparts to substances. Now
that we have a more detailed characterization of substance, we can deﬁne a
mode both negatively and positively. An entity is a mode if it is not a sub-
stance. More helpfully, we usually ﬁnd mode deﬁned as a state or modiﬁca-
tion of a substance. Descartes writes in Principles I:56: ‘‘But we employ the
term mode when we are thinking of a substance as being affected or modi-
ﬁed’’ (CSM I:211). He does not seem to explicitly recognize here the possibil-
ity that modes can affect or modify other modes. Since substances are only
independent things, it follows that modes can be things as well, just not
independent ones. Thus we ought not to think of modes in opposition to
substances qua things but in opposition to substances qua independent
(often simple) things. In Principles I:64, Descartes continues: ‘‘If, on the
other hand, we attempted to consider them [modes] apart from the sub-
stances in which they inhere, we would be regarding them as things which
subsisted in their own right, and would thus be confusing the ideas of a
mode and a substance’’ (CSM I:216). Confusing a mode with a substance
produces the Scholastic concept of a real quality, an impossibility to Des-
cartes since there is nothing (i.e., no substance) through which one can
conceive such an entity (see CSM/K III:216–17).9 The independence criterion
is paramount in separating modes from substances.
An immediate point of clariﬁcation is required. The moderns differenti-
ated between modes and attributes. Descartes tells us that we ought to think
of modes as qualities that inhere in substances. Attributes are special kinds
of qualities that are often identiﬁed as essential modes. Not all attributes are
9. For the separation between the Cartesian and Suarezian theories of mode, see Glauser
2002, esp. 427–40.

the traditional ontology
21
modes, but when they are, they are essential modes. Extension is an attribute
of matter since every bit of matter must have extension.10 It is unintelligible
to think of matter as not being extended, that is, as not being modiﬁed in
that manner. Whereas most qualities are thought of as contingent (a bit of
matter might be red or not), attributes are essential. Descartes rightly tells us
in Principles I:56 that God does not have qualities but rather only attributes,
emphasizing that none of God’s modes is contingent or accidental (CSM
I:211). Spinoza even explicitly links essence with attribute. ‘‘By attribute I
understand what the intellect perceives about a substance, as constituting its
essence’’ (CWS 1:408, I-D4).11 Despite the special nature of attributes, they
nonetheless are subject to the same conceptual limits as modes. They de-
pend on substances for their being, even if their dependence is perhaps less
striking than modes generally. Attributes are more interdependent with their
substances, since they are essential to them. Hence one cannot ﬁnd a sub-
stance without its attribute. Modes, by contrast, are utterly and asymmetri-
cally dependent on the substances in which they inhere.
In general, the moderns thought of mental modes along the lines of phys-
ical modes. Authors frequently spoke of inclinations and sensations as
modes of the mind because such things were thought of as activities where
the mind is in a certain state. Hence motion is a mode of physical objects,
and particular instances of sensing might be called modes of the mind or
soul (see, e.g., LO, 2–3 [1.1]).
Yet this analogy, even if appropriate, does not tell us much about what
modes actually are. There are two competing understandings of modes
among the moderns, but I am interested here in preserving a core sense that
is neutral between the two. First, drawing from the Platonic tradition, one
might think of a mode transcendentally; on this approach, a mode is like a
kind of universal. A red ball participates in the universal red, but the red
‘‘in’’ the ball is not a separate particular thing. Nonetheless, the mode is
10. Some might think this confusion, but the moderns are fairly clear and frequently use the
terms ‘‘mode’’ and ‘‘attribute’’ in the same breath. This is true even of the empiricists. Consider
Berkeley at PHK 49: ‘‘[S]ince extension is a mode or attribute, which . . . is predicated of the
subject in which it exists.’’ Attributes are conceived as special kinds of modes here. Descartes is
more straightforward about the relation between mode and attribute, even seeking to disambigu-
ate them because they are frequently used together. ‘‘We must take care here not to understand
the word ‘attribute’ to mean simply ‘mode,’ for we term an ‘attribute’ whatever we recognize as
being naturally ascribable to something, whether it be a mode which is susceptible to change, or
the absolutely immutable essence of the thing in question’’ (CSM I:297).
11. The translation is mine, adapted from Curley’s. Spinoza’s conception of attribute is the
one least identiﬁable (directly) with modes but nonetheless preserves the important distinction
between them (attributes are essential, modes are not).

22
idea and ontology
dependent on the ball for its particular being. Redness is a thing, but redness
itself is not a mode; it is a substance. Only instances of redness are modes.
Second, one might think of modes immanently as more like particular indi-
viduals. This latter view is certainly the dominant one for the moderns. The
red in the ball is like a quality instance and is also utterly dependent on the
substance for its being. On either interpretation modes are dependent be-
ings, even if they are things.
Assuming we have a solid conception of what substances and modes are,
we can now ask after the status of ideas. We are fortunate in one important
respect when it comes to determining whether ideas are substances or
modes; there are a few indicators. Naturally the most obvious one is how
inclined an author is to treat ideas as mind independent. The more indepen-
dent ideas are, the more substance-like they are. Additionally, we can look
to see whether a given philosopher takes perception to be a monadic prop-
erty or dyadic relation. In dyadic relations the relata are distinct and usually
(but not always) thought of as independent of one another. Hence the relata
are thought of as substances. When taken to be monadic properties, ideas
are treated as modes. How one speaks of perception thus often reveals what
one thinks about the status of ideas. When coupled with the issue of depen-
dence, the conceptual territory surrounding the nature of ideas is familiar
and well trodden. We also know one pitfall to avoid: using thing talk as an
indication of a particular ontology. Simply because an author speaks of ideas
as or like things is a poor guide to his metaphysical views, for both modes
and substances can properly be called things. Substances are independent
things; modes are dependent things.
1.3 What Is an Idea?
When determining the ontological commitments of a philosopher in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the ﬁrst question one should ask is
where ideas fall within the substance/mode spectrum. Since everyone pur-
ported to believe in the generally exclusive and exhaustive nature of the
ontology, at ﬁrst glance one ought to expect that ideas will be either modes
or substances. Although the early moderns had a reasonably stable core con-
ception of substance and mode, difﬁculties persistently arise when philoso-
phers attempt to ﬁt ideas into this ontology—the obstacles that bar our
understanding are serious enough that many scholars have sought to impose
different conceptual distinctions on the early moderns in an attempt to clear

the traditional ontology
23
up some of the confusions. One distinction in particular warrants close in-
spection. We might ask the deceptively straightforward question of whether
a given philosopher reiﬁes ideas. Another question, related to this one, is
whether and to what extent the philosopher treats ideas as objects, either of
the understanding or of perception. Here the analysis focuses on the nature
of the perceptual relation posited by the philosopher, from which conclu-
sions about his understanding of ideas are derived. We must be wary, how-
ever, since both questions, whatever their clarity in a contemporary context,
often cannot be directly applied to the early moderns with the aim of trying
to determine the ontological status of ideas in their philosophical systems.
Let me be clear: it is often fruitful to ask these questions, but their value has
been overestimated in application to the early modern period, occasionally
resulting in muddied analyses. Accordingly we antecedently need to be clear
about what these distinctions are and what we might be able to expect from
their use.
1.3.1 Reifying Ideas
The temptation to divide the early moderns into reiﬁers and nonreiﬁers is
particularly powerful.12 Developments in twentieth-century theories of per-
ception, especially sense-data theories, make the distinction intuitive and
compelling. To reify an entity is to treat it as a res, a thing. The term is
generally applied to mental or abstract entities. Thus one reiﬁes numbers or
appearances (sense data) by treating them like material things.13 Common
sense, we are frequently told, instructs us that chairs, cherries, and children
are things while wisdom and irritability are not. To treat wisdom or moods
like chairs or cherries or children is to reify them.
Contemporary philosophers tend to have a sharper conception of what
constitutes a thing than did the moderns. Ever since W. V. O. Quine’s inﬂu-
ential paper ‘‘On What There Is’’ (1980, 1–19), philosophers have typically
deﬁned a ‘‘thing’’ as that over which one quantiﬁes. This characterization is
neat and clean. If one can quantify over something, on some level it exists.
Quine’s criterion for thinghood is ﬂexible, allowing for the domain of things
to be tiered and to take into account that there can be ‘‘levels’’ of things.
12. To provide just one example relevant to the context of this book and the early modern
tale, consider Thomas Lennon’s observation that ‘‘This [inferring factual thing-claims from ap-
pearance claims] seems to me precisely the reiﬁcation, or ontologizing of ideas, that Yolton has
tried to preserve Locke from’’ (2004a, 327).
13. See the Compact Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed. (1994), s.v. ‘‘reify’’ and ‘‘reiﬁcation.’’

24
idea and ontology
The domain of ‘‘things’’ remains the same and the variables keep the same
meanings even as the predicates change. We can quantify over modes or
states of being as well as over individual substances and call them all things
in a perfectly clear sense. Unfortunately, that sense is not shared by the early
moderns, and so discovering that someone reiﬁes ideas is often patently
unhelpful. Knowing that an idea is a thing in this minimal sense does little
to ﬁx its ontological status and role in the larger theory. In particular, it
does not distinguish between substance and mode, since both were routinely
taken to be things.14 Nor does it reveal what level of thing an idea happens
to be. Even if we grant that the Athenian state is not a substance but a thing,
nevertheless the state is importantly distinct from bricks and atoms, even
though we can quantify over all of them.
Perhaps most tellingly, the distinction between reifying and not reifying
ideas lacks genuine clarity when applied to the early moderns. We might be
clear about those who reify ideas, but what would be the status of ideas for
those who do not reify them? No suitable contrast class exists.15 If ideas are
not things in the sense that we cannot quantify over them, then their status
is decidedly murky. Sometimes those who employ this distinction claim that
the alternative is to treat ideas as modes. Yet we have already seen that this
is not a proper contrast class. Modes are things too. We quantify over
thoughts and colors as well as buildings and bricks. What about the initial
and admittedly intuitive distinction with which we started? We treat chil-
dren and cherries as things but not wisdom or irritability. Given our power-
ful sense that something is wrong with reifying moods, there must be some
kernel of a genuine distinction here. And indeed there is, though the issue
is not one of thinghood. Consider Jonathan Bennett’s enlightening discus-
sion of why it is wrong to reify moods and sense data (1971, 31–35).16 First,
one ought to note that Bennett starts out with the same sort of intuition
that I do. He says, ‘‘Of course there are moods. I was in a bad mood this
morning, and my mood changed around noon. Still, one hesitates to say
that there are such things as moods—it seems wrong to reify moods’’ (32).
Bennett offers two justiﬁcations for his claim. First, statements about moods
14. Consider Leibniz, who in his commentary on Descartes’ Principles takes Descartes to be
treating ideas (qua modes) as things (L, 390).
15. I am ignoring attempts to apply a Meinongian distinction between existence and subsis-
tence, ﬁrst because it is obviously foreign to the early moderns, and second because Meinong’s
distinction is not between things and nonthings, but between existing things and nonexisting
things.
16. Bennett modiﬁes this analysis but preserves the relevant point for this discussion in
Learning from Six Philosophers (2001), 2:8–12, secs. 158–59.

the traditional ontology
25
are statements about being in moods. Thus there is no sense of moods being
things. Second, statements about moods are equivalent to nonrelational
statements about persons. He gives the example that ‘‘He is in a good
mood’’ is equivalent to ‘‘He is cheerful and friendly.’’ The contrast is thus
between existence and nonexistence. When we reify, we are claiming that
something exists. Therefore we ought not to reify moods because they can
be reduced to other things that do exist, and there is no need to posit a new
entity, a ‘‘mood.’’ The analysis here is good, but perhaps less than compel-
ling. Bennett presents a straightforward case, but not all statements are like
these. Consider the statement, ‘‘Those two are in the same good mood.’’
This is not reducible to ‘‘He is cheerful and friendly, and the other fellow is
cheerful and friendly.’’ It is unclear that being in a ‘‘good mood’’ entails the
same properties for everyone. I might be in a good mood when not friendly
because I am not generally friendly. Of course there are possible responses
to this and similar concerns, but I am only concerned to note that the issue
is not one easily decided. I am not interested here in dwelling on Bennett’s
reductionist contention, which even if mistaken is nevertheless interesting
and does seem to capture an important point about how we talk about
moods. Still, even granting that we can reduce statements about moods to
nonrelational claims, I submit that Bennett has not quite put his ﬁnger on
the underlying issue. Consider his ﬁrst justiﬁcation. Why does Bennett be-
lieve it is important to say that statements of moods are statements about
being in moods? I suggest that what is worrying Bennett (and others) is that
moods do not exist apart from people. We say ‘‘in’’ to express the depen-
dence of moods.17 The problem is not in treating moods as things but as
independent things. Moods do not satisfy the independence criterion for
substancehood. It is difﬁcult to separate thing talk from substance talk and I
speculate that our hesitancy about reifying moods stems from our conﬂating
substantiality with mere thingness. Bennett’s second justiﬁcation buttresses
my case. One feature of nonrelational states (as indeed of all states) is that
they do not exist without a subject. Again, the issue here is one of substanti-
ality and not thingness. Moods for Bennett are states, and since states, like
modes, are dependent things, they are not things simpliciter. He helpfully
notes, ‘‘Does it follow that we cannot say about moods anything of the sort
we can say about things? It does not. Moods are states; and states, like
things, can be owned and clocked and compared with one another’’ (32). I
17. This point will become especially important when we discuss Berkeley (see section 7.2),
who uses ‘‘in’’ to express the ontological dependence of ideas on minds without implying that
ideas are modiﬁcations of the mind.

26
idea and ontology
agree. Yet a better approach is to admit that moods and states are things,
just not primary substances (i.e., simple things), which would explain the
parallels. Moods and states do persist through change and we can quantify
over them. Thus they are things. In short, Bennett’s reasoning is absolutely
sound, but he fails to draw a deep enough lesson. My point is that we often
think asking the reifying question draws clear lines when in fact it does not.
The issue here is one of substantiality (the distinction between substances
and nonsubstantial beings) and not mere thinghood.
One might object that good scholars do not anachronistically apply
Quine’s criterion for thinghood to past theories. But even if we were to
resist the temptation to read the moderns as Quinians—using instead the
traditional endurance conception of thinghood when trying to understand
their conception of ideas—we would still not yet be free of problems. Pre-
cisely because the term ‘‘thing’’ ranges over levels of dependence on other
entities, it is often difﬁcult to separate the traditional thing-thought (the
notion of endurance underlying change) from that of independence (includ-
ing simplicity). Even today when we accuse someone of reifying we most
often conjoin the two. Thus Plato reiﬁes forms (ideas), and we are especially
conﬁdent in this case since the forms have both endurance and indepen-
dence. In other words, if someone treats ideas as substances, then he or she
clearly may be said to reify them. But the rest of spectrum is less transparent.
We can have modes as well as modes of modes. Hence a color might have
hue or brilliance. Certain modes thus underlie change and are reiﬁed while
others do not and thus are not reiﬁed. Yet what are we to say about the
philosopher who treats ideas like modes in both senses (such that some
modes are reiﬁed and others are not) or who does not see that he needs to
distinguish between the two? The category simply does not allow for clear
conceptual divisions.
More to the point, on this accounting, philosophers who do not reify
ideas apparently commit themselves to the position that ideas do not under-
lie change. We might attribute this view to some early modern philosophers
(perhaps Berkeley) but certainly not all. Descartes’ ofﬁcial position treats
ideas as modiﬁcations of minds. Does this mean that he thinks that his idea
of red cannot underlie changes of hue or brilliance? Such a claim appears
dubious. Once one is clear about the two contrast classes, the thing-non-
thing distinction loses its appeal. Only when we can blur the lines by adding
the independence criterion does the use of reiﬁcation as a conceptual tool
seem promising.
Another compelling worry emerges when we try to ﬁnd someone at-

the traditional ontology
27
tempting to provide criteria for determining when a philosopher does in
fact reify ideas. Suspiciously, this task has proven rather difﬁcult. Aside from
someone generously telling us that he or she is reifying ideas (in a sense that
does not amount to substantializing them), there are no conclusive indica-
tors that a person reiﬁes. In most cases, philosophers who use this distinc-
tion do not even bother to list the characteristics they take to be indicative
of reiﬁers. Ian Tipton attempts to provide a deﬁnitive list, but his commit-
ment to his own criteria does not inspire conﬁdence (1986, 577). He provides
three signs that someone might be reifying. First is the tendency to construe
the notion of ‘‘presence to mind’’ spatially. Secondly, there might be an
inclination to push hard the mirror model (camera obscura) of perception.
Finally, we might expect reiﬁers of ideas to use imagistic talk in describing
ideas. None of these, however, is a dependable indicator, and the last Tipton
himself describes as ‘‘rather unreliable.’’ We ought to be on our guard when
asked to classify theories and philosophers without any clear set of criteria.
In this case, I doubt that any such illuminating set exists.
1.3.2 The End of Ontology?
I have, up until this point, ignored one possible interpretation of the distinc-
tion between those who reify and those who do not. Some have argued,
most notably John Yolton and Richard Watson, that the distinction ought
not to be thought of within ontological or metaphysical bounds at all.18 One
might think instead that to reify ideas is to commit oneself to the notion
that ideas have an ontic status and to avoid reifying ideas is to deny that
ideas have ontic status.19 I question, however, whether we can conclude any-
thing about the ontological status of ideas for an early modern philosopher
simply on the basis of an absence of reifying talk. Something minimally has
an ontic status provided that one can quantify over it. We require this
broader contemporary understanding in order to follow possible moves that
the early moderns might make when thinking about the traditional ontolog-
ical categories of substance and mode. Trying to deny that ideas have an
ontic status, however, is both conceptually confusing and simply mistaken.
I nonetheless suspect that many will ﬁnd the motivation for denying that
ideas have an ontic status compelling. Trying to join ideas, theories of repre-
sentation, and the traditional substance/mode ontology is painful at best.
18. See Yolton 1996a, esp. 1–19; Yolton 1984, 100–103; and Watson 1987, 109.
19. See Lennon’s remark cited in n. 12 of this chapter.

28
idea and ontology
Despairing of ﬁnding a way to reconcile their theories of ideas with this
ontology, philosophers like Watson make the interesting argument that sev-
eral early moderns rejected the notion that ideas have any ontic status at all.
Others, like Yolton, are less clear about embracing this alternative, but care-
ful analysis reveals that they do in fact endorse a similar view. Yolton origi-
nally argues for this thesis primarily with Locke in mind,20 but in later work
he extends it to Berkeley as well (1984, 132–44, 181–201). His analysis starts
with an attempt to free Locke from the charge of representationalism. For
Locke, an idea is not some tertium quid in perception. Instead, Yolton em-
phasizes that ideas are not ‘‘entities’’ at all: ‘‘[B]ut on the Locke-Arnauld
concept of ideas those problems do not involve ideas as entities standing
between us and external objects’’ (102). Yolton has a tendency to shift back
and forth between speaking about ideas as ‘‘things’’ and as ‘‘entities.’’ One
might suppose they are synonyms; they are not. That he does not treat them
as synonyms is made eminently clear in a reply of his to an article by Ian
Tipton. Yolton writes: ‘‘Berkeley tells us that he has not turned things into
ideas, but just the reverse. Thus ideas are things. Does this mean they are
entities?’’ (1986, 584). If the question is meaningful, there must be some kind
of distinction between things and entities. At ﬁrst one might be tempted to
read the difference as between things and substances (independent things)
but that turns out not to be what Yolton has in mind. In his exposition of
Berkeley’s theory of ideas, Yolton makes it clear that ideas are neither modes
nor substances (1996a, esp. 148). Yolton’s language here mirrors his treat-
ments of Locke. The distinction he is trying to employ operates on a level
outside of a particular ontology. Thus when he tells us that the answer to
the question of whether for Berkeley ideas are entities is ‘‘no,’’ I suggest that
he means that ideas have no ontic status at all. I confess that Yolton is not
always perfectly clear on this point, but I can construct no other consistent
position to attribute to him. At the very least he is not alone in endorsing a
position like the one I am ascribing to him here.
Yolton presents a similar case for Locke. His argument is straightforward.
Locke does not reify ideas, nor does he treat them as intermediate objects
of any sort. And so he must have rejected the substance/mode ontology
altogether.
We might then distinguish kinds of indirectness. One kind involves
another ontology, an ontology where ‘‘object in the mind’’ is taken
20. ‘‘The substance-accident ontology was applied to Locke’s empirical epistemology, an
ontology which Locke rejected as far as ideas were concerned’’ (Yolton 1996b, 95).

the traditional ontology
29
as ‘‘immaterial substance’’ (special things) and where ‘‘exists in’’
also has an ontic meaning. Another kind of indirectness rejects this
ontology, preferring to read ‘‘ideas’’ not as things but simply as
‘‘conscious mental contents,’’ and it translates ‘‘exist in’’ as ‘‘under-
stood.’’ On this second kind of indirectness, perceiving an object is
having or receiving ideas. On this point, Locke and Malebranche
agree. The difference is in the nature of ideas. For Malebranche, an
idea is God-given and thing-like. For Locke, ideas are the result of
a physical process and of a psychological process, but they are not
thing-like. (1984, 102)
Ideas for Locke are not things but ‘‘conscious mental contents.’’ The claim
that ideas ‘‘exist in’’ the mind does not have an ontic meaning but merely
an epistemological one. The contrast is clear. To speak of ideas as things is
to speak within an ontology. But when one asks whether ideas are entities,
one is asking if ontic categories apply to them at all. For the moment let’s
set aside the exegetical issues and focus on the philosophical merits of this
position. I engage and argue against this thesis on textual grounds in the
subsequent chapters on Locke, Berkeley, and Hume.
If ideas have no ontic status—if they are not ‘‘entities’’—then what alter-
native remains? A natural inclination might be to invoke the Cartesian for-
mal/objective distinction. Perhaps Yolton intends ideas to be modes yet
focuses on their objective aspect as representing content. But this is not his
claim. Instead, he radicalizes the distinction by shearing off the formal real-
ity altogether. Ideas are ‘‘conscious mental contents,’’ we are told. They are
representations, objects of awareness and ‘‘epistemological beings’’ only. I
confess I do not really know what an ‘‘epistemological being’’ is. Vere
Chappell tries to put a good face on Yolton’s point, arguing that all he means
is that ideas are necessarily dependent beings. Hence, despite the confusing
terminology, ideas are entities, just dependent mental ones best described as
‘‘intentional objects’’ (1994, 32–33). If so, then whether such intentional ob-
jects are mental substances or modes (or some kind of third substance)
remains to be determined. Yet it is difﬁcult to accept Chappell’s reading.
Yolton argues that after Descartes the moderns abandoned the ontological
model as a framework for their theories of ideas. The following is typical of
Yolton’s analysis: ‘‘For Descartes, this kind of existence in a mind had the
same meaning as it later did for Berkeley: the object is known by the mind.
This is what the objective reality of ideas is: at one and the same time,
representative of and also the reality of the object. . . . The ontological ﬂavor

30
idea and ontology
of Descartes’s talk of the being of objects existing in the mind is missing
from Berkeley’s formulation; only the cognitive translation remains’’ (1996a,
148). We have left ontology behind altogether. In essence, Yolton rejects as
meaningless the question ‘‘What is an idea?’’ He grounds the argument in a
careful exposition of the development of the ‘‘way of ideas’’ among the
moderns. The problem, as he sees it, is straightforward. The shift away from
ontology to ‘‘pure’’ epistemology is a result of the inability of the moderns
to reconcile two important principles. They held both that there is no cogni-
tion at a distance and that knowing requires presence to the mind. Yet as
long as presence to the mind was interpreted along the lines of a spatial
metaphor, no progress could be made in eliminating the conﬂict between
the two principles. It was simply not possible to explain representation and
cognition inside an ontological model of ideas. As a result the metaphor and
its ontological assumptions were jettisoned. Richard Watson sums up the
conclusions of this view nicely in an article on Malebranche:
Neither Malebranche nor Foucher saw that the modern way out
was to be an utter denial of the meaningfulness of the question
‘‘What is an idea?’’ taken as a demand to provide an ontological
model that explains how representation can and does take place,
and that the modern answer to how causal interaction takes place
was to be the rejection or at the very least the ignoring of the de-
mand for an ontological explanatory model . . . but instead . . .
a description—not an explanation on metaphysical or ontological
grounds, but a mere description of the course or sequence of events.
(1991, 31–32)
One might think that we have here an account of reifying that perhaps not
only makes sense but reveals an important truth about the development of
the concept of an idea. Those who reify ideas, in the most basic sense, accept
an ontological model. Those who do not, such as Locke and Berkeley (ac-
cording to these interpreters), deny the appropriateness of such a model,
favoring a ‘‘purely epistemological’’ approach.
I ﬁnd it odd that neither Watson nor Yolton consider an obvious alterna-
tive. If the traditional ontology is demonstrably inadequate, why not gener-
ate a new ontology? Perhaps the ground needs to revised, not abolished. The
logic seems to be that because this ontology fails to account for ideas and
representation, we must abandon ontology altogether as grounding our un-
derstanding of ideas and their roles. In questioning this logic, I am not

the traditional ontology
31
claiming there was no focus on the epistemological aspect of ideas but rather
that this focus did not come as result of rejecting the notion that ideas need
to have an ontological ground. The mere fact that some have argued that
Locke and Leibniz (among others) thought of ideas as tropes should give us
reason to pause.21 This point notwithstanding, I think that the anti-ontologi-
cal project suffers from serious conceptual difﬁculties.
There are philosophical reasons for rejecting the thesis that ideas are
‘‘purely’’ epistemological beings. The ﬁrst problem stems from another mis-
leading characterization of ideas. Perhaps one of the most ubiquitous de-
scriptions one ﬁnds of ideas is that they are the objects of perception. Locke
says so, as does Berkeley, Descartes, Malebranche, and others. Contempo-
rary commentators are particularly fond of latching on to this point due to
the close connection this particular deﬁnition has with issues in representa-
tion. This characterization of ideas initially accords with the anti-ontological
thesis, which proposes that ideas should be thought of as ‘‘objects of aware-
ness.’’ Saying that an idea is an object could mean several things, however,
depending on what one takes an object to be.22 The two main readings are:
(1) an object is a thing, and (2) an object is the referent of a particular act of
perception. (1) and (2) are not identical. The former collapses into straight-
forward reifying talk, and the latter invokes ideas as relata in perceptual
relations.
Object talk and thing talk run dangerously parallel, so one might reason-
ably substitute ‘‘thing’’ for ‘‘object’’ without any loss of meaning. This kind
of substitution usually happens in analyses of perception. Is there a distinc-
tion between act and object in perception? The analysis usually runs as fol-
lows. If not, then ideas (as the immediate objects of perception) are not
things but something else. If so, then ideas must be things that are in some
sense (this sense varies by commentator) distinct from perceiving minds.
Some therefore want to move from ‘‘an idea is an object’’ to ‘‘an idea is a
thing’’ on the basis of a philosopher endorsing an act/object distinction.23
As I have been arguing, this effort is all well and good but does not reveal
much about the nature of ideas. Even if one denies the act/object distinction
ideas might still be things. Only if endorsing the distinction compels one to
treat ideas as substances can we credit ourselves with progress. Yet, as often
21. Unfortunately, the best example of the argument for a trope reading has not been pub-
lished (Alston 1976).
22. Yolton also recognizes this point (1996a, 140).
23. See Winkler 1989, 4–6, 290–309. Winkler adduces other reasons for thinking that ideas
are ‘‘entities,’’ but the main move rests on dividing acts from their objects.

32
idea and ontology
as not, scholars do not want to make that leap.24 Those who do often ﬁnd
their analyses of perception falling into incoherence, but that is, after all,
exactly what one should expect when operating within an ontology that
cannot properly accommodate ideas.
Most often scholars want to endorse something like the anti-ontological
thesis and adopt (2), avoiding the ontological issues altogether. Ideas are
here characterized as ungrounded intentional objects. They are ‘‘inten-
tional’’ since the act of perception (or cognition) is ‘‘about’’ the object. It
was generally accepted among the moderns that all acts of cognition and
perception are intentional; every thought has an object, what the thought is
about. That object is an idea. In this light, Malebranche and Locke, they say,
mark a decisive break simply because they consider ideas only as epistemo-
logical entities, ignoring or resisting the ontological issues altogether.
A closely related move is to treat ideas as phenomenal individuals that
have phenomenal properties. To say that my idea has color and shape is
only to attribute phenomenal color and shape to the idea. Reifying an idea is
to attribute actual shape and color properties to ideas, which turns them
into robust entities. The alternative to reifying is then to treat ideas not as
things but in purely phenomenological terms. I want to be clear about this
point. I have no principled objection to phenomenological accounts that
provide an ontological ground for the phenomena; I am only resisting any
possible accounts that treat phenomena as purely ‘‘epistemological entities.’’
Whether one wants a phenomenological account or one that treats ideas as
intentional objects, the difﬁculties these views engender are considerable.
First, the notion of an ungrounded intentional or phenomenological ob-
ject, one without any ontological foundation, is mysterious. Consider an
appropriate parallel: dispositional properties. Dispositions in contemporary
discourse are thought of either as grounded or not. Ungrounded disposi-
tions are brute-fact regularities we discover in the world. Nothing else about
the world explains the tendency. Most often, however, we are inclined to
think of dispositional properties as grounded in other nondispositional
properties. What would we say about someone who argues that the color
red is an ungrounded dispositional property? Many now think of colors as
dispositional properties. Red just is the power of objects to cause certain
phenomenological states in appropriate perceivers. Even here, however, the
dispositional view is credible because it is grounded in the reﬂective proper-
24. Winkler, for instance, only maintains that Berkeleian ideas, as objects, are ‘‘weakly’’ dis-
tinct from minds. Hence, they are some form of mental ‘‘entity’’ but are not substances. I can
make no clear sense of what he takes the ontological status of ideas to be for Berkeley.

the traditional ontology
33
ties of the surfaces of objects. To say that seeing red just happens when we
see red things (under standard lighting conditions) provides a description
but no explanation. Similarly, solubility would be mighty mysterious were
it not for the fact that we ground the property in a chemical theory about
molecules and their interrelations. Where we think of ideas as dispositions,
we need to worry about whether and how such theories provide us the
opportunity to explain important features within the realm of ideas. I am
not arguing that dispositional theories of ideas are impossible; I am arguing
that such theories require special care to make them plausible. To abandon
an ontic grounding without good cause undermines the intellectual and sci-
entiﬁc enterprise of genuinely explaining the phenomena we encounter. To
attribute such a view to the moderns with their heightened sense of the
burdens of the new scientiﬁc enterprise is prima facie suspect.
Even if one could somehow accept the consequences of ungrounded in-
tentional objects, however, additional problems for the anti-ontologist re-
main. To hold that ideas are ‘‘purely’’ epistemological entities still portrays
ideas (as objects) as relata in perceptual or cognitive relations. Relations,
however, fall underneath the umbrella of ontological entities. Relata have to
be minimally ‘‘thingy’’ creatures, for they fall within the domain of that over
which we can quantify. In short, it does not make sense to say, of polyadic
relations or even monadic properties, that a relatum has no ontic status. To
endorse this odd view is to say that one cannot ask what is being related. To
complicate matters further, perceivers (minds) have a clear ontic status (at
least insofar as they are substances and things). Thus on the view that the
status of ideas is purely epistemological, perception and cognition involve
relations between that which has an ontic status (the mind) and that which
does not (ideas). I have no difﬁculty conceptualizing relations between dif-
ferent kinds of beings (say substances and modes), but I must confess igno-
rance about what it means to relate something that has an ontic status to a
‘‘being’’ that does not. To deny ideas an ontic status leads to incoherence.
Perhaps the early moderns simply ignored the ontological implications
of their theorizing. Even if this was their intent, the ontological questions
do not simply vanish. Convinced of Locke’s epistemological conclusions,
one does not then merrily go on one’s way, unmindful of the underlying
ontology his system requires. Although Locke does explicitly set aside meta-
physical questions in the Essay, he does not suggest that they ought to be
entirely ignored. A convinced Lockean would have to, at some point, tease
out and reconcile the ontological commitments with the epistemological
superstructure.

34
idea and ontology
Aside from the complications raised by the problem of relations, a third
philosophical difﬁculty emerges for the Watson/Yolton thesis. Insofar as
they want ideas to be ‘‘purely’’ epistemological entities, we ought to expect
that they can deliver results on certain important questions. In particular,
we should expect our opponent to be able to explain representation. Con-
sider an example. Assume that we want to know how a particular idea repre-
sents its particular content. Thus we want to know how an idea of a dog is
an idea of a dog and not something else. In order for this question to be
meaningful, we need to be able to conceptualize an idea separately from
what it is ‘‘of.’’ If ideas have no being other than as intentional or epistemo-
logical ‘‘entities,’’ then there is nothing of which we can ask what makes it an
idea of a dog.25 I am not saying that occasionally bracketing off ontological
questions cannot be fruitful. Ignoring them, however, courts disaster. Even
though Descartes, for instance, separates the formal from the objective as-
pects of ideas, there is no hint that he thinks ideas can exist objectively
(i.e., merely as representing content) in whatever sense without having some
formal (i.e., ontic, as a mode) existence. Even those moderns who embrace
the view that ideas are modes of the mind all recognize that an idea is some-
thing that represents, independently of what they think constitutes the
‘‘thingness’’ of the idea.
In short, there is no proﬁt in ignoring ontology. If ideas are intentional
objects or phenomenological, then we must assume they have some onto-
logical ground if there is to be any rational discourse or understanding about
them at all. And if not, then our efforts are idle. The exasperation many
have encountered when trying to untangle the ontology of ideas is under-
standable and probably unavoidable, but that does not license our ignoring
it. I thus reject attempts to deal with the present difﬁculties by trying to
sweep them away.
1.4 Stretching Idea Ontologies
Although the main thesis of this work is that the early moderns preserved a
common core of the traditional substance/modiﬁcation ontology, I also
admit that under various pressures the early moderns stretched the borders
of that ontology. In one sense my claim is obvious. A careful survey of the
25. The same holds true generally for images. Images must have some ontological status, else
we cannot analogously ask what makes it (the image) an image of something (this point is made
in Alston 1976, 2–3).

the traditional ontology
35
major philosophers of the period reveals that they understood the details of
the concept of substance differently from one another. I have addressed
some of those differences above. Yet for all of these differences, a central
adherence to a notion of substances as enduring, independent things re-
mains. If that claim is plausible, then what might it mean to say that the
traditional ontology was ‘‘stretched’’ by the likes of Berkeley?
I contend that pressures arising from the epistemological roles that ideas
play helped radicalize the metaphysics of ideas, especially for Berkeley.
While recognizing that ideas played epistemological roles such as represent-
ing content, forming belief and knowledge claims, and so on, Berkeley si-
multaneously recognized that these epistemological vehicles had to have
some ontological foundation. From an examination of the history of the
way of ideas starting with Descartes, however, we discover that ideas never
quite ﬁt either the category of substance or modiﬁcation. Depending on
what features one chooses to emphasize, ideas can look like both. Berkeley
was familiar with Cartesianism and the debates that exercised its adherents.
He was also familiar with the moves Locke made and the central role he
accorded to ideas when it came to human understanding. In light of this
history, Berkeley provides us with an ontological innovation. He crafts a
hybrid ontological category I call ‘‘quasi substance.’’ Ideas formally possess
one feature usually reserved for substances, namely a kind of separation
from other entities such that they are neither modes nor proper parts of
other substances. Yet they also possess the one feature most distinctive of
modes: they are ontologically dependent on these distinct substances. What
emerges is a theory of ideas that makes them volitionally independent of
ﬁnite minds, such that we have the appearance of an independent, external
world, yet also recognizes that the world is nonetheless ontologically depen-
dent on something else. Providing the background and then argument for
this account constitutes a large measure of my challenge to the early modern
tale. Blending the category of substance and mode is not a rejection of the
concepts of substance and modiﬁcation; it is a new application. How this
pointedly ontological account of the development of the way ideas in the
early modern period arises unfolds in the remainder of this book.
For any particular philosopher, the most appropriate question to ask with
regard to the status of ideas is the one with which we started. Are they
substances? If not, are they modes? And if neither, then what are they, and
in what relation do they stand to the traditional ontological categories? To
repeat for emphasis, I argue that despite superﬁcial indications to the con-
trary, the moderns did not abandon the core of the traditional ontology.

36
idea and ontology
They stretched it, they fought with it, but their thinking did not genuinely
extend beyond it. Early modern metaphysics became increasingly radicalized
as philosophers became aware of the problems of reconciling idea philoso-
phy with ontology. Yet a radicalization of metaphysics is not a rejection of
it. I argue here that, suitably understood, the substance/mode distinction is
not only conceptually meaningful but in fact preferable when it comes to
making ontological judgments, at least among and about the early moderns.
They understood the issues themselves through the core substance/mode
ontology. To stretch or even test the categories is not to deny the categories
themselves. Additionally, I argue that trying to avoid issues of ontology
when it comes to ideas invites incoherence. We have sober philosophical
reasons for thinking that the early moderns ought to have kept an eye on
ontic issues. What remains is to show that in fact they did.

2
descartes
Conventional wisdom, like the early modern tale, holds Rene´ Descartes re-
sponsible for effecting a revolutionary break from the Scholastic tradition,
particularly in the theory of ideas. Although he applied the term ‘‘idea’’ in a
new way and built an innovative mechanistic theory of perception that capi-
talizes on this new use, it is not at all obvious that Descartes advanced a new
and clear theory of the ontological status of ideas. We are, in the main, still
in familiar conceptual territory. He tells Hobbes in the Third Replies that ‘‘I
used the word ‘idea’ because it was the standard philosophical term used to
refer to the forms of perception belonging to the divine mind, even though
we recognize that God does not possess any corporeal imagination. And
besides, there was not any more appropriate term at my disposal’’ (CSM
I:127–28). Perhaps the main innovation accorded Descartes is that of shifting
the application of the word ‘‘idea’’ from the contents of the divine mind to
the human mind. It is worth noting that Descartes indicates he is using the
word not in spite of its traditional use but because of it. Nicholas Jolley
suggests that this is a clue that Descartes is ascribing some properties to the
human mind that were formerly reserved for God (1990, 12). This move
makes Descartes’ use of the word ‘‘idea’’ no less innovative but perhaps less
unexpected. His Jesuit education at Le Fle`che emphasized the Thomistic
tradition, but he was exposed to a variety of important Scholastic luminaries
including Ockham and Duns Scotus (Gaukroger 1995, esp. ch. 2). As a result,
although he was to push a new theory of perception and was the ﬁrst to
use the word ‘‘idea’’ in the modern sense, Descartes’ musings are in many
important respects Scholastic.
Descartes’ ofﬁcial ﬁnal view is that ideas are properly modes, but the
details of this position turn out to be rather complex. Descartes gives us
what many take to be the ofﬁcial deﬁnition of an idea in the Second Replies.

38
idea and ontology
‘‘I understand this term [idea] to mean the form of any given thought,
immediate perception of which makes me aware of the thought’’ (CSM
II:113). Importantly, however, he distinguishes between kinds (or rather as-
pects) of ideas, and it has frequently been remarked that these divisions are
crucial to understanding his general theory, since he often employs the dif-
ferent senses of idea without signaling that he is doing so (Chappell 1986,
177–78). Descartes appears to discuss not one but rather several distinctions
that apply among ideas. He distinguishes between taking ideas formally and
objectively, materially and formally, and ﬁnally materially and objectively
(CSM II:27–28, 162–63, 7). The ﬁrst is the main distinction, the second refers
to an additional distinction within the context of material and formal falsity,
and the last is simply a variant of the ﬁrst. Nonetheless, Descartes’ use of
terms makes his discussion in the Third Meditation occasionally difﬁcult to
unravel, as he fails to use the same language to describe the distinctions
being invoked (CSM II:27–28). To further complicate matters, he uses the
word ‘‘idea’’ to apply to corporeal images in his early works on perception.
Despite the varying usages, the underlying distinction is a familiar one. Ideas
taken materially (or often, formally) are modes of the mind, and this gener-
ally refers to the ontic status of ideas. Ideas taken objectively (or more rarely,
formally) indicates their representative content. In accordance with stan-
dard use, I shall refer to ideas taken materially as ideasm, and ideas taken
objectively as ideaso.
The material/objective distinction, because not a ‘‘real’’ distinction in the
Cartesian world, makes this bit of philosophy more difﬁcult to penetrate.
Descartes tells us that the material and objective aspects differ only by a
distinction of reason. Thus when talking about an idea (the form of a
thought) materially and objectively, there are not two entities. Rather there
is but one thing, about which we speak in two different ways. Descartes is
notoriously vague on this point (see, e.g., Chappell 1986, 193–94). As a rule,
he treats ideaso as the contents of ideasm. Most scholars are tempted to hold
that ideas, strictly speaking, are modes, but Descartes sometimes confusedly
speaks (as do the rest of us) of the content represented by those modes as
ideas.
2.1 Representation
Ideas are modes that express content, and when speaking of that representa-
tive content we speak of ideas objectively. Of course, this does not tell us

descartes
39
much about the nature of representation, only that it occurs and can be
conceptually separated from the ontic status of ideas. It is an odd but per-
haps understandable feature of seventeenth- and even eighteenth-century
philosophy that everyone talks about representation, but no one actually
tells us what it is. There is no shortage of examples of what it is not (Arnauld
tells us it is not like a painting nor is it like a reﬂection in a still pond), but
unsurprisingly such insights are rarely helpful. Many philosophers operated
with some sort of resemblance theory. An idea represents an object x if it
resembles x in some respect.1 Simon Foucher even argued that either ideas
represent by likeness or they do not represent at all (1995, 35). Resemblance
theories are, of course, puzzling for any adherent of a form of substance
dualism. There can be no resemblance between mind and matter, and this
tenet seems to kill a resemblance theory for any serious nonmonist.2 None
of the major Cartesian ﬁgures enthusiastically and unequivocally endorsed
a resemblance theory, and probably for just this reason. Descartes himself
can be difﬁcult to ﬁx on this point. On the one hand he seems to explicitly
deny that representation must be by resemblance. As he notes in the ﬁrst
chapter of The World, ‘‘For although everyone is commonly convinced that
the ideas we have in our mind are wholly similar to the objects from which
they proceed, nevertheless I cannot see any reason which assures us that this
is so. On the contrary, I note many observations which should make us
doubt it’’ (CSM I:81; compare CSM I:165). On the other hand, he certainly
seems to allow that representation frequently does involve resemblance, es-
pecially in those passages where he speaks of ideas as properly being images.3
How ought we to resolve this incongruity? When Descartes discusses resem-
blance, he usually does so only in the context of the veridicality of ideas
(i.e., their correspondence with reality). That is, he equates resembling with
veridicality, as in the following:
But there was something else which I used to assert, and which
through habitual belief I thought I perceived clearly, although I did
1. As Descartes notes, it is best if the idea does not resemble the object too much. If it did,
then we would not be able to distinguish the idea from its object. See CSM I:165.
2. Although this principle is clearly held by most early moderns, one wonders about such
similarities as number (we can count both physical objects and minds) and other abstract rela-
tions.
3. For example, in the Third Meditation he claims that ‘‘Some of my thoughts are as it were
the images of things, and it is only in these cases that the term ‘idea’ is strictly appropriate’’ (CSM
I:25). This kind of passage is not infrequent. See also CSM I:165 in the Optics, where he discusses
images in the brain clearly in terms of resemblance. Where ideas are images, resemblance is not
far away.

40
idea and ontology
not in fact do so. This was that there were things outside me which
were the sources of my ideas and which resembled them in all re-
spects.
But the chief question at this point concerns the ideas which I take
to be derived from things existing outside me: what is my reason
for thinking that they resemble these things? Nature has apparently
taught me to think this. (CSM II:25, 26)
So when he denies that representation requires resemblance, he more prop-
erly should be said to be addressing a point about veridicality. Seen in this
light, the best we can conclude is that Descartes has no clear theory of the
veridicality of ideas. We have ideas that do not in fact resemble their objects,
and assuming they do resemble them is often a source of error, but neither
of those claims in and of themselves constitutes strong evidence that Des-
cartes rejected representation by resemblance. We might conclude that he has
no considered view, but the issue is complicated, and the literature on the
topic is substantial.4 Nonetheless, I take it that Descartes, if pressed, would
recognize that representation by literal similarity cannot be the whole story.
If that supposition is right—because he saw the complications arising from
mind-body interaction—then at least his claims ﬁt more broadly with his
remarks on the veridicality of ideas. We thus have the following conjunction
of positions to which I wish to draw attention: Cartesians broadly tended to
emphasize the distinction between formal and objective reality (in ideas)
while maintaining that resemblance was not the entire picture in representa-
tion. One obvious element responsible for these views was the increasing
‘‘mentalization’’ of ideas (treating ideas as in the category of the mental, ei-
ther as mental substances or modes of the mind). The further separated ideas
become from the physical, the greater the strain on the epistemological (par-
ticularly representative) functions of ideas. As we shall see, Descartes is a
transitional ﬁgure here, ﬁnally recognizing the difﬁculties with physicalistic
conceptions of ideas, although whether he completely frees himself from a
mechanical understanding of perception (and hence ideas) is not at all clear.
Returning to the main issue, most early modern philosophers talk about
‘‘signs’’ when discussing representation. An idea can be a sign of an external
object in the way that a few letters strung together can be the sign of a
4. See Wilson 1994, 209–28, who thinks that Descartes has no considered view. For sophisti-
cated engagements of the issue, see Simmons 1999 and Hoffman 1996.

descartes
41
concept. Such a move is used to circumvent the objections to imagist theo-
ries of ideas. Ideas represent not by providing us with pictures of things but
by serving as signs of things more generally. Malebranche tells us that to
represent is to make present that which is absent (see Nadler 1992, 49). Signs
fulﬁll this role. The book on the table in the next room is not present to my
mind, but the idea I have of that book is.
This understanding of signs highlights an interesting feature of many
early modern philosophies of mind. Just as Descartes railed against action
at a distance in the material world, so too he and other philosophers rejected
the idea of perception (broadly construed) at a mental distance. Knowledge
cannot be had without something being immediately present, or joined, to
the mind. Malebranche argues that ‘‘my soul must be united in some man-
ner to whatever it perceives’’ (OC 6:212, also quoted in Nadler 1992, 67). As
we will see in the next chapter, Arnauld objected that this principle did not
entail local presence, as suggested by the principle’s spatial cousin, but he
nonetheless accepted the basic spirit of the claim. Mental representation
thus posed a particularly difﬁcult problem for the early moderns, including
Descartes. On the one hand, material nonmental objects were to be repre-
sented, but on the other, such representation had to include some sort of
intimate contact between the mind and the representans. It is small wonder
that such a perplexing problem began to generate increasingly unusual on-
tologies.
Ultimately most early moderns simply avoided the issue. Arnauld and
Pierre Nicole take a characteristic approach and say it best in the beginning
of the Logic, or; The Art of Thinking (known as the Port-Royal Logic): ‘‘The
word ‘idea’ is one of those that are so clear that they cannot be explained by
others, because none is more clear and simple’’ (Arnauld and Nicole 1996,
25). From this we may conclude that the representative power of ideas is
basic and not subject to further explanation. During the period immediately
following Descartes, the difﬁculties representation presents constitute the
focal point of the debate around the ontological status of ideas. For the
moment I am content to claim merely that difﬁculties in the representative
function of ideas were held to be closely connected to their ontological
status.
2.2 Perception, Ideas, and Images
Descartes’ works on perception sometimes seem a world away from the later
Principles and the Meditations, at least with respect to his understanding of

42
idea and ontology
ideas. We must ﬁrst understand the outlines of his theory of perception; only
then can we turn to examine the changes his conception of ideas underwent.
Descartes saw himself as opposing a long and venerable Aristotelian Scholas-
tic tradition. His principal move was to shift perception out of the mysteri-
ous spiritual realm of ‘‘ﬂying species’’ and into the more accessible and
newly ﬂowering mechanistic world. These deviations from Scholastic theo-
ries quickly became points accepted among the early moderns as obvious
truths. Descartes took ideas to be the immediate objects of perception and
argued that secondary qualities, such as color, are not external to the mind
(Wolf-Devine 1993, 1). Locke took over this position and Berkeley simply
assumes these points, proceeding from there.
Despite Descartes’ break with the Aristotelian conceptual apparatus,
much of his theory of perception is nonetheless reminiscent of Aristotle. Of
particular interest is that Descartes’ early thinking about ideas mirrors that
of Aristotle inasmuch as they are not deemed exclusively mental entities.
Descartes argues that the sense organs are the passive receptors of corporeal
images, using the same analogy of a wax impression Aristotle used in De
Anima. In Rule 12 in Rules for the Direction of the Mind, Descartes writes:
[S]ense perception, strictly speaking, is purely passive, even though
our application of the senses to objects involves action, viz. local
motion; sense-perception occurs in the same way in which wax
takes on an impression from a seal. It should not be thought that I
have a mere analogy in mind here: we must think of the external
shape of the sentient body as being really changed by the object in
exactly the same way as the shape of the surface of the wax is altered
by the seal. (CSM I:40; compare Aristotle 424a18–23)
Descartes makes good on his warning that he wants to take the example
literally. All forms of sensory perception reduce to touch—pushes and pulls.
Vision, for instance, involves the impression of shapes on the outer part of
the eye, audition involves a change in the shape of the eardrum, taste in-
volves physical changes on the tongue, and so forth (CSM I:40). We perceive
only through a mechanics of contact.5 The so-called secondary qualities like-
wise have shape and are extended. ‘‘Whatever you may suppose color to be,
you will not deny that it is extended and consequently has shape’’ (CSM
5. This is implicit throughout his works on perception, but he does explicitly endorse this
characterization as well. See, for example, CSM II:174, where he notes that ‘‘we have sensory
awareness of something only by contact.’’

descartes
43
I:41). No matter the modality, sensory perception involves the passive recep-
tion of change in the appropriate sense organ.
The passivity Descartes describes ought not to be thought of in terms of
an act/potency distinction. Rather he has the more mundane concept of
mechanical passivity in mind. The sense organs do not, strictly speaking,
act during perception. They are acted on. Likewise, Scholastic ‘‘forms’’ are
abandoned in favor of physical shape. Whereas Aristotle treats secondary
qualities as basic and robust entities, Descartes does not. Color perception
supervenes on the reception of the geometrical properties of objects. Quali-
ties are thus all fundamentally alike. That is, they are all ultimately geometri-
cal and reduce to shape, number, and motion.
Although Descartes abandons much of the Scholastic conceptual frame-
work, he retains the old contagion theory of causation (see Adams 1975,
73–75). He speaks of causes ‘‘giving’’ to their effects, as in the Third Medita-
tion: ‘‘For where, I ask, could the effect get its reality from, if not from the
cause? And how could the cause give it to the effect unless it possessed it?’’
(CSM II:28). Therefore instead of vision being caused by the transmission of
forms, we now have vision caused by the transmission of shape and motion.
Perception is accordingly more of a physical process (still not entirely so),
but the story remains fundamentally causal. External objects impress on
our sense organs. The images or impressions are conveyed to the corporeal
imagination and thence, somewhat mysteriously, to the incorporeal under-
standing. In his early works, especially the Rules, Descartes holds that mind
and body do interact. ‘‘The intellect can either be stimulated by the imagina-
tion or act upon it’’ (CSM I:43, Rule 12).6 It is this interaction between the
imagination and the understanding on which we must focus our attention.
Earlier I mentioned the deﬁnition usually taken to be Descartes’ ‘‘ofﬁcial’’
one for ideas (which appears much later chronologically). A few pages later
(still in the Second Replies), however, he provides another equally impor-
tant characterization. ‘‘But I make it quite clear in several places throughout
the book, and in this passage in particular, that I am taking the word ‘idea’
to refer to whatever is immediately perceived by the mind’’ (CSM II:127).
This version leaves open what might be immediately perceived by the mind.
In particular, if the corporeal imagination interacts directly with the under-
standing, why might we not suppose that things in the imagination are ideas
6. The imagination for Descartes is corporeal, as the rest of the paragraph (not reproduced)
conﬁrms. For additional evidence that the mind and body must causally interact, see CSM/K
III:149, letter to Mersenne, July 1640: ‘‘for it is certain that the soul must be joined to some part
of the body.’’

44
idea and ontology
as well? In fact, this is exactly what Descartes does. Throughout his early
works Descartes uses the term ‘‘idea’’ to refer to not merely images but
corporeal images as well. Some of the passages are explicit, others are merely
suggestive, but the overall picture is hard to miss. For example, he argues in
the Discourse on Method that
I also indicated what changes must occur in the brain in order to
cause waking, sleep and dreams; how light, sounds, smells, tastes,
heat and other qualities of external objects can imprint various
ideas on the brain through the mediation of the senses; and how
hunger, thirst, and the other internal passions can also send their
ideas there. And I explained which part of the brain must be taken
to be the ‘‘common’’ sense, where these ideas are received; the
memory, which preserves them; and the corporeal imagination
[phantasia], which can change them in various ways, form them
into new ideas. (CSM I:139)
Passages like this one indicate that Descartes uses the term ‘‘idea’’ rather
widely to include corporeal images (see CSM I:355, 370, 376, and CSM II:25).
In more careful moments, however, he clariﬁes this position. Not just any
image impressed on the brain will count as an idea. When he says ‘‘brain’’
in these cases, he means speciﬁcally that part of the brain responsible for
the transmission of images to the understanding: the infamous ‘‘gland H,’’
otherwise known as the pineal gland. Thus in the Treatise on Man, he states:
Now among these ﬁgures, it is not those imprinted on the external
sense organs, or on the internal surface of the brain, which should
be taken to be ideas—but only those which are traced in the spirits
on the surface of the gland H (where the seat of the imagination and
the ‘‘common’’ sense is located). That is to say, it is only the latter
ﬁgures which should be taken to be the forms or images which the
rational soul united to this machine will consider directly when it
imagines some object or perceives it by the senses. (CSM I:106, em-
phasis in the original)
Read carefully, all the passages normally taken to imply that corporeal im-
ages are ideas cohere with this sharper explanation. Not any corporeal image
will do but only those imprinted on that special organ responsible for the
speciﬁcs of mind-body interaction. Despite the unusual nature of gland H,

descartes
45
Descartes’ description of it nonetheless implies that the ideas imprinted on
it are corporeal. The gland has a surface and a physical location. Images
impressed on this gland must be corporeal.
What, then, are these images? One might argue that Descartes can extend
his theory of the nature of ideas to include images. Images thus would be
modes. In this case, they are states of the gland H, and the impressions on
the pineal gland are analogous to modes of mind. He wants to employ the
wax example literally, so strictly speaking there is nothing substantial pres-
ent other than the wax formed in a particular way. He later conﬁrms this
story in a 2 May 1644 letter to Mesland:
I regard the difference between the soul and its ideas as the same as
that between a piece of wax and the various shapes it can take. Just
as it is not an activity but a passivity in the wax to take various
shapes, so, it seems to me, it is a passivity in the soul to receive one
or other idea, and only its volitions are activities. It receives its ideas
partly from objects which come into contact with the senses, partly
from impressions in the brain, and partly from prior dispositions
in the soul and from movements of the will. Similarly, the wax
owes its shapes partly to the pressure of other bodies, partly to the
shapes or other qualities which it already possesses, such as heavi-
ness or softness, and partly also to its own movement, in so far as
it has in itself the power to continue moving when it has once been
set in motion. (CSM/K III:232–33)
One needs to be careful when considering Descartes’ letters to the Jesuit
Mesland, since political considerations might well have inﬂuenced his par-
ticular choice of words. The relevant point here, however, is appropriately
present elsewhere. The wax analogy is repeatedly used by Descartes in just
this form (see CSM I:40 and the Second Meditation). It would seem that
corporeal images, being so like ideas in the mind, are modes as well. Note
that Descartes here also indicates that the soul receives ideas from the brain,
a corporeal organ. So if the mind receives ideas, which are corporeal modes,
from the brain, what is it that the mind receives? The interaction is causal
and thus falls under his stricture that causation involves giving. Descartes
needs some account of how the physical image alters the mind. The best we
get is an unsatisfactory appeal to ‘‘animal spirits’’ in gland H.7 In this discus-
7. See CSM/K III:62, letter to Mersenne, 24 December 1640; CSM/K III:190, letter to Hyperas-
pistes, August 1641; and CSM I:100–104, Treatise on Man.

46
idea and ontology
sion the causal interaction appears entirely corporeal. The spirits are able to
literally move muscles as they are forced through substances, yet the mind,
despite its power to move bodies, is entirely incorporeal.
Now it is routine to say that Descartes’ early discussions of ideas as (cor-
poreal) images can be set aside since he later abandoned that particular
usage of the term ‘‘idea’’ (Chappell 1986, 179).8 Although corporeal images
still play an important role in perception, they are no longer strictly counted
as ideas. That is right to a certain degree, but it seems to ignore the problems
still facing Descartes in his theory of perception. He does not abandon the
more general claim that images are ideas.9 Rather he reinforces that view.
‘‘For by ‘idea,’’’ he notes in a July 1641 letter to Mersenne, ‘‘I do not just
mean the images depicted in the imagination; indeed, in so far as these
images are in the corporeal imagination, I do not use that term for them at
all. Instead, by the term ‘idea’ I mean in general everything which is in our
mind when we conceive something, no matter how we conceive it’’ (CSM/
K III:185). Ideas are not just images, suggesting that at least some ideas are
images. In the Third Meditation Descartes maintains the same view: ‘‘Some
of my thoughts are as it were the images of things, and it is only in these
cases that the term ‘idea’ is strictly appropriate—for example, when I think
of a man, or a chimera, or the sky, or an angel, or God. Other thoughts have
various additional forms: thus when I will, or am afraid, or afﬁrm, or deny,
there is always a particular thing which I take as the object of my thought,
but my thought includes something more than the likeness of that thing’’
(CSM II:25–26). The ‘‘as it were’’ qualiﬁer in this passage might give some
pause, but in general Descartes consistently denies that corporeal images are
ideas while simultaneously asserting that images, broadly conceived as men-
tal entities, are. As a result, although not all ideas are images, all mental
images appear to be ideas. But corporeal images, as nonmental entities, do
not qualify as ideas. Descartes’ strategy throughout the Replies is to deﬂect
criticism of his theory of ideas by arguing that his opponents wrongly take
him to think that corporeal images are ideas. Even after that denial, how-
ever, the relation between the mind and its objects remains a murky affair.
Ultimately his ﬁnal position is that although there is causal interaction
between the material world and the soul, sensory ideas in the mind are
nonetheless innate. This theory, which supplants his early one, also has sig-
niﬁcant problems; I explore these issues in the next section. I want to em-
8. See CSM II:113, 251.
9. See section 2.4.

descartes
47
phasize before moving on that Descartes never abandoned his basic theory
of the mechanics of perception. Even the mature Descartes held that corpo-
real images are impressed on gland H.
2.3 Innate Ideas, Dispositions, and Causes
Descartes lists yet another set of categories for ideas. He posits an additional
distinction among adventitious, innate, and invented (or ﬁctitious) ideas
(CSM II:26). Adventitious ideas are those caused or generated from without,
innate ideas are caused from within but not by the mind (they are ‘‘derived
from my own nature’’), and invented ideas are both internal and generated
by an act of the will. Confronting his earlier problems explaining how sen-
sory experience gives rise to understanding, Descartes deftly employs this
distinction to reason that all sensory ideas must be innate, deftly noting in
Comments on a Certain Broadsheet that
[n]othing reaches our mind from external objects through the
sense organs except certain corporeal motions, as our author him-
self [Henricus Regius] asserts in article nineteen, in accordance
with my own principles. But neither the motions themselves nor
the ﬁgures arising from them are conceived by us exactly as they
occur in the sense organs, as I have explained at length in my Op-
tics. Hence it follows that the very ideas of the motions themselves
and of the ﬁgures are innate in us. The ideas of pain, colors, sounds,
and the like must be all the more innate if, on the occasion of
certain corporeal motions, our mind is to be capable of represent-
ing them to itself, for there is no similarity between these ideas and
the corporeal motions. (CSM I:304)
Recall Descartes’ problem. If perceived qualities are all physical and geomet-
rical in nature and perception is basically causal, then how do we represent
them to ourselves in our immaterial minds? The inadequacy of the original
view was obvious to everyone. Accordingly Malebranche writes: ‘‘Since ideas
are spiritual, they cannot be produced from material images in the brain,
with which they are incommensurable’’ (LO, 223 [3.2.3]). Causation is by
contagion, so corporeal images cannot transfer anything to the understand-
ing. Thus Descartes concludes there can be no interaction and the ideas we
have of external objects must be innate. Ideas not only can not be caused by

48
idea and ontology
corporeal images but also generally do not resemble them either. Sensory
ideas are adventitious only in the sense that external objects provide the
occasion for the mind’s forming a particular idea.10
Although Descartes does not adopt the contagion theory of causation
exactly as the Scholastics endorsed it, the underlying principle is the same.
‘‘Now it is manifest by the natural light that there must be at least as much
reality in the efﬁcient and total cause as in the effect of that cause’’ (CSM
II:28, Third Meditation). His formulation suggests that it is not necessary
that the (numerically) same form be transferred in causation (as the Scholas-
tics would have it) but only that at least as much reality exist in the cause as
in the effect. Descartes nonetheless operates with a theory of causation that
requires ‘‘contact,’’ implying that whatever is transferred is of the same
order of being (e.g., both parties involved must be physical). In an August
1641 letter to Hyperaspistes, he invokes this principle and explains that he
cannot fathom an instance of causation without contact (CSM/K III:192–
93). We do not cognize or conceive the external material world by entertain-
ing extension, motion, and shape. Corporeal ideas have nothing else to
‘‘give’’ the understanding, and hence they cannot causally give rise directly
to ideas in the understanding.
Sensory ideas, then, are innate. Because they are innate, when they are
not occurrent, they exist within us only potentially. Hence every possible
sensory idea we might have exists within us already in some sense. As Des-
cartes argues in Comments on a Certain Broadsheet,
[I]t is surely obvious to everyone that, strictly speaking, sight in
itself presents nothing but pictures, and hearing nothing but utter-
ances and sounds. So everything over and above these utterances
and pictures which we think of as being signiﬁed by them is repre-
sented to us by means of ideas which come to us from no other
source than our own faculty of thinking. Consequently these ideas,
along with that faculty, are innate in us, i.e. they always exist within
us potentially, for to exist in some faculty is not to exist actually,
but merely potentially, since the term ‘‘faculty’’ denotes nothing
but a potentiality. (CSM I:305)
One consequence of this view is that we can have an (innate) idea of some-
thing without thinking of that something. It is tempting to read this as indi-
10. Thus we should read passages like those in the Sixth Meditation (e.g., CSM II:55) as being
somewhat elliptical. External objects are not strictly the cause of our ideas of them.

descartes
49
cating that ideas are simply dispositions, but given that faculties are clearly
dispositions for Descartes, ideas would then be dispositions of dispositions.
I ﬁnd no evidence that he endorsed that view, and it seems dubious. More
charitably, we have innate ideas in the sense that we have the corresponding
disposition, whether or not that disposition is activated. These can still
loosely be interpreted as modes, especially since he insists that the mind
need not have ideas that are strongly distinct from the mind’s faculty of
thinking (CSM I:303). Only now ideas are occurrent thoughts. When a dis-
position is activated, an idea is actualized as the object of thought.
A natural question arises. If all sensory ideas are innate, do external stim-
uli play any role in the formation of our ideas? Descartes is already commit-
ted to the claim that they play no direct causal role. His reply to this sort of
question is surprising. External stimuli, he tells us, are remote causes while
our mental faculties are the primary or proximate causes. Descartes, as we
have just seen, tells us that our faculty of thinking is the ‘‘source’’ of our
ideas. In his explanation leading up to this conclusion, he assures us that
only our mental dispositions are proximate causes (CSM I:305).11
The difﬁculty now is how to reconcile this account with Descartes’ al-
ready established commitment to a theory of causation as contagion. Con-
sider two ways of understanding dispositions. In the ﬁrst, dispositions
supervene on grounding nondispositional properties. We generally do not
think of dispositions as possessing causal powers; rather we think of the
underlying properties as possessing them (Ryle 1984, 118ff.). Thus salt is sol-
uble because it (and water) possesses certain nondispositional chemical
properties. We can account for dispositional properties on this view with
counterfactual conditionals. To say that some salt is soluble is to indicate
that were someone to place the salt in water, then a particular result would
obtain (it would dissolve). Descartes, however, has no theory of counterfac-
tual conditionals and appears to treat dispositions as ungrounded entities.
In that case, we may legitimately inquire what mental dispositions ‘‘have’’
to give to other mental states. For salt, one might appeal to its basic chemical
properties for an answer, but there is no correlate for ungrounded disposi-
tions. Perhaps we need a more charitable understanding of dispositions. A
second understanding denies that dispositions possess causal powers on the
grounds that dispositions are causal powers. That is, they are simply discov-
ered regularities in the world. For Descartes to claim that innate ideas are
dispositions is only to assert that if there is a particular stimulus of a certain
11. See Jolley 1990, 36–37.

50
idea and ontology
sort, then there will be a response of a certain kind. This view, however, also
runs afoul of his larger theory of causation, since he is antecedently commit-
ted to there being something that is transferred in an instance of causation.
He cannot, recall, imagine causation without some form of presence (‘‘there
can be nothing in an effect which was not previously present in the cause’’
[CSM/K III:192]). More generally, Descartes owes us a theory of mental-
mental causation that makes room for his theory of innate ideas.
Descartes does not discuss mental causation as much as one would like,
but it is at least clear that he retains his adherence to the principle that
causes must have at least as much reality as their effects. Hence, the cause of
an idea must have at least as much reality as the idea itself. When speaking
of ideasm this principle seems innocent enough. Any mode might reasonably
be supposed to have as much reality as another qua mode. But Descartes
does not discuss instances of causation between ideas. All of his examples
involve external causes of our (internal) ideas. Consider the following typi-
cal passage, from the Second Replies:
It follows from this that the objective reality of our ideas needs a
cause which contains this reality not merely objectively but for-
mally or eminently. It should be noted that this axiom is one which
we must necessarily accept, since on it depends our knowledge of
all things, whether they are perceivable through the senses or not.
How do we know, for example, that the sky exists? Because we see
it? But this ‘‘seeing’’ does not affect the mind except in so far as it
is an idea—I mean an idea which resides in the mind itself, not an
image depicted in the corporeal imagination. Now the only reason
why we can use this idea as a basis for the judgment that the sky
exists is that every idea must have a really existing cause of its objec-
tive reality; and in this case we judge that the cause is the sky itself.
And we make similar judgments in other cases. (CSM II:116–17)
For any ideao we represent to ourselves, there must be a really existing cause
of its content. The same must hold of ideas generated by other means, such
as via mental operations, but he provides no hint of a theory in this regard.
At this point Descartes simply has nothing else to offer. His theory of the
status of ideas evolves in response to criticism, but he never manages to
produce a view free from pressing and obvious difﬁculties. What matters for
our purposes is that he and his contemporaries were aware of the problems
driving his developing analysis.

descartes
51
2.4 The Complications of the Passions
Despite the ample textual evidence that Descartes shifted to a view where all
ideas are innate, an understandable move on his part given the philosophical
pressures that had been brought to bear on his thinking, one might object
to my analysis on the grounds that Descartes returns to his older position
of ideas as corporeal images in his late work The Passions of the Soul. The
Passions was published in late 1649, although there is evidence that initial
versions of the piece were written as early as 1646. The important Comments
on a Certain Broadsheet where Descartes lays out his occasionalist under-
standing of ideas was written in December 1647 and published in 1648.12
What makes the Passions troubling, at least initially, is that in it Descartes
straightforwardly defends a naive version of interactive dualism. The soul
receives some of its ideas externally through the famous pineal gland, sug-
gesting that Descartes might have been less than sincere in his claim that
sensory ideas are actually innate. ‘‘Apart from this gland,’’ he writes, ‘‘there
cannot be any other place in the whole body where the soul directly exercises
its functions’’ (CSM I:340). The mind and body interact through the me-
dium of animal spirits.
Let us therefore take it that the soul has its principal seat in the
small gland located in the middle of the brain. From there it radi-
ates through the rest of the body by means of the animal spirits,
the nerves, and even the blood, which can take on the impressions
of the spirits and carry them through the arteries to all the limbs.
. . . To this we may now add that the small gland which is the
principal seat of the soul is suspended within the cavities containing
these spirits, so that it can be moved by them in as many different
ways as there are perceptible differences in the objects. But it can
also be moved in various different ways by the soul, whose nature
is such that it receives as many different impressions—that is, it has
as many different perceptions as there occur different movements
in this gland. (CSM I:341)
Why would Descartes return to this account after having apparently aban-
doned it? The question is all the more pressing because nothing in the Pas-
sions provides even a hint of an answer to the problems raised and engaged
12. See the translators’ comments in CSM I:293, 325.

52
idea and ontology
in the Comments. The philosophical pressures that led Descartes to court
occasionalism are nowhere in evidence in the Passions. Two possible reasons
for his return to interactionism suggest themselves. First, it might be that
Descartes did indeed write the Passions before the Comments, in which his
more careful thinking manifests itself, and simply did not revise it. He says
in a 23 April 1649 letter to Clerselier that he has been ‘‘indolent in revising
it and adding the things you thought lacking’’ (CSM/K III:376). I ﬁnd this
explanation unsatisfying, however, since Descartes appears to have been
seeking to publish the work for some time.13 If he had been unhappy with
his claims in the work, it is unlikely that he would have been so enthused
about having the piece published.
More probably, Descartes simply had not resolved all of the difﬁculties
and tensions within his own philosophical system. I do not think that Des-
cartes believed that the two accounts were in conﬂict at all. He holds that
there are two kinds of objects when it comes to perception: one sensory
(corporeal images) and one mental (ideas). This division must be the case
since our sensory images do not always exactly resemble the ideas we form
in thinking. The prick of a pin does not resemble the idea of pain it puta-
tively causes. Furthermore there is still the familiar causal picture in place.
Corporeal motions cause the soul to have the (mental) ideas it does, but the
ideas in the soul are not the sensory items intromitted through the corporeal
imagination. As he notes in Comments on a Certain Broadsheet,
if we bear well in mind the scope of our senses and what it is exactly
that reaches our faculty of thinking by way of them, we must admit
that in no case are the ideas of things presented to us by the senses
just as we form them in our thinking. So much so that there is
nothing in our ideas which is not innate to the mind or the faculty
of thinking, with the sole exception of those circumstances which
relate to experience, such as the fact that we judge that this or that
idea which we now have immediately before our mind refers to a
certain thing situated outside us. We make such a judgement not
because these things transmit the ideas to our mind through the
sense organs, but because they transmit something which, at exactly
that moment, gives the mind occasion to form these ideas by means
13. In a letter to Freinshemius in June 1649, Descartes talks about publishing the Passions, but
he notes that he only did so after securing permission from Queen Christina, to whom the work
was presented privately. His willingness to have the work published as it was suggests that he had
not seriously changed his mind about the nature of ideas and mind-body interaction.

descartes
53
of the faculty innate to it. Nothing reaches our mind from external
objects through the sense organs except certain corporeal motions,
as our author himself asserts in article nineteen, in accordance with
my own principles. (CSM I:304)
We can perhaps forgive Descartes for using the phrase ‘‘ideas of things pre-
sented to us by the senses,’’ given that in the Second Replies he ardently
claims that strictly speaking nothing in the senses is an idea, but only an
image.14 But the picture is otherwise the same as in the Passions. In a sense,
the story is at once both interactionist and occasionalist. The senses cause
alteration in the soul through the pineal gland, but the change is not direct.
The corporeal motions that inﬂuence the gland H—and hence the soul—
provide an ‘‘occasion’’ (Descartes’ word) for the soul to activate its own
dispositions to have otherwise purely mental ideas, which presumably would
be modes of the mind.
This account has all of the defects of both theories and no special advan-
tages. The sort of causal connection present between the animal spirits and
any particular mental idea is still left mysterious. What explains the occa-
sional connections is equally unclear. Yet the view, despite its defects, is also
testament to the profundity of Descartes’ thinking. For although Descartes
is too deeply committed to the interactionist thesis to let go of it at this
point, he is at least vaguely cognizant of the problems it engenders and tries
to introduce a modiﬁed occasionalism to smooth out some of the kinks in
his system. It is small wonder that such diverse philosophers as Malebranche
and Arnauld would both claim to be genuine Cartesians.
Some have argued that it is vain to pursue a uniﬁed, coherent Cartesian
theory of the mind. Descartes worked diligently to fashion a new and radical
mechanical theory of the world and then simply dumped everything that
did not ﬁt into that model into the ‘‘dustbin’’ of the mind. In particular,
secondary qualities (proper sensibles) were relegated to the mind because
they could not be fully explained by his physical theory.15 I ﬁnd this under-
standing of Descartes unsatisfying but nonetheless largely correct. He tried
to integrate ideas and qualities into his new mechanistic philosophy but
ultimately failed. More importantly, in this failure he refused to squarely
confront the problems generated by making ideas purely mental entities. We
14. This thesis is supported, for example, by his claim concerning the distinction that sepa-
rates brutes from humans. Brutes have images in the senses; it is not until the mind regards the
images that they become ideas (CSM II:161; see also CSM II:97).
15. See Shoemaker 1990, 109–31, and Cook 1996, 17–33.

54
idea and ontology
have no theory of mental-mental causation and little more than hand wav-
ing about the interaction between mind and body.
We at least know the following: Descartes never ofﬁcially abandoned his
core commitment to ideas as modes. The problems generated by trying to
explain how external stimuli cause adventitious ideas led Descartes to sepa-
rate corporeal images from mental ideas and introduce an odd version of
occasionalism in which bodies do affect the soul despite the fact that the
soul’s ideas are nonetheless proximately caused only within the mind. The
unsatisfying nature of this theory and the unclarities within it provide a
fertile ground for debate and illustrate the fundamental incongruity between
idea philosophy and the traditional ontological categories. Descartes, as it
were, sets the stage for the drama concerning the debate over the ontology
of ideas. He is nonetheless ﬁrmly entrenched within the conﬁnes of sub-
stance and mode. He passed this metaphysical constraint on to his intellec-
tual audience, who would continue to wrestle with the nature of the ideas.

3
the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
Nicolas Malebranche, although he considered himself a devoted Cartesian,
was a potent critic of Descartes’ theory of ideas. In particular he denied that
ideas could be modes, claiming that Descartes was simply unclear about
their exact nature (OC 6:172, Re´ponse 24.)1 In this way, he hoped to enlist
Cartesians in his cause without endorsing a particular claim he was con-
vinced was in error. His hope was short-lived, however, as most Cartesians
either ignored Malebranche or else rejected his theory of ideas. Antoine Ar-
nauld, a renowned Port-Royalist, entered into a lengthy debate with Male-
branche not only about the nature of ideas but also about which view should
be properly attributed to Descartes. The starting point is the familiar early
modern one initiated by Descartes. Malebranche, for instance, characterizes
an idea as ‘‘the immediate object, or the object closest to mind, when it
perceives something, i.e. that which affects and modiﬁes the mind with the
perception it has of an object’’ (LO, 217 [3.2.1]). Arnauld does not quarrel
with this deﬁnition per se; he only questions whether the perception of ideas
requires a representation distinct from the mind (TF, 35).
Malebranche alleges that treating ideas as modes engenders skepticism
and confuses the psychological with the logical. Thinking of x is different
from the concept of x. The former is a mode of the mind, the latter is an
abstract entity. To conﬂate them, he argues, is a gross error. Both of these
larger concerns stem from his conviction that modes cannot properly fulﬁll
the representative role accorded them by Arnauld and other supporters of
that view. In other words, on Malebranche’s view, the functional roles ideas
are supposed to play in the new idea philosophy launched by Descartes
cannot be accomplished by modes but only by substance(s). Malebranche
1. See Nadler 1992, 38.

56
idea and ontology
therefore proposes instead a theory that divides Cartesian ideas into ideas
proper, which are substantival abstract objects (substance-like but not neces-
sarily substances per se) that represent the external world, and sensations
(sentiment), which are modes of the soul and cannot represent anything
external to it.
3.1 Malebranche’s Theory of Ideas
Malebranche accepts Descartes’ distinction between ideas taken materially
and those taken objectively. Malebranche, as I mentioned above, wants to
distinguish between (1) thinking of x and (2) the concept of x. The former
involves an activity and is a mode of thinking substance (mind) whereas
the latter is an abstract entity. To conﬂate the two is a signiﬁcant error in
Malebranche’s view, and he aims to demonstrate the mistake by arguing that
modes cannot genuinely represent things or events external to that which is
being modiﬁed. Hence modes cannot represent the external world. Ideas,
insofar as they are the objects of the mind representing an external reality,
must be independent of the mind.
Everything the soul perceives belongs to either one of two sorts:
either it is in the soul, or outside the soul. The things that are in
the soul are its own thoughts, i.e., all its various modiﬁcations—for
by the words thought, mode of thinking, or modiﬁcation of the soul,
I generally understand all those things that cannot be in the soul
without the soul being aware of them through the inner sensation
it has of itself—such as its sensations, imaginings, pure intellec-
tions, or simply conceptions, as well as its passions and natural
inclinations. . . . But as for things outside the soul, we can perceive
them only by means of ideas, given that these things cannot be
intimately joined to the soul. (LO, 218 [3.2.1])
Part of his conviction on this point stems from the Platonic/Augustinian
inﬂuences that dominated his intellectual development. Platonic concep-
tions emphasize the immutability and eternality of ideas. Such conceptions,
when coupled with Malebranche’s belief in the transparency of the soul (no
idea is present in the soul of which the soul is not aware), makes ideas
ontologically distinct from minds.
To start, Malebranche tells us that the mind gains knowledge of the world

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
57
in three ways: through pure understanding (or conception), imagination,
and sensation. Only the ﬁrst strictly involves ideas exclusively. Although
early on Malebranche brieﬂy held that ideas are particular entities, he
quickly corrected his position, arguing that they are all abstract and general.
‘‘[F]or the mind never sees clearly what is not universal’’ (LO, 5 [1.1.2]).
Knowledge of individual external objects requires that the perceived ideas
be ‘‘particularized’’ by sensations, which are modes of the soul. In sensory
perception, sensation is added to the idea to produce a particular perceptual
experience (see LO, 234 [3.2.6]). It should be emphasized, however, that for
Malebranche the pure perception of an idea is the perception of an external
entity. Sensations, such as color, tone, or temperature only individuate
ideas.
However, in order to satisfy partially the desire you have to know
how the mind can discover all kinds of ﬁgures and see the sensible
world in intelligible extension, note the three ways you perceive a
circle, for example. You conceive it, you imagine it, you sense or
see it. When you conceive it, intelligible extension is applied to
your mind with indeterminate limits in respect of size, but equally
distant from a determinate point, and all on a single plane; and
then you conceive a circle in general. When you imagine it, a deter-
minate part of this extension, the limits of which are equally distant
from a point, lightly touches your mind. And when you sense or
see it, a determinate part of this extension sensibly touches your
soul and modiﬁes it by the sensation of some color. (DMR, 17,
Dialogue I.10)
What Malebranche labels ‘‘imagination’’ is in no-man’s-land, not quite pure
intellection and not sensation, involving only the idea ‘‘touching’’ the mind.
Not much good use is made of imagination, and I largely ignore it in what
follows. Of most importance is the play between sensation and conception.
The state of the mind (its mode) particularizes the universal idea it per-
ceives.
It is tempting to argue that Malebranche holds an adverbial theory of
sensation (but not of ideas). When, for example, we perceive a particular
red line we are apprehending that bit of extension redly. He frequently treats
secondary qualities not as objects but as perceptions identical with the men-
tal act of perceiving. ‘‘When we have a vivid sensation of light attached or
related to an intelligible circle, distant through a certain intelligible space,

58
idea and ontology
and made sensible by different colors, we see the sun’’ (OC 6:65, Re´ponse 6,
also quoted in Nadler 1992, 64). The mind attaches color to the pure idea of
a circle in order to perceive it as an individual body. We have here a relation
between the mind and the idea-object in which the ﬁrst relatum is the mind
in a particular state. Thus to perceive the yellow sun is to perceive an idea
of the sun yellowly. Steven Nadler thinks ascribing this view to Malebranche
unnecessarily burdens him with ‘‘confusions,’’ since Malebranche suggests
that color sensations are ways of apprehending pure ideas (most often in
connection with the perception of extension) (Nadler 1992, 64–65). But if
ideas are abstract entities and not sense data, how could one sensibly per-
ceive ideas? I am unconvinced by Nadler’s worry here, since an alternative
explanation exists. Sensation is, in a sense, the touching of ideas to the mind.
Since the mind cannot perceive without being in a particular mode, then it
cannot perceive without sensing. The goal of pure thought is to separate out
sensation from the pure idea, although often that might not be possible.
Color sensations are ways of apprehending pure ideas only in the sense that
we have no perceptions without sensation. I grant that Malebranche is un-
clear in many of the passages, and perhaps Nadler is right to point out these
rough spots, but I do not think these worries are independently serious.
Malebranche uses the word ‘‘perception’’ multivocally to include both the
apprehension of ideas and at some points the apprehension of material bod-
ies (albeit indirectly). Both processes require mentation (since perception
for Malebranche always involves the intellect), but the objects of perception
can differ. Straightening out such worries as Nadler presents often leaves
small riddles like this one.
Whereas sensations are modes, ideas are explicitly described as entities
external to the mind. They can, for instance, exist independently of minds
(LO, 229 [3.2.5]).2 They are universal, abstract, and immutable. In his Dia-
logues on Metaphysics and Religion, Malebranche (represented by Theodore)
has his opponent Aristes sum up his conception of ideas near the end of the
ﬁrst dialogue.
aristes: I give in, Theodore. Ideas have more reality than I thought, and
their reality is immutable, necessary, eternal, common to all intellects
and in no way modiﬁcations of the being of the intellect which, be-
cause it is ﬁnite, cannot actually receive inﬁnite modiﬁcations. The
perception I have of intelligible extension belongs to me, it is a modi-
2. See McCracken 1983, 236–37.

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
59
ﬁcation of my mind. It is I who perceive this extension. But the exten-
sion I perceive is not a modiﬁcation of my mind. . . . But the extension
I see subsists without me. For you can think of it without my thinking
of it, you and everyone else. (16, Dialogue I.9)
Ideas are ‘‘third realm’’ entities (neither strictly mental nor material) and
the only proper vehicles to represent the external material world. As inde-
pendent and immutable entities, they can underlie change, making them
unambiguously rather like substances. I do need to be clear that when I say
that Malebranche’s ideas are like substances, I intend that they are ‘‘second-
rate’’ substances and not substances per se. As Descartes notes, technically
speaking only God is a substance, and Malebranche shares this conviction.
This caveat explains one passage in The Search After Truth where Malebran-
che appears to deny the substantiality of ideas. ‘‘But if it be said that an idea
is not a substance, I would agree—but it is still a spiritual thing, and as it is
impossible to make a square out of a mind, though a square is not a sub-
stance, so a spiritual idea cannot be formed from a material substance, even
though an idea is not a substance’’ (LO, 223 [3.2.3]). So Malebranche treats
ideas on the continuum of things as substance-like, as being close to genuine
substances in the sense that they are independent and simple, but does not
regard them as literally ﬁrst-rate substances. We should not be surprised,
therefore, to see him denying that ideas are strictly substances, even though
his considered view makes ideas strikingly similar to them. Additionally, in
this particular passage, Malebranche is primarily concerned with denying
that ideas are either material or strictly mental—the two traditional sub-
stance types. Ideas for him are decidedly third realm, and this no doubt also
contributes to his desire to argue against the notion that they are traditional
substances (mind or matter).
One might ask at this point where these ‘‘substantial’’ ideas reside and
how the mind relates to them in perception. Given that he essentially models
his conception of ideas on that of Augustine, it should be no surprise that
Malebranche locates all ideas in God.3 Malebranche also asks how ideas
could come to be present to our minds. He asserts that there are (only) ﬁve
possible explanations. He considers and rejects the ﬁrst four, leaving only
the ﬁnal possibility. In short, the only substances of which we have knowl-
edge are mind, body, and God. He argues that neither bodies nor ﬁnite
3. It is instructive to compare Malebranche with Augustine on this point. See LO, 613–14,
Elucidation 10, and Augustine 1993, 2:8.43–47.

60
idea and ontology
minds could produce ideas, and thus all we have left is God. He then dis-
misses the possibilities that God either continuously creates ideas or has
bestowed us with an innate repository of the same and so ﬁnally concludes
that the mind perceives ideas in a being different from itself. That being has
to be in close mental union with our minds and contain an inﬁnite store
of ideas, actual and possible. Since only an inﬁnite being can meet such
requirements, we must see our ideas ‘‘in’’ God, in the sense that we literally
see God.
To understand this ﬁfth way, we must remember what was just said
in the preceding chapter—that God must have within Himself the
ideas of all the beings He has created, and thus He sees all these
beings by considering the perfections He contains to which they are
related. We should know, furthermore, that through His presence
God is in close union with our minds, such that He might be said
to be the place of minds as space is, in a sense, the place of bodies.
Given these two things, the mind surely can see what in God repre-
sents created beings, since what in God represents created beings is
very spiritual, intelligible, and present to the mind. Thus, the mind
can see God’s works in Him. (LO, 230 [3.2.6])
Malebranche’s ‘‘Vision in God’’ thesis has been much ridiculed, but it is
nonetheless an ingenious theory. Ideas are actually ideal archetypes in God.
Since it is not my purpose to here to evaluate the entirety of his philosophy,
I leave this strange, exciting doctrine for others to analyze, but I would like
to make one observation. Note that for Malebranche ideas ‘‘in’’ God are not
modes of Him. Instead, they are God’s substantial essence. ‘‘But, you will
say, for these same reasons God would not be able to see His creatures in
Himself. This would be true if ideas of creatures were modiﬁcations of His
substance, but the Inﬁnite Being is incapable of modiﬁcations. God’s ideas
of creatures are, as Saint Thomas says, only His essence, insofar as it is
participable or imperfectly imitable’’ (LO, 625, Elucidation 10). This view is
intriguing, since it strikes me as initially plausible that ideas in God could
be modes of the divine substance. Malebranche denies this move, presum-
ably on the grounds he uses to attack ideas as modes generally, but he pro-
vides no explicit argument against this possibility when applied to God
(assuming that God not being able to directly see His creatures in Himself
is a consequence with which we can live). What matters for present purposes
is that ideas are robust, ontologically distinct entities; Malebranche is a con-

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
61
vinced substantivalist about ideas, even if perception generally requires both
ideas and sensation.
Granting, then, that perception involves both ideas and sensations, Male-
branche still needs to argue for his claim that ideas cannot be modes. After
all, it is possible that sensations are a species of ideas and hence that both
are modes of the mind. Here we need to be careful. Malebranche launches
an impressive array of attacks against treating ideas as modes, but not all of
them are used constructively to defend his claim that ideas must be sub-
stance-like. I will thus break down the voluminous amount of material into
two sections, one concerning what might be taken as his arguments for
treating ideas as (like) substances and a second that examines his negative
attacks on the Cartesian theory of ideas as modes.
3.2 Substantializing Ideas
Malebranche’s strategy for arguing that ideas must be substantial is best
thought of in two parts, even though he himself might not have conceived
his own argument in this way. He ﬁrst attempts to establish that material
objects cannot be directly perceived by the soul and then that all perception
is object directed (intentional). Since every thought must have an object
distinct from itself, and material objects cannot fulﬁll this required role,
ideas must ﬁt the bill.
Malebranche writes as if his ﬁrst point is obvious.
I think everyone agrees that we do not perceive objects external to
us by themselves. We see the sun, the stars, and an inﬁnity of ob-
jects external to us; and it is not likely that the soul should leave
the body to stroll about the heavens, as it were, in order to behold
all these objects. Thus, it does not see them by themselves, and our
mind’s immediate object when it sees the sun, for example, is not
the sun, but something that is intimately joined to our soul, and
this is what I call an idea. Thus, by the word idea I mean nothing
other than the immediate object, or the object closest to the mind,
when it perceives something, i.e. that which affects and modiﬁes
the mind with the perception it has of an object. (LO, 217 [3.2.1])
Since the soul does not ‘‘stroll out’’ to the stars, and they don’t seem to be
coming to us, there must be intermediate ideas that we directly perceive.

62
idea and ontology
Malebranche’s reasoning here relies heavily on the principle mentioned in
our discussion of Descartes (section 2.1) that cognition cannot occur ‘‘at
a distance.’’ What this argument does not do, however, is establish what
Malebranche acts as if it does, namely, that an idea must be that object
closest to the mind. Arnauld quarrels with the reasoning that leads Male-
branche to conclude that an idea must be an object, countering that Male-
branche is confusing a purely physical principle with a mental one. There
cannot be action at a distance; hence, in the physical world, causality re-
quires locality. But one cannot legitimately apply this analogously to the
mental, since by deﬁnition the material and mental share nothing in com-
mon. ‘‘But why then, I will be asked,’’ Arnauld writes,
does everyone go along with the thought that since the soul cannot
know distant objects, there must be something which makes them
present to it and that therefore ideas or species are necessary?
I have already given the explanation in Chapter IV. It is the com-
parison of bodily vision, itself poorly understood, with mental vi-
sion. The ambiguity of the word presence also played an important
role, as I have indicated. It is quite common that the same word is
applied to mind and to body, and is taken by most people in a very
coarse sense suitable for bodies even when it is applied to the mind.
Thus the word presence signiﬁes, with regard to bodies, a local pres-
ence, and with regard to minds, an objective presence, according to
which objects are said to be in our mind when they are there objec-
tively, i.e., when they are known by it, as in deﬁnition 4. (TF, 37)
Arnauld’s move attempts to ﬁll a gap left by Descartes, who had no clear
theory about mental causation. His point is well taken and Malebranche
replies by disowning the literalness of the example. His only intent, he
claims, was to demonstrate that the ‘‘presence’’ (in whatever sense) of some-
thing other than material objects is required for the perception of the exter-
nal world.
Malebranche does not make it clear exactly what he means by ‘‘pres-
ence.’’ Arnauld argues that if Malebranche does not mean physical locality,
then he must mean some sort of cognitive (he calls it ‘‘objective’’) presence.
Yet if it is the latter, then there does not seem to be any (stated) reason why
material objects cannot be present to the mind. Locke is equally puzzled by
Malebranche on this point, ﬁnally concluding in exasperation, ‘‘Explain this

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
63
manner of union, and show wherein the difference consists between the
union necessary and not necessary to perception, and then I shall confess
this difﬁculty removed’’ (EM, 416, also quoted in Nadler 1992, 74). We might
venture on Malebranche’s behalf to say that presence requires sameness of
ontological kind, which would be perfectly in keeping with Malebranche’s
deep Cartesian dualism. The reason that a physical object cannot be present
to the mind stems from the fact that the object and the mind are of distinct
ontological kinds. Unfortunately the drawback to this explanation of pres-
ence is that if material objects cannot be present to the mind, then neither
can ideas! Ideas, recall, are abstract ‘‘third realm’’ entities for Malebranche.
If ‘‘presence’’ means similarity of kind, then the mind cannot directly per-
ceive ideas either.
Steven Nadler has proposed another possible reading of ‘‘presence’’ for
Malebranche. Nadler argues that presence to the mind is causal in nature.
‘‘To be present to the mind is to be in a causal relationship with the mind;
thus only that which can act on the mind, which can ‘touch’ or modify it by
causing a perception in it, is visible or intelligible by itself’’ (1992, 76). There
is some textual evidence to support Nadler’s assertion. Malebranche does
occasionally indicate that material bodies cannot be present to the mind
because they cannot act on it (LO, 320 [4.11.3]). Bodies are devoid of causal
powers with respect to minds not only because their essence is only passive
extension but also because Malebranche adheres to a form of Descartes’
causal reality principle. A cause must have at least as much reality and power
in itself as is present in the effect. For minds, this means ‘‘nothing can act
immediately upon the mind unless it is superior to it [the mind]’’ (LO, 232
[4.11.3]).4 Souls, however, are more perfect and real than bodies, and hence
they cannot be affected by material objects but only by ‘‘God alone.’’ Male-
branche wants ideas to be ontologically distinct from the mind yet simulta-
neously insists that they have robust causal powers to affect the mind. ‘‘It is
certain that ideas are efﬁcacious, since they act upon the mind and enlighten
it’’ (LO, 232 [3.2.6]). Why should we not think that ‘‘third realm’’ ideas are
like material objects and thus consider that they cannot act outside of their
own ontological kind? Malebranche does not confront this issue squarely.
One possible explanation has been suggested by Nicholas Jolley (1996, 542).
Perhaps Malebranche is in the grips of the following argument:
4. Technically, of course, the Cartesian doctrine only requires equality or superiority, and not
simply superiority as mentioned here by Malebranche.

64
idea and ontology
(1) Ideas are literally in God.
(2) Everything in and about God is causally efﬁcacious.
(3) Therefore ideas are causally efﬁcacious.
The crux of the matter is the second premise. Malebranche does not explic-
itly argue that everything ‘‘in’’ God must be causally efﬁcacious. Yet he was
steeped in the medieval theological tradition that conceived of God as pure
activity, which suggests that he would have accepted the notion that what-
ever is ‘‘in’’ God must also be active and hence causally active as well. None-
theless it is difﬁcult to see on independent philosophical grounds why
everything in God would have to be causally potent. At some point one
might muster in his defense that, confound it all, ideas just do affect minds.
Such a response would be thoroughly Cartesian. Instead of mind/body in-
teraction problems, Malebranche has mind/idea interaction problems.
Let us assume, for the moment, that Malebranche successfully defends
his claim that material objects cannot be directly perceived by the mind.
Ideas are deﬁned by him as the immediate objects perceived by the mind,
so what remains is for him to establish that only ideas construed as abstract
entities can be present to the mind in the appropriate manner to allow for
the perception/representation of the external world. Malebranche seems to
recognize that the ﬁrst part of his argumentation does not quite accomplish
his goal; he claims in his ‘‘Response’’ to Arnauld that Arnauld simply did
not read carefully enough (OC 6:96, also quoted in Nadler 1992, 78–79).
In short, Malebranche contends that every mental act requires an object.
To be more precise, every perception is necessarily object-directed. One can-
not have a thought without it being a thought of something. Note, however,
that for Malebranche this discussion excludes sensation, since he believes
that sense perception does not have an object distinct from the object pro-
vided by the pure understanding. Recall that the senses ‘‘particularize’’ the
abstract objects of the intellect, so strictly speaking sensation has no object
of its own. Malebranche thinks his basic point is indisputable: to perceive
nothing is not to perceive at all.
It should be carefully noted that for the mind to perceive an object,
it is absolutely necessary for the idea of that object to be actually
present to it—and about this there can be no doubt; but there need
not be any external thing like that idea. . . . When, for example, a
man imagines a golden mountain, it is absolutely necessary that the
idea of this mountain really be present to his mind. When a mad-

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
65
man or someone asleep or in a high fever sees some animal before
his eyes, it is certain that what he sees is not nothing, and that
therefore the idea of this animal really does exist, though the golden
mountain and the animal have never existed. (LO, 217 [3.2.1])
Arnauld, interestingly enough, agrees with Malebranche’s underlying point
here. ‘‘Therefore,’’ he writes, ‘‘since it is clear that I think, it is also clear that
I think of something, because thought is essentially thus. So, since there can
be no thought or knowledge without an object known, I can no more ask
what is that reason why I think of something, than why I think, since it is
impossible to think without thinking of something’’ (TF, 6). They differ,
however, on what it means to be the object of a thought. Whereas Malebran-
che takes perception and intentionality to be a two-place relation, Arnauld
insists that perceiving is a nonrelational property of the mental act.
Using what he regards as the uncontested premise that all perception
takes an object, Malebranche makes his case for substantializing ideas. Every
mental act has an object. Some mental acts, however, have no corresponding
external material object, as in the case of illusions or hallucinations. Yet even
here it cannot be the case that nothing is perceived, and since by hypothesis
no material object is present, it must be the case that some nonmaterial
entity is present to the mind fulﬁlling the role of the direct object. Malebran-
che advances this argument in several places, sometimes with minor differ-
ences, but this rough outline is sufﬁcient for our purposes here.5
The argument is generally unsatisfying, since Malebranche seems to be
assuming that intentional perception is relational in order to prove that
ideas must be substantial. As mentioned in the ﬁrst chapter, often part of
what it means to substantialize ideas is to hold that perception is inherently
relational. As a consequence, Malebranche’s argument appears circular.
And, unsurprisingly, his inference is valid. If all mentation requires an object
and the intentional nature of mentation is inherently relational, then the
ideas that serve as the objects of thought must be entities distinct from the
mind. Yet we have two problems to ﬂesh out here. The ﬁrst is that merely
discovering that ideas must be distinct from the mind does not entitle Male-
branche to conclude that they must be ontologically distinct. And, certainly,
one might think he cannot conclude this at all. After all, ideas are causally
efﬁcacious on minds. Second, he has not given us a good reason to suppose
that the intentional nature of mentation is relational.
5. For a full discussion, see Nadler 1992, 81–90.

66
idea and ontology
Malebranche indicates how the second problem can be overcome. He
provides a number of arguments against the possibility of ideas being modes
and concludes that if they are not modes, perception must be relational. I
examine those arguments in the next section. Arnauld, of course, ﬁghts him
tooth and nail on that point. More interesting, however, is Malebranche’s
apparent blindness to the issue of ontological kinds. I submit that he was
profoundly unclear about the exact nature of ideas as a distinct ontological
kind. Evidence of his unclarity is abundant. He argues that ideas can affect
minds—ideas are ‘‘present’’ to them. Yet minds are particular beings
whereas ideas are abstract and universal. Thus when I say that one might
deny that he could conclude ideas are ontologically distinct from minds, I
am suggesting that he might not have thought they were distinct. That is
because he was unaware of the importance of this issue. To Malebranche,
ideas are essentially, if confusedly, mental entities. He does not say so, but
he acts as if they are, and therein lies the problem. Given what Malebranche
says about ideas alone, they must be ‘‘third realm’’ entities. Given what he
says about their relations to minds, they cannot be. Acting as if ideas are
mental entitities causes him and his system problems, and it also points to
a fundamental obscurity about the nature of ideas that the early moderns
would have difﬁculty shaking. As we shall see, the nature of the metaphysical
relation between minds and ideas causes Berkeley considerable distress, and
I suspect what worries he does display come partially from Malebranche.
3.3 Attacking Modes
Although Malebranche does not provide us with any independent argu-
ments as to why intentionality must be relational (aside from appeals to
commonsense descriptions of mental activities), he does generate a number
of often insightful criticisms of ideas as modes. His target is usually Des-
cartes, whom he thought (despite his general genius) did not reﬂect carefully
enough on the status of ideas and hence fell into error. Arnauld is quick to
defend not only modes but also the claim that Descartes genuinely did in-
tend to advance a theory of ideas that treats them exclusively as modes.
On an initial read of his critique of Descartes, we encounter a ﬂurry of
problems raised by Malebranche. He thinks it reasonable to ask, ‘‘How
many ideas have I had in the past hour?’’ but there is no easy answer forth-
coming from Descartes’ theory. Malebranche does not restrict himself sim-
ply to posing difﬁcult questions. He advances both metaphysical and

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
67
epistemological concerns that militate against ideas being modes. He pro-
vides a number of arguments, many of them minor variations of others, and
I want to consider only the most potent of them.6 The ﬁrst I call the ‘‘dis-
tinctness argument,’’ which he lays out in Elucidation 10, Second Reply:
To be sure, we can assert what we clearly conceive. Now, we clearly
conceive that the extension we see is something distinct from our-
selves. We can say, then, that this extension is not a modiﬁcation
of our being, and that it is indeed something distinct from our-
selves. For it should be noted that the sun that we see, for example,
is not the one we look at. The sun, and everything else in the mate-
rial world, is not visible by itself. This I have proved elsewhere. The
soul can see only the sun to which it is immediately joined, only
that sun that like it occupies no place. Now, we see clearly and
perceive distinctly that this sun is something distinct from us. Thus,
we speak contrary to our light and consciousness when we say that
the soul sees in its own modiﬁcations all the objects it perceives.
(LO, 625)
Assuming the truth of his claim that the material world is not directly per-
ceived, Malebranche reasons that since the modes of the soul are perceived
as part of the soul (since they in fact are), it is not possible for it to represent
anything as distinct and external to itself. Yet we do think of things, such as
extended objects, as external to and distinct from ourselves; thus our knowl-
edge of that externality must not stem from the modes of the soul. The
argument is based on Descartes’ distinction between modes and substances.
A mode is that which cannot be conceived apart from its substance (CSM
I:298, Comments on a Certain Broadsheet). Hence, if our idea of an extended
square ﬁgure is a mode, there must be some part of representing that ﬁgure
to ourselves that involves the mind or that at least does not depend solely
on the body. Yet we do represent ﬁgures to ourselves as entirely nonmental
entities. For a body to possess squareness, the body must be square. Like-
wise, for a person to be in pain her or his mind must be in a painful state.
So, in order for an idea to be a mode, it must be possible that the soul is
square and extended (or is in a square, extended state) when it represents a
square ﬁgure to itself. Yet this is absurd, for it ascribes physical properties to
a nonmaterial thing.
6. For a more complete exploration of Malebranche’s arguments against modes, see Rome
1963, esp. ch. 2.

68
idea and ontology
One might try Descartes’ suggestion that ideas are modes contained ‘‘em-
inently’’ within the mind (CSM II:30–31, Third Meditation). God, after all,
contains all the ideas of the world and yet is not material, so why might we
not think that the soul can be square without being extended? This option
suggests that ideas are in the soul in a manner somehow superior to the
content represented. Malebranche considers this reply in Elucidation 10 and
rejects it (LO, 624–25). God is an inﬁnite being; the minds of persons are
ﬁnite. He does not think it possible for ﬁnite minds to contain all the prop-
erties of every possible physical object that might be represented to it.
Hence, external physical objects must be represented to the mind in another
way. He further strengthens this reply by appealing to another argument he
uses elsewhere against modes, namely, that if ideas were modes, we could
not have ideas of the inﬁnite.
Malebranche argues that, unlike God’s mind, the human mind is ﬁnite
and therefore cannot contain within itself an inﬁnite number of essences.
Yet, he protests, we do have an idea of the inﬁnite. We can clearly conceive
of an inﬁnite number series and ﬁgures in geometry that invoke similar
concepts. If ideas were modes, however, then the mind would have to be in
an inﬁnite state or perhaps represent to itself an inﬁnite number of mental
states at once. But this is impossible.
Therefore, since the human mind can know all beings, including
inﬁnite beings, and since it does not contain them, we have a sure
proof that it does not see their essence in itself. For the mind not
only sees things one after another in temporal succession, but it
also perceives the inﬁnite, though it does not comprehend it, as we
have said in the preceding chapter. Consequently, being neither
actually inﬁnite nor capable of inﬁnite modiﬁcations simultane-
ously, it is absolutely impossible for the mind to see in itself what
is not there. It does not see the essence of things, therefore, by
considering its own perfections or by modifying itself in different
ways. (LO, 229 [3.2.5])
Every state of a ﬁnite mind is not only ﬁnite but particular. Thus every time
we perceive an idea representing the inﬁnite, we have demonstrated that
ideas are not modes. Now, since the mind cannot be inﬁnitely modiﬁed, it
cannot contain within itself eminently all the possible modiﬁcations that
would be required to represent the external world.

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
69
Perhaps more important to Malebranche, however, are the dire episte-
mological consequences of treating ideas as modes. Modes lead to skepti-
cism for a variety of reasons. First, if ideas are merely modes, then he thinks
that the truths of geometry become true simply because we think them so.
The interior angles of a triangle total 180 degrees. I have a series of ideas
from which I deduce this truth. But since those ideas are nothing more than
states of my mind, the veracity of the claim reduces to an assertion that it is
so. Necessary truths, he complains, are not like this at all. Unless we have
access to an external, immutable reality, we have no, and can have no, guar-
antee that what we think about the external world is true. In short, modes
grant no security that things outside us correspond to our ideas (LO, 320
[4.11.3]).
Most of this charge rests on Malebranche’s (Platonic) belief that ideas are
immutable. The idea of a triangle does not change, nor could it. Since modes
are merely transient states of mind, we have no guarantee that our ideas
remain stable over time, especially since they now are ﬂeeting, particular,
and contingent beings. To make matters even worse, had no human mind
ever thought of a triangle and its interior angles, then that necessary truth
would never be! Now we might add Malebranche’s claim that ideas are not
only immutable but also universal. Modes are particular states of minds. As
a result, there is no guarantee that when two persons think of a triangle that
they are thinking of the same thing. In short, the natural consequence of
treating ideas as modes is a pernicious form of skepticism. Yet we do know
we have the same idea, he protests, and we do reason and act on the basis of
that knowledge. We therefore have ample metaphysical and epistemological
reasons for rejecting the claim that ideas are modes.
Whether or not Malebranche is right, his insistence that ideas are not
modes coupled with his equally stringent insistence that ideas are joined
intimately with the mind leaves us with a considerable difﬁculty. Ideas are
not modes and they are not mental entities, but he describes them and
their behavior as if they were decidedly mental. What then are we to con-
clude? His descriptions of them make them substantial, but they often do
not behave like substances, and they cannot be modiﬁcations of substance.
Within a Cartesian framework Malebranche has no other choices. As a
result, I think he simply did not confront the question. And so we are left
with the unpalatable task of having to carry this increasingly unclear notion
of an idea into additional philosophical accounts that rely ever more heav-
ily on it.

70
idea and ontology
3.4 A New Ontology?
Left with the manifestly unclear doctrine of ideas, one might be tempted to
conclude that Malebranche abandoned the substance/mode ontology alto-
gether. Such a move would not have been surprising or even perhaps ill
advised. Malebranche, however, did not make it. He, as with the rest of the
early moderns, was ﬁrmly in the grip of the core of the old ontology. Some
scholars, however, credit Malebranche with novel moves when it comes to
ideas. Richard Watson, for instance, argues, ‘‘Malebranche’s radical innova-
tion is in his treatment of ideas. Concerning ideas he breaks not only with
the Cartesian but also with the Scholastic ontological tradition’’ (1987, 109).7
Ultimately Watson argues that Malebranchian ideas are neither modes nor
substances. Here I want to be clear. I agree with Watson that there are im-
portant philosophical pressures guiding Malebranche’s reasoning about the
nature of ideas. I further agree that these tensions push him toward stretch-
ing the traditional substance/mode ontology. Ideas are ‘‘third realm’’ entities
and like substances are neither material nor mental. Thus Malebranche did
abandon traditional substance dualism. That said, abandoning Cartesian
dualism does not imply the abandonment of the traditional ontology in any
important way. All Malebranche has done is to reintroduce the possibility of
a third kind of substance, a move made by others before him and arguably
even by philosophers within the Scholastic tradition. Watson’s analysis of
Malebranche’s innovation does not extend beyond the (re)introduction of
this third kind of substance. ‘‘Malebranche must deny that the traditional
ontological categories are complete. Ideas appear to be some kind of third
representative entity that allows the mind to know material objects’’ (111).
Interestingly, however, instead of concluding as I have in the analysis
above that ideas are substances of a new kind, Watson infers that ideas must
be a new kind of ontological entity altogether. ‘‘[Malebranche] recognizes
that his external—third entity—ideas have no place in the Cartesian onto-
logical framework, but rather than alter that framework he tries to add to it
by calling on God to be the place of representative entities that have no place
in a substantial God nor in an ontological structure that is still basically that
of substances and their modiﬁcations’’ (112). His is an odd conclusion.
While simultaneously conceding that Malebranche operated entirely within
the Cartesian framework, Watson denies that ideas have any place within it.
7. See Lennon 1993, esp. 257. Lennon stops short of endorsing Watson’s position but notes
the unusual moves being made by Malebranche.

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
71
Unsurprisingly, he ﬁnds more confusion and disarray in Malebranche than
one might expect. ‘‘Malebranche is certainly trying to solve the problem of
how we know external objects by way of ideas, by breaking out of the onto-
logical pattern of substance and modiﬁcation. But he succeeds (at least
within the Cartesian framework he accepts) only in making it as difﬁcult to
understand how a mind can know external ideas as it is for the orthodox
Cartesians to explain how a mind can know external material objects’’ (113).
Watson ultimately attempts to explain the paradox of Malebranche’s em-
bracing the abandonment of the traditional ontology by invoking God.
‘‘Further, having broken with the Cartesian ontological framework, he offers
no explanation of what might be a new ontological structure. Instead, he
does as the orthodox Cartesians do: He appeals again to the mysterious ways
of God’’ (114). I am sympathetic to Watson’s contention that Malebranche
is being pushed to test the bounds of the traditional ontology but insist that
struggling with problems within an ontology is not evidence that one has
abandoned it.
The evidence Watson brings to light for his reading of Malebranche is
good but not compelling. Watson’s reasoning runs roughly as follows (114–
15). Malebranche retained several key Cartesian tenets, most notably the
likeness principle and the belief that presence to the mind was necessary for
understanding. Yet he denied that ideas could be modes of the mind, and
this forced him to abandon the traditional categories of substance and
mode. Implicitly Watson assumes that the only relations of idea-mind ac-
quaintance available are those of mode to substance. Since direct acquain-
tance is required for knowledge, yet ideas cannot be modiﬁcations of mind,
Malebranche must have discarded the substance/mode ontology and in-
vented a new ontological category for ideas. This new category, with the
assistance of God, allows for direct contact with the mind without the rela-
tion being one of mode to substance. As Watson rightly notes, Malebranche
has no explanation of what this new ontological structure might be and so
invokes God to cover over the cracks. But nothing in Watson’s analysis pre-
vents us from supposing that Malebranche took ideas to be substances of a
new kind. Nothing in Malebranche precludes the possibility of substance-
substance relations. Granted, mind and body cannot interact, but he has no
(persuasive) story of how ideas and minds interact either. We have ample
evidence that Malebranche, in effect, treats ideas as substances. They are
thing-like, simple, and ontologically independent. Watson may suppose, and
perhaps rightly, that Malebranche needed a completely new ontological cat-
egory, but as a matter of historical interpretation, Malebranche already had

72
idea and ontology
a category at hand that he thought could serve his purposes. Given that
Watson graciously admits that Malebranche was ﬁrmly in the grips of the
Cartesian framework, including its ontology, I do not see how his supposi-
tion that Malebranche was trying out a new category is likely. Instead of
concluding that Malebranche reached for this new ontology, we can simply
conclude that he applied his powerful mind to mixed effect within the tradi-
tion in which he was so deeply entrenched. To say so does nothing to mini-
mize his accomplishments. Malebranche was driven to explore the limits of
the substance/mode ontology because of his theorizing about ideas. That his
results pushed and pulled at that ontology are just as sure signs of his intel-
lect as any claim that he abandoned it for a nebulous new ontology that not
even he could describe.
3.5 Arnauld’s Theory of Ideas
Although a few scholars today have seen ﬁt to place Malebranche outside
the traditional ontology, his contemporaries did not. Arnauld in particular
was a potent critic of Malebranche who nonetheless accepted without appar-
ent worry that they shared a common ontology. As such, some scholars have
thought that the dispute between Arnauld and Malebranche concerned only
representation. Arnauld is depicted as a direct realist and Malebranche as an
indirect one.8 This characterization, however, is oversimpliﬁed and mislead-
ing. As has been implicit in my arguments thus far, the two are primarily
disputing the ontological status of ideas and not whether some form of rep-
resentationalism is true. Arnauld grants that ideas represent material objects
and in fact must do so. Malebranche characterizes their dispute as follows:
‘‘What is the issue at hand? Mr. Arnauld insists that the modalities of the
soul are essentially representative of objects distinct from the soul; and I
maintain that these modalities are nothing but sensations, which do not
represent to the soul anything different from itself’’ (OC 6:50, also quoted
in Nadler 1992, 184). I argue that we ought to take Malebranche at his word:
the issue is whether representative ideas are modiﬁcations of the mind or
external to it (see OC 9:902). This particular dispute is not of pressing con-
cern here; even if the primary issue does revolve around direct versus indi-
rect perception, the problem of the status of ideas nonetheless underlies that
dispute. I read Arnauld as though the ontological question is primary in his
8. See Lovejoy 1923, 449–61, and Cook 1974, esp. 54.

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
73
thinking, mindful of the fact that others might disagree.9 Such concerns will
not affect my analysis.
Why, then, assuming that both agree that ideas need to represent, does
Arnauld so strongly deny that ideas are mind-independent external entities?
At the heart of his objections lies his belief that such a view in fact cuts us
off from the material world altogether.
He [Malebranche] assumed at the outset that our mind perceives
material things. He was troubled only about how, whether through
ideas or without ideas, taking the word ‘‘idea’’ to stand for represen-
tative beings, distinct from perceptions. After he has philosophized
a great deal about the nature of those representative beings, after he
has trotted them everywhere and succeeded in locating them only
in God, all the fruit he gathers from them is no longer to explain
to us how we see material things, which is the only thing he sought,
but rather that our mind is incapable of perceiving them, and that
we live in a continual illusion, thinking that we see the material
things that God has created when we look at them, i.e., when we
turn our eyes toward them, and nevertheless seeing, in their place,
only the intelligible bodies which resemble them. Is anything more
needed to destroy all credence in what the author of The Nature of
Ideas says, whatever air of superiority he gives it? (TF, 51)
The point, Arnauld argues, was to explain how we perceive the material
world. To conclude that we don’t perceive the world reveals an (alleged)
absurdity somewhere in the reasoning. Malebranche’s chief error was to
introduce the unnecessary complication of intermediate, external represen-
tative entities.
Contrary to some early twentieth-century readings of him, Arnauld does
not treat ideas as objects in any serious sense.10 Ideas are straightforwardly
acts of perception. Part of the difﬁculty in interpreting Arnauld stems from
the fact that Malebranche himself does not quite seem to understand Ar-
nauld’s position either. He appears to take Arnauld as arguing that ideas are
objects but ones that are merely internal to the mind. According to his
reading of Arnauld, the mind perceives only itself, which is suggestive of the
fact that he never abandoned the opinion that ideas must be some form of
9. Many in fact support my view here. See Church 1970, 155, and Nadler 1992, 183–85.
10. See Lovejoy 1923, 454–55, who attributes a form of sense-datum theory to Arnauld.

74
idea and ontology
object, even if mental ones (see OC 6:78, 170). Malebranche glosses over
Arnauld’s assertions that ideas are essentially acts. The words ‘‘idea’’ and
‘‘perception’’ simply describe two aspects of the same entity in Arnauld’s
view: ‘‘I have said that I take the perception and the idea to be the same thing.
Nevertheless it must be noted that this thing, although only one, has two
relations: one to the soul which it modiﬁes, the other to the thing perceived
insofar as it is objectively in the soul; and that the word ‘perception’ indi-
cates more directly the ﬁrst relation and the word ‘idea’ the second’’ (TF,
20). There is no act/object distinction for Arnauld in perception. The per-
ception of an object refers to its modifying the mind, whereas the idea of
the object refers to the fact that the activity is itself related to an external
object by way of representing it. Thus, although our ordinary talk might
make things confusing, we must not forget that ‘‘these are not two different
entities but one and the same modiﬁcation of our soul, which includes es-
sentially the two relations’’ (TF, 20).
External physical objects are directly perceived, even though they are
nonetheless represented to the mind. When I perceive a chair, it is the chair
itself that stands in the basic perceptual relation to my mind. This view is
occasionally difﬁcult to interpret, as Arnauld nonetheless wants to say that
the chair is represented to the mind by the idea. Yet ideas are only acts, so
are material objects immediately perceived or not? If one deﬁnes ‘‘immedi-
ately’’ as ‘‘perceived without any representation,’’ then the answer is no. If
one deﬁnes ‘‘immediately’’ as without a representative entity distinct from
the perceptual act itself, then the answer is yes (TF, 31). Essentially Arnauld
is a direct realist, for he claims that there are no representative entities dis-
tinct from the perceptual act. His adherence to the claim that the soul can
only be modiﬁed by its own operations corroborates his commitment to
direct realism. The mind is an essentially active entity. It always thinks, and
all of its modes are activities. He thus sees the issue to be whether or not
modiﬁcations of the soul (as operations of the same) can intrinsically repre-
sent.
Now one might expect that Arnauld owes us an explanation of how per-
ception actually works on his theory. Since he too is a Cartesian dualist, how
do modes of the mind represent external material objects? His answer is
uncharacteristically unsatisfying:
If it is asked, for example, why our soul can see material things, its
own body and those which surround it, even when they are very
far away, it is quite a good reply to say that it can see them because

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
75
that is its nature and because God gave it the faculty of thinking. Once
again I hold that the reply is quite good and it is for want of being
content with it that we are led to imagine that our soul can see
material things only by means of representative beings, which, being
intimately united to our soul, put them into a position to be known
by it. (TF, 113, emphasis in original)
The passage is mildly reminiscent of Descartes’ claim in the Sixth Medita-
tion that the mind-body union is more than the relationship of a sailor to
his ship, but what more he cannot say (CSM II:56). At least this much is
clear: both Arnauld and Malebranche face difﬁculties they are not able to
overcome by marrying any theory of ideas with substance dualism. Still,
though Arnauld’s own theory ultimately suffers from defects, his attack on
Malebranche is nevertheless potent and interesting.
3.6 Critique of Malebranche
We have already seen that Arnauld views treating ideas as substances as self-
defeating in a theory that purports to explain how we perceive the material
world. Positing the existence of intermediaries that we perceive as represen-
tative of the external world means that we have no direct contact with the
latter. This problem is especially acute for Malebranche, who argues that we
strictly perceive only the intelligible ideas (located ‘‘in’’ God) of external
objects. In effect, when he tries to explain how we perceive the external
world, Malebranche winds up telling us that we cannot do it at all. In addi-
tion to claiming that Malebranche’s theory cuts us off from the material
world, Arnauld also holds that treating ideas like substances is superﬂuous
on two related grounds. The ﬁrst is a straightforward application of Ock-
ham’s razor. He thinks he can better explain perception without recourse
to intermediary representative entities. Second, he advances a theological
argument that relies on a similar principle: that God always acts in the sim-
plest manner.
Earlier we brieﬂy alluded to Arnauld’s accusation that Malebranche con-
ﬂates local, spatial presence with a different kind of ‘‘presence’’ needed for
mentation. Arnauld agrees that action cannot take place at a distance, but
since the mental realm is nonspatial, one cannot apply this principle directly
to minds and their objects. It is not the eyes but the soul that ‘‘sees,’’ and it
does perceive distant objects. Arnauld conﬁdently asserts, ‘‘[I]t is certain

76
idea and ontology
that my soul has seen the sun, the stars and the other works of God countless
times, as well as men, not specters but true men created by God like me:
Therefore I am certain that my soul has the faculty of seeing all those things’’
(TF, 36–37). Objects are present to the soul objectively, in the Cartesian sense
of ‘‘presenting content.’’ Thus there is no need for external ideas to make
objects ‘‘present’’ to the mind.11 Malebranche is simply confusing two differ-
ent principles and therefore must agree that ‘‘local presence is not a neces-
sary condition of an object’s being able to be seen by our soul, and
consequently, local absence contributes nothing to its not being able to be
seen’’ (TF, 40).
More generally, Arnauld contends that the only way it is possible to prove
that representative entities are required for perception is to assume as much,
which begs the question. Malebranche does appear to reason just so, blithely
remarking that, ‘‘I think everyone agrees that we do not perceive objects
external to us by themselves’’ (LO, 217 [3.2.1]). We have greater cause for
complaint, Arnauld says, when Malebranche invokes his argument for sub-
stantializing ideas on the basis of illusions. Malebranche, recall, argues that
‘‘[F]or the mind to perceive an object, it is absolutely necessary for the idea
of that object to be actually present to it—and about this there can be no
doubt; but there need not be any external thing like that idea. For it often
happens that we perceive things that do not exist, and that even have never
existed—thus our mind often has real ideas of things that have never ex-
isted’’ (LO, 217 [3.2.1]). Arnauld responds that this too begs the question. If
‘‘idea’’ here means an external representative entity, there is indeed doubt.
About this very passage he remarks:
But if the proposition is conceived in these terms, not only is it
possible to doubt it, but I absolutely deny its ﬁrst part, since I see no
need of that assumed representative being in order to know any
object, either present or absent. So, to assume that it is impossible
to doubt the necessity of the representative being, is manifestly to beg
the question. As for the second part, if it is not necessary that there
be something outside, similar to the representative being, it is no
more necessary that there be something existent outside, similar to
my perception of the sun. (TF, 43)
11. As noted earlier in the discussion of Arnauld’s own theory of ideas, exactly how this works
remains a Cartesian mystery.

the cartesians: malebranche and arnauld
77
Arnauld’s point is subtle. If there doesn’t need to be an object genuinely
existing beyond the representative idea (since we can have ideas without
external objects when we hallucinate or perceive illusions), then there need
not ever be an idea beyond the perception itself in the ﬁrst place. Hallucina-
tions are examples of acts of perceiving without external objects, and they
are analogous to cases of perceiving without any object separate from the
act of perception, including, in particular, ideas. There is no reason to posit
an idea beyond the mental activity of perceiving. Arguing from perceptual
error can only succeed in proving representative entities by antecedently
assuming they are necessary. Arnauld’s argument does not, however, estab-
lish that Malebranche’s conclusion is false; it only provides some reason for
thinking that Malebranche’s analysis about the indubitability of the exis-
tence of ideas as distinct representative entities fails.
Rightly not content with this negative point, Arnauld also advances a
positive argument that he thinks conclusively demonstrates that there are
no representative ideas distinct from the activity of perceiving. The proof is
a theological one and runs roughly as follows:12
(1) God would not have put souls in bodies without allowing them to per-
ceive bodies.
(2) Thus souls do perceive bodies.
(3) God always uses the simplest means.
(4) It is simpler to make our minds know our bodies directly than by repre-
sentations.
(5) Therefore we know bodies immediately without representative entities
distinct from the mind.
Forcing God to create representations of the material world not only violates
Ockham’s razor; it is also an affront to the power and simplicity of God’s
greatness. Instead of having minds and bodies, Malebranche requires God
to create ideas as well, not to mention countless ‘‘bizarre and groundless
laws’’ to accommodate them (TF, 47).
Malebranche, of course, denies the fourth premise, arguing that it cannot
possibly be true given the nature of the soul. His reasons, however, are
merely his old arguments for why ideas must be like substances. Arnauld’s
critique, as interesting as it is, does not fully resolve the dispute in his favor.
It is one thing to argue that ideas do not need to be substantial to represent
12. Paraphrased from Arnauld, TF, 44–46.

78
idea and ontology
and quite another to provide a theory that plausibly shows they cannot rep-
resent if they are substances. Arnauld fails in this latter endeavor, whatever
his successes in proving the former. Thus although Arnauld has ﬁrmly es-
tablished that philosophers need not be forced into substantializing ideas, he
has not decisively demonstrated why they ought not to do so.
3.7 The Cartesian Debate
Despite extended wrangling concerning the nature of ideas, the Arnauld-
Malebranche exchange did little to resolve the issue for other early moderns
who would follow them. Indeed, those who did follow this debate found few
clear answers, and many gave up entirely on resolving the deep metaphysical
difﬁculties associated with ideas. Malebranche advanced interesting and oc-
casionally plausible reasons for holding that ideas simply could not be modi-
ﬁcations of the mind. His arguments for treating ideas as substances,
however, fail to adequately deal with potent criticisms by the likes of Ar-
nauld. In turn, Arnauld made a number of interesting moves in trying to
cast ideas as simple mental modiﬁcations but failed to decisively meet all of
Malebranche’s objections. Independently, Arnauld also failed to conclu-
sively establish that ideas could not be at least substance-like.
Despite the frustrating lack of a clear answer about the ontological nature
of ideas, one element in the Malebranche-Arnauld discussion remained con-
stant. They, like early modern philosophers in general, thought it was impor-
tant to keep ideas in their philosophical systems. The epistemological
functions played by ideas were simply too vital to the early modern under-
standing of the world for philosophers to abandon them. Consequently
there was an often unstated imperative to solve the metaphysical problems
surrounding ideas, although one might set aside those questions for a time
to work on the epistemological details. Locke would take the latter route,
but even in so doing he could not escape, nor did he desire to escape, the
powerful inﬂuence of ontology.

4
locke
Descartes’ philosophy of ideas left unresolved the issue of how ideas were to
be reconciled with the traditional ontology of substance and mode. A debate
ensued, epitomized most famously by the Malebranche-Arnauld exchanges,
but little apparent progress was made. As a result, some turned their atten-
tion away from questions of ontology altogether. By this I do not mean that
ontological questions were rejected as unimportant but rather that some
philosophers chose to spend their time attempting to solve other problems.
Aside from the dispute about the status of ideas, there were other issues,
including how ideas could represent. Perhaps, it was thought, progress could
be made here, and philosophers could return to the challenges of ontology
after grappling with other puzzles in idea philosophy.
Such is the motivation I attribute to Locke. While the disagreements over
the status of ideas raged, Locke focused his attention on other issues. Here I
will argue that he did not reject the core traditional ontology nor deny that
ideas have an ontic status. He did, however, set those questions aside, fearing
that they might not have answers that could be discovered by mere human
beings. Thus I am arguing that Locke is committed to the importance of an
ontology for ideas, but I am not arguing that Locke endorsed a particular
well-deﬁned ontological theory. The issue is not whether ideas are sub-
stances or modes. For Locke there is an answer, but it might be beyond our
ﬁnite powers to know what it is. In the introduction to the Essay Concerning
Human Understanding, he is delightfully explicit.
I shall not at present meddle with the Physical Consideration of the
Mind; or trouble myself to examine, wherein its Essence consists,
or by what Motions of our Spirits, or Alterations of our Bodies, we
come to have any Sensation by our Organs, or any Ideas in our

80
idea and ontology
Understandings; and whether those Ideas do in their Formation,
any or all of them, depend on Matter, or no. These are Specula-
tions, which, however curious and entertaining, I shall decline, as
lying out of my Way, in the Design I am now upon. . . . We should
not then perhaps be so forward, out of an Affection of an universal
Knowledge, to raise Questions, and perplex our selves and others with
Disputes about Things, to which our Understandings are not suited;
and of which we cannot frame in our Minds any clear or distinct
Perceptions, or whereof (as it has perhaps too often happen’d) we have
not any Notions at all. (ECHU I.1.2, I.1.4, emphasis mine)
Locke consciously excludes an examination of the causal processes that un-
derlie perception.1 He is thus essentially excluding ontology from his pur-
view but not from any conviction that ideas have no ontic status (just as he
does not believe that there is no underlying causal story to be told). He
thinks there are causal relations in perception and that ideas have some
ontological grounding but that these questions of causation and the meta-
physical status of ideas might well be unanswerable.
In general, even a cursory glance should make it apparent that Locke has
good reason to be wary of making any deﬁnite pronouncements about the
nature of ideas. If they are substances, then their natures lie outside the
realm of human knowledge. Locke tells us that we have no clear understand-
ing of substratum, let alone substance, and hence we also would have no
clear understanding of the nature of ideas should they be substances. In
short, by Locke’s analysis, if ideas are substances then by that very fact their
formal nature must be a permanent mystery to us. If ideas are modes, then
he encounters problems about how they can represent and how they can
perform certain other functions he ascribes to them. The puzzles associated
with marrying idea philosophy to the traditional ontology were well known
to Locke. He read Malebranche and Arnauld and was well steeped in the
Cartesian tradition. Thus he tries to avoid explicitly saying anything deﬁnite
about the ontic nature of ideas. He simply is not sure and does not have the
answers to resolve the issue either way. I contend that Locke attempts to
sidestep what he perceives as a metaphysical quagmire, although perhaps
1. Compare ECHU II.33.6, where Locke starts to speculate about the cause of ideas but refuses
to engage in any serious analysis. ‘‘Whether the natural cause of these Ideas, as well as of that
regular Dancing of his Fingers be the Motion of his Animal Spirits, I will not determine, how
probable soever by this Instance it appears to be so.’’

locke
81
not with the greatest success. Yet whether Locke’s sidestepping is successful
or not, he does implicitly endorse the core traditional ontology for ideas.
To defend my contention that Locke had an implicit ontology for ideas,
I ﬁrst engage the line of interpretation that holds that Locke shunned ontol-
ogy with respect to ideas in two of its most prominent forms as defended
(differently) by John Yolton and Thomas Lennon. After arguing that these
readings of Locke are unpersuasive, I build a case for my limited claim that
Locke ought to be read as endorsing an ontology of ideas. The qualiﬁcation
is important, since it is not my aim to argue that Locke has a particular
ontology in mind. Locke recognized the need for some supporting ontology
but, having learned something from his predecessors, did not think he could
reasonably defend any speciﬁc view. Consequently Locke bracketed those
concerns even though he wrote and thought within the context of the core
traditional ontological categories. I argue for this position by considering
how Locke’s contemporaries understood his work and then by engaging in
a positive analysis of what Locke has to say about the nature of ideas, focus-
ing in this positive analysis on the generally neglected ‘‘Examination of P.
Malebranche’s Opinion of Seeing All Things in God.’’ There Locke is forced
to confront explicitly ontological concerns about ideas.
4.1 Locke ‘‘Deontologized’’
At ﬁrst glance it is not obvious exactly what Yolton and his advocates want
to argue with respect to Locke. Initially one is led to believe that Yolton
merely wants to exonerate Locke from the charge of treating ideas as sub-
stances, as some tertium quid in perception. Ideas are perceptions and ‘‘not
real beings.’’2 Yet oddly enough Yolton is not arguing that Locke treats ideas
as (mental) modes. Instead, we are told that Locke rejected ideas as ontolog-
ical beings altogether. He ‘‘deontologized’’ them (1975, 158). ‘‘Had Locke
seen sufﬁciently clearly these implications of his position, he could have
written a reply to clarify the difference between his own epistemological
analysis and that which used the older metaphysical categories of substance
and accident. He so quietly dispensed with the traditional categories on this
question that many of his critics did not appreciate the novelty which he
was introducing’’ (1996b, 97). Locke’s quiet contribution to the way of ideas,
Yolton maintains, was to remove them not just from the traditional ontol-
ogy but from ontology altogether.
2. See Yolton 1975, 159; Yolton 1984, 88–94; and Chappell 1994, 32.

82
idea and ontology
Yet when we turn to examine what Locke actually says about the nature
of ideas, it is difﬁcult to understand what grounds Yolton’s thinking. In
responding to Malebranche’s theory of ideas Locke writes: ‘‘So that suppos-
ing ideas real spiritual things ever so much, if they are neither substances
nor modes, let them be what they will, I am no more instructed in their
nature, than when I am told they are perceptions, such as I ﬁnd them. And
I appeal to my reader, whether that hypothesis is to be preferred for its
easiness to be understood, which is explained by real beings, that are neither
substances nor modes’’ (EM, 424). Locke neither says nor implies that ideas
have no ontological status. Yet this is exactly what Yolton suggests. With
respect to the text just quoted (‘‘Examination’’), Yolton writes:
In another draft of a reply to Norris, he makes this point emphati-
cally: ‘‘If you once mention ideas you must be presently called to
an account what kind of things you make these same ideas to be
though perhaps you have no design to consider them any further
than as the immediate objects of perception.’’ The point of this last
remark is that Locke did not consider ideas to have an ontological
status; he wanted to concentrate upon their role in perception and
knowledge. Having Malebranche’s theory as an example of a theory
that gave to ideas an ontological status, Locke had a twofold reac-
tion: he rejected Norris’s attempts to ﬁt ideas into the standard
ontological categories of substance or mode, and he stressed the
cognitive, awareness features of ideas. The language of ‘‘having
ideas’’ is identiﬁed with being aware, with perceiving.3 (1984, 94)
Exactly what it means to ‘‘deontologize’’ Locke is difﬁcult to untangle. Fol-
lowing Chappell, one might construe Yolton in one of two ways (Chappell
1994, 32–33). First, Yolton is fond of pressing the point that ideas are percep-
tions themselves, indicating that ideas are merely acts of perception. Second,
Yolton also indicates that ideas are the contents of perceptual acts. Lennon
provides yet a third variant, which I take up in the following section.
Usually Yolton talks about ideas as acts when drawing parallels between
Locke and Arnauld, trying as it were to rub them together and imbue Locke
with Arnauld’s philosophy by friction (see, e.g., 1984, 89–90). Arnauld tries
to invoke Descartes’ distinction between ideas taken objectively and for-
mally in order to argue that ‘‘presence to the mind’’ means a dull form of
3. For comments on John Norris, see Acworth 1971.

locke
83
objective presence only. On that view, an object is present to the mind (‘‘in’’
it) only when the mind perceives it.
There certainly are a number of passages in the Essay and ‘‘Examination’’
that superﬁcially support this thesis, and Yolton lists them. The best of these
are from the Essay and run as follows:
Whatever Idea is in the mind, is either an actual perception, or else
having been an actual perception, is so in the mind, that by the
memory it can be made an actual perception again.
For our Ideas, being nothing but bare Appearances or Perceptions
in our Minds, cannot properly and simply in themselves be said to
be true or false, no more than a single Name of any thing, can be
said to be true or false.
To ask, at what time a Man has ﬁrst any Ideas, is to ask, when he
begins to perceive; having Ideas, and Perception being the same
thing. (I.4.20, II.32.1, and II.1.9)
There are more, but these passages are representative.4 The difﬁculty here is
that these selections do not support Yolton’s claim that ideas are identiﬁed
with acts of perception. Locke, as with virtually all of his contemporaries,
held that there could be no cognitive activity, whether thinking or perceiv-
ing, without an object.5 Since Locke uses ‘‘thinking’’ and ‘‘perceiving’’ inter-
changeably in the Essay, this maxim applies to all instances of perception.
As a result, it is easy to be misled by ambiguities in the use of perception
talk. An instance of the word ‘‘perception’’ can refer both to the act and the
object(s) of perceiving. Thus when Locke indicates, as he does in the above
passages, that ideas are perceptions, he means nothing more than that ideas
are the objects of perceptions. To conﬁrm this, note that when Locke refers
to the act of sense perception he speaks of ‘‘having ideas,’’ as in the last of
the quoted passages above. The contrast between II.32.1 and II.1.9 is telling.
In the former we are told that ideas are ‘‘appearances,’’ which is object talk.6
The qualiﬁer ‘‘or Perceptions’’ is accordingly best read as ‘‘or objects of
4. See also ECHU II.1.3, II.1.5, II.1.23, and II.10.2 as well as Yolton 1984, 90.
5. We will have cause to engage this claim further when discussing Thomas Lennon’s defense
of a Yolton-style reading of Locke.
6. Lennon would disagree, arguing that my claim that appearances are objects is misleading.
His position will be engaged in section 4.2.

84
idea and ontology
perception.’’ His ofﬁcial deﬁnitions consistently indicate that ideas are ob-
jects of perception, as at II.8.8: ‘‘Whatsoever the Mind perceives in it self, or
is the immediate object of Perception, Thought, or Understanding, that I
call Idea’’ (see also, e.g., ECHU I.1.8). When Locke wants to describe percep-
tion itself, a fairly clear line is drawn between the acts and the ideas that are
the objects of those acts. ‘‘Perception, as it is the ﬁrst faculty of the Mind
exercised about our Ideas, so it is the ﬁrst and simplest idea we have from
reﬂection’’ (ECHU II.9.1). Note that perception, when described as an act or
faculty, is not an idea but about an idea. Given the nature of examples like
these, it is unlikely that Locke identiﬁed the act of perception with an idea.
At the very least Yolton requires a systematic analysis to uncover the ambi-
guity in the use of the word ‘‘perception’’ (and similar terms like ‘‘sensa-
tion’’). In fact none of the cases Yolton provides to buttress his thesis
survives this test; all of them either can be read, or are even best read, as
taking ‘‘perception’’ to mean an object of perception.
Independently, Yolton offers another reading for what Locke intends by
the term ‘‘idea.’’ Just as frequently, Yolton argues, Locke tells us that ideas
are the ‘‘contents’’ of perceptual acts. Yolton’s favorite version of this line is
that ideas are simply ‘‘conscious mental contents’’ (1984, 101–2). In short,
Yolton takes ideas to be intentional objects that lack any ontic ground, as
evinced by his puzzling language of ideas not being ‘‘entities.’’7 The trick is
to now parlay that into an account that makes these intentional objects
‘‘purely’’ epistemological beings without any ontic status whatsoever. I have
already argued in the ﬁrst chapter that such a view is implausible. I do not
see how one can maintain the thesis that ideas, at least as understood by any
of the early moderns, have no ontic ground at all. About what would we be
speaking? What remains is to demonstrate that Locke did not hold this view.
The ﬁrst thing we should note is that Locke’s language generally does not
cohere well with the view that ideas are nothing but intentional objects
(which is not to deny that Lockean ideas might involve intentional acts and/
or objects). He asserts, for instance, that ideas can either resemble or fail to
resemble their external objects. Simple ideas are never false but complex
ideas may well be (ECHU II.21.16–18). What, then, is being compared? Simi-
larly, knowledge is garnered through the comparison of ideas. ‘‘Knowledge
then seems to me to be nothing but the perception of the connexion and
agreement, or disagreement and repugnancy of any of our Ideas’’ (ECHU
IV.1.2). By this he means that our ideas are in genuine relations with one
7. Ayers and Chappell agree on this point. See Ayers 1991, 56–59, and Chappell 1994, 33.

locke
85
another, and it is these relations that the mind perceives. ‘‘First, the one is
of such Truths laid up in the Memory, as whenever they occur to the Mind, it
actually perceives the Relation is between those Ideas’’ (ECHU IV.1.9; see also
ECHU IV.1.8). If the mind perceives the relation without the intervention of
yet a third idea, Locke calls this ‘‘intuitive knowledge.’’ If ideas are merely
conscious mental contents, then what is it that one compares? Ungrounded
content is not enough, since it has to ﬁll the role of relata, which falls within
the category of ontology.
Perhaps more importantly, Locke claims that all ideas are particular.
‘‘Every Man’s Reasoning and Knowledge, is only about the Ideas existing in
his own Mind, which are truly, every one of them, particular Existences’’
(ECHU IV.17.8). What could it mean to say (using Yolton’s deﬁnition of
‘‘idea’’) that ‘‘content’’ is particular? I should think that content can be de-
tailed or abstract. Perhaps content can be particular in the sense that some
ideas are particular (as in an individual instance) and others universal or
general. But if so, then this makes Locke’s claim that all ideas are particular
implausible. And here he describes ideas as ‘‘existences,’’ talk not consistent
with the view that they are merely conscious contents. Locke writes as if
ideas have an ontic ground; he simply does not know what that ground
happens to be. Consider the following passage, which I think indicates
Locke’s leanings on this issue: ‘‘For all the Enquiries that we can make,
concerning any of our Ideas, all that we know, or can afﬁrm concerning any
of them, is, that it is, or is not the same with some other; that it does, or
does not always co-exist with some other Idea in the same Subject; that it
has this or that Relation to some other Idea; or that it has a real existence
without the Mind’’ (ECHU IV.1.7). Ideas ‘‘coexist’’ and become relata not
only in relations with other ideas but also with external objects. Even here,
however, a supporter of Yolton will not likely be convinced. Maybe Locke
used relational talk in the absence of better language or spoke loosely to
convey his point.
Perhaps so, but there is one locution Locke uses that makes my point
forcibly. If Yolton is correct, then when Locke speaks of ideas being ‘‘in the
mind,’’ he cannot mean that ideas are ontically in the mind. Ideas must be
only ‘‘cognitively’’ in the mind. Yet when we examine what Locke says, it
becomes clear that he cannot be endorsing the merely cognitive sense of ‘‘in
the mind.’’ For one thing, Locke maintains the now venerable causal story
of how ideas come to the mind, and for another he insists that ideas are signs
of external objects. Consider the ﬁrst point. The corpuscularian hypothesis
extends all the way to the mind. ‘‘There are some Ideas, which have admit-

86
idea and ontology
tance only through one Sense. . . . And if these Organs, or the Nerves which
are the Conduits, to convey them from without to their Audience in the
Brain, the mind’s Presence-room (as I may so call it) are any of them so
disordered, as not to perform their Functions, they have no Postern to be
admitted by; no other way to bring themselves into view, and be perceived
by the Understanding’’ (ECHU II.3.1). And elsewhere Locke is less meta-
phorical:
First, Our Senses, conversant about particular sensible Objects, do
Convey into the Mind, several distinct Perceptions of things, accord-
ing to those various ways, wherein those Objects do affect them:
And thus we come by those Ideas, we have of Yellow, White, Heat,
Cold, Soft, Hard, Bitter, Sweet, and all those which we call sensible
qualities, which when I say the senses convey into the mind, I
mean, they from external Objects convey into the mind what pro-
duces there those Perceptions. (ECHU II.1.3)
The traditional ‘‘presence principle’’ is the one advanced by Malebranche.
What is known is literally present or somehow united to the mind. Locke’s
story is entirely literal, especially when it comes to sensation. ‘‘[T]he Sensa-
tion of Heat and Cold, be nothing but the increase or diminution of the
motion of the minute Parts of our Bodies, caused by the Corpuscles of other
Body’’ (ECHU II.8.21). This corroborates (as do other passages) his analysis
in the ‘‘Examination,’’ where he indicates that external objects literally affect
the mind, suggesting that he found it difﬁcult to free himself from the Male-
branchian interpretation of the presence principle. The reason Locke has the
causal thesis is to guarantee local presence to the mind.
What seals my case here about the nature of ideas with respect to the
mind is the second point. Ideas are signs. And why must this be so? ‘‘For
since the Things, the Mind contemplates, are none of them, besides it self,
present to the Understanding, ’tis necessary that something else, as a Sign
or Representation of the thing it considers, should be present to it: And
these are Ideas’’ (ECHU IV.21.4). As Michael Ayers notes, this passage must
invoke ontic presence to the mind, otherwise the argument simply does not
work (1992, 176–77). A sign must be in the mind and these signs (as ideas)
are the elements of mental propositions as words are elements of verbal
sentences. Yolton requires that ideas be intrinsically representative, yet
Locke does not accept this claim. They become representative when used as

locke
87
signs present to the mind and not before. Immediate cognitive presence
seems to require ‘‘local’’ (on a physical model) presence for Locke.
Yolton might respond by claiming that ideas qua signs are in fact intrinsi-
cally representative. This cannot be the case, however, since the representa-
tive power of ideas stems from their causal origins. How is it that this
particular idea represents the redness of that (external) ball? Because the ball
and I are so constituted that the ball caused me to be affected in a certain
way. The idea represents the redness in virtue of the causal relationship
between the ball and myself. Locke is explicit:
[S]imple Ideas are not ﬁctions of our Fancies, but the natural and
regular productions of Things without us, really operating on us;
and so carry with them all the conformity which is intended; or
which our state requires: For they represent to us Things under
those appearances which they are ﬁtted to produce in us. . . . Thus
the Idea of Whiteness, or Bitterness, as it is in the Mind, exactly
answering all the real conformity it can, or ought to have, with
Things without us. (ECHU IV.4.4)
There is no evidence that Locke thinks of ideas as intrinsically representa-
tional. We already know that the mind can ‘‘have’’ ideas in the memory of
which it takes no notice. Are we to suppose that such ideas nonetheless
represent their objects to the mind? Certainly not—not until the mind by
its own actions conjures up those ideas again, and even then the mind recre-
ates the impression of the idea (quality) on the mind. Therefore even in
memory an implicit causal story is preserved. Ideas ‘‘in the mind’’ must
be present ontically according to Locke, and hence ideas cannot be merely
intentional objects; all ideas are ontically grounded.
It is true that Locke professes ignorance as to what ideas are beyond
that they are perceptions.8 Yet this claim does not support Yolton’s thesis.
Admitting ignorance of the underlying ground is not the same as proclaim-
ing that none exists. Interestingly, Locke’s commonplace assertions that he
either wants to avoid or has no understanding of the metaphysics of ideas
aside, he never actually says ideas have no ontic grounding. Given the pre-
ponderance of evidence suggesting that he must think they do, Yolton’s in-
teresting thesis about Locke must be false, providing further evidence that
the early modern tale is also false.
8. See Yolton 1984, 94, remembering that this is an object reading of ‘‘perception.’’

88
idea and ontology
4.2 Lennon’s Locke
Yolton is not alone in endorsing views about Locke friendly to the early
modern tale. One important defense comes from Thomas Lennon, who ar-
gues that, despite admitted problems in the details, Yolton essentially has
Locke right. (Lennon defends ‘‘the line, if not the exact letter, of Yolton’s
interpretation’’ [2004a, 322].) Lennon ascribes to Locke what amounts to a
theory of appearing. Ideas are not entities separate from their objects be-
cause ideas are simply descriptions of the objects as perceived. Lennon is
characteristically clear with his thesis: ‘‘The central point of my paper is that
an idea of x is an appearance of x, not really distinct from x’’ (323). The
underlying point is that ideas for Locke refer to ideas qua perceived things,
which is all the same as referring to objects themselves. Thus just as Yolton
tells us there is no ‘‘third thing’’ that constitutes an idea, so Lennon argues
that ‘‘‘The phantasm of my pen’ refers to my pen’’:
But why not just ‘‘my pen’’? Why mention ‘‘phantasm’’ in referring
to my pen? The answer is that ‘‘the phantasm of my pen,’’ like ‘‘the
idea of my pen,’’ refers not just to my pen, but to my pen insofar
as it is perceived. And since Locke will never speak strictly about
things except as they are perceived, i.e. except as they appear, he
cannot help but use the term ‘‘idea.’’ The necessity is philosophical,
and stylistic only in the sense that it is an omnibus way of express-
ing a necessity attaching to the use of many other such items. (326)
Lennon fastens on Locke’s frequent use of the word ‘‘appearance’’ in con-
nection with Locke’s theory of ideas. Ideas represent not by being a surro-
gate for the external object but rather by making the object ‘‘present’’ to the
mind.9 Lennon’s reading of Locke retains the advantage both he and Yolton
are seeking, namely to ‘‘save’’ Locke from the sense-datum fallacy (327).
There is no textual ‘‘smoking gun’’ in Locke that supports Lennon’s the-
sis. The absence of obvious textual evidence is to my mind no bar to its
truth, but we are nevertheless owed good reasons for thinking that Locke
endorsed Lennon’s theory of appearing for ideas. He produces four explana-
tory beneﬁts that accrue from his interpretation, arguing that they render
Locke more consistent and comprehensible. When coupled with the added
9. Lennon uses this clarifying language in an unpublished essay, ‘‘Locke on Ideas and Repre-
sentation.’’ I am grateful to Lennon for allowing me access to this and other materials of his.

locke
89
bonus that his account frees Locke from the evils of a sense-datum theory,
the position has initial credibility. Lennon lists the attractions of his reading:
First, it gives us the sense of Locke’s empiricism, which is grounded
in the distinction between simple and complex ideas. Second, it
explains Locke’s ambiguous talk of ideas as objects, including the
texts most frequently cited in connection with the veil of percep-
tion. Third, Locke’s use of awkward metaphors is explicated in a
way that both avoids the veil and is philosophically important. Fi-
nally, Locke’s argument for substance is relieved of some of the
obscurity often attributed to it. (2001a, 161)
Here I argue that none of these beneﬁts requires Lennon’s reading of Locke’s
theory of ideas and they they often reveal textual obstacles to his own view.
As a result, when coupled with the textual analysis provided above in section
4.1, I conclude that although Lennon’s analysis is smart, it is not Locke’s.
The ﬁrst of Lennon’s advantages concerns the division between simple
and complex ideas. Lennon alleges that his reading of Locke makes this
distinction more comprehensible. Simple ideas are ‘‘just those with respect
to which the mind must be passive, the complex all others’’ (161). The mind,
once equipped with the ammunition of a stock of simple ideas, can actively
manipulate them to produce complexes. Lennon quotes Locke: ‘‘Where the
Understanding is once stored with these simple Ideas, it has the Power to
repeat, compare, and unite them even to an almost inﬁnite Variety, and so
can make at Pleasure new complex Ideas. But it is not in the Power of the
most exalted Wit, or enlarged Understanding, by any quickness or variety
of Thought, to invent or frame one new simple Idea in the mind, not taken
in by [sensation or reﬂection]’’ (ECHU II.2.2). With respect to simple ideas,
the mind is passive. Once it has a stock of simple ideas, the mind may
actively manipulate them into complexes. I happily grant that Lennon’s ex-
plication of the difference between simple and complex ideas might well be
exactly right. What is unclear, however, is how this analysis indicates that
Locke endorses a theory of appearing. There are two concerns. First, this
reading does not exclude rival theories. Second, some of what Locke says
with respect to this distinction seems to deny Lennon’s view.
In the passage from the Essay (II.2.2. quoted just above), Locke does not
say that either simple or complex ideas are passive; he says that the mind is
passive when receiving simple ideas (see ECHU II.21.72, also cited by Len-
non). To be clear, this is the position Lennon attributes to Locke as well. I

90
idea and ontology
am not attributing any error to Lennon here. A ﬁnite mind cannot conjure
up new simple ideas in the way that it can create new complex ideas by
manipulating its stock of simple ones. The distinction is thus not one that
concerns the nature of ideas but rather the nature of the mind when perceiv-
ing ideas. Understood in this way, however, the distinction (between simple
and complex ideas) is compatible even with theories that make ideas robust
substances. All ideas intromitted through the senses are passively received
into the mind. Once present to the mind, the mind may manipulate its stock
of ideas to form complex ideas. In this case, that would be complexes of
substances. A similar story can be told if ideas are mental modiﬁcations.
Hence, any advantage Lennon accrues from his reading concerning explain-
ing passivity in the mind is also available to more ontological understand-
ings of ideas as well.
More importantly, when Locke discusses the distinction between simple
and complex, he writes as if ideas are distinct from the external objects they
represent. Consider what Locke says in II.2.2 after noting that ‘‘it is not in
the Power of the most exalted Wit, or enlarged Understanding, by any
quickness or variety of Thought, to invent or frame one new simple Idea in
the mind, not taken in by the ways before mentioned,’’ namely, that no
‘‘force of the Understanding [can] destroy those that are there.’’ What is it
that the mind cannot destroy? According to Lennon, ideas are appearances
not distinct from the object themselves. One might say that choosing not to
perceive a certain presentation of an object is tantamount to its destruction,
but this is to stretch the text a fair bit. Things are destroyed. Since Locke
considers the possibility of destroying ideas (perhaps only complex ones) in
cases where obviously the external object would not be, this passage at a
minimum suggests that Locke is thinking of ideas as distinct from their
objects. In the same paragraph Locke further reinforces this impression.
‘‘The same inability, will everyone ﬁnd in himself, who shall go about to
fashion in his Understanding any simple Idea, not received in by his Senses,
from external Objects; or by reﬂection from the Operations of his own mind
about them’’ (ECHU II.2.2). Ideas are ‘‘received’’ by the senses from external
objects. The foregoing is the language of someone implicitly thinking of
ideas as things (whatever they might be) distinct from what they represent.
Lennon might plausibly respond that Locke is forced into a loose use of
language given his available resources. That response is fair enough, but I
hope I have shown that this ﬁrst interpretative beneﬁt is meager at best.
The second payoff for Lennon’s thesis is that it explains Locke’s ‘‘ambigu-
ous’’ talk of ideas as objects. The difﬁculty Lennon hopes to clarify is Locke’s

locke
91
speaking of objects of sensation as external to the mind and objects of per-
ception internal to the mind. Thus in some passages it is unclear exactly
what are the objects—ideas or external things. Lennon produces the clock
passage as an example. ‘‘The Picture, or Clock may be so placed, that they
may come in his way every day; but yet he will have but a confused Idea of
all the Parts they are made up of, till he applies himself with attention, to
consider them each in particular’’ (ECHU II.1.7). Locke seems to recom-
mend that we attend to the actual parts of the clock (not the ideas) in order
to understand the clock better. One traditional resolution of this problem is
to attribute confusion to Locke. Perhaps Locke simply confuses qualities and
ideas, as Jonathan Bennett has alleged (1996; see also Bennett 2001, 2:30–33).
Lennon’s analysis at least partially absolves Locke of Bennett’s charge. There
is no confusion when speaking about external things as the objects of under-
standing, since ideas are simply the appearances of the former.
Elaborating on his position in response to a challenge by Vere Chappell,
Lennon appeals to a view of Paris from atop a department store, the Samari-
taine. The view of Paris is an appearance, depends on minds (there are no
views without viewers), and satisﬁes the conditions for being a thing. We
refer to the view, it may be individually considered, and we can quantify
over views in a meaningful sense. The issue, then, is what thing this appear-
ance is and whether it is distinct from Paris as the object of perception.
Lennon denies that the idea/view is distinct. ‘‘On the contrary, what one
sees from the Samaritaine is just Paris, which is why the view from there is
so much to be preferred to the view from Blackpool Tower, for example.
Chappell and Yolton cannot disagree about this; where, then, does the dis-
agreement lie?’’ (2004a, 325). Lennon clears away the putative confusion by
noting that Locke’s object talk is perfectly consistent when one recognizes
that the appearances (the ideas) and the actual objects are not ontologically
distinct.
Lennon’s analysis in turn depends on what the word ‘‘object’’ means for
Locke. Lennon anticipates this question by arguing that the word ‘‘object’’
perhaps never meant anything beyond ‘‘an awareness of the mind,’’ at least
according to the Oxford English Dictionary (325). I think Lennon is probably
right on this point, but that turns out to be exactly the problem. Locke
qualiﬁes the word ‘‘object’’ in his discussions. Ideas are the immediate ob-
jects of perception, external things are not. In fact, the dictionary even cites
as evidence under the fourth deﬁnition for ‘‘object’’ a letter from Locke to
Stillingﬂeet that uses the qualiﬁer. ‘‘Ideas are . . . the immediate objects of
our mind in thinking.’’ In Locke’s works ‘‘immediate object’’ or its plural is

92
idea and ontology
used twenty-seven times. In every case it is associated with the term ‘‘idea’’
and no other.10 In none of Locke’s discussions of external objects (that I can
ﬁnd) do we ﬁnd the qualiﬁer ‘‘immediate.’’ We thus have a decidedly more
compelling reason to exonerate Locke from this particular charge. External
things are objects; ideas are objects. But only ideas are immediate objects.
Not only is there is a more compelling explanation for the problem Lennon
locates but this same explanation also adduces textual evidence against at-
tributing a theory of appearing to Locke. Locke does not treat objects and
their appearances as walking hand in hand; instead, he separates them using
a mediate/immediate distinction.
Lennon’s third beneﬁt concerns Locke’s ‘‘awkward’’ metaphors. In fact,
Lennon’s analysis here is intended to defend his interpretation of Locke
against those who might seek to oppose it on the grounds that Locke’s meta-
phors commit him to a particular theory of ideas. The worry is that Locke’s
use of picture terms betrays at least an implicit commitment to some form
of veil and hence a denial of Lennon’s theory of appearing. Locke metaphor-
ically compares ideas to images, resemblances, and pictures (in ECHU
II.8.15, II.14.9, II.11.17, among other places). If ideas are pictures or images of
things, then as such they are distinct from the items they resemble.
In response, Lennon musters an interesting reading of Locke. Pictures
might represent by ‘‘calling attention to’’ something other than themselves.
Hence a picture of Caesar calls our attention to Caesar, not merely an image
of him. Similarly, when I look at a mirror I see myself and nothing else. But
in all of these cases, I would note, there is something present that is not the
actual object. In looking at a picture of Caesar we do not perceive the actual
body of Caesar. Hence the formal object in perception is numerically dis-
tinct from the external thing. Lennon recognizes the constraint, but his anal-
ysis is troubling. ‘‘If this idea theory of pictures is at all plausible, then we
can resolve what appears to involve a contradiction in the logic-of-ideas
interpretation of Locke: an idea is a bodily state and an idea is the object as
it appears to us. What this amounts to is that for him the ontology of an
idea is that of a material impression, but the having of the idea, a perception,
has as its object something beyond that impression’’ (2001a, 166). The trick
now is to focus on the epistemic relation and not on the impression, which
otherwise would be like ‘‘focusing on the paint and canvass and thereby
10. Locke uses the phrase ‘‘immediate object’’ four times in the Essay: once at the end of
‘‘The Epistle to the Reader,’’ then again at II.8.8, IV.1.1 and IV.17.8. The other twenty-three in-
stances appear in Locke’s letters to the bishop of Worcester, in the ‘‘Examination,’’ and in Locke’s
‘‘Remarks upon Some of Mr. Norris’s Books.’’

locke
93
missing the portrait.’’ This passage is a difﬁcult one to understand in the
context of Lennon’s larger argument. Although Lennon wants us to look
past the impressions, I see no good reason why we ought to do so, either on
textual or philosophical grounds. Textually, I have already argued that Locke
invokes a distinction between mediate and immediate perception insofar as
he uses the language of ‘‘immediate objects’’ with respect to ideas but not to
external things, and Lennon does not provide any new analysis here to
tempt one to reconsider the language of the Essay.
Philosophically the position is troubling because earlier Lennon explicitly
claims that ideas are not things (even though there is an ontology of ideas).11
A ‘‘thing’’ is among the broadest categories and includes whatever exists
(moods, for instance, exist and are things; they are simply not substantial
things). I fail to see any good reason for thinking that appearances are not
things. They might not be independent things and hence not substances, but
they are certainly things. And here we ﬁnd by Lennon’s own lights that ideas
are things, namely material impressions. I speculate that Lennon is concerned
(as is Yolton) not to reify Locke’s ideas (see section 1.3.1). But this contempo-
rary emphasis then misses part of Locke’s early modern thinking. When Len-
non resists calling ideas ‘‘things,’’ I submit that in fact he wants to resist
interpretations of Locke that substantialize ideas, that is, that treat ideas as
robust, independent things. The problem, however, is that resisting the ten-
dency to substantialize ideas does nothing to remove the veil of perception.
Modes and appearances can both be ‘‘third things’’ even if not substances.
A fourth and ﬁnal argument remains. Lennon contends that Locke’s dis-
cussion of substance can be clariﬁed if one adopts his thesis. Lennon’s view
rests on an analysis of the phrase ‘‘idea of x.’’ According to Lennon, the
‘‘of’’ when applied to ideas is a material genitive—the genitive of kinds. So,
using his own example, to speak of a vase of gold is to stipulate a kind of
vase, namely a golden one. Ideas of substance and mode likewise use the
material genitive. The idea of substance is in fact not an idea about some
thing but rather about a kind of idea in general. The idea of substance is the
kind of idea we have when the intellect performs a particular kind of opera-
tion, namely that of collecting qualities together. As a bit of philosophy, this
is ﬁrst rate, and I can ﬁnd no compelling reason to disagree with the func-
tion to which Lennon puts his material genitive. In fact, there is reason to
think Lennon might be right, at least with respect to a few particular ideas
11. Lennon 2001a, 156: ‘‘Although ideas are not things, there is nonetheless an ontology of
ideas (as there is of rainbows).’’

94
idea and ontology
Locke discusses. When Locke divides complex ideas into modes, substances,
and relations, his presentation does read as if he were talking about kinds of
ideas (see, e.g., ECHU II.7.3–4). But does this admission entail that Locke
never thought of ideas as objects distinct from what they putatively repre-
sent? I confess I remain skeptical, especially since Lennon’s insight with re-
spect to the material genitive is relatively limited in scope; it only applies to
a select few ideas and not to ideas in general.
In the aggregate, I ﬁnd too much of the Essay simply does not read the
way Lennon would have us understand it. As a result, although I confess
that Lennon’s sophisticated analysis provides a more potent reading of Locke
that might well ‘‘preserve’’ Locke from several errors, I do not believe that
his analysis captures Locke the early modern philosopher. Too much core
traditional ontological talk survives in Locke. The question remains whether
in interpreting Locke’s theory of ideas I can do any better in defending the
claim that some kind of ontological thinking underlies Locke’s theory of
ideas.
4.3 Locke’s Contemporaries
Before we turn to provide a positive account of Locke’s theory of ideas, it is
worthwhile to brieﬂy examine what his near contemporaries had to say, not
only in their own work but more importantly in reaction to the Essay itself.
Few disagreed about the epistemological role ideas play. Locke’s deﬁnition
of an idea as an object of the mind is echoed in various loosely similar
forms, and he was not the only one to use ‘‘idea’’ in that sense.12 The repre-
sentative function of ideas was widely accepted, although how ideas repre-
sent naturally caused disagreement. The status of ideas remained a major
issue. An anonymous writer in 1705, commenting not only on Locke but
also on Malebranche and others, notes:
By an Idea, I mean the Representation of something in the Mind.
(This Deﬁnition I think, all sides are agreed in thus far, but whether
12. Peter Browne, for instance, calls ideas ‘‘any Representation or Likeness of the Object being
transmitted from thence to the Imagination, and lodged there for the View and Observation of
the pure Intellect’’ (1976, 58). See also Lee 1984, 2. Lee narrows the representative function of
ideas to visual images, but the basic thought is the same. Lastly, of course, Descartes was the ﬁrst
to use the word ‘‘idea’’ as an object of the mind. See chapter 2 and CSM II:113, 127, Second
Replies.

locke
95
this Representation be only a Modiﬁcation of the Mind, or be a
Distinct Being, or Substance United to the Mind, is a Question.)
These are the only Two Hypotheses that carry any show of Prob-
ability along with them, the latter you will ﬁnd Currently set forth
by Mr. [Malebranche] in his Search After Truth. ([1705] 1996, 6)
Thus the representative function of ideas was not in serious contention, and
even the disputants themselves recognized that it wasn’t. Neither Arnauld
nor Malebranche, for instance, denied the important epistemological role of
ideas. What they quarreled about was whether such functions were carried
out by ideas construed as modes or as substances. In short, the tangles high-
lighted during Locke’s time concerned reconciling the generally accepted
representative functions of ideas with their ontological status, where the
choices were limited to only two. Ideas were either substances or modes. It
was in this philosophical atmosphere that Locke was reared.
Not only was the thinking of the era ﬁxed by the boundaries of the tradi-
tional ontology but all interpreters of Locke read him as bound by this meta-
physic as well. This is not to say there is no room for maneuver. Perhaps
one of the more interesting things about reading the commentaries of
Locke’s near contemporaries on the Essay is how divergent their interpreta-
tions of his theory of ideas can be. There is, of course, the now-famous
general invective against Locke’s use of the word ‘‘idea,’’ especially the gen-
eral complaint made by Edward Stillingﬂeet, the bishop of Worcester.13 My
focus here, however, is on ontology. I want brieﬂy to consider a few critics
and defenders of Locke and note how they interpret his theory of ideas.
All of them read Locke as adopting the traditional ontology, although they
understandably vary as to whether he thinks of ideas as substances or modes.
A clear consensus emerges: no one thought Locke was seeking to deny the
traditional ontology. Naturally, in Locke’s replies to his critics he never sug-
gests he was seeking to do so either.
Commentaries on the Essay give little explicit attention to the question
of the ontological status of ideas, a striking feature given the volume of total
responses the work provoked. Nonetheless, there are a number of clues that
signal to the careful reader that Locke’s commentators read him as adhering
to the traditional ontology. Stillingﬂeet, perhaps Locke’s most important
adversary, never explicitly raised the issue of what ideas are. Most of their
13. Compare Stillingﬂeet 1697a, 273: ‘‘But none are so bold in attacking the Mysteries of the
Christian Faith; as the Smatterers in Ideas, and new Terms of Philosophy, without any true
Understanding of them. For these Ideas are become but another sort of Canting with such men.’’

96
idea and ontology
disputes about ideas concerned purely epistemological questions such as
whether Locke’s idea philosophy could generate certainty about anything,
especially about the existence of substances. Stillingﬂeet attacks Locke for
grounding human knowledge and certainty on the observed relation among
ideas. In particular, he faults Locke for supposing that our ideas of sub-
stances are nothing more than congeries of simple ideas. At this point in his
critique, he reveals what he otherwise assumes all along, namely, that he
takes ideas to be genuine substantial things: ‘‘A general Abstracted Idea of
Substance is no real Substance, nor a true Idea of one, if particular Substances
be nothing but a Complication of simple Ideas’’ (1697b, 27, emphasis in the
original). That he understands ideas to be substances is clear by the distinc-
tion he draws between an abstract idea as a substance (‘‘A general . . . idea
. . . is no substance . . . if particular substances are nothing but a complica-
tion of simple ideas,’’ and he completes this thought by denying that sub-
stances are complications, implicitly concluding that a general idea is a
substance) and the idea of substance.14 Stillingﬂeet goes on to explain that
the word ‘‘idea’’ derives from the Greek ‘‘to see’’ (‘‘idein’’) and is connected
to the concept of an unchanging and uniform appearance. ‘‘[A]nd so the
natural Sense of it is something Visible; from thence it came to signiﬁe the
Impression made in us from our Senses; and thence it was carried to the
general Notion of a thing, and from thence by Metaphysical and abstracted
speculations to the Original Exemplars of particular Essences, which were
Simple and Uniform and not liable to those Changes which visible Objects
are subject to’’ (1697b, 32). Stillingﬂeet’s etymology stems from Plato and
classical Roman authors who use ‘‘visum’’ (that which is seen) to mean ‘‘a
true Idea.’’ At no point does Stillingﬂeet ever suggest that there is disagree-
ment between him and Locke about the nature of ideas. The pressing and
immediate issue for him was whether ideas as used by Locke could ward off
pernicious skepticism.
Stillingﬂeet was not the only commentator to invoke the etymology of
the word ‘‘idea’’ when explicating Locke. Henry Lee asserts that the word in
Greek means ‘‘that which is a visible representation or resemblance of the
object’’ (1984, 2). Ideas, we are told, are thus properly only images. Lee’s
primary complaint against Locke is that the latter’s use of the word ‘‘idea’’
is far too inclusive and thus essentially meaningless.
14. Obviously the lesson drawn from this passage is a weak one, given that Stillingﬂeet’s
purpose here does not relate directly to the ontology of ideas. Nonetheless, my point remains
that when unreﬂectively discussing ideas the default view is to treat ideas as ontically grounded.

locke
97
By the word idea [Locke] means, he says, whatever is the object of
the understanding when a man thinks. And this term, he says, he
could not avoid frequently using, and there is no wonder at that;
for if every thing that is within the reach of thought be an idea,
then all the world, of which we have the least knowledge, must
consist only of several kinds of ideas. And so it must come to pass
that the word must be used in no certain sense. And accordingly
this author makes it stand, sometimes for the thoughts, or concep-
tions themselves, in the mind, and sometimes for the things them-
selves without the mind, that are the objects of its thoughts. (1,
emphasis in the original)
Lee reprimands Locke for not restricting the use of the word ‘‘idea’’ to its
strict and proper signiﬁcation: that of an image. In this diagnosis, Lee clearly
reads Locke as one committed to the claim that ideas are all modes.15 ‘‘By a
simple idea, then, this author means (excepting space) the same which other
philosophers do by a single quality, property, or accident, or, in one word, a
mode, allowing some latitude for the word mode, so as it may comprehend
inseparable attributes, such as unity, existence, etc., as well as separable quali-
ties’’ (48). Lee rejects Locke’s theory, of course, but what matters for our
purposes here is that his engagement with Locke falls squarely within the
conﬁnes of substance and mode.
As far as Lee is concerned, Locke’s worries about substances are un-
founded. We do have a perfectly serviceable conception of substance and, as
it turns out, that conception is exactly the traditional one.
This name of substance we give to any thing whose existence we
conceive independent upon every thing else, and in which several
properties or qualities are united or combined. And this, as old as
it is, is taken to be a perfect deﬁnition of substance in general. . . .
And now I am ready to answer all my author’s queries. Have we
any notion of substance in general? Yes, as before deﬁned, and that
as distinct as qualities in general, or idea either, if he mean by the
word idea that which is the object of which he is said to have an
idea. (110)
15. Lee’s claim explicitly refers only to simple ideas, but in the larger context the assertion can
reasonably be applied to all ideas.

98
idea and ontology
Again, Lee analyzes Locke within the assumption that the formal nature of
ideas must be either as a substance or a mode, for everything that exists must
obey this (apparently) exhaustive distinction. It is difﬁcult to clearly pin Lee
down on what he takes ideas in his own conception to be, but his language
suggests that images are substantival. He typically treats ideas as robust im-
ages, independent things that are somehow conveyed to the sense organs.
‘‘For when we see a body of any certain ﬁgure or bulk, the image or idea of
it goes no farther than the bottom of the eye’’ (56). The implication is that
the image is moved from the external object to the eye (much like in Aristot-
le’s theory of perception). It is beyond my task here to defend the view that
Lee held a speciﬁc kind of theory, for it sufﬁces that we recognize that Lee’s
reasoning shows clear signs of accepting as obvious the conﬁnes of the tradi-
tional ontology of substance and mode. Lee believes that Locke takes ideas
to be modes. The anonymous author quoted earlier in this section also attri-
butes a mode view of ideas to Locke, something of which that author ap-
proves ([1705] 1996, 8). We thus ﬁnd a consistent and traditional pattern of
interpretation by Locke’s contemporaries.
Locke ignored most of his critics, especially with regard to ontological
issues. He took most seriously those attacks relating to religion and skepti-
cism, another reminder of his epistemological priorities when he wrote the
Essay. There is at least one important exception. John Norris, a supporter of
Malebranche, wrote a brief tract criticizing Locke in May 1690, a scant ﬁve
months after the Essay appeared. Norris’s commentary is predictable. He
starts by complaining that Locke should have deﬁned ‘‘idea’’ before search-
ing for its origin, but he goes on to provide some interesting analysis. He
attacks Locke’s doctrine that the memory is a storehouse of ideas (II.10.2),
claiming that substances cannot be ‘‘stored’’ in the mind ([1728] 1961, 9).
Although Locke did not publicly respond directly to Norris, the Essay was
amended at this point in the second and subsequent editions. (The ‘‘Exami-
nation of P. Malebranche’s Opinion of Seeing All Things in God’’ was most
likely prompted by Norris’s critique as well, judging by the invective in the
[usually unpublished] ﬁrst six paragraphs of the piece. There Locke attacks
an anonymous follower of Malebranche. These opening paragraphs have
not been included in any published version of the ‘‘Examination’’ of which
I am aware but are available in the originals at the Bodleian Library in Ox-
ford.) Norris spends a fair bit of time arguing that ideas cannot be modes
and hence must be immaterial substances, but Locke simply ignores this
part of Norris’s tract. The changes Locke makes appear to commit him to
making ideas modiﬁcations of the mind. Ideas are ‘‘nothing, but actual Per-

locke
99
ceptions in the Mind, which cease to be any thing, when there is no percep-
tion of them’’ (ECHU II.10.2). Locke’s changes are apparently intended to
shift his position away from one that could be seen as substantializing ideas.
Of those contemporaries who wrote about Locke’s underlying metaphys-
ics, I have found none who read Locke in any way other than within the
bounds of the traditional ontology. Although this in itself does not consti-
tute evidence that Locke thought of ideas within that tradition, it is at least
suggestive that he was nonetheless so constrained. He certainly made no
attempts to clarify his position, the absence of which is odd if he genuinely
intended to reject the substance/mode ontology. I remind the reader that I
am not arguing Locke ought to have adopted the traditional ontology; I am
merely noting that in fact, explicitly or not, he did. The difﬁculties that arise
stem from the incompatibility of the way of ideas and the traditional ontol-
ogy, but those problems, simply because they exist, do not in and of them-
selves constitute evidence that Locke abandoned the ontology.
4.4 Locke’s Implicit Ontology
Locke says nearly everything about ideas except what we really want to
know. From his own era to the present, much has been made of the alleged
many senses in which Locke uses the term ‘‘idea.’’ Gilbert Ryle even accuses
Locke of using the word in one sense such that, had it been the only sense,
his philosophy would have been ‘‘a labored anatomy of utter nonentities’’
(1968, 17). There has been no shortage of scholars who remark in various
ways how Locke must have employed multiple uses of the word ‘‘idea’’ when
writing the Essay (Greenlee 1977, esp. 47, e.g.). Yet even so, none of this
entails that Locke was confused about ideas or even about how he used the
word. I grant that Locke used different conceptions of the term and for
divergent purposes, but I deny that an overarching sense was missing. Locke
introduces us to the word ‘‘idea’’ early in the Essay. ‘‘It being that Term,
which, I think, serves best to stand for whatsoever is the Object of the Un-
derstanding when a Man thinks, I have used it to express whatever is meant
by Phantasm, Notion, Species, or whatever it is, which the Mind can be em-
ploy’d about in thinking; and I could not avoid frequently using it’’ (ECHU
I.1.8). Again, not far into the work, Locke gives us another deﬁnition.
‘‘Whatsoever the Mind perceives in it self, or is the immediate object of
Perception, Thought or Understanding, that I call Idea’’ (ECHU II.8.8).
From these minimal deﬁnitions we know several things. First, ideas are ei-

100
idea and ontology
ther mental entities that exist ‘‘in’’ the mind (to be speciﬁc, in the under-
standing) or are minimally ‘‘mental’’ in the sense of being specially related
to minds (they are ‘‘known’’ even if not necessarily mental substances or
mental modes).16 Second, ideas are the objects of mental activities, including
thinking, understanding, and perceiving. Finally, ideas are immediate ob-
jects. The ﬁrst and third invoke what I have called the ‘‘presence principle.’’
Ideas must be ‘‘present to’’ the mind, or ‘‘in’’ the mind in order to be prop-
erly perceived. Putting the three points together, ideas are that which are in
immediate contact with the mind when any form of mental activity occurs.
As it stands, we perhaps ought not to be surprised that some think the word
‘‘idea’’ has no one clear sense; the deﬁnition is amazingly broad. Locke uses
it to describe images, concepts, and occasionally even qualities.17 Yet in each
of these uses, ideas are all objects in contact with the mind. As a result, one
might more accurately say that Locke uses the term ‘‘idea’’ as a genus that
covers a wealth of species. In so doing we might fault him for not being as
detailed as we might like, but that hardly constitutes confusion.
The fact that Locke makes explicit reference to terms that would generally
not be thought synonyms is important. John Sergeant uses the term ‘‘no-
tion’’ to mean ‘‘the nature of the objects represented.’’ This expression is
intended to capture the meaning of the represented object, and he contrasts
it explicitly with ‘‘idea,’’ which he thinks means a similitude or image (1696,
2–3). ‘‘Phantasm’’ was widely used to mean ‘‘image’’ in relation to the imag-
inative faculty of the mind. And ‘‘species,’’ of course, is a reference to the
Scholastic doctrine of intentional species. On the surface, none of them is a
synonym. I take the wide variety in the language used by Locke as good
evidence that he did not have one narrow conception of idea in mind. In-
stead, he had a number, all of which loosely ﬁt underneath the umbrella of
‘‘objects present to the mind.’’ If this speculation is correct, then perhaps we
would not be well served to suppose that all ideas must have the same onto-
logical ground. We already have a precedent. Malebranche separates sensa-
tion from pure intellection and correspondingly argues that sensations have
a different ontological nature from ideas of the intellect, so it is not unrea-
16. In claiming that ideas are mental entities, I am not denying that sensations for Locke are
material impressions nor that ideas might have a causal origin in the body. See ECHU II.1.23,
where Locke says that ideas are ‘‘coeval’’ with sensations. I take this to mean that they have
similar origins and not, as Thomas Lennon argues, that ideas are, in fact, material. See also
ECHU II.9.3.
17. Since I argue that Locke at times conﬂates ideas with qualities, it is worth noting that my
contention that Locke’s use of the word ‘‘idea’’ is not ‘‘all over the place’’ is nonetheless consistent
with the presence of some difﬁculties in its use.

locke
101
sonable to suppose Locke might have done something similar. In fact, Locke
paid little explicit attention to what might ontically ground his ideas, how-
ever used, but that is no bar to our doing so in his place. His professed
agnosticism about metaphysical issues leaves open the possibility that differ-
ent kinds of ideas have varying ontic grounds. Thus even if one understand-
ing of ideas dominated his thinking, we should not automatically expect
that there will be only one underlying ontological ground for all ideas.
Locke’s discussions in the Essay provide little explicit information about
his views on the metaphysical nature of ideas. Given that he warned us that
he would not be confronting such issues, we should not be surprised that
he doesn’t. Nonetheless, all of Locke’s works are replete with references and
implicit appeals to the core of the traditional substance/mode ontology. The
soul, for instance, is sometimes clearly treated as a simple substance, and he
provides extended discussions of our ideas of substances and modes. Natu-
rally one might have cause to doubt Locke about the soul, since he also
thinks it metaphysically possible that God could superadd thought to mate-
rial bodies (ECHU IV.3.6). Yet even in his discussion of the possibility of
thinking bodies, two things are clear. First, Locke never denies that thinking
is an attribute of substance, and second, his language clearly preserves the
substance/mode ontology. There can be little doubt that Locke was thor-
oughly steeped in the traditional ontology, and even if Locke believes that
there is an in principle barrier to our knowing the nature of substance, such
a view does not entail his believing that ideas have no ontic status, as either
substance or accident (mode). Earlier commentators seem more cognizant
of this point than recent ones. James Gibson, for instance, makes it a point
to note the inﬂuence of the background ontology on Locke’s writings:
‘‘Locke had himself inherited the current scheme of thought, for which the
categories of substance and quality expressed in an exhaustive manner the
ultimate nature of reality, and he never thought of questioning either its
general validity or its applicability to the subject of experience’’ ([1917] 1960,
28). It is difﬁcult to avoid noting the inﬂuence of the traditional ontology
even in a work as self-confessedly opposed to discussing metaphysical issues
as the Essay. Yet to indicate that Locke’s thought was conditioned by the
background ontology does not constitute proof that Locke thought ideas
had any particular ontic status. In fact, Locke tried to be agnostic about
exactly that claim, with varying degrees of success. Locke repeatedly chal-
lenges his opponents to generate a clear and distinct idea of substance. He
famously does this with respect to space: ‘‘If it be demanded (as usually it
is) whether this Space void of Body, be Substance or Accident, I shall readily

102
idea and ontology
answer, I know not: nor shall be ashamed to own my Ignorance, till they
that ask, shew me a clear distinct Idea of Substance’’ (ECHU II.13.17). The
inability of others (or himself) to conjure up a clear idea of substance is not
an admission that ideas are not substances. Instead, it is an admission that
he cannot say whether they are, and he refuses to pass judgment until some-
one can make it clear to him exactly what saying an idea is a substance
would entail. We do not, of course, ﬁnd many open pronouncements about
the status of ideas. We do, however, ﬁnd numerous remarks that betray
leanings in different directions.
One clue we might fasten on is how he treats ideas in connection to
relations. If he were to present ideas as clearly objects in two-place relations,
then there would be reason to suppose he was thinking of ideas in a sub-
stance-like manner, since this would suggest that ideas are not dependent
on other relata. Recall that claiming that an idea is ‘‘substance-like’’ indi-
cates that the idea has at least one of the features associated with the core
conception of a substance while lacking at least one other important feature
typically associated with a substance. An idea that is volitionally but not
ontologically dependent on a mind has one feature associated with the core
conception but lacks another. Therefore that idea is at best only substance-
like. It satisﬁes the independence requirement in one way (ontologically)
but not in another. To think of an idea as an object in a two-place relation
is to think of that idea, in at least some sense, as an independent thing. That
might not be enough for ideas to qualify as robust substances, but it would
mean that they share a vital feature we primarily associate with substances.
Likewise, were Locke to treat ideas on the model of predicates modifying
subjects (as monadic predicates), then that would constitute some evidence
he viewed ideas as modes. There are a number of places where Locke sounds
like he is treating ideas substantially. We have already brieﬂy touched on
one. In discussing memory Locke reports that it is a ‘‘Store-house of our
Ideas’’ (in II.10.2). More compellingly, he tells us that ‘‘[t]he Mind very often
sets it self on work in search of some hidden Idea, and turns, as it were, the
Eye of the Soul upon it; though sometimes too they start up in our Minds
of their own accord, and offer themselves to the Understanding; and very
often are roused and tumbled out of their dark Cells, into open Day-light,
by some turbulent and tempestuous Passion; our Affections bringing Ideas
to our Memory, which had otherwise lain quiet and unregarded’’ (ECHU
II.10.7). This passage reads as if Locke believes there is a two-place relation
between the mind and its ideas. They are ‘‘roused’’ from slumber, where
they otherwise reside ‘‘unregarded.’’ Locke’s language suggests that ideas in

locke
103
the memory are called up by certain mental actions, in turn indicating that
ideas exist in some sense without the attention of the mind. Some might
object that this would be odd indeed given that he commits himself to the
transparency of the mind, such that it has no ideas of which it is not aware:
‘‘[I]t seeming to me near a Contradiction, to say, that there are Truths im-
printed on the Soul, which it perceives or understands not’’ (ECHU I.2.5).
Yet Locke’s view is not that the mind must be aware of any ideas it has;
rather he claims that the mind must be or have been aware of them. That is,
Locke makes an exception for memory. ‘‘For what is not either actually in
view, or in the memory, is in the mind no way at all’’ (ECHU I.4.20, emphasis
mine). So there can be ideas (in some sense yet to be determined) in the
mind without actually being ‘‘in its view.’’
We should be quick to recall, however, that the sense in which ideas
can be in the mind without being ‘‘in view’’ shifts Locke ﬁrmly away from
substantializing ideas. In a later edition, Locke deleted the storehouse meta-
phor, replacing it with the following:
But our Ideas being nothing, but actual Perceptions in the Mind,
which cease to be any thing, when there is no perception of them,
this laying up of our Ideas in the Repository of the Memory, signi-
ﬁes no more but this, that the Mind has a Power, in many cases,
to revive Perceptions, which it has once had, with this additional
Perception annexed to them, that it has had them before. And in
this Sense it is, that our Ideas are said to be in our Memories, when
indeed, they are actually no where, but only there is an ability in
the Mind, when it will, to revive them again; and as it were paint
them anew on it self, though some with more, some with less difﬁ-
culty; some more lively, and others more obscurely. (ECHU II.10.2)
But what are we to make of this passage?18 Locke apparently believes here
that ideas cannot exist without a mind. And why would he believe this? The
most plausible explanation would be that ideas are modiﬁcations, states, or
properties of the mind. Other scholars have come to similar conclusions.19
One worry about attributing this view to Locke is that it seems to deny a
distinction between the act of perception and its object. As we have seen in
18. I read the word ‘‘perceptions’’ in the ﬁrst sentence of the passage as meaning ‘‘objects of
perception.’’
19. Jonathan Bennett, for one, in private conversation. Ian Tipton has defended in conversa-
tion the same reasoning with respect to Berkeley.

104
idea and ontology
our discussion of Yolton, Locke often uses the word ‘‘perception’’ to mean
‘‘object of perception.’’ For the moment, however, it is enough to notice
that this worry is unfounded. Locke provides a nice explanation that might
help clarify the situation. Ideas are the ﬁnal states that result from an activity
of the soul. Locke writes: ‘‘[T]he perception of Ideas being (as I conceive) to
the Soul, what motion is to the Body, not its Essence, but one of its Opera-
tions’’ (ECHU II.1.9). When a body is moved, the ﬁnal state resulting from
that action is the object, as it were, of that act. Similarly, an idea is the end
result (or ‘‘object’’) of a mental activity. The act of perception and its object
are kept distinct, yet the idea-object is nonetheless a modiﬁcation of the
mind.
Is all of this clear evidence that ideas are modes for Locke? No, although
I cannot imagine what else he could have in mind at this point. At no place
does Locke explicitly deny that ideas are substantial, and he never even hints
that we know nothing other than our own mental states (Alexander 1908,
30–31). Aside from those numerous passages where Locke sounds like he is
treating ideas substantially, he also complicates matters by apparently en-
dorsing a substance view when attacking adverbial theories of ideas else-
where.
The only place Locke explicitly takes up the issue of the ontological status
of ideas comes in his lengthy commentary on Malebranche’s Search After
the Truth. Here Locke directly takes up the metaphysical issues Malebranche
raises about ideas. Without doubt, the ‘‘Examination’’ is the most signiﬁcant
work of Locke’s we have to consider, despite the prominence of the Essay.
In the former, Locke directly addresses the ontological problems Malebran-
che raises and, although not published until after his death, it was apparently
written in between the ﬁrst and third editions of the Essay.20 Locke’s direct-
ness is refreshing and illuminating.
Malebranche divides the objects of mental activity into two groups: senti-
ments (sensations) and ideas. Sentiments correspond to Locke’s ideas of
sense and the latter to Locke’s ideas as they ﬁgure in intellectual thought.
Locke claims to be bafﬂed by Malebranche’s claim that sentiments are modi-
ﬁcations of the soul.
The ‘‘sentiment,’’ says [Malebranche], in the next words, ‘‘is a
modiﬁcation of our soul.’’ This word modiﬁcation here, that comes
20. Locke wrote to Molyneux on 28 March 1693, indicating that he was thinking of adding a
chapter to the next (second) edition of the Essay. Later, on 26 April 1695, he reports to Molyneux
that his critique of Malebranche is a treatise in itself, but he decided not to include it in the third

locke
105
in for explication, seems to me to signify nothing more than the
word to be explained by it; v.g. I see the purple color of a violet;
. . . I take the word [‘‘modiﬁcation’’], and desire to see what I can
conceive by it concerning my soul; and here, I confess, I can con-
ceive nothing more, but that I have the idea of purple in my mind,
which I had not before, without being able to apprehend anything
the mind does or suffers in this, besides barely having the idea of
purple; and so the good word modiﬁcation signiﬁes nothing to me
more than I knew before. (EM, 438)
On the surface this is classic Locke. By a ‘‘modiﬁcation’’ Malebranche asks
Locke to conceive of something about a substance (namely his mind), and
this Locke refuses to do. Yet his claim that the word ‘‘modiﬁcation’’ means
nothing to him is disingenuous. Locke proceeds to argue against the modi-
ﬁcation view in a way that reveals he understands the position well enough.
Ideas cannot be modes, he claims, because it would require that a uniﬁed
substance (the soul) be modiﬁed in incompatible ways.
Now I ask, take modiﬁcation for what you please, can the same
unextended indivisible substance have different, nay, inconsistent
and opposite (as these of white and black) modiﬁcations at the
same time? Or must we suppose distinct parts in an indivisible sub-
stance, one for black, another for white, and another for red ideas,
and so of the rest of those inﬁnite sensations which we have in sorts
and degrees; all which we can distinctly perceive, and so are distinct
ideas, some whereof are opposite, as heat and cold, which yet a
man may feel at the same time? (439)
This passage, I think, reveals that Locke’s initial trepidation with Malebran-
che’s use of the word ‘‘modiﬁcation’’ owes to the claims it makes on his
knowledge of substances. Locke shows that he understands Malebranche’s
use of the term ‘‘modiﬁcation’’ to mean an alteration, state, or property of
a substance. He balks at the notion that he therefore has to know what this
modiﬁcation means in terms of the underlying metaphysics. Thus, without
having to claim any understanding about the substance itself that is modi-
ﬁed, he can still turn and criticize this view whatever it actually entails in
edition because he wished to avoid controversy and had ‘‘affection’’ for Malebranche. See also
Locke 1976, 4:1620 and 5:1887.

106
idea and ontology
terms of the underlying substance. All he knows is the represented content
of the idea, be it a mode or not.
Locke’s criticism is a famous one. The basic claim is that the soul cannot
simultaneously be modiﬁed by the idea of white and the idea of black. So
far as I can tell, the only rationale for this claim is that Locke attributes to
Malebranche the view that the soul ‘‘having’’ the idea of white, that is, being
so modiﬁed, literally qualiﬁes the soul. Locke’s allegation is technically
wrong, since Malebranche holds that only sensations qualify the soul. It is,
however, right insofar as what Locke means by ‘‘idea’’ includes what Male-
branche calls sensations. Malebranche certainly does hold that sensations
are literal qualiﬁcations of the mind (LO, 634–35, Elucidation 11). Hence,
seeing white entails that the soul is white. On that thinking, the soul cannot
simultaneously sense white and black because the soul itself (which is a
unity) cannot simultaneously be white and black. It is not clear to me
whether Malebranche is committed to any such view.21 That is, I am not
convinced that Malebranche would take the unity of the soul to imply any-
thing about how it might be modiﬁed. At a minimum we should take careful
note of Malebranche’s distinction between ideas (which are never modes)
and sensations. To perceive white might just mean that people who so per-
ceive are in a particular state, and likewise with every other sensation. There
is no obvious requirement that the modiﬁcations be mutually exclusive (in-
deed they cannot be). Locke’s argument here will be of interest later, since
his own analysis occasionally appears to merge idea and quality. If an idea
impresses on the mind in such a way as literally to qualify it, then, arguably,
ideas just are qualities.
Importantly, we have no explicit evidence that Locke changes his position
about the ontological nature of ideas here. If that is correct, then we have
reason to think that Locke’s considered view is that ideas cannot be modes.
In questioning the Malebranchian concept of sentiment, he outlines the pos-
sible meanings of the word as used by Malebranche: ‘‘If by sentiment, which
is the word he uses in French, he means the act of sensation, or the opera-
tion of the soul in perceiving; and by pure idea, the immediate object of that
perception, which is the deﬁnition of ideas he gives us here in the ﬁrst chap-
ter, there is some foundation for it, taking ideas for real beings or sub-
stances’’ (437). This passage is particularly telling, since his description of
pure ideas, ‘‘the immediate object of that perception,’’ exactly resembles his
21. Steven Nadler has ably argued at some length that Malebranche avoids the error of mak-
ing representation literal, but this does not exonerate Malebranche from the problems concern-
ing sensations (1992, esp. 41–43).

locke
107
ofﬁcial deﬁnition of ‘‘idea’’ in Essay (II.8.8). Here we are told that to treat
ideas as immediate objects of perception is to take them as real beings or
substances. Now Locke attacks the position that Malebranche can say all
ideas are substances on the grounds that it would mean that all sensations
are perceived in God. This complaint is not a rejection of the view that ideas
are substances; it is a rejection of Malebranche’s doctrine of Vision in God.
In fact, Locke concludes this paragraph by wondering why everything isn’t
properly an idea, given that ‘‘by this word idea he understands here nothing
else but what is the immediate or nearest object of the mind when it per-
ceives anything’’ (438). This remark is, of course, made in reference to Male-
branche’s work, but given that Locke describes ideas in the same way in the
Essay there is reason to suppose he thinks that ideas as immediate objects
are substance-like.22 Here, in the one spot where Locke says anything explicit
about ideas, they rather resemble substances.
But our puzzle deepens. There are no other conclusive indications that
Locke thought of ideas as substances. If he did, we ought to expect at least
two things. First, we should expect that he treat any act of perception as a
two-place relation in which one of the relata is an idea (which is not to
suggest that substances are the only things that can stand in relations). Sec-
ond, we should expect that Locke give some credence to the notion of sub-
stance by minimally acting as if ideas are somehow independent beings.
Now Locke does write as if perception is relational. In one place, for
instance, we are told that ideas continually parade before the mind and that
the mind only considers some of them. ‘‘At other times, it barely observes
the train of Ideas, that succeed in the Understanding, without directing, and
pursuing any of them: And at other times, it lets them pass almost quite
unregarded, as faint shadows, that make no Impression’’ (ECHU II.19.3).
Here the perceptual relation between the mind and its ideas is decidedly
two-place. Such passages abound in the Essay. I will go so far as to say that
I think they dominate his discussions of ideas. Some might object, citing
Locke’s example of pleasure and pain. That example is supposedly the clear-
est case where Locke treats ideas as monadic predicates (aside from the
memory and retention passage examined above). Yet even here Locke does
not indicate that our idea of pain is itself a mode, even if pain itself is a
modiﬁcation of the mind. ‘‘By Pleasure and Pain, I must be understood to
mean of Body or Mind . . . though in truth, they be only different Constitu-
22. This does not imply that Locke thought of ideas as abstract concepts existing in a Platonic
heaven. Rather, ideas just are (behave like) thing-like independent entities.

108
idea and ontology
tions of the Mind, sometimes occasioned by disorder in the Body, some-
times by Thoughts of the Mind’’ (II.20.2). I ﬁnd it surprising that if our
ideas are modes that Locke does not clearly write as if our idea of pain in
particular is just a modiﬁcation of the mind. Yet he does not. He distin-
guishes between pain and our concept (idea) of pain, at the same time main-
taining only that the former is a mode of the mind. The key is that we must
reﬂect on our experience—how the soul is modiﬁed—to fashion the idea.
‘‘For to deﬁne [pleasure and pain] by the Presence of Good or Evil, is no
otherwise to make them known to us, than by making us reﬂect on what we
feel in our selves, upon the several and various Operations of Good and Evil
upon our Minds, as they are differently applied to, or considered by us’’
(II.20.1). Consider an example. If I were being harmed by an ‘‘evil’’ cause,
say someone burning my arm with a brand, then my body would be in the
state of being damaged (‘‘disordered’’). It is not until I reﬂect on that disor-
der (and its effects in the mind) that I am said to feel pain. We can suffer
pain without having the idea of that pain. Now this ﬁts Locke’s analysis
because he alleges that the mind cannot fail to receive impressions conveyed
by the senses. The outcome is perhaps odd; namely, that we can be in pain
without having the idea of pain, but I submit that Locke might have had
just this result in mind.23
In order to make this clear, we need to examine the claim that Locke did
not think ideas could exist apart from a mind (Chappell 1994, 28). Locke
holds that every instance of thinking or perceiving requires an object, but
the reverse is not obviously true for him. I want to be absolutely clear about
the position I am about to take. I am not asserting that Locke reﬂectively
believed that ideas can exist without a mind like some third substance. I am
arguing that once we reveal some tensions in Locke’s thought concerning
the relationship between ideas and qualities we can see pressures within his
thought to treat ideas as rather like substances. Consider one passage often
taken as evidence that ideas cannot exist ‘‘outside’’ the mind:
Want of Sensation in this case [when there is an impression on the
sense organ but no notice is taken of it] is not through any defect
in the Organ, or that the Man’s Ears are less affected, than at other
23. In discussing Berkeley, Robert Muehlmann notes that sensations (like pain) can have two
components, one affective (which would be the suffering aspect), one sensory. There is thus some
reason to believe that this view is not entirely implausible, and I engage it further in section 7.2
with respect to Berkeley. See Muehlmann 1992, 255. As Muehlmann himself notes, he is presaged
by Norton Nelkin with respect to Reid (Nelkin 1989, 65–77).

locke
109
times, when he does hear: but that which uses to produce the Idea,
though conveyed in by the usual Organ, not being taken notice of
in the Understanding, and so imprinting no Idea on the Mind,
there follows no Sensation. So that where-ever there is Sense, or Per-
ception, there some Idea is actually produced, and present in the Un-
derstanding. (ECHU II.9.4)
Although I grant that the passage does not explicitly allow that ideas can
exist without perception, it is consistent with that possibility, although it is
not commonly interpreted in this way. The part typically seized on here is
not the last sentence emphasized by Locke but the one before it. No idea is
formed unless the mind takes notice of it. His ﬁnal conclusion does not
indicate that there can be no ideas without a mind perceiving them; it only
asserts the reverse. Every instance of perception involves an idea. Perhaps
there is some reason for this omission. Locke tells us that the mind in the
perception of simple ideas is utterly passive: ‘‘[T]he Mind is wholly Passive
in the reception of all its simple Ideas’’ (ECHU II.12.1). Hearing a basic
sound is, as we have seen, offered as an example of a simple idea by Locke.
Furthermore, in addition to being passive, the mind cannot refuse to admit
a simple idea. ‘‘For the Objects of our Senses, do, many of them, obtrude
their particular Ideas upon our minds, whether we will or no. . . . These
simple Ideas, when offered to the mind, the Understanding can no more
refuse to have, nor alter, when they are imprinted, nor blot them out, and
make new ones in it self, than a mirror can refuse, alter, or obliterate the
Images or Ideas, which, the Objects set before it, do therein produce’’
(ECHU II.1.25). Note that Locke states that the objects of the senses intrude
on the mind and not just the sensory organs. Thus Locke tells us on the one
hand that the mind can refuse entrance to certain sensory ideas (by inatten-
tion or otherwise), while on the other he tells us that the mind cannot.
I submit that Locke’s position here is not necessarily contradictory. The
mind cannot refuse the impressions conveyed by the senses. By this Locke
intends that the mind cannot refuse to be modiﬁed by qualities that affect
the senses. When the senses function properly, the causal powers of external
objects extend, via the senses, to the mind. The impressions conveyed to the
mind are not themselves ideas but qualities. Confusion arises because in the
earlier passage Locke is providing an intellectual interpretation of ideas in
mind. I should be clear here. By ‘‘intellectual’’ I do not mean to imply any-
thing about whether ideas are images. I only intend that such ideas are not
qualities nor immediately sensory. In short, Locke sometimes blends quali-

110
idea and ontology
ties and ideas, especially when it comes to the underlying metaphysical is-
sues. This point has been discussed in the literature by Jonathan Bennett
and opposed by Thomas Lennon.24 Locke himself warns us of the possibility
of confusion or error on this very point in II.8.8, and I am inclined to think
that Locke offered the apology for some reason, even if he is not generally
guilty of conceptual confusion.25 Allowing for the possibility that Locke at
least occasionally runs ideas and qualities together, we can see that percep-
tion usually involves a two-place relation between the mind and the ideas it
considers. As I brieﬂy suggested in section 4.2, we might tell a corroborating
story. Sensations (bodily impressions) are mediate objects (of perception)
that are perceived only when made present to the mind by causing an idea
(the immediate object) to be perceived. It would be easy to lose track of the
objects to which we refer when we admit multiple kinds of them, thus ex-
plaining some of Locke’s apparently loose language.
And what of the passage about memory and retention where Locke says
that ideas are really nothing when not perceived by the mind? A careful
rereading will satisfy us that he has a quality sense of idea in mind. I repro-
duce the passage for convenience.
But our Ideas being nothing, but actual Perceptions in the Mind,
which cease to be any thing, when there is no perception of them,
this laying up of our Ideas in the Repository of the Memory, signi-
ﬁes no more but this, that the Mind has a Power, in many cases,
to revive Perceptions, which it has once had, with this additional
Perception annexed to them, that it has had them before. And in
this Sense it is, that our Ideas are said to be in our Memories, when
indeed, they are actually no where, but only there is an ability in the
Mind, when it will, to revive them again; and as it were paint them
anew on it self, though some with more, some with less difﬁculty;
some more lively, and others more obscurely. (ECHU II.10.2; the
last emphasis is mine).
Note the last italicized phrase. The mind ‘‘paints’’ ideas on itself anew. The
metaphor is imagistic and strongly reminiscent of qualities. From his cri-
24. Bennett 1971, 25–30, and Lennon 1998, 13–21.
25. Compare ECHU II.21.1: ‘‘The Mind being every day informed, by the Senses, of the alter-
ation of those simple Ideas, it observes in things without’’ and ‘‘For we cannot observe any
alteration to be made in, or operation upon any thing, but by the observable change of its sensible
Ideas; nor conceive any alteration to be made, but by conceiving a Change of some its Ideas.’’ In
these passages, as elsewhere, the word ‘‘idea’’ is plausibly best taken as meaning ‘‘quality.’’

locke
111
tique of Malebranche we know that Locke is inclined to take the qualiﬁca-
tion of minds literally. As a consequence, Locke is here telling us that the
mind has the power to invoke states of itself that recreate the affection of a
sensory quality. In this sense, ideas (understood as quality instances) do not
exist when not perceived by the mind. Here ‘‘perception’’ again means ‘‘the
object of perception.’’ Qualities modifying the mind are actual objects of
mental activity. I am emboldened by the fact that this is the only passage
where Locke says anything remotely like this, and it is easily explained in
terms of the idea/quality conﬂation.
Additional evidence of pressures in Locke’s thinking to treat ideas as sub-
stance-like (because perception is relational) may be found elsewhere. Locke
tells us that consciousness is ‘‘the perception of what passes in a Man’s
own mind’’ (ECHU II.1.19). Given that he admits that we can be inﬂuenced
(materially affected by external objects) while asleep, it follows that the mind
can be affected without consciousness or intellectual perception (ECHU
II.1.21). This view is plausible, since something must presumably cause the
mind to start functioning consciously when we awaken. Sensory qualities
affect the mind even when we sleep. Another piece of evidence comes from
Locke’s adherence to the transparency thesis, which holds that the mind
must be aware of any idea in its possession. ‘‘For to imprint any thing on
the Mind without the Mind’s perceiving it, seems to me hardly intelligible’’
(ECHU I.2.5). Adhering to this thesis contradicts his claim that the mind
does not have to take notice of ideas conveyed to it, unless he intends that it
is possible to perceive something of which one takes no notice. The only
sense I can give to that suggestion is that Locke thinks the affection of the
mind by qualities constitutes a form of perception. And so it does. The mind
‘‘perceives’’ whenever it has an object on which it acts. Since the impression
of qualities on the mind always results in mental activity (the mind being
modiﬁed), the mind always perceives in a minimal sense what is imprinted
on it, hence the distinction between having ideas and ‘‘taking notice’’ of
them. We cannot fail to perceive a sensory impression in the sense that we
are modiﬁed by it, but we need not take notice of it, which involves generat-
ing an immediate object for the mind, an idea.
The end result is that because Locke does not fully separate qualities from
ideas, it is not surprising that he writes as if perception is relational between
minds and distinct objects. He often thinks of qualities as like ideas and as
external features of the world, and so in perception there is a two-place
relation between the mind and the idea ‘‘in’’ the object. Yet we cannot thus
conclude that ideas are substances for Locke. At best we can conclude that

112
idea and ontology
when Locke speaks of ideas in the quality sense, he merely treats them as
rather like substances. They have important features typically associated only
(or primarily) with substances but they lack others, so we cannot conclu-
sively hold that Locke considers ideas to be substances. What if Locke had
completely separated ideas and qualities consistently in all of his thinking
and writing? Might that have led Locke to make a clear pronouncement
about the nature of ideas? I suspect Locke would have urged us to pay close
attention to the distinction between mediate and immediate objects, but
beyond this I have no good sense of what else he would have said. I am
content to conclude that a substance interpretation at least inﬂuences his
thinking about the nature of ideas. That still leaves a fundamental ambiguity
in his thinking about them. When he speaks of ideas as qualities external
to us, they at least behave like substances and ﬁt well with his attack on
Malebranchian modes. At other times, however, he thinks of the effect
(mechanistically) of qualities on our bodies and minds, and in those few
cases ideas appear to be modes (as in the memory passage). Either way, his
thinking betrays a clear commitment to the traditional categories.
But what of the second element in Locke’s thinking we expected to ﬁnd?
If Locke implicitly holds that ideas are like substances in some cases, there
should be some evidence that ideas are independent of minds. Insofar as he
thinks of ideas as qualities, they exist independently of minds as derivative
on the mind-independent primary qualities of external objects. Consider
those passages where Locke most clearly conﬂates qualities with ideas. ‘‘The
Mind being every day informed, by the Senses, of the alteration of those
simple Ideas, it observes in things without.’’ And again later in the same
paragraph: ‘‘For we cannot observe any alteration to be made in, or opera-
tion upon any thing, but by the observable change of its sensible Ideas; nor
conceive any alteration to be made, but by conceiving a Change of some
[of] its Ideas’’ (ECHU II.21.1, emphasis on ‘‘its Ideas’’ is Locke’s). The ideas,
which are ‘‘out there’’ in the objects, are independent of the mind. Insofar
as we consider ideas of primary qualities, where he merges those qualities
with ideas they would be obviously mind independent. When Locke merges
idea with quality, he treats them both as relata in two-place relations and as
independent of the mind.
I am intrigued by the fact that there are no clear cases where Locke denies
independence. He is careful to assert that perception always requires an idea,
but he never claims that all ideas must be perceived. That innovation was
Berkeley’s, not Locke’s. It is possible that Locke simply ignored these prob-
lems, leaving them for others to grapple with as best they might. I do not

locke
113
believe Locke thought hard about these complications and hence also do not
believe that Locke held a reﬂective view about the independence of ideas, all
of which helps to explain why the quality-idea conﬂation runs so deep.
We have yet, of course, to explain how quality ideas sometimes can be
modes of the mind when Locke attacked Malebranche for holding a similar
view. Locke takes care to emphasize that ideas of secondary qualities, when
received by the mind, do not resemble external objects. In effect, Locke here
adopts the solution I provided for Malebranche above. That is, he recognizes
that the mind need not be literally red when perceiving red. Thus it is possi-
ble for the mind to receive contrary impressions simultaneously. I also take
this as some evidence that Locke was thinking within the conﬁnes of the
traditional ontology.
It is worth reminding ourselves of Locke’s agnosticism about the nature
of ideas. When John Norris attacked him for not discussing the nature of
ideas, Locke replied, ‘‘[A]nd as to that, I answer, no man can tell; for which
I not only appeal to experience, which were enough, but shall add this rea-
son, viz. because no man can give any account of any alteration made in
any simple substance whatsoever.’’26 Locke’s attitude results in one passage
some have cited as evidence that Locke rejected the notion that ideas are
substances (Lennon 1993, 246). In his response to Norris, Locke goes on to
say:
Ideas may be real beings, though not substances; as motion is a real
being, though not a substance; and it seems probable that, in us,
ideas depend on, and are some way or other the effect of motion;
since they are so ﬂeeting, it being, as I have elsewhere observed, so
hard, and almost impossible, to keep in our minds the same unvar-
ied idea, long together, unless when the object that produces it is
present to the senses. . . . To excuse therefore the ignorance I have
owned of what our ideas are, any further than as they are percep-
tions we experiment in ourselves; and the dull, unphilosophical way
I have taken of examining their production, only so far as experi-
ence and observation lead me, wherein my dim sight went not be-
yond sensation and reﬂection. (1894, 2:469)
The passage is admittedly difﬁcult for me, even if a singular exception. But
perhaps Locke does not deny that ideas are substances in this passage. He
26. Locke 1894, 2:460, ‘‘Remarks upon Some of Mr. Norris’s Books.’’ The reply to Norris was
appended to his ‘‘Examination’’ and apparently written in 1693 (between the ﬁrst and second
editions of the Essay), although not published until after Locke’s death.

114
idea and ontology
may be reasonably read as denying that he knows. They may be real beings
without being substances (and hence may be analogous to the case of mo-
tion), and at any rate he tells us that all he commits himself to is the claim
that they are clearly dependent on external causes through motion (which
still allows ideas to be substance-like). This last claim reﬂects his mechanistic
corpuscularianism and reinforces the point that external qualities causally
affect the mind. Thus the passage might not speak against the traditional
ontology, although it raises the possibility of another interpretation. Thomas
Lennon argues, partially on the basis of this text, that Locke’s ideas are mate-
rial particles (1993, esp. 247–48). The plausibility of that thesis lies outside
the purview of this work (see section 4.2), but I may content myself with
the knowledge that Lennon’s thesis still has Locke adopting the traditional
ontology.
Now, ﬁnally, we have an ontic ground for Locke’s theory of ideas. Ideas,
in the broad sense of his ofﬁcial deﬁnition, have characteristics of both sub-
stances and modes. That is, he sometimes acts as if they are modes and
sometimes acts as if they are like substances. We can interpret this ambiguity
in one of two ways. First, we might think that there are various kinds of
ideas, some of which are modes, some of which are substances. Alterna-
tively, we might conclude that Locke is simply unreﬂectively inconsistent.
Such options come as a result of his broad and free-ranging conception of
ideas, his consciously ignoring the metaphysical consequences of his theoriz-
ing, and the occasional merging of qualities and ideas. We can also explain
why his contemporaries, although all placing him within the substance/
mode ontology, nevertheless interpreted him in various ways. Since they
were not clear about the conﬂation, and most commentators committed it
themselves, any of a number of plausible readings may come from the texts.
Thus far I hope at a minimum to have established the reasonableness of
supposing that Locke operated within the substance/mode ontology when
thinking about ideas. One lesson seems clear from a careful study of Locke’s
theorizing. Even when one sets aside questions about ontology, the prob-
lems that arise from the poor ﬁt between idea philosophy and ontology
intrude into the epistemology. Locke occasionally makes ideas mental enti-
ties in the tradition of the later Descartes and his Cartesian followers, yet he
too wishes to account for our knowledge of a nonmental world. His core
problem is essentially the same one that Descartes, Arnauld, Malebranche,
and others faced. How do ideas function epistemologically given the nature
of the mind and body? As with Descartes, the difﬁculty is pressing not only
because Locke maintains that resemblance sometimes ﬁgures into the proc-

locke
115
ess (as with primary qualities) but also because he conceives of perception
as a causal process.
I conclude that although Locke did not advance early modern thinking
about the ontic nature of ideas, he neither ‘‘abandons’’ ontology nor ‘‘deon-
tologizes’’ ideas. Instead, he provides an interesting bridge between the
Cartesians and Berkeley, and not just on the infamous matter of abstraction.
Locke’s work additionally constitutes a preservation of the core conceptual
scheme associated with the Cartesian philosophy of ideas. Ideas are mental,
tightly related to the mind (present to it), and represent the external world.
Understanding them in their entirety is the key to unlocking the secrets of
the mind. As we shall see, Locke was not alone during this period in main-
taining an adherence to a core traditional ontology when thinking about the
nature and function of ideas. Leibniz, often a critic of Locke, develops a
distinctively different theory about ideas. Yet on closer scrutiny, Leibniz’s
philosophizing about ideas retains this same commitment to a traditional
underlying ontology.

5
leibniz
G. W. Leibniz, like Locke, also developed his theory of ideas in the aftermath
of the famous dispute between Arnauld and Malebranche. That dispute
turned on the ontological status of ideas. For Malebranche ideas are abstract
and substantial things that reside ‘‘in’’ the mind of God. They are permanent
entities preserved by Him even when not in use by ﬁnite beings. Arnauld
takes ideas to be temporary modes of the mind. Both ﬁgures pull Leibniz in
opposite directions. He agrees with Malebranche that ideas cannot be identi-
ﬁed with particular thoughts; ideas must be objects to which the mind is
related in thinking. Yet Leibniz simultaneously takes Arnauld’s side in the
dispute, agreeing that ideas must be internal modiﬁcations of the mind.
What emerges, at ﬁrst glance, is a difﬁcult amalgam of incompletely
stated views. Early in his career, in the ‘‘Notes on the Reply of Foucher to
the Criticism of his Criticism of the ‘Recherche de la Verite’’’ (1676 [L, 155]),
Leibniz distinguishes between two senses of idea, and ten years later he re-
peats the very same distinction, making it plausible to suppose that he had
a relatively stable conception of their nature. According to the Discourse on
Metaphysics (1686), ideas can be either the form of thought or the immediate
object of perception (L, 320; G 4:451). Sometimes he explicitly speaks of
ideas as modes and sometimes as objects, leaving us with what Jonathan
Bennett calls an ‘‘unresolved tension’’ in Leibniz’s thinking about ideas (NE,
xxiii; see SSB 6).
Conventional scholarship now indicates that these opposing forces are
resolved in Leibniz’s mature theory that treats ideas as dispositions. Thus
Nicholas Jolley argues that Bennett’s ‘‘unresolved tension’’ is actually a
‘‘genuine synthesis’’ of the views of Arnauld and Malebranche (1990, 134–
35). Leibniz agrees with Malebranche that ideas are not particular thoughts
but nonetheless seeks to make them mental. ‘‘Although he resists any

leibniz
117
straightforward identiﬁcation of ideas with thoughts,’’ Jolley remarks, ‘‘Leib-
niz does believe that talk about ideas can be reduced to talk about the men-
tal. Leibniz brings off the reduction by explaining that ideas are dispositions
to think in certain ways’’ (136). Benson Mates takes it as obvious that Leib-
nizian ideas are just mental dispositions (1986, 49, 175, 246).1 Ideas are not
particular events but are nonetheless nonabstract psychological entities.
Again, idea language reduces to talk about the mental as dispositions to
think in certain ways.2
Unfortunately what it means to say that ‘‘ideas are dispositions’’ is less
clear than it appears at ﬁrst blush. Not only is the ontic nature of Leibnizian
ideas left murky but a number of unresolved philosophical difﬁculties are
also associated with this particular theory. It is especially important that one
should take care to distinguish between what ideas are (ontologically) and
what occurs when representing is being tokened. Furthermore, one should
understand that the claim that what it means to be in possession of an idea
requires a disposition is distinct from the identiﬁcation of an idea with a
disposition. In this chapter I seek to ﬂesh out Leibniz’s ultimate ontology of
ideas by investigating what it might mean to say that ideas ‘‘are’’ disposi-
tions. The goal is largely prophylactic; I want to head off any possible sug-
gestion that Leibniz’s theory of ideas places him in the early modern tale or
supports an understanding of the development of the way of ideas that is
anti-ontological. Ultimately I contend that ideas for Leibniz are, strictly
speaking, modes (i.e., mental modiﬁcations). As such his views place him
cleanly within the traditional core ontology, although the focus of my dis-
cussion indicates why ideas cannot be straightforwardly identiﬁed with dis-
positions. Many modes are dispositional, but to think of ideas as
dispositions engenders considerable philosophical difﬁculties in Leibniz and
runs counter to signiﬁcant textual evidence.
5.1 Resolving a ‘‘Tension’’
As a student of the Malebranche-Arnauld dispute, Leibniz was clear about
the competing views concerning the status of ideas early in his philosophical
career. In 1676, in response to Foucher’s criticisms of Malebranche, he
1. Note that Mates expresses the claim differently at different points. On page 49 Mates says
to have an idea is to have a disposition; at 175 and 246 he says that an idea is a disposition. I go
on to argue that the distinction matters. See Broad 1975, 134–35.
2. ‘‘What Is an Idea?’’ (1678 [L, 207, G 7:263–64]); see also G 2:547.

118
idea and ontology
writes: ‘‘Idea can be taken in two senses; namely, for the quality or form of
thought, as velocity and direction are the quality and form of movement; or
for the immediate or nearest object of perception. Thus the idea would not
be a mode of being of our soul. This seems to be the opinion of Plato and
the author of the Recherche’’ (L, 155). Later Leibniz repeats this basic distinc-
tion in the Discourse, but he indicates a preference for the object reading he
will continue to hold as late as the New Essays. ‘‘If the idea were the form of
the thought, it would come into and go out of existence with the actual
thoughts which correspond to it, but since it is the object of thought, it can
exist before and after the thoughts’’ (109). This passage is a straightforward
denial that ideas are particular thoughts (that is, particular states of think-
ing). Thoughts come and go, but ideas are stable objects to which the mind
is related during mental activity. Thus far Leibniz seems to be in agreement
with Malebranche. Yet Leibniz curiously sides more often with Arnauld,
arguing that ideas must be modes of the mind. In a 4 November 1715 letter
to Remond, Leibniz is unequivocal. ‘‘There is more plausibility in attacking
P. Malebranche’s opinion about ideas. For there is no necessity (it seems) to
take them for something which is outside us. It is sufﬁcient to consider ideas
as Notions, that is to say, as modiﬁcations of our mind. This is how the
Schools, M. Descartes, and M. Arnauld take them’’ (G 3:659). The standard
way to resolve these apparently conﬂicting passages is to appeal to disposi-
tions. Ideas are both particular objects and internal modiﬁcations, and we
can make sense of this by saying that ideas are dispositions. The relevant
concept here means something like ‘‘the power to act or be acted on in a
certain way.’’3 To say that an idea is a disposition means that the idea just is
a power to bring about some result. Unfortunately this contemporary char-
acterization is positively misleading when applied to Leibniz, who does not
have such an understanding of the concept of power. A power, according to
Leibniz, is the possibility of change (NE, 169). But genuine powers—active
powers—also include something Leibniz calls ‘‘endeavor.’’ The powers had
by substances, for instance, include an active striving to actualize whatever
faculty is possessed. ‘‘If ‘power’ is taken to be the source of action, it means
more than the aptitude or ability in terms of which power was explained in
the preceding chapter. For, as I have more than once remarked, it also in-
cludes endeavor’’ (NE, 216; see also NE, 169, 226). Ideas, of course, are not
active substances according to Leibniz. As a result, when one alleges that
3. I borrow this formulation from Mackie 1972.

leibniz
119
ideas are dispositions, we cannot charitably understand he or she to mean
that ideas are (active) powers in Leibniz’s sense of the term. Instead, disposi-
tions are perhaps best understood as abilities or capacities absent any entele-
chy or ‘‘endeavor.’’ Leibniz uses the word ‘‘aptitude’’ to describe powers that
do not include endeavor.
Having an idea thus reduces to the mind having the bare possibility (apti-
tude) of bringing about a certain kind of change. Accordingly scholars like
Mates and Jolley argue that Leibniz holds a coherent synthesis view that
borrows from both Malebranche and Arnauld. Idea language reduces to
mental talk, and the reduction works because ideas are mental dispositions.
In ‘‘Quid sit Idea?’’ (‘‘What Is an Idea?’’) Leibniz writes: ‘‘There are many
things in our mind, however, which we know are not ideas, though they
would not occur without ideas—for example, thoughts, perceptions, and
affections. In my opinion, namely, an idea consists, not in some act, but in
the faculty of thinking [Idea enim nobis non in quodam cogitandi actu, sed
facultate consistit], and we are said to have an idea of a thing even if we do
not think of it, if only, on a given occasion, we can think of it’’ (L, 207; G
7:263–64). From this and other passages it is clear that Leibniz does not
attribute endeavor to the nature of ideas. They are faculties of mere capacity.
There is an additional complication, however. Leibniz also consistently
indicates that ideas ‘‘express’’ their objects. In the Discourse he writes: ‘‘I
believe that this disposition [qualite´] of our soul in so far as it expresses
some nature, form, or essence, is properly the idea of the thing, which is in
us, and which is always in us, whether we think of it or not’’ (L, 320; G
4:451).4 Leibniz’s doctrine of expression is an interesting, if technical, one.
In short, x expresses y if we can move from the properties of x to knowledge
of the corresponding properties of y.5 If I have an idea of a square, then my
mind is in a certain dispositional state. Furthermore, from the properties of
my mind so disposed, one (a supermind) could read off the properties of
the square. So ideas have dispositional properties to express their objects. As
such they are enduring objects themselves, as Malebranche would have it.
However, they are not abstract entities, but decidedly mental beings, in ac-
cordance with the views of Arnauld. The initial case for attributing a disposi-
tional theory of ideas, properly understood, to Leibniz is quite nice. We
have, it appears, a genuine synthesis of views.
4. Loemker translates the word ‘‘qualite´’’ here as ‘‘disposition,’’ and Jolley follows his transla-
tion.
5. For a more thorough discussion, see Kulstad 1977, 55–76.

120
idea and ontology
5.2 Ideas as Dispositions
If ideas just are dispositions, then we need to ﬂesh out the rest of the theory.
Importantly, one might argue that dispositions must be ‘‘grounded.’’6 The
solubility of salt (its disposition to dissolve in water) is grounded in the
chemical properties of salt and water. That is, solubility depends on the
relations that hold between the intrinsic properties of salt and water. Un-
grounded dispositions were often held in the early modern period to be
philosophically repugnant. To use a now (in)famous example, if one were
to ask me why a particular substance causes people to go to sleep, merely
saying that the substance has a dormitive power is unsatisfying. Similarly, if
one wants to know why this idea expresses a dog as opposed to something
else, merely saying that it is a disposition to conjure the content dog fails to
explain anything.7
Whether dispositions generally must have a ground or not, Leibniz inde-
pendently provides in his system a ground for the dispositional states of the
mind: his doctrine of petites perceptions. There are many minute, insensible
modiﬁcations of the mind at every point in time. ‘‘Besides, there are hun-
dreds of indications leading us to conclude that at every moment there is in
us an inﬁnity of perceptions, unaccompanied by awareness or reﬂection;
that is, of alterations in the soul itself, of which we are unaware because
these impressions are either too minute and too numerous, or else too un-
varying, so that they are not sufﬁciently distinctive on their own’’ (NE, 53;
see also NE, 112–13, 134). These minute modiﬁcations of the mind ultimately
explain why we have the dispositional properties we do, and Leibniz de-
scribes them as ‘‘alterations in the soul itself,’’ suggesting that they are not
also dispositions themselves. Assume that I have an idea of a dog (as op-
posed to an idea of a cat or an elephant). Since that idea just is a disposition,
my having this idea means either (1) that should I somehow be able to
reﬂect on my petites perceptions—the modes of my mind that ground this
6. This is actually a contentious contemporary metaphysical issue, as some hold that disposi-
tions are intrinsic objects that do not require grounds. I do not wish to take a particular stand
on this issue here, for Leibniz seems to recognize some need for a ground. Both Mates and Jolley,
for instance, explicitly agree that at least Leibnizian dispositions are grounded. See Mates 1986,
246, and Jolley 1990, 139. For a contemporary defense of ‘‘categoricalism’’ (where dispositions
must be grounded in nondispositional states), see Armstrong 1997, esp. ch. 5. For a nice recent
overview, including some of the alternate positions, see Bird 2001, 137–49.
7. It should be noted that I am forced into using some awkward language just to express the
view that ideas are identiﬁed with dispositions. The natural inclination is to attribute a disposi-
tion to the idea (hence saying that the idea has a dog disposition), which is not the view I take
Jolley and Mates to be espousing.

leibniz
121
disposition—I will learn why they express a dog and not a cat or an ele-
phant, or (2) that merely having these modiﬁcations entails my possession
of this particular idea (the reverse is not necessarily true; having an idea
does not entail the possession of any particular set of modes). I want to
remain neutral with respect to these options as, for my purposes here, not
much hinges on which one is taken. Given this characterization, we might
make a comparison between solubility and ideas.
Salt
Mind
My mind
Chemical structure
Petites perceptions
Petites perceptions x, y, and z
Solubility
Ideas
Idea of a dog
Dissolvings
Occurrent thoughts
Thinking of a dog
Salt is soluble because of its chemical structure. A mind has an idea in virtue
of its petites perceptions. The important difference, of course, is that an idea
also has an expressive ability.8 One important advantage accrued here is the
ability to explain Leibniz’s contention that we have ideas even when not
thinking of them and that all of our ideas are innate and internally generated
(L, 320; G 4:451; see also L, 113; G 4:109–10).
Given this understanding of what it means to say that Leibniz treats ideas
as dispositions, what compelling reason is there to think that he actually
thought of ideas this way? There are two. The ﬁrst reason for supposing
Leibniz thought of ideas as dispositions is that he appears to say so in two
places. Second, Leibniz’s discussion of innate ideas appears to support the
disposition thesis. Let us engage both reasons, turning ﬁrst to analyze the
former.
5.3 Reading Leibniz
Loemker’s translation of the Discourse has Leibniz writing that ideas are
‘‘dispositions of the soul.’’ This translation imports a fair bit of philosophy
into the text, but virtually all of the commentators follow this translation (L,
320; G 4:451.).9 In the French, Leibniz uses the word ‘‘qualite´’’ and not the
8. One might immediately worry that for Leibniz petites perceptions are also representational.
I think that is right. Compare NE, 54, where he says that these minute perceptions are like
unconscious sensations. However, as Jolley does not emphasize the expressive role of ideas in his
account of how they are grounded (he certainly does so elsewhere), it is not clear that this point
can (or should) be held against him.
9. Interestingly, in The Light of the Soul Jolley notes the French word but preserves the
translation of ‘‘disposition’’ anyway (1990, 137).

122
idea and ontology
word ‘‘disposition’’ (which is an English cognate). As it turns out, however,
Leibniz simply does not use ‘‘qualite´’’ to mean disposition. He does not do
so primarily because it was not seventeenth-century usage (and indeed it is
not even today). In the Thresor de la langue franc¸aise (1606) none of the
sample uses of ‘‘qualite´’’ plausibly means a disposition in the sense of a
tendency to behave. More importantly, the Dictionnaire de l’Acade´mie fran-
c¸aise (1694) also does not list any such usage for the term. At best one
deﬁnition indicates that ‘‘qualite´’’ might mean an inclination or habit (‘‘Il
signiﬁe plus particulierement, inclination, habitude’’), but the illustration of
what this deﬁnition means indicates that it is intended in the sense of a
personal character trait (‘‘C’est un homme qui a beaucoup de bonnes qualitez,
d’excellentes qualitez, des qualitez louables, extraordinaires, & heroiques. il a
de belles, de grandes qualitez. parmi quelques bonnes qualitez il en a beaucoup
de mauvaises. il a une mauvaise qualite´, c’est qu’il ne sc¸auroit garder de se-
cret.’’). ‘‘Qualite´’’ certainly has diverse meanings and Leibniz employs them
all. He commonly uses it in the sense of ‘‘has value’’ (‘‘Si notre illustre
Auteur avoit beaucoup de compagnons en qualite´ et en merite’’ [G 3:428]),
most often as a property (as with ‘‘qualite´ occultes’’ [e.g., G 2:534 and pas-
sim]), and even in the sense of a role (‘‘Pour la seconde fois il ne le ﬁr qu’en
qualite´ de pensionnair de la France’’ [G 3:277]).10 A careful search of the
original French (at least in the Gerhardt edition) does not reveal even one
other clear instance of ‘‘qualite´’’ being used to mean disposition in the rele-
vant sense.
Tellingly, Leibniz does use the French word ‘‘disposition’’ to mean what
one would expect. In the New Essays in response to Locke’s claim (at
II.22.10) that tenderness is a disposition, Leibniz uses the word ‘‘disposition’’
in the sense of a tendency to behave. ‘‘[E]t quand on peut le reduire en
acte a` chaque occasion qui se presente, nous l’appellons disposition; ainsi la
tendresse est une disposition a` l’amitie´ ou a` l’amour’’ (G 5:199; NE, 215).
One should wonder, then, why Leibniz would not use this word in the Dis-
course if that were what he really meant. Since arguably ‘‘qualite´’’ did not
mean ‘‘disposition’’ and he had alternative words that he did use in the
appropriate sense (even in the same work), I conclude that Leibniz is just
not saying that ideas are dispositions at all. Ideas are qualities of the soul. I
will subsequently argue that he intends this in the sense of a straightforward
10. With respect to the property characterization of the term, Andrew Pessin in private con-
versation reminded me that Locke in the Essay tends to conﬂate quality and property (especially
in II.8), suggesting that it might have been common to identify the two in the period. If so, then
this would, in turn, make Loemker’s translation yet more of a stretch.

leibniz
123
mental modiﬁcation. In short, to have an idea involves a disposition, but an
idea is a mode.
A second, more difﬁcult bit of text remains to analyze. Recall that
Loemker translates the passage from ‘‘Quid sit Idea?’’ cited above as ‘‘an
idea consists, not in some act, but in the faculty of thinking, and we are said to
have an idea of a thing even if we do not think of it, if only, on a given
occasion, we can think of it’’ (L, 207; G 7:263–64). This passage certainly
seems to say that ideas ‘‘consist’’ in an activated power, which could be a
disposition to think. Consider the original Latin.11 ‘‘Idea enim nobis non in
quodam cogitandi actu, sed facultate consistit, et ideam rei habere dicimur,
etsi de ea non cogitemus, modo data occasione de ea cogitare possimus.’’
The verb ‘‘consistere’’ (here conjugated as consistit) in Latin carries the posi-
tional or architectural metaphor of ‘‘standing on’’ or ‘‘resting on.’’ Thus a
building may ‘‘consist’’ of marble either by ‘‘resting on’’ a foundation made
of marble or by being literally composed of it. I do not wish to deny that
Leibniz might well be saying here that ideas consist in a faculty, but it is
not the only plausible reading of the Latin. Although the English cognate
‘‘consists’’ derives from the Latin ‘‘consistere,’’ it can be a misleading transla-
tion. The Oxford Latin Dictionary lists both ‘‘to be composed of’’ and ‘‘to
be based or dependant upon’’ as deﬁnitions, but they are the tenth and
eleventh entries respectively.12 Lewis and Short indicates that ‘‘consisto’’ plus
‘‘in’’ (as occurs in the present passage) means either ‘‘composed of’’ or ‘‘de-
pends upon.’’ In common usage the word is prone to ambiguity and in
philosophical parlance a special sense of the word is available that is consis-
tent with the rest of Leibniz’s claims about ideas. It is not unreasonable to
think that Leibniz might have the sense of ‘‘depends on’’ in mind, especially
since this is the only known text where Leibniz appears to say that ideas
‘‘consist’’ of a faculty. Additionally, there is reason to believe that Leibniz
uses the word in a similarly specialized philosophical sense to mean ‘‘de-
pends upon’’ elsewhere in his writings. Consider the following passage from
an untitled note around 1710: ‘‘Extensionis modiﬁcatio consistit in varietate
magnitudinis et ﬁgurae’’ (G 7:328). It would be odd to hold that Leibniz
thinks that the modiﬁcation of extension is ‘‘composed’’ of the variety of
magnitude and ﬁgure. The more natural reading is that the modiﬁcation of
11. I would like to thank Doug Jesseph and John Brinkley for their valuable assistance on this
material.
12. The Oxford Latin Dictionary is a classical Latin dictionary, but there does not appear to
have been any change in the use or deﬁnition of this word in the medieval period.

124
idea and ontology
extension depends on the variety of magnitude and ﬁgure. Notice that the
grammatical constructions are parallel.
In the passage in question, had Leibniz wanted directly to identify ideas
with faculties, then the clearest Latin would have been ‘‘idea est facultes
cogitandi,’’ but he does not use this wording. A better translation than
Loemker’s might be ‘‘our ideas depend not on some act, but on the faculty
of thinking.’’ In that case, the phrase only indicates that Leibniz takes there
to be some relation between ideas and the faculty of thinking. I am not
suggesting that ideas depend on dispositions (the faculty of thinking).
Rather I think Leibniz is asserting that our having an idea requires the fac-
ulty of thinking. I freely admit that, unlike my analysis concerning ‘‘qualite´,’’
the support for my position is considerably weaker in this case. In the end,
all I can do is suggest that this passage might not be as convincing a support
for the dispositional reading as it appears at ﬁrst glance. At a minimum it is
worth noting that there is only a single instance that is troubling in the face
of considerable textual evidence elsewhere that Leibniz holds ideas to be
modiﬁcations. Before we turn to that speciﬁc evidence, however, I want to
provide a diagnosis as to why others might think that Leibniz considers
ideas to be dispositions.
5.4 Ideas: Being One vs. Having One
In order to make proper sense of my reading of Leibniz in the above pas-
sages, we need to stop and be clear about an important distinction being
made in the texts. Once clear about this distinction, we have a natural and
plausible way to understand Leibniz even in these two initially troublesome
texts. Ideas for Leibniz are modes but not merely modes. What separates
ideas from mere modes is the clarity of their expressive capacity. We ‘‘have’’
ideas even when they are not actively being considered only in the sense that
should they become ‘‘activated,’’ they would express their external object.13
Thus Jolley is absolutely right to attach something dispositional to ideas. But
the relationship is not one of identity. My mind does not perpetually express
a dog, but a supermind could ‘‘read’’ from the arrangements of my mental
modes the nature of this dog. It is in this sense that Leibniz believes that one
mind expresses the entire universe. The entire universe is not simultane-
ously actively represented in the mind, but the entire universe can be ex-
pressed by a single mind.
13. A more complete account of this ‘‘activation’’ follows in the next section.

leibniz
125
I propose that Leibniz is drawing a distinction here between ‘‘having’’ an
idea and the nature of the idea itself. To have an idea involves a certain sort
of relation between the subject and some represented content. This ‘‘hav-
ing’’ relation is a dispositional one but is something distinct from the meta-
physical nature of ideas. Consider the following contrast. I have a headache.
That is, there is a relation—an occurrent one—that holds between me
(whatever I am) and some mode with a certain content. The headache is a
case of nondispositional having and is akin to occurrent thinking. Ideas for
Leibniz function similarly, except with the dispositional twist. Imagine that
I have an idea of a dog. Having this idea entails that there is a relation
between me and a represented dog. In this case, the relation is hypothetical.
To say that I have an idea of a dog means that under certain circumstances
(if such and such should occur . . .), I become aware of the particular con-
tent of a dog. A more natural example of dispositional having is tempera-
ment. One might say that I have a bit of a temper. That attribution does
not imply anything about my current behavior (although it might suggest
something about my states that ground this disposition). Rather it describes
the content of my behavior or mental states given certain conditions.
The key now to understanding Leibniz’s theory of ideas is separating
what does the representing from the representation itself. Imagine that I
have the idea of a barking dog. Having this idea does not entail that my idea
‘‘just is’’ the disposition to have that content (perhaps after hearing a bark-
ing dog). Rather the idea (its formal nature) is whatever it is that enables me
to be related to that content (to ‘‘have’’ it). After all, one may meaningfully
ask what it is that makes this idea an idea of a barking dog as opposed to a
meowing cat or something else.
Ideas can be had both occurrently and dispositionally. Such is Leibniz’s
insight. To have an idea occurrently is to be in a nondispositional relation
to some content. I am thinking about a barking dog now. That is, my mind
is actually modiﬁed such that I have that particular content now. To have
the idea dispositionally is at least this: that my mind is capable of being
altered such that a particular mode of my mind actually represents a barking
dog (has that particular content), regardless of whether I am aware of that
content. If I have a headache in the dispositional sense of having, I might be
said to have a headache even when I am, in fact, not feeling any pain. These
sentences doubtless sound odd because we are forcing language into the
dispositional model, but that might just indicate that headaches are not
‘‘had’’ dispositionally—only occurrently.
Now for Leibniz this distinction between having ideas occurrently and

126
idea and ontology
having them dispositionally might entail one of two things. Perhaps he in-
tends that modes of the mind are brought into actuality from possibility. In
other words, at one moment my mind is not modiﬁed (at all) in this way,
and at another moment it is. This view assumes, not unreasonably, that all
modes are occurrent beings. Alternatively, Leibniz’s view might be that we
always have all of the (our) modiﬁcations. To say that minds always have all
of their modes might require that we claim that for Leibniz modes can
themselves be had dispositionally, introducing further complication. It does
not matter for our purposes here which is right. In either case, occurrent
thought will require an activator to make the content represented by the
particular mode available to consciousness. The best evidence of this inter-
pretation comes from an analysis of his discussion of innate ideas.
5.5 Innate Ideas
The traditional reading of Leibniz makes his theory of innate ideas a disposi-
tional one.14 Thus Leibniz tells us that ideas are (innately) in us the same
way that the veins that outline the shape of Hercules are in a block of marble
(NE, 52). As one might expect from the foregoing, I maintain that Leibniz
implicitly distinguishes between what it means to have innate ideas and what
it is for something to be an idea (innate or otherwise). That is, I think the
traditional reading of Leibniz is right when properly construed. He does
have a dispositional theory of innate ideas: a theory of what it means to have
innate ideas. Perhaps more importantly, on the account I provide Leibniz’s
dispositional theory of having ideas meshes neatly with the traditional on-
tology.
Leibniz’s principal strategy in countering Locke’s attack against innate
ideas rests on his establishing that there are at least some ideas that we
acquire only from within (i.e., not from the senses). ‘‘Logic also abounds in
such truths, and so do metaphysics and ethics, together with their respective
products, natural theology and natural jurisprudence; and so the proof of
them can only come from inner principles, which are described as innate’’
(NE, 50). The question is now how these ideas are present within us. Here
Leibniz provides us with what I call the ‘‘attention model’’ of having ideas
innately: ‘‘It would indeed be wrong to think that we can easily read these
eternal laws of reason in the soul, as the Praetor’s edict can be read on his
14. See Jolley 1984, esp. 177. See also Yolton 1956, 58.

leibniz
127
notice-board, without effort or inquiry; but it is enough that they can be
discovered within us by dint of attention.’’ The mind must do something to
activate the content of the ideas held innately by us. Leibniz then argues that
Lockean ideas of reﬂection are nothing else but ‘‘attention to what is already
within us, and the senses do not give us what we carry with us already’’ (NE,
51). This assertion implies that whatever grounds the content activated by
the mind is always actually present within us. And this is exactly Leibniz’s
position. Our mind is a vast repository that actually contains the ideas we
have. We uncover the content represented by a particular idea when we
focus our attention inwardly (as it were) on it. Consider again this passage
reproduced in section 5.2: ‘‘Besides, there are hundreds of indications lead-
ing us to conclude that at every moment there is in us an inﬁnity of percep-
tions, unaccompanied by awareness or reﬂection; that is, of alterations in
the soul itself, of which we are unaware because these impressions are either
too minute and too numerous, or else too unvarying, so that they are not
sufﬁciently distinctive on their own’’ (NE, 53). Ideas (perceptions) are
modes of the mind (alterations of the soul itself). We are unaware of the
vast majority of the ideas we actually have. We become aware of them (and
bring them to consciousness as occurrent thoughts) when we attend to them
for whatever reason. Thus it would be best to say that Leibniz holds that we
have ideas (including those that we have innately). It might well be that we
have all of our ideas innately; this thesis has been ably argued elsewhere, and
I do not pursue it here (Jolley 1984, 113; see also Russell 1900, 163). Ideas are
modes of the mind but to have an idea (innately or otherwise) calls for
dispositions.
Leibniz is reasonably consistent in his discussions of ideas and about
what it means to have them as opposed to what they actually are. Recall
that immediately after he says that ideas depend [consistit] on the faculty of
thinking he says that ‘‘we are said to have an idea of a thing . . . if only . . .
we can think of it.’’ In the New Essays Leibniz has a characteristic way of
reminding his readers of his view. ‘‘You will remember, too, that I have
shown how ideas are in us—not always so that we are aware of them, but
always in such a way that we can draw them from our own depths and bring
them within reach of our awareness’’ (438). So when he says that ‘‘we are
said to have an idea of a thing . . . if only . . . we can think of it,’’ he is
providing a description of how we have ideas and how we can ‘‘draw them
from our depths.’’ The pervasive nature of this kind of language in Leibniz’s
philosophy lends credence to the argument that he makes such a distinction.
This account is also strongly reminiscent of the one Locke employs to sepa-

128
idea and ontology
rate perceptions from having perceptions.15 ‘‘Having’’ an idea certainly does
involve a disposition: the disposition to express an external object. But for
Leibniz this is not what an idea is; a disposition is an aptitude that we have
in virtue of having an idea.16 Similarly, solubility is not what salt is; it is a
power that salt has. Just as salt is best described by its chemical structure, so
ideas are best understood as being modes of the mind. As a result, I suggest
that the following is a better understanding of the relationship between ideas
and dispositions than the one with which we started in section 5.2:
Salt
Mind
My mind
Chemical Structure
Ideas
The ideas I have
Solubility
Expressive ability
My power to express a dog
Dissolvings
Occurrent thoughts
My actually thinking of a dog
Importantly, the two problem texts (discussed in section 5.3) are the only
passages (of which I am aware) where Leibniz clearly seems to say that ideas
are to be identiﬁed directly with dispositions. I admit that other passages
could be massaged to provide some limited support for the thesis that ideas
are disposition, but none of them comes nearly as close to explicitly stating
that ideas just are dispositions, and most often when read carefully, they
indicate the opposite. So Leibniz writes (immediately on the heels of the
veined marble block passage) in the preface to the New Essays, ‘‘This is how
ideas and truths are innate in us—as inclinations, dispositions, tendencies,
or natural potentialities, and not as actions’’ (52). Although this certainly
ties ideas to dispositions, Leibniz does not indicate by any reasonable stretch
that ideas are dispositions. Instead, he says this is what it means to say that
ideas are innate in us—a rather different claim. At best, when he appears to
say otherwise, he is being incautious about separating the grounds of our
dispositions from the dispositions themselves.
As it turns out, as Leibniz matures he outright asserts that ideas are
modes. By the turn of the century Leibniz appears to have staked out a
rather ﬁrm position. For instance, in the letter to Remond in 1715 (quoted
earlier) Leibniz writes ‘‘It is sufﬁcient to consider ideas as Notions, that is to
say, as modiﬁcations of our mind’’ (G 3:659). There is no ambiguity here.
15. See section 4.1.
16. Note the account I endorse here is not a general account of dispositions and what it
means to have or activate a disposition but rather only an account of Leibniz’s theory.

leibniz
129
5.6 Difﬁculties with Dispositions
The case against the argument that Leibniz holds ideas to be dispositions
can be further strengthened. The textual evidence becomes especially per-
suasive when we attend to the philosophical concerns that push us to reject
the traditional interpretation of Leibniz. Note that my analysis here assumes
an account of dispositions that requires a ‘‘ground’’ for the disposition. Al-
though I recognize that in contemporary discussions the assumption may be
controversial, the evidence that Leibniz provides a ground for dispositions is
compelling. My aim here is only to argue that ascribing to Leibniz the view
that ideas ‘‘are’’ dispositions is a mistake. In this context, I limit myself to
two pressing problems. The ﬁrst concerns the expressive ability of ideas. The
second is a worry about Leibniz’s commitment to a metaphysical hierarchy
of ideas, such that complex ideas are formed from more simple ones, ulti-
mately originating from the attributes of God.
Ideas serve to express their objects. Divorcing the expressive role of ideas
from the ideas themselves eliminates the need for ideas entirely. It is difﬁcult
to explain, however, how dispositions can adequately ﬁll the role required
by ideas as expressive beings. The idea of a circle, we are told, expresses a
circle (‘‘What Is an Idea?’’ G 7:264). How can an aptitude to act or be acted
on express anything? I do not see how it can. Here we need to be careful.
Recall ﬁrst that aptitudes for Leibniz are powers without principles of ‘‘en-
deavor’’ to internally actualize them. Clearly the thing that has the aptitude
can express, and such capacities ‘‘do the expressings,’’ but it seems perhaps
a category mistake to hold that dispositions themselves express external ob-
jects.17 What does solubility express? It certainly expresses the propensity of
some things to dissolve in liquids, but this is not what we are after. We can
meaningfully ask why this idea expresses a dog (as opposed to something
else). If the idea of a dog is just a disposition, then the idea of a dog is the
capacity to think of a dog. But an aptitude to think of x does not express x.
How could a supermind read off from the aptitude to think of x the proper-
ties of x? Perhaps it could, since the aptitude is directed toward some state.
Yet if it could, there would need to be a determinant directing the content
of the aptitude to a dog instead of something else. Fair enough, we know
what this is for Leibniz: the petites perceptions or modes that ground the
disposition. But this knowledge does not do us any good, for the move
17. And note that the concern is independent of the particular theory of dispositions one
chooses to embrace.

130
idea and ontology
simply indicates that the underlying modes themselves are what actually
determine what is expressed, contrary to the hypothesis. I can construct no
viable case for supposing that dispositions can perform the expressive func-
tion of ideas.18 Ideas have dispositional powers, and part of what it means to
say that ideas can express is captured by their dispositional abilities. None-
theless, it is a mistake to confuse the aptitude of an idea with the idea itself.
A more pressing difﬁculty presents itself when we consider Leibniz’s ad-
herence to the common early modern claim that ideas are compositional.
Complex ideas are formed from combinations of simpler ones, and ulti-
mately we derive our simple ideas from God.19 There are actually two sub-
problems here. The ﬁrst concerns whether we can make a reasonable case
for supposing that dispositions are compositional, and the second involves
whether we can make sense of the claim that we receive our simple ideas
from God, assuming those ideas are dispositions.
Locke tells us in the Essay that all complex ideas are made by the mind
combining several simple ideas into one compound one (II.12.1). Leibniz
accepts not only the division of ideas into simple and complex but also a
version of the basic Lockean story of how simple and complex ideas are
related.20 We need to be a bit circumspect here, since Leibniz does not accept
the division in the same spirit as Locke does. Leibniz, for instance, holds
that simple ideas are characterized by the fact that they cannot be deﬁned
and that complex ideas are those resolvable into simple ideas (Monadology,
pars. 35 and 33; L, 646). The emphasis differs, but for our purposes nothing
important hinges on the areas of divergence. The outlines of the distinction
between simple and complex ideas are straightforward. I arrive at the idea
of a satyr by combining the ideas of a goat and a man (or resolve the idea
of a satyr into the component ideas of a goat and a man), and less obviously
I arrive at the complex idea of lead by combining the ideas of a substance, a
18. One might object by asking for the details of how modes express. The answer, of course,
is that we do not know. So one might challenge this analysis by saying that if one cannot explain
how modes express, then one cannot complain that the problem with dispositions is that one
cannot account for how they express. Perhaps dispositions are also primitively expressive. The
point is well taken, but since Leibniz does apparently seek to ground dispositions (contemporary
concerns aside), there is some reason for giving modes preferential treatment.
19. One might suppose that the compositionality of ideas here is purely objective and not
formal. If so, I grant that the force of this last argument will be greatly diminished. It is plausible
to suppose, however, that there must be some link between the objective content of ideas and
their formal nature, hence reinvigorating the issue. None of the early moderns had any developed
theory about what the nature of the connection between the objective and formal was, and so I
believe these considerations are relevant and pertinent.
20. See Monadology, par. 33; L, 646; G 6:612; and NE, 120–21, 212; L, 285.

leibniz
131
color, a certain degree of weight, ductility, hardness, and so forth (ECHU
II.12.6). The only explicit hesitancy Leibniz shows concerns what constitutes
the stock of simple ideas; he thinks that Locke is overly generous.
Any interpretation of Leibniz’s theory of ideas needs to provide a reason-
able explanation of his understanding of the division of ideas and their com-
positional nature. Unfortunately, it is difﬁcult to see how we can combine
and decompose dispositions given Leibniz’s claims about ideas. We would
be adding two distinct aptitudes to generate a third. Let’s be careful about
what this means. Recall that the relevant sense of an aptitude for Leibniz is a
power (a ‘‘possibility of change’’) without an internal principle of endeavor.
Faculties are possibilities of change that would result from an act. The most
charitable case I can conjure is something like the following. Perhaps apti-
tudes are compositional like my ability to drive a vehicle is composed of the
ability to turn the steering wheel, manipulate the pedals, and so on. Yet
even here there must be some guiding principle of organization. Simply
conjoining random steering with pedal pushing does not (always) produce
driving. So we need not only the mere capabilities but also some (special)
way to put them together. Unfortunately this drives us back to our former
problem, the need for a determinant. I confess that I must struggle to give
any meaning to the claim that aptitudes are composed of other aptitudes in
the sense that our idea of lead is composed of the ideas of substance, color,
ductility and the like without appealing to something outside of powers to
make it work.21
Another approach to this problem might be to compare dispositional
powers with ordinary properties. After all, Locke arrives at complex ideas
by simply conjoining properties (think of his lead example again). Leibniz
discusses complex ideas by forming their deﬁnitions out of simpler ideas, so
there is no reason to suppose that we are not just conjoining dispositional
properties. On a given occasion, when I think of a dull white, fusible, ductile
substance I am thinking of lead. But this will not quite work. The problem
arises when we recall that Leibniz holds that we have our ideas prior to being
aware of them. ‘‘For I believe I have shown that in so far as they [ideas]
contain something distinct they are in us before we are aware of them’’ (NE,
111). This view coheres with his theory of petites perceptions. As a result, we
21. Again, one might challenge this analysis by inquiring whether Leibniz has any better story
when it comes to how modes are added or combined with one another. As I’ve suggested, I take
the early moderns to think of the compositionality of ideas as involving the manipulation of
content (images), which then had to be (in some unspeciﬁed way) reﬂected in the formal nature
of ideas as well. At a minimum the issue is neutral between dispositions and ideas.

132
idea and ontology
cannot construct an account that relies only on merging occurrent thoughts
but must include the passive dispositional aptitudes. Thus imagism cannot
be what Leibniz has in mind since we do not have an image to manipulate
if ideas are dispositions—at least not until there is actual thought. The dis-
position to think of lead is already present in the mind and must be made
by combining the aptitudes to think of substance, color, and so on. Further-
more, the complex idea of lead must be able to be decomposed into more
‘‘simple’’ dispositions.
Here again, I am at a loss as to how to make sense of this process without
making the grounding mental modes do all the work. How can an aptitude
(contemporary ‘‘power’’) be reduced to other aptitudes? We do not think
that solubility reduces to another set of powers but to nondispositional
chemical properties. Salt is soluble because of the structure of sodium chlo-
ride and water and how they interact (relate). We might perhaps say that a
passive power of sodium chloride when conjoined with a power of water
gives us solubility, but what are these underlying powers? Dispositions are
relational; given a certain situation, a particular result occurs. There is no
further analysis of powers required. To make matters worse, there is no clear
way to make sense of the notion that some dispositions are complex when
others are not except by appealing to their grounds, which only serves to
deny the hypothesis that ideas are dispositions.
We might say that since I have the ability to think of a goat and the ability
to think of a man, ipso facto I have the ability to think of a satyr. But the
ability to think of a satyr is more than merely thinking of a man and a goat;
I have to join the ideas in a certain way (goat on bottom, since there are
mythological creatures with the lower body of a human and the head of a
goat that are not satyrs). What can explain how the abilities are joined?
Dispositions by themselves do not do the trick. Dispositions merely indicate
that given an occasion, a certain result follows. If we want to know why a
particular result follows under those situations, we need to examine the
grounds of the disposition. (We might, as Hume would later, just study the
regularities in nature as brute facts, but Leibniz does allow for that possibil-
ity.) As in the case expression, it turns out that the mental modes are doing
all the actual work. Differences in the modes and how they are related can
explain differences in the ideas we have. The mode or modes associated with
a whitish color alone gives us the disposition to think of this whitish color.
But those modes properly adjoined to others expressing substance, ductility,
and the rest give us the disposition to think of lead. In short, all of the
compositionality occurs at the level of the modes. Similarly, when decom-

leibniz
133
posing a complex idea, we must look to the grounding modes to distinguish
its parts. Whatever intuitive explanatory force the dispositional view gets in
terms of explaining the compositionality of ideas it gets derivatively from
the modes that ground those dispositions. Hence there is good independent
reason to suppose that Leibniz ought not be thinking of ideas as disposi-
tions.
One complication arises, however. Leibniz says that some allegedly sim-
ple ideas are really in fact relations. This difﬁculty leads us directly to our
ﬁnal—and most damaging—problem: Leibniz’s claim that our simple ideas
come from God. Some of the ideas that Locke lists as simple Leibniz charac-
terizes as ‘‘merely relations’’ (NE, 145). We get an interesting result when we
compare these claims to others made by Leibniz in which he indicates that
simple ideas are relations that derive from the attributes of God. The overall
picture is fairly easy to construct. God alone affects us from without (Dis-
course on Metaphysics, L, 321; G 4:453). As Leibniz puts it in his Paris notes
from April 1676, ‘‘Ideas are in God insofar as the most perfect being consists
in the conjunction of all absolute [i.e., positive] forms or possible perfec-
tions in the same object’’ (L, 163). We thus ultimately derive our ideas from
God’s ideas, but they are not transferred to us. Rather our ideas are ‘‘reﬂec-
tions’’ of God’s, and thus our simple ideas are related to those of God’s. In
a seldom-referenced work from after 1707 in which Leibniz comments on
Locke’s criticism of Malebranche, Leibniz remarks, ‘‘I believe that one may
say that these [ideas] are only relations that result from the attributes of
God’’ (G 6:576).22 For the moment we know two things about Leibniz’s
position. First, God has (simple) ideas, and second, our ideas stem from
God’s.
From these insights a difﬁculty emerges. Dispositions, even according to
Leibniz’s own discussions of the concept of an aptitude, involve potentiali-
ties and not actualities. In particular, Leibniz contrasts aptitude with act.
God, of course, is pure act (NE, 114). So if ideas are dispositions, how can a
God of pure act have ideas as passive potentialities? He cannot. I ﬁnd this a
fairly decisive objection against treating ideas as straightforward disposi-
tions.
Defenders of the dispositional theory might not surrender so easily. I can
conceive of two possible responses to this problem concerning the activity
of God. The ﬁrst is that perhaps Leibniz uses the word ‘‘idea’’ equivocally
when applied to God and created minds. Perhaps idea is like Leibnizian
22. See Rutherford 1995, 104, who makes a similar point without using this particular passage.

134
idea and ontology
power. Just as there are active and passive powers, so too there might be
active and passive dispositional ideas. The most immediate trouble with this
response, however, is that it appears to ﬂy in the face of Leibniz’s commit-
ment to the claim that created minds differ from God only by degree and
not in kind. Jolley in particular is in a poor position to make this distinction
between active and passive dispositional ideas since his analysis of Leibniz
rests heavily on the continuity between created mind and God.
Leibniz gives a radically new twist to this thesis [that man is made
in the image of God]. By virtue of his metaphysics he is in a posi-
tion to claim that human knowledge resembles divine knowledge in
its extensive aspect; since every mind expresses the whole universe
according to its point of view, there is a real sense in which it is
omniscient. Such omniscience is of course unlike divine omni-
science in that it is, for the most part, extremely confused; but Leib-
niz need not deny that, in the case of a priori truths, human
knowledge can be close to godlike in its quality. (1990, 9)
On this point I think Jolley is almost certainly correct. Leibniz is ﬁrmly
committed to a robust doctrine of the image of God. As he writes in the The
Principles of Nature and of Grace, Based on Reason (1714), ‘‘As for the reason-
able soul or spirit, there is something more in it than in monads or even in
simple souls. It is not only a mirror of the universe of creatures but also an
image of divinity. The spirit not only has a perception of the works of God
but is even capable of producing something which resembles them, though
in miniature’’ (L, 640). It is difﬁcult to see how Leibniz could make a princi-
pled exception for ideas given his strenuous commitment to the claim that
created souls share even in the same capabilities as the divinity. It is simply
not plausible to suppose that Leibniz uses the term ‘‘idea’’ equivocally.
Alternatively, one might try to ﬁnesse the claim that there is nothing
potential in a purely active God. In one sense God is pure act, but in an-
other, the divinity can be said to contain potentiality. The distinction might
be thought of as parallel to Leibniz’s distinction between moral and meta-
physical necessity. Leibniz tells us that God is free with respect to the cre-
ation of this world because He could have opted not to create at all. Since
He did create, His moral perfection required that this be the best of all
possible worlds. But in terms of God’s raw omnipotence, there was no meta-
physical bar to His creating any of a number of other possible worlds. God,
qua morally perfect being, could only create the best world. God, qua per-

leibniz
135
fectly powerful divinity, could create any world he desired to bring into
being. We might try to tell a similar story with respect to divine potential.
Although God is pure act, there is a sense in which God could have done
otherwise. And this metaphysical possibility is within the power of God and
hence represents a sense in which God contains potentiality: the sense in
which God has unrealized dispositional features. Now God will, in fact,
never create a world less than perfect, but because metaphysically speaking
He has the ability to do so, there is a sense in which God is not purely active.
Consequently one might then contend that God has passive, unrealized
aptitudes in a fashion similar to that of created beings. There is an extreme
difference in degree, of course, namely that, in fact, God never actually is
passive. But it is metaphysically possible for God to be passive, if He were
to will Himself to be so. But God is not this way as it would deny His
perfection. The underlying point, however, remains: there is a sense in
which Leibniz can hold that we were created in the image of God even
though we have passive dispositions.
Engaging this particular line of response is difﬁcult not because it is po-
tent but rather because it is hard to provide textual evidence to refute a
position that seems so deeply anti-Leibnizian in spirit. First, Leibniz would
most likely deny that there is a sense in which God has passive potentials
simply because God could have done otherwise. That God could have done
otherwise is an indication of our limited understanding of the nature of
God. God’s nature, like his propensity to act, is absolute. As Leibniz reveals,
‘‘It is essential to substances to act, to created substances be acted upon’’
(NE, 305). Thus Leibniz introduces two senses of power discussed earlier
(section 5.1). Genuine, active powers include within them an active internal
principle of endeavor toward some particular aim. Passive powers do not.
God, a purely active being, has powers only in the active sense. As a conse-
quence, conceived absolutely, Leibniz’s God has no potentialities. Every idea
God has, He has occurrently and not dispositionally. To seek to deny this is
to undercut several of Leibniz’s more important distinctions. It is possible,
I confess, that a more plausible story might be told in defense of the reading
of Leibniz in which God contains potentialities. I am prepared to change
my mind if confronted by such a more persuasive account, but as it stands
now, I do not believe this line of response is promising.
One might yet wonder, however, whether my proposed solution—that
ideas are mental modes for Leibniz—is any better off. Modes are arguably
more passive than dispositions. But the problem is only apparent. In the
Paris notes (April 1676, L, 163), Leibniz tells us that from the conjunction of

136
idea and ontology
an inﬁnite number of absolute (i.e., positive) simple forms, modes result
(i.e., ideas). Thus the simple forms in God (the essence of God) generate
modes. God’s attributes are expressed in us as mental modes, which in turn
ground our dispositions to think on those ideas and compound them into
complex ideas. The passivity of ideas is accordingly a generated feature and
not intrinsic to God. In short, ideas qua modes only result from the simple
attributes.
5.7 Ideas as Modes
Given that the textual support for supposing ideas to be dispositions is ques-
tionable and that there are positive reasons of a philosophical nature for
thinking that Leibnizian ideas cannot be dispositions, why should we hold
that at least for the later Leibniz ideas are simply modes? There are several
reasons. First, virtually all of the putative beneﬁts of identifying ideas with
dispositions can be retained. Ideas are modes, but these modes ground dis-
positional properties. What it means to have an idea involves a disposition
to think, and I do not want to deny any of the analysis presented by the
likes of Jolley and Mates on that score; however, we must keep carefully
separate what ideas are from what it is to have them. What is innovative and
challenging in Leibniz’s thought remains untouched.
Second, taking ideas to be modes provides Leibniz with reasonable ways
to consistently answer the philosophical worries we have considered here.
Modes can easily accommodate the expressive function of ideas, and there
are no unusual conceptual difﬁculties that arise from plugging modes into
the simple/complex distinction. The compositionality problem can also be
solved in a way that at least the early moderns would have thought straight-
forward. Since we actually have all of our modes and the mind only focuses
its attention on some of them, the complexity of an idea will be dependent
on the range and arrangement of modes on which the mind focuses. All the
basic building blocks are present; how the attentive faculty of the mind
stacks those blocks determines the complexity of an idea. There is more to
be said here, of course, but a detailed analysis of Leibniz’s theory of complex
ideas lies beyond the scope of this work. Lastly, and perhaps most impor-
tantly, this reading provides us with a way to understand Leibniz’s thinking
concerning a divinity of pure act and its relation to the ideas we have.
As a result of our analysis in this chapter, it is reasonable to conclude
that Leibniz, for all of his innovations, was a traditional thinker when it

leibniz
137
came to the ontology of ideas. His interesting and important introduction
of dispositions into his theory of what it means to have an idea does not
produce a theory that denies that the formal nature of ideas falls squarely
within the core categories of substance and modiﬁcation. No Leibniz scholar
to my knowledge has explicitly argued that Leibniz was an anti-ontologist
with respect to ideas. I hope to have shown that the thought that Leibniz
endorsed a dispositional account of ideas does not push him in that direc-
tion either.

6
berkeley
With Locke and Leibniz we see the continuation of serious dissonance be-
tween the way of ideas and the traditional substance/mode ontology. Locke
recognized the difﬁculties and sought to avoid them. Leibniz perhaps intro-
duced important novelties into the way of ideas, but he did not explicitly
engage concerns about their ontological nature. The Irish philosopher
George Berkeley, however, confronted the metaphysical problems more ex-
plicitly. In that process he encountered no less difﬁculty than his predeces-
sors. In fact, some of his most interesting and ingenious philosophy stems
from the conﬂict between the epistemological roles of ideas and their ontic
grounding. Nevertheless, like those before him, Berkeley did not seek to
abandon the ontology of substance and modiﬁcation. Instead, he stretched
it, if you will, to make room for a new category within the traditional ontol-
ogy. Ideas for Berkeley had features of substances and of modes, but instead
of outright rejecting ontology and the substance/mode ontology in particu-
lar, he altered it. As a result, despite some appearances to the contrary,
Berkeley did not abandon ontology with respect to ideas. He modiﬁed and
improved it, but his thinking never became ‘‘extra-ontological,’’ let alone
anti-ontological.
Berkeley’s metaphysics is rich. Understanding his theory of ideas is com-
plicated, however, by the fact that at times Berkeley himself is still grappling
with the ﬁt between the epistemological roles of ideas and their ontological
foundation. My goal here is to support an interpretation of Berkeleian ideas
that treats them as objects and to simultaneously deny that they must be
strongly distinct from (i.e., independent of) minds. After making this argu-
ment, I engage the scholarship that alleges that Berkeley makes his ideas
rather like modiﬁcations of the mind. The literature on the topic is large,
and I do not pretend to engage all of it, only enough to make my reading of

berkeley
139
Berkeley plausible. The key element in this discussion will be the relation-
ship of dependence that ideas have on minds. I then explain why these two
interpretations are compatible, generating a complete theory of ideas for
Berkeley. Along the way we shall see how this reading leaves Berkeley within
the substance/mode tradition yet outside the early modern tale.
Establishing the plausibility of my reading of Berkeley is, I recognize, not
enough. There might be additional concerns about my thesis, and I thus
also defend the claim that reading the early moderns through the lens of the
traditional substance/mode distinction yields interpretive and philosophical
insights hidden by the early modern tale. So in subsequent chapters I engage
several important issues in Berkeley scholarship within the framework of my
reading of Berkeley’s theory of ideas that I offer here in this chapter. In the
course of these discussions I also address the most serious objections to my
reading. In particular, I consider Berkeley’s much maligned theory of divine
ideas, his attack on abstraction, and his claim that ideas are heterogeneous.
In each of these areas, avoiding the early modern tale results in what I claim
is a more charitable reading of Berkeley that gives him a more philosophi-
cally potent system.
6.1 Minds and Ideas
Ideas, Berkeley tells us, are ‘‘inert, ﬂeeting, dependent beings, which subsist
not by themselves, but are supported by, or exist in minds or spiritual sub-
stances’’ (PHK 89, emphasis in the original). Given this characterization, in
which Berkeley appears to deny ontological independence for ideas, we
might expect him to think that ideas are adverbial (or perhaps adjectival, if
one thinks of minds and ideas as more like balls that are red than mental
acts of a particular sort).1 They are ‘‘in the mind’’ and ‘‘dependent beings,’’
so what else could they be? Furthermore, he tells us in no uncertain terms
that only spirits are proper substances.2
1. See section 7.5 for a more complete treatment of the ﬂeeting nature of ideas.
2. That spirits are traditional substances for Berkeley has been challenged by several scholars,
most notably Steve Daniel and Robert Muehlmann (on separate and unrelated grounds). See
Daniel 2000, 621–36; Daniel 2001a, 239–58; Daniel 2001b, 55–68; and Muehlmann 1992, esp. ch 6,
170ff.; and Muehlmann 1995, 89–106. It does not fall within the purview of this book to engage
all of the complications surrounding Berkeley’s theory of mind, which I take to be somewhat
more traditional than either Daniel or Muehlmann do. For extended engagement of the views of
Daniel and Muehlmann, see Hight and Ott 2004.

140
idea and ontology
From what has been said, it follows, there is not any other sub-
stance than spirit, or that which perceives. But for the fuller proof
of this point, let it be considered, the sensible qualities are colour,
ﬁgure, motion, smell, taste, and such like, that is, the ideas per-
ceived by sense. Now for an idea to exist in an unperceiving thing,
is a manifest contradiction; for to have an idea is all one as to
perceive: that therefore wherein colour, ﬁgure, and the like qualities
exist, must perceive them; hence it is clear there can be no unthink-
ing substance or substratum of those ideas. (PHK 7)
Ideas, then, apparently cannot be proper substances. Since Berkeley appears
to operate within the traditional ontology, only one alternative remains:
ideas must be modes. Richard Watson illustrates this kind of thinking.
‘‘Berkeley is bound to the all-inclusive ontological type-distinction between
substance and modiﬁcation. He adheres to this pattern particularly in saying
that ideas depend on minds in that their being is being perceived by a mind.
Ideas, for Berkeley, must be mental modiﬁcations’’ (1987, 124, emphasis in the
original). Unfortunately, Berkeley appears to work just as hard at denying
that ideas are modes. Near the beginning of the Principles, in section 2, we
are told that the mind is ‘‘a thing entirely distinct’’ from ideas. One main
theme in his works is that the activity of the mind contrasts with the passiv-
ity of ideas. In light of this contrast, it is difﬁcult to allow that he thinks
modes are sufﬁciently distinct from minds to qualify as ideas. Section 49 of
the Principles seems to clearly deny that ideas are modes. ‘‘I answer, those
qualities are in the mind only as they are perceived by it, that is, not by way
of mode or attribute, but only by way of idea’’ (see 3D, 237). Again in section
89 he reafﬁrms the distinction between minds and ideas. ‘‘Thing or being is
the most general name of all, it comprehends under it two kinds entirely
distinct and heterogeneous, and which have nothing common but the name,
to wit, spirits and ideas.’’3
Perhaps the most notorious element of Berkeley’s theory is that ideas are
‘‘in the mind.’’ The superﬁcial suggestion is that ideas are either somehow
parts of the mind or states of the same. Yet Berkeley repudiates this sugges-
tion, saying that ideas being ‘‘in’’ the mind means nothing more than that
they are perceived by it. But if the mind and its ideas are strongly distinct,
then one naturally is led to believe that they can exist separately, a position
3. Luce makes much of this progression, ultimately arguing that ideas cannot be construed
as mental entities at all (1963, esp. 24–32).

berkeley
141
Berkeley famously rejects with his esse is percipi doctrine. We thus have a
tangle of apparently inconsistent views. Minds and ideas are entirely dis-
tinct, but ideas are dependent on minds for their existence, all the while so
existing only ‘‘in’’ the mind. It should be clear, then, that part of unraveling
the status of ideas for Berkeley must involve characterizing the relationship
that holds between ideas and spirits.
Despite his insistence that only spirits are proper substances, Berkeley
often speaks of ideas as if they were robust and independent things. Ideas
are ‘‘objects’’ of the mind. The impression that he thinks of them as being
like substances is difﬁcult to shake, and many commentators understand
Berkeleian ideas in this way. Ultimately the position Berkeley ends up adopt-
ing, however odd it might be, is that ideas fall somewhat short of being
genuine substances. I argue here that ideas for Berkeley are quasi substances
(and hence not proper substances). That is, they behave like substances ex-
cept for the fact that they are ontologically dependent on minds. In particu-
lar, they are ‘‘external’’ to the mind, by which I mean that ideas are not
modiﬁcations (nor proper parts) of the mind and that there exists a two-
place relation between the mind and its perceptual objects. This reading
allows Berkeley to claim volitional independence for ideas (the ‘‘external’’
ideas of sense are not under my control) while denying them ontological
independence. In summary, Berkeley implicitly denies that the substance/
mode ontology is exclusive or exhaustive without actually denying the basic
ontology itself. Instead, he bends it to allow for a new kind of entity, and in
so doing, he does not think that he is in any way denying the legitimacy of
the traditional distinction. The ﬁnal test of my interpretation comes when,
in light of my analysis here, I endeavor to explain his puzzling endorsement
of certain radical metaphysical claims.
6.2 Ideas as Objects
The most prevalent characterization of Berkeleian ideas in contemporary
scholarship is simply as ‘‘objects.’’4 Kenneth Winkler, in his excellent book,
makes his position clear right at the start. ‘‘I hope to show that Berkeley’s
tendency to treat ideas as objects is a powerful one; in later chapters I will
show how the tendency is expressed in his case for immaterialism. I think
Berkeley’s tendency to treat ideas as objects is not only powerful but domi-
4. See Harry Bracken (to take just one example), who characterizes Berkeleian ideas as ‘‘ob-
jects to mind’’ (1963, 9).

142
idea and ontology
nant; it is, I think, virtually the only one governing his understanding of the
word ‘idea’’’ (1989, 4). Winkler’s claim strikes me as basically correct, but
his understanding of what it means for an idea to be an object is not sufﬁ-
ciently clear. In claiming that ideas for Berkeley are objects, Winkler is pre-
sumably implicitly denying the assertion that Berkeley sees ideas as
(perceptual) acts. The rival view, most notably defended by George Pitcher,
holds that ideas for Berkeley should be construed as ‘‘adverbial’’ (Pitcher
1977, esp. 189–203, 1969, 198–207, and 1981, 221–27). I stress the word
‘‘should’’ since even Pitcher backs off from saying that Berkeley himself
really did endorse such a view of ideas. If ideas are adverbial on minds,
then they are modes of the mind. Pitcher’s worries notwithstanding, I think
Berkeley did at times seriously consider ideas to have traits that can only be
understood if ideas are thought of as, or rather like, modes. The debate
among most scholars, then, has centered on whether Berkeley’s ideas are
objects or acts.
Initially there is some reason to doubt that ideas can be modes. Consider
the grammar of modes. One might think that whether something is a mode
is purely dependent on how it is expressed in language, such that all mo-
nadic predicates represent modes. So ‘‘is red,’’ ‘‘being a father’’ and ‘‘being
near Niagara Falls’’ would each express a mode because their grammatical
structure is one place. Yet Berkeley would deny that any of these are genuine
modes, since being a father and being near a place involves more than what
is required to simply be red. Being a father, for instance, implies a relation
to another speciﬁc person or persons, despite the grammar. Being a mode
goes deeper, and in one way this makes Berkeley understandably nervous.
He believed (as many did before him) that something cannot be a mode
without being predicated of its subject. Thus red cannot be a mode because
it would have to be predicated of me (my mind). In other words, I would
be red if I perceived or owned that quality. ‘‘[I]t may be objected, that if
extension and ﬁgure exist only in the mind, it follows that the mind is ex-
tended and ﬁgured; since extension is a mode or attribute’’ (PHK 49; see
also 3D, 237). In response to just this criticism Berkeley tries to separate his
understanding of ideas from that of mere modes. On the ﬁrst pass, there-
fore, we have reason to expect that he will favor object talk over mode talk.
Ian Tipton once kindly pointed out to me how infrequently Berkeley uses
the term ‘‘mode’’ in his writings. He should have made the point far
stronger. In Berkeley’s complete works the word ‘‘mode’’ appears in a scant
ten paragraphs and its plural in only twenty-six. Of these combined in-
stances more than half are negative uses either articulating or attacking the

berkeley
143
view that extended substance underlies or supports material modes.5 The
rest all are innocuous uses.6 The phenomenon is striking. Berkeley does not
even once use the word ‘‘mode’’ to positively describe his own theory of
ideas. He appears to be consciously avoiding the term and reserving its use
primarily for the discussion of the views of his contemporaries.
Without doubt the one word Berkeley uses frequently to describe an idea
is ‘‘object.’’ Virtually all of his ofﬁcial pronouncements about ideas reﬂect
an understanding of ideas as objects. ‘‘Note that when I speak of tangible
ideas, I take the word idea for any immediate object of sense or understand-
ing, in which large signiﬁcation it is commonly used by the moderns’’ (NTV
45). As we have already seen, this characterization is not uncommon among
early modern philosophers. Locke, Malebranche, and others accept some
version of this deﬁnition and treat ideas as objects of perception. In Berke-
ley’s private notebooks, we can clearly see how this conception of ideas is
present in his thinking.
427
We see the Horse it self, the Church it self it being an Idea &
nothing more
427a
The Horse it self the Church it self is an Idea i.e. object
immediate object of thought.
There are numerous other examples, all of which essentially conform to
those offered here (e.g., PHK 1, PC 643, PC 808, 3D, 230 and 249). Immedi-
ately, however, we encounter conceptual difﬁculty. The act/object distinc-
tion is not straightforwardly an ontic distinction. Simply because something
is identiﬁed as an act does not necessarily imply that it is not an object. As
a result, employing the distinction will not tell us anything of signiﬁcant
value about the ontological status of Berkeley’s ideas. Consider the following
sentence:
A mind M perceives an idea of a red ball.
According to the traditional act/object analysis as I understand it, this sen-
tence means:7
5. See PC 711; PC 785; PHK 16; 3D, 190, 198, and 237; S 162, 249.
6. For instance, ‘‘modes of light,’’ in TVV 40, 41, 44; ‘‘modes of speech,’’ in PHK 52 and PC
176; and ‘‘modes of living,’’ in Berkeley 1948–57, 9:154.
7. I am not, of course, implying that any of the early moderns would have understood things
this way. The formalization is only meant to help us be clear about what the position entails.

144
idea and ontology
(x)(y)[(x is a mind) • (y is an idea of a red ball) • (x per-
ceives y)]
This formalization seems right, except we do not know the status of y, other
than that we are quantifying over it. If we can quantify over modes, and the
moderns certainly did,8 nothing in the logical analysis of the sentence bars
one from holding that ideas are modes. In general, nothing prevents modes
from being the objects of awareness, either in cognition or perception. Bar-
ring unusual cases where the modiﬁcation of the mind is its own object,
nothing logically precludes one from supposing that in cognition we are
contemplating objects that are simply modes of our own mind. Thus even
if ideas were modes, they could still be objects, and indeed objects entirely
consistent with what Berkeley says about the nature of ideas. If so, then
merely characterizing ideas as objects does not determine whether they are
ontologically independent of minds. Prima facie, one ought not to expect
that invoking the act/object distinction by itself will enable us to make prog-
ress in solving the ontological problems surrounding ideas.
Why then do many assume that if an idea is an object, it cannot be a
mode of the mind? Winkler certainly seems to accept this entailment. His
central claim is that ‘‘ideas are objects distinct from (that is, not identical
with) the acts or operations of the mind; they are not viewings or perceiv-
ings but objects viewed or perceived’’ (1989, 6). Following George Pitcher,
we might distinguish two kinds of distinctness, strong and weak (1969, 198–
207). Two things are weakly distinct when they can be described as separate
objects but there is some ontological dependence between the two. Corre-
spondingly, modes are weakly distinct from their substances. They can be
described as separate objects, but modes depend on minds for their exis-
tence. Two things are strongly distinct when they can be separately described
and are ontologically independent of one another. Thus I am strongly dis-
tinct from my computer, since I do not require my computer to exist and
vice versa. Now we can ask whether Berkeleian ideas, as understood by Win-
kler, are strongly or weakly distinct from minds. Initially, the most plausible
view would be that ideas are only weakly distinct from minds. After all,
Berkeley tells us that ideas cannot exist without a mind and that ideas are
decidedly dependent beings. Yet if this is the case, then the ‘‘distinctness’’
Winkler emphasizes between the idea and the mind is not sufﬁcient to pre-
vent ideas from being objects that are also modes. A ‘‘viewing’’ can be the
8. See sections 1.3 and 1.3.1.

berkeley
145
object of the mind, just as any other mode can be as well. Oddly, however,
Winkler denies this move, arguing that ‘‘If ideas are weakly distinct from
the mind it does not follow that they are modiﬁcations of the mind’’ (1989,
297). Just so, there is no entailment, but is there another possibility? Winkler
cites PHK 49 as evidence for his claim that just because ideas are weakly
distinct from the mind does not mean they are, on Berkeley’s view, modiﬁ-
cations of it, but he provides no alternative. Instead, he simply confronts
Berkeley with the charge of ‘‘metaphysical embarrassment.’’ Ideas are weakly
distinct from both the mind and its acts, but their ontic status is scandal-
ously mysterious.
What about the alternative? Might ideas be strongly distinct from minds?
Interestingly enough, Winkler does not argue for strong distinctness despite
the fact there might be some reason to suppose that Berkeley does take
minds and ideas to be strongly distinct. Berkeley dwells on certain differ-
ences between minds and ideas and consistently urges that these differences
are important. One example comes late in the Principles, in section 142:
‘‘Spirits and ideas are things so wholly different, that when we say, they exist,
they are known, or the like, these words must not be thought to signify
anything common to both natures.’’9 We know that ideas are completely
passive and spirits likewise active (3D, 231). Yet the passivity issue is not
what ultimately drives Berkeley’s thinking here. Instead, Berkeley is trying
to preserve the commonsense distinction between the external world and
our mental lives. ‘‘When I speak of objects as existing in the mind or im-
printed on the senses; I would not be understood in the gross literal sense,
as when bodies are said to exist in a place, or a seal to make an impression
upon wax. My meaning is only that the mind comprehends or perceives
them; and that it is affected from without, or by some being distinct from
itself’’ (3D, 250).10 If Berkeley wants to hold on to this kind of division be-
tween minds and ideas, it appears he must be thinking they are strongly
distinct from one another. If ideas are simple modes of the mind, then they
(minds and ideas) must share some commonality. After all, for something
to modify something else, at least sameness of ontological kind seems re-
quired.11 Here we ﬁnd that something (through ideas as passive vehicles)
9. See also 3D, 231, and PHK 89 and 2. In these passages Berkeley uses the phrase ‘‘entirely
different from’’ to separate minds and ideas.
10. Note Berkeley’s use of the Cartesian example of the wax imprint, in turn borrowed from
Aristotle. The continuity of thinking is striking.
11. I go on to argue in section 8.10 that Berkeley occasionally allows this ontological common-
ality to bleed into his thinking about the content of ideas as well.

146
idea and ontology
affects minds ‘‘from without.’’ If we take Berkeley seriously here, it follows
that ideas are not really mental entities at all. They are neither mental sub-
stances nor modes of the same. The sense in which they could be ‘‘ﬂeeting,
dependent beings’’ starts to lapse into incoherence. Since I would rather
have mystery than incoherence, I conclude that Berkeleian ideas are only
weakly distinct from minds but in a sense that remains to be explored; we
have a mystery to be solved.
Returning to the original problem, why might one be so quick to apply
the act/object distinction to ontic issues? A reasonable conjecture is that
the act/object dichotomy has traditionally been associated with an implicit
internal/external pairing. The assumption that if ideas are identical with
perceptual acts then they must be internal to and dependent on the mind
leads us to naturally conclude that if ideas are objects then they must be
external to and independent of the mind. Although perhaps a psychologi-
cally natural inference, it does not follow. Completing this move is especially
difﬁcult with Berkeley, who independently denies the existence of matter.
Without an external material reality to ground our intuitions about percep-
tion, we seek an alternative that resembles it, that is, a reality that is external
and independent. I think a sort of underlying material realism undergirds
our intuitive understanding of the act/object distinction. Importantly,
Berkeley shares this sense of realism about ideas. That is, Berkeley also
thinks of the act/object distinction at least partially in terms of the internal/
external pairing. Ideas, as objects, are external to the mind. ‘‘External’’ in
this context means in a two-place relation with the mind in which ideas are
not a mode of the mind. As he says, ideas affect the mind ‘‘from without.’’
One might object that my claim here ignores Berkeley’s allusions to ideas
of reﬂection (in, e.g., PHK 13, 25, 35, 68, and 74). Apparently not all ideas
come from without. The point is well taken but misses the force of my
claim. All ideas ultimately come from a source independent of our minds.
Ideas of reﬂection (a memory might be an example) themselves originate
from previous sensory experience. As a result, if they are ideas, they have a
sensory content of a particular kind. Since ideas can only be like other ideas
(PHK 90), and sensory ideas are the exemplar for ideas in general, it follows
that calling an idea an idea of reﬂection is a reference to how we access
sensory content. We can have direct experience (seeing a visual image) or
reﬂective experience (calling to mind a visual image). Thus although Berke-
ley frequently runs together ‘‘ideas of sense or reﬂexion’’ (in PHK 13, 25, 35,
68, and 7, for instance), he does explicitly restrict the use of the word ‘‘idea’’
when it comes to nonsensory content. In section 89, he notes that

berkeley
147
[w]e comprehend our own existence by inward feeling or reﬂexion,
and that of other spirits by reason. We may be said to have some
knowledge or notion of our own minds, of spirits and active beings,
whereof in a strict sense we have not ideas. In like manner we know
and have a notion of relations between things or ideas, which rela-
tions are distinct from the ideas of things related, inasmuch as the
latter may be perceived by us without our perceiving the former.
To me it seems that ideas, spirits and relations are all in their re-
spective kinds, the object of human knowledge and subject of dis-
course: and that the term idea would be improperly extended to
signify everything we know or have any notion of.
We do not have ideas of a mind or of anything else other than that which
can be described as having sensory content. None of this denies that Berke-
ley holds that we have ideas of reﬂection. I am only noting that such ideas
will be restricted in content if they are to be ideas at all on Berkeley’s view.
If that is right, then my claim that ideas generally invoke an internal/external
pairing with the mind remains reasonable, given that ideas ultimately origi-
nate from a source other than the mind. Even so, learning that perception
(broadly construed as all mental activity) involves two-place relations with
objects usually, but not always, ‘‘outside’’ the mind does not tell us much
about the ontic nature of ideas.
We are still left asking exactly what it means to treat an idea as an object.
And if ideas are objects, what are these objects Berkeley calls ‘‘ideas?’’ At the
start of his analysis, Winkler only indicates that they are objects as distinct
from perceptual acts. Winkler resists characterizing Berkeleian ideas as men-
tal, suggesting that for Berkeley they cannot therefore be modes. Instead, we
are told that Berkeley regards ideas as genuine entities. ‘‘An idea is an entity,
a real thing, and the relation between an idea and the mind is a genuine
relation between two distinct items. An idea is an object of thought in a
sense demanding that the object exists whenever it is true to say that a
thought is directed towards it’’ (1989, 7). Presumably then Berkeley thinks
that perceptual acts are not themselves ‘‘real entities’’ that exist and so ideas
cannot be adverbial on minds. But if ideas are ‘‘real things,’’ are they there-
fore substances? Winkler does not say in the course of his analysis, until the
very end of his book, where he confesses that on his reading ‘‘ideas have no
clear place in the framework of traditional ontology’’ (309–10). I take this to
imply that he does not consider ideas to be proper substances, although he
stops short of giving Berkeley a role in the early modern tale. But then what

148
idea and ontology
are ideas for Berkeley? Winkler does not discuss the ontic status of ideas,
and so all we know according to him is that they are real things that are
neither substances nor modes. They are simply ‘‘objects.’’12 At this point, we
know that ideas are objects that function as arguments in two-place relations
and that they are weakly distinct from minds, which entails that they are not
ontologically independent of them. Dependence, however, is traditionally
expressed only in terms of the substance-modiﬁcation dichotomy. As I have
endeavored to demonstrate, establishing that ideas are objects does not ex-
clude them from being modes, and some commentators still urge that
Berkeleian ideas are indeed modiﬁcations of minds.13 So might they be right?
Might ideas be mere modes?
6.3 Ideas as Modes
Although I argue that Berkeley does not take ideas to be modes, there are
several places where Berkeley seems to characterize ideas as modiﬁcations of
the mind. That is, he apparently denies that a genuine distinction exists
between the perceptual act and its object. Consider the following passages.
PHK 7 [F]or to have an idea is all one as to perceive.
PC 609 The distinguishing betwixt an idea and perception of the
idea has been one great cause of imagining material substances.
PC 656 Twas the opinion that Ideas could exist unperceiv’d or be-
fore perception that made Men think perception was somewhat
different from the Idea perceived, yet it was an Idea of Reﬂexion
whereas the thing perceiv’d was an idea of Sensation. I say twas this
made ’em think the understanding took it in receiv’d from without
which could never be did not they think it existed without.
PC 585 Qu. if there be any real Difference betwixt certain Ideas of
Reﬂexion & others of Sensation, e.g. ’twixt perception & white,
12. Moreover, Winkler endorses a particular kind of phenomenalistic interpretation of
Berkeleian ideas. I think Winkler’s account is smart but mistaken. I address his reading in section
6.6.
13. Aside from George Pitcher, Philip Cummins (1975, 55–72) and Richard Watson (1987, esp.
124) have defended this view. Alan and David Hausman defend a loosely similar view of Berke-
leian ideas (1995, 47–66).

berkeley
149
black, sweet, etc. wherein I pray you does the perception of white
differ from white. Mea . . .
These passages to varying degrees appear to deny the legitimacy of the dis-
tinction between act and object. The denial of this distinction is important
to scholars who wish to attribute an adverbial view of ideas to Berkeley.
The most well-known advocate of an adverbial analysis of ideas is proba-
bly George Pitcher, who argues that ascribing an adverbial account to Berke-
ley does the least amount of philosophical violence to the plausibility of his
system. He ﬁrst argues that Berkeley is independently committed to three
mutually inconsistent claims (J), (K), and (L).
(J) The mind perceives ideas.
(K) The mind is wholly distinct from its ideas.
(L) The alleged distinction between (i) the perceiving of an idea
and (ii) the idea perceived, is a bogus one; there is no such distinc-
tion.14 (1977, 189)
(J) and (K) are claims made explicitly in Berkeley’s published works and (L)
is the important (alleged) denial of an act-object distinction in perception.
Pitcher eventually decides to jettison (K) and allow that ideas are not
strongly distinct from minds because they are, in fact, modes of the same.
His reasoning depends on the claim that accepting (K) requires Berkeley to
admit that ideas can exist unperceived (201–2). Any view of ideas (of sense)
that makes them ‘‘wholly distinct’’ from the mind without collapsing into
an adverbial theory requires that it is at least possible for some idea to exist
without a mind. This result is not an immediate disaster, for one might
retreat to the position that although it is possible for ideas to exist without
a mind, in fact they do not. But, as Pitcher rightly notes, the retreat is ulti-
mately a disaster. Berkeley would then owe us some account of why (and
how) ideas happen to exist only when perceived (given that there is no
logical necessity that they be perceived on the current assumption). Berke-
ley, of course, provides no such analysis, and it is difﬁcult to even imagine
what he might say in response to such a challenge. Thus Pitcher rejects any
act-object analysis that would support (K), instead opting to reject (K) and
assert that Berkeley at a minimum should have embraced an adverbial theory
of ideas.
14. This analysis appeared earlier in article form. See Pitcher 1969.

150
idea and ontology
I conclude that Luce’s ‘‘act-object’’ interpretation of Berkeley sad-
dles our philosopher with a hopeless position. My suggestion, then,
is that we allow Berkeley to abandon proposition (K), with its act-
object analysis of the perceiving of ideas, and have him adopt in-
stead the adverbial analysis implicit in proposition (L). This move
has the great advantage of allowing him to retain the necessary
non-existence of unperceived ideas as part of his system. Further-
more, everything else of importance that Berkeley wishes to main-
tain can be accommodated within the adverbial analysis. (202–3)
Pitcher’s analysis rests on the contention that Berkeley needs (L) (the denial
of the act-object distinction) and is not, or should not be, deeply wedded to
the claim that ideas are distinct from the minds that perceive them. Acts of
perception are identical to their objects.
The most commonly cited evidence for the identity claim is Principles 5,
where Berkeley is characteristically bold.15 ‘‘Light and colours, heat and cold,
extension and ﬁgures, in a word the things we see and feel, what are they
but so many sensations, notions, ideas or impressions on the sense; and is it
possible to separate, even in thought, any of these from perception? For my
part I might as easily divide a thing from itself.’’ Pitcher takes the passage
(combined with its matching passage in the Three Dialogues [195]) to be
decisive based on two arguments Berkeley goes on to offer. The ﬁrst argu-
ment depends on the passivity of perception. When I perceive a sensory
idea, my mind is passive with respect to that idea. As a result, Pitcher rea-
sons that there is no act of perceiving the idea at all. Thus there can be no
distinction between act and object in a case where there is no identiﬁable
act. Pitcher recognizes that this line of reasoning is unacceptable, since it
depends on a rather stringent conception of what it means to act. On this
reading, acts would have to be directly caused by a volition. Even Berkeley
would not likely adopt the position that one must be positively willing in
order to be acting, since the implications of such a position border on the
absurd. To use Pitcher’s own example, Berkeley would be forced to admit
that there are no distinctions between active and passive actions, such that
there is no distinction between falling on an ant and the ant being fallen on
in cases where my falling was not preceded by a volition (193).16 As a result,
Pitcher rests his case on Berkeley’s second line of reasoning.
15. Pitcher 1977, 191, relies on the passage heavily. More recently, Lennon follows a similar
pattern of analysis, defending a theory of appearances for Berkeley (2001b, esp. 657–60).
16. The events might be distinct, but Pitcher does not engage the distinction between acts
and events in his analysis on this point.

berkeley
151
The matching passage in the Three Dialogues comes early in the work,
where Philonous speaks on behalf of Berkeley. ‘‘To return then to your dis-
tinction between sensation and object; if I take you right, you distinguish in
every perception two things, the one an action of the mind, the other not’’
(195). Two pages later he gets around to attacking this distinction by using
the example of pain. ‘‘Besides, since you distinguish the active and passive
in every perception, you must do it in that of pain. But how is it possible
that pain, be it as little active as you please, should exist in an unperceiving
substance?’’ (197). If we are to distinguish ideas from perceivings, then we
must do so in every case. But at least for some cases, like perceiving pain,
suggesting that the idea might exist outside the mind is allegedly absurd.
Berkeley’s argument relies on his claim that sensations are ideas, and
advocates of the adverbial reading of Berkeley will likely be quick to point
out that we need not posit a separately existing entity in these cases. There
is no ‘‘chill’’ separate from my feeling it. We tend to naturally use the lan-
guage of ‘‘sense’’ and ‘‘feel’’ to describe external objects. I can feel the needle
being inserted into my arm and one might easily be misled into thinking
that I am actually feeling the needle. Yet we would be better off saying we
feel the sensation caused by the needle, which is not necessarily the needle
itself. In that case, there is no bar to our saying that we perceive the caused
modiﬁcation in our mind and that is the object to which our mind is di-
rected when feeling pain. The pain passage becomes more compelling when
we note that Berkeley draws much of his inspiration from Malebranche.
Recall that Malebranche divides sensory objects into two kinds: sensations
and ideas.17 Sensations, however, are explicitly modes. A reasonable conjec-
ture is that Berkeley collapses the sensation/idea distinction and preserves
the critical feature of sensations as modes. As we have seen, a long line of
Cartesians thought of ideas as modes, including Descartes himself.18 Such a
simple appeal to authority, however, is neither convincing nor consistent
with Berkeley’s temperament as a philosopher.
I think something more limited is going on in this passage in the Three
Dialogues. We need to be rather careful before attributing to him the claim
that perceptual acts are identical with their objects (I am not even sure I
know what this ultimately means), when a weaker, more plausible position
is available. When Philonous clariﬁes Hylas’s distinction between act and
object, he does so cautiously. ‘‘So that if there was a perception without any
17. See section 3.1.
18. Watson makes this observation and uses it as evidence that Berkeley thought of ideas as
modes (1987, 124).

152
idea and ontology
act of the mind, it were possible such a perception should exist in an un-
thinking substance’’ (196). Berkeley, of course, denies the consequent, con-
cluding that the antecedent is therefore also false. But what is the negation
of this statement? It does not follow that if there is no perception without
an act of the mind, that act and object must be identical. Instead, all that
follows is that every case of perception must be accompanied by a mental
act. This consequence expresses dependence, not necessarily identity, and
therefore one cannot conclude that ideas must be modes. Pain, we are told,
cannot exist ‘‘in (i.e. be dependent upon) an unperceiving substance,’’ but
that does not logically preclude instances of pain from being (or being like)
substances. The point is that Berkeley’s apparent denial of the act-object
distinction is not an assertion of the identity of act and object but instead an
assertion of the necessary dependence of act on object and object on act in
perception.19
It is telling that in the Principles 5 passage Berkeley discusses the impossi-
bility of separating idea from perception (‘‘and is it possible to separate, even
in thought, any of these from perception? For my part I might as easily
divide a thing from itself.’’). Even in thought we ﬁnd the two so conjoined
by necessity that we cannot imagine one without the other. The assertion of
unimaginable separability does not make them identical. His ﬁnal comment
is rhetorical ﬂourish, for saying that he might as well divide a thing from
itself implies that in this case one would not be doing so, although it would
be similarly difﬁcult. In general, all of the selections from Berkeley that some
scholars read as endorsing strict identity between act and object can be more
plausibly read as expressing the essential dependence of object on mind. Thus
we are told that to have an idea is all one as to perceive, that is, one cannot
have an idea without perceiving (PHK 7). I might similarly say, in explaining
the concept of parenthood to an alien, that being a parent is all one as
having children (although one ought not to confuse this concept of mere
parenthood with that of being a good parent). That is, if you want to under-
stand what it means to be a parent, you may substitute the concept of having
children for parent, since the two are logically dependent on each other.
Berkeley’s big target in all of these passages is the notion that ideas can exist
19. Compare Tom Stoneham’s analysis of what he calls the ‘‘simplest model of perception’’
(SMP). SMP is technically neutral between adverbial and nonadverbial accounts while preserving
the two-place nature of perceptual relations (2002, esp. 53–56). Asserting that Berkeley’s apparent
denial of the act-object distinction is in fact a denial of their logical separability (and nothing
stronger) coheres with Stoneham’s account, although he does not pursue the particular line I do
here.

berkeley
153
unperceived. If we stay focused on that as the main issue, my weaker reading
of these passages is more appropriate than the identity reading.
Interestingly, in the original 1710 edition of the Principles, the last line of
section 5 reads as follows: ‘‘In truth the object and the sensation are the
same thing, and cannot therefore be abstracted from each other.’’ In revising
the work, Berkeley removed this important line from the text. The last line
of the 1734 edition reads: ‘‘Hence as it is impossible for me to see or feel
anything without an actual sensation of that thing, so is it impossible for me
to conceive in my thoughts any sensible thing or object distinct from the
sensation or perception of it.’’ The difference is striking. The 1710 edition
suggests an identiﬁcation whereas the 1734 version does not, instead empha-
sizing how sensation cannot be thought of as distinct from (i.e., independent
of) the object. I take this change to be at least consistent with my thesis and,
more strongly, as constituting corroborating evidence.
There are additional positive reasons for thinking that ideas cannot be
mere mental modes. First is what I call the ‘‘content argument.’’ One of the
key roles ideas play is that of explaining the content of our various mental
activities. If ideas are meant to genuinely provide us with additional infor-
mation about our mental states, then they cannot be straightforwardly iden-
tical with them.20 Even here this might not exclude ideas being modes, so
long as the object mode is sufﬁciently distinct from the act of mentation. I
can reﬂect on my own state of mind without any difﬁculty. But Berkeley
qualiﬁes this claim. One cannot have an idea of one’s own mental states,
since the mental is active and ideas are passive. What I have when I contem-
plate my own mental states is a ‘‘notion.’’ Alternatively, Berkeley could
admit that we have ideas that represent the effects of a mental action, but
representing an effect does not capture the entire content of the act (PHK
27). Unfortunately Berkeley does not provide us with much theory about
notions; all he does is strongly separate them from ideas.21 About the act of
perceiving itself, Berkeley is adamant that the relation is two place. ‘‘It is
therefore evident there can be no substratum of those qualities but spirit, in
which they exist, not by way of mode or property, but as a thing perceived
in that which perceived it’’ (3D, 237; see also 3D, 230). An idea is a (separate)
thing perceived by the mind. As a result, Berkeleian ideas cannot be modes.
Note, however, that nothing here indicates that ideas are not decidedly de-
pendent just like modes.
20. Winkler advances a similar argument (1989, 6).
21. Daniel Flage (1987) has made a book-length study of the doctrine of notions, but the issue
otherwise lies outside the scope of our discussion here.

154
idea and ontology
Consider the companion passage denying that ideas are modes from sec-
tion 49 in the Principles. ‘‘I answer, those qualities are in the mind only as
they are perceived by it, that is, not by way of mode or attribute, but only by
way of idea.’’ This passage has been resisted by many commentators on the
grounds that there is no other possibility than that they are modes given
Berkeley’s claims elsewhere that act and idea are not distinct. Now, however,
we have another option, and one that coheres well with all of his other
claims. Ideas are not modes but are merely ontically dependent, which ex-
plains why some might be misled into thinking that Berkeley is endorsing a
mental modiﬁcation view.
I must confess, however, that there is another reason why one might
nonetheless wish to hang on to an adverbial understanding of ideas for
Berkeley. If ideas are modes, then Berkeley has an immediate and intuitive
answer to the question of why he thinks ideas must be dependent on minds.
The esse of ideas is percipi because ideas are literally modiﬁcations of the
mind. If ideas are not modes of the mind, then it is reasonable to ask why
Berkeley was so thoroughly convinced that ideas had to be such dependent
beings. To partly answer this question, however, requires that we stop and
consider the assertion lying behind it. Might Berkeley think that ideas are
dependent because they are modes of the mind? It seems unlikely, even if it
were true that Berkeley had an adverbial theory of ideas. The dependent
nature of ideas seems to be an assumption he holds deeply; his commitment
to it seems to trump his metaphysical engagements with the nature of the
mind, although I grant that I doubt any quality argument could be adduced
for this claim. An adverbial theory would explain why ideas are dependent
on minds but would not in itself explain why Berkeley seems so obviously
convinced of the claim. The explanatory gap left by adverbial theories strikes
me as especially clear given the preceding discussion that strongly indicates
that Berkeley wished to separate himself from those analyses. As a result, I
fail to see how such a theory really has any serious explanatory superiority.
So why did Berkeley think that ideas must be dependent on minds? The
simplest answer is that he, like his philosophical predecessors, built this fea-
ture into the concept of an idea. Oddly enough, even Pitcher recognizes the
point. ‘‘Ideas of sense—like all other ideas, are, for Berkeley, necessarily
mind dependent. It is a conceptual truth that there can be no such thing as
a free-ﬂoating idea’’ (1977, 93). Descartes, Locke, and even Berkeley all tell
us that ideas are the immediate objects of perception. How could such ob-
jects exist without being perceived? Berkeley only touched on this issue long
enough to say that the dependence of ideas ‘‘is what everybody will

berkeley
155
allow. . . . I think an intuitive knowledge may be obtained of this, by anyone
that shall attend to what is meant by the term exist when applied to sensible
things’’ (PHK 3). Berkeley was, of course, right when he said that everyone
agreed with this claim. It was not an assertion for which he thought he
needed to argue. Instead, the dependence of ideas was a foundational prem-
ise he thought obviously true because, in part, everyone thought it was obvi-
ously true.
We have yet to put the ﬁnishing touches on what he means by ‘‘way of
idea,’’ but the pieces are beginning to fall into place. I submit that traditional
scholarship has been misreading the force of Berkeley’s assertion that we
err when distinguishing between idea and perception (PC 609). Pitcher’s
interesting and powerful analysis is largely responsible for the tradition of
reading Berkeley this way, but I hope to have shown that, at a minimum,
we are not forced into making Berkeley an adverbialist about ideas. We have
a better way of reconciling the various texts, one that doesn’t weaken any of
his explicitly held positions. When Berkeley writes as if ideas are perceptual
acts, he is in fact only seeking to express his insight that ideas are essentially
dependent on minds. Reading him this way preserves his philosophical anal-
ysis, although we have yet fully to reconcile these claims with others that
suggest ideas are substances. At a minimum, by embracing my weaker read-
ing we can save Berkeley from obvious inconsistency.
6.4 Qualities
Why does Berkeley think that ideas are ontologically dependent yet not
mental modes? The answer, I think, lies partially in his contention that qual-
ities are ideas. According to contemporary scholarship, Berkeley is rather
notorious for his conﬂation of qualities and ideas. ‘‘Qualities, as hath been
shewn, are nothing else but sensations or ideas, which exist only in a mind
perceiving them; and this is true not only of the ideas we are acquainted
with at present, but likewise of all possible ideas whatsoever’’ (PHK 78). It
is important to note, however, that Berkeley is perfectly conscious of the
distinction he denies. That is, he thinks he has reasons for supposing that
qualities are nothing more than ideas. Thus we ought not to accuse Berkeley
of confusion, even if it were to turn out he was ultimately in error.
The basic story about qualities and their relationship to ideas Berkeley
likely derived from his reading of Locke. Most of that story Berkeley ﬁnds
plausible. Locke holds that ideas are a kind of intermediary that give us all

156
idea and ontology
the information present about the qualities of things and theorizes that qual-
ities might as well be expressed in terms of the ideas they generate within
perceivers (the primary and secondary quality thesis). For Locke, what it
means to be a (secondary) quality essentially involves the ideas caused
within us. Berkeley, however, who thinks he has good reasons to deny the
existence of an independent material world, does not have to account for
correspondence between ideas and external things. As a result, if qualities
can be explained essentially in terms of ideas, it is a short step to simply
reducing qualities to ideas. Without a material world, what role could quali-
ties play if distinct from ideas? None. Thus we ought not ﬁnd Berkeley’s
conﬂation initially unreasonable.
What matters for our purposes, however, is that the identiﬁcation of idea
and quality was more of a meeting than a reduction. Berkeleian ideas have
features reminiscent of material qualities; he does not merely turn qualities
into ideas. And so Berkeley has Philonous tell Hylas: ‘‘I am not for changing
things into ideas, but rather ideas into things’’ (3D, 244). In a materialist
ontology, qualities are the ‘‘vehicles’’ (Locke’s ‘‘powers’’ grounded in the
microstructure of material things) that report about an independent, exter-
nal reality. Skepticism arises because there is a purported gap between the
vehicles and the reality they represent. There does not appear to be any
mechanism by which we can guarantee that the ideas we perceive accurately
represent reality because reality and what represents reality are distinct
items. On Berkeley’s view, however, ideas/qualities still report a nominally
independent, external reality, just not a material one, and this allows him
to circumvent skepticism. Locke’s representative vehicles become reality in
Berkeley’s system. Ideas and qualities represent, as it were, themselves. Since
we immediately perceive them, skepticism is averted. We are passive with
respect to many of the ideas we perceive, having no control over them.
Berkeley thinks that the world according to his immaterialist principles is
just materialism without the matter. ‘‘Hence it is evident the supposition of
external bodies is not necessary for the producing our ideas: since it is
granted they are produced sometimes, and might possibly be produced al-
ways in the same order we see them in at present, without their concur-
rence’’ (PHK 18). His world is just like the material world; the order and
arrangement of what we experience remains unchanged on his view. Since
Berkeley does not deny that the world appears to be external to us, in an
important sense it really is external. Now here I mean ‘‘external’’ in the weak
volitional sense of ‘‘not created by the (i.e., our) mind’’ and not in the sense
Berkeley concerns himself to deny, namely that of ‘‘ontologically indepen-

berkeley
157
dent of all minds.’’ Berkeley himself makes this clear: ‘‘And so may you
suppose an external archetype on my principles; external, I mean, to your
own mind; though indeed it must be supposed to exist in that mind which
comprehends all things’’ (3D, 248). Ideas are things, and just as materialists
assert for physical objects, these idea-things are ordered and stand in rela-
tions to one another. They behave remarkably like physical objects (‘‘ideas
into things’’).
In light of this explanatory model, it is worthwhile to brieﬂy take note of
Berkeley’s unusual theory of perception. For each of the senses there is a
smallest perceptible unit, called a minimum sensibilium. No matter the pur-
ported physical object or event, our perception of it consists of a large num-
ber of these minimum sensibilia. A direct result of this is that there are
no invisible/insensible parts to things in our universe. This consequence is
important to Berkeley, since it helps guarantee that skepticism will be sealed
out of his system. Nothing physics posits will be in principle undetectable.
As for the advances of microscopes and telescopes all the rage in his time,
his reply is sharp. ‘‘[F]or when we look through a microscope we neither
see more visible points, nor are the collateral points more distinct then when
we look with the naked eye at objects placed in a due distance. A microscope
brings us, as it were, into a new world: it presents us with a new scene of
visible objects quite different from what we behold with the naked eye’’
(NTV 85). Berkeley’s universe is genuinely external, just not independent
from us in the way a materialist would suggest. We might not ﬁnd his theory
of minimum sensibilia attractive, but the picture is coherent. Since his New
Theory of Vision was the ﬁrst of his major philosophical works to be pub-
lished, the fact that he puts so much emphasis on the sensibility and exter-
nality of the perceived world in his subsequent works is signiﬁcant.
This kind of reading of Berkeley is not original to me, although I think I
have discovered reasons for accepting it that are stronger than those hereto-
fore proposed. A. A. Luce casts Berkeley as a realist, at one point noting that
Berkeley ‘‘is talking about ideas that are stones, trees and books’’ (1963, 30).
The world ‘‘outside’’ the mind is real—it is just not material. Berkeley’s
critique of matter is a critique of the possibility of a material substratum.
That is, he is primarily concerned to deny that ideas could be ontically de-
pendent on anything other than spirit. But this goal, as stated, indicates
nothing about the nature of the dependence. Berkeley is actually quite clear
about what he means.
That there is no substance wherein ideas can exist besides spirit, is
to me evident. And that the objects immediately perceived are

158
idea and ontology
ideas, is on all hands agreed. And that sensible qualities are objects
immediately perceived, no one can deny. It is therefore evident
there can be no substratum of those qualities but spirit, in which
they exist, not by way of mode or property, but as a thing perceived
in that which perceives it. . . . If there be anything which makes the
generality of mankind averse from the notions I espouse, it is a
misapprehension that I deny the reality of sensible things: but as it
is you who are guilty of that and not I, it follows that in truth their
aversion is against your notions, and not mine. I do therefore assert
that I am as certain of my own being, that there are bodies or
corporeal substances (meaning the things I perceive by my senses),
and that granting this, the bulk of mankind will take no thought
about, nor think themselves at all concerned in the fate of those
unknown natures, and philosophical quiddities, which some men
are so fond of. (3D, 237–38)
The only thing here that is at all confusing is his persistent claim that ideas
are ‘‘in’’ substances. Even so, the argument is straightforward.
(1) For an idea to exist is for it to be perceived.
Or: ideas can only exist ‘‘in’’ the mind.
(2) Only ideas are immediately perceived.
(3) Qualities are immediately perceived.
(4) Therefore qualities are ideas.
(5) Therefore for a quality to exist, it must be perceived (be ‘‘in’’ the mind).
Now Berkeley takes qualities to be things. He urgently repeats his claim that
what we perceive—sensible qualities—are real things. He additionally
stresses that the recognition of this truth will not signiﬁcantly alter our un-
derstanding of how the ordinary world appears to us. This result is only
possible if qualities retain some form of independence from the mind, by
which I mean that they are not ‘‘controlled’’ by our wills (what I call voli-
tional independence). When we open our eyes in the morning the sky is still
blue, no matter how hard we wish to perceive it as yellow. In that sense,
ideas are independent of our minds, but this form of independence is not
an ontological notion.
Thus Berkeley takes ideas to be quasi substances: (ontologically) depen-
dent things whose primary relation to the mind is two place without being
modes of it (i.e., ‘‘external’’ to the mind). The view is plausible given Berke-

berkeley
159
ley’s desire to simultaneously eliminate skepticism by reducing qualities to
ideas. Once we accept his assertion that qualities must be ideas, Berkeley’s
only escape from solipsism is to forcibly bend the substance/mode ontology
to allow for a category of volitionally independent and ‘‘external’’ entities
that retain a measure of ontological dependence.
6.5 Unperceived Existence
A crucial test of the viability of my interpretation is how well it handles
certain notorious problems. In the remainder of this chapter I start my de-
fense by brieﬂy introducing the ﬁrst of those issues: the problem of unper-
ceived existence. I then move on to engage a rival reading of Berkeley
(Winkler’s phenomenalistic interpretation) before delving deeply into more
complicated problems in chapters 7 and 8.
At ﬁrst blush it rubs common sense the wrong way to claim that when
we leave a room it and its contents wink out of existence. The nature of the
world and how we perceive it strongly suggests the opposite. If I leave a
clock alone and unobserved for several hours, I return to ﬁnd that it has
kept the proper time despite its apparent nonexistence in the interim. Given
our analysis of Berkeley’s theory of ideas, he now has some resources to
account for this phenomenon more plausibly.
Importantly, Berkeley makes sure that the existence conditions for any
idea require only a mind, and not all minds. Hence, my clock continues to
exist so long as some mind perceives it. ‘‘Wherever bodies are said to have
no existence without the mind, I would not be understood to mean this or
that particular mind, but all minds whatsoever. It does not therefore follow
from the foregoing principles, that bodies are annihilated and created every
moment, or exist not at all during intervals between our perception of
them’’ (PHK 48). As Ronald Knox has popularized in his limerick, what
ultimately guarantees the continuity of objects unperceived by ﬁnite minds
is God.22 Berkeley does not seriously discuss the role of God in preserving
continuity until late in the Three Dialogues, where he marries the role of
God with the externality of ideas.
22. Knox’s limerick: ‘‘There was a young man who said ‘God / Must think it exceedingly
odd / If he ﬁnds that this tree / Continues to be / When there’s no one about in the Quad.’ A
second limerick follows: ‘‘Dear Sir: Your astonishment’s odd; / I am always about in the Quad. /
And that’s why the tree / Will continue to be, / Since observed by / Yours faithfully, GOD.’’

160
idea and ontology
When I deny sensible things an existence out of the mind, I do not
mean my mind in particular, but all minds. Now it is plain they
have an existence exterior to my mind, since I ﬁnd them by experi-
ence to be independent of it. There is therefore some other mind
wherein they exist, during the intervals between the times of my
perceiving them: as likewise they did before my birth, and would
do after my supposed annihilation. And as the same is true, with
regard to all other ﬁnite created spirits; it necessarily follows, there
is an omnipresent eternal Mind, which knows and comprehends all
things. (230–31)
Berkeley sees two challenges here. First, how to explain the continuity of
unperceived objects across time, and second, how to explain why they be-
have independently of us, both when perceived and not. He solves the sec-
ond problem with his realization that ideas are both mind dependent
(ontologically) yet volitionally independent (‘‘external’’) and the ﬁrst by
positing an omnipresent deity that perceives all things. Presumably then,
God perceives every idea throughout its functional existence, making the
world of ideas one ﬁlled with permanent ideas.23 Exploring the exact nature
of this divine order of ideas will occupy us at length in the next chapter, so
I limit the following discussion of God to certain circumspect claims.
Although invoking God to provide continuity in the world would be a
pleasant solution, there are difﬁculties, since Berkeley elsewhere indicates
that God does not sense as ﬁnite minds do. ‘‘There is no sense or sensory,
nor anything like a sense or sensory, in God. Sense implies an impression
from some other being, and denotes a dependence in the soul which hath
it. Sense is a passion; and passions imply imperfection. God knoweth all
things as pure mind or intellect; but nothing by sense, nor in nor through a
sensory’’ (S 289).24 If God does not sense ideas, then how can He preserve
their existence? Berkeley already provides the answer. Like virtually all of his
contemporaries, Berkeley uses the term ‘‘perception’’ and its cognates in a
broad sense to capture all mental activity.25 His usage includes sensing,
thinking, pondering, and so forth. Sensing, as Berkeley notes, implies both
the exercise of a passion and the reception of the object from an external
source. Since God is the source of all ideas, clearly God does not sense. Yet
23. I am not alone in this interpretation. See Luce 1942, 4, and Berman 1986, 41–45.
24. See Thomas 1976, 163–68. That God does not sense even though God perceives has not
been as widely noted as it ought to be.
25. Compare the similar discussion of ‘‘idea’’ with reference to Locke in section 4.3.

berkeley
161
God can nonetheless be aware of our ideas of sense without actually sensing
them. ‘‘God May comprehend all Ideas even the Ideas which are painfull &
unpleasant without being in any degree pained thereby. Thus we our selves
can imagine the pain of a burn etc. without any misery or uneasiness at
all’’ (PC 675). Berkeley clearly allows perception without sensation. More
importantly, the view allows God and ﬁnite minds to be aware of the nu-
merically same ideas.26 God creates every idea that we perceive (the order of
which obeys what we call the laws of nature), although such creation does
not entail that God experiences or senses them; it merely implies that God
is simultaneously aware of them.
Thus Berkeley accounts for the nominal independence of the perceived
world by asserting that God preserves the existence of ideas. Ideas are never-
theless (ontologically) dependent beings. Now this picture makes the rela-
tionship between ideas and ﬁnite minds admittedly unusual. In his quest
to preserve some of our ordinary intuitions, Berkeley had to make certain
emendations to the traditional ontological categories. Before we can further
explore the fruits of Berkeley’s labors on this score, however, we ﬁrst need
to engage one last potent rival interpretation.
6.6 Phenomenalism
To this point the picture I have been sketching of Berkeley’s metaphysic is
thoroughly idealist. There are no things that we perceive that are not actual
ideas. Kenneth Winkler, however, has urged that Berkeley is in fact a kind
of an early phenomenalist (1989, esp. ch. 6). Broadly speaking, ‘‘phenome-
nalism’’ applies to any theory according to which objects (like bodies) are
constituted of phenomenal items, or sensa. I readily admit that in general
terms Berkeley is not far from phenomenalism. Winkler’s phenomenalism,
however, holds that any statement about a sensible thing is equivalent to a
set of counterfactual conditionals about ideas. As a result, what is essential
to sensible things is that they are perceivable and not just perceived.27 Addi-
tionally, the meanings of statements depend on the truth conditions ex-
pressed in the counterfactual language about minds and ideas (193). The
26. I amend and expand on this claim at length in the following chapter.
27. This leaves room for positivistic phenomenalisms. To say now that dinosaurs once
roamed the earth would be cashed out in terms of counterfactuals about sensory evidence per-
ceivable now (e.g., fossils). What would be essential to asserting that dinosaurs did exist is that
evidence be perceivable to us now.

162
idea and ontology
primary appeal of Winkler’s phenomenalism stems from its ability to inde-
pendently explain the persistence of unperceived objects without invoking
the divine. So my statement ‘‘The clock is on the table in my study’’ is
equivalent to a presumably complex set of counterfactuals including ones
that describe what I would perceive were I now in my study. Hence Winkler
ultimately concludes that Berkeley consciously endorses this form of phe-
nomenalism: ‘‘These imperfections are to be expected, I think, in the
writings of a philosopher who was one of the ﬁrst to see the promise of
phenomenalism’’ (200). From this point forward, I will use the word ‘‘phe-
nomenalism’’ to refer to Winkler’s speciﬁc theory and not to the broad sense
of the term, primarily because Winkler himself does not further qualify the
word. I recognize, however, that the term ‘‘phenomenalism’’ in contempo-
rary usage covers more positions than just Winkler’s.
If indeed Berkeley were a phenomenalist, that revelation would not criti-
cally undermine my contention that ideas are quasi substances. Even Win-
kler’s phenomenalism is technically compatible with my analysis about the
nature of Berkeleian ideas. It is not, however, the best of marriages. On my
view, one of the reasons Berkeley is attracted to the claim that ideas are
substance-like is that he needs to explain how the perceived world is inde-
pendent of our will. The clock exists even when I fail to perceive it because
God perceives it and because its nature or perceptual content is independent
of me. A main motive for embracing phenomenalism is that it allows (but
admittedly does not require) one to make sense of the world without God.
As it turns out, however, I think that Berkeley cannot be a phenomenalist.
Attributing such a view to him presents a number of philosophical problems
and is unconvincing in light of a careful analysis of the texts.
At ﬁrst glance, two philosophical reasons arise for rejecting phenomenal-
ism as an interpretation of Berkeley. The ﬁrst difﬁculty stems from the na-
ture of counterfactuals. One might think that counterfactuals must be
grounded (as I have discussed previously, especially in section 5.2). If a
counterfactual is true, then that is because there is some nonconditional
truth that ‘‘underlies’’ it.28 Thus if one were to say truly that ‘‘If this sugar
were put into the water then it would dissolve,’’ that can be true only in
virtue of other nonconditional truths about sugar and water. In this case,
the counterfactual is true because of the chemical properties of sugar. When
28. My sense is that few contemporary philosophers seriously argue that counterfactuals do
not require a ground in the sense that some have argued for ungrounded dispositions. See Arm-
strong 1997, esp. ch. 5, and Bird 2001, 137–49. Nonetheless, as I shall argue shortly, that need not
be a restriction on Berkeley.

berkeley
163
we turn to analyze sensory statements, however, we run into a problem.
Consider Berkeley’s example about the table. Winkler claims that the state-
ment ‘‘There is a table in my study,’’ is equivalent to ‘‘If one were to go into
the study, one would see a table.’’ But then what nonconditional truth
grounds this counterfactual? We certainly cannot say that there truly is a
table in the study, and not just because it seems to beg the question. More
probingly, the claim that ‘‘There is a table in my study’’ is itself a sensory
claim according to Berkeley. As such it also has a counterfactual reading and
accordingly is not itself a nonconditional ground. In fact, no sensory claim
at all can ground any other, since they are all supposedly equivalent to
counterfactual conditionals about what we would experience under certain
circumstances. Berkeley, of course, does have an out: God could ground
these counterfactuals. What explains why I have certain experiences instead
of others depends on nonconditional truths about how God is now. Yet if
we must rely on God to make phenomenalism plausible for Berkeley, much
of the impetus to endorse the theory in the ﬁrst place is vitiated.
Yet it strikes me that Berkeley, who does not have any reﬂective theory of
counterfactuals, might just as well deny the starting assumption. Just as
some argue that there might be ungrounded dispositions, so one might sug-
gest there are ungrounded counterfactuals as well.29 To say ‘‘There is a table
in my study’’ only asserts as a brute fact that two sets of sensory experiences
are regularly conjoined. Berkeley was arguably interested in removing the
metaphysical pretensions of the scientists of his day. One of those preten-
sions was the claim that every event in the experienced world had to be
reduced to some underlying mechanistic or metaphysical cause (Brook 1973,
esp. 3). Science is not about efﬁcient causes but simply about discoverable
uniformities. Yet if we reduce counterfactual talk to mere discoverable uni-
formities, one might well wonder how this supports phenomenalism at all.
If the point of analyzing ‘‘There is a table in my study’’ is only that we learn
to regularly associate certain ideas with one another, then the counterfactual
nature of the claim drops out entirely. The sentence now means only when
I do x, I will have a y-type experience. ‘‘There is a table in my study’’ means
nothing about what would happen were I to go there. After all, there is no
‘‘there’’ to which to go when I am absent from ‘‘it.’’ Instead, it is shorthand
I use to describe a regularity in the order of ideas I perceive. Thus at the end
of our analysis, we might confront the phenomenalist reader of Berkeley
with a dilemma. Either counterfactuals require a ground, in which case the
29. See section 5.2ff. for a more complete discussion of grounding dispositional properties.

164
idea and ontology
view looks implausible, or they do not. And if not, then the best reason for
denying they do pushes one to a position where it appears Berkeley does not
need counterfactuals at all, removing yet more of the impetus for endorsing
phenomenalism.
A second problem emerges, however, when we remember that phenome-
nalism attempts to characterize the meanings of sentences in terms of the
sensory evidence one could have for them.30 What it means to say that there
is a table in the study depends on the truth of various counterfactuals about
what I would experience under certain conditions. That relationship seems
clear enough. We could presumably list all the counterfactuals and then
conjoin them, providing the meaning for the original declarative statement.
Yet therein lies the problem. How are we to know what sensory statements
count as evidence for the truth of any given claim? Does the meaning of
‘‘There is a table in my study’’ depend on who sees or touches it? Does it
depend on being able to see the desk in the ultraviolet spectrum? There
seems to be no nonarbitrary method for determining which counterfactuals
are genuinely relevant. It is even possible that we will discover new kinds of
sensory evidence in the future, yet it sounds odd to say that the meaning of
a sentence would change were we to make a new empirical discovery. At the
very least such an account is un-Berkeleian. Berkeley does not seem to rest
his account of meaning on complexes of counterfactuals, although this point
will require further textual proof.
I am not arguing that either concern absolutely defeats the phenomenal-
ist interpretation. They do, however, make it more difﬁcult to imagine why
one would think that Berkeley endorses such a view. As it turns out, I think
Berkeley did brieﬂy entertain a phenomenalist account. Ultimately, how-
ever, he rejected it, and the textual evidence of this strikes me as unusually
clear. Most of the statements cited as evidence that Berkeley embraced phe-
nomenalism come from early entries in his notebooks. Here is a sample of
some of his musings that are suggestive:
 293a Bodies taken for Power do exist when not perceiv’d but
this existence is not actual. When I say a power exists no more is
meant than that if in the light I open my eyes & look that way I
shall see it i.e. the body etc.
30. I learned of this argument from Jonathan Bennett. See Bennett 1979, 45–64.

berkeley
165
M.P. 185a Colours in the dark do exist really i.e. were there light or
as soon as light comes we shall see them provided we open our
eyes. & that whether we will or no.
 52 Bodies etc do exist even when not perceiv’d they being powers
in the active Being.
These entries, and others like them, all indicate that Berkeley did ﬂirt with a
broadly phenomenalist understanding of the existence of sensory objects.
Note, however, that I have provided Berkeley’s own system of marginalia
prior to the entry numbers.31 The proper interpretation of the ‘‘’’ sign has
engendered considerable controversy and requires a brief aside to consider
properly.
6.6.1 An Aside About Signs
Discovering the proper interpretation of the ‘‘’’ sign is all the more impor-
tant now since a surprisingly large amount of the evidence used by Winkler
comes from entries with this symbol.32 Luce originally wrote of the sign that
‘‘I am inclined to think that Berkeley used it as a sort of obelus, setting it
against those entries which he found he could not use, whether because (a)
irrelevant to his ﬁnal argument, or personal, or trivial, or (b) representing
discarded views’’ (1970, 8). He subsequently added that although he believed
this to account for 95 percent of the occurrences of the sign, he was ‘‘not
entirely satisﬁed’’ on this point. Much later he qualiﬁed his claim even fur-
ther, reducing the number of ‘‘clear’’ cases of rejection to about one third
of the total entries marked with the ‘‘’’ symbol. Nonetheless, arguably the
standard reading of the sign still treats it as some form of hesitancy or rejec-
tion, whether an indication that Berkeley thought the statement false in
some way or merely that he wanted to set that particular line of reasoning
aside. In his introduction to Berkeley’s philosophical works, Michael Ayers
writes that ‘‘The symbol ‘’ indicates a ‘black list’ consisting of entries for
which Berkeley had no further use, often, but not always, expressing rejected
possibilities’’ (Berkeley 1975, xxi–xxii).
31. The ‘‘M’’ and ‘‘P’’ stand for ‘‘matter’’ and ‘‘primary and secondary qualities’’ respectively,
according to his notes.
32. My thanks to Walter Ott (and the Canadian Journal of Philosophy), who graciously agreed
to the republication of this material, with revisions, originally coauthored with him and applied
in another context. See Hight and Ott 2004, 8–11.

166
idea and ontology
There are some reasons for supposing that something like a rejection
mark might be an appropriate understanding of the symbol. Among the
entries with the ‘‘’’ are PC 422 and 356 (‘‘No word to be used without an
idea’’), PC 450 (‘‘Motion on 2nd thought seems to be a simple idea’’), and
PC 623 (‘‘An extended [sic] may have passive modes of thinking, not ac-
tive’’), all claims that Berkeley goes on to reject in his published works. PC
378 is an ancestor of one of his arguments that eventually appears in the
Principles. A portion of that entry is as follows:

1. All signiﬁcant words stand for Ideas
2. All knowledge about our Ideas

3. All ideas come from without or from within.
4. If from without it must be by the senses & they are call’d
sensations.

5. If from within they are the operations of the mind & are
called thoughts.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

8. All our ideas are either sensations or thoughts, by 3.4.5.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

13. that thing wch is like unto another thing must agree wth
it in one or more simple ideas.
14. whatever is like a simple idea must either be another

simple idea of the same sort or contain a simple idea of that
same sort. [By] 13.
Here Berkeley attaches the ‘‘’’ symbol to certain premises and not to oth-
ers. Tellingly, he attaches the sign to subsequent lines that depend on earlier
premises marked with the plus sign. At a minimum, Berkeley is being hesi-
tant about endorsing the claims he marks with the ‘‘’’ symbol. I am not
interested in demonstrating that the sign is univocally a rejection (I am not
conﬁdent that such a proof is even possible); I only wish to establish that
frequently the sign is so used. The evidence is sufﬁciently compelling that
one may not legitimately simply appeal to entries marked with a ‘‘’’ as if
they unproblematically reﬂect Berkeley’s considered views. In short, we
ought not refer to his unpublished works as evidence for any considered
position at all and certainly not without corroborating evidence from his
published works.
Bertil Belfrage has since cast doubt on the standard interpretation, ar-
guing that Luce’s reading of the sign as an obelus is mistaken (1987, 217–30).

berkeley
167
Stephen Daniel has taken Belfrage’s analysis seriously and as evidence to
justify his liberal use of the notebooks entries.33 The ‘‘black list’’ interpreta-
tion of the symbol is attacked as textually unsupportable. According to Bel-
frage, of the 188 entries with the ‘‘’’ sign only around 50 indicate allegedly
obvious rejections. The rest are either unclear or controversial for various
reasons.
Many of the passages containing references suggestive of phenomenalism
are marked with the ‘‘’’ sign. That in itself, as Belfrage has argued, is not
necessarily a good reason to suppose that Berkeley later rejected them. But
it is also no reason to suppose that Berkeley endorsed them either. Even
Belfrage’s own view stops short of that. He argues that the Notebooks should
be read not as a single evolving philosophical position but rather as a collec-
tion of ‘‘different philosophical standpoints which were set forth at different
times in Berkeley’s life’’ (226). Belfrage has an important point. Even if one
fully accepts all of Belfrage’s claims concerning the interpretation of the
offending sign it does not follow that they represent Berkeley’s mature, con-
sidered views. Without additional evidence conﬁrming that these entries are
among those Berkeley accepts, the countervailing evidence in the particular
case of phenomenalism makes it more plausible to assume that they number
among those he really did set aside or reject. At a minimum, we should be
hesitant to give special weight to any ‘‘’’ marked entry in the Notebooks.
6.6.2 Against Phenomenalism
Despite the foregoing analysis of the Commentaries, occasionally we do ﬁnd
passages in the main works that remind one of phenomenalism. In section
3 of the Principles Berkeley writes: ‘‘The table I write on, I say, exists, that is,
I see and feel it; and if I were out of my study I should say it existed, meaning
thereby that if I was in my study I might perceive it, or that some other
spirit actually does perceive it.’’ Berkeley does not go on to develop this into
a theoretical position; rather he instead notes that the essence of sensible
things is to be perceived, and not, as phenomenalism requires, merely per-
ceivable. As it turns out, Berkeley endorses another unrelated view that gen-
33. In private correspondence Daniel has asserted that Belfrage’s article has ‘‘refuted’’ Luce’s
interpretation of the ‘‘’’ sign. Whether that is the case is open to debate, but it must be noted
that Daniel has the admirable desire to preserve as much of Commentaries as good scholarship
will allow and thus believes that any possibility that allows us to employ the entries seriously
compels us to do so. Although I am sympathetic, I believe that changes required elsewhere to
accommodate this methodology come at too high a price.

168
idea and ontology
erates examples that look a lot like phenomenalism. He tells us that the
‘‘laws of nature’’ are a set of rules we can use to predict sensory experiences.
Now the set of rules or established methods, wherein the mind we
depend on excites in us the ideas of sense, are called the Laws of
Nature: and these we learn by experience, which teaches us that
such and such ideas are attended with such and such other ideas,
in the ordinary course of experience.
This gives us a sort of foresight, which enables us to regulate our
actions for the beneﬁt of life. (PHK 30–31)
In the context of this analysis he provides us with an interesting example
that some might take as evidence of phenomenalism.34 ‘‘[F]or the question,
whether the earth moves or no, amounts in reality to no more than this, to
wit, whether we have reason to conclude from what hath been observed by
astronomers that if we were placed in such and such circumstances, and
such or such a position and distance, both from the earth and the sun, we
should perceive the former to move among the choir of the planets, and
appearing in all respects like one of them’’ (PHK 58). However, the condi-
tional expressed here is decidedly not phenomenalist. Instead, Berkeley is
seeking to explain why sensible phenomena appear to have causal connec-
tions in a universe that nonetheless is purely immaterial. This analysis is not
about the meaning of statements but about their truth and relationship to
other sensory claims. As a result, when Berkeley says that the table exists in
the study and explains the claim by noting that if we should walk into the
room we would perceive it, all he is really doing is explaining the truth of
the claim in terms of the connections between perceived ideas. Why, before
I walk into the study, do I believe I will perceive the table? Answer: because
God has so regulated the ﬂow of ideas such that we can reliably predict that
we would have such a sensory experience. None of this unequivocally sup-
ports phenomenalism, and I believe I have provided a viable alternative to
explain passages like these.35
34. Winkler takes this passage as some evidence for his view, although he does call it ‘‘defec-
tive as a statement of phenomenalism’’ (1989, 199).
35. At 3D, 238, Berkeley brings up another example (the bent oar case) that some might think
is suggestive of phenomenalism (although Winkler himself does not directly appeal to it). As this
case is even weaker than the astronomical one discussed above, I have omitted a detailed analysis
of it. As a gloss, the oar passage is not about the meaning of ‘‘The oar is bent’’ but rather concerns
the nature of his error in supposing that the oar is bent. Here again, what is at issue is the
connection of sensory ideas and the judgments we make on their basis and not the construction
of meaning from counterfactuals.

berkeley
169
One passage appears to more directly support Winkler’s thesis. When
writing about creation in the Dialogues, Berkeley presents the following
analysis:
hylas: What shall we make then of the Creation?
philonous: May we not understand it to have been entirely in respect of
ﬁnite spirits; so that things, with regard to us, may properly be said to
begin their existence, or be created, when God decreed they should
become perceptible to intelligent creatures, in that order and manner
which he then established, and we now call the Laws of Nature? You
may call this a relative, or hypothetical existence if you please. (253)
Here we have perhaps the closest thing to an instance of Berkeley endorsing
phenomenalism. I do not deny that this passage has a phenomenalist air
about it, but it is an oddity. Instead of being representative of a deeper
commitment to phenomenalism, I think it is a case where he did not care-
fully think things through. That is, in general his Mosaic account of the
Creation is basically an ad hoc exercise.36 Consider the core claim (C) Berke-
ley advances: ‘‘Things properly begin their existence when God decrees they
should become perceptible to intelligent creatures.’’ We might interpret (C)
in one of two ways. The sensible object becomes perceptible when God
makes the decree, or, alternatively, God decrees the time at which intelligent
creatures could perceive the object, were they doing the right things. There
is an ambiguity between the time of the decree (ﬁrst reading) and the time
mentioned in the decree (second reading). Phenomenalist interpreters will
favor the latter option, since it relies on a counterfactual analysis. Either
way, however, Berkeley’s theory of the Creation runs into some theological
problems.
Consider the ﬁrst interpretation. At the time of the decree, things become
perceivable to intelligent creatures should they do the right things, be in the
proper spot, etc. This reading entails that God did not make the decree
about what humans could perceive until they were created. So during the
ﬁrst few days, while God is making the earth, the trees, and lower animals,
God apparently has no idea what he is going to do a few days later. After all,
on this reading, he cannot make the decree at the outset of creation. Berkeley
certainly would have rejected the notion that God had no idea what he was
going to do in the last days of the Creation. Yet the alternative only makes
36. Here I am echoing parts of Jonathan Bennett’s (unpublished) analysis on this issue.

170
idea and ontology
matters worse. If God immediately decreed the time at which things would
become perceivable to humans, we ﬁnd that God is acting arbitrarily. As-
sume that on day 1 God willed the following statement to be true on day 3:
If any created spirit were now to do certain things, then it would have certain
kinds of ideas. Presumably God knows that there will not be any created
spirits on day 3, so why make the statement true then? The existence of
sensible things just is their being perceived, so what possible reason could
God have for making the statement true then, and not some other time,
either later or earlier? As philosophical theology I think Berkeley would have
been disturbed by the consequences. Phenomenalism does not make Berke-
ley’s account of the Creation theologically more tempting.
Part of what compels me to believe that his analysis here is ad hoc is
how he presents the entire account. The always-conﬁdent Philonous usually
explains new objections away by invoking points already established earlier.
He does not do this here. Nor does he indicate that the issue is apiece with
some other objections raised elsewhere. Lastly, his conclusion is not that he
is correct but rather that no one can do better. Here is the ﬁnish to the
passage quoted immediately above, discussing his account of Creation:
But so long as it supplies us with the most natural, obvious, and
literal sense of the Mosaic history of the Creation; so long as it
answers all the religious ends of that great article; in a word, so long
as you can assign no other sense or meaning in its stead; why should
we reject this? Is it to comply with a ridiculous sceptical humor of
making everything nonsense and unintelligible? I am sure you can-
not say, it is for the glory of God. For allowing it to be a thing
possible and conceivable, that the corporeal world should have an
absolute subsistence extrinsical to the mind of God, as well as to
the minds of all created spirits: yet how could this set forth either
the immensity or omniscience of the Deity, or the necessary and
immediate dependence of all things on him? Nay, would it not
rather seem to derogate from those attributes? (253, emphasis mine)
As a bit of Berkeley, the passage is unusual. It is not a conﬁdent assertion of
the truth of his immaterialist doctrines; rather it is a defense on the grounds
that no one has a better answer. As long as his account preserves religious
ends and we can assign no other (better) meaning, then we ought to just sit
back and be happy with what we have. I take his unusual tone—and the

berkeley
171
theological difﬁculties present—as evidence that this passage is not a care-
fully thought out representation of his systematic beliefs.
The crowning bit of evidence that Berkeley rejected phenomenalism,
however, comes in the Dialogues. Berkeley has Hylas present Philonous with
the perfect opportunity to make his intentions clear.
hylas: Yes, Philonous, I grant the existence of a sensible thing consists
in being perceivable, but not in being actually perceived.
philonous: And what is perceivable but an idea? And can an idea exist
without being actually perceived? These are points long since agreed
between us. (234)
Hylas invites Philonous to make his phenomenalism pellucid. Instead,
Berkeley explicitly declares that such a move is useless. Bennett rightly calls
this an ‘‘anti-phenomenalist skirmish’’ (1971, 150), and Winkler’s reply is
unsatisfying.37 Winkler asserts that the passage is compatible with phenome-
nalism, but he does not provide any analysis to support his claim, instead
relying on a ‘‘long list of reasons which are not, I admit, decisive even in the
aggregate’’ (201; see also 227). The logic of the exchange seems fairly clear.
Hylas starts by asserting:
(1) A sensible thing exists  an idea is perceivable.
Winkler’s phenomenalism would have Berkeley interpret this as:
(1P) A sensible thing exists  if a situation were to occur, then an
idea would be perceived.
But Philonous does not adopt this interpretation. Instead, he takes a stronger
position:
(1S) A sensible thing exists  there is an idea such that, if a certain
situation were to occur, then it would be perceived.
Recall that Berkeley adopts the esse is percipi thesis. If there is an idea, then
it is being perceived. Conjoined with that thesis, (1S) does not allow the
existence of unperceived objects, whereas (1P) does. (1S) stipulates that there
37. See Winkler 1989, 227, and Bennett 2001, 2:189–96.

172
idea and ontology
is an extant idea—and hence that it is perceived—whereas (1P) does not.
To say that a sensible thing exists only commits one to the truth of the
counterfactual(s) according to phenomenalism. Thus the sensible thing
could exist even if not now actually perceived, so long as the counterfactual
remains true. (1S) sticks to the idealist claim that without actual perception,
an idea cannot exist. Berkeley is even good enough to explicitly state in the
exchange that the existence of sensible things requires actual perception.
In summary, I grant that Winkler’s phenomenalism might have some
positive features that make it philosophically desirable in general, but in the
context of the rest of Berkeley’s metaphysics, it leaves much to be desired.
Traditional idealistic approaches are more plausible, especially in terms of
what Berkeley actually says, and ultimately the textual evidence strikes me
as fairly conclusive. Most of the passages that seem to ﬂirt with phenomenal-
ism can be readily explained by other features of his thought. Most impor-
tantly, although he did brieﬂy entertain phenomenalism, when he ﬁnally
seriously confronted its possibility, he outright rejected it. I therefore con-
clude that Berkeley was not a phenomenalist.
6.7 Berkeley and the Early Modern Tale
There are a number of philosophers who see Berkeley as playing a vital role
in the early modern tale (although I hope I have provided an interpretation
of the nature of ideas in Berkeley’s ontology that is plausible and fruitful
enough to throw doubt on that ascription). Interestingly, some give Berkeley
a role in part precisely because they understand him as groping toward ex-
actly the sort of the theory I attribute to him. Richard Watson writes:
Berkeley’s treatment (deriving from Malebranche) of the relation-
ships between mind and idea, and between mind and notion, is
illuminated by a consideration of the extent to which he takes these
relationships for granted in the Cartesian way (as substance to
modiﬁcation), and of the extent to which he sees difﬁculties in the
relationship between substance and modiﬁcation. Berkeley’s solu-
tion to Cartesian problems by the introduction of an entity external
to substance and modiﬁcation is, like that of Malebranche before
him, not successful; Malebranche belittles, and Berkeley denies, the
dualism of substances, but neither philosopher can break entirely

berkeley
173
with the ontological pattern of substance and modiﬁcation. (1987,
24)
Watson notes more or less the same tensions driving Berkeley’s ontology of
ideas as I do, except that I think Berkeley’s solution has more merit than
Watson admits. More importantly, however, Watson argues on the basis of
this alleged failure that Berkeley is a part of a tradition that pushes away
from ontology with respect to ideas. Claiming that ideas for Berkeley must
be mental modiﬁcations (124), Watson proceeds to argue that this ontology
of ideas was incapable of supporting the epistemological roles ideas play.
He thus sees Berkeley as a failed idea ontologist, one well on the way to
‘‘deontologizing’’ ideas (127–28). For Watson, Hume completes the early
modern tale, ‘‘breaking’’ with the traditional ontology, but Berkeley plays a
vital role in the story. I defer the discussion of Hume until the ﬁnal chapter;
it is enough for the moment to note Berkeley’s pivotal role.
John Yolton in fact pushes Berkeley further down this epistemological
road than Watson. He reads Berkeley as already having made the leap away
from ontology with respect to ideas. Yolton reduces Berkeley’s language of
‘‘exist in the mind’’ to ‘‘is known’’ or ‘‘is perceived,’’ where the reduction is
an epistemological one. ‘‘The being of objects in the mind is not a notional
existence. It is, as it was for Descartes, an epistemic existence. Esse est [sic]
percipi, ‘to be is to be perceived,’ is clearly a translation of ‘to be is to exist
in the mind’’’ (2000, 96).38 I have, in effect, spent the majority of this chap-
ter arguing against such readings of Berkeley. Unlike Yolton, I take the word
‘‘in’’ to express ontological dependence, a view I take to have better textual
support and more philosophical respectability.
In a similar vein, recent scholarship has increasingly tended to read
Berkeley as an epistemologist ﬁrst and an ontologist second. Daniel Flage is
an excellent representative of this line of thinking. I hasten to note, however,
although sympathetic at times with the claims of Watson and Yolton, Flage’s
views are differently motivated.39 I readily confess that his approach is not
without merit, but it does strike me as somehow missing part of what is
important and even plausible in Berkeley’s thinking. I cannot fully make
this case until given the opportunity in the next chapters to explore some of
the consequences of my ontological reading of Berkeley, but is it worth
38. As a point of accuracy, note that Berkeley consistently writes ‘‘esse is percipi’’ and does
not use the Latin ‘‘est.’’
39. Flage cites Yolton’s thesis about Berkeley while building his own distinct account (2004,
34).

174
idea and ontology
brieﬂy exploring Flage’s approach. ‘‘The alternative approach I propose is
epistemological. On such an approach, Berkeley asks what is known and
introduces ontological commitments only on the basis of what is known.
Ideas are nothing more than ‘objects of human knowledge’’’ (2004, 26). On
one level Flage and I do not disagree. We both hold that Berkeley has an
underlying ontology of ideas; we differ on the importance and role of that
ontology in his thinking. For Flage, the ontology is added afterward to sup-
port the epistemological roles idea play. I read Berkeley as seeking to use
ontology as the means to solve a variety of problems, metaphysical and epis-
temological. Berkeley is an immaterialist ﬁrst; some of the epistemological
problems that arise from his metaphysics need to be engaged, but they ap-
pear only after the system is in place. Berkeley is an ontologist happy to reap
epistemological rewards.
Flage would likely object that I am missing the point. The Principles of
Human Knowledge, after all, has a title with an explicit epistemological refer-
ence. Yet it should be no surprise to anyone familiar with early modern
philosophy that within the work epistemological and metaphysical issues are
often blurred and hard to separate. I read the Principles as an attempt to
ground a reasonable (perhaps even ‘‘commonsensical’’) epistemology inside
his immaterialist ontology. As such, epistemological concerns are often
going to have pride of place in the book but only because Berkeley needs to
demonstrate that his metaphysical system can accommodate our experi-
ences of the world. A metaphysical system that cannot explain the world as
we experience it is a poor theory.
Flage contends that Berkeley builds his ontology on epistemological
foundations (2004, 59).40 One of Flage’s core arguments is that ordinary
objects are nothing more than appearances, mere sensible things. ‘‘If my
account is correct, Berkeley holds that ordinary objects are nothing but col-
lections of ideas of sense’’ (2004, 54, emphasis mine). But this formulation
of Berkeley’s view, which I do not dispute, misses a rather important feature
of his thinking. Ordinary objects in the world are not merely ideas of
sense—they are also real things. That is, Berkeley tells us that sensory ideas
constitute reality (PHK 35–36). And he is quite clear about this.
philonous: You mistake me. I am not for changing things into ideas,
but rather ideas into things; since those immediate objects of percep-
40. See Flage 2007. I am grateful to Flage for having allowed me to read this material in
advance of its publication.

berkeley
175
tion, which according to you, are only appearances of things, I take to
be the real things themselves. (244)
One might wish to press me further. The fact that Berkeley is turning ideas
into things is evidence that he is grounding his ontology (things) in his
epistemology (ideas). Thus Flage notes that the appearance of ideas as real
things does not occur until Principles 33, where it is invoked to separate
imaginary things from real ones. It is, in essence, serving an epistemological
end as well as an ontological one. But there is more to knowing the world
than perceiving ideas. We also learn to anticipate ideas based on previous
experience and discover regular patterns in the ideas we perceive. These
epistemological discoveries depend on the nature of reality—the order of
ideas whose nature it is to be perceived. To be fair to Flage, I am not certain
our views are that far apart, for he also claims that the esse is percipi principle
is a ‘‘principle of ontological commitment’’ (2004, 59). Flage does not deny
that Berkeley’s thinking operates within the traditional ontology; he simply
believes that Berkeley’s ontology is limited by epistemological constraints.
What is real is limited by what is known. Although I agree that there is an
important connection here, I am more inclined to believe that, for Berkeley,
what is known is limited by what is real. It just so happens, however, that
the two sets closely overlap in Berkeley’s philosophical system.
My primary concern here is only to note the role that some scholars have
given to Berkeley in the early modern tale. I doubt Flage would consciously
place Berkeley in the tale, but his thinking is representative of a larger move-
ment to read the early moderns as epistemologists ﬁrst and ontologists sec-
ond (if at all). It is this tendency I am resisting.
Up to this point I have provided a positive account of Berkeley’s theory
of ideas that preserves and reconciles two apparently conﬂicting tendencies
in his works. Berkeley writes as if ideas are like modes because he emphasizes
the ontological dependence of ideas on minds, and he writes as if ideas are
like substances because he thinks of them as robust objects that in percep-
tion appear volitionally independent of minds. As a result, Berkeley emerges
with a view that makes ideas what I call ‘‘quasi substances.’’ In effect, Berke-
ley is stretching the traditional ontology of substance and mode by creating
a category that shares features of both without fully being either. The most
prominent nontraditional alternative, Winkler’s form of phenomenalism, is
not a viable candidate. As a result, we have not only an independent case
for positively thinking that Berkeley endorsed this view but also signiﬁcant
evidence that its rivals are unacceptable.

176
idea and ontology
Making sense of the positive account I have provided is not enough. The
real test of the theory is how well it accommodates and explains important
features of Berkeley’s metaphysics, for I have maintained from the outset of
this study that reading the early moderns in light of the substance/mode
ontology will provide us with interpretive and philosophical beneﬁts. I have
chosen to spend most of my effort on Berkeley on this score because he
has been considered a key ﬁgure in the early modern tale and because the
philosophical payoff is considerable. I argue that Berkeley’s fantastical meta-
physical system is in fact more plausible (without saying that it is true) given
our ontological approach. The following two chapters consequently engage
several important topics in light of my reading of Berkeley’s theory of ideas,
demonstrating its interpretative power and philosophical promise.

7
divine ideas
It has long been thought that Berkeley cannot consistently help himself to a
theory of divine archetypal ideas in order to explain our perception of the
sensible world. Positing the existence of such ideas in God allegedly creates
skeptical problems, difﬁculties about the continuity of sensible objects, puz-
zles about the privacy of ideas, and worse. Introducing divine ideas allegedly
inserts an intermediary between minds and ultimate reality, creating an-
other veil of perception in a new form. Ardently committed to removing
skepticism, Berkeley cannot endorse any theory that even hints at represen-
tationalism. J. D. Mabbott concludes, ‘‘It does not seem likely that Berkeley
himself believed in Divine Ideas, at least as a necessary part of his system’’
(1968, 373). These ideas allegedly raise more problems for Berkeley than they
solve. Worse yet, they are not even adequate to the challenges they are sup-
posed to overcome. Thus Leopold Stubenberg has insisted that an archetypal
theory of divine ideas for Berkeley is ‘‘a complete failure,’’ unable to provide
a stable, continuous, unfragmented world (1990, 226). In general, most com-
mentators have argued that Berkeley ought not to have defended a theory
of divine ideas at all.1
Much of the skepticism regarding Berkeley’s theory of divine ideas de-
rives from a reluctance to assiduously follow Berkeley through his reasoning
about the nature of ideas and their relation to genuine substances. The topic
of divine ideas and the alleged embarrassment they constitute to Berkeley
accordingly provides us with an ideal opportunity to show how the early
modern tale is frequently uncharitable to the early moderns. My task here is
1. See Acton 1967, 1:301. Acton alleges that archetypes lead Berkeley back into skepticism. See
also Stack 1970, esp. 71; Tipton 1988, 344ff.; and Warnock 1982, 124. Winkler is an unusual excep-
tion, but even there the view he attributes to Berkeley is a weak version of an archetype theory
(1989, 228–32).

178
idea and ontology
to construct a theory of divine ideas in light of Berkeley’s ontology, thereby
demonstrating the philosophical and textual advantages of our traditional
ontological approach. In short, I argue here that technically Berkeley did not
endorse a divine archetypal theory at all; he does not believe that God has
an original order of ideas of which our own ideas are copies. Instead, the
sensory ideas perceived by ﬁnite minds are numerically identical to God’s
divine ideas.2 Thus although one might (misleadingly) call Berkeley’s theory
of divine ideas an archetypal theory, this label does not imply that there are
always distinct archetypes and ectypes in his ontology.3 This realization in
turn makes not only Berkeley’s theory of divine ideas more plausible but
also renders the rest of his metaphysics more consistent and reasonable.
Along the way we shall have opportunity to engage a number of concerns
that might be pressed against the quasi-substance account of Berkeley’s
ideas. The most important of these worries is what I call the ‘‘privacy prob-
lem,’’ an issue that will arise naturally in the course of the discussion about
divine ideas. This chapter is therefore meant also to be an extension of the
argument of chapter 6.
7.1 Divine Ideas and Archetypes
At a minimum it is clear that Berkeley does hold some form of a theory of
divine ideas, archetypal or otherwise. Historically, divine archetypes are the
ideas of God that represent (or for Berkeley, constitute) genuine reality; they
are the ‘‘originals’’ of what we perceive. Their counterparts, ectypes, are
copies of these original archetypal ideas. Berkeley knew of archetypes from
both Locke and Malebranche. For Locke, our ideas generally are derived
from genuine things or properties we encounter in the world. As Locke
writes in the Essay: ‘‘First, By real Ideas, I mean such as have a Foundation
in Nature; such as have a Conformity with the real Being, and Existence of
Things, or with their Archetypes. Fantastical or Chimerical, I call such as
have no Foundation in Nature, nor have any Conformity with that reality
2. To my pleasant surprise, I am not the ﬁrst to argue for this explicit thesis. See Raynor 1987,
611–20, esp. 613. Jonathan Dancy (I think unintentionally) suggests a similar view when he asserts
that God perceives every idea. Hence, our ideas are simply a subset of those of God’s (1987, 71).
3. Daniel Flage has recently attributed a theory of archetypes to Berkeley, but his theory is
not one strictly of divine ideas as archetypes. Instead, archetypes on Flage’s account are ordered
sets of ideas (which are not themselves ideas) accessed only notionally. There is much to recom-
mend Flage’s account and although I think we agree substantively, my emphasis here is on
individual divine ideas (not common sense objects or collections). As a result, a detailed treat-
ment of Flage’s position lies beyond the scope of this chapter. See Flage 2001, 7–31.

divine ideas
179
of Being, to which they are tacitly referr’d, as to their Archetypes’’ (II.30.1).
Locke, of course, thinks of most archetypes as objective, external, material
things, which ideas represent either by causation or by resemblance.4 Male-
branche, unlike Locke, invokes ideas as archetypes for the material world.
That is, physical objects are ‘‘reﬂections’’ or even ectypes (images) of God’s
ideas. Consider two representative passages from the Dialogues on Metaphys-
ics and on Religion, in which Malebranche’s mouthpiece Theodore speaks:
Ideas have an eternal and necessary existence, and the corporeal
world exists only because it pleased God to create it. Thus, to see
the intelligible world, it sufﬁces to consult Reason which contains
intelligible, eternal, and necessary ideas, the archetype of the visible
world. (9, Dialogue I.5)
Consider attentively the clear idea of extension. It is the archetype
of bodies; it represents their nature and properties. Is it not evident
that all the possible properties of extension must be simply rela-
tions of distance? (38, Dialogue III.10; see LO, 320 [4.11.3])
Malebranche concludes that when we perceive, we ‘‘see’’ the very archetypes
in God, hence the name for this doctrine: ‘‘Vision in God.’’ When Berkeley
talks about divine ideas, one immediately wonders whether he might not be
ﬂirting with the Malebranchian position that our ideas just are the arche-
types in God. ‘‘[D]o I not acknowledge a twofold state of things, the one
ectypal or natural, the other archetypal and eternal? The former was created
in time; the latter existed from everlasting in the mind of God’’ (3D, 254).
Positive remarks about archetypes, however, are relatively rare in Berkeley’s
works, and the majority of those references are negative.5 When not nega-
tive, they are typically grudging remarks about terms and language use. Thus
after Johnson presses Berkeley about an archetypal understanding of ideas,
Berkeley replies, in a 24 March 1730 letter, that ‘‘I have no objection against
calling the ideas in the mind of God archetypes of ours. But I object against
those archetypes by philosophers supposed to be real things, and to have an
absolute rational existence distinct from their being perceived by any mind
4. Locke also speaks of some archetypes as complex ideas, as in the case of abstract notions
like incest and adultery (ECHU III.5.3).
5. Archetypes are mentioned three times in the Principles (sections 45, 87, and 99), twice as
many times in the Dialogues (pp. 206, 212, 214, 240, 248, and 254–55), and a few times in the
correspondence with Johnson. See also PC 823.

180
idea and ontology
whatsoever; it being the opinion of all materialists that an ideal existence in
the Divine Mind is one thing, and the real existence of material things an-
other’’ (Berkeley 1948–57, 2:292).6 The reluctance of Berkeley to use the lan-
guage of archetypes is not surprising given that he generally wants to
distance himself from the accounts of Locke and Malebranche. Despite su-
perﬁcial appearances here that Berkeley accepts a robust archetypal under-
standing of God’s ideas (such that they are the originals of our own sensory
ideas), there are powerful reasons for thinking that Berkeley wants to make
the distance great enough to allow him to deny this traditional understand-
ing of God’s ideas as archetypes.
A divine archetypal theory of ideas presumably solves several pressing
problems for Berkeley. First, it provides a solution to what is commonly
known as the problem of privacy. Two persons perceive the very same thing
in an immaterialist world when their ideas are properly related to the one
archetypal idea in God. Second, it removes worries about unperceived parts
of the world, since God is always present to perceive everything. As an ex-
tension of the last point, it preserves the continuity of sensible objects as
well. The objects intermittently perceived by ﬁnite minds remain constant
without blinking in and out of existence. Unfortunately, as we have already
seen, most Berkeley scholars believe that none of these problems can be
effectively overcome by Berkeley’s theory of divine archetypes and further-
more that new difﬁculties arise from it. Since this archetypal theory intro-
duces our own ﬁnite ideas as intermediaries between our understanding
and the archetypal ideal reality, Berkeley allegedly would be smuggling in a
representative theory that he himself argues engenders skepticism. Even if
our ideas are perfect copies of the archetypes in God, we nonetheless are not
directly perceiving reality.
All of these alleged inadequacies, however, stem from an incomplete un-
derstanding of Berkeley’s theory of divine ideas. I demonstrate that Berkeley
does not believe that the archetypal order is inside the mind of God in any
sense that implies inherence or that these archetypal ideas are modes. In-
stead, Berkeley holds that ideas fall into the hybrid ontological category of
quasi substance. Ideas are dependent on minds but nonetheless distinct
from and ‘‘external’’ to them. The resulting theory of archetypes survives
the above objections, is broadly consistent with the rest of Berkeley’s philo-
sophical system, and provides his immaterialism with greater resources.
6. Given the amount of careful time and space Johnson gives to the issue of archetypes,
Berkeley’s response is curiously brief.

divine ideas
181
7.2 ‘‘In’’ the Mind of God
Recall that ideas for Berkeley are decidedly dependent beings. Their esse is
percipi. As a result, some divine order of ideas must be maintained by God
to preserve the perceived connected and continuous nature of the sensible
world.7 Yet now an issue arises as to where this order ‘‘resides.’’ Here I want
to revisit my earlier analysis of the nature of ideas but this time from the
perspective of Berkeley’s language about being ‘‘in the mind.’’ The conclu-
sions I ultimately reach are exactly the same, but the difference in approach
might be helpful for some and in any event makes the analysis concerning
divine ideas more lucid.
Some interpreters of Berkeley’s theory of divine ideas have emphasized
that he posits an archetypal ideal order ‘‘inside’’ the mind of God. This
characterization might mean that ideas are ‘‘in’’ the mind in a metaphori-
cally spatial sense as a color is ‘‘in’’ an object or a chair is ‘‘in’’ a room. Thus
one might say that ideas are ‘‘in’’ the mind of God in the sense of being a
part of God. Berkeley writes, ‘‘the real tree existing without his mind is truly
known and comprehended by (that is exists in) the inﬁnite mind of God’’
(3D, 235). The parenthetical remark with emphasis is Berkeley’s. Given that
Berkeley is apparently telling us that reality is in the mind of God, it should
not be surprising that some commentators have taken him seriously.8 For
instance, Berkeley explains the continuity of sensible things by appealing to
their real existence ‘‘in’’ God: ‘‘When I deny sensible things an existence out
of the mind, I do not mean my mind in particular, but all minds. Now it is
plain they have an existence exterior to my mind, since I ﬁnd them by expe-
rience to be independent of it. There is therefore some other mind wherein
they exist, during the intervals between the times of my perceiving them. . . .
it necessarily follows, there is an omnipresent eternal Mind’’ (3D, 230–31).
Ideas exist in minds. Yet to suppose that ‘‘in’’ here should be read as inher-
ence or to treat ideas as monadic properties of minds is an error. Berkeley
explains that by ‘‘in the mind’’ he means nothing more than ontological
dependence. God’s ideas are ‘‘external’’ to the mind of God in the sense of
being distinct relata in a two-place relation with the mind, implying only
7. This claim does not necessarily imply that archetypes are themselves continuously existing
beings. The divine order of ideas can be continuous in terms of the content they represent (their
appearances) without the ideas themselves being necessarily permanent. When Berkeley says that
part of the state of things is ‘‘archetypal and eternal’’ (3D, 254), that is a reference to the order of
ideas and not to the nature of the ideas themselves. See section 7.5.
8. For instance, Peter Wenz argues, ‘‘Nowhere does Berkeley deny the existence of archetypal
ideas, archetypes existing within the mind of God’’ (1976, 541, emphasis in the original).

182
idea and ontology
that they are neither modes nor proper parts of the divine mind. They are
perceived directly but depend on the constant perception of God for their
existence.
We have here two different conceptual distinctions that run closely to-
gether. I preserve the slightly misleading language because it is Berkeley’s.
Using the same language will help us unravel some otherwise confusing
passages. First, there is the distinction between an idea being ‘‘in’’ and
‘‘without’’ the mind. An idea is ‘‘in’’ the mind if it is dependent on the mind
for its existence. An idea is ‘‘without’’ the mind if it does not rely on that
mind to sustain it.9 Here we need to be careful, since Berkeley sometimes
blurs ontological and volitional independence. In one sense, all the sensory
ideas a ﬁnite mind has are ‘‘without’’ because they are independent of the
will, even though the idea itself is still dependent on some mind or other for
its existence. Berkeley sometimes expresses this by saying that sensory ideas
affect the mind ‘‘from without.’’ A ﬁnite mind may perceive a sensory idea
not under its volitional control and have that idea be ‘‘in’’ the mind. As a
consequence, the idea is both ‘‘in’’ and ‘‘without’’ the mind. Such assertions
are not contradictory but rather reﬂect an infelicitous use of language, since
the ‘‘without’’ here implies only that the idea is independent of the will and
not that the idea can exist independently of a mind.
Yet a second potential distinction lurks. Ideas may be either internal
(‘‘in’’) or external to the mind. Note that this distinction implies nothing
about ontological dependence. An idea is ‘‘external’’ to the mind if it is both
distinct from the mind and in a two-place relation with it. Sensory percep-
tion is an external relation. The ideas we have are distinct from us. Berke-
ley’s insight is to note the unusual nature of this relation. The existence of
one of the relata (the idea) depends on the relation actually holding. Apart
from some perceptual relation the idea does not exist. Therefore when we
perceive, we are related to a distinct but (ontologically) dependent entity. It
is natural to think that this dependence is on the mind that is participating
in the particular relation in question, but this does not necessarily follow.
One might well perceive an idea that is actually being sustained by another
mind or whose sustenance is overdetermined. As a result, ‘‘external’’ ideas
can be neither modes nor proper parts of a mind. On the other hand, an
idea is ‘‘internal’’ to the mind if its relation to the mind can be reduced to a
monadic property. Berkeley does not think ideas are internal to the mind in
this sense.
9. Thus the distinction is only a conceptual one, since Berkeley denies that ideas can exist
‘‘without’’ the mind in this sense.

divine ideas
183
In Principles 49 Berkeley distinguishes between the dependence of ideas
(being ‘‘in’’ the mind) and their being modes (being ‘‘internal’’ to the
mind).
[I]t may be objected, that if extension and ﬁgure exist only in the
mind, it follows that the mind is extended and ﬁgured; since exten-
sion is a mode or attribute, which (to speak with the Schools) is
predicated of the subject in which it exists. I answer, those qualities
are in the mind only as they are perceived by it, that is, not by way
of mode or attribute, but only by way of idea; and it no more fol-
lows, that the soul or mind is extended because extension exists in
it alone, than it does that it is red or blue, because those colours
are on all hands acknowledged to exist in it, and nowhere else.10
Ideas are not modes of the mind and thus are not present ‘‘in’’ the mind in
that sense. Then what does it mean to say that qualities are ‘‘in’’ the mind
‘‘as they are perceived by it?’’ ‘‘In’’ expresses nothing more than ontological
dependence. Berkeley uses this odd phraseology to distance himself from
materialist confusions, but his position is unmistakable. ‘‘When I speak of
objects as existing in the mind or imprinted on the senses; I would not be
understood in the gross literal sense, as when bodies are said to exist in a
place, or a seal to make an impression upon wax. My meaning is only that
the mind comprehends or perceives them; and that it is affected from with-
out, or by some being distinct from itself’’ (3D, 250). When perceiving a
sensory idea, the mind is affected by another source, making ideas dependent
but decidedly external (in the Berkeleian sense). God’s archetypal order is a
set of ideas external to His mind, but ‘‘in’’ it in the sense that the ideas
depend on His perceiving them for their existence.11 This example is not an
isolated use of the language I am attributing to Berkeley. ‘‘Again, the things
I perceive must have an existence, they or their archetypes, out of [i.e., exter-
nal to] my mind: but being ideas, neither they nor their archetypes can exist
otherwise in [i.e., are dependent on] an understanding: there is therefore an
understanding’’ (3D, 240).
One might object, however, that I have left out an alternative possibility.
10. The claim is essentially repeated at 3D, 237.
11. This claim is not to imply that ideas, even archetypes, causally affect God. Here Berkeley
means nothing more than God and His ideas are in a two-place relation, one in which God
preserves ideas by perceiving them.

184
idea and ontology
Perhaps Berkeley takes ideas to be a special kind of monadic property.12 In
Principles 49, when he says that ideas are not in the mind by way of mode
or attribute, he might mean that the following proposition (P) is false:
(P) (x)(x is in substance S entails S is x).
If an idea were a mode or an attribute, this proposition might be true, but
ideas are predicated of the mind in such a way that this proposition remains
false. Hence ideas could be a kind of thing predicated of the mind such that
the mind does not become what is predicated of it. Having an idea of blue
means that the mind has a monadic predicate without itself being blue. I
agree that Berkeley needs to keep P false, but I deny that he can allow ideas
to be predicated monadically of minds. There are two reasons for this denial.
First, I have no sense of what it might mean ontologically for an idea to be
predicated of the mind yet not be a mode or part of the mind. There is no
textual evidence of which I am aware that suggests he is thinking in this way.
Second, attributing this view to Berkeley immediately introduces skeptical
problems. If the ideas that ﬁnite minds have are properties of those minds
they are thus numerically distinct from those of God. That would make the
ideas we directly perceive distinct from the divine ideas that constitute sensi-
ble reality. Berkeley cannot consistently allow any such result without seri-
ous risk of skepticism, since the ideas we perceive would then constitute an
intermediary between the real world and our knowledge of it.
Berkeley’s antiskepticism runs deeper than simply his denying the exis-
tence of a material substratum. In the preface to the Three Dialogues Between
Hylas and Philonous, Berkeley makes the stakes quite high. ‘‘Upon the com-
mon principles of philosophers, we are not assured of the existence of things
from their being perceived. And we are taught to distinguish their real nature
from that which falls under our senses. Hence arise scepticism and paradoxes.
It is not enough that we see and feel, that we taste and smell a thing. Its true
nature, its absolute external entity, is still concealed’’ (167, emphasis in the
original). Anything that separates us from the real nature of things produces
skepticism. The claim is perhaps more obviously true for material sub-
stances, but it would nonetheless cause embarrassment if it turned out that
the ideas we perceive are not in fact real things but only copies of them.
Even if one were to suppose that our ideas were copies of God’s ideas, doubt
could reemerge concerning the perfection of the copies. And Berkeley does
12. My thanks to Scott Ragland for raising this concern.

divine ideas
185
not believe his system will allow for any doubt. ‘‘If the principles, which I
here endeavour to propagate, are admitted for true; the consequences which, I
think, evidently ﬂow from thence, are, that atheism and skepticism will be
utterly destroyed’’ (168, emphasis in the original). He is consistent on this
point. While engaging Hylas on this very issue, Berkeley has Philonous re-
mark: ‘‘It is your opinion, the ideas we perceive by our senses are not real
things, but images, or copies of them. Our knowledge therefore is no farther
real, than as our ideas are the true representations of those originals. But as
these supposed originals are in themselves unknown, it is impossible to
know how far our ideas resemble them; or whether they resemble them at
all’’ (3D, 246). The explicit target here, of course, is material archetypes, but
the point also applies perfectly well against immaterial archetypes. Any view
that creates a numerical difference between the ideas that constitute genuine
reality and the (sensory) ideas had by ﬁnite minds will engender skepticism.
It will always be misleading to say of Berkeley’s theory of divine ideas that it
is an archetypal theory, even if Berkeley himself on occasion uses that lan-
guage as well.
Berkeley sometimes argues against archetypes precisely because they are
said to be without the mind, and these cases have caused some confusion.
‘‘But if they are looked on as notes or images, referred to things or archetypes
existing without the mind, then we are involved all in scepticism. We see
only the appearances, and not the real qualities of things’’ (PHK 87). Yet
note the parallel use of language. ‘‘Without the mind’’ here means ‘‘inde-
pendent of the mind.’’ Berkeley attacks archetypal views (like Locke’s) be-
cause they posit archetypal orders that are independent and hence on the
other side of the veil of perception.13 As we have seen, he clariﬁes his posi-
tion in the letter quoted above to Samuel Johnson: ‘‘I have no objection
against calling the ideas in the mind of God archetypes of ours. But I object
against those archetypes by philosophers supposed to be real things, and to
have an absolute rational existence distinct from their being perceived by
any mind whatsoever; it being the opinion of all materialists that an ideal
existence in the Divine Mind is one thing, and the real existence of material
things another’’ (Berkeley 1948–57, 2:292–94). To make sense of this remark
it is necessary to introduce Johnson’s earlier line of questioning as a back-
13. Genevie`ve Brykman has ably argued that archetypes play no role in Berkeley’s immaterial-
ism because he uses them only polemically to distance himself from the material archetypal views
of those like Locke and Malebranche (1987, 103–12). I agree that Berkeley does attempt to distance
himself from this kind of archetypal theory but insist that this does not otherwise deny him the
use of a theory of divine ideas.

186
idea and ontology
ground. In his letter of 5 February 1730, Johnson pressed Berkeley to clarify
his position on the nature of divine ideas. He mistakes Berkeley’s insistence
that ideas are an ‘‘exterior existence’’ for a theory of archetypes.
From those and the like expressions, I gathered what I said about
the archetypes of our ideas, and thence inferred that there is exte-
rior to us, in the divine mind, a system of universal nature, whereof
the ideas we have are in such degree resemblances as the Almighty
is pleased to communicate to us. . . . The divine idea, therefore, of
a tree I suppose (or a tree in the divine mind), must be the original
or archetype of ours, and ours a copy or image of His (our ideas
images of His, in the same sense as our souls are images of Him) of
which there may be several, in several created minds, like so many
several pictures of the same original to which they are all to be
referred. (Berkeley 1948–57, 2:285–86)
What is unusual about this exchange is that Johnson is expanding and enlar-
ging on questions he had already asked in a previous letter (10 September
1729). Berkeley, however, simply refused to address those questions. Only
after Johnson continues to voice his concerns does Berkeley ﬁnally relent
and respond with two short sentences, neither of which actually endorses
the reading Johnson advances and attributes to him. Berkeley’s real concern
about archetypes stems from his fear that insofar as they are not dependent
on minds they could introduce skepticism. If archetypes (as Berkeley would
say, ‘‘if you wish to call them that’’) are independent, then they are without
the mind of God and constitute reality. As a result, sometimes Berkeley
denies the possibility of archetypes, as when he attacks Lockean versions
that marry ontological independence to them. At other times Berkeley is
willing to allow the use of the term but only because it aptly describes divine
ideas as originals that constitute reality. I cannot explain why Berkeley re-
fuses to straightforwardly admit to Johnson that God’s ideas are numerically
identical to the ideas of sense had by ﬁnite minds (and hence refuses to deny
that God’s ideas are strictly speaking archetypes in the sense of being origi-
nals of which we have copies), but the exchange is suitably odd as to con-
vince me that something is amiss in the correspondence.14
With the complications about the language of archetypes behind us, the
14. One possible explanation is provided by Berkeley himself, who complains of being ill in
his ﬁrst response to Johnson. Nonetheless, his illness had passed by the time he authored the
second letter, which is still mysteriously cryptic concerning the issue of archetypes.

divine ideas
187
main point is straightforward. Only God’s divine world of ideas is genuinely
continuous.15 As God is an atemporal being, the continuity to which I refer
is for us as ﬁnite minds and not a reference to how God perceives the world.
Presumably God perceives all ideas immediately and nontemporally; the ref-
erence to the continuity of God’s ideas is thus shorthand for how God pre-
serves the world as it appears temporally to ﬁnite minds. As a result, if our
(individual) worlds are to be continuous and independent of us as well, they
must be identical with God’s world. If we recall a few of Berkeley’s central
claims, the conclusion seems hard to deny. Berkeley asserts:
(1) We know the appearances of things.
(2) The appearances of things constitute their reality.
(3) Therefore we know the reality of things.
When we add,
(4) Genuine reality is contained only ‘‘in’’ God,
we are driven (with or without Berkeley’s consent) to the conclusion that
what we know is contained ‘‘in’’ God. Now, however, we see that this im-
plies only that what we see is preserved by God (ontologically) in an ‘‘exter-
nal’’ set of divine ideas (making them volitionally independent of ﬁnite
minds). Importantly, this does not imply that ideas are enduring beings, but
only that the continuity we perceive is maintained (in whatever form) by
God. What follows is that we, like God, directly perceive these ideas. We
directly perceive an external but mind-dependent reality.
The claim that our sensory ideas are numerically identical to God’s arche-
types might spark some controversy. David Yandell, for instance, has already
argued that it must be false that God perceives the same ideas ﬁnite per-
ceivers do (1995, 414–15). Yet this opinion traditionally relies, as it does with
Yandell, on the commonly held view that ideas are ‘‘in’’ minds in some
literal sense. Berkeley famously says that God knows or has ideas, but they
are not carried to Him ‘‘by sense’’ as it is with ﬁnite minds (3D, 241, and S
289). We can feel or sense pain, but although God knows pain, He does not
sense or feel it as we do. Hence, we cannot perceive the very same ideas God
does. Yet this conclusion simply does not follow. It follows only that we do
not come to have ideas in the same way God does. We ‘‘sense’’ pain; God
15. Here I intend ‘‘continuous’’ not in the mathematical sense of ‘‘not discrete’’ but rather in
the ordinary sense of ‘‘not gappy.’’

188
idea and ontology
‘‘knows’’ pain, but there is no suggestion that the pains in question are
numerically distinct. It is possible that the difference can be explained by
the nature of the relation and not the nature of the relata. The worry, of
course, is that if ideas are like modes of the mind, God could not help but
feel (sense) pain as we do if He has the idea of pain. But if God’s ideas (like
all sensory ideas) are external to the substance of God then nothing prevents
the relation between God and His archetypes from being different from that
of ﬁnite ideas and those same archetypes. And this is exactly the kind of
distinction Berkeley invokes. Consider PC 675: ‘‘God May comprehend all
Ideas even the Ideas which are painfull & unpleasant without being in any
degree pained thereby. Thus we our selves can imagine the pain of a burn
etc. without any misery or uneasiness at all.’’ Here the suggestion is that
God knows the ideas we sense in a similar manner to how we remember or
imagine past pains. Berkeley makes the point generally as well. ‘‘God knows
or hath ideas; but His ideas are not convey’d to him by sense, as ours are’’
(3D, 241). The object of perception is the same; the nature of the relation
varies. Robert Muehlmann has already argued at greater length for a similar
kind of interpretation, claiming that for Berkeley sensation has two distinct
components (1992, 254–55). The ﬁrst is ‘‘hedonic’’ or sensory and the second
is affective. In the case of a pain sensation, the affective element would be
the suffering. The upshot is that God can have concepts (ideas) of pain (be
related to a perceptual object) without actually enduring pain. Our concepts
of pain are concepts because having one involves a different kind of percep-
tual relation from experiencing a sensation.
All of the traditional interpretations of Berkeley on divine ideas run into
this problem (the dicey relationship between God and sensory contents like
pain). Although the textual evidence strikes me as compelling, at a mini-
mum readings like Muehlmann’s and my own have the virtue of being more
charitable to Berkeley. The point remains that asserting numerical identity
between our sensory ideas and God’s ideas is epistemologically necessary
from Berkeley’s point of view to defeat skepticism and is at least theologi-
cally defensible on the grounds that the nature of the perceptual relation
varies for God and ﬁnite minds.
Although we now have the position clearly laid out before us, one might
object that my reading leaves Berkeley with an incomprehensible view. What
exactly does it mean to say that ideas are ‘‘external’’ to but dependent on
God? Since ideas are dependent they cannot be substances (and Berkeley
tells us that spirit is the only proper substance anyway). And Berkeley indi-
cates in Principles 49 that ideas are not modes. So what are they? I think it

divine ideas
189
is clear that Berkeley has carved out a new ontological category, which again
I call ‘‘quasi substance.’’ A quasi substance is ontologically dependent on
other proper substances yet simultaneously distinct from them. This under-
standing of ideas is coherent and ﬁts well with the rest of Berkeley’s system.
Motivating this reading of Berkeley in relation to archetypes will occupy us
for the remainder of this chapter.
7.3 Permutations
At this point we can formulate four kinds of possible divine idea theories
based on the two distinctions mentioned earlier. They are:
(1) God’s ideas are in God and internal to Him. Divine ideas are both depen-
dent on God and either a mode or proper part of God.
(2) God’s ideas are without God and internal to Him. Divine ideas can exist
without God (they are independent of Him) but are nonetheless some-
how a mode or proper part of God. One might make sense of this view
by arguing that some parts of God are not essential to Him, although
such a claim would engender considerable controversy.
(3) God’s ideas are in God and external to Him. God’s divine ideas depend
on Him for their existence, but they are neither a mode nor a proper
part of God. Such ideas would be related to God in a relation that was
at the very least two place, making them distinct from the nature of
God despite their being ontologically dependent on Him.
(4) God’s ideas are without God and external to Him. This is the familiar
Lockean view where divine objects do not depend on God perceiving
them. If there were material archetypes, they would fall under this cate-
gory.
Berkeley, by his own reasoning, can only plausibly endorse the third of these
alternatives, but let’s examine the other possibilities ﬁrst to see why they are
unsuitable.
Malebranche endorses (1). Our ideas are intellectual concepts in the sub-
stance of God. Hence his ‘‘Vision in God’’ thesis. We literally perceive God’s
ideas within His substance. Berkeley works hard to distance himself from

190
idea and ontology
Malebranche and not only for political reasons. In a 27 November 1710 letter
to Percival, he writes ‘‘As to what is said of ranking me with Father Male-
branche and Mr. Norris, whose writings are thought too ﬁne spun to be of
any great use to mankind, I have this to answer: that I think the notions I
embrace are not in the least coincident with, or agreeing with, theirs, but
indeed plainly inconsistent with them in the main points, insomuch that I
know few writers whom I take myself at bottom to differ more from than
them’’ (Berkeley 1948–57, 8:41). To be certain, Berkeley’s views do differ
from that of Norris and Malebranche and in several important respects.
However, his commitment to a divine order of ideas created by God is de-
cidedly Malebranchian, and I speculate that he gained this insight from the
famous Frenchman. That is, Berkeley takes Malebranche as his starting
point when theorizing about ideas and then diverges from him as he adds
his own insights. Importantly, none of Berkeley’s reasons for denying an
afﬁnity with Malebranche has anything to do with the nature of divine ideas.
Yet given that the views are reasonably close in origin, why is Berkeley so
adamant about their differences? Although there is a political subtext, Berke-
ley also has genuine and reasonable objections to other features of Male-
branche’s philosophy.
Few men think, yet all will have opinions. Hence, men’s opinions
are superﬁcial and confused. It is nothing strange that tenets, which
in themselves are ever so different, should nevertheless be con-
founded with each other by those who do not consider them atten-
tively. I shall not therefore be surprised, if some men imagine that
I run into the enthusiasm of Malebranche, though in truth I am
very remote from it. He builds on the most abstract general ideas,
which I entirely disclaim. He asserts an absolute external world,
which I deny. He maintains we are deceived by our senses, and
know not the real natures or the true forms and ﬁgures of extended
things; of all which I hold the direct contrary. So that upon the
whole there are no principles more fundamentally opposite than
his and mine. (3D, 214, added in the 1734 edition)
Berkeley lists his complaints. (1) Malebranche relies on abstract ideas. (2)
He asserts the existence of an external material world, which serves no ex-
planatory purpose and is odious to God’s simplicity of design. And (3) he

divine ideas
191
preserves the structures that allow for the same pernicious skepticism that
Locke engendered with his views.16
Nicholas Jolley has highlighted the ﬁrst point, rightly arguing that Male-
branchian ideas in God share the same problematic indeterminacy as Lock-
ean abstract ideas do (1996, esp. 544–48). I engage Berkeley’s views on
abstraction in more detail in the next chapter, but it is also clear why he
objects to (2) and (3). He denies the duality of worlds between the mental
and physical and similarly rejects the skeptical dangers he sees arising from
such a division. Berkeley will not advocate any theory that maintains an
intermediary between minds and ultimate reality.
Yet are these differences enough for us to conclude, as Berkeley does, that
‘‘there are no principles more fundamentally opposite than [Malebranche’s]
and [his]?’’ I have my doubts. Berkeley was perhaps too eager to argue that
his principles conformed to the beliefs of the common person and insofar
as Malebranche’s views were already popularly thought of as unusual and
decidedly not mainstream, it only makes sense that Berkeley would labor
diligently and vociferously to distance himself from the shadow of Male-
branche. It was not until after he received critical reviews of his main works
that he added pointed sections to later editions trying to separate himself
from the likes of Norris and Malebranche. Furthermore, Berkeley’s system,
especially the underlying theory of ideas, nonetheless has some afﬁnities
with Malebranche’s doctrine of Vision in God.
So then why not conclude that, despite his protestations, Berkeley did
accept that God’s ideas are in God and internal to Him and therefore hold
that divine ideas are modes or proper parts of God? I take the reasons to be
fairly straightforward. The most pressing one concerns the passivity of God.
God is an entirely active being, purus actus, and ideas are essentially passive
and inert. To allege that God’s ideas are a mode or part of God is to allege
that a part of God is passive, a conclusion Berkeley would be loath to allow.
Furthermore, in Principles 49 Berkeley seems to rule out the possibility that
ideas are either modes or (as would apply to God) attributes, in part because
he thinks that such modiﬁcations literally qualify the subject. God certainly
16. Interestingly, Berkeley does not explicitly distance himself here from Malebranche’s occa-
sionalism as one might otherwise expect. Consider PC 548: ‘‘We move our Legs our selves. ’tis
we that will their movement. Herein I differ from Malbranch.’’ His resistance to occasionalism
in the published works is more circumspect, as in 3D, 237, where his separation is cautious. ‘‘I
have nowhere said that God is the only agent who produces all the motions in bodies.’’ The
complications of Berkeley’s views about occasionalism need not delay us here.

192
idea and ontology
does not take on the properties of the ideas He perceives (at least not all of
them); hence this account cannot be right. Thus Berkeley has reason to
distance himself from the position that God’s ideas are in God and internal
to Him not just because of its afﬁnity with Malebranche but also because
there are philosophical concerns that militate against supposing that divine
ideas are modiﬁcations of God.
Berkeley cannot endorse either the suggestion that God’s ideas are with-
out God and internal to Him or the suggestion that God’s ideas are without
God and external to Him (options 2 and 4 listed above for possible divine
idea theories) since both of these deny the dependent nature of ideas. The
esse of ideas is percipi. All ideas are fundamentally (ontologically) dependent
beings, even those (perhaps especially those) perceived by God. If God’s
ideas constitute sensible reality, then even if our ideas were perfect copies of
those divine ideas we would still not directly perceive reality. The problem
of skepticism dominates Berkeley’s thinking—so much so that the introduc-
tion to the Principles presents the work as one that promises to eliminate it.
His skeptical worries preclude him from endorsing any theory that would
reintroduce a veil in a representative theory of perception.
That leaves the theory that God’s ideas are ontologically dependent on
and external to the divine mind. I hasten to emphasize here that the depen-
dence of God’s ideas does not imply that God’s ideas are dependent in any
way on ﬁnite minds. They are, nonetheless, essentially dependent beings.
God created an ideal order external to Himself and during sensation we
directly perceive those very divine ideas.17 And what should we say about
Berkeley’s occasional invocation of archetype/ectype language? On my anal-
ysis, ectypes only exist for ideas of the imagination. The sensory ideas we
perceive simply are reality. The distinction nonetheless makes sense because
we do dream and hallucinate and otherwise have ectypal ideas of the imagi-
nation. Berkeley is not as lucid as one might like in his published works, but
in his notebooks he makes a fortuitously explicit claim: ‘‘Ideas of Sense are
the Real things or Archetypes. Ideas of Imagination, Dreams, etc. are copies,
images of these’’ (PC 823).18 A more compelling bit of supporting evidence
17. A point of clariﬁcation. One might object that this interpretation reintroduces an inter-
mediary in perception since God must have had ideas of the divine archetypes before He created
them (hence we do not directly perceive God’s ideas at all). As I hope is already clear, this is a
misunderstanding. God’s ideas—our sensory ideas—just are the originals. In this sense Berkeley’s
divine ideas are not properly archetypes at all (because there is no original/copy distinction).
God perceives all of them continually (for however long they exist). The ontic nature of ideas
(external but dependent beings) places them (ﬁguratively) ‘‘outside’’ of God’s mind, but they are
no less God’s ideas.
18. Note that the ‘‘’’ mark does not appear next to this entry.

divine ideas
193
would be hard to ﬁnd. If our sensory ideas were ectypes in any way then
Berkeley would have effectively reintroduced the veil of perception he has
labored so hard to remove. We therefore have good reason not only to reject
the alternatives but also to endorse (3) as Berkeley’s considered view. The
real test of my interpretation, naturally, will come when we examine how
well it handles the problems that theories of divine ideas allegedly cannot
overcome. I turn now to those challenges.
7.4 Defending Berkeley’s Theory of Divine Ideas
There are a number of difﬁculties, as mentioned earlier, in attributing any
theory of divine ideas to Berkeley, yet overall my reading is a decidedly
stronger contender than any of the traditional theories attributed to Berke-
ley inside the early modern tale. I do not wish my defense of this account of
Berkeley to be confused with a defense of its overall philosophical merit, but
I do argue that my interpretation makes him more philosophically respect-
able than the alternatives. Berkeley’s position on these matters is more so-
phisticated than generally recognized.
My interpretation lets us solve one problem immediately. In an immate-
rialist world where we directly perceive divine sensory ideas we are in perfect
contact with the world as it is. Thus Berkeley could reasonably think that
his metaphysical system in fact eliminates skepticism. That my reading of
Berkeley explains his conviction is, to my mind, nearly worth the price of
admission alone. Yet some might still have certain concerns about my inter-
pretation.
7.4.1 Privacy
A straightforward consequence of asserting that ideas had by ﬁnite minds
are numerically identical to those of God is that we might not always be able
to tell whether any of ‘‘my’’ ideas are exclusive or ‘‘private’’ to me. It might
be the case that the very (sensory) idea I perceive now is also being perceived
by another ﬁnite mind (in a case where two persons perceive the same divine
idea). As a consequence, ‘‘my’’ ideas are not logically dependent on my
perceiving them, which straightforwardly denies the privacy of ideas. This
line of reasoning runs directly counter to a traditional understanding of
Berkeley as a thinker who encodes the privacy of ideas into the foundations

194
idea and ontology
of his philosophy.19 In his excellent study of Berkeley, Robert Muehlmann
explicitly defends the privacy thesis at some length. Early in Berkeley’s Ontol-
ogy Muehlmann writes: ‘‘I take idealism to be two theses: ﬁrst, sensed quali-
ties cannot exist apart from, and are unique to, the mind of one who
perceives them; second, sensible objects—apples, stones, trees, books, and
‘houses, mountains, rivers’—cannot exist apart from the mind of some per-
cipient or other’’ (1992, 13, bold emphasis mine). Muehlmann believes that
Berkeley’s idealism requires that sensed qualities ‘‘are unique to’’ the mind
that perceives them. I do not contest the fact that this is a natural thought,
but that does not mean that Berkeley either endorsed this thought as his
ﬁnal position or that his theory entails it. The esse is percipi thesis holds that
ideas require minds to exist; it does not require that an existing idea be
related to only one mind at a time. In one sense the privacy thesis is trivially
false, since God perceives all the (sensory or archetypal) ideas I do as a part
of his omniscience.20 Hence my sensory ideas do not really logically depend
on my having them anyway, since God ultimately preserves them. The logic
strikes me as compelling.
Naturally, Muehlmann’s position is more sophisticated than this ﬁrst
gloss, and he provides an argument for the claim that sensory ideas are
private. The argument, in short, depends on Berkeley’s purposeful conﬂa-
tion of ﬁrst sensations (i.e., qualities) and ideas and then of acts of sensation
and the objects of sensation. As to the ﬁrst move, Muehlmann is most cer-
tainly right. Berkeley straightforwardly identiﬁes sensations with ideas.
Light and colours, heat and cold, extension and ﬁgures, in a word
the things we see and feel, what are they but so many sensations,
notions, ideas or impressions on the sense; and is it possible to
separate, even in thought, any of these from perception? (PHK 5)
Qualities, as hath been shewn, are nothing else but sensations or
ideas, which exist only in a mind perceiving them; and this is true
not only of the ideas we are acquainted with at present, but likewise
of all possible ideas whatsoever. (PHK 78)
19. As we shall see shortly, Stoneham is just one example of those who think that Berkeley’s
ideas are essentially private insofar as they are ‘‘relativized’’ to particular minds (2002, 171).
20. Berkeley allows that God can perceive sensory ideas without actually sensing them (PC
675). Dancy defends what is in effect a stronger view, namely that God perceives all possible ideas
(1987, 70–72).

divine ideas
195
Berkeley consistently treats ideas and sensations as the same kind of object.
They are both mind-dependent entities whose esse is percipi. On this point
we agree.
Muehlmann, however, errs when he further argues that Berkeley con-
ﬂates the act of sensation with the object of sensation.21 Now I should say at
the outset that this is no gross error; there are plausible reasons for being
tempted into this position, not the least of which is that Berkeley appears to
have carelessly ﬂirted with endorsing it.
The most important bit of text comes in the Three Dialogues with what
Muehlmann calls the ‘‘tulip-smelling argument’’:
philonous: Make me to understand the difference between what is im-
mediately perceived, and a sensation.
hylas: The sensation I take to be an act of the mind perceiving; beside
which, there is something perceived; and this I call the object. For
example, there is red and yellow on that tulip. But then the act of
perceiving those colours is in me only, and not in the tulip. (195)
On Muehlmann’s reading this is the start of an argument designed to show
that there is no distinction between act and object when it comes to sensa-
tions (smellings, suffering pains, etc.). Hylas raises the distinction in an at-
tempt to defend a mind-independent external reality. It is thus natural to
suppose that Berkeley would attack this move by denying the posited dis-
tinction. Initially one might be led to think that this is his strategy:
philonous: I see you have no mind to be pressed that way. To return
then to your distinction between sensation and object; if I take you
right, you distinguish in every perception two things, the one an action
of the mind, the other not.
hylas: True. (195)
This exchange appears to be the start of a discussion of the relevant distinc-
tion between act and object. In fact, however, it is not. Instead, Philonous
turns to engage the concept of an active mind during perception. I will now
21. Muehlmann’s language here is occasionally confusing, as he typically writes of the conﬂa-
tion as one between ‘‘sensation’’ and ‘‘object of sensation.’’ That he means acts of sensation in
the ﬁrst case is clear from the context of his analysis. I speculate that this infelicity of language
might well have contributed to his erroneously endorsing the act-object distinction in Berkeley’s
analysis of perception, even though I grant that the view is superﬁcially plausible.

196
idea and ontology
reproduce an extended bit of the relevant core of the remaining argument
with omissions.
philonous: In plucking this ﬂower, I am active, because I do it by the
motion of my hand, which was consequent upon my volition; so like-
wise in applying it to my nose. But is either of these smelling?
hylas: No. . . .
philonous: But I do not ﬁnd my will concerned any farther. Whatever
more there is, as that I perceive such a particular smell or any smell at
all, this is independent of my will, and therein I am altogether passive.
Do you ﬁnd it otherwise with you, Hylas?
hylas: No, the very same. . . .
philonous: Tell me now, whether seeing consists in perceiving light and
colours, or in opening and turning the eyes?
hylas: Without doubt, in the former.
philonous: Since therefore you are in the very perception of light and
colours altogether passive, what is become of that action you were
speaking of, as an ingredient in every sensation? And doth it not follow
from your own concessions, that the perception of light and colours,
including no action in it, may exist in an unperceiving substance? And
is not this a plain contradiction?
hylas: I know not what to think of it.
philonous: Besides, since you distinguished the active and passive in
every perception, you must do it in that of pain. But how is it possible
that pain, be it as little active as you please, should exist in an unper-
ceiving substance? In short, do but consider the point, and then con-
fess ingenuously, whether light and colours, tastes, sounds, &c. are not
all equally passions or sensations in the soul. You may indeed call
them external objects, and give them in words what subsistence you
please. But examine your own thoughts, and then tell me whether it
be not as I say? (196–97)
At the end of his analysis of this same extended passage, Muehlmann con-
cludes that the ‘‘traditional’’ way of reading the passage, namely, as an argu-
ment that denies any distinction between acts of sensation and the objects
of sensation, is the best. Muehlmann therefore claims that Berkeley takes as
established that ‘‘in the immediate perception of the proper objects of sense,
no distinction can be drawn between a sensation and an object of that sensa-
tion’’ (1992, 197, emphasis in the original). Muehlmann grants that there is

divine ideas
197
a distinction between perception and commonsense objects but maintains
that when it comes to the proper objects of sensation (objects that are the
speciﬁc and immediate objects of a particular sense modality, like light and
color to sight), there is no distinction between smelling and the proper object
of smelling.
Applying this analysis to the larger privacy problem, we might construct
an argument for the claim that ideas must be unique to a mind. Muehlmann
does not himself offer up this explicit argument nor is his analysis concern-
ing the tulip-smelling argument speciﬁcally targeted at the uniqueness of
perception. I believe, however, that it is a reasonable argument that anyone
following Muehlmann’s interesting analysis might be tempted to employ.
Hence it deserves consideration.
(1) Berkeley identiﬁes ideas and sensations (qualities).
(2) Berkeley identiﬁes acts of sensations and the proper objects of sensa-
tions (qualities).
(3) Sensory acts are unique to their percipients.
(4) Hence ideas are unique to their percipients.22
If Muehlmann is right, this argument constitutes a serious objection to my
thesis that ﬁnite minds directly perceive God’s divine ideas as sensible real-
ity. In private correspondence Muehlmann has confessed that the unique-
ness claim ‘‘seems straightforwardly to follow from Berkeley’s identiﬁcation
of ‘idea’ with ‘sensation,’ an identiﬁcation that is more obvious in the Three
Dialogues than in the Principles.’’23 As I have already indicated, I think that
Muehlmann is right when he claims that Berkeley identiﬁes ideas and sensa-
tions (qualities). The issue, however, is whether this identiﬁcation entails
that ideas (and sensations) are unique to their percipients.
The key premise is (2). Unlike Muehlmann, I do not think Berkeley iden-
tiﬁes sensory acts and the objects (proper or otherwise) of sensations. With
respect to this conclusion I essentially agree with Winkler’s analysis of the
same passage (1989, 7–8). Berkeley’s intent in the ‘‘tulip-smelling argument’’
is to show that minds are passive in sensory perception. The motivation for
Berkeley to do this is clear and compelling. He wants to defend a view that
he thinks is like commonsense realism, which requires that his theory pre-
serve the volitional independence of our sensory experiences (i.e., that the
22. My thanks to Tapio Korte for helping me to clarify the formulation of this argument.
23. I want to thank Robert Muehlmann for generously allowing me to reproduce some of
our correspondence.

198
idea and ontology
sensory world appears in our experience as independent of our wills). As a
result, when Hylas presents the distinction between act and object as a dis-
tinction between two items, ‘‘the one an action of the mind, the other not,’’
Berkeley needs to demonstrate that the former item (that the mind is always
active and never passive during perception) is not strictly true, at least in
one important sense. There are two senses in which minds are active. The
ﬁrst is with respect to the actual perception of an idea. The mind is always
active when perceiving (it is doing something). But there is a second sense
in which the mind may be passive, namely in terms of the generation (or
origination) of the ideas it perceives. Some of the ideas a ﬁnite mind per-
ceives are perceived involuntarily. Thus, the mind is passive with respect to
the cause of the idea (as opposed to ideas of the imagination, which the
mind generates itself). In sensory perception minds must be passive. If he
fails to prove that minds are passive in this sense, then solipsism and skepti-
cism are not far away. Berkeley holds that sensory ideas constitute the real
things of the world. But if my ideas and yours are both private and unique
to us, there is no meaningful sense in which we can both perceive the same
real world. In effect, the uniqueness claim undermines Berkeley’s deeply
held antiskepticism.
This understanding of Berkeley’s aim seems well conﬁrmed by how the
passage unfolds. Philonous moves from the introduction of the distinction
to a discussion not of the putative identity of act and object but of the
activity of the mind in perception. As it turns out, we learn that in sensing
(seeing and smelling and the like), the sensing is not the drawing of air into
the nose or such actions but the perceiving of the proper objects of that
sense. It is at this point that Muehlmann may allege that the identiﬁcation
is being made. What it is to smell just is to perceive the proper object of
smell. Yet this is, to my mind, manifestly not the emphasis of the argument.
When Berkeley says through Philonous that ‘‘seeing consists in perceiving
light and colours’’ (197), his intention is not to make an identiﬁcation but
to note the essentially dependent and passive nature of the sensory process.
That is, seeing is a species of perceiving—a species that takes proper objects.
This speculation is conﬁrmed by Philonous’s next speech, where he notes
that the perception of light and color includes ‘‘no action in it.’’ And in the
following speech (extending the analysis to pain) the lesson is that sensa-
tions like pain are all equally ‘‘passions or sensations in the soul’’ that cannot
exist in an unperceiving substance. That is, sensations are ontologically de-
pendent on minds, just not volitionally dependent. I thus submit that Berke-

divine ideas
199
ley’s goal in these passages is to preserve the volitional independence of the
sensory world in his system.
We have not, however, reached the end of the matter. Muehlmann might
draw some comfort from the 1710 edition of the Principles, where in the last
sentence of the ﬁfth paragraph Berkeley writes: ‘‘In truth the object and the
sensation are the same thing, and cannot therefore be abstracted from each
other.’’ There can be little doubt that here Berkeley is ﬂirting with exactly
the position Muehlmann wishes to ascribe to him. But as we have seen (in
section 6.3), Berkeley removed this passage from subsequent editions. What
he replaced it with—‘‘Hence as it is impossible for me to see or feel anything
without an actual sensation of that thing, so is it impossible for me to con-
ceive in my thoughts any sensible thing or object distinct from the sensation
or perception of it’’—indicates that he cannot separate the object from the
sensation. This rendition is consistent with the esse is percipi principle. Why
would Berkeley remove an explicit identity claim that is perfectly clear and
replace it with a weaker claim that does not even suggest the same identity?
One plausible answer is that Berkeley recognized that the identity claim was
a mistake. If he kept the identity claim, then he could not reasonably defend
the volitional independence of the experienced world inside his system, a
claim he trumpets in both the Three Dialogues and the Principles.24
Perhaps the problem is a matter of emphasis. Muehlmann underscores
Berkeley’s adherence to the identiﬁcation of sensation and the objects of
sensation and then proceeds to note the difﬁculties that this move makes
for his metaphysics later. I, alternatively, wish to downplay the early identi-
ﬁcation in order to preserve more of Berkeley’s subsequent moves. I am not
entirely resistant to this characterization, but I think my view has important
beneﬁts. Textually I can explain why he ﬂirted with the view and then re-
jected it, and I can provide Berkeley with a more philosophically potent
system in the ﬁnal analysis. The conjunction strikes me as convincing. At
the end of the day, when faced with two plausible readings of the text, we
ought to prefer the one that remains historically sensitive while improving
the quality of the philosophical insights.
Another important position that Berkeley defends would be threatened
were we to accept Muehlmann’s identiﬁcation. As we saw in section 6.2 (as
well as in section 5.5), Berkeley argues that God can perceive our pains with-
out actually sensing them. This argument implies that the object is distinct
24. Muehlmann provides his own explanation for why Berkeley removed the last line of PHK
5 from the 1734 edition, arguing that ‘‘it proves too much’’ when his point was only to preclude
the possibility of sensory qualities existing independently in matter (1992, 141ff).

200
idea and ontology
from the sensation: ‘‘God May comprehend all Ideas even the Ideas which
are painfull & unpleasant without being in any degree pained thereby’’ (PC
675). Berkeley needs the distinction to explain how God can be omniscient
and yet not suffer. On my reading, his mature theory solves this problem
quite well. The objects of perception and sensation are the same; it is the
nature of the relation that varies.
To my knowledge, at no time does Berkeley ever assert that sensory ideas
are wedded to particular individuals.25 He carefully maintains in his ﬁnal
published works the view that ideas depend for their existence only on some
mind or other. Ideas of imagination may still remain unique to the mind
that conjures them, and thus Berkeley can continue to do some justice to
our intuitions about the privacy of ideas but only insofar as they extend to
the imagination. Certain passages can be reasonably read as endorsing pri-
vacy for ideas but none of them explicitly so. More importantly, to preserve
the coherence of his larger system and to be charitable to Berkeley, none of
them ought to be read that way.
No doubt it is a natural inclination to treat all ideas as private (as being
like our ‘‘own’’ images) and so Berkeley (or contemporary readers) might
occasionally lapse. Yet Berkeley can even explain why we have this tendency
in the ﬁrst place. The alleged uniqueness of ideas is a holdover from materi-
alism. On Locke’s view, for instance, ideas are private intermediaries be-
tween our minds and the external material world. The objective nature of
the world is preserved by the material objects, not our ideas, and hence the
difﬁculty is not as apparent. But the cost of uniqueness is representational-
ism and skepticism. Because we have some propensity to think of the world
materialistically, it is understandable why one might easily slide into think-
ing that our ideas are unique to us. It might sound odd to say that our
sensory perceptions are not genuinely private, but Berkeley can simply ex-
hort us to set aside the vulgar confusions that stem from this mistaken ad-
herence to materialism. If God is the author of the sensible world, in what
sense could our ideas be genuinely private? At least God would always share
them.26 The only ideas that are truly our own are those we conjure ourselves.
25. One might object that although Berkeley does not explicitly assert this, he does so implic-
itly. At PHK 4 he writes that we perceive nothing other than ‘‘our own ideas or sensations.’’ On
my reading of Berkeley, however, the ownership of an idea is nothing more than being in a
particular two-place relation with it. Here, as elsewhere (e.g., 3D, 248), Berkeley is asserting only
that this relation holds for a certain person. When I say that I am having an idea, I mean that I
am in a particular relation with that idea. When I speak of ‘‘my’’ ideas, I refer to the set of ideas
that are relata in perceptual relations with me. Possessive pronouns ﬁx one end of the relation,
nothing more. I ﬁnd nothing odd or unusual about this given Berkeley’s system.
26. Again, this does not entail that God senses as we do. See PC 675.

divine ideas
201
Even so, one might think that Muehlmann has additional resources to
resist my analysis. Since Muehlmann does not use the ‘‘tulip-smelling’’ argu-
ment to explicitly push for the uniqueness of ideas to particular minds,
perhaps there is a better way of characterizing his position, one that is tied
to its explanatory power. According to Muehlmann, Berkeley’s adherence to
the uniqueness of ideas does philosophical work inside his system. It ex-
plains why Berkeley would think that ideas generally must be mind depen-
dent in the ﬁrst place. Ideas are like sensations, and since sensations like
pain are (apparently) private, it follows that ideas must be private as well.
There is an order of exposition in Berkeley’s thinking about this issue. In
order to show that commonsense things like mountains and cherries are
mind dependent, he ﬁrst endeavors to demonstrate that sensory qualities
are mind dependent. So Muehlmann might well respond this way: what is
your explanation for why Berkeley is so conﬁdent that ideas and sensations
are mind dependent?
The question is a fair one, and my answer is straightforward. Like most
of the other moderns, Berkeley simply could not imagine an idea without
an owner (just as there can not be the experience of color without something
doing the experiencing). We do not need an additional reason to make the
view reasonable. On Muehlmann’s account, because sensations are private,
it follows that they are dependent. Thus since ideas are like sensations, ideas
must be private and dependent as well. On my interpretation, Berkeley per-
haps at ﬁrst believed the privacy account (in the Notebooks and the early
edition of the Principles) but then later came to realize the disaster that
accompanied such a claim. Fortunately, Berkeley had an out. Ideas could
still be dependent without being unique to a particular mind. This feature
is true for sensory ideas generally, so it could be true for sensations as well.
My account explains why Berkeley backed down from the claim made in
the 1710 edition of PHK 5 and why explicit references to uniqueness are
nowhere else to be found in his later works.27 It is worth noting that in all
of these challenges, none of the concerns is a straightforwardly philosophical
worry. They are textual concerns. Given that I believe I have made a plausi-
ble case on textual grounds for my reading, we should prefer my account
precisely because of the philosophical advantages we can accrue without
sacriﬁcing allegiance to what Berkeley actually wrote.
27. Berkeley explicitly takes up the issue of whether two ﬁnite minds can perceive the same
house in the Three Dialogues (3D, 247), but that discussion is not strictly about the uniqueness of
my ideas. Instead, the passage concerns whether multiple minds are able to perceive the same
common sense objects (like houses). For a fuller treatment of that passage, see Hight 2007a, esp.
448–50.

202
idea and ontology
As a small afterthought, assuming that my account is correct, one might
have some qualms about the nature and number of divine ideas. One could
ask whether God has an idea for each bit of content that could be perceived
(including those that in fact never are) or only ideas for those things actually
perceived by ﬁnite minds (at some time or other). I do not have an answer
here, nor am I certain that Berkeley has one (see Dancy 1987, 70–72). Pre-
sumably Berkeley would opt, ceteris paribus, for the response most consis-
tent with the simple nature of God, saying that God does not need to
preserve ideas where there is no demand to do so. Perhaps God’s omni-
science indicates that God perceives all possibilities. I see no obstacle to or
serious defect in either option. There might well be many more divine ideas
if God preserves all those that simply might be perceived, but that in and of
itself presents no difﬁculty. Even if God must maintain an idea for every
qualitatively distinct potential experience, that admission does not under-
mine the textual or philosophical advantages of my reading.
7.4.2 Privacy Revisited: Stoneham’s Relativized Ideas
One might question my analysis of the privacy of ideas in another way,
this time with explicit reference to the claim that ﬁnite minds perceive the
numerically same ideas as God. This challenge to my account comes from
Tom Stoneham, who urges that God cannot possibly perceive the numeri-
cally same ideas as ﬁnite minds because ideas are intrinsically relativized to
the individual perceiving minds. God cannot perceive the same idea as a
ﬁnite mind because simply changing the perceiving mind ipso facto changes
the idea as well. When it comes to what it means to be perceived, Stoneham
rejects a cluster of views he calls ‘‘theocentric’’ (2002, 170). These are views
that ascribe to God some role in sustaining and hence perceiving ideas. He
notes two problems with assigning God such a role. The ﬁrst is familiar:
God does not sense. Hence God cannot perceive ideas of sense. I have al-
ready addressed this worry, arguing that the object is the same but the nature
of the perceptual relation varies, thus allowing for ﬁnite minds to perceive
the numerically same ideas as God. The second issue, Stoneham’s conten-
tion that ideas are ‘‘relativized qualities,’’ however, raises a new challenge to
my position. The view that God and ﬁnite minds sometimes perceive the
numerically same ideas, Stoneham argues, ‘‘faces the further problem that it
needs us to make sense of a particular idea being in or being perceived by
more than one mind. If, as I have argued, an idea is a relativized quality,
such as the-green-of-this-grass-to-me-now, then God cannot stand in the

divine ideas
203
same relation to it as the ﬁnite subject of that idea’’ (171). The argument
depends on Stoneham’s contention that ideas are relativized qualities. As
should be obvious, I deny that this characterization of an idea is Berkeley’s.
So, to begin with, why does Stoneham think otherwise?
Stoneham arrives at this view ﬁrst by analyzing why Berkeley was com-
mitted to the perceptual dependence of ideas. For Locke, ‘‘free-ﬂoating’’
qualities were unacceptable, since allowing such detached qualities would
preclude us from being able to describe the world. Meaningful propositions
typically state relations between sensible things, and unless qualities are
‘‘tied’’ to something (e.g., a substratum) we cannot make clusters of quality
attributions at all. To use Stoneham’s example, unless yellow and a sweet
smell are grounded in something, we have no way of knowing whether our
visual sensation of yellow is connected to our sweet olfactory experience and
indeed whether either of them are related to a rose or something else. Locke
simply could not imagine qualities that were not qualities of anything (167).
Such is Locke’s picture. Berkeley, however, ﬁnds the inherence relation
equally as mysterious and thus adopts a different theory of the objects of
quality predication. What ties down qualities for Berkeley are minds. To
group several disparate qualities we do not require some mind-independent
material substance; we only require a mind to organize the qualities to-
gether. Such a view need not commit Berkeley to literal predication (such
that perceiving yellow makes the mind yellow) since he provides a separate
theory of quality predication that identiﬁes qualities and ideas.
Stoneham’s account is plausible and intuitive, but I think it is not Berke-
ley’s. Stoneham’s analysis depends on the traditional understanding of an
idea being ‘‘in’’ the mind. He assumes that an idea can only be in one ﬁnite
mind. The assertion is reasonable if one construes ‘‘in’’ more literally (as if
ideas qualify or are a part of the mind), but as we have seen Berkeley uses
‘‘in’’ to mean merely ontological dependence. To say that an idea is ‘‘in’’ a
mind only indicates that that mind at least partially is involved in sustaining
that idea. Nothing logically precludes more than one mind from sustaining
an idea. Indeed, common sense demands otherwise, since how else might
we be certain that we are engaging one another in the same world? If I
cannot perceive any of the ideas you perceive, solipsism and skepticism,
repugnant to Berkeley, are yet again not far away.
What ‘‘ties down’’ qualities in Berkeley’s system is God. God arranges
and orders the ideas we perceive (and who perceives them). If we try to
conceptualize the system without God, then what we are left with is some-
thing like a brute-fact Humean trope theory. We simply realize that the

204
idea and ontology
universe is ordered such that certain qualities come bundled together in
regular patterns. But I do not organize those bundles (and you do not ei-
ther). Instead, we all discover more or less the same regularities in the ideas/
qualities we perceive. There is, to my mind, no compelling need in Berke-
ley’s system to assume that perception must be private. Indeed, there are
good reasons to think he needs to deny exactly that it is. The ﬁrst I have
already mentioned: it is necessary to avoid skepticism. Second, Berkeley
wants to preserve (to the extent he can) our commonsense understandings
of the world. Relativizing ideas denies what Berkeley explicitly asserts,
namely that we can meaningfully say that we (i.e., multiple distinct minds)
perceive the same thing. To be certain, the exact sense in which this claim is
true is unusual, since we are referring in this case only to speciﬁc ideas in
the same sense modality (Berkeley’s heterogeneity thesis denies that we see
the same objects we feel). Furthermore, since Berkeley takes commonsense
objects to be congeries of ideas, there are complications about when and
whether two minds perceive the ‘‘same’’ commonsense object. Yet neither
of these complications denies that two minds perceive the numerically same
ideas of sense. The commonsense assertion Berkeley retains is that your
senses function like mine, and you see (immediately) exactly what I see (and
so on for the other sense modalities). There might be difﬁculties with
whether you ‘‘see’’ the same house I do, since a house is a large collection of
ideas and strictly speaking we do not (immediately) ‘‘see’’ houses at all, but
there is no difﬁculty over whether you see the same immediate square patch
of red that I do.28 To deny that we can perceive the same immediate objects
is to deny our most fundamental assumptions about how the world works.
Lastly, it is worth noting that Stoneham’s depiction of Berkeleian ideas is
motivated by an alleged story of how Berkeley explains what ties qualities
together. The relativized nature of ideas for Berkeley is not the conclusion
of an argument that forces one to accept that they are relativized given either
what Berkeley says or other positions he holds. Instead, the supposition that
ideas are relativized qualities is a smart (but I think false) hypothesis meant
to explain how Berkeley ‘‘ties down’’ qualities into commonsense objects.
Stoneham offers a similar analysis (64–71) of the pain argument we engaged
in the previous section, but beyond that he provides no textual evidence
that Berkeley believes that ideas (as the immediate objects of perception) are
either private or relativized. I have argued at length in this chapter that
28. Pappas denies my claim here, arguing that for Berkeley we immediately perceive common
sense objects (2000, esp. 172–78). That extended engagement lies beyond the scope of this work.
For a detailed treatment, see Hight (2007b).

divine ideas
205
precisely the reverse is the case. To maintain a maximal number of his other
philosophical claims, one must reject the notion that he regards ideas as
private, and the texts reasonably support the hypothesis that he did not so
regard them.
7.4.3 Continuity and Inertness
Despite my defense of Berkeley against the charge that ideas are private, one
might press related concerns. One worry is the problem of continuity for
sensible objects. Since my ideas only exist when perceived, if those ideas are
dependent only on me then their existence is fragmented at best. But if there
is no privacy for my ideas because they are numerically identical with those
‘‘in’’ (i.e., ontologically dependent on) God or other minds, then the conti-
nuity of sensible objects is guaranteed, or at least explained. The tree I see
outside my window is the ‘‘same’’ tree as I saw ﬁve minutes ago, because its
continuity is preserved in a divine world of ideas to which I have access.
One might object, as Stubenberg does, that this view only guarantees that
something exists when I close my eyes but not necessarily the same tree as I
saw earlier (1990, 225). Note that the challenge here concerns not sensory
ideas as the immediate objects of perception but commonsense objects that
are complex congeries of ideas. There is no inconsistency between my analy-
sis of Stoneham’s concern and my response here. For Berkeley, Stubenberg’s
complaint is not a worry. It may simply happen that God continuously
creates numerically distinct but qualitatively similar divine ideas over time.
From our perspective, whether there is one set of numerically identical ideas
or a larger set ﬁlled with distinct but qualitatively identical ideas, nothing
changes. On the other hand, if we do discover qualitative differences, then
the sameness of the tree becomes a verbal dispute, based on how one wants
to capture ‘‘sameness’’ without respect to qualitative identity.29 Since we
have no access to other methods that could guarantee an answer, Stuben-
berg is asking for an answer no ﬁnite mind can provide. Whether it is one
idea or many that preserves the apparent continuity of the sensible world,
all we really know is that the world appears continuous. Generally speaking,
so long as I perceive divine ideas—and the tree I perceive now and the
one I perceive later are qualitatively identical—there are no other issues to
resolve.30 The trees are the same trees in the only sense of ‘‘same’’ that mat-
29. See 3D, 247, where Berkeley claims that such disputes about sameness are idle.
30. I develop and extend this same point about judgments of diachronic identity with respect
to Berkeley’s theory of bodily resurrection in Hight 2007a, esp. 448–53.

206
idea and ontology
ters. When I perceive differences in my ideas over time, I can track certain
patterns and continuities in what I sense, and no other pretensions or ab-
stractions will tell me more about the world as I perceive it. The world
as perceived is neither fragmentary nor discontinuous. Only philosophers
invoking disreputable abstractions might think otherwise. As a result, the
initial worry most have about Berkeley’s system—that it makes our world(s)
fragmentary and discontinuous—depends on concerns that simply do not
apply. We do notice a regularity and constancy in our perceptions, and that
is enough for Berkeley.31
The most frequently cited worry, however, stems from Berkeley’s ﬁrm
claim that ideas are utterly inert (Mabbott 1968, 372). God allegedly causes
me to have the sensory ideas I do. Yet those ideas cannot be caused by the
divine ideas in God, since ideas are passive. What role, then, do divine ideas
play in the ontology? Should we not use Ockham’s razor to remove this
odious appendage to his system? Stubenberg also raises this as a difﬁculty.
‘‘This consideration suggests that God’s ideas, construed as archetypes, play
no role in the explanation of the sensory ideas of created beings. Thus, para-
doxically, divine ideas appear as dispensable ontological baggage’’ (1990,
224).
We might, however, see a reason for reintroducing divine ideas if we
consider the difference between divine and ﬁnite knowledge of reality. If
God is going to cause me to have an idea, and that idea is a real thing, then
God must be creating something independent of my volition. God does not
need archetypes to cause me to have ideas, but we need divine ideas to
perceive a real, continuous, unfragmented world.32 If Berkeley’s immaterial
world is to be continuous and ultimately real, then he needs to establish it
in a way that allows our access to it while preventing skeptical problems.
The order of ideas set down by God is Berkeley’s hypothesis about how this
works. As a result, divine ideas are created by God for us, not simply for
Himself. This also helps to explain why people can err in perception. When
we err, we do not create ideas that inadequately resemble reality. Instead,
we make poor inferences on the basis of the ‘‘real’’ ideas themselves. Error
31. Berkeley even argues for the existence of God on the basis of this regularity. Since he
argues from continuity to the existence of God, that is a good signal that he does not think he
can completely characterize the divine realm. After all, he cannot use as premises in his argu-
ments claims about a reality created by a being he is trying to prove exists. The divine ideas of
God are an explanatory result, a hypothesis used to explain the sensible experiences we have.
32. That the divine order is required for us and not God also helps remove worries about
why God would have a set of ideas that are temporally ordered. God, as an atemporal being, does
not require temporal ordering. What ordering exists is for our beneﬁt.

divine ideas
207
is the result of mental operation and does not create or distort the order of
reality by introducing new ‘‘false’’ ideas. Ideas of imagination are dependent
on our wills,33 as Berkeley says, and are less real only because of that depen-
dence on our mental activity.34 As a result, Stubenberg’s criticism applies
only if one preserves the numerical distinction between the ideas ‘‘in’’ God
and those in ﬁnite minds. Since I deny that distinction, the worry does not
arise.
Mabbott, in presenting a similar objection to Berkeley, considers the pos-
sibility that our ideas are numerically identical with the divine ideas of God.
He dismisses this option because it ‘‘is still open to the objection that things
passive and inert can be no part of God’’ (1968, 372). Yandell pursues the
same course, explicitly identifying the claim with Malebranche’s ‘‘Vision in
God’’ doctrine. ‘‘Our ideas, since they are ideas of sensation, cannot there-
fore be perceived by God. Moreover, Philonous has said in the Second Dia-
logue that we do not perceive God’s ideas (3D, 215). There is plainly no
doctrine of vision in God, nor any doctrine that we perceive God’s ideas, in
Berkeley’s theory’’ (1995, 414). Others have engaged the possibility of identi-
fying our sensory ideas with the ideas of God and rejected it as well.35 Yan-
dell’s claim that in the Three Dialogues Philonous denies that we perceive
God’s ideas is puzzling, since that passage does not seem to support his
claim.
From all which I conclude, there is a mind which affects me every
moment with all the sensible impressions I perceive. And from the
33. 3D, 235, represents Berkeley’s basic, unreﬂective view. Ideas of the imagination are depen-
dent on our wills, ideas of sense are not. A serious problem arises here, however, since at one
point (PC 548) Berkeley appears to argue that we can cause nonimaginary ideas when we will the
voluntary motion of our limbs. Berkeley also introduces a robust conception of free will to deﬂect
the problem of evil (3D, 237), further complicating the issue by requiring that he have a system
that preserves the volitional independence of reality while maintaining free moral responsibility
for agents in their actions. Berkeley clearly needs a criterion for distinguishing among perceptions
of one’s own actions, one’s own imaginings, and the ideas one’s voluntary actions cause in others.
I have no acceptable solution to this problem, although Stoneham does an excellent job of
discussing the variants (2002, 192–99).
34. There is yet another related difﬁculty. For Berkeley there is no such thing as mispercep-
tion, only mistaken judgments based on perception. If I perceive a mirage, Berkeley is committed
to the claim that I am accurately seeing an idea, and a divine idea. Yet such ideas are not ‘‘real’’
on Berkeley’s view because they are not connected to other ideas in an orderly (natural) fashion
(see PHK 33). So why would God create such ideas that cohere poorly with the rest of the divine
order? What explains why we appear to ‘‘misperceive’’? Even without a theory of divine ideas this
puzzle confronts Berkeley, and so I do not take it to weigh against my interpretation.
35. See Grey 1952, 338–49. The topic of Grey’s paper runs only tangentially to the one here,
but it is instructive to see how his analysis concerning putatively public objects brings him close
my view.

208
idea and ontology
variety, order, and manner of these, I conclude the Author of them
to be wise, powerful, and good, beyond comprehension. Mark it well;
I do not say, I see things by perceiving that which represents them
in the intelligible substance of God. This I do not understand; but
I say, the things by me perceived are known by the understanding,
and produced by the will, of an inﬁnite spirit. (215)
Here Berkeley denies (1) anything representational and (2) that we see ideas
as a part of the intelligible substance of God. He does not deny that we per-
ceive divine ideas. The interpretation I am presenting requires that one read
Berkeley’s divine ideas as external to God’s being, but because of their inert-
ness this is precisely what we should expect! After all, how could passive
ideas be any part of a necessarily active being? They cannot. I take this to be
more evidence that my reading is right. Malebranche, of course, puts the
divine order within God, and Berkeley is clear about his objection to this
alternative.
I do not understand how our ideas, which are things altogether
passive and inert, can be the essence, or any part (or like any part)
of the essence or substance of God, who is an impassive, indivisible,
purely active being. Many more difﬁculties and objections there
are, which occur at ﬁrst view against this hypothesis; but I shall
only add that it is liable to all the absurdities of the common
hypotheses, in making a created world exist otherwise than in the
mind of a spirit.36 (3D, 213–14)
Divine ideas are needed to bring order and ground reality for ﬁnite spirits.
Both of these tasks can be accomplished without undermining the divine
nature of God by simply moving the ideas ‘‘outside of’’ (i.e., they are not a
part of the substance of) Him.
One might, however, seek to extend the original criticism. Positing divine
ideas does not explain how two persons can perceive the ‘‘same’’ idea.
Berkeley says that the existence of an archetype ‘‘serves all the ends of iden-
tity, as well as if it existed out of a mind’’ (3D, 248).37 Yet although this
36. Note again that the word ‘‘in’’ in the last sentence only means ontological dependence and
does not indicate that the created world is literally (located) inside the mind of God. Indeed,
arguing that the world, as a mental order of ideas, must have a physical location would be a
category mistake.
37. Here Berkeley is attacking the Lockean notion of ‘‘out of a mind,’’ where independence
is assumed. That is, Berkeley claims his view is just as good as one that posits mind-independent
archetypes.

divine ideas
209
might work for Locke, whose material archetypes are causally empowered
and independent of all minds, how can causally inert ideas explain how two
persons perceive the same idea? This problem becomes pressing since Berke-
ley clearly thinks that divine ideas bear the explanatory weight here. Fortu-
nately, we already have the resources to answer this objection. When two
minds perceive the (qualitatively) same idea(s), they are both directed by
God to the same (at least qualitatively identical) idea(s). God causes us to
perceive the ideas we do, but that need not entail that there are archetypes
that serve as causal intermediaries. The divine idea itself causes nothing; it
is what is passively perceived. Now we say, for the sake of convenience, that
‘‘our’’ ideas are the same as that of others because they ‘‘match’’ the divine
idea, but strictly speaking that language is misleading, since from our stand-
point we cannot distinguish between ideas that are numerically identical and
those that are distinct but qualitatively identical. Thus, without invoking
numerical diversity or a causal role, divine ideas do explain how diverse
persons can perceive the ‘‘same’’ thing. The ‘‘thing’’ perceived is the divine
idea and its qualitative content. Whether that means you and I perceive
numerically one idea or two does not matter to Berkeley, who thinks the
question bears no philosophical weight.38 The distinction between the two
cases deserves emphasis. All that I am attributing to Berkeley is the claim
that our sensory ideas are numerically identical to those of God. It need not
follow (and indeed, does not) that the ideas had by two ﬁnite minds are
therefore numerically identical as well. That is logically possible, but it is not
required by Berkeley’s system.
7.5 Fleeting Ideas
One last, general concern awaits attention. Berkeleian ideas, and hence di-
vine ideas as well, are ‘‘inert, ﬂeeting, dependent beings’’ (PHK 89).39 The
assertion that ideas are transient is not unique to Berkeley. Spinoza quotes
Bacon in Letter 2 to Oldenburg as holding that the intellect frequently takes
things to be constant that are in fact ﬂeeting (CWS 1:167). Leibniz is fond of
referring to ﬂeeting modes and modiﬁcations (PE, 266, 267). Locke describes
mixed modes as ‘‘ﬂeeting and transient’’ (ECHU II.22.8). Berkeley and
Hume both refer to ideas speciﬁcally as ﬂeeting beings. Perceptions for
Hume are ‘‘ﬂeeting copies’’ (1999, 201). Yet one does not ﬁnd any analysis
38. For an extended defense of this claim I attribute to Berkeley, see Hight 2007a, esp. 448–53.
39. See 3D, 205, where ideas are ‘‘perpetually ﬂeeting and variable.’’

210
idea and ontology
as to why ideas were thought of as ﬂeeting. The supposition that all ideas
must be ﬂeeting and changeable is so ingrained in the secondary literature
that it seems no one has stopped to investigate seriously what this might
mean.
So what is the exact nature of the worry? Berkeley posits the existence of
an archetypal order of divine ideas that is ‘‘eternal’’ (3D, 254). If ideas are all
by their nature ﬂeeting in the sense of ‘‘passing swiftly,’’ it is difﬁcult to
make sense of how divine ideas—that are nonetheless ideas despite their
divine relation—could also be eternal. Hence the suggestion is that God’s
ideas must be distinct in kind from those perceived by ﬁnite minds. As I
have argued here, there are textual and philosophical reasons for believing
that Berkeley’s ﬁnite minds perceive the numerically same sensory ideas as
God. This thesis is problematic if ideas are all ﬂeeting. The worry, however,
extends beyond this particular context. For Hume, the ﬂeeting and uncon-
nected nature of perceptions helps to generate his famous problem reconcil-
ing the distinct existence of perceptions with the lack of connections among
them. For if what we take to be commonsense objects are successions of
ﬂeeting but actually unconnected perceptions, then how are we to make
sense of the claim that there are really commonsense objects at all? The
‘‘ﬂeeting’’ nature of ideas appears troublesome.
The difﬁculty is avoidable. I propose a reading of Berkeley’s claim that
ideas are all ‘‘ﬂeeting, indeed, and changeable’’ (3D, 258) that is both consis-
tent with the use of the term generally in the early modern period as well as
consistent with Berkeley’s philosophical pronouncements. I suggest here
that Berkeley’s claim that ideas are ﬂeeting and changeable originated only
as a reference to the appearance of the sensible world as one that continually
changes. That is, ideas are ﬂeeting in relation to us, but that does not imply
anything about the metaphysical nature of the ideas themselves, aside from
the short duration of their relation to our mind. As a result, the alleged
ﬂeeting nature of ideas does not conﬂict with his theory of divine ideas.
Lastly, I conclude by providing what I think is a reasonable explanation for
why none of the early moderns thought it necessary to defend explicitly the
claim that ideas are ﬂeeting beings.
7.5.1 Idea Orderings
What did the early moderns mean when they claimed that ideas were ﬂeet-
ing? At ﬁrst glance, ‘‘ﬂeeting’’ seems to mean ‘‘passing swiftly’’ or ‘‘exists in
a transitory state for only an instant.’’ In fact, many of the uses of the word

divine ideas
211
in the period mean exactly that. In the Natural Dialogues, however, Hume
describes mortal existence as ‘‘ﬂeeting,’’ but he certainly did not intend that
mortals exist only for an instant. One can discern at least two distinct uses
of the word ‘‘ﬂeeting’’ in the early modern period. The more familiar one is
that of ‘‘short duration’’ implying a brief or only instantaneous existence.
But the word ‘‘ﬂeeting’’ also implies instability and relative changeableness,
which is not quite the same thing as being of instantaneously short duration.
The difference matters.
When Berkeley refers to ideas as ﬂeeting, he is referring not merely to
individual ideas but to ideas as a part of a coherent order or sequence. In so
doing he is able to reconcile his claim that God’s ideas are in a sense eternal
with the claim, reiterated by him, that ideas are ﬂeeting and changeable
(ﬂeeting in the sense, as we have just seen, of changing with respect to the
rest of the order of ideas; thus, to repeat, to say that ideas are ﬂeeting is not
to say much about ideas but only about our relation as ﬁnite minds to an
order of ideas).40
There are four arguments I want to advance to defend the claim that
ideas need not be intrinsically ﬂeeting and as inconstant as one might at ﬁrst
glance believe. The ﬁrst concerns contemporary usage. Berkeley’s contem-
poraries all use the language of ﬂeeting ideas in ways that reveal that the
claim is not about the metaphysical nature of ideas at all. Second, I advance
a parity of reasoning argument. A critique that Berkeley uses against materi-
alism would apply with equal force against his own views, unless his attribu-
tions of ﬂeetingness do not imply that ideas are literally instantaneous
existences. Third, there are passages where Berkeley appears to say that ideas
are not equally ﬂeeting, suggesting a more nuanced view. Finally, an analysis
of parts of the Siris strongly suggests that Berkeley’s claims about ﬂeeting-
ness apply to the sequence of ideas and not the ideas themselves.
7.5.2 The Argument from Contemporaries
When discussing the metaphysical nature of ideas, the natural starting posi-
tion most of the early moderns adopted was that of Plato; his ideas exist as
eternal realities. Hence to deny Plato’s claim one might reasonably say that
ideas are ﬂeeting and transitory. After all, a common appeal to our ordinary
sensory experience reveals a torrent of new and changing sensory ideas.
40. We should expect this result, since Berkeley independently holds that our concept of time
is constructed out of the succession of changing, distinct ideas. Thus to say that an idea is ﬂeeting
in a temporal sense conﬂicts with his theory of time.

212
idea and ontology
Leibniz argues against Malebranche in exactly this way, asserting the exis-
tence of ‘‘ﬂeeting modiﬁcations of our souls’’ rather than ‘‘external ideas’’
that are ‘‘external realities’’ (PE, 266, 267). There is no implication that these
modiﬁcations must be instantaneous existences; the use is intended to pro-
vide a contrast to Platonic (and hence Malebranchian) immutable ideas.
Locke, however, most clearly demonstrates that the attribution of ‘‘ﬂeet-
ing’’ to ideas does not necessarily entail that ideas are nothing but quickly
fading entities. More importantly, Berkeley’s own account resembles the
larger part of Locke’s, especially when it comes to the concepts of duration
and time. Time, Locke opines, is only understood through the idea of dura-
tion, which is derived from our noticing that ‘‘there is a train of Ideas, which
constantly succeed one another in [the] Understanding’’ (ECHU II.14.3).
Berkeley similarly argues that our concept of time is derived only from the
succession of ideas we perceive (PHK 98). Yet from this claim Locke does
not infer that ideas must have uniformly brief existences. Instead, Locke ﬁrst
considers a thought experiment where a person perceives steadfastly only
one idea, concluding that if such were possible, the person would have no
sense of time. He then considers a case he believes is conﬁrmed in actual
experience—one in which a person ﬁxes on an idea while other ideas pass
in succession without notice (ECHU II.14.3). Ideas must change to give the
impression of time, indicating that some ideas might be relatively more ﬁxed
than others. Ideas need not all be ﬂeeting in the ontological sense.
To make matters more clear, Locke even deﬁnes ‘‘instant’’ as ‘‘that which
takes up the time of only one Idea in our Minds’’ (ECHU II.14.10). An instant
is thus effectively associated not with the idea itself but with the change
in an idea. Until the idea gives way to another, there is no sense of time.
Consequently, just as Berkeley suggests, an instant for one person might
well appear as several instants to another, again suggesting that the ﬂeet-
ingness of ideas is a feature of the order and succession of them and not
something intrinsic. When Locke writes in his ‘‘Remarks upon Some Books
of Mr. Norris’’ that ‘‘ideas are so ﬂeeting,’’ he almost immediately clariﬁes
the claim in the same paragraph when he admits that an individual idea
might persist in cases where sensory objects are present to the sensory or-
gans (1812, 10:17.256). Locke and Berkeley are remarkably consistent with
respect to this feature of ideas.
Other examinations reveal a similar story. Ideas are continually referred
to as ‘‘ﬂeeting,’’ ‘‘transitory,’’ and so on but equally consistently only in
reference to their succession and ordering. Since Berkeley takes many of his
cues from Locke and other early modern ﬁgures, it is plausible to suppose

divine ideas
213
in the absence of countervailing evidence that his use of such language also
conforms to those of his peers. The remaining three considerations I take to
remove any serious doubt that Berkeley had a nonstandard conception of
these terms in mind. Where he departs from early modern usage Berkeley is
typically quite clear about it.
7.5.3 The Parity of Reasoning Argument
In the Three Dialogues Berkeley has Philonous argue that the supposition of
a material substratum does not make sense because it is not possible to have
an idea, which is ﬂeeting and changeable, of a permanent and unchanging
substance.
philonous: How then is it possible, that things perpetually ﬂeeting and
variable as our ideas, should be copies or images of any thing ﬁxed
and constant? Or in other words, since all sensible qualities, as size,
ﬁgure, colour, &c. that is, our ideas are continually changing upon
every alteration in the distance, medium, or instruments of sensation;
how can any determinate material objects be properly represented or
painted forth by several distinct things, each of which is so different
from and unlike the rest? Or if you say it resembles some one only of
our ideas, how shall we be able to distinguish the true copy from all
the false ones? (205–6)
On one level Berkeley is perfectly consistent in employing the likeness prin-
ciple here, since he readily admits that we do not have ideas of mental sub-
stances either. The problem, however, is that this same argument can be
used against his claim that there is an eternal archetypal order. If an idea
can only copy or represent something to which it is like in kind, and ideas
cannot represent material things because material objects are constant when
ideas are not, then ideas cannot represent or copy eternal, divine ideas ei-
ther. We might simply attribute confusion to Berkeley here, or perhaps sup-
pose that he missed this particular tension. But I prefer to contend that
Berkeley’s reference to the eternality of archetypes is a reference to the eter-
nality of the archetypal order.41 The order and arrangement of the divine
41. Recall that my position is that Berkeley has a theory of divine ideas that are not themselves
archetypes with corresponding ectypes. A theory of archetypes will be a theory of the order of
ideas or of sets of ideas. Daniel Flage has ably argued for an archetypal theory like this already
(2001).

214
idea and ontology
ideas is constant and eternal even if the individual ideas are not. Note that
the Three Dialogues passage where Berkeley speaks of eternality is most natu-
rally read as a claim about the order or sequence of ideas and not about the
ideas individually. ‘‘[D]o I not acknowledge a twofold state of things, the
one ectypal or natural, the other archetypal and eternal? The former was
created in time; the latter existed from everlasting in the mind of God’’ (254;
see PHK 30–33). The ‘‘archetypal and eternal’’ reference is to the state of
things and not to the individual ideas.
In order to free Berkeley from what is otherwise an easily recognizable
error, I submit that his attribution of ﬂeetingness is best read as he techni-
cally wrote it. We cannot have ideas of substances because substances do not
form changing sequences like ideas do (not to mention the fact that ideas
are passive and substances are not). Similarly, we cannot, strictly speaking,
have ideas of archetypes either.42 In essence, Berkeley’s objection is that no
sequence of ideas can represent a substance since by hypothesis we can only
know that there is a sequence if there are changes within that ordering. Since
no changes occur during the existence of a substance, no collection of ideas
can possibly represent it. No individual idea can represent a substance with-
out the idea being a substance, unless we want to violate the likeness prin-
ciple.
7.5.4 Because Berkeley Says So
The third reason for thinking that ideas are not all equally ﬂeeting by nature
is that Berkeley says that they are not. The ideas of sense we as ﬁnite minds
have are, of course, ﬂeeting and changeable, but they are not nearly as ﬂeet-
ing as other ideas we have.
philonous: But on the other hand, it is very conceivable that they [ideas]
should exist in, and be produced by, a spirit; since this is no more
than I daily experience in myself, inasmuch as I perceive numberless
ideas; and by an act of my Will can form a great variety of them, and
raise them up in my imagination: though it must be confessed, these
creatures of the fancy are not altogether so distinct, so strong, vivid,
and permanent, as those perceived by my senses, which latter are
called real things. From all which I conclude, there is a mind which
affects me every moment with all the sensible impressions I perceive. And
42. Flage concludes precisely this same point (2001, 7).

divine ideas
215
from the variety, order, and manner of these, I conclude the Author
of them to be wise, powerful, and good, beyond comprehension. Mark it
well; I do not say, I see things by perceiving that which represents
them in the intelligible substance of God. This I do not understand;
but I say, the things by me perceived are known by the understanding,
and produced by the will, of an inﬁnite spirit. And is not all this most
plain and evident? Is there any more in it, than what a little observa-
tion of our own minds, and that which passes in them not only en-
ableth us to conceive, but also obligeth us to acknowledge? (3D, 215,
bold emphasis mine)
Berkeley clearly has a distinction in mind between the relative permanence
of sensory ideas and those of the imagination. Ideas are ﬂeeting for Berkeley
because they are constantly changing before our mind. We might extrapolate
from this passage to speculate that references to ﬂeeting ideas are references
to the sequence or order of ideas. The above passage can then be reasonably
read as indicating that ideas of imagination tend to be unstable, fragmented,
and hence ﬂeeting and changeable (although I freely grant this requires
reading a bit into the text). The ideas of sense we have change as we experi-
ence the world as a rapid sequence of sensory contents, but this is nonethe-
less more ‘‘permanent’’ because the order of the ideas we perceive is neither
fragmented nor unstable but instead regular and predictable. Furthermore,
as Locke also notes, a sensory idea can be maintained in the awareness
longer when the putative external object is thought to be before us. My
thesis also has the advantage of allowing (but not requiring) Berkeley to
defend the reasonably commonsense claim that when we stare ﬁxedly at a
sensory object, we are seeing the ‘‘same thing’’ (numerically and qualita-
tively) the whole time. I can ﬁnd no other consistent and plausible way to
defend the coherence of his claims given his assertions about the ﬂeeting
nature of ideas.
7.5.5 The Siris Argument
A ﬁnal consideration helps to conﬁrm my hypothesis. In the Siris, Berkeley
attempts to ground his own immaterialism in the history of ancient philoso-
phy. He describes what he means by the changeable and ﬂeeting nature of
ideas by aligning himself with those ancients (presumably Heraclitus) who
characterized reality as ‘‘ﬂowing.’’ He then sets up a distinction between
individual acts of sensation and the intelligible whole.

216
idea and ontology
In effect, if we mean by things the sensible objects, these, it is evi-
dent, are always ﬂowing; but if we mean things purely intelligible,
then we may say on the other hand, with equal truth, that they are
immovable and unchangeable. So that those who thought the
Whole, or {τ παˆυ}, to be {στ	ς}, a ﬁxed or permanent One,
seem to have understood the Whole of real beings, which in their
sense was only the intellectual world, not allowing reality of being
to things not permanent. (S 349)
The distinction being drawn is between individual parts of reality and the
entire order of nature. Individual sensible things, ideas, are ﬂeeting and
changing because the order of nature expresses a dynamic principle. But
that principle, the order of nature, is itself an unchanging and permanent
whole. This reading captures quite well what Berkeley appears to invoke in
his discussions of divine ideas. The individual divine ideas, like all ideas, are
changing. But the order of divine ideas is itself an eternal and immutable
structure. Thus Berkeley can consistently hold that God’s ideas—as an or-
dering—are eternal even if the individual ideas are relatively ﬂeeting with
respect to ﬁnite minds.
Assuming that these four considerations are individually or collectively
compelling, one might still ask why ideas were thought to be ‘‘ﬂeeting,
indeed, and changeable.’’ When Berkeley says that ideas are ﬂeeting and
transient, he means nothing more than that ideas are always found by
experience to be in constantly changing sequences or orderings. The early
moderns, including Berkeley, provide no argument for that claim (that
ideas are ﬂeeting) because they all equally thought the claim sufﬁciently
obvious to not warrant defense. Of course the ideas and impressions we
have vary constantly. No sense modality gives us any indication otherwise.
Furthermore, ideas must be a part of a ﬂeeting order or sequence to pro-
vide us ﬁnite mortals with an understanding of duration and time. With-
out these alterations we would have no sense of change or growth. Our
knowledge of the world hinges on this metaphysical truth. In other words,
it was just obvious.
As a result, when Berkeley discusses the nature of divine ideas and calls
them ‘‘eternal,’’ there is no problem or inconsistency with his assertion
about the ﬂeetingness of ideas. God’s ideas constitute an eternal and atemp-
oral order. Inside of that order the individual ideas may appear to us to be
ﬂeeting and transient, but that is because God constructed the sequence to

divine ideas
217
appear that way. My solution to this apparent worry, hopefully like my gen-
eral analysis concerning Berkeley’s theory of ideas, might not be exciting or
deeply illuminating, but I think it gets Berkeley right in the way we want to
get Berkeley right: it preserves the quality of his philosophy at the same time
as it preserves the historical integrity of the texts.

8
abstraction and heterogeneity
Given that we have a rough ﬁx on how Berkeley treated ideas and of the
signiﬁcant philosophical beneﬁt this reading provides to our understanding
of Berkeley’s theory of divine ideas, we are now in a position to take note of
other important developments in the ontology of ideas as they culminate in
Berkeley. If I am right that Berkeley treats ideas as individual quasi sub-
stances, then we ought to expect some additional ‘‘fallout’’ from that view.
That is, my interpretation should make a difference more broadly in his
philosophical system given the centrality of ideas within it. Indeed it does.
Here I highlight two additional areas where his ontology of ideas impacts
his thinking. The ﬁrst concerns abstraction, which I will consider initially,
and the second his odd belief in the heterogeneity of ideas (best captured by
his claim that we do not see the numerically same objects which we touch).
I want to emphasize again that it is not my intent to defend Berkeley’s views
on abstraction and heterogeneity but rather to provide a more compelling
explanation than has hithertofore been offered for why he endorsed such
unusual, radical claims. If it also turns out that Berkeley’s positions are also
more philosophically respectable, so much the better.
8.1 Abstract Ideas
Berkeley thinks ordinary folk make a serious mistake when they unreﬂec-
tively suppose that commonsense material objects exist independently of
their being perceived and understood. He even diagnoses the error: ‘‘If we
thoroughly examine this tenet, it will, perhaps, be found at bottom to de-
pend on the doctrine of abstract ideas. For can there be a nicer strain of
abstraction than to distinguish the existence of sensible objects from their

abstraction and heterogeneity
219
being perceived, so as to conceive them existing unperceived?’’ (PHK 5).
Berkeley takes this issue to be of such importance that he devotes nearly the
entire introduction of the Principles and considerable space elsewhere to
attacking abstract ideas.
The topic of abstraction is relevant to my argument for two primary
reasons. First, as I endeavor to demonstrate, at least part of what drives
Berkeley to reject the conceivability of abstract ideas is his conception of
ideas generally as quasi-substantial things. I will out of necessity need to
rehash some well-worn ground about the debate between Berkeley and
Locke, but my purpose in so doing is to highlight how Berkeley’s thinking
about ideas inﬂuences his philosophical position on abstraction. Second,
what Berkeley has to say about abstract ideas is relevant to the more impor-
tant discussion of heterogeneity. As a result, we need to be clear about why
Berkeley rejects abstract ideas before we can fully understand why he also
thinks that ideas are radically heterogeneous. As a ﬁnal aside, one might
argue that any serious treatment of ideas in Berkeley cannot omit reference
to abstraction.1 I am not certain that the supposition is correct, but those
who hold that opinion will not be disappointed here.
8.2 Kinds of Abstraction
Various commentators have identiﬁed as many as four different kinds of
abstract ideas in Berkeley. Most scholars, following an inﬂuential article by
E. J. Craig (1968, 425–29), identify three: (1) single quality abstract ideas,
where the idea is an individual property separated from its particularities,
(2) common quality abstract ideas, where one property seen in many in-
stances is isolated and attended to selectively (determinables, such as color
in general), and (3) full representation abstract ideas, where the idea some-
how manages to contain the content of every possible instance of a selected
property.2 To these three initial types, George Pappas adds a fourth, namely
(4) highly generalized ideas of fundamental concepts, like being or existence
(2000, 44). My aim here is not to provide a comprehensive analysis of the
1. George Pappas, for instance, argues at book length that Berkeley’s attack on abstraction is
crucial to understanding the esse is percipi principle and the rest of Berkeley’s metaphysics (2000,
esp. ch. 2). The arguments of this chapter do not directly engage or contest Pappas’s core claims,
as the centrality of abstraction is of less importance to this study than the impact of Berkeley’s
ontology of ideas on his abstraction doctrine.
2. Pappas is more speciﬁc, arguing that type 3 abstract ideas are general ideas of bodies rather
than qualities (2000, 43).

220
idea and ontology
abstraction doctrine in Berkeley. In fact, although I believe that my analysis
has wider application, I will restrict myself primarily to one relatively small
piece of the puzzle: Berkeley’s attack against what most commentators call
the ‘‘separation’’ model of abstraction found in Locke. The goal is to dem-
onstrate that Berkeley’s ontological approach to his theory of ideas—and
the unique particulars of his theory as established in chapters 6 and 7—
provides some insight into his attack against abstraction. I contend that
Berkeley’s conviction that abstract ideas are impossible in large part ﬂows
directly from his understanding of the ontological nature of ideas.
Achieving clarity with respect to the abstraction doctrine requires that we
answer not one but two questions. First, what are abstract ideas supposed to
do? Then, exactly what are they, that is, what is their nature? Given that
Berkeley most explicitly attacks Locke’s version(s) of abstraction, we may
safely take Locke’s views on the matter as a starting point. Abstract ideas,
ﬁrst and foremost, are entities that play a key role in Locke’s semantic the-
ory. Abstract ideas are supposed to reveal how a single word can refer to
and denote a large and diverse number of individuals. Semantic theories
need to be able to explain the function of general words and how they get
their meanings. Abstract ideas provide that explanation.
The Mind makes the particular Ideas, received from particular Ob-
jects, to become general; which is done by considering them as they
are in the Mind such Appearances, separate from all other Exis-
tences, and the circumstances of real Existence, as Time, Place, or
any other concomitant Ideas. This is called abstraction, whereby
Ideas taken from particular Beings, become general Representatives
of all of the same kind; and their Names general Names, applicable
to whatever exists conformable to such abstract Ideas. (ECHU
II.11.9)
We have, then, a particular idea that serves as the representative of a large
number of things of that same kind. The idea is of an unusual sort, however,
since one must separate from the idea all the ‘‘circumstances’’ in which one
ﬁnds it. As it turns out, the process involves more than just this stripping of
circumstances; it also involves the deliberate omission of detail.
There is nothing more evident, than that the Ideas of the Persons
Children converse with (to instance them alone), are like the Per-
sons themselves, only particular. . . . The Names they ﬁrst give to

abstraction and heterogeneity
221
[their nurse and mother] are conﬁned to those Individuals; and the
Names of Nurse and Mamma, the Child uses, determine themselves
to those Persons. Afterwards . . . they frame an Idea, which they
ﬁnd those many Particulars do partake in; and to that they give,
with others, the name Man, for Example. And thus they come to
have a general Name, and a general Idea. Wherein they make noth-
ing new, but only leave out of the complex Idea they had of Peter
and James, Mary and Jane, that which is peculiar to each, and retain
only what is common to them all. (ECHU III.3.7)
So now we have a procedure for forming abstract ideas. We omit those
details that are not shared by all of that kind. That is, we leave out ‘‘the
shape, and some other Properties signiﬁed by the name Man, . . . retaining
only a Body, with Life, Sense, and spontaneous Motion, comprehended
under the Name Animal’’ (ECHU III.3.8). One point seems clear: Locke
thinks of general words as being like proper names that refer to particular
abstract ideas. One would use the word ‘‘George’’ to name a particular per-
son. Similarly, one uses the word ‘‘animal’’ to name a particular idea, an
abstract entity (Warnock 1982, 72–73).3 Locke posits the existence of abstract
ideas as the referents of general words. As a result, abstract ideas function as
the bearers of indeterminate (nonparticular) content.
There is another perspective from which to view Locke’s theory and from
which to judge the dispute between Locke and Berkeley. Locke’s abstract
ideas function in analogous ways to Aristotle’s secondary substances. Recall-
ing our early discussion of Aristotle on substance (section 1.1), primary sub-
stances are particulars that are predicable of nothing, and all else is said of,
or is ‘‘in,’’ them. Secondary substances, however, are particular substances
that are also predicable of other things. The clearest case of a secondary
substance is a genus predicable of a species. So we say of a dog that it is an
animal (predicating animal of dog). This theory makes the species dog a
(second-rate) substance, because things are said of it, one key marker for a
substance. Nonetheless, we may also predicate dog of particular canines. To
make room for these kinds of things, Aristotle classiﬁed species as ‘‘second-
ary’’ substances. They function like things but are not substances per se.
Now consider Lockean abstract ideas. Ideas that are predicable of other ideas
are abstract. Take the case of a triangle. The idea of a particular triangle is a
substance. It refers to something else but is ‘‘said of’’ nothing else. Triangu-
3. See Bennett 1971, 22–25.

222
idea and ontology
larity (the abstract idea of a triangle) is, however, said of many other ideas;
namely, those particular ideas that are also of triangles. We do say of the
idea of a scalene triangle that it nonetheless is an idea of a triangle. As a
result, we might think of Locke as treating abstract ideas as rather like sec-
ondary substances. Additionally, it lends weight to my earlier assertion that
Locke is under some pressure to think of ideas as substantial beings.4
Berkeley, no matter how one interprets him, seems reasonably clear
about Locke’s doctrine; he simply disagrees with it. His own gloss of Locke’s
separation account is reasonable and accurate.
It is agreed on all hands, that the qualities or modes of things do
never really exist each of them apart by itself, and separated from
all others, but are mixed, as it were, and blended together, several
in the same object. But we are told, the mind being able to consider
each quality singly, or abstracted from those other qualities with
which it is united, does by that means frame to itself abstract ideas.
For example, there is perceived by sight an object extended, col-
oured, and moved: this mixed or compound idea the mind resolv-
ing into its simple, constituent parts, and viewing each by itself,
exclusive of the rest, does frame the abstract ideas of extension,
colour, and motion. Not that it is possible for colour or motion to
exist without extension: but only that the mind can frame to itself
by abstraction the idea of colour exclusive of extension, and of mo-
tion exclusive of both colour and extension. (IPHK 7)
At another point in the introduction to the Principles Berkeley even uses
Locke’s own example of abstracting ‘‘man’’ and ‘‘animal’’ to ﬂesh out the
position (IPHK 9). Just like we can say of a man that it is an animal exclusive
of its other properties, so we can say of an isosceles triangle that it is a
triangle, without reference to the length of sides, its color, and so forth. We
can, as a result, see that Berkeley and Locke are genuinely locking horns, as
it were, on the same issue.
And what of the nature of abstract ideas? With respect to at least those
abstract ideas formed by separation (admitting but bracketing other types),
we already know that these abstract ideas, like ideas generally, are particular
entities formed through a careful process of detail omission.5 More than
4. See chapter 4.
5. There is some disagreement among scholars as to exactly what Locke meant by abstract
ideas, perhaps owing to some obscurity in the details of Locke’s expression. Although I am aware
of rival accounts of Locke (including, e.g., those that invoke selective attention models), in this

abstraction and heterogeneity
223
this, as it turns out, we do not need to know. The core of Berkeley’s attack
rests on the claim that abstract ideas must be particular entities, as Locke
grants. So, although Berkeley freely admits that he understands the role ab-
stract ideas are meant to play in Locke’s semantic theory, he denies there
can exist any such thing to ﬁll that role. Understanding his rejection of
abstract ideas depends on recognizing what Berkeley thought abstract ideas
to be.
8.3 Berkeley’s Attack
Berkeley opposes abstraction because he thinks the doctrine postulates the
existence of impossible entities. A ﬁrst rough pass at Berkeley’s reasoning is
as follows. All ideas (abstract or otherwise) are particular, determinate enti-
ties. Representation requires resemblance. Therefore abstract ideas must
represent through resemblance as well. And what is being represented, ac-
cording to (Berkeley’s) Locke, by (for example) the abstract idea of a trian-
gle? Something that is indeterminate with respect to its particular shape. Yet
there cannot be indeterminate things, triangles that have no particular shape.
As a result, abstract ideas represent impossible things. Since one cannot
represent an impossible thing, abstract ideas cannot exist. Strictly speaking,
of course, Berkeley does not think ideas represent a material world. Instead,
he takes ideas to be the things we immediately perceive. The story remains
the same. Because Berkeley thinks of ideas as individual quasi substances
‘‘external’’ to the mind, they must be fully determinate with respect to all of
their properties (as all material things would be, if they existed). Locke can-
not simultaneously assert that abstract ideas are both particular and indeter-
minate if they are robust things. Given this rough overview as a guide, let us
turn and carefully examine the textual evidence to reassure ourselves that
this picture is the right one. My interpretation is rather mainstream in most
respects, although it importantly diverges from some readings in its empha-
sis on the reasons why Berkeley rejected abstraction.
For our purposes, Berkeley identiﬁes two broad kinds of abstraction in
the Principles.6 The ﬁrst he ﬁnds unproblematic. ‘‘I do not deny absolutely
discussion I am primarily concerned with what Berkeley took the abstraction doctrine to be (and
thence why he opposed it) and not with the technical merits of Locke’s alleged actual position.
6. I am not seeking to deny that there are other distinctions (including Pappas’s four types).
I am only highlighting a new distinction among ideas relevant to my contention that the ontic
nature of ideas generally is germane to his criticism of abstraction. See Pappas 2000, 40–44.

224
idea and ontology
there are general ideas, but only that there are any abstract general ideas’’
(IPHK 12). A general idea is one that, although fully particular and determi-
nate, is made to be a sign of all ideas similar to it in some respect. The idea
is not a sign of some abstract entity but rather a sign directly for all the ideas
of that kind that can actually exist (IPHK 12). The second kind of abstraction
is the one he ﬁnds objectionable. Abstract ideas in this sense are ideas that
represent indeterminate particulars. Even in his description of his positive
view of how general words get meaning we can detect the difﬁculty Berkeley
ﬁnds with abstraction: he does not think abstract ideas could possibly exist.
As a result Berkeley advances a broad argument against abstract ideas.
(1) Whatever is impossible is inconceivable.
(2) Abstract ideas are impossible.
(3) Hence abstract ideas are inconceivable.7
The ﬁrst premise appears explicitly in Berkeley’s writings several times. In
the ﬁrst draft of the introduction to the Principles he notes: ‘‘It is, I think, a
receiv’d Axiom that an Impossibility cannot be conceiv’d’’ (MI, 75). Simi-
larly, in the published version of the introduction he writes: ‘‘But I deny
that I can abstract one from another, or conceive separately, those qualities
which it is impossible should exist so separated’’ (IPHK 10). Lastly, consider
Principles 5, where Berkeley makes the same claim in a slightly different way.
‘‘So far I will not deny I can abstract, if that may properly be called abstrac-
tion, which extends only to the conceiving separately such objects, as it is
possible may really exist or be actually perceived asunder. But my conceiving
or imagining power does not extend beyond the possibility of real existence
or perception.’’ Here we are told that what may be conceived depends on
what is actually (logically) possible, and then the negative point is reiterated.
Recall that for ideas, their esse is percipi, so features about perception directly
reﬂect features about fundamental reality. Thus when Berkeley says that our
power to conceive does not extend beyond what may be perceived, he means
if two ideas are inconsistent, then one cannot conceive them together.
Although I ﬁnd that Berkeley clearly endorsed this premise as true, I
produce this evidence because not everyone agrees that the conditional here
works this way. Willis Doney in particular claims that Berkeley argues from
inconceivability to impossibility, reversing the order of explanation, citing
7. See Winkler 1989, 33–34. Winkler generally reads Berkeley as I do here, although his expla-
nation of why Berkeley takes abstract ideas to be impossible differs somewhat (especially in
emphasis) from my own.

abstraction and heterogeneity
225
section 10 of the introduction as evidence (1983, 295–307).8 Doney carefully
notes two interesting features of Berkeley’s attack. First, in his own words,
Berkeley’s stated target seems to be the claim that the mind has the power
to frame abstract ideas and not that abstract ideas are straightforwardly im-
possible. ‘‘And that is the opinion that the mind hath a power of framing
abstract ideas or notions of things’’ (IPHK 6). Second, section 10 does not
really establish that abstract ideas are impossible, and so read my way it is
allegedly difﬁcult to make proper sense of what Berkeley thinks he is doing.
If Berkeley doesn’t assert the second premise (that abstract ideas are impos-
sible), what would be the point of his arguing that whatever is impossible is
inconceivable? Furthermore, the ﬁrst (and starkest) example supporting my
position was eliminated from the published version of the introduction, and
one might reasonably take this as evidence that Berkeley rejected that line of
reasoning.
The preponderance of the evidence does not support Doney. Instead, I
ﬁnd that I can admit most of the points he thinks support his view without
altering my own. First, Doney’s claim that Berkeley’s target is powers of the
mind and not the metaphysics of ideas strikes me as misleading. Berkeley
intends to explain why the doctrine of abstract ideas is absurd. Why is it
that those who think they can frame abstract ideas are in fact confused? The
answer is because (as we discover) they are attempting to frame ideas of
impossible entities. If we look back on his descriptions of how abstraction
allegedly works for Locke, we ﬁnd that abstract ideas are formed on the basis
of the observed qualities of things. We move from perceiving traits to form-
ing ideas (IPHK 8). To say that Berkeley wants to discover whether humans
have this mysterious faculty of abstracting does not deny my reading of what
he is doing. That we do not possess this faculty is the conclusion of his argu-
ment. As a result, we should not be surprised that he states this as his goal.
Furthermore, Doney relies on a controversial interpretation of which he
himself is aware. His contention that section 10 is meant to state a consid-
ered conclusion is difﬁcult to accept. When Berkeley writes, ‘‘But I deny that
I can abstract one from another, or conceive separately, those qualities
which it is impossible should exist so separated,’’ Doney reads this as indi-
cating that ‘‘it follows that we cannot know that [two qualities] cannot exist
apart without knowing that [each quality] cannot be conceived apart’’ (1983,
299). Doney’s case relies on the dubious assumption that inconceivability
8. Doney explicitly attacks Pitcher and E. J. Craig, both of whom defend interpretations that
are consonant with mine. See Pitcher 1977, esp. 62–70, and Craig 1968, 425–37.

226
idea and ontology
entails impossibility. Even if we accept this claim as true, however, it does
not help his cause. Berkeley could easily hold that, as a matter of what we
know, conceivability is the only guide to possibility without relinquishing
the claim that what explains why we cannot conceive of certain sorts of
things depends on whether those things are metaphysically possible.
As for Doney’s second claim that my interpretation does not make sense
of the passage, observe that Berkeley does try to indicate why abstract things
are impossible. He does not do so explicitly in section 10 because he has not
ﬁnished his discussion of the topic; he continues examining the question for
another eight sections and picks it up again later in the Principles. Why
Berkeley takes abstract things (ideas) to be impossible will occupy us next.
For the moment, I think it sufﬁcient to rely on the texts as a whole to
support my contention that Berkeley argues from impossibility to incon-
ceivability, at least insofar as he wishes to explain why people cannot have
genuine Lockean abstract ideas.
So now let us turn to the second premise: abstract ideas are impossible.
This claim is certainly the more controversial premise, but Berkeley thinks
his task an easy one. In a note to himself in the Philosophical Commentaries,
Berkeley writes about bringing the ‘‘killing blow’’ against Locke’s theory of
abstraction (PC 687). Section 125 of the New Theory of Vision repeats his
forceful complaint against Locke. He attacks abstraction in most of his
major philosophical works, starting with his earliest works on vision, and in
every case where he does so one is struck by the almost casual certainty that
bursts forth from his analyses. Berkeley thinks he has fastened on a clear
inconsistency.
The most offensive passage in Locke to Berkeley’s mind is the now fa-
mous ‘‘triangle passage.’’ Locke writes: ‘‘For example, Does it not require
some pains and skill to form the general Idea of a Triangle, (which is yet
none of the most abstract, comprehensive, and difﬁcult,) for it must be
neither Oblique, nor Rectangle, neither Equilateral, Equicrural, nor Sca-
lenon; but all and none of these at once. In effect, it is something imperfect,
that cannot exist; an Idea wherein some parts of several different and incon-
sistent Ideas are put together’’ (ECHU IV.7.9).9 What is wrong with this
passage? Berkeley emphasizes in his quotations of Locke (especially section
13 of the introduction to the Principles) the phrase ‘‘all and none,’’ suggest-
ing that Lockean abstract ideas are impossible because they describe entities
that violate the law of excluded middle (Bennett 1971, 38). A triangle can be
9. Berkeley quotes this passage in NTV 125 and again in IPHK 13.

abstraction and heterogeneity
227
either scalenon, equicrural, or right but not all of them at once. That much
certainly seems right. Particular things cannot have more than one quality
from a set of mutually exclusive ones. We might call this principle the law
of saturation. An entity can only possess one of a set of incompatible proper-
ties. Yet why would Berkeley think that Locke’s abstraction doctrine violates
this claim? A reasonable and charitable reading of Locke would hold that
the abstract idea of a triangle is simply silent on the issue of the speciﬁc
properties of its interior angles and the lengths of its sides (emphasizing the
so-called selective attention model of Locke’s theory of abstraction). In that
case, an abstract idea would be one that could represent any of these kinds
of speciﬁc triangles but that in fact is itself none of them.
Pitcher urges that Berkeley’s imagism is to blame for the attack on ab-
stract ideas. He ascribes the following principle to Berkeley:
(a) If an idea of x lacks the representation of some feature F, it
must therefore be the idea of x that lacks F. (1977, 70)
The reason Berkeley believes (a) is presumably that all ideas are images. The
image of something must reﬂect what it is an image of, and therefore one
might reasonably hold that if an image of a dog failed to represent its color,
then the dog itself must also fail to have any color. Yet as even Pitcher notes,
(a) is simply not true for images. I might conjure an image of Lassie to
myself that omits the characteristic color scheme of the collie without sup-
posing that Lassie herself has no particular coloration. We conjure images
in exactly this way all the time. When I think on the image of the face of the
president I do so without representing his eye color, but this does not mean
that the president has no eye color.10 It is, perhaps, doubtful that most im-
ages even can be completely determinate; we simply lack the power as ﬁnite
minds to form images that are perfectly detailed.
There is some evidence that Berkeley did take all sensible ideas to be
images. In the draft introduction he writes: ‘‘Any Name may be used indif-
ferently for the Sign of any Idea, or any number of Ideas, it not being deter-
min’d by any likeness to represent one more than another. But it is not so
with Ideas in respect of Things, of which they are suppos’d to be the Cop-
ies & Images. They are not thought to Represent them otherwise, than as
they resemble them’’ (MI, 83). Although this appears in the draft, and he
is nominally describing the views of others, Berkeley does so approvingly.
10. Warnock makes a similar point (1982, 67–68).

228
idea and ontology
Throughout his published works one can detect imagistic inﬂuences, al-
though I nonetheless maintain he adheres to a theory of divine ideas that is
somewhat at odds with a strictly imagistic theory (compare PHK 33 and 3D,
194). Pitcher’s analysis thus appears initially plausible. Yet it nonetheless
seems odd that this alone would push Berkeley to read Locke so uncharita-
bly. After all, Berkeley did in all likelihood read the whole of the Essay, and
it is manifestly uncharitable to fasten on one poorly phrased passage. As we
will see, in other places Berkeley makes it explicit that he is aware of this
other reading of Locke. If we can unearth another reason for rejecting the
triangle passage that does not depend on the particular phrasing present
therein, then we ought to seriously consider it as a superior reading of
Berkeley’s thinking. Such a reading is suggested by my contention that
Berkeley thought of ideas as quasi substances.
I do not believe Berkeley endorsed merely (a); instead, I think he believed
something stronger.
(b) Every determinable must have a determinant.
That is, Berkeley takes all ideas to be both particular and fully determinate.
For example, the determinable ‘‘color’’ must be either red, or green, or blue,
and so forth. An idea must be some speciﬁc color (to include a determinate
hue and brilliance, etc.). For Berkeley, there is no such thing as an idea that
is ‘‘silent’’ on some property. If I am right, then Berkeley has a better reason
to parade the triangle passage, since the phrase ‘‘all and none’’ is doubly
objectionable. On the one hand, no particular thing can violate the law of
saturation, but on the other, no particular thing can be indeterminate ei-
ther—possessing ‘‘none’’ of the available properties.
We have already seen that Berkeley considers ideas to be robust things. It
should therefore be no surprise that ideas cannot be silent with respect to
certain qualities, since it is metaphysically impossible for a particular thing
to exist that is indeterminate. I think Berkeley took this point to be so blind-
ingly obvious that he believed little more needed to be said on it. There is,
additionally, signiﬁcant evidence that Berkeley was focusing his attack on
the indeterminate nature of abstract ideas. Berkeley attributes the source of
the error to abuse of language, noting that even Locke thinks of abstraction
as arising partially from a desire to name things.11 Berkeley’s diagnosis is
noteworthy. ‘‘Let us therefore examine the manner wherein words have con-
11. Berkeley cites ECHU III.6.39 and ‘‘elsewhere’’ in the Essay.

abstraction and heterogeneity
229
tributed to the origin of that mistake. First then, ’tis thought that every
name hath, or ought to have, only one precise and settled signiﬁcation,
which inclines men to think there are certain abstract, determinate ideas,
which constitute the true and only immediate signiﬁcation of each general
name’’ (IPHK 18). The emphasis is original! The error is to think that ab-
stract ideas can be determinate. Why? Answer: in the descriptions of abstract
ideas, they are anything but determinate. Thus we have an inconsistency,
and not merely the inconsistency of a triangle that is both scalenon and not,
but the more general (and problematic) inconsistency of positing an idea
that is both determinate and indeterminate. We now have a stronger reason
for supposing that Locke is in trouble in the triangle passage.
More generally, Berkeley thinks—not unreasonably—that particularity
entails determinateness. If a thing (like a rock or a chair) is particular, then
it is fully determinate. If ideas are things in the same sense (and Berkeley is
not for turning things into ideas but ideas into things), then they too must
be fully determinate as all genuine particular substances are. In the intro-
duction to the Principles we can see a progression in his argument. First, he
describes the illegitimate process of abstraction as involving the creation of
ideas that determine no particular existence.
For example, the mind having observed that Peter, James, and
John, resemble each other, in certain common agreements of shape
and other qualities, leaves out of the complex or compounded idea
it has of Peter, James and any other particular man, that which is
peculiar to each, retaining only what is common to all; and so
makes an abstract idea wherein all the particulars equally partake,
abstracting entirely from and cutting off all those circumstances
and differences, which might determine it to any particular exis-
tence. (IPHK 9)
It is worth pausing to note that this process Berkeley describes just is the
more charitable reading of Locke where abstract ideas are ‘‘silent’’ about
certain qualities. Apparently Berkeley was aware of this move and rejected
abstraction anyway. The triangle passage is illustrative of another, more gen-
eral, problem than the one suggested by Locke’s perhaps unfortunate choice
of words. In the original draft version of the introduction, Berkeley goes on
to provide an example of what this process seems to require. He makes the
alleged absurdity readily transparent. ‘‘Suppose now I should ask whether
you comprehended in this your Abstract Idea of Man, the Ideas of Eyes, or

230
idea and ontology
Ears, or Nose, or Legs, or Arms, you will own it to be an odd & mutilated
Idea of Man wch is without all these. Yet it must be so to make it consistent
with the Doctrine of Abstract Ideas, there being particular Men that want,
some Arms, some Legs, others Noses etc’’ (MI, 69). Here we ﬁnd that Berke-
ley explicitly holds that the abstract idea of Man is itself a man without
limbs and other features. Ideas are always self-predicating. They are so be-
cause ideas just are the ‘‘things’’ in the world. He provides a more striking
example, also only in the ﬁrst draft, immediately afterward. ‘‘In like manner
Man by leaving out of his Idea of a Line the particular Colour & Length
comes by the Idea of a Line, which is neither black, nor white, nor red &c
nor long nor short, which he calls the Abstract idea of a Line, & which, for
ought I can see, is just Nothing. For I ask whether a Line has any more than
one particular Colour & one particular Length, wch being left out, I beseech
any one to consider what it is that remains’’ (MI, 71). The problem, as Berke-
ley sees it, is that abstract ideas posit the existence of things that are ‘‘noth-
ing.’’ There are no lines without a particular color or length and since he
later ‘‘shows’’ us that lines and bodies are nothing but sensible ideas, it
follows that there are no ideas of lines like this either. One might be worried
about why Berkeley removed these passages, but they are consistent with the
material that does make it into the published versions. Both are incorpo-
rated into the ﬁnal draft in varying ways (for example, a near facsimile of
the abstract idea of a man example ﬁnds its way into section 10 of the intro-
duction). He apparently chose to emphasize different examples (highlight-
ing, for instance, one about motion instead of the line). Interestingly, he
also chose to emphasize the inseparability of qualities when presenting his
examples. Motion, for instance, cannot be abstracted or separated from a
particular speed (fast or slow) or thing in motion. So what could this ‘‘mo-
tion’’ be if abstracted from all those things that make it particular? Berkeley’s
answer is clear: nothing. He essentially uses a different route to the same
ﬁnal conclusion, but both examples rely fundamentally on the claim that
ideas, as particular things, must be determinate. Berkeley concludes near the
end of section 10 in the introduction that ‘‘I deny that I can abstract one
from another, or conceive separately, those qualities which it is impossible
should exist so separated’’ (IPHK 10). We cannot have an idea of motion
alone, just like we cannot have an idea of a man that has no color or particu-
lar limbs, because such things do not exist. We therefore have a more reason-
able and charitable interpretation of Berkeley’s claim that abstract ideas are
impossible than the one typically ascribed to him.
Given that whatever is impossible is not conceivable, Berkeley can now

abstraction and heterogeneity
231
conclude that abstract ideas are inconceivable. People, especially those
learned men fond of words, are simply confused when they claim to make
use of Lockean abstract ideas. Ideas, even abstract ideas, are particular things
and as such must be determinate. Abstract ideas as described by Locke and
others are decidedly not determinate. Hence such things are impossible and
in turn inconceivable.
We can now go back and recast the attack on abstraction in terms of
Berkeley’s rejection of Locke’s treatment of abstract ideas as secondary sub-
stances. Any idea, if it can possibly exist, must be a genuine or primary
(quasi) substance. Abstract ideas are predicable of many other ideas without
being any of those ideas. Thus the abstract idea of a triangle is itself not
scalene nor right nor equilateral. But Berkeley believes that all ideas are fully
particular and determinate, which precludes them from being secondary
substances. Furthermore, Locke is asking the impossible when he asks us to
separate species out from their instances, since a species cannot so exist.
What is motion without a thing moved? Nothing. And what is dog without
any particular dogs? Again, nothing. To ask us to talk about them is to ask
the impossible and hence they must be inconceivable. The ready applicabil-
ity of Aristotle’s primary/secondary substance distinction to the Locke/
Berkeley debate provides an additional indication to my mind that both
ﬁgures are well within the conceptual bounds of the traditional ontology.
8.4 Berkeley’s Solution: General Ideas
If my interpretation is correct, then I must brieﬂy establish that the positive
view Berkeley endorses is consistent with my claim that his ideas are all
determinate particular quasi substances. Fortunately this is relatively easy to
do. A general idea for Berkeley is a particular one made to be the sign for a
set of similar or related ideas. As a consequence, my idea of a particular
right triangle may be used by me to represent all triangles, but in that use
the idea remains fully determined. With respect to the line example, Berke-
ley provides his own analysis.
He draws, for instance, a black line of an inch in length, this which
in itself is a particular line is nevertheless with regard to its signiﬁ-
cation general, since as it is there used, it represents all particular
lines whatsoever; for that what is demonstrated of it, is demon-
strated of all lines or, in other words, of a line in general. And as

232
idea and ontology
that particular line becomes general, by being made a sign, so the
name line which taken absolutely is particular, by being a sign is
made general. And as the former owes its generality, not to its being
the sign of an abstract or general line, but of all particular right
lines that may possibly exist, so the latter must be thought to derive
its generality from the same cause, namely, the various particular
lines which it indifferently denotes. (IPHK 12)
Berkeley allows us to use ideas in ways that might not mention or employ
certain qualities but does not allow us to employ ideas that are themselves
indeterminate. Thus he freely admits that when doing geometry we might
not mention all the qualities present. ‘‘And here it must be acknowledged
that a man may consider a ﬁgure merely as triangular, without attending to
the particular qualities of the angles, or relations of the sides. So far he may
abstract: but this will never prove, that he can frame an abstract general
inconsistent idea of a triangle’’ (IPHK 16). We may, as Berkeley indicates,
consider a ﬁgure without attending to some its qualities, but the idea itself
must nonetheless have all those qualities. The mention of Locke’s ‘‘abstract
general inconsistent idea of a triangle’’ is misleading and has encouraged
scholars to see him as being uncharitable to Locke. It is true that Berkeley is
not one to pass by an easy shot that he thinks might be rhetorically persua-
sive. Nonetheless, he has a deeper point. How we use ideas might tempt us
into thinking that they are incomplete or indeterminate, but we know that
ideas must be fully determinate.
We now have a more complete picture of the nature of abstraction.
Berkeley’s conviction stems from his prior commitment to the substantial
nature of ideas. This commitment explains why he thinks abstract ideas are
impossible. Abstract ideas are indeterminate, when all ideas must be particu-
lar and hence determinate. So Locke’s claim that all ideas are particular
is inconsistent with his contention that abstract ideas are conceivable. My
interpretation also helps make better sense of Berkeley’s superﬁcially unkind
reading of Locke in the triangle passage. He does seize on an infelicitous
phrasing and exploit it for rhetorical gain, but he nevertheless offers a deeper
and perhaps accurate criticism of Locke’s general program. We ought not
read Berkeley’s attack on abstraction through the distorting lens of this one
passage when he elsewhere demonstrates sensitivity to more charitable un-
derstandings of Locke.
None of this makes Berkeley right, of course. At a minimum I hope to
have provided an additional reason for thinking that my interpretation of

abstraction and heterogeneity
233
Berkeley’s theory of ideas is correct. If my reading is accurate, then his attack
on abstraction is more comprehensible, based on his understanding that
ideas are individual quasi substances. They are particular things that must
be determinate. Still, what Berkeley has to say about abstraction underdeter-
mines what theory of ideas we should attribute to him, and so I turn to
examine in some considerable detail a ﬁnal vexing issue in Berkeley scholar-
ship: his claim that ideas are heterogeneous. If I am successful in establishing
that my interpretation makes better sense of both his attack on abstraction
and his unusual metaphysical claims about heterogeneity, then in conjunc-
tion with the previous analysis about archetypes I will have minimally estab-
lished that my thesis about Berkeley’s theory of ideas has independent
philosophical merit. In turn, this conclusion strongly suggests that Berkeley
in particular ought not be read as an anti-ontologist contributing to the
early modern tale, since all of this analysis requires that Berkeley is commit-
ted, albeit loosely, to the constraints of the traditional ontology.
8.5 Perceptual Heterogeneity
Berkeley believes that ‘‘we do not see the same object that we feel’’ (3D,
245).12 No object of one sense is identical with any object of another.13 He
makes the point boldly. ‘‘The extensions, ﬁgures, and motions perceived by
sight are speciﬁcally distinct from the ideas of touch called by the same names,
nor is there any such thing as one idea or kind of idea common to both senses’’
(NTV 127, emphasis in the original). The thesis, popularly called the hetero-
geneity thesis, is clear enough, but his reasons for supposing it to be true are
decidedly less transparent. In what follows, I explore why Berkeley felt so
conﬁdent about the truth of perceptual heterogeneity and attempt to recon-
struct some of his analysis that is not explicitly presented in order to com-
plete his account. Much of the following analysis may appear at times to be
a large digression, and I ask for the reader’s patience until I am able to tie
the narrative to the ontology of ideas. At the end, we will see that Berkeley’s
views on the nature of ideas directly contribute to his embracing the hetero-
geneity thesis.
12. The following analysis is a modiﬁed and updated version of an argument I made in a
previously published article. See Hight 2002.
13. Berkeley generally restricts himself to the claim that visible and tangible objects are dis-
tinct, and I shall limit myself to this as well, although it is sometimes important to remember
that the thesis extends to all the senses.

234
idea and ontology
Many philosophers think Berkeley’s views about distance perception
drove him to endorse heterogeneity. D. M. Armstrong reports that ‘‘he is
forced into holding such a view, because he thinks that the objects revealed
by sight are merely two-dimensional while touch alone gives us access to
ordinary three-dimensional objects’’ (1960, 35, emphasis in the original).
The argument relies on Berkeley’s prior premise that distance is never im-
mediately seen.14 Even if one can learn to represent three dimensions by
sight (as we presumably do with pictures), the content of what we immedi-
ately perceive by sight has two dimensions while the content of what we
strictly feel has three.15 Hence, we do not see and touch the ‘‘same’’ things.16
Our spatial ideas of sight and those of touch have no relations to one an-
other.
Unfortunately, Berkeley’s premise that distance is never immediately seen
does not logically entail heterogeneity. Two-dimensional properties are a
subset of three-dimensional ones, just as two-dimensional geometry is a
subset of three-dimensional geometry.17 It cannot be merely because the
dimensionalities differ that heterogeneity is true. Perhaps Armstrong meant
to be reporting Berkeley’s state of mind when he mentioned the position as
‘‘forced,’’ for he comes to a similar conclusion as I do (1960, 36–38). The
actual content of our ideas of sight and touch is irrelevant. Suppose Berkeley
underestimates the richness of what we visually perceive, such that we do
perceive distance immediately.18 The question remains whether the space
perceived by sight is numerically identical with that perceived by touch. The
contingency of the relations between the seen and the felt is the real issue.
Berkeley holds we could feel roundly when we see squarely, even if sight and
touch have similar content (see Warnock 1982, ch. 2). Thus his position that
sight is two dimensional while touch is not fails to explain his adherence to
the heterogeneity of ideas.
14. Pitcher makes a similar argument (1977, 25–28).
15. One might deny my passing assertion that the content of what we immediately perceive
by sight is two dimensional. David Berman argues in a discussion concerning disembodied sight
that ‘‘the sighted mind could have no notion of visual shape or size’’ (1999, 33). Berman’s analysis
is controversial, but in any event the point is not vital to my claim here. So long as the immediate
visual content (whatever it might be) is distinct from the content presented through touch, my
point stands.
16. ‘‘Same’’ here is purposely vague. Its meaning depends on the theory of perception one
uses.
17. By this I mean only that two-dimensional objects and properties can be represented in
three-dimensional space. Alternatively, however limited the content of what is immediately pre-
sented in vision might be, it can be represented in richer depictions of space and space-time.
18. James J. Gibson actually argues that we do perceive visual distance immediately (1976,
87).

abstraction and heterogeneity
235
Alternatively, one might think Berkeley’s strategy in the New Theory
forced him into accepting heterogeneity. After introducing the issue, but
before arguing for the thesis, he brieﬂy skirmishes with abstract ideas at
NTV 122–26. Only after disposing of abstraction does he turn and argue
seriously that the heterogeneity thesis is true. One might suppose Berkeley
is thinking along the following lines. If there were common sensibles, what
could they have in common? What intrinsic characteristic would the ideas
of sight and touch share? Abstract ideas are the only readily viable candi-
dates. If extension is a common sensible—to use Berkeley’s example—then
an idea of it must be abstractable from both our visual and tactual experi-
ences. But Berkeley is antecedently committed to denying abstract ideas.19
The only other remotely plausible candidate is a material substratum, and
he would not allow that as a live option either. Thinking he has exhausted
the alternatives, Berkeley concludes there can be nothing shared in common
between ideas of sight and touch. If we cannot abstract, then ideas cannot
share content, and hence the ideas of different modalities must be radically
distinct.
Although an interesting and reasonable conjecture about part of Berke-
ley’s thinking, this argument suffers from the same ﬂaw as the distance ac-
count. His objections to abstraction do not entail the truth of heterogeneity.
As it turns out abstraction does not depend on the truth of heterogeneity
either. If one takes the heterogeneity of ideas seriously, then one must apply
the divisions among kinds of ideas as deeply as they can go. Allowing Lock-
ean abstract ideas into Berkeley’s system does not affect the thesis. What
common element do we see and feel in the case of extension? The abstract
idea itself is not available. An abstract idea is still an idea perceived by some
sense. When I feel the length of the book and attempt to abstract from that
experience, I am abstracting from a tactual experience. I am not yet entitled
to assume that I am abstracting from a tactual-visual experience or an expe-
rience that extends beyond what I sense with that particular modality. Hence
the phrase ‘‘abstract idea of extension’’ fails to disambiguate an abstract
tangible idea of extension from an abstract visible idea of extension.
To conclude that the truth of the heterogeneity thesis is independent of
abstraction, however, we need to establish further that rejecting abstraction
is compatible with accepting the homogeneity of ideas. Showing that accept-
ing the latter does not entail accepting the former is a relatively weak claim
19. I do not assume here that his reason for denying abstract ideas is related to his conception
of ideas.

236
idea and ontology
and correspondingly easy to do. Assume that homogeneity is true. As a re-
sult, when we see and touch the extension of an object, we are accessing the
numerically same quality. We need not think abstraction is true to account
for this phenomenon. It just so happens that the idea of extension associated
with this object can be translated into two different sensory languages: a
tactual and a visual one. The idea remains particular, and it cannot be un-
derstood absent some sensory ‘‘language,’’ but it just so happens that in our
sensory lives we are multilingual. Of course this straightforwardly denies
Berkeley’s thesis, but it is entirely possible. As a result, we have no indepen-
dent reason to suppose that the rejection of abstraction in itself drove Berke-
ley to endorse heterogeneity. His views concerning the perception of
distance and abstract ideas provide no reasons for endorsing a radical divide
between kinds of ideas. Nonetheless, he thought it was true. Let us turn to
what Berkeley says and evaluate his reasons for so thinking. The New Theory
presents us with three separate arguments.20
8.6 The Molyneux Thought Experiment
In the ﬁrst argument Berkeley uses in defense of heterogeneity, he appeals
to a thought experiment ﬁrst raised by William Molyneux. ‘‘But it has been,
if I mistake not, clearly made out that a man born blind would not at ﬁrst
reception of his sight think the things he saw were of the same nature with
the objects of touch, or had anything in common with them; but that they
were a new set of ideas, perceived in a new manner, and entirely different
from all he had ever perceived before’’ (NTV 128). Part of the reason this
constitutes an initially compelling case for Berkeley is that he subscribes to
the view that the contents of the mind are self-transparent. That is, one
cannot entertain two ideas and not know whether they are identical. Thus
Berkeley thought that the subject described by Molyneux would have to
come to some deﬁnite conclusion. Either he would recognize the similarity
in the ideas or he would not. Although the case has an undeniable intuitive
appeal, as an argument it falls short. Even were such a person (‘‘Molyneux
Man’’ for short) unable properly to judge the nature of things by sight alone,
that in and of itself would not constitute proof of heterogeneity. If correct
about the divergence between the ideas of sight and touch, Berkeley needs a
20. Atherton tells us that there is a fourth, less explicit, argument concerning the perception
of motion (1990, 193). As it concerns the Molyneux Man and does not add a new line of reason-
ing, I consider it with my analysis of the Molyneux Man.

abstraction and heterogeneity
237
conceptual test that will conﬁrm his hypothesis. He needs more than the
mere fact that a Molyneux Man would not be able to recognize objects by
sight, since there might be other factors that could explain such a failure.21
Rather he needs the stronger claim that such a person would never be able
determine the matchups between the felt and the seen by sight and reason
alone. Determining the matchups by this process would require an alternate
experiment. Imagine another subject blind from birth who later acquires
her sight (‘‘Molyneux Woman’’ for short). However, at the moment sight is
restored, the person loses all tactual and kinesthetic abilities, preventing her
from using mere correlation to make tangible-visual matchups. If ideas are
heterogeneous, such a Molyneux Woman should not be able to ﬁgure out
the visible-tangible correspondences ever. I think Berkeley believes this, but
he does not in fact argue for this stronger claim.
Independently, it is hard to see how Berkeley’s original thought experi-
ment accomplishes much. If perceptual heterogeneity is true, then the con-
nections between the seen and the felt will be contingent. Thus Berkeley
needs to motivate the possibility of connections between experiences like felt
squares and visible circles, but the Molyneux case does not speak to this
issue. Pitcher remarks, ‘‘Thus, a world in which tangible squares answered
to what we, in our world, would call visible circles would be a world that is
very radically different from our actual world, and its laws would have to
be so fantastically complicated, that it is uncertain whether any coherent
description of it could possibly be formulated. It is, therefore, uncertain that
it is a possible world’’ (1977, 57). Imagining a coherent physics that conjoins
felt squares to seen circles is daunting, yet it is what Berkeley requires. The
inability of the Molyneux Man to match up his visual and tactual sensations
provides no direct evidence of the sort of radical contingency Berkeley
needs.
8.7 The Argument from Difference in Content
The second argument Berkeley advances in the New Theory comes in the
next paragraph at 129: ‘‘Secondly, light and colours are allowed by all to
21. There are several possible alternate explanations. The most compelling involves recent
advances in our understanding of how visual abilities develop. We now know that the pathways
in the brain associated with proper vision form in the early months of infancy. Individuals who
do not have sight during the ﬁrst year of life do not properly develop those pathways in the
brain. As a result, congenitally blind persons who have had their sight restored might not pass
the Molyneux test on account of a deﬁciency in the structure of the brain and not because ideas
are radically heterogeneous.

238
idea and ontology
constitute a sort or species entirely different from the ideas of touch: nor
will any man, I presume, say they can make themselves perceived by that
sense: but there is no other immediate object of sight besides light and col-
ours. It is therefore a direct consequence that there is no idea common to
both senses.’’ Essentially, Berkeley argues that ordinary people will grant
that what they strictly perceive by sight and touch are in fact distinct. He
admits that there is a ‘‘prevailing opinion’’ that by sight we perceive consid-
erably more than just light and color, but he thinks he has already proven
earlier in the New Theory that those cases are instances of mediate percep-
tion (130). Yet, again, this argument does not support Berkeley’s conclusion.
Having distinct phenomenal contents does not entail heterogeneity. Perhaps
the content of a single idea is presented differently to (has different effects
on) various senses. Berkeley is here describing heterogeneity, not explaining
why it is true. If by sight I perceive only light and color and by touch only
solidity and shape, then what prevents the idea of a triangle from affecting
my eye in one way and my tactual senses in another? The content will differ
but that alone does not guarantee the sort of radical heterogeneity Berkeley
seeks to establish.
In short, I do not think much philosophical substance lies here.22 At best
we might reconstruct the argument Armstrong uses to claim that Berkeley
is forced into accepting the heterogeneity thesis, but as we have seen that
line of reasoning fails. Most of the mileage Berkeley gets from the argument
stems from its intuitive and not its philosophical appeal.
8.8 Adding Visible and Tangible Lines
Of more interest is Berkeley’s last explicit argument. He claims that if exten-
sion in particular is common to both sight and touch, then one ought to be
able to add visible and tangible lines together. But this cannot be done;
hence ideas of visible and tangible extensions share nothing in common.
They are not the same sort of idea, despite the similarity in name. Berkeley
conﬁdently asserts this point in section 131: ‘‘A blue and a red line I can
conceive added together into one sum and making one continued line: but
to make in my thoughts one continued line of a visible and tangible line
added together is, I ﬁnd, a task far more difﬁcult, and even insurmountable:
and I leave it to the reﬂexion and experience of every particular person to
22. Pitcher seems to disagree. Compare Pitcher 1977, 53–54. I concur with Atherton that
Pitcher reads too much into this argument (Atherton 1990, 188).

abstraction and heterogeneity
239
determine for himself.’’ This is less an argument than a challenge—he thinks
no opponent can perform the task.
Armstrong provides the obvious reply when he asks ‘‘Can I not pace out
part of a distance, and then measure the remainder by the eye?’’ (1960, 56).
Margaret Atherton challenges Armstrong’s example by questioning whether
it is a genuine case of adding a tangible to a visual line (1990, 190). She
rightly points out that what he is doing is measuring a tangible distance and
estimating a visible distance. Hence Armstrong has not met the challenge,
although we have still to determine whether Berkeley is correct. Perhaps
Armstrong might reply that in fact Berkeley is estimating distance in both
cases, tactually and visually. Yet even so, it is difﬁcult to see how this sort of
estimation could rise to the challenge set by Berkeley. What reason do we
have to think that visual estimations are of a kind with tactual ones? At best
the issue remains clouded.
To add two lines in this fashion, Atherton contends one would need an
inconceivable measuring device whose units are neither visible nor tangible.
This move is meant to mirror Berkeley’s own reasoning earlier in the New
Theory. He holds that we measure distance in terms of sense modality–
speciﬁc points, his ‘‘minimum sensibles.’’ The distance between two tangible
locations is a certain number of tangible points; the distance between two
visible places is a visible line consisting of visible points. Now the problem
arises. ‘‘[B]ut if they are one tangible and the other visible, the distance
between them doth neither consist of points perceivable by sight nor by
touch, i.e. it is utterly inconceivable’’ (112).
Why is a distance measuring device that is neither visible nor tangible
inconceivable? Atherton answers, ‘‘There is no unit of measurement that
will allow you to get from a point that is visible to one that is tangible’’
(1990, 163). We might challenge her by considering some unusual olfactory
abilities. The world might be constructed such that each tangible and visible
point is associated with a particular kind of smell, thus permitting one to
measure distance by comparing the differences in smells. It seems reason-
able to suppose, then, that by smelling a point felt but not seen and then a
point seen but not felt, I could still accurately judge the distance between
them. Now this case would not bother Atherton or Berkeley, for they would
doubtless describe my measuring as being completely within the olfactory
realm. I ﬁxed one of the points visually and the other tactually, but the
distance being measured is between, as it were, two olfactory points. Olfac-
tory points presumably only provide cues to visible and tangible distances.
Atherton’s point is thus not that there cannot be a measuring device that is

240
idea and ontology
neither visible nor tangible but rather that there cannot be a measuring
device that is both visible and tangible, that would take us directly from a
tangible point to a visible one.
Yet this is precisely what is at issue! One might attribute our inability to
add visible and tangible lines to something other than their being radically
distinct. Contingent psychological limitations in humans comes to mind
(we might be able to think ‘‘in’’ only a single sense modality at a time).
Berkeley cannot expect his readers to be convinced of a conceptual truth on
the basis of an empirical result. At best our alleged inability to add visible
and tangible lines can only conﬁrm an antecedently assumed hypothesis.
Admittedly, this result is not what one would expect, and being led to recog-
nize its truth is a powerful psychological ploy. Berkeley uses this argument
not as a careful reason for accepting the heterogeneity of ideas but as persua-
sive tool to convince his lay readers. We have yet to penetrate to the heart
of what motivates Berkeley on this issue.
8.9 Heterogeneity and the Nature of Ideas
To this point we have seen that Berkeley’s explicit arguments in defense of
perceptual heterogeneity seem to amount more to intuitive appeals than
rigorous reasoning. Nonetheless I think that Berkeley understood where the
work had to be done. For perceptual heterogeneity to be true, he needs to
establish that the contents presented by ideas of different senses themselves
are not merely distinct but incommensurable. Incommensurability is im-
plied by the complete distinctness of the ideas. He clearly thinks that they
are incommensurable, but why? Pointing to differences in the intrinsic fea-
tures of presented sensory content will not validate his thesis. It generates
plausible and intuitive examples, but there should be more. There is.
In this discussion we have left unexamined an important element of per-
ception: the things that bear content, namely the ideas themselves. If ‘‘inter-
nal’’ features of content cannot explain heterogeneity, perhaps extrinsic ones
can. When discussing representation and content, Berkeley treats ideas like
robust things: quasi substances. He makes them ‘‘external’’ to the mind (see
chapters 6 and 7) and accounts for perceptual heterogeneity. If sensory ideas
are themselves quasi substances of distinct kinds, then asking someone to
add a visible line with a tangible one is analogous to asking someone to add
pain (something mental) to a cubical block (something material). The rea-
son such acts cannot be performed is attributable to the ontological nature

abstraction and heterogeneity
241
of the bearers of the content and not to either limitations of the mind or
the objective contents of ideas themselves.
In order to make my analysis plausible, I need to establish two claims.
The ﬁrst I have already done in the preceding two chapters, namely demon-
strate that Berkeley thought of ideas as quasi substances or as entities in
their own right external to (even if ontologically dependent on) the mind.
Second, I need to indicate why this view would lead him to heterogeneity
when, say, an adverbial theory of ideas would not. It is to the latter of these
tasks we now turn.
8.10 Ontology to Heterogeneity
Why does Berkeley’s conception of ideas as ‘‘external’’ (that is, as standing
in two-place relations with minds such that they are not modiﬁcations of
minds), dependent things encourage him to endorse perceptual heterogene-
ity? If my thesis is to have any explanatory power, it must be the case that
had Berkeley thought of ideas as, say, adverbial on minds, then that would
have undercut his reasons for thinking that perception is heterogeneous.
In order to make this clear, I want to use Berkeley’s third argument as a
guide. He claims that a visible and a tangible line are incommensurable and
cannot be added together. Why might he think this? If ideas are modiﬁca-
tions of the mind, they (the visible and tangible ideas) share at least one
thing in common: they both qualify (or are ontically ‘‘in’’) the same mind.
If touch and sight are radically incommensurable, then the content of those
ideas can only be correlated, not shared. Recall that Berkeley’s claim is rather
strong: the two lines cannot be added together. Now the mind for Berkeley
is an active unity.23 Given this feature, what is the cognitive limit that ex-
plains why the mind, while simultaneously being modiﬁed by the ideas of
tactual and visual lines, cannot add them together? Berkeley has no explicit
answer. If he had one, however, it would have to be something internal to
the mind, which might deny its unity. That is, if he thought of ideas as
adverbial while thinking about perceptual heterogeneity, then he would be
compelled to deny the fundamental unity of the mind in order to explain
why the mind cannot add the lines together. I cannot see any other way out
for him. As a result, perceptual heterogeneity is not compatible with an
adverbial view of ideas.
23. See PHK 89, quoted earlier, where he describes spirits as active indivisible substances. His
writings are replete with such references.

242
idea and ontology
The picture changes, however, if we attribute a quasi-substantial concep-
tion of ideas to Berkeley. If ideas are quasi substances, then the problem of
adding the lines is shifted, as it were, ‘‘outside’’ the mind. An idea would
then be an external thing in the sense that the mind perceives it in a two-
place relation that is not a modiﬁcation or proper part of the mind. We
know the mind can perceive ideas from diverse senses at the same time since
it can correlate sensations. What bars the mind from ‘‘sharing’’ the content
of distinct sensory ideas is the very nature of the ideas themselves. I submit
that Berkeley thought of ideas as sufﬁciently like substances that when one
divides them into kinds, those kinds are basic. Thus just as one cannot
merge the mental with the material because they share no more fundamen-
tal features, so one cannot merge the content of ideas of various sense mo-
dalities. Since reality consists of ideas ordered and created by God, and
perceived differences in real (sensory) ideas are veridical, there is no deeper
metaphysical level to which one can push. If God created ideas in different
kinds, then those differences are fundamental.
That Berkeley thinks of sensory ideas as divided into fundamental sub-
stantial kinds is discernible in the texts. When he describes the differences
among the senses, he often explains what he means in terms of kinds. ‘‘But
it will not hence follow that any visible ﬁgure is like unto, or of the same
species with, its corresponding tangible ﬁgure’’ (NTV 143).24 Why would
Berkeley say that visible ﬁgure is not ‘‘of the same species’’ as tangible ﬁgure?
After all, they are both ﬁgures. We have already ruled out the possibility that
abstraction ultimately explains this move. So what else might explain why
two bits of content must belong to separate species? I submit that the answer
is that their vehicles belong to distinct ontological kinds. In short, the miss-
ing piece of the puzzle is that Berkeley took the differences between the
contents of the various senses to be grounded on ontological differences in
kind among the ideas. The reason these ontic discrepancies affect content is
that Berkeley thinks representation requires likeness. In effect, Berkeley en-
codes content into his ontology of ideas. This blue idea cannot be added to
this idea of extension because visual ideas are a kind of being distinct from
tactual ones. Therefore there can be no point of overlap in their content
except by mere correlation.
Robert Muehlmann has recently challenged my interpretation of Berkeley
here on the grounds that my view essentially forces Berkeley to beg the
24. Berkeley often distinguishes among sensory ideas in terms of their being more or less ‘‘of
a species.’’ See NTV 129, 140, and 142.

abstraction and heterogeneity
243
question.25 If we ask why Berkeley would think that the encoding of content
into the ontology of ideas establishes the heterogeneity of ideas—why the
identiﬁcation of content and ontic status shows that tangible and visible
ideas are speciﬁcally distinct—the answer appears to be nothing more than
that they are distinct. This presentation of the interpretation I am advancing
is uncharitable, even were it to turn out to be technically true. Not every
petitio principii is a gross error; sometimes it takes great thinkers to make
great mistakes. Granting that ideas are quasi-substantial and that Berkeley
reduces qualities to ideas, it follows that the content of ideas (whether or
not this is distinct from the ideas themselves qua qualities) will also be voli-
tionally independent yet ontically dependent on minds. Their volitional in-
dependence indicates that their phenomenal appearance has nothing to do
with me (beyond my contribution to sustaining the existence of the ideas)
and in particular with my mind. Abstraction will not solve the problem
either. But on the hypothesis that the merging of quality and idea extends
to the ontological level, we have a reasonable explanation for the heterogene-
ity thesis. Ideas (and their contents) are real things. The contents of ideas
differ based on the sense modality to which they are attached. Hence, the
ideas qua real things differ as well. If we then ask, why do the ideas of
different sense modalities differ, I think Berkeley would have no other an-
swer than to say that in his experience they do differ. Touches are not like
smells or colors. Hence tactual ideas are not like olfactory or visual ones. All
of these ideas might be classiﬁed as mental, but as we have learned this is
misleading, since they are mental only in the limited sense that they are all
objects that may be perceptually related to minds. There is no sense that
ideas are ontologically like minds. In fact, they cannot be since ideas are
passive and minds are not. That this argument might be question begging is
unfortunate, but it does not undermine the explanatory power that this
account has, nor does it undermine my claim that we can better understand
Berkeley by thinking of him as a philosopher operating within the limiting
categories of substance and modiﬁcation even as he introduces quasi sub-
stances. In fact, Muehlmann agrees that Berkeley is best read this way (as a
metaphysician who thinks that ‘‘speciﬁc’’ differences entail distinctness of
ontological categories); he simply defends an alternative understanding of
Berkeley’s strategy concerning the heterogeneity thesis. Muehlmann’s posi-
tion, unfortunately, is quite complicated and a meaningful analysis of it
25. Robert Muehlmann, ‘‘Seeing Berkeley in Depth’’ (unpublished manuscript).

244
idea and ontology
would take us too far aﬁeld from our concerns here.26 Let me be clear about
the upshot of my analysis. That Berkeley’s motivation for endorsing the
heterogeneity thesis might be circular is not the point. I have aimed here to
provide a plausible account for why Berkeley endorsed the heterogeneity
thesis at all, given that the reasons he actually advances in the New Theory
fall manifestly short of accounting for it. Pointing to the inﬂuence of the
ontological nature of ideas in Berkeley’s theory provides a reason for him to
endorse heterogeneity, even if that reason might otherwise hide certain de-
fects in his thinking. I am not confusing my analysis here with a philosophi-
cal defense of Berkeley’s heterogeneity thesis, and the reader ought not do
so either, although I think some philosophical progress has been made.
So now we can go back and complete the arguments Berkeley provided.
Why can the Molyneux Man not ever make the required matchups without
some conjunction of the senses? Answer: the formal nature of visual ideas is
incompatible with that of tactual ones. Berkeley too closely connected the
ontic status of ideas with their representative function. This move led him
to believe that differences in content had to be reﬂected in the ontological
nature of the ideas that bear that content. Given this belief as a starting
point, heterogeneity is neither unexpected nor all that implausible, especially
in light of why he rejects abstraction. Berkeley’s implicit conception of ideas
as quasi substances undergirds his rejection of abstract ideas as impossible
entities and enables him to coherently maintain heterogeneity. None of this
analysis is possible, however, if we accept Berkeley’s role in the early modern
tale. A Berkeley that is seeking to ‘‘abandon’’ ontology seems another world
away from the Berkeley we see here reasoning deftly about abstraction, di-
vine ideas, and heterogeneity.
With Berkeley comes an important change. He wants to operate within
the traditional substance/mode ontology, but he ﬁnds he cannot properly ﬁt
ideas into either category. He inherited a tradition, most notably through
Malebranche, that guided his reasoning about ideas and metaphysics gener-
ally. But guides are not straightjackets. Berkeley’s radical metaphysics may
be seen as an attempt to save the philosophy of ideas within the ontology of
substance and mode. Although he ultimately might not have been clear
26. In short, Muehlmann’s hypothesis, as I understand it, is that Berkeley uses the heteroge-
neity thesis disingenuously (because Muehlmann’s Berkeley does not think strong heterogeneity
is true) to lead his readers to accept the core claims of his immaterialist metaphysic, which he
does believe. I readily confess that Muehlmann’s analysis is both interesting and smart; I am less
convinced that he is right. A fair and proper treatment of his book-length argument for his thesis
is simply beyond the scope of this discussion.

abstraction and heterogeneity
245
about all aspects of the nature of ideas, to admit this is not to say that he
ever abandoned the ontology. Berkeley never explicitly does so; on the con-
trary, he labors to preserve the old conceptual framework. His system, how-
ever, cannot properly hold that ideas are dependent yet genuine substances.
As a result, he was driven to adopt increasingly unusual positions until he
ultimately defended a radical form of heterogeneity among kinds of ideas.
Here I have sought—and found—explanatory power in his dedication to
the outlines of the traditional ontology. But Berkeley paid a price for his
ingenious metaphysics. Its counterintuitive conclusions generally encour-
aged later philosophers to misread his commitment to the traditional ontol-
ogy and misread its importance more generally to the philosophy of ideas.

9
hume and idea ontology
For many adherents of the early modern tale, Hume represents the ﬁnal
break from the traditional ontology. Richard Watson, for instance, writes of
the transition from Malebranche and Berkeley to Hume in just this way.
Attempts to escape the weight of ontological status for ideas are
characterized as attempts to break out of the ontological pattern of
substance and modiﬁcation. Everything is either a substance or a
modiﬁcation. As long as this principle is adhered to, the way of
ideas is doomed. One could say that ideas are nothing or at least
that they are not entities, or one could try to introduce a new onto-
logical entity. But as Malebranche and Berkeley illustrate, it is dif-
ﬁcult to characterize such an entity. There is another alternative.
Everything might be of the same ontological status. . . . I introduce
Hume now, near the close of this study, not as a monist who re-
duces all ontological categories to one, but as a philosopher who
breaks entirely with the ontological structure of substance and
modiﬁcation.1 (1987, 127–28)
A fairly standard reading of Hume is that he is the ﬁrst systematic critic of
the doctrine of substance. The Treatise of Human Nature, especially book 1,
part 4, initially seems to lend itself to being read that way. I do not deny that
Hume was a critic of the concept of substance. But being a critic of the
concept and its use by his contemporaries does not entail that Hume dis-
missed ontology. My relatively modest goal in this chapter is to demonstrate
1. See also Yolton 2000, 139–40, who argues for a similar progression. Daniel Flage likewise
argues that Hume does not subscribe to a substance ontology for ideas, arguing that Hume’s
perceptions are only ‘‘theoretical primitives’’ without positive characterization (1990, 19–20).

hume and idea ontology
247
that Hume did not ‘‘break’’ from the traditional ontology. There is good
reason to believe that Hume operated within the ontology of substance and
modiﬁcation, at least with respect to ideas and impressions (perceptions),
despite concerns about how his intellectual predecessors used those concepts.
Hume was inﬂuenced by Berkeley with respect to the nature of ideas.
There might be some dispute about how profound the inﬂuence is, but it is
present. He accepted Berkeley’s reduction of qualities to ideas (what Phillip
Cummins has since called ‘‘no-quality nominalism’’—the view that qualities
are not ontologically distinct from individuals [1996, 49–88]), he accepted
Berkeley’s critique of abstract ideas, and he also embraced the important
claim that we have no epistemic access to anything beyond perceptions.
Yet Hume also saw the tension of which I believe Berkeley was aware: that
perceptions as independent existences cannot simultaneously be modiﬁca-
tions of mental substances. But whereas Berkeley sought to reconcile these
features of perceptions by positing a new special status for them, Hume
could not see his way to accepting them both. Persuaded by the likes of
Bayle that a uniﬁed simple substance cannot account for the changes we
experience in perception, Hume separated mental substances from percep-
tions completely. As he himself would confess, this separation of mental
substances from perceptions presented him with insuperable difﬁculties.2
Yet despite the problems Hume faced, I contend that none of his reasoning
involved abandoning the traditional ontology for ideas.
Hume believed that the mind consists solely of perceptions; there is no
substance in which these perceptions inhere. Thus it is quite clear that
Hume rejects a substance account of the mind. Hume’s claim eventually
commits him to the view that perceptions are substances themselves.3 But
he also says that perceptions are dependent entities that do not exist when
not perceived, which plausibly inclines one to think that perceptions are not
substances. After all, such things would not be independent entities in the
sense required for substancehood in the traditional ontology. To complicate
matters, Hume is also a skeptic about substance. Since there is no antecedent
impression from which we may derive our idea of substance, it must be that
the concept is conceptually thin. These sorts of concerns that Hume ex-
presses have led some to include him in the early modern tale. Perhaps,
one might speculate, Hume joined Berkeley at the pinnacle of early modern
2. I refer, of course, to Hume’s famous concerns expressed in the appendix to the Treatise,
esp. T, 633–36; N, 398–401. For a discussion of Bayle’s inﬂuence, see Smith 1964, 325.
3. I am not the ﬁrst to advance this kind of thesis with respect to Hume; see, for example,
Anderson 1966, esp. 3–15.

248
idea and ontology
thought in this respect. The difﬁculties with the status of ideas in fact indi-
cate that perceptions ought not be thought of as having any ontological
status at all. Yolton draws the parallel between Hume and Berkeley in exactly
this way. ‘‘‘Existence in the mind’ for Berkeley turns out to mean ‘known’
or ‘understood.’ Hume offers a similar suggestion for ‘present to mind.’ The
mind adds to my object-perceptions the belief in their continued existence’’
(1984, 163). On Yolton’s analysis, presence to the mind is an epistemological
relation only. Thus Hume is characterized along with Berkeley as a philoso-
pher who moved away from ontology with respect to ideas.
This characterization is as erroneous with respect to Hume as it is with
respect to Berkeley. Strongly inﬂuenced by his Irish predecessor, we have
reason to believe that Hume was driven by many of the same pressures that
led Berkeley to the conclusion that ideas are quasi substances. Perceptions
are existences that are distinct from minds without being modiﬁcations of
them (Hume uses the word ‘‘independent’’ to describe perceptions in this
sense), but they are nonetheless ontologically dependent on those minds for
their existence. Although I believe that Hume resisted the pull to think of
perceptions as quasi substances, he nonetheless provides a sort of capstone
to the development of the early modern ontology of ideas, just not one in
the service of the early modern tale. Hume recognizes the problematic ﬁt
between the ontology of ideas and their epistemic roles but nevertheless
preserves the core ontology of substance and mode when applied to ideas. I
recognize that the claim is controversial, but I base my contention on what
Hume actually says at various places in the texts. Although at one point
Hume indicates that substances and perceptions are distinct, he nevertheless
consistently treats perceptions elsewhere as independent entities. He might
intend to be a critic of the concept of substance, but at the end of the day
Humean perceptions are still things with some sort of ontological standing.
9.1 Perceptions as Substances
Let us start with an analysis of the nature of perceptions. Hume is fortu-
itously clear on this point, arguing that perceptions are distinct, individual
existences that underlie higher levels of change. As such they appear to qual-
ify as substances. This realization turns out not to be as important for Hume
as it is for some of the other early moderns, because Hume takes the content
of the concept of substance to be exceedingly thin. We have no idea or
impression of substance. Hence learning that something is a substance turns

hume and idea ontology
249
out to be of minimal value. This analysis explains Hume’s consistent criti-
cisms of the concepts of substance used by his contemporaries. He doesn’t
like to invoke essentially ﬁctionalized concepts. Philosophers who ‘‘read
into’’ substance more than they are entitled are basically telling stories on
Hume’s view. We thus help ourselves to ﬁctions like identity over time by
inserting elements into the notion of substance to which we are not entitled.
In order to understand Hume’s thinking about the nature of perceptions,
however, we ﬁrst need to do some background work.
9.1.1 Two Principles
Hume divides the sensible world into ideas and impressions; together both
of them exhaust the category of perceptions. ‘‘All perceptions of the mind
are of two kinds, viz. impressions and ideas, which differ from each other
only in their different degrees of force and vivacity’’ (T, 96/N, 67 [1.3.7]).
Furthermore, we only have perfect ideas of things that may be perceived,
which again are only perceptions. Hence, we can only have perfect percep-
tions of perceptions. ‘‘We have no perfect idea of any thing but of a per-
ception’’ (T, 234/N, 153 [1.4.5]). All of this signals Hume’s underlying
commitment to the way of ideas. Ideas and impressions constitute the en-
tirety of what must be mastered to acquire knowledge about the world. The
particularities about the relationship between ideas and impressions (the
famous ‘‘copy thesis,’’ namely, that all ideas derive from a corresponding
impression) need not delay us here.
There are, however, two important principles that Hume invokes when
discussing the nature of perceptions. The ﬁrst is the conceivability principle.
Whatever can be conceived is logically possible. ‘‘’Tis an established maxim
in metaphysics, That whatever the mind clearly conceives includes the idea of
possible existence, or in other words, that nothing we imagine is absolutely
impossible. We can form the idea of a golden mountain, and from thence
conclude that such a mountain may actually exist. We can form no idea of
a mountain without a valley, and therefore regard it as impossible’’ (T, 32/
N, 26 [1.2.2]).4 The contrapositive also holds. Whatever is absolutely impos-
sible is inconceivable. Therefore whatever implies a contradiction cannot be
conceived. ‘‘’Tis in vain to search for a contradiction in any thing that is
distinctly conceiv’d by the mind. Did it imply any contradiction, ’tis impos-
sible it cou’d ever be conceiv’d’’ (T, 43/N, 33 [1.2.4]).
4. See T, 236/ N, 155 (1.4.5), and T, 250/N, 164 (1.4.5).

250
idea and ontology
The second principle I call the ‘‘difference-existence principle.’’ Wherever
the mind can discern difference, the mind can conceive of separate exis-
tences. ‘‘First, We have observ’d, that whatever objects are different are dis-
tinguishable, and that whatever objects are distinguishable are separable by
the thought and imagination’’ (T, 18/N, 17 [1.1.7]).5 Unsurprisingly, this
principle also holds in the inverse: whatever is separable is distinguishable.
‘‘And we may here add, that these propositions are equally true in the in-
verse, and that whatever objects are separable are also distinguishable, and
that whatever objects are distinguishable are also different’’ (T, 18/N, 17
[1.1.7]). One might think that two putatively distinct objects that are, in fact,
numerically identical might nevertheless be (mistakenly) distinguished from
one another. Certainly we distinguished the morning star and evening star
before learning that the two bodies are the same planet. Why should any
rational person accept this principle?
Hume’s difference-existence principle, however, is meant to apply only
to perceptions and not generally (say to material objects or other nonideas).
Where we detect no difference in sensory content we posit no plurality in
objects. Why would we? The morning star/evening star case is disingenuous
because there is a detected difference, namely when we see planet. As a re-
sult, the principle is generally defensible within his philosophical system.
We only distinguish things when we detect difference. That we sometimes
mistakenly detect differences when there are none does not undercut the
principle.
9.1.2 Determinate and Individual
Like Berkeley, Hume holds that all existing things are fully determinate.
When applied to perceptions, it follows that each and every idea and impres-
sion must be ﬁxed in terms of their qualities. Hume starts with the case of
impressions in the Treatise. ‘‘Secondly, ’tis confest, that no object can appear
to the senses; or in other words, that no impression can become present to
the mind, without being determin’d in its degrees both of quality and quan-
tity. The confusion, in which impressions are sometimes involv’d, proceeds
only from their faintness and unsteadiness, not from any capacity in the
mind to receive any impression, which in its real existence has no particular
degree nor proportion’’ (T, 19/N, 18 [1.1.7]). The explanation is then ex-
5. See T, 24 /N, 21 (1.1.7) (‘‘all ideas, which are different, are separable’’ [emphasis in the
original]) and T, 634/ N, 399, appendix.

hume and idea ontology
251
tended to include ideas as well at the start of the next paragraph. ‘‘Now
since all ideas are deriv’d from impressions, and are nothing but copies and
representations of them, whatever is true of the one must be acknowledg’d
concerning the other. . . . An idea is a weaker impression; and as a strong
impression must necessarily have a determinate quantity and quality, the
case must be the same with its copy or representative.’’ We now know that
perceptions are individual and fully determinate entities. When we apply
the two preceding principles to these entities, it follows that they possess the
key features of traditional substances.
One might think that Hume is actually slightly cagey on this point about
the ontological status of perceptions. In the section entitled ‘‘Of the Immate-
riality of the Soul’’ (1.4.5), Hume addresses the question of the nature of
perceptions indirectly as a part of his argument that the soul is not a sub-
stantial unity. Considering the challenge that one might think that there are
substances, deﬁned only as independent existences, Hume responds by not-
ing that on this deﬁnition every perception becomes a substance.
For thus I reason. Whatever is clearly conceiv’d may exist; and
whatever is clearly conceiv’d, after any manner, may exist after the
same manner. This is one principle, which has been already ack-
nowledg’d. Again, every thing, which is different, is distinguishable,
and every thing which is distinguishable, is separable by the imagi-
nation. This is another principle. My conclusion from both is, that
since all our perceptions are different from each other, and from
every thing else in the universe, they are also distinct and separable,
and may be consider’d as separately existent, and may exist sepa-
rately, and have no need of any thing else to support their existence.
They are, therefore, substances, as far as this deﬁnition explains a
substance. (T, 233/N, 153 [1.4.5])
Applying the conceivability principle to the difference-existence principle,
we learn that it is conceivable that everything that is separable in thought
may in fact be distinct. Perceptions—whether ideas or impressions—are all
separable in thought. Hence perceptions (which, we should carefully note,
are objects of some sort) are all possibly distinct from one another. At
a minimum this is enough for Hume to conclude that perceptions could
all individually exist apart from everything else. But this analysis depends
on the supposition that a substance is to be deﬁned as ‘‘something which
may exist by itself’’ (T, 233/N, 153 [1.4.5], emphasis in the original). I believe

252
idea and ontology
Hume endorses this point but thinks it does not entail much. If that is all a
substance is, then all perceptions are substances.
Some might object that Hume is in fact being hesitant about substance
and that the passage above is intended as a reductio on the assertion that
perceptions are substances. Watson, for instance, alleges: ‘‘As a reductio,
Hume argued that if independent existence is the criterion of a substance,
then his perceptions are substances. Although perceptions are all ontologi-
cally of the same kind and type, and although ideas represent by being like
impressions, perceptions are neither substances nor modiﬁcations’’ (1987,
152). On Watson’s view, Hume is unsure not merely about what perceptions
are but also about whether they even exist. Watson concludes, ‘‘Hume in-
stead denies the possibility of the knowledge and even of the existence of
substances’’ (130). However, the only serious support for this view, I think,
comes from reading Hume in this section ironically, since Hume explicitly
concludes that perceptions count as substances. And some believe that there
is a reason to think that this might be so. Close on the heels of the passage
where Hume reasons that perceptions are substances he seems to explicitly
deny the same thesis.
Thus neither by considering the ﬁrst origin of our ideas, nor by
means of a deﬁnition are we able to arrive at any satisfactory notion
of substance; which seems to me a sufﬁcient reason for abandoning
utterly that dispute concerning the materiality and immateriality of
the soul, and makes me absolutely condemn even the question it-
self. We have no perfect idea of anything but of a perception. A
substance is entirely different from a perception. We have, there-
fore, no idea of a substance. (T, 234/N, 153 [1.4.5])
I do not think that this passage repudiates the claim that perceptions are
substances. Some might respond to my claim with incredulity. After all,
what else could ‘‘A substance is entirely different from a perception’’ mean?
Well, one should note at the outset that if Hume wanted to assert that per-
ceptions could not be substances, he could have said so more clearly. Worse
yet, Hume elsewhere explicitly makes claims that entail that perceptions are
independent objects, just like substances. Thus there is good reason to at
least look for another understanding of the passage. After all, if we take the
passage to deny that perceptions are substances, then we have much work
to do to explain why Hume says what he does elsewhere (and much more

hume and idea ontology
253
work than trying to understand a single apparently contrary bit of text, as
in this case). So what is going on in the passage?
Instead of denying that perceptions are substances, the key sentence em-
phasizes the point that substances are not perceptions, that is, we do not
perceive substances. And that claim is not only true but also coheres well
with the line of argument actually found in the section. In the context of the
extended passage, Hume reasons (1) we have no (perfect) idea of anything
other than perceptions, (2) substances are not perceptions, and hence (3) we
have no (perfect) idea of substances. This, I ﬁnd, is a natural way to read
the passage, and it has the virtue of rendering Hume internally consistent,
since he elsewhere reafﬁrms the claim that substances exist and perceptions
are substances. This verity is perhaps nowhere more obvious than in the
appendix where Hume gives voice to his concerns about where his thinking
has led him. ‘‘In short there are two principles, which I cannot render con-
sistent; nor is it in my power to renounce either of them, viz. that all our
distinct perceptions are distinct existences, and that the mind never perceives
any real connexion among distinct existences’’ (T, 636/N, 400). Hume makes
clear from the preceding analysis in the appendix that his ‘‘distinct exis-
tences’’ assertion qualiﬁes perceptions as substances provided one takes a
substance to be a simple, individual existence. And here he is quite explicit:
he cannot free himself from this particular claim. Hume ﬁnds that he has
no positive idea of a substance separate from a collection of qualities but
nonetheless concludes that, given the traditional deﬁnition, perceptions in
fact do qualify as substances. There is no reductio ad absurdum here. Hume
is carefully following the consequences of believing that substances are inde-
pendent existences. It simply follows that his perceptions so construed are
all substances. This result is not initially worrying because Hume ﬁnds that
there is not much to the claim that something is a substance.
We should note that a weaker claim is present in Hume’s analysis of
perceptions as well: perceptions are distinct from minds. That is, percep-
tions form two-place relations with the minds that perceive them. Percep-
tions are neither modes of minds nor do they inhere in any suspect thing
like a mind or a substance. For Hume, minds perceive ideas more in a part-
whole relation (since minds are bundles of perceptions). Even as Hume
distances himself from a substantial account of the mind, he preserves the
language of perceptions as distinct things. Deﬁnitions of substance seem
inadequate because they do not create a suitable contrast class. If substances
are independent existences, then as established above, no thing of which we
can conceive (i.e., no perception) fails to be a substance. Hume’s insightful

254
idea and ontology
analysis is not a denial that perceptions are substances; rather it is an asser-
tion that such a claim does not amount to much.
As Robert Anderson notes in his analysis of the same argument (1966, 9),
Hume indicates that this reasoning applies only to actually existing objects.
Perceptions may be considered substances if they so exist as conceptually
separable entities. But Hume is clearly committed to the existence of percep-
tions if he is committed to the existence of anything. As noted above, Hume
takes perceptions to be entities that are always particular and determinate. In
discussing personal identity, Hume advances the following argument, also
cited by Anderson: ‘‘’Tis still true, that every distinct perception, which enters
into the composition of the mind, is a distinct existence, and is different, and
distinguishable, and separable from every other perception, either contempo-
rary or successive’’ (T, 259/N, 169 [1.4.6]). The argument clearly reveals that
Hume thinks perceptions are genuine existences. The issue is what sort of
existences. Hume is seeking to separate perceptions from minds because he
ﬁnds that he can make no sense of the claim that perceptions inhere in sub-
stance, the mind in particular (were the mind to be a substance). That leaves
perceptions as independent existences in their own right, satisfying the de-
mand of the traditional deﬁnition of substance that requires them to be onto-
logically independent. As he argues in the appendix:
In general, the following reasoning seems satisfactory. All ideas are
borrow’d from preceding perceptions. Our ideas of objects, there-
fore, are deriv’d from that source. Consequently no proposition
can be intelligible or consistent with regard to objects, which is not
so with regard to perceptions. But ’tis intelligible and consistent to
say, that objects exist distinct and independent, without any com-
mon simple substance or subject of inhesion. This proposition,
therefore, can never be absurd with regard to perceptions. (T, 634/
N, 399])
As perceptions are distinct and independent entities, they must be sub-
stances, and this is exactly the conclusion at which Hume arrives.
9.1.3 Concepts of Substance
The preceding discussion importantly depends on the claim that Hume
thinks that the concept of substance is in fact meaningful.6 Here we need to
6. My assertion is controversial. Daniel Flage, for one, disagrees. ‘‘Hume argues that the
Cartesian deﬁnition of substance is too broad, and therefore, the substance/accidents distinction
is unintelligible’’ (1990, 71, emphasis mine).

hume and idea ontology
255
be careful. There is a difference between a concept that is meaningless and
one that has meaning but a meaning so thin as to be of relatively little value.
Hume thinks of the concept of substance in the second manner. The mere
fact that Hume positively ascribes perceptions the status of being substances
should be ample evidence of this truth, but the point is worth further explo-
ration to satisfy ourselves that this is Hume’s view.
Hume’s initial engagement of the concept of substance comes in the form
of a challenge. ‘‘I wou’d fain ask those philosophers . . . whether the idea of
substance be deriv’d from the impressions of sensation or reﬂexion?’’ (T,
15–16/N, 16 [1.1.6]). I can recall learning as an undergraduate that the answer
is neither and that hence we have no idea of substance at all. Thus in his
introduction to his edition of the Enquiry, Tom Beauchamp similarly writes
that ‘‘Hume maintains that terms such as ‘substance’ have been employed in
philosophy without clear meaning and that resultant controversies are bur-
dened by meaningless terms’’ (19). Although in general Beauchamp is right,
this is not what Hume actually concludes about substance. Hume reveals that
we have no idea of substance ‘‘distinct from that of a collection of particular
qualities, nor have we any other meaning when we either talk or reason
concerning it’’ (T, 16/N, 16 [1.1.6]). That we have no idea distinct from a
collection entails that we do have a meaningful conception of substance,
namely exactly that of a collection of qualities. Perhaps this is ‘‘no clear
meaning’’ (emphasis mine), but it most certainly is meaningful. Importantly,
in the Enquiry Hume does not speciﬁcally name substance as one of his
targets. Substance is hardly mentioned much at all in this later work, no
doubt primarily because of Hume’s inability to resolve the puzzles surround-
ing substance and identity.7 It is therefore hasty to conclude that Hume takes
the concept of substance to be entirely meaningless or unintelligible.
The point of Hume’s skepticism about substance concerns the concept
of an underlying unity. On reﬂection, Hume ﬁnds that he has no idea of this
unity. Alternatively, without this union the concept of substance becomes a
sort of ﬁction constructed from the conjunction of particular qualities.
The idea of a substance as well as that of a mode, is nothing but a
collection of simple ideas, that are united by the imagination, and
have a particular name assigned them, by which we are able to
recall, either to ourselves or others, that collection. But the differ-
7. The word ‘‘substance’’ in its ontological sense occurs rarely in the Enquiry. The word is
used in this way most notably in section 7, pars. 11 and 19, and then again in section 12, par.
11. The other appearances of the word are unrelated to the sense of the word relevant to this
discussion.

256
idea and ontology
ence betwixt these ideas consists in this, that the particular qualities,
which form a substance, are commonly refer’d to an unknown
something, in which they are supposed to inhere; or granting this
ﬁction should not take place, are at least supposed to be closely and
inseparably connected by the relations of contiguity and causation.
The effect of this is, that whatever new simple quality we discover
to have the same connexion with the rest, we immediately compre-
hend it among them, even tho’ it did not enter into the ﬁrst con-
ception of the substance. (T, 16/N, 16 [1.1.6])
Hume’s depiction of substance here is consistent with his earlier claim that
substances simply pick out independent distinct existences. A particular set
of qualities may be given a name and considered a distinct entity in its own
right. In fact, this is precisely what we do in ordinary language. If, on the
other hand, we deny that a collection is a robust entity in its own right, then
we content ourselves with the idea that there are nonetheless underlying
‘‘connexions’’ that bind those qualities together. The key to this analysis is
the notion of union. The disparate qualities are somehow joined together. It
is this collection that constitutes our idea of a substance for Hume, and we
most certainly possess that concept (the concept of a union of perceptions).
Yet because the nature of this union is so mysterious, the actual content of
the concept of substance is surprisingly thin. Thus Hume’s attack on theism
(that all theists are ultimately atheists, invoking Spinozism) centers on his
contention that inherence in a uniﬁed substratum is incoherent. He com-
plains that substances must be altered based on the qualities that modify
them (such as extensions that would, per impossible, cause substance to ex-
pand or contract) and that they cannot simultaneously support incompati-
ble qualities (T, 243–44/N, 159–60 [1.4.5]). A single substance conceived of
as a unity is incompatible with our understanding of qualities.
The problem is all the worse when it comes to the idea of a person, since
we ﬁnd no unvarying unity when we reﬂect on the nature of the self. Here
Hume argues that the ‘‘ﬁction’’ of an underlying substance in fact conceals
the conﬂation of identity with succession (T, 254–55/N, 165–66 [1.4.6]). The
point, however, remains the same. We have a conception of substance, but
the one we have is inadequate for its intended uses. Hence, Hume’s concern
about our idea of substance does not conﬂict with his assertion that percep-
tions nevertheless are substances.
One might interject that the story I am telling about Hume mischaracter-
izes what is going on. Instead of arguing that Hume has a ‘‘thin’’ conception

hume and idea ontology
257
of substance that remains within the core view of the substance/modiﬁca-
tion ontology, why should we not conclude that Hume is introducing a new
set of criteria for something to be a substance? I understand why one might
be tempted to advance such a proposal, but I resist it for two reasons. First,
the revised view is equivalent to a position already articulated by his con-
temporaries, so there does not seem to be any compelling need for Hume
to bring forward a new theory of substance. If his goal is to critique the
concept as used by his contemporaries, then such a move would be exceed-
ingly odd. One does not typically criticize the concepts of others by redeﬁn-
ing those concepts from the outset. Second, the language Hume uses is
remarkably consistent with that of his early modern contemporaries and
predecessors; further, when he introduces new terms and conceptual dis-
tinctions, he typically is quite clear about them (as with the idea/impression
division of perceptions). I thus hold fast to my claim that Hume believes he
is engaging his contemporaries on their own conceptual ground, especially
with respect to ontology.
At this point we need to address one further concern about Hume’s con-
cept of substance. According to what I have described as the ‘‘core’’ tradi-
tional ontology, substances are both independent and enduring. Although
Hume clearly fastens on the former, what of the latter? At one point Hume
explicitly endorses the common view that ideas are ﬂeeting beings. ‘‘To
begin with the coherence; we may observe, that tho’ these internal impres-
sions, which we regard as ﬂeeting and perishing, have also a certain coher-
ence or regularity in their appearances’’ (T, 195/N, 130 [1.4.2]). Noting that
impressions might be ﬂeeting, however, need not entail that there is no
sense in which they endure. Independently, I want to extend the analysis of
Berkeley’s conception of ideas as ‘‘ﬂeeting’’ beings offered in section 7.5.
There I argue that the transitory nature of ideas is a reﬂection of a changing
order of perceptions. Even in the passage just cited, Hume recognizes a dis-
tinction between individual impressions and the higher-level order in the
same. Yet Hume is clearer than Berkeley when it comes to perceptions un-
derlying change. Recall that the endurance criterion captures the ‘‘thing
thought’’ for substance. Hume certainly treats perceptions like robust things.
We need only watch Hume at work to see this element in his thinking. For
instance, ideas and impressions underlie change because Hume holds the
familiar theory of simple and complex perceptions.
There is another division of our perceptions, which it will be conve-
nient to observe, and which extends itself both to our impressions

258
idea and ontology
and ideas. This division is into simple and complex. Simple percep-
tions, or impressions and ideas, are such as admit of no distinction
nor separation. The complex are the contrary to these, and may be
distinguished into parts. Though a particular colour, taste, and
smell, are qualities all united together in this apple, it is easy to
perceive they are not the same, but are at least distinguishable from
each other. (T, 2/N, 7–8 [1.1.1])
Impressions need not be permanent (or even stable over time) to underlie
change; they only need to be continuants under some change—the constit-
uents, if you will, of the world. That they play this role should not be contro-
versial (the more pressing and difﬁcult issue being whether they are
independent). Our complex idea or impression of an apple depends on the
underlying ideas or impressions of taste and smell and so on. Thus a certain
color impression underlies the more complex impression of the apple. Now
the point is not that the simple impression needs itself to change; rather it
only needs to endure long enough to allow the presence of change. Simple
substances, in fact, will not change in themselves, except insofar as they are
created or annihilated. Our endurance criterion requires nothing more, and
Hume’s ideas and impressions seem to meet this criterion.
9.2 Dependent Perceptions
Although it appears that Hume’s perceptions are at least substance-like (in
the core sense of the concept), some philosophers nonetheless continue to
assert that for Hume perceptions cannot be genuine substances. Hume con-
sistently denies that perceptions are in fact ontologically independent. They
depend on minds (speciﬁcally mental faculties) for their existence. The de-
pendence of perceptions is an intriguing position for Hume to hold, since
he simultaneously maintains that minds are constituted by perceptions. Fur-
thermore, as we have already seen, Hume argues that perceptions are inde-
pendent existences distinct from the mind. How does Hume tie these claims
together? First, we need to remind ourselves that Hume takes the mind to
be composed of perceptions. Then we may more proﬁtably turn to examine
the evidence for thinking that he believes perceptions to be dependent enti-
ties. I argue that Hume is driven by separate lines of reasoning to incompati-
ble positions. He has no recourse to Berkeley’s position of treating ideas as
quasi substances, for that view appears to require a substance account of the

hume and idea ontology
259
mind. Thus Hume believes that perceptions are substances and that they are
dependent beings, without any way of ultimately reconciling the two. This
difﬁcult ending place, however, is the result of Hume adhering to the tradi-
tional ontology for ideas, not abandoning it.
9.2.1 The Bundle Theory of the Mind
Saying that Hume has a bundle theory of the mind is now commonplace.8
The details of the view, however, are important to our questions here. The
exact nature of the relationship between minds and perceptions will deter-
mine what one may reasonably say about the status of both. The most fa-
mous passage comes from the section ‘‘Of Scepticism with Regard to the
Senses.’’ ‘‘As to the ﬁrst question; we may observe, that what we call a mind,
is nothing but a heap or collection of different perceptions, united together
by certain relations, and suppos’d, tho’ falsely, to be endow’d with a perfect
simplicity and identity’’ (T, 207/N, 137 [1.4.2]). Minds are collections of
perceptions. But what is the relation between the mind and its perceptions?
Hume continues in the same passage: ‘‘Now as every perception is distin-
guishable from another, and may be consider’d as separately existent; it evi-
dently follows, that there is no absurdity in separating any particular
perception from the mind; that is, in breaking off all its relations, with that
connected mass of perceptions, which constitute a thinking being.’’ Percep-
tions are independent of the mind, but in a strict sense. We can, in thought,
separate the mind from any particular perception. As a result, the mind is
not necessarily dependent on any particular perception. That is, no percep-
tion is individually essential to the mind. This realization does not, however,
entail that perceptions can exist without a mind that somehow perceives it.
We shall turn to that issue shortly.
Hume describes the mind as a ‘‘succession’’ of ideas. The illusion of an
underlying unity is fostered by the uniform and consistent appearance pres-
ent in this succession. ‘‘The mind is a kind of theatre, where several percep-
tions successively make their appearance; pass, re-pass, glide away, and
mingle in an inﬁnite variety of postures and situations. . . . The comparison
of the theatre must not mislead us. They are the successive perceptions only,
that constitute the mind’’ (T, 253/N, 165 [1.4.6]). Hume again asserts the
thesis that minds are composed of perceptions, but this time he claims that
minds are successive perceptions only. The passage from the chapter on
8. John Biro, to name just one example, calls the bundle theory ‘‘famous’’ (1993, 49).

260
idea and ontology
skepticism with regard to the senses explicitly indicates that the mind is its
perceptions and certain ‘‘uniting’’ relations. Perhaps the second formulation
is a bit of a slip, since Hume consistently ascribes powers and faculties to
the mind.9 It hardly makes sense to ascribe powers and faculties to individual
perceptions (and in fact he does not [see Biro 1993, 56]), so these faculties
must arise from the relations that allegedly unite the perceptions in ques-
tion. They could, of course, arise from a uniﬁed substantial self, but Hume
excludes that possibility. That the mind has faculties is important because
one of those faculties is that of perception. Minds also perceive impressions
and ideas. Minds are thus both constituted by perceptions and form a per-
ceptual relation with them.
We are accordingly driven by Hume to the conclusion that the mind is
constituted by its perceptions and certain faculties or powers. Hume is per-
suaded by Berkeley’s analysis that all ideas and impressions are fundamen-
tally dependent beings. We are sometimes led, of course, to think otherwise,
but this does not deter Hume from endorsing the dependent nature of per-
ceptions. ‘‘Whoever wou’d explain the origin of the common opinion con-
cerning the continu’d and distinct existence of body, must take the mind
in its common situation, and must proceed upon the supposition, that our
perceptions are our only objects, and continue to exist even when they are
not perceiv’d. Tho’ this opinion be false, ’tis the most natural of any, and
has alone any primary recommendation to the fancy’’ (T, 213/N, 141 [1.4.2]).
Hume admits that we perceive only perceptions, and hence the ‘‘false opin-
ion’’ can only refer to the claim that perceptions exist when not perceived.
He indicates that our perceptions are generally dependent on our sense or-
gans, as evidenced by the simple trick of pressing one’s eye to conjure a
double image. Such experiments, says Hume, are enough to convince us
‘‘that our perceptions are not possest of any independent existence’’ (T,
210–11/N, 140 [1.4.2]; see also T, 5/N, 9 [1.1.1]). Although Hume insists that
we can conceive of perceptions as existing independently from minds, in fact
they do not exist independently. The two views are not necessarily inconsis-
tent. The former insists only that perceptions are distinct from minds (and
not modiﬁcations of them), while the latter makes a claim about the actual
ontological nature of ideas and impressions. What is missing is a discussion
9. For instance, here are a few references, virtually at random: the mind has the power to
produce ideas (T, 23/N, 20 [1.1.7]), has feelings and operations (T, 576/ N, 368 [3.3.1]), and has
operations that are ‘‘natural and necessary’’ (T, 266/ N, 173 [1.4.7]). The Treatise is replete with
references to the faculties of the mind.

hume and idea ontology
261
of what constitutes a perceiver. Minds are bundles of ordered perceptions,
and perceptions are entities perceived, but what is doing the perceiving?
9.2.2 On the Unintelligibility of Substantial Minds
Hume’s insight, I argue, is that the obvious candidate—a substantial mind
understood as an immaterial unity—is not the right answer to the question
of what is doing the perceiving. But the problem is not that minds cannot
be substances or that substances are impossible entities; rather the problem
concerns the positive intelligibility of the question of what the nature of a
substance (like the soul) is. Because substances are not perceptions, we can-
not ascribe any positive content to the concept of a substance. Hume’s strat-
egy is to show that any conception of the soul as an immaterial substance
requires us to admit by parity of reasoning the possibility that the soul is a
material substance—a heretical view endorsed only by the likes of Spinoza.
Hume provides three arguments to support his position.
First, Hume reasons that arguments that can be used against Spinoza’s
conception of substance also can be used against the doctrine of an immate-
rial soul. A uniﬁed substance that underlies change does not itself change,
but this is exactly what is required on an inherence theory of quality predica-
tion. On this view, just as Spinoza’s properties literally qualify the one sub-
stance, for a mind to have the idea of a particular extension also literally
extends the mind.
First, It has been said against Spinoza . . . that a mode, not being
any distinct or separate existence, must be the very same with its
substance, and consequently the extension of the universe, must be
in a manner identify’d with that simple, uncompounded essence,
in which the universe is suppos’d to inhere. But this, it may be
pretended, is utterly impossible and inconceivable unless the indi-
visible substance expand itself, so as to correspond to the extension,
or the extension contract itself, so as to answer to the indivisible
substance. This argument seems just . . . and ’tis plain nothing is
requir’d, but a change in the terms, to apply the same argument to
our extended perceptions, and the simple essence of the soul. (T,
243–44/N, 159–60 [1.4.5])
The concern here is not that the word ‘‘substance’’ is meaningless but rather
that its meaning is so thin as to preclude any serious distinctions from being

262
idea and ontology
raised about its application. Thus what applies to Spinoza applies equally to
the posits of theologians.
Hume’s second argument is an extension of his earlier claim that all per-
ceptions count as substances if by substance we mean nothing more than a
distinct thing that can exist by itself. Given the nature of matter, every bit of
matter will qualify as a substance. From this it follows that matter is never a
mode. This argument is not a reductio ad absurdum on the possibility of
substances but an argument designed to show that material monism and
mind/body dualism labor under the same constraints. Hume concludes this
argument by noting that ‘‘consequently the one hypothesis labours under
the same difﬁculties in this respect with the other’’ (T, 244/N, 160 [1.4.5]).
Thus the point is that because matter and mental substances are parallel in
this respect, if one accepts the latter theory then there is no reason to reject
the former. If you want immaterial, indivisible substantial souls, you must
accept the possibility that material monism might undermine or replace the
theory entirely. As Hume concludes, ‘‘we cannot advance one step towards
the establishing the simplicity and immateriality of the soul, without prepar-
ing the way for a dangerous and irrecoverable atheism’’ (T, 244/N, 160
[1.4.5]).
The ﬁnal argument is the venerable one that a single uniﬁed substance
cannot be simultaneously modiﬁed by inconsistent qualities, as seems other-
wise necessary. ‘‘The round and square ﬁgures are incompatible in the same
substance at the same time. How then is it possible, that the same substance
can at once be modify’d into that square table, and into this round one?’’
(T, 244/N, 160 [1.4.5]). The question, Hume believes, has no satisfactory
answer, but neither does the parallel question when applied to souls and
their perceptions. Hume continues in the same passage: ‘‘I ask the same
question concerning the impressions of these tables; and ﬁnd that the an-
swer is no more satisfactory in one case than in the other.’’
Hume moves on to explore other options about the nature of mentality,
including the possibility that thought is simply an action of the soul. Dis-
missing this alternative as well, Hume ﬁnally concludes that it is not possible
to ascertain the nature of the soul. ‘‘To pronounce, then, the ﬁnal decision
upon the whole; the question concerning the substance of the soul is abso-
lutely unintelligible: All our perceptions are not susceptible of a local union,
either with what is extended or unextended. . . . And as the constant con-
junction of objects constitutes the very essence of cause and effect, matter
and motion may often be regarded as the causes of thought, as far as we
have any notion of that relation’’ (T, 250/N, 163 [1.4.5]). Materialism might

hume and idea ontology
263
explain the affects of the soul as well as it explains anything else, which is to
say not well at all. What matters for our purposes, however, is that this
skeptical conclusion is not a rejection of the traditional ontology. Hume does
not conclude that the soul cannot be a substance; he concludes that the
concept of substance is so thin that the question resolves into unintelligibil-
ity. By this he means that the concept is not robust enough to justify making
any conﬁdent pronouncements that might matter to us, whether they con-
cern the soul or material objects.
Hume’s insight, unfortunately for us, is only a negative one. We do not
have access to the nature of the mind, its essence ‘‘being equally unknown
to us with that of external bodies,’’ and ‘‘it must be equally impossible to
form any notion of its powers and qualities otherwise than from careful and
exact experiments’’ (T, xvii/N, 5). In light of this analysis, Hume’s aim is
quite clear. Although he does not think it possible to discern the true (onto-
logical) nature of the mind, we can understand regularities in its operations.
He seeks to show that the human mind—whatever that might be—has regu-
lar and constant machinery (Hume 1875, 166). Yet even if the mind cannot
be a simple uniﬁed substance, it does not follow that there are no substances
or that the traditional ontology has been abandoned when it comes to per-
ceptions.
One might wish to press me on this issue.10 Perhaps there is an alternative
to the traditional ontology here. The Hume of the Treatise holds that the
mind is nothing but an ordered collection of perceptions without necessary
connections or mysterious substances; it is just a collection of perceptions
ordered by the principles of the association of ideas. What role could such a
thin conception of substance play? Although I recognize the force of this
worry that might arise from my reading of Hume, and the traditional way
of reading Hume lends credence to this concern, we cannot escape the un-
derlying problem. If the mind is ‘‘nothing but’’ a collection of perceptions,
then what are perceptions? They exist. They must have some ontological
status for the theory to be meaningful. And so the question is: what is that
status? I take Hume’s answer to be that perceptions are substances. The
answer might seem unsatisfactory because he also believes perceptions to be
dependent, but at least Hume is aware of this tension. For those who might
think that I am trying to hammer my ontological reading onto Hume, I can
only stop and ask how they can account for the persistent tendency of Hume
to talk about perceptions as distinct, independent entities. I do not deny
10. My thanks to Daniel Flage for raising this objection.

264
idea and ontology
that Hume is a critic of the concept of substance and especially its use by
his contemporaries. But having an epistemological focus does not eliminate
the need for an underlying ontology.
9.2.3 Perceivers and Perceptions
We have yet, however, to ﬁnd an answer to the question about the nature of
perceivers in Hume’s ontology. From the preceding we should already know
that Hume is not going to tell us much that we will ﬁnd satisfying. Fortu-
nately for this study, we do not require a complete answer or even necessar-
ily a consistent one. Hume tells us that perceptions are mind dependent.
Perception is a faculty of the mind, and minds are collections of perceptions
related in certain ways. But as Hume famously concluded, none of his think-
ing revealed the necessary connections or relations among perceptions that
characterize a perceiver or a self. Throughout this analysis, however, Hume
holds on to the claims that all perceptions are things and distinct existences
(and hence at least like traditional substances in those important respects)
as well as dependent ones. The fact that he recognizes a problem with this
nest of claims is actually evidence of his commitment to the core conception
of the traditional ontology. The conﬂict between these claims only arises
from the traditional view that substances are both enduring (distinct exis-
tences underlying change) and independent (not dependent on other kinds
of things for their existence). Had Hume abandoned the traditional ontol-
ogy with respect to the nature of perceptions it would be more difﬁcult to
see what the problem actually is.
Examine Hume’s conﬂicting principles carefully:
In short there are two principles, which I cannot render consistent;
nor is it in my power to renounce either of them, viz. that all our
distinct perceptions are distinct existences, and that the mind never
perceives any real connexion among distinct existences. Did our per-
ceptions either inhere in something simple and individual, or did
the mind perceive some real connexion among them, there wou’d
be no difﬁculty in the case. For my part, I must plead the privilege
of a sceptic, and confess, that this difﬁculty is too hard for my
understanding. (T, 636/N, 400)
The ﬁrst principle articulates the claim that perceptions are substances (for
as Hume argues, whatever is distinct may exist independently). The second

hume and idea ontology
265
principle expresses Hume’s inability to locate the dependence of perceptions
in their relations to other perceptions. If perceptions were not independent,
what might that mean in terms of the traditional ontology? Hume gives us
the possibilities. Perceptions might inhere in simple substances. Such an
alternative would in effect deny that perceptions are substances but preserve
his claims that they are dependent. Alternatively, we might explain the de-
pendence of perceptions by appealing to necessary ‘‘connexions’’ or rela-
tions. This option would enable us to accept Berkeley’s view that ideas are
quasi substances. They would be distinct and independent from minds but
nonetheless dependent on minds construed as necessary collections of per-
ceptions. But Hume ﬁnds himself unable to adopt Berkeley’s answer because
he ﬁnds on introspection no necessary relations of any sort.
Thus when Hume provides an initial account of the self, he seeks a unify-
ing faculty for the disparate perceptions that constitute the mind. One can-
didate for this role is memory. If, following Locke’s theory of personal
identity, we as persons were constituted by necessary connections among
perceptions (that we call ‘‘memory’’), that is, if certain perceptions by their
content and nature were necessarily a part of a particular collection, then
Hume’s dilemma fades away. But here again, the problem is that our percep-
tions do not demonstrate this kind of dependence. Hume sees the need for
perceptions to be dependent—and indeed baldly asserts that they are depen-
dent on a number of occasions—but cannot ﬁgure out how to make them
dependent given his prior claim that perceptions are distinct and individual
existences.
It is in part because I think my hypothesis explains the seriousness of
Hume’s dilemma as expressed in the appendix that I believe that Hume did
not depart in his thinking from the traditional ontology. Indeed, it is pre-
cisely because Hume weds himself to the ontology of ideas and impres-
sions—his thinking lies within the conﬁnes of an ontology of substance and
mode—that he ﬁnds himself in such a quandary.
9.3 Concluding Remarks: The Demise of the Early Modern Tale
The aim of this endeavor has been to debunk the early modern tale and
provide an account of the development of the way of ideas that acknowl-
edges the important role ontological concerns played in that development. I
hope to have succeeded in this project in at least two ways. First, I hope I
have made a good case for accepting that, as a matter of good history of

266
idea and ontology
philosophy, the developments in the ‘‘way of ideas’’ from Descartes to
Hume simply do not entail that we read any of the moderns as abandoning
or ‘‘deontologizing’’ ideas. Second, I hope I have shown that by embracing
the early modern tale we risk impoverishing our understanding of the early
moderns. If Berkeley, Locke, and Hume (among others) have gained philo-
sophical power and respectability as a result of my analysis, that is largely
because I have been unwilling to surrender them to a fairy tale designed for
mainly contemporary interests. Although I have not the space to make the
argument here, I think this lesson extends to other philosophers as well,
modern and contemporary. It does not pay to ignore ontology.
The early modern tale is one designed both to avoid the deep difﬁculties
of metaphysics and ‘‘save’’ the early moderns for contemporary philosophy.
Our fairy tale fails on both accounts. The problems of ontology are inescap-
able—and I believe that is just as true now as it was for the early moderns.
Idea epistemology without ontology leaves the systems of the best early
modern minds potentially more confused and less relevant. Trying to pre-
serve Locke from a sense-datum fallacy is an admirable aim, provided that
ﬁrst, we are conﬁdent that invoking sense data is a fallacy and provided that
we do not allow our contemporary interests to mask other historical insights
yet to be gleaned. Great minds can provide illumination in their failures as
well as their successes; we do not shame or belittle Locke by detailing the
struggles he had with ideas. Sometimes our own analyses are improved by
respecting the historical conditions that guided the thinking of the early
moderns. Thus I have tried to argue that Berkeley’s metaphysical system is
not quite as fantastical as some might believe. He might not be right, but he
has resources to employ in defense of his system that can be easily over-
looked if we are intent on forcing on him a contemporary ‘‘epistemology as
ﬁrst philosophy’’ perspective. If I am right, and Berkeley was also strongly
motivated by deeply metaphysical concerns (which is not to exclude episte-
mological ones), then new understandings of his controversial claims may
emerge. I submit that Berkeley’s theory of divine ideas, his attack on abstrac-
tion, and his heterogeneity thesis are all more potent when viewed in this
light. As a result, Berkeley has more philosophy to teach us than we might
have otherwise thought.
Even how we read Hume depends on the mindset with which we come
to the texts. When I was a younger philosopher (in several senses), Hume
held little attraction for me. I had no use for ﬁgures who wished to set our
theories of knowledge and belief adrift, unconnected to ontology. I still be-
lieve in the relevance of ontology, but now I have come to see Hume as a

hume and idea ontology
267
philosopher interested in ﬁxing our epistemological place by exploring its
natural and metaphysical boundaries. Those boundaries might involve thin
concepts, distant borders, and difﬁcult problems, but the enterprise makes
sense to me. Hume is not merely a critical skeptic; he has a positive agenda
that respects the need for an ontological ground, even if that ground does
not take center stage.
In tracing early modern discussions about the nature of ideas from Des-
cartes forward to Hume, it is clear that much of the friction generated in
those debates derives from the conﬂict between the epistemological roles
ideas play and the metaphysical nature of those same ideas. Conﬂicts typi-
cally can be resolved in several ways. Here I have argued mainly that the
early moderns did not seek to ‘‘deontologize’’ ideas as an answer to their
problems. To suppose that they did is not only to mischaracterize some of
the early moderns but also to miss some brilliant philosophy. Denying the
spectacular metaphysical speculations of the early moderns is to rob us
today of what they did best.


references
Acton, H. B. 1967. ‘‘George Berkeley.’’ In vol. 1 of The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed.
Paul Edwards. New York: Macmillan.
Acworth, Richard, ed. 1971. ‘‘Locke’s First Reply to John Norris.’’ The Locke Newsletter
2:7–11.
Adams, Robert Merrihew. 1975. ‘‘Where Do Our Ideas Come From?’’ In Innate Ideas,
ed. Stephen Stich, 71–87. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press.
Alexander, Samuel. 1908. Locke. London: Constable.
Alston, William. 1976. ‘‘The Representative Function of Ideas in Locke.’’ Unpublished
manuscript.
Anderson, Robert. 1966. Hume’s First Principles. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Anonymous. [1705] 1996. A Philosophick Essay Concerning Ideas, According to Dr. Sher-
lock’s Principles. New York: AMS Press.
Aristotle. 1984. Complete Works of Aristotle. Ed. Jonathan Barnes. 2 vols. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Armstrong, D. M. 1960. Berkeley’s Theory of Vision. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
———. 1997. A World of States of Affairs. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Arnauld, Antoine. 1990. On True and False Ideas. Trans. Elmar J. Kremer. Lewiston,
N.Y.: Edwin Mellen.
Arnauld, Antoine, and Pierre Nicole. 1996. Logic; or, The Art of Thinking. Trans. and
ed. Jill Vance Buroker. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Atherton, Margaret. 1990. Berkeley’s Revolution in Vision. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univer-
sity Press.
Augustine. 1993. On Free Choice of the Will. Trans. Thomas Williams. Indianapolis,
Ind.: Hackett.
Ayers, Michael. 1991. Locke: Epistemology and Ontology. New York: Routledge.
———. 1992. ‘‘Are Locke’s ‘Ideas’ Images, Intentional Objects, or Natural Signs?’’ In
John Locke: Theory of Knowledge, ed. Vere Chappell, 153–86. New York: Garland.
Belfrage, Bertil. 1987. ‘‘A New Approach to Berkeley’s Philosophical Notebooks.’’ In
Essays on the Philosophy of George Berkeley, ed. Ernest Sosa, 217–30. Boston: D.
Reidel.
Bennett, Jonathan. 1971. Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes. New York: Oxford
University Press.
———. 1979. ‘‘Analytic Transcendental Arguments.’’ In Transcendental Arguments and
Science, ed. Peter Bieri, Rolf P. Horstmann, and Lorenz Kru¨ger, 45–64. Dor-
drecht: D. Reidel.
———. 1996. ‘‘Ideas and Qualities in Locke’s Essay.’’ History of Philosophy Quarterly
13:73–88.
———. 2001. Learning from Six Philosophers. 2 vols. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Berkeley, George. 1948–57. The Works of George Berkeley, Bishop of Cloyne. Ed. A. A.
Luce and T. E. Jessop. 9 vols. London: Nelson.

270
references
———. 1975. Berkeley: Philosophical Works, Including the Works on Vision. Ed. Michael
Ayers. Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Littleﬁeld.
———. 1987. George Berkeley’s Manuscript Introduction. Ed. Bertil Belfrage. Heading-
ton, U.K.: Doxa.
Berman, David. 1986. ‘‘Berkeley’s Quad: The Question of Numerical Identity.’’ Idealis-
tic Studies 16:41–45.
———. 1999. Berkeley. New York: Routledge.
Bird, Alexander. 2001. ‘‘Review of Dispositions: A Debate and Dispositions.’’ The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 52:137–49.
Biro, John. 1993. ‘‘Hume’s New Science of the Mind.’’ In The Cambridge Companion
to Hume, ed. David Norton, 33–63. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bracken, Harry. 1963. ‘‘Berkeley and Malebranche on Ideas.’’ The Modern Schoolman
41:1–15.
Broad, C. D. 1975. Leibniz: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brook, Richard J. 1973. Berkeley’s Philosophy of Science. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Browne, Peter. 1976. The Procedure, Extent, and Limits of Human Understanding. New
York: Garland.
Brykman, Genevie`ve. 1987. ‘‘Berkeley on ‘Archetype.’’’ In Essays on the Philosophy of
George Berkeley, ed. Ernest Sosa, 103–12. Boston: D. Reidel.
———. 1997. Berkeley et le carte´sianisme. Nanterre: University of Paris X.
Chappell, Vere. 1986. ‘‘The Theory of Ideas.’’ In Essays on Descartes’ ‘‘Meditations,’’ ed.
A. O. Rorty, 177–98. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
———. 1994. ‘‘Locke’s Theory of Ideas.’’ In The Cambridge Companion to Locke, ed.
Vere Chappell, 26–55. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Church, R. W. 1970. A Study in the Philosophy of Malebranche. Port Washington, N.Y.:
Kennikat Press.
Cook, Monte. 1974. ‘‘Arnauld’s Alleged Representationalism.’’ Journal of the History of
Philosophy 12:53–62.
———. 1996. ‘‘Descartes and the Dustbin of the Mind.’’ History of Philosophy Quar-
terly 13:17–33.
Craig, E. J. 1968. ‘‘Berkeley’s Attack on Abstract Ideas.’’ Philosophical Review 77:425–37.
Cummins, Phillip. 1975. ‘‘Berkeley’s Ideas of Sense.’’ Nouˆs 9:55–72.
———. 1996. ‘‘Hume on Qualities.’’ Hume Studies 22:49–88.
Dancy, Jonathan. 1987. Berkeley: An Introduction. New York: Basil Blackwell.
Daniel, Stephen. 2000. ‘‘Berkeley, Sua´rez, and the Esse-Existere Distinction.’’ American
Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 74:621–36.
———. 2001a. ‘‘Berkeley’s Christian Neoplatonism, Archetypes, and Divine Ideas.’’
Journal of the History of Philosophy 39:239–58.
———. 2001b. ‘‘Edwards, Berkeley, and Ramist Logic.’’ Idealistic Studies 31:55–72.
Descartes, Rene´. 1984–91. The Philosophical Writings of Descartes. Trans. and ed. John
Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch. Vol. 3 also trans. Anthony
Kenny. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Doney, Willis. 1983. ‘‘Berkeley’s Argument Against Abstract Ideas.’’ In Midwest Studies
in Philosophy 8, ed. Peter French, Theodore Uehling Jr., and Howard Wett-
steing, 295–308. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Flage, Daniel. 1987. Berkeley’s Doctrine of Notions. London: Croom Helm.
———. 1990. David Hume’s Theory of Mind. New York: Routledge.
———. 2001. ‘‘Berkeley’s Archetypes.’’ Hermathena 171:7–31.
———. 2004. ‘‘Berkeley’s Epistemic Ontology: The Principles.’’ Canadian Journal of
Philosophy 34:25–60.

references
271
———. 2007. ‘‘Berkeley’s Epistemic Ontology: The Three Dialogues.’’ In New Interpre-
tations of Berkeley’s Thought, ed. Stephen Daniel, 45–75. Amherst, N.Y.: Human-
ity Books.
Foucher, Simon. 1995. Malebranche’s First and Last Critics. Trans. Richard Watson and
Marjorie Grene. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Frede, Michael. 1987. Essays in Ancient Philosophy. Minneapolis: University of Minne-
sota Press.
Gaukroger, Stephen. 1995. Descartes: An Intellectual Biography. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Gibson, James. [1917] 1960. Locke’s Theory of Knowledge and Its Historical Relations.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gibson, James J. 1976. ‘‘Three Kinds of Distance That Can Be Seen, or How Bishop
Berkeley Went Wrong.’’ In Studies in Perception: Festschrift for Fabio Metelli, ed.
Giovanni B. Flores D’Arcais, 83–87. Milan: Martello-Giunti.
Glauser, Richard. 1999. Berkeley et les philosophes du xiie sie`cle: Perception et scepticisme.
Sprimont, Belgium: Mardaga.
———. 2002. ‘‘Descartes, Suarez, and the Theory of Distinctions.’’ In The Philosophy
of Marjorie Grene, ed. Randall E. Auxier and Lewis Edwin Hahn, 417–45. La
Salle, Ill.: Open Court.
Greenlee, Douglass. 1977. ‘‘Locke’s Idea of ‘Idea.’’’ In Locke on Human Understanding,
ed. Ian Tipton, 41–47. New York: Oxford University Press.
Grey, Denis. 1952. ‘‘The Solipsism of Bishop Berkeley.’’ Philosophical Quarterly
2:338–49.
Hausman, Alan, and David Hausman. 1995. ‘‘A New Approach to Berkeley’s Ideal
Reality.’’ In Berkeley’s Metaphysics: Structural, Interpretive, and Critical Essays,
ed. Robert Muehlmann, 47–66. University Park: Pennsylvania State University
Press.
Heil, John. 2003. From an Ontological Point of View. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hight, Marc. 2001. ‘‘Locke’s Implicit Ontology of Ideas.’’ British Journal for the History
of Philosophy 9:17–42.
———. 2002. ‘‘Why We Do Not See What We Feel.’’ Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly
83:148–62.
———. 2005. ‘‘Defending Berkeley’s Divine Ideas.’’ Philosophia 33:97–128.
———. 2007a. ‘‘Berkeley and Bodily Resurrection.’’ Journal of the History of Philoso-
phy 45:443–58.
———. 2007b. ‘‘Why My Chair Is Not Merely a Congeries: Berkeley and the Single
Idea Thesis.’’ In Reexamining Berkeley’s Philosophy, ed. Steve Daniel, 82–107.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Hight, Marc, and Walter Ott. 2004. ‘‘The New Berkeley.’’ Canadian Journal of Philoso-
phy 34:1–24.
Hoffman, Paul. 1996. ‘‘Descartes on Misrepresentation.’’ Journal of the History of Phi-
losophy 34:357–81.
Hume, David. 1875. Essays Moral, Political, and Literary. Vol. 2. Ed. T. H. Green and
T. H. Grose. London: Longmans, Green.
———. 1978. A Treatise of Human Nature. Ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge. Rev. P. H. Nidditch.
New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 1999. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. Tom Beauchamp.
New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 2000. A Treatise of Human Nature. Ed. David Fate Norton and Mary J. Nor-
ton. New York: Oxford University Press.

272
references
Jolley, Nicholas. 1984. Leibniz and Locke. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 1990. The Light of the Soul. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 1996. ‘‘Berkeley, Malebranche, and Vision in God.’’ Journal of the History of
Philosophy 34:535–48.
———. 2005. Leibniz. New York: Routledge.
Kashap, S. Paul. 1978. ‘‘Spinoza’s Use of ‘Idea.’’’ In Spinoza: New Perspectives, ed.
Robert Shahan and John Biro, 57–70. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Kneale, William. 1939. ‘‘The Notion of a Substance.’’ Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society 40:103–34.
Kulstad, Mark. 1977. ‘‘Leibniz’s Concept of Expression.’’ Studia Leibnitiana 9:55–76.
Lee, Henry. [1702] 1984. Anti-Scepticism; or, Notes upon Each Chapter of Mr. Lock’s
‘‘Essay Concerning Human Understanding.’’ New York: Garland.
Leibniz, G. W. 1875–90. Die philosophischen Schriften von G. W. Leibniz. Ed. C. I. Ger-
hardt. 7 vols. Berlin: Weidmann.
———. 1962. Samtliche Schriften und Briefen. Ser. 6. Berlin: Berlin Academy.
———. 1976. Philosophical Papers and Letters. Trans. and ed. Leroy Loemker. 2nd ed.
Boston: D. Reidel.
———. 1981. New Essays on Human Understanding. Trans. and ed. Peter Remnant and
Jonathan Bennett. New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1989. Philosophical Essays. Trans. and ed. Roger Ariew and Daniel Garber.
Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett.
Lennon, Thomas. 1993. The Battle of the Gods and Giants. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
———. 1998. ‘‘Bennett on Ideas and Qualities in Locke’s Essay.’’ Locke Newsletter
29:13–21.
———. 2001a. ‘‘Locke and the Logic of Ideas.’’ History of Philosophy Quarterly
18:155–77.
———. 2001b. ‘‘Berkeley on the Act-Object Distinction.’’ Dialogue 40:651–67.
———. 2004a. ‘‘Through a Glass Darkly: More on Locke’s Logic of Ideas.’’ Paciﬁc
Philosophical Quarterly 85:322–37.
———. 2004b. ‘‘The Logic of Ideas and the Logic of Things: A Reply to Chappell.’’
Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly 85:356–60.
Locke, John. 1812. The Works of John Locke. 11th ed. 10 vols. London: Otridge and Son.
———. 1894. The Philosophical Works of John Locke. 2 vols. Ed. J. A. St. John. London:
G. Bell and Sons.
———. 1975. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. P. H. Nidditch. New
York: Oxford University Press.
———. 1976. The Correspondence of John Locke. 9 vols. Ed. E. S. De Beer. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Lovejoy, A. O. 1923. ‘‘‘Representative Ideas’ in Malebranche and Arnauld.’’ Mind
32:449–61.
Luce, Arthur A. 1942. ‘‘Berkeley’s Doctrine of the Perceivable.’’ Hermathena 9:3–15.
———. 1963. The Dialectic of Immaterialism. London: Hodder and Stoughton.
———. 1970. ‘‘Another Look at Berkeley’s Notebooks.’’ Hermathena 110:5–23.
Mabbott, J. D. [1931] 1968. ‘‘The Place of God in Berkeley’s Philosophy.’’ In Locke and
Berkeley: A Collection of Critical Essays, ed. D._M. Armstrong and C._B. Martin,
364–79. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press.
Mackie, J. L. 1972. Truth, Probability, and Paradox. New York: Oxford University Press.
Malebranche, Nicolas. 1958. Oeuvres comple`tes. 20 vols. Ed. Andre´ Robinet. Paris: J.
Vrin.

references
273
———. 1997a. The Search After Truth, with Elucidations of the Search After Truth.
Trans. and ed. Thomas M. Lennon and Paul J. Olscamp. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
———. 1997b. Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion. Ed. Nicholas Jolley and David
Scott. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mates, Benson. 1986. The Philosophy of Leibniz: Metaphysics and Language. New York:
Oxford University Press.
McCracken, Charles. 1983. Malebranche and British Philosophy. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Muehlmann, Robert. 1992. Berkeley’s Ontology. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett.
———. 1995. ‘‘The Substance of Berkeley’s Philosophy.’’ In Berkeley’s Metaphysics:
Structural, Interpretive, and Critical Essays, ed. Robert Muehlmann, 89–105. Uni-
versity Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Nadler, Stephen. 1992. Malebranche and Ideas. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nelkin, Norton. 1989. ‘‘Reid’s View of Sensations Vindicated.’’ In The Philosophy of
Thomas Reid, ed. Melvin Dalgarno and Eric Matthews, 67–77. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Norris, John. [1728] 1961. Cursory Reﬂections upon a Book Call’d ‘‘An Essay Concerning
Human Understanding.’’ Augustan Reprint Society, no. 93. Ed. Gilbert D.
McEwen. Los Angeles: William Andrews Clark Memorial Library, University of
California.
O’Connor, D. J. 1967. John Locke. New York: Dover.
Pappas, George. 2000. Berkeley’s Thought. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Pitcher, George. 1969. ‘‘Minds and Ideas in Berkeley.’’ American Philosophical Quar-
terly 6:198–207.
———. 1977. Berkeley. Boston: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
———. 1981. ‘‘Berkeley on the Mind’s Activity.’’ American Philosophical Quarterly
18:221–27.
Putnam, Hilary. 2004. Ethics Without Ontology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
Quine, Willard Van Orman. 1980. From a Logical Point of View. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Raynor, David. 1987. ‘‘Berkeley’s Ontology.’’ Dialogue 26:611–20.
Rome, Beatrice. 1963. The Philosophy of Malebranche. Chicago: Henry Regnery.
Russell, Bertrand. [1900] 1992. The Philosophy of Leibniz. New York: Routledge.
Rutherford, Donald. 1995. Leibniz and the Rational Order of Nature. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Ryle, Gilbert. [1933] 1968. ‘‘John Locke on the Human Understanding.’’ In Locke and
Berkeley: A Collection of Critical Essays, ed. D. M. Armstrong and C. B. Martin,
14–39. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press.
———. 1984. The Concept of Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sergeant, John. 1696. The Method to Science. London: Printed by W. Redmayne.
Shoemaker, Sidney. 1990. ‘‘Qualities and Qualia: What’s in the Mind?’’ Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research (fall supplement) 50:109–31.
Simmons, Alison. 1999. ‘‘Are Cartesian Sensations Representational?’’ Nouˆs 33:347–69.
Smith, Norman Kemp. 1964. The Philosophy of David Hume. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
Spinoza, Baruch. 1985–. Collected Works of Spinoza. Trans. and ed. Edwin Curley. 1 vol.
to date. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

274
references
Stack, George J. 1970. Berkeley’s Analysis of Perception. The Hague: Mouton.
Stillingﬂeet, Edward. 1697a. A Discourse in Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity.
London: Henry Mortlock.
———. 1697b. The Bishop of Worcester’s Answer to Mr. Locke’s Letter, Concerning
Some Passages Relating to His Essay of Humane Understanding. London: Henry
Mortlock.
Stoneham, Tom. 2002. Berkeley’s World: An Examination of the Three Dialogues. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Stubenberg, Leopold. 1990. ‘‘Divine Ideas: The Cure-all for Berkeley’s Immaterialism.’’
Southern Journal of Philosophy 27:221–49.
Thomas, George. 1976. ‘‘Berkeley’s God Does Not Perceive.’’ Journal of the History of
Philosophy 14:163–68.
Tipton, Ian. 1986. ‘‘‘Ideas’ in Berkeley and Arnauld.’’ History of European Ideas
7:575–84.
———. 1988. Berkeley: The Philosophy of Immaterialism. New York: Garland.
Warnock, G. J. 1982. Berkeley. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press.
Watson, Richard. 1987. The Breakdown of Cartesian Metaphysics. Atlantic Highlands,
N.J.: Humanities Press International.
———. 1991. ‘‘Foucher’s Mistake and Malebranche’s Break: Ideas, Intelligible Exten-
sion, and the End of Ontology.’’ In Nicolas Malebranche: His Philosophical Crit-
ics and Successors, ed. Stuart Brown, 22–33. Maastricht/Assen: Van Gorcum.
Wenz, Peter. 1976. ‘‘Berkeley’s Christian Neo-Platonism.’’ Journal of the History of Ideas
37:537–46.
Wilson, Margaret. 1994. ‘‘Descartes on Sense and ‘Resemblance.’’’ In Reason, Will, and
Sensation, ed. John Cottingham, 10–25. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 1996. ‘‘Spinoza’s Theory of Knowledge.’’ In The Cambridge Companion to
Spinoza, ed. Don Garrett, 89–143. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Winkler, Kenneth. 1989. Berkeley: An Interpretation. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Wolf-Devine, Celia. 1993. Descartes on Seeing. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University
Press.
Yandell, David. 1995. ‘‘Berkeley on Common Sense and the Privacy of Ideas.’’ History
of Philosophy Quarterly 12:411–23.
Yolton, John. 1956. John Locke and the Way of Ideas. New York: Oxford University
Press.
———. 1975. ‘‘Ideas and Knowledge in Seventeenth-Century Philosophy.’’ Journal of
the History of Philosophy 13:145–65.
———. 1983. Thinking Matter: Materialism in Eighteenth-Century Britain. Minneapo-
lis: University of Minnesota Press.
———. 1984. Perceptual Acquaintance from Descartes to Reid. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press.
———. 1985. Locke: An Introduction. New York: Basil Blackwell.
———. 1986. ‘‘Reply to Mr. Tipton.’’ History of European Ideas 7:584.
———. 1996a. Perception and Reality, A History from Descartes to Kant. Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press.
———. 1996b. Locke and the Way of Ideas. Bristol, U.K.: Thoemmes.
———. 2000. Realism and Appearances. New York: Cambridge University Press.

index
abstraction, 218–33, 235, 243. See also ideas, ab-
stract
Anderson, Robert, 254
Aristotle, 9, 11–14, 42, 43, 98, 221
Armstrong, D. M., 234, 238, 239
Arnauld, Antoine, 4, 39, 53, 55, 62, 65–66, 72–
78, 80, 82, 114, 116, 118, 119
critique of Malebranche, 75–78
as direct realist, 74
ideas as acts, 73–74
and mental presence, 75–76
representation, 41, 72–73, 76
theory of perception, 74–75
Atherton, Margaret, 239–40
attributes, as distinct from modes, 20–21
Augustine, 19, 59
Ayers, Michael, 86, 165
Beauchamp, Tom, 255
Belfrage, Bertil, 166–67
Bennett, Jonathan, 24–25, 91, 110, 116, 171
Berkeley, George, 4, 8–10, 31, 35, 42, 66, 115,
138–245, 246, 247–48, 250, 257, 266
and ‘‘’’ sign, 165–67
act/object distinction, 143–44, 146–47, 148–
52, 154, 195–200
archetypes, 157, 178–80, 185, 208–9, 210,
213–14
attributes, 21 n. 10
and common sense objects, 204, 210
and continuity of perceived world, 205–6
esse is percipi principle, 141, 154, 171, 175, 181,
194, 195, 199, 224
God, as preserving the world, 159–60,
206–8, 242
idea-quality conﬂation, 155–59, 194–95, 243,
260
ideas: abstract, 218–33, 235; as acts (see
Locke, ideas, as acts); adverbial account
of, 139–40, 142–55, 241–42; deontologiz-
ing, 28, 30, 173; dependence on minds, 25
n. 17, 139, 144, 152, 154, 198, 201; divine, 8,
177–217; as ‘‘external’’ to the mind, 141,
146, 159–60, 182, 186, 188, 240, 241; as
ﬂeeting, 209–17, 257–58; as heterogeneous,
9, 218, 233–45 (see also heterogeneity); nu-
merically identical to God’s, 187–88, 192
n. 17, 206–9; of imagination, 200, 207, 215;
as immediate, 154; ‘‘in’’ the mind, 140–41,
158, 181–89, 203–4; as modes, 138, 140,
142–43, 145–46, 148–55, 175, 183, 241–42; as
objects, 138, 141–48; as passive, 145, 206–8,
214, 243; as private, 178, 180, 193–205; as
quasi substance (see substance, quasi); of
reﬂection, 146–47; as relativized qualities,
202–4; as sensations, 151, 194–95; unper-
ceived existence of, 149, 152–53, 159–61
as identifying content and ontological
status, 241–45
law of saturation, 227
laws of nature, 168
likeness principle, 146, 213
minds (see Berkeley, spirits)
and minimum sensibilia, 157, 239, 253
mosaic account of creation, 169–71
notions, 153
perception, theory of, 157
and phenomenalism, 161–64, 167–72
qualities (see Berkeley, idea-quality conﬂa-
tion)
as realist, 156–8, 161, 174–75, 192, 197–98
and skepticism, 156, 157, 180, 184–85, 192, 193,
198, 203–4
spirits: as active, 145; no ideas of, 147, 153,
213; as the only substance, 139, 141; passive
in perception, 150–51, 156, 197–98
time, 19, 211 n. 40
and tulip-smelling argument, 195–98, 201
and volitional independence, 141, 158, 160,
206, 243
Berman, David, 234 n. 15
Brinkley, John, 123 n. 11
Brykman, Genevie´ve, 185 n. 13
causation
causal reality principle, 48, 50, 63
as contagion, 47, 49
among ideas, 50
mental-mental, 53–54
mind-body, 46, 52 n. 13
Chappell, Vere, 29, 82, 91
counterfactuals, grounded, 162–63

276
index
Craig, E. J., 219
Cummins, Phillip, 247
Daniel, Stephen, 139 n. 2, 167
dependence, ontological and causal, 14–15, 17–
18. See also Berkeley, ideas, dependence
on mind
Descartes, Rene´, 2, 6, 26, 31, 35, 37–54, 55–56,
59, 66, 114, 151, 154, 173, 267
animal spirits, 45, 51, 53
causal reality principle (see causation)
concept of mode, 20–21, 67
concept of substance, 11, 15, 16–17, 19–20
ideas: adventitious, 47, 54; as corporeal, 6,
38, 44–47; deﬁnition of, 38, 43; innate,
47–51; innovative use of, 37
material/objective distinction, 29, 34, 38–40,
56, 82
mind-body relation, 46
pineal gland (gland H), 44–45, 47, 51, 53
and qualities, 43
and wax analogy, 42, 45
dispositions, 8, 49, 117–36. See also ideas, as dis-
positions
grounded, 32–33, 120, 129, 163
of the soul, 53
distance, not immediately seen, 234
distinctness, strong and weak, 144–45
divine ideas. See Berkeley, ideas, divine
Duns Scotus, John, 37
epistemology
as ﬁrst philosophy, 266
as ground for ontology, 174–75
as ‘‘pure,’’ 30–34
Flage, Daniel, 173–75
Foucher, Simon, 39
Gibson, James, 101
God
as atemporal, 19, 187
attributes expressed in us, 133–36
archetypal order of, 177, 179–93, 206, 242
as enduring, 19
as independent substance, 15, 17, 59
as inﬁnite, 68
as a perceiver, 160–61, 187–88, 194, 199–200,
202
as purus actus, 64, 133–35, 191
simple nature of, 75, 77, 190, 202
Heil, John, 1
heterogeneity, 9, 218, 233–45. See also Berkeley,
ideas, as heterogeneous
and abstraction, 235
and adding lines, 238
and distinctness of content, 237–38
and Molyneux thought experiment, 236–37
Hobbes, Thomas, 37
Hume, David, 5, 9–10, 132, 173, 209–11, 246–67
bundle theory of mind, 247, 253, 259–61, 263,
264
and conceivability principle, 249–51
concept of substance, 18, 246, 248–49, 253,
254–58, 262
and copy thesis, 249
and difference-existence principle, 250–51
and immaterial soul, 261–63
and perceptions: as dependent, 247, 258–65;
as determinate, 250–51, 254; distinct from
minds, 253; as ideas and impressions, 249;
as independent, 248, 251–52, 254, 258, 259,
265; simple and complex, 257–58; as sub-
stances, 247, 248–58, 263, 264
and person, 256
and powers of the mind, 260, 264
as skeptic about substance, 247, 255, 262–63,
267
ideas
abstract, 9, 58; as determinate, 223–24, 228–
31, 233; as impossible entities, 224–26, 231;
as particular, 220–23, 228. See also ab-
straction; Locke, ideas, abstract
as corporeal, 6, 38, 92–93
deontologized, 4, 10, 28–34, 81–83, 173, 267
as dispositions, 8, 32–33, 49, 117–24, 129–36
‘‘external’’ to the mind, 9, 108, 112, 141, 146,
159–60, 180
general, 224, 231–33
as heterogeneous (see Berkeley, ideas, as het-
erogeneous)
as images, 39, 46, 96–98, 109
innate (see Descartes, ideas, as innate; Leib-
niz, ideas, as innate)
as intentional objects, 29, 31–34 (see also
Locke, ideas, as intentional objects)
material and objective (see Descartes, mate-
rial/objective distinction)
as objects, 23, 31, 31–33, 64, 90–92, 102, 138,
141–48
reiﬁed, 5, 23–27, 30, 31, 93
as signs, 40–41
as things, 22, 24, 90, 93, 153, 157, 228, 233, 243
as veridical, 39–40
as volitionally independent, 35, 102 (see also
Berkeley, and volitional independence)

index
277
Jesseph, Douglas, 123 n. 11
Johnson, Samuel, 179, 185–86
Jolley, S. Nicholas, 8, 37, 63, 116–19, 121 nn. 8
and 9, 124, 134, 136, 191
Kneale, William, 13
Knox, Ronald, 159
Lee, Henry, 96–98
Leibniz, G. W., 4–5, 7, 24 n. 14, 115, 116–37, 138,
209, 212
and God and simple ideas, 130, 133–34
and expression 119, 129–30, 132
ideas: deﬁnition of, 116, 118–19; as disposi-
tions, 117–36; having vs. being, 124–26,
136; as innate, 121, 126–28; as modes, 117,
118, 123, 124, 128, 136–37; occurrent,
125–26; as qualities, 122; simple and com-
plex, 130–31
and image of God doctrine, 134
and petites perceptions, 120–21, 127, 129, 131
and powers, 118–19, 131–32, 135
and substance, 13, 14, 16, 17–18
Lennon, Thomas, 7, 23 n. 12, 81, 88–94, 110, 114,
150 n. 15
Locke, John, 3, 4, 6–7, 9, 31, 32, 33, 42, 62, 78,
79–115, 116, 127, 130, 131, 138, 143, 154, 155–
56, 178–80, 191, 200, 203, 209, 212, 215, 265,
266
ambiguity of perception, 83–84
as bracketing ontology, 79–80, 113
and concept of substance, 15
as deontologizing ideas, 28–30, 81
ideas: abstract, 219–31, 232; conﬂation with
qualities, 106, 109–13; deﬁnition of, 84, 94,
99–100, 106–7; as images, 92; as inten-
tional objects, 84–87; as intrinsically rep-
resentational, 87; as material, 114; as
modes, 97–99, 102–6, 108, 112, 114; as ob-
jects, 90–92, 100; as particular 85; as signs,
85–87; simple and complex, 89–90, 130; as
substances, 102, 104, 107–14
and knowledge, 84–85
and material genitive, 93–94
memory, 98, 102–3, 110
pain, idea of, 107–8
and presence to the mind, 86, 87, 88, 100
and the soul, 101
and transparency of the mind, 103, 111
time, theory of, 212
Luce, A. A., 157, 165
Mabbott, J. D., 177, 206–07
Malebranche, Nicolas, 4, 19, 31, 32, 53, 55–78,
80, 94, 98, 100, 104–7, 113, 114, 116, 118, 119,
143, 151, 178–80, 189–91, 208, 212, 244, 246
archetypes, 60
dispute with Arnauld, nature of, 6, 72
ideas: concept of, 55, 58–66, 69; as efﬁca-
cious, 63–64, 65; of the inﬁnite, 68; as
modes, critique of, 55–56, 61, 66–69; simi-
lar to substances, 59, 61–66, 70–71
and imagination, 57
and mental presence, 62–63, 66, 75–76, 86
and perception, 61
and representation, 41
and sensations (sentiment), 56, 57, 64, 100,
104, 106, 151
vision in God doctrine, 60, 75, 107, 179, 189
Mates, Benson, 7, 117, 119, 136
mind, transparency of. See soul, transparency
of
mode, 11, 105. See also Berkeley, ideas, as
modes
distinct from attributes, 20–21
as things, 20–22, 24
Molyneux, William, 236
Muehlmann, Robert, 108 n. 23, 139 n. 2, 188,
194–202, 242–44
Nadler, Steven, 58, 63, 106 n. 21
Nelkin, Norton, 108 n. 23
Nicole, Pierre, 41
Norris, John, 7, 98, 113, 190–91
O’Connor, D. J., 4
occasionalism, Cartesian, 52–54
Ockham, William, 37
ontology
abandonment of, 2, 5, 7, 70–72, 244, 247, 263
breakdown of, 5, 11
exhaustive nature of, 3, 11, 20, 22, 98, 141
traditional, 2 n. 2, 5, 8, 11, 70–72, 95, 99, 101,
115, 139–40, 231, 244–45, 247–48, 254, 257,
259, 263–64
Pappas, George, 219
perception
and act/object distinction, 31–32, 74, 103–4,
143–4, 146–47, 148–52, 154, 195–200
always takes an object, 32, 65, 83
as broad umbrella term, 58, 160
camera obscura model of, 27
and error, 206–7
at a mental distance, 41
as requiring mental presence, 30, 62
and nature of ideas, 22
Pessin, Andrew, 122 n. 10

278
index
Pitcher, George, 142, 144, 149–50, 154–55, 227–
28, 237
Plato, 26, 96, 211–12
privacy. See Berkeley, ideas, as private
Putnam, Hillary, 1
Quine, W. V. O., 23, 26
quasi substance. See substance, quasi
reiﬁcation. See ideas, as reiﬁed
relations, 33, 102, 107
representation, 30, 31, 34, 38–41, 223, 240
by ‘‘calling attention to,’’ 92
of the inﬁnite, 68
and Malebranche-Arnauld dispute, 72,
76–77
Ryle, Gilbert, 99
Sergeant, John, 100
soul, transparency of, 56, 103, 111, 236
Spinoza, Baruch, 7, 12, 21, 209, 261–62
Stillingﬂeet, Edward (Bishop of Worcester),
95–96
Stoneham, Tom, 152 n. 19, 202–4, 207 n. 33
Stubenberg, Leopold, 177, 205–6
substance, 11–20, 254–58
as atemporal, 19
breakdown of (see ontology, breakdown of)
as conceptually thin, 10, 254–57, 261–63
core conception of, 11–20, 35–36, 102 (see
also ontology, traditional)
created, 16, 19
and endurance criterion, 12–14, 18–19, 26,
257–58
and epistemic priority, 19
and independence criterion, 14–18, 26, 102
and mode, 5
primary and secondary, 13–14, 26, 221, 231
quasi, 8, 35, 141, 158, 162, 175, 189, 218, 219,
228, 231, 233, 240, 242–45, 248, 258, 265
as ‘‘thing thought,’’ 13–16, 257
traditional conception of (see ontology, tra-
ditional)
tale, the early modern, 35, 265–67
and Berkeley, 139, 147, 172–76, 177, 193, 233,
244–45
deﬁned, 2–10
and Descartes, 37
and Hume, 173, 246–47
and Leibniz, 117
and Locke, 87–88
Tipton, I. C., 27, 28, 142
Watson, Richard, 3, 27–28, 30, 70–71, 140, 172–
73, 246, 252
Wenz, Peter, 181 n. 8
Willis, Doney, 224–26
Winkler, Ken, 31 n. 23, 32 n. 24, 141–42, 144–45,
147–48, 161–63, 165, 171–72, 197
Yandell, David, 187, 207
Yolton, John, 3, 7, 27–30, 81–87, 88, 93, 104, 173,
248

“A wide-ranging study of the ‘way of ideas’ and its metaphysics, culminating 
in a bold reinterpretation of Berkeley.” 
	
	
	
	
—Kenneth Winkler, Yale University
Marc Hight’s book deals in great depth with the ontology of ideas in the 
early modern period, concentrating principally on Descartes, Malebranche, 
Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume. He shows that there is a great deal 
still to be learned on this traditional topic as it concerns each of these 
great philosophers. Hight’s insightful and very well-defended inter-
pretations will likely excite important new interest and debate on 
this central topic.”
                  —George Pappas, The Ohio State University
Idea and Ontology is an important book which should change 
our thinking about the development of philosophy in the pre-
Kantian period.  With care, attention to detail, and philosophi-
cal rigor, Hight systematically demolishes the popular ‘early mod-
ern tale’ about an epistemological turn and shows the ineliminability 
of the question ‘What kind of thing is an idea?’ Hight’s sympathetic and 
sophisticated interpretation of Berkeley is rightly placed center stage 
in his account of the progress from Descartes to Hume and gives us 
a new insight into his relation to his predecessors and especially to 
Locke. While Locke shied away from ontological questions in favor 
of the epistemological, Hight’s Berkeley sees the importance of tak-
ing ontology as seriously as epistemology if he is to save the ordi-
nary commitment to naïve realism from the sceptical threat posed 
by the theory of ideas.”            
                            —T. W. C. Stoneham, University of York
Hight’s book is a very interesting and original inquiry into the difficulty 
early modern philosophers had in reconciling the central concept of 
‘idea’ with traditional ontological categories like substance and mode. 
Hight’s point is that the claim of some early moderns to avoid those cat-
egories has significant difficulties, since the notion of ‘idea’ in some ways 
has the properties of a mode and in other ways the properties of a 
substance.”
                            —Richard Brook, Bloomsburg University
ISBN 978-0-271-03383-9
9 780271 033839
90000
The Pennsylvania State University Press
University Park, Pennsylvania
www.psupress.org
“
“
“

