

Praises for Identity Theft Handbook: Detection, Prevention and Security
‘‘No one in the world is more knowledgeable about Identity Theft than Mr. Biegelman. This book
has it all—well-written and researched, chock full of illustrative examples, and insightful tips on
how to reduce and prevent this burgeoning crime.’’
—Joseph T. Wells, CFE, CPA, Founder and Chairman, Association of
Certified Fraud Examiners
‘‘In the same way he has unselfishly shared his vast knowledge on the establishment of financial
investigations units and world-class compliance programs, Mr. Biegelman has once again
delivered what will undoubtedly become the authoritative work on Identity Theft. What makes
his latest book so powerful is that it can both be utilized as a primer to college students pursuing
careers in economic crime investigations while at the same time serve as an invaluable desk
reference to veteran financial crime investigators. With his latest work, Marty has further
solidified his iconic status in the investigative and fraud prevention field.’’
—Scott Moritz, Executive Director, Daylight Forensic & Advisory
‘‘Biegelman’s Identity Theft Handbook provides a thorough discussion of the history and
typology of identity theft and fraud that is enriched by significant and poignant cases from
investigative files. One cannot help but be impressed by the permutations and resiliency of this
crime, the dogged determination of those who investigate and prosecute offenders and those who
research the motivations and methods of offenders in an effort to devise technologies and
countermeasures to detect and prevent identity theft. Although I have studied identity theft from
the legal perspective for several years, the Handbook has provided me with different perspectives
on identity theft. This is an ideal read for those whose daily tasks involve fighting identity theft,
but also those wish to learn about this crime for the first time. It should also be mandatory reading
for legislators, regulators, and other policymakers seeking to define and resolve issues of data
privacy.’’
—George E. Curtis, J.D., Executive Director, Economic Crime Institute & Professor
of Criminal Justice, Utica College
‘‘Martin has done it again! This book is a must-read for anyone who cares about protecting their
financial health and reputation as well as those of us who protect and counsel others. As a former
federal prosecutor and now private practitioner, I have seen the devastating financial and
emotional impact that identity theft can cause. Each year I advise numerous corporate and
individual clients, from major league athletes, celebrities, and corporate executives to physicians,
attorneys and banking and investment professionals, on how they should protect themselves and
their clients against the fastest-spreading financial disease— identity theft. Martin’s latest book
provides insightful guidance, extremely helpful suggestions, and practical examples that will be
your best defense against identity theft. Every fiscally responsible adult needs to read this book.’’
—George A. Stamboulidis, Esq., Managing Partner of the New York office
and head of the White Collar Defense & Corporate Investigations Team
at Baker Hostetler LLP

‘‘Identity theft, the fastest growing white collar crime, preys upon the assets and reputations of
businesses and consumers, even the deceased. Sadly it is one of the few crimes in which the
victim must often first prove their innocence before anyone will pay attention. Law enforcement
cannot give identity theft the attention it needs due to the sheer volume and the fact that it crosses
so many jurisdictions, often world-wide thanks to the Internet. No consumer or business is
immune from its reach and all would be well advised to read this book by a renowned, innovative
investigator with a unique blend of knowledge, story-telling ability, and experience as a federal
investigator and now as an industry fraud expert in one of the largest companies in the world.
Martin Biegelman has devoted his life to fighting crime, protecting consumers and businesses,
and teaching thousands of investigators and auditors.’’
—Kenneth Hunter, Former Chief Postal Inspector, Former President & CEO,
Council of Better Business Bureaus
‘‘The issue of identity theft is one of the most important and controversial of our time. Martin
does a masterful job of bringing value to both the naive consumer and the educated professional
with his new book on the subject. He set the bar very high with his previous works and his latest
on Identity Theft continues the trend.’’
—Dan Wachtler, President & CEO, IPSA International, Inc.
‘‘Some executives will read this book after they discover that private information they were
entrusted to hold on to, was not held tight enough. Others will read Martin Biegelman’s Identity
Theft Handbook before a leak occurs. I recommend the latter.’’
—Roy Snell, CEO, Society of Corporate Compliance and Ethics
Over the past several years, identity crimes have captured the interest and imagination of the
media, the public, and, yes, fraudsters. Nonetheless, professional publications on this subject
have been scarce. With Identity Theft Handbook: Detection, Prevention and Security, Martin
Biegelman fills the need for one comprehensive volume addressing all of the various aspects of
identity frauds. Drawing on his many years of experience and his well-recognized expertise in the
field of fraud fighting, Mr. Biegelman has produced the definitive book on this subject. Richly
researched, yet written in an accessible and interesting style, Mr. Biegelman’s Identity Theft
Handbook: Detection, Prevention and Security will undoubtedly become the primary resource
for fraud examiners, researchers, academics, member of law enforcement, and anyone else
interested in identity theft.
—William J. Kresse, MS, JD, CPA, CFE, Associate Professor and Director of
Graduate Programs in Fraud Examination, Graham School of Management,
Saint Xavier University, Chicago, 2007 ACFE Educator of the Year

Identity Theft Handbook


Identity Theft Handbook
Detection, Prevention, and Security
Martin T. Biegelman
JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.

Copyright # 2009 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-
8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed
to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 201-748-
6011, fax 201-748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparingthisbook,they makenorepresentationsorwarrantieswithrespecttothe accuracy orcompletenessof
the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for
a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales
materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should
consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of
profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential,
or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services, or technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at 800-762-2974, outside the United States at 317-572-
3993 or fax 317-572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not
be available in electronic books.
For more information about Wiley products, visit our Web site at http://www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Biegelman, Martin T.
Identity theft handbook : detection, prevention and security / Martin T. Biegelman.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-17999-4 (cloth)
1. Identity theft—United States.
2. Identity theft—United States—Prevention.
I. Title.
HV6679.B54 2009
332.024—dc22
2008037343
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

This book is dedicated to the men and women of the United States
Postal Inspection Service. These outstanding law enforcement
professionals were fighting the scourge of identity theft and protecting
consumers and businesses long before the crime was named.


Contents
About the Author
xv
Foreword
xvii
Preface
xix
Acknowledgments
xxiii
1 THE IDENTITY THEFT EXPLOSION
1
What Is Identity Theft?
2
It Is Not Rocket Science
3
Early Days of Credit Cards
6
Limiting Losses
8
Jail Order Fraud
10
Identity Theft Was Not a High Priority
11
2 GAME OF THE NAME: HOW IT ALL BEGAN
13
First Identity Theft Victim
14
Identity Fraud Connection
14
History of Credit Cards
15
Growth of Credit Card Fraud
17
Even Postal Employees Will Steal
20
Recidivism Is Common
21
Mail Theft and Phony ID
22
The Circulation: A Southern California Crime Syndicate
22
3 HOW IDENTITY THEFT OCCURS
27
Criminal Roles of Identity Thieves
28
How Identity Thieves Steal Your Good Name
28
4 STUDENT LOAN FRAUD AND THE THEFT OF IDENTITY
45
Growth and Impact of Student Loan Fraud
46
Financial Fleecing 101: The Case of John Edward Christensen
47
ix

A Family Affair of Fraud
48
Trying to Make Amends
49
Compromise of Student Loan Data
49
Admission to the Ivy League through ID Theft
50
More Cases
52
It Is Not Just an American Problem
52
Department of Education’s Outreach Prevention Program
53
5 NIGERIAN CRIMINAL ENTERPRISES
57
FBI Recognizes the Growing Identity Theft Threat
58
Genesis of the Problem
59
Credit Card and Identity Fraud
60
Highly Confidential Identity Theft ‘‘Training Manual’’
60
Check Fraud
62
Advance Fee or ‘‘419’’ Fraud
62
Senate Hearings
64
Nigerian Criminal Enterprises
68
Ongoing Threat of Fraud
70
6 METHAMPHETAMINE, THE MAILS, AND CHECK WASHING
73
Mail Theft Problem
74
Check Washing: A New Spin on Mail Theft
75
All ‘‘Methed’’ Up: The Drug Connection
76
Origin of the Problem
78
Changing Face of Check Forgery
80
Prevention Efforts
81
The Problem Continues Today
82
7 THE VIOLENT SIDE OF IDENTITY THEFT
85
Chicago Parcel Bomb Murder Case
88
Mail Theft Turned Violent
90
An Identity Thief Turns His Brutality on Law Enforcement
93
8 MEDICAL IDENTITY THEFT
97
It Is Often an Insider
98
Unprotected Medical Files
98
Being Your Own Detective
99
Snooping Eyes
99
Theft and Fraudulent Use of Physician Names and Licenses
100
Life-and-Death Consequences
102
It Started with an Innocent Advertisement
102
Arizona’s Identity Theft Problem
102
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
103
CONTENTS
x

Healthcare Records on the Web
104
National Health Information Network
105
Prevention and Security
107
And So It Continues
110
9 FAKE IDS
113
Fake IDs on the Web
114
Senate Hearing on Phony IDs
115
Justice Served
116
Interstate Identity Theft and Fake ID Ring
116
Operation Catchnet
119
Major Fraudulent Document Manufacturing Ring
122
Using Identities of the Dead
122
10 LEGISLATION AND CRIMINAL STATUTES
129
Criminal Statutes
130
Legislative Acts
136
Impact of Legislation
148
11 LAW ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS
151
Metro Richmond Identity Theft Task Force
151
Operation Reconcile
152
Felony Lane Gang
154
Law Enforcement Efforts to Enact Antifraud Legislation
157
M.I.A.M.I. Program
159
Financial Industry Mail Security Initiative
160
12 TEENS AND YOUNG ADULTS AS VICTIMS AND PERPETRATORS
163
Teenage Hackers
164
Teen De´ja` Vu
165
It Is So Easy, Even a Child Can Do It
169
Evil Mentor
171
Child ID Theft
172
Prevention and Security for Teenagers and Young Adults
173
13 VICTIMS AND VICTIMIZATION
177
An Identity Theft Nightmare
178
Getting a New SSN If All Else Fails
178
Operation Gaffle
179
Victim and Witness Rights
181
Victim Notification System
184
Recent Milestones in Victims’ Rights
187
‘‘The Best-Laid Plans of Mice and Men Often Go Awry’’
188
Forever Vigilant
189
Contents
xi

14 THE SAN DIEGO EXPERIENCE
191
Destination of Choice
191
Rise of the NDCBU
192
Unforeseen Achilles’ Heel
193
Thefts and Frauds of the 1980s and 1990s
194
Impact of Meth in San Diego
196
Emergence of Organized Gangs
200
The Way It Is Today
200
15 THE RICH, THE FAMOUS, AND THE DEAD GET NO PEACE
205
Dumpster Diving Hits a Home Run
206
No Rest for the Dead
207
Genealogy and the Risk of Identity Theft
208
Who Is John Doe?
214
What Is a Genealogist to Do?
215
Identity Thieves Are Equal Opportunity Abusers
217
16 IDENTITY THEFT GOES GLOBAL
221
Australia
222
Japan
222
United Kingdom
223
Morocco
223
Brazil
224
Russia
224
India
225
China
226
Global Phishing Scheme
226
Terrorism and Identity Theft
226
Global Identity Theft and Money-Laundering Ring
229
17 PRIVACY AND DATA BREACHES
239
Loss of Privacy
239
Defining ‘‘Privacy’’
240
Data Breaches
241
Insider Threats
243
Your Home Is Their Castle
244
Carelessness as a Contributing Factor
244
Wireless (In)Fidelity
245
T.J. Maxx Attack
246
P2P Networks
248
Botnets: Zombie Armies of the Internet
250
Plunder Down Under
251
Protecting PII
258
CONTENTS
xii

18 IDENTITY THEFT RESEARCH
263
Saint Xavier University Study of Identity Theft Incidents
264
The President’s Identity Theft Task Force
268
Federal Trade Commission’s 2006 Survey Report
274
19 THE CENTER FOR IDENTITY MANAGEMENT
AND INFORMATION PROTECTION
277
About CIMIP
277
CIMIP and Utica College
278
Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-Based Foundation
for Proactive Enforcement
279
Executive Summary
279
Implications for Law Enforcement
290
20 PREVENTING IDENTITY THEFT: 21 RULES YOU MUST USE
295
21 FUTURE OF IDENTITY THEFT
313
Predicting the Future
314
Making Money from Identity Theft
315
Proactive Approach and Education Outreach
319
No Country for Identity Thieves
325
Appendix
DESIGNING AN EFFECTIVE IDENTITY
THEFT RED FLAGS RULE COMPLIANCE PROGRAM
329
Index
339
Contents
xiii


About the Author
Martin T. Biegelman, CFE, CCEP, is Director of Financial Integrity for Microsoft
Corporation in Redmond, Washington. In 2002, he joined Microsoft to create and lead a
worldwide fraud detection, investigation, and prevention program based within Internal
Audit. In addition to focusing on preventing financial fraud and abuse, his group
promotes financial integrity, fiscal responsibility, and compliance in a COSO frame-
work of improved business ethics, effective internal controls, and greater corporate
governance. He works closely with Microsoft’s executive leadership, the Office of Legal
Compliance, Internal Audit, and others in protecting Microsoft from financial and
reputational risk.
He has more than 30 years of experience in fraud detection and prevention. Prior to
joining Microsoft, he was a Director of Litigation and Investigative Services in the Fraud
Investigation Practice at BDO Seidman, LLP, an international accounting and consult-
ing firm. He is also a former federal law enforcement professional, having served as a
United States Postal Inspector in a variety of investigative and management assign-
ments. As a federal agent, he was a subject matter expert in fraud detection and
prevention. He retired as the Inspector in Charge of the Phoenix, Arizona, Field Office of
the Postal Inspection Service. He also served as a technical advisor in the filming of the
Showtime movie The Inspectors II on the subject of identity theft.
Mr. Biegelman is a Certified Fraud Examiner as well as an adjunct faculty member,
Regent Emeritus, and Fellow of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE).
He is a Certified Compliance and Ethics Professional, a member of the Society of
Corporate Compliance and Ethics, and an adjunct faculty member. He serves on the
Board of Directors of the ACFE Foundation, the Board of Advisors for the Economic
Crime Institute at Utica College, and the Accounting Advisory Board for the Department
of Accounting and Law in the School of Business at the University at Albany, State
University of New York. He is also a member of ASIS International and the High
Technology Crime Investigation Association.
He is a sought-after speaker and instructor on identity theft, white-collar crime,
corruption, security, fraud prevention, and corporate compliance. He has written
numerous articles on fraud-related subjects including identity theft, corporate crime,
Internet fraud, check fraud, fraud prevention, corporate investigations, and the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act. Mr. Biegelman is the author of Building a World-Class Compliance
xv

Program: Best Practices and Strategies for Success and coauthor of Executive Roadmap
to Fraud Prevention and Internal Control: Creating a Culture of Compliance. He is also
a contributing author to Fraud Casebook: Lessons from the Bad Side of Business.
He is the 2008 recipient of the Cressey Award bestowed annually by the Association
of Certified Fraud Examiners for lifetime achievements in the detection and deterrence
of fraud.
Mr. Biegelman has a Bachelor of Science degree from Cornell University and a
Master of Public Administration from Golden Gate University.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
xvi

Foreword
The magnitude of the identity theft and fraud problem is enormous. Identity fraud was
identified as one of the top priorities of the Department of Justice, just prior to the
terrorist attacks of 9/11. Naturally, everyone’s priorities changed after 9/11. The impact
of identity theft and identity fraud is reaching a proportion and a level of sophistication
by the criminal element that prompt coordination by governments, multinational
corporations, and citizens is required if we are going to have any significant impact.
Identity Theft Handbook: Detection, Prevention, and Security is also very timely,
considering the woes of our financial services/banking industry. Current poor economic
trends, oil prices, and mortgage lending problems threaten the confidence in our
financial services industry. It must be protected from further damage from identity
theft and identity fraud.
Identity Theft Handbook: Detection, Prevention, and Security is a great beginning to
understanding the history and complexity of the identity theft and identity fraud
problem. Biegelman gives an excellent view of the history of the identity theft problem
in the United States. The past method of operation for criminals committing these crimes
provides a framework for understanding the origins of their new methods and indicates
how much the criminal element has grown.
In the Postal Inspection Service, we separate identity crimes into two areas: identity
theft and identity fraud. Identity theft is the act of stealing your identity. This often
includes your Social Security Number, driver’s information, date of birth, and so on.
Biegelman gives a very clear picture of the old days of Dumpster diving to obtain
personal identifying information to the newest threats dealing with today’s very tech-
nologically savvy, borderless, international organized criminals.
In today’s world, two of the common ways of stealing identities are computer
intrusion and infiltration. We have seen far too many examples of computer intrusion.
As Biegelman outlines, infiltration is when the criminals intentionally gain employ-
ment in a company to access large quantities of personal information or bribe existing
employees to steal the information. The use of technology to maintain massive
quantities of data has opened up greater opportunities for infiltration as a prime method
for stealing your identity.
Identity fraud is the use of your personal information to obtain money, products, or
services, using your identity and your credit. Biegelman takes us from the old days of
xvii

submitting a fraudulent, handwritten application for a credit card, to the use of online
banking systems to defraud on a grander scale.
Identity Theft Handbook: Detection, Prevention, and Security provides insight that
may be helpful in preventing victimization. Governments, corporations, and individual
citizens all can learn how to better protect personal identifying information and to reduce
fraud.
The Postal Inspection Service is at the forefront of the Department of Justice’s new
efforts to combat international organized crime. Governments must coordinate inves-
tigations, prevention, and awareness in order to reduce the crimes and protect commerce.
We also play a key role with the Departments of Justice and Homeland Security in
ensuring that identity theft and identity fraud are not used for funding terrorist activities.
Virtually every major terrorist event involved identity theft; many involved identity
fraud for funding terrorist activities.
Corporations play a key role in future mitigation of identity crimes. Self-audits and
due diligence are needed to protect that valuable information you have entrusted to
them: your identity. Also, their corporate brand reputation, fraud losses, and customer
loyalty all depend on the protection of that information.
Finally, individual citizens must be as savvy as the criminals seeking to steal their
identity. The new methods of stealing your identity require you to understand and use
technology to protect yourself. Understanding the dos and don’ts of protecting your
identity are key, but that will stop only some of the criminals’ methods.
In all, Biegelman has more than accurately captured the challenges of both today and
tomorrow in the world of identity theft and identity fraud. Here we get a clear picture of
the challenges to come and the opportunities to meet those challenges. Now we need
action. I hope some of the leaders in both business and government who read this book
(as well as the average citizen) are prompted to get involved and take action. The
consequences of inaction are grave.
Kenneth R. Jones
Deputy Chief Inspector
U.S. Postal Inspection Service
Washington, DC
August 2008
FOREWORD
xviii

Preface
This is the book that I have always wanted to write. In fact, I have been preparing for it
for 30 years, since my early days investigating mail theft and credit card fraud. ‘‘Identity
theft’’ was not even a term then. That would come in the 1990s. The crime had many
names, but it was always the same. Identity theft was and is an evil with a life of its own.
It has grown from just an American problem into a worldwide epidemic that shows no
signs of ending.
My first experience with identity theft was in 1978, when I was a newly hired United
States Postal Inspector in the New York metropolitan area. I heard other inspectors tell
stories of fraudulent credit card applications and the resulting credit card frauds, the ease
of obtaining personal information and phony identification to perpetrate this crime, how
foreign nationals were behind many of the schemes, and how much money the banks and
growing credit card industry were losing. It seemed like such a simple crime to commit.
By 1981, I was assigned to a team of federal agents investigating mail theft involving
credit cards, checks, and other valuables sent through the mail. I saw firsthand how
identity theft occurred and how easy it was to perpetrate. It still would be years before
the crime would get the name ‘‘identity theft.’’ At the time we called it credit card fraud,
fraud apps (for credit card application fraud), true name fraud, and the Crime of the ’80s.
As I investigated case after case, I came to the realization that this was not just any
typical fraud.
Back then there were not many in law enforcement involved in fighting this crime. As
the epidemic grew, more and more federal, state, and local law enforcement agents
would learn about and start investigations into identity theft. Even though we were
making arrest after arrest of defendants involved in this crime, other fraudsters just took
their places. It felt like we were fighting a losing battle. We realized that prevention
needed to be embraced and evangelized to the public as well as the financial services
industry. Perhaps education and awareness could stem the tide.
By the mid-1980s, other agents and I were speaking about the growing problem to
anyone who would listen but especially to law enforcement, credit card and bank in-
vestigators, and the media. I said things like ‘‘It’s a major problem throughout the
country; the problem is growing so much that it is overwhelming law enforcement
agencies; cooperation between banks, credit bureaus and law enforcement is essential to
address the problem; and it’s a growing problem and can destroy the credit industry as
xix

we know it if we don’t stop it.’’ I made these comments on a 1985 video for the
TransUnion credit bureau to show to its employees, financial services employees, and
law enforcement. The video was titled Crime of the 80s.
In September 1986, I had the honor of testifying before the United States Senate about
emerging criminal groups, credit card fraud, and the phony identification used to
perpetrate this crime. Nowhere in the hearings transcript is the phrase ‘‘identity theft’’
but every person there was describing it as they spoke. In writing this book, I looked at
my testimony and was struck by something I said. Asked about the impact on victims, I
responded:
Basically, it is a horror story for the individual. The banks assume the losses so the
individual does not have to pay the losses out of his pocket, but the real problem is the effect
on the individual’s credit rating. . . . I know of cases where the people, a year or two after
the fraud, and after they have contacted the credit bureaus to clear up their name, they still
have problems getting credit, including credit cards, mortgages, and other loans.
Ultimately, the greatest impact that identity theft has is on the victim, and that is
something we must do a better job of addressing. I have met thousands of victims of
fraud in my career as a criminal investigator: not just victims of identity theft but of all
varieties of fraud. I have seen people from all walks of life who have lost not only their
money but also hope. They were good people who falsely believed in the fraudsters to
whom they gave their life savings. There is nothing good about being a victim, and that is
especially true for identity theft. Even when victims of identity theft did not lose any
money, they still lost their most important asset: their good name.
In a memorable cartoon strip on the first Earth Day in 1971, the title character of the
Walt Kelly comic strip Pogo uttered the famous quote ‘‘We have met the enemy and he
is us.’’ Pogo was reflecting on the sad state of the environment and the growing problem
of pollution when he made this comment. Yet, Pogo’s timeless quote is just as relevant
to our loss of privacy over the years and how we as a society provide fraudsters with all
the tools they need for identity theft. We hold some responsibility for identity theft, and
we are the ones to stop it. Famed poet and philosopher George Santayana once said:
‘‘Those who cannot learn from history are doomed to repeat it.’’ We need to remember
Santayana’s words as they relate to identity theft.
I like to believe that we can turn the tide of identity theft. I still believe it is all about
prevention. That is also why I wrote this book. I intend it to be a handbook both in name
and premise. A handbook is a detailed and comprehensive guide, manual, and reference.
I want to provide as much information and cover as many aspects of identity theft as
possible. To do that and provide context, I have included numerous stories and case
studies about the criminals who commit this crime and the law enforcement profes-
sionals who hunt them down. Often they tell their stories in their own words. Through
these accounts, you will learn much about the many ways identity theft occurs and its
effect on all of us.
This handbook details the history and evolution of identity theft, the impact on
individuals and businesses, key legislation, the global reach of this crime, privacy rights
and the loss of privacy, case studies that illustrate the various methods employed by
PREFACE
xx

fraudsters, the role of technology, research and trends, the future growth and challenges
of this crime, and prevention recommendations. I have included anecdotes, news stories,
government reports, and other information related to identity theft that I have personally
collected since the late 1970s.
The United States Postal Inspection Service is the leading federal law enforcement
agency fighting identity theft since the 1960s. It devoted investigative resources to credit
card fraud, mail theft, and identity theft long before anyone else did, and it continues to
be a thought leader in detecting and preventing these interrelated crimes. The Inspection
Service provided me access to closed case files as well as to the inspectors who are
subject matter experts in identity theft. These inspectors shared many experiences that I
have included in this book.
In a few instances, I changed the names of victims, witnesses, and defendants as well
as locales and dates for specific privacy and/or safety concerns. The essential facts of
these cases remain the same.
Throughout the book are unique profiles of criminals whom I have ignominiously
admitted to the ‘‘Identity Theft Hall of Infamy’’ for their criminality. I also profile the
honorable and dedicated professionals working to put these fraudsters behind bars and
prevent the growth of identity theft in sections entitled ‘‘Thought Leaders in Identity
Theft Investigation, Research, and Prevention.’’
As you read this book, you may come away with a feeling of dread. Be afraid, be very
afraid for what identity thieves have done. These criminals have taken our good names
and reputations as their very own. Once they start, they cannot stop. They are addicted to
identity theft; it becomes their heroin. But we have the power to stop them and it will
take a great deal of work. Education, awareness, technology, and prevention are
important tools in stopping the spread of this fraud. It is my pleasure to provide all
that and more in this book. Read and learn.
Preface
xxi


Acknowledgments
With each book I write, the more I realize that my success is the direct result of the
efforts and contributions of others. This book is no exception. I have had exceptional
support from many people who provided their experiences, stories, materials, and
thought leadership.
First and foremost, I thank my son, Daniel Biegelman, who, as with my previous
books, provided extraordinary assistance. Daniel was involved in research, writing,
editing, and proofing. His countless hours and tireless dedication helped make this book
a reality.
A special note of thanks to my executive editor at John Wiley & Sons, Tim Burgard,
who strongly encouraged me to write this book and, as before, guided me through the
writing and publishing process. Tim has continuously supported my literary adventures
and has given me the unique opportunity to express my thoughts and experiences in
writing. I also want to acknowledge Helen Cho and Dexter Gasque at Wiley, who have
been invaluable in helping me get through issues large and small in the production
process. They are true professionals.
Chief Postal Inspector Alexander Lazaroff and Deputy Chief Inspector Kenneth Jones
of the United States Postal Inspection Service gave me unique access to their highly
skilled law enforcement professionals who are subject matter experts in identity theft.
This amazing opportunity allowed me to tap some of the best minds in the business for
this book.
Postal Inspector Phil Garn provided me the excellent content for Chapter 14 as well as
other material. He devoted untold hours sharing his firsthand knowledge and experience
of how identity theft severely impacted San Diego. I am extremely grateful for his
assistance.
A special thank you to Brad Kleinknecht, Henry Herrera, Patricia Sweeney, Phil
Bartlett, Larry Katz, Mike McCarthy, Bob Hoffman, Don Landisi, Patrick Bernardo,
Robert Diaz, Brian Huenefeld, Ken Male, Richard Petry, Mark Shaw, Walley Wang,
Scott Mathews, Dave McGinnis, Jack Galvin, Mike Colaiacovo, Jim Antonino, Debbi
Baer, Joseph Wolf, Jane DeFillippo, Joseph Jakubiec, Carl Clapper, John Murphy,
Steven Maciag, Mark Carr, Raymond Marvez, Tony Galetti, Dave Collins, Thomas
Kerns, Bob Vincent, Tony Haskett, Ralph Perez, Randy DeGasperin, Dave Colen, Eddy
Boucher, Dominick Pinto, Bernard Ferguson, Melisa Llosa, Jody Kowahl, Mike
xxiii

Casadei, Bob Northrop, Bob Joy, Tom Buggie, Ron Pry, Rick Ruhland, George Eller,
John Wisniewski, Sally Wolfe, Joe Clark, Rick Johnson, Joe Byers, Tom Kelly, Dennis
Kelleher, Don Gattie, Rudy Green, Mike Egner, Al Dockus, Paul Hinman, and Brendan
O’Brien. These Inspection Service personnel, past and present, provided me insight and
shared many experiences and considerable expertise that I have included in this book.
I would also like to acknowledge the late Robert ‘‘Buzz’’ Jones, Jr. He was an
extremely dedicated Postal Inspector with an innate ability to solve even the most
difficult of cases. That special skill was on display when he was the case agent in a series
of identity theft-related homicides profiled in this book. Buzz especially enjoyed
working with and teaching new inspectors. He is missed.
My sincere thanks to those who those who provided ideas, content, interviews, and
assistance: Shannon Grayer, Brock Phillips, Kevin Barrows, Don Rebovich, George
Curtis, Todd Hutton, Georgia Hanif, Julie Werner-Simon, Jackie Fishman, Byron Hollis,
Scott Moritz, George Stamboulidis, Joe Wells, Dick Carozza, John Gill, Joel Bartow,
Catherine Grant, Bill Kresse, Kathleen Hanold Watland, John Lucki, Steve Reed, Harry
Megerian, William Zabotka, and Thomas Cooney.
When I wanted someone to read my draft manuscript and give me honest feedback,
I again turned to my old and wise friend, DeWayn Marzagalli. DeWayn, a former federal
agent extraordinaire, provided the constructive and thoughtful comments I needed.
As always, he offered ongoing advice and encouragement that was much needed and
appreciated.
Although this work is solely mine and does not reflect the views and opinions of
Microsoft Corporation, I would like to thank my company for allowing me to write this
book.
And, last but not least, my gratitude to my wife Lynn, who was indispensable as she
again spent many hours reviewing the manuscript and providing insightful feedback.
Lynn’s constant encouragement, wisdom, and attention to detail were essential to my
writing. Her patience as I again spent all my free time engrossed in the book, is
exceptional.
xxiv
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Identity Theft Handbook


CHAPTER 1
The Identity Theft Explosion
Imagine seeing a disaster unfold before your very eyes, one constantly growing larger
and more destructive. It continually evolves to the changing environment and resists all
attempts to blunt its impact. You and thousands of others try to stop this disaster, but all
actions are futile. Despite all the warnings, you are powerless to do anything but observe
the massive impact on individuals, organizations, and businesses. While I could easily
be describing a major earthquake, hurricane, or tsunami, the actual culprit is a crime. But
this is not just any crime. It is an extraordinary wrong that is more like an unstoppable
force in its devastation. The crime is identity theft, and it has grown and evolved over the
last 35 years to take on a relentless life of its own.
Identity theft is the fastest-growing financial crime in the United States and the world.
Several years ago CBS News reported that someone’s identity is stolen every 79
seconds. A Federal Trade Commission (FTC) survey in 2006 found that 8.3 million
American adults were victims of identity theft. That same study estimated the total
identity theft losses to be $15.6 billion, a figure significantly down from a similar FTC
study in 2003 that found total losses to be $47.6 billion. Of note, the 2006 study indicated
that changes in survey methodology may be the reason for the difference, rather than an
actual drop in incidence levels.
Whatever the exact losses, the growth of identity theft has been striking. Kiplinger’s
Personal Finance magazine in its July 1995 edition reported that the credit reporting
bureau Experian received 600 to 700 identity theft complaints each day. MasterCard
International reported that identity theft represented 96% of member banks’ fraud losses
in 1997. Identity theft losses grew from $450 million in 1996 to over $2 billion in 1999.
1

According to the FTC, fraudulent use of credit cards accounted for 50% of all identity
theft complaints in 2000. Identity theft complaints involving the misuse of Social
Security numbers (SSNs) jumped from 27,000 in 1998 to 73,000 in 2002, according to
the Social Security Administration.
As a result of stronger data-loss notification laws, more than 500 incidents of data
breaches were reported between 2005 and the first half of 2007, involving more than
155 million records. The lost data came from the theft of laptops, intrusions by hackers,
and general carelessness and disregard for data security. Breaches have affected
government agencies, hospitals, financial services firms, and a host of other companies.1
WHAT IS IDENTITY THEFT?
During identity theft, criminals acquire key pieces of personal identifying information—
such as name, address, date of birth, SSN, mother’s maiden name, employment infor-
mation, credit information, and other vital facts—in order to impersonate and defraud
the victim. This information enables the thief to commit numerous forms of fraud,
including taking over the victim’s financial accounts; applying for loans, credit cards,
and Social Security benefits; purchasing homes and cars; and establishing services with
utility and phone companies.
Simply put, identity theft is the stealing of your good name and reputation for
financial gain. Yet not everyone can agree on a suitable meaning of the term. The
definition of this crime differs among law enforcement, regulatory agencies, and the
many studies on this subject. The United States Postal Inspection Service states that
‘‘[i]dentity theft occurs when a crook steals key pieces of personal identifying informa-
tion to gain access to a person’s financial accounts.’’2 The United States Secret Service
calls it identity crimes and defines it as ‘‘the misuse of personal or financial identifiers in
order to gain something of value and/or facilitate other criminal activity.’’3
The President’s Identity Theft Task Force Report issued in April 2007 stated that
‘‘[a]lthough identity theft is defined in many different ways, it is, fundamentally,
the misuse of another individual’s personal information to commit fraud.’’4 The report
goes on: ‘‘Criminals must first gather personal information, either through low-tech
methods—such as stealing mail or workplace records, or ‘dumpster diving’—or through
complex and high-tech frauds, such as hacking and the use of malicious computer
codes.’’5 More detailed information on the Task Force Report can be found in
Chapter 18.
The October 2007 study entitled Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-
Based Foundation for Proactive Enforcement issued by the Center for Identity Man-
agement and Information Protection at Utica College in Utica, New York provided
detailed new research on identity theft. For a more detailed discussion of this study,
please see Chapter 19. The study agreed with the President’s Task Force that the
fraudulent use of personal identifying information—name, address, SSN, date of birth—
are elements of identity theft but fraud involving credit cards, debit cards, and ATM
cards are not. The report stated: ‘‘While the theft of a credit card may result in fraudulent
charges, it does not result in the theft of an identity.’’6 The study went on to quote a line
from the President’s Task Force: ‘‘For example, a stolen credit card may lead to
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
2

thousands of dollars in fraudulent charges, but the card generally would not provide the
thief with enough information to establish a false identity.’’7
I generally agree with these definitions but respectfully disagree with the idea that a
theft of a person’s credit card, including name and related credit card number, is not
identity theft. I take a much larger and more victim-oriented view of identity theft.
Therefore, I prefer the definition used by the Federal Trade Commission’s Consumer
Sentinel. Consumer Sentinel is an information sharing network that provides law
enforcement with access to consumer complaints received by the FTC. Identity theft
is ‘‘when someone appropriates your personal identifying information (like your Social
Security number or credit card account number) to commit fraud or theft.’’8 When a
fraudster steals a victim’s credit card, the criminal poses as that person, fraudulently
using the name and linked credit card number to steal money and property that will be
charged to the victim’s account. Although the ultimate financial loss will be borne by the
financial institution or credit card issuer, the true card holder is still a victim. There are
various degrees of identity theft, but I do not think there is a single person who would not
be outraged knowing that someone had stolen and used his or her credit card or other
financial access device.
IT IS NOT ROCKET SCIENCE
It is very easy for criminals to obtain our personal information and our identities.
Everything from low-tech to high-tech thievery is readily available. It seems that not a
day goes by without hearing about another news story on identity theft. Due to this
publicity, almost everyone knows about this crime. It has been called everything from
credit card fraud to true name fraud to identity fraud to the Crime of the ’80s, and since
the mid-1990s, identity theft. It was called credit card fraud first because in the early
days, it primarily involved the theft of personal identifying information for submitting
fraudulent credit card applications. The stolen information came from a variety of
sources: Dumpster diving; insiders at banks, credit bureaus, and the post office; mail
theft from collection boxes and residences were but some of the ways the fraudsters
obtained personally identifiable information.
The growth of credit card fraud paralleled the rise of credit card use in this country
starting in the early 1970s. Once people began to accept credit card use and heavy
marketing by the banking industry spurred their growth, fraudsters had a new avenue for
their criminal enterprise. These criminals would steal personal information and apply for
credit cards in the victims’ names. I would like to say they were ingenious, but in reality it
was pretty easy to do. They used simple means to obtain identity information because then
as now, personal information, the keys to our personal vault, was so readily available.
The old standby of getting down and dirty in Dumpster diving has been effective
whenever individuals or businesses do not safeguard information. Unfortunately that is all
too often. Dumpster divers look in the trash for discarded credit card statements, canceled
checks, preapproved credit card offers, medical records, mortgage applications, and any
other documents that contain your name, address, date of birth, SSN, or other information.
In the days before shredders were commonplace, fraudsters found mother lode after
mother lode of personal information. And they still find gold today.
The Identity Theft Explosion
3

Mail theft is another valuable source of personal data for identity thieves. The beauty
of the mail system is that Americans receive mail delivery to their homes and businesses
six days a week, 52 weeks a year. There is a never-ending supply of bank and brokerage
statements, credit card bills, convenience checks, credit card offers, and a wealth of
other personal and financial information for identity thieves. We lock our homes, our
cars, and our businesses to protect what is inside, but how many of us have a locking
mailbox?
As Internet access gets faster and cheaper, more and more people worldwide use it for
business and pleasure. Do you know anyone who does not have Internet access either at
home or work? Very few, I would say. Fraudsters have found how easy it is to do
business—fraudulent business—using the Internet. They use spam, phishing, pharming,
vishing, hacking, planting malicious codes, and whatever new technology breakthrough
they can exploit to steal passwords, financial information, and other identifying data. If
you are not familiar with some of these terms, you will learn all about them in Chapter 3.
The increasing reporting of large-scale data breaches are the result of these technology
attacks as well as plain old human failure. Story after story involves laptops left
unsecured in cars or hotel rooms without encryption. No wonder we have the problem
we do; we make it so easy for identity thieves.
In the early 1980s, professionals such as lawyers, stockbrokers, physicians, and others
with good credit ratings were likely victims. Fraudsters often applied for jobs as night
watchmen, security guards, and cleaning people at major businesses, where at night they
would have free access to search through personnel files, employees’ desks, and other
belongings to obtain names, home addresses, job titles, and SSNs for credit card fraud.
They often passed this data to confederates throughout the country for further fraud. In
1985, identity thieves did just that when they infiltrated CBS News in New York City
and stole personal information on hundreds of CBS employees, including famed news
anchor Walter Cronkite and 60 Minutes’ Ed Bradley.
The crime began to evolve. Fraudsters subverted postal employees so that they would
turn over mail containing credit cards. Identity thieves would infiltrate Social Security
offices, banks, brokerages, and credit bureaus to fraudulently access victims’ credit
reports and then do credit card and bank frauds with the stolen identities. They used post
office boxes to obtain fraudulently ordered credit cards. Postal Inspectors would arrest
these identity thieves when they came to pick up the cards at post offices. They then
began to use a new business industry called commercial mail receiving agencies
(CMRAs) or mail drops to open mail boxes in the names of their victims and receive
the fraudulently requested credit cards.
By the mid-1980s, this crime began to hit the media’s radar screen. More and more
victims complained to financial institutions and law enforcement. In 1982 and 1984,
Congress enacted legislation that made access device fraud, including credit and debit
card fraud, specific crimes. The United States Secret Service was given primary
authority for the investigation of access device fraud. Postal Inspectors who had
been working credit card frauds since the 1960s were now joined by Secret Service
agents. Still the crime grew.
Identity theft has grown tremendously since those early years because criminals have
found out how easy it is and how available personal information is. The associated
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
4

crimes currently include identity takeovers of company names, committing insurance
fraud under stolen names of physicians, and stealing information from family home-
pages and resumes found online. The Internet and online databases make obtaining
personal information just a mouse click away.
THOUGHT LEADER IN IDENTITY THEFT INVESTIGATION
Edward Stroz
Following a 16-year career as a Special Agent for the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Edward Stroz founded Stroz Friedberg, LLC in 2000 and now
serves as its copresident. Stroz Friedberg is a technical and consulting services firm
specializing in digital forensics, e-discovery, and corporate investigations. Stroz
has assisted clients in responding to Internet extortions, denial-of-service attacks,
hacks and unauthorized access, and theft of trade secrets and has pioneered the
concept of incorporating behavioral science into the methodology for addressing
computer crime and abuse.
Stroz is an expert in addressing the threat of computer crime and abuse posed by
insiders and has coauthored a book on the subject. He has supervised numerous
forensic assignments for federal prosecutors, defense attorneys, and civil litigants
and has conducted network security audits for major public and private entities. In
1996, while still a Special Agent, he formed the FBI’s Computer Crime Squad in
New York City, where he supervised investigations involving computer intrusions,
denial-of-service attacks, illegal Internet wiretapping, fraud, money laundering,
and violations of intellectual property rights, including trade secrets. Here Stroz
provides his perspective on the evils of identity theft and fighting back:
Imagine you are at home having dinner with your family and you hear an unexpected
knock on the door. You answer the door and meet two FBI agents who want to question
you about threatening email messages that have been traced as having originated
from your home. You find it hard to believe this could be true. However, in the
interview with the FBI, it becomes clear that the wireless network in your home was
hacked remotely by the true perpetrator to commit a crime by making threats and
extortionate demands to people completely unknown to you. In essence, your identity
and that of your household were compromised, and used to provide cover to an
intruder. While not an everyday occurrence, I’ve seen this kind of identity theft
scenario played out over my career in law enforcement and as a consultant.
Identity theft is essentially the theft of information. It’s information ‘‘about you’’ as an
individual person, and there is some reason that it would be valuable to a thief. That
value could be purely monetary—as simple as the thief using your credit in order to
buy things. But the value of your information may have nothing to do with money, as
the scenario recounted above shows.
(Continued)
The Identity Theft Explosion
5

EARLY DAYS OF CREDIT CARDS
In the early years of credit card issuance, the cards generally had very low purchasing
limits. Purchasing caps of $300 to $500 were not uncommon, and it usually took a formal
application with a good payment history to raise a card’s limit. Although American
Express offered cards that appeared to have no spending limit, the balance could not be
carried over and had to be paid off by the end of the billing cycle. American Express was
much more selective with regard to potential customers than other card issuers, such as
Visa, MasterCard, department stores, and gasoline companies.
Initially, credit card transactions were processed manually from the merchant making
an imprint on the sale or charge slip at the store to reconciling slips at the bank and
And there are other forms of identity theft. Using a stolen identity can allow a wanted
person to evade capture, or a suspected terrorist to pass through a security checkpoint
unrecognized in order to get on an airplane. I have been involved with computer
hacking cases in which stolen identities were used to make it look as though someone
else was behind the crime, and to get them in serious trouble.
Each of these examples represents different types of problems, and it’s important to
make distinctions among them. As with any type of fight, it is important to know
something about your adversary. The different types of identity thieves can be
categorized into ‘‘threat agent’’ profiles in order to fight this problem. The term
‘‘threat agent’’ is often used to describe the individual behind the attack and the
method used to execute the attack.
The simplest type of identity theft is targeted against consumer credit/debit cards.
These are often stolen in bulk (large computer files that contain numerous card
numbers) and used a few times before being discarded. This activity is more of a
‘‘property crime,’’ which, while serious, is sometimes more manageable. This is
because stealing money or credit will show up right away in business records as there
is a vendor alongside you in the fight. Within days or weeks, the unauthorized activity
will show up on a credit card or bank statement, bringing the problem to light. While
this represents a real problem, it is probably not the biggest threat to our society.
Identity theft for the purpose of actually assuming your identity in order to move
through society unimpeded is different from that of stealing a credit card number, and
is harder to fight. Here you are up against a smarter and more dedicated adversary,
with much greater value to a threat agent in the form of a terrorist, than a property
crime thief. Fighting that type of adversary is primarily done by law enforcement.
Nobody really knows where these problems will lead. Greater security almost always
comes at the price of decreased convenience and privacy. The technologies with the
least inconvenience will likely be in high demand. For example, retinal scans, already
in use at some airports to speed people through security, will probably gain increasing
acceptance as a form of biometric (something you ‘‘are’’) recognition. Fingerprint
scanners are increasingly featured on laptop computers. It seems that opting in for
biometrics as a form of protection is going to be the most useful technology for
countering identity theft without inconveniencing people to an unacceptable level.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
6

posting charges to customers’ accounts. Although a card might have a limit of $500,
criminals would make multiple purchases under recognized floor limits, which they
learned from trial and error. When financial institutions reconciled the charges at the end
of the cycle, the total charges would far exceed the card’s limit. It was not uncommon for
small businesses to send in charges a month or more past the normal cycle. The store
might wait until it had several charges to send in its charge slips, and this would delay the
posting of the particular charges. So it might take several months to determine the true
losses on the card. This manual process carried through the early days of automation as
many smaller merchants were not ‘‘online.’’ The online electronic process was gradually
phased in and equipment became more affordable for smaller merchants.
As local banks began to issue their own cards and more banking functions became auto-
mated, far more cards were issued, including ones mistakenly linked to other accounts.
San Diego–based Postal Inspector Phil Garn related a case where a doctor applied for
a $50,000 loan for a piece of diagnostic medical equipment. The bank accidentally
issued a card linked to the loan account with a $50,000 limit. This card was then stolen
from the mail. The crook had no idea what the limit was and, luckily for the victim,
only charged a few thousand dollars. Despite the low limits on credit cards, criminals
were able to run up charges so quickly that they frequently far exceeded the card’s limit.
It was common to find cards with $500 limits but which had over $1,800 of fraudulent
charges.
At this time, both newly issued cards and reissued cards were ‘‘live cards.’’ They could
be used immediately upon arrival. There was no activation procedure, either in person or
on the phone, and there was no online banking. Most merchants manually ran the card
through a device that embossed an imprint of the card onto a carbon sales slip that the
customer had to sign. This turned out to be a great paper trail for investigators, not only
for suspects’ handwriting but for fingerprints. However, these copies rapidly disap-
peared as banks began to microfilm the slips and destroy the originals due to the sheer
quantity of slips and physical storage limits. The microfilmed copies would preclude
fingerprint analysis and make it hard to get a positive forensic identification on the
handwriting.
Later, merchants would be able to make queries via telephone, and larger merchants
would be able to run the card through their own magnetic card readers to get an
authorization code. These codes became commonplace; however, at the time, the codes
could also be manually overridden at the point of sale at the merchant’s discretion and
liability. If access to credit was denied, criminals would often engage in social engineer-
ing, telling the merchant a story about how their vindictive ex-spouse canceled their card
or had intentionally reported it stolen.
The criminal would also demand to speak to the credit card company on the telephone
at the store. The criminal would then put on a dramatic one-sided conversation, finally
coming up with an authorization code, usually a sequence of letters and numbers, which
he or she would provide to the merchant, who would write the number down on the
charge slip and finish the transaction. Although this authorization code was not valid, it
would appear to have a correct sequence of numbers and letters for the particular card
being used. Magnetic credit card readers would eventually come down in price and
become commonly used, as they are now. Today nearly every merchant has an electronic
The Identity Theft Explosion
7

credit card terminal for approving purchases. There is no doubt that today’s technology
has helped to significantly decrease fraud at the point of sale.
LIMITING LOSSES
Detection and prevention of credit card fraud were also very much on the minds of the
credit card issuers. During these years, each card issuer, such as American Express, Visa,
and MasterCard, would also issue lists of lost/stolen credit card numbers, typically
printed in books similar to the size of telephone books. These warning lists allowed
subscribing merchants to check the account number when the customer presented a card
to make a purchase. It was a time-consuming process, as the type was very small and it
was hard to find a suspect card’s number in the endless pages of listed numbers.
Merchants did not always check the warning lists even though they would be liable for
fraudulent charges. European merchants would hang on to this countermeasure for much
longer than the United States. Criminals who stole bulk shipments of new or reissued
credit cards in the United States would use the cards immediately after the theft and then
send the cards in bulk to criminal associates in Europe, where the printed lost/stolen lists
were at least a month behind. After charging purchases up to the cards’ limits in Europe,
the cards were sent to Asia, where they would be reencoded. It was not unusual for a
stolen Visa card to be magnetically reencoded with a MasterCard account number and
fraudulently used.
In the 1970s and 1980s, billing processes were far more manual and much slower than
today. Electronic point-of-sale terminals had yet to come into existence. Charges would
typically post during the following month and be mailed to a customer in a statement for
a 30-day period, although it was not uncommon for some charges to show up 60 or 90
days later. This was due to merchants physically mailing in their sales slips and the
increased time needed for processing and posting.
When unauthorized charges appeared, a lengthy process to dispute these charges
could take months. Problems even could continue for years, as sometimes these unpaid
balances were not removed from people’s credit histories. Inspector Garn relates how he
would often get panicked calls from victims six to 18 months after he first talked to them
about their stolen credit cards. The victims had filed affidavits of forgery and had cleared
their accounts with the financial institutions but were now trying to buy a car or close on
a house. Unfortunately, the fraudulent charges still appeared on their credit records.
Even though victims may have cleared one fraudulently used card, criminals often
applied for additional cards or utility services in the names of the victims. These new
cards would be sent to another address controlled by the fraudsters; then after use and
nonpayment, the account would appear as unpaid and delinquent. After hearing from the
first few panic-stricken callers, Inspector Garn would tell victims to check their credit
histories on an ongoing basis to see if any additional charges appeared. He often felt
helpless in not being able to do more for these victims; even arresting the scammers did
not stop the credit problems.
Customers were also responsible for the fraud charges or some portion of them, until
lawsuits and public opinion caused banks to change their policies. It became highly
embarrassing when victims who had an average monthly balance of a few hundred
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
8

dollars and a history of on-time payments could show the news media thousands of
dollars charged in a few days, all obvious fraud. Financial institutions also found they
could pass the losses off to their customers in the form of higher interest rates. It was not
until the losses from fraud cut into the banking institutions’ profits that changes occurred
and proactive fraud prevention became routine.
In the early 1980s, a bank investigator for a major financial institution in New York
decided that he would create his own fraud detection process for the increasing number
of fraudulent credit card applications his bank was receiving. These applications were
being submitted using stolen identities and contained the names, birth dates, Social
Security numbers, and employment histories of the victims. This bank investigator
correctly assumed that the bulk of these thousands of fraudulent applications were being
submitted by members of Nigerian Criminal Enterprises who were a plague on the credit
card industry at the time.
At this point, credit card applications were completed by hand and mailed in for
processing. After finding that the fraudsters had a very distinctive style of handwriting,
this investigator began to manually review each submitted application looking for these
handwriting characteristics. They included the signature being underlined, periods on
both sides of middle initials in names, period after signatures, reversal of first and last
names, European-style date, a colon used in place of decimals, dashes or slashes, letters
A and E connected to the next letter, dashes between names or nouns, as well as other
misspelled words and strange abbreviations. Although this process by itself was not
totally conclusive as to the existence of fraud, this investigator was very successful in
identifying suspect applications that needed additional scrutiny.
Both federal and state authorities would investigate and prosecute identity theft—
although it was yet to have that name—but many considered the fraud a ‘‘victimless’’
crime. Banks and credit card issuers ultimately made the individuals whole for fraud
losses. When I was working these cases in Brooklyn, New York, a federal prosecutor
told me that he would not accept any credit card fraud cases for prosecution unless I
could specifically detail the prevention efforts in place by the victim financial institu-
tion. This prosecutor felt that the banks were not doing enough to stop identity theft and
that they were using law enforcement to fix the problem. I went back and told this to the
bank investigators I was working with. Some banks had excellent prevention efforts;
others sadly did not.
I remember making a prevention recommendation that was quickly rejected as cost
prohibitive. The fraudulent credit card applications submitted by criminals contained
stolen identity information, but one piece of information could be used to quickly
determine the validity of the application. To ensure that an application would be
approved, the thieves would include the victim’s actual employer but would substitute a
telephone number controlled by the suspect for the actual work number. This was done
so that when a credit card issuer called to verify employment, the fraudster or his
accomplice would verify employment. I recommended that when verifying the credit
card application, a call be made to the named employer asking to speak directly to the
named employee but not using the telephone number on the application. Instead, the
employer’s number would need to be obtained through the telephone directory or
calling Directory Assistance. The financial institutions advised me that while my
The Identity Theft Explosion
9

suggestion was sound in theory and would quickly determine if a person had
submitted the application in question, the extra steps and time would be financially
burdensome.
There were many prosecutions in the early years, but the jail sentences were not
significant enough to have a deterrent effect. The crimes continued to grow. As a
consequence, although criminals were apprehended and successfully prosecuted, of-
fenders did not receive long prison sentences, and the lure of the money brought on
recidivism. A felony or even a misdemeanor conviction would have a major impact on
an average person, but the short sentences the fraudsters received sent a clear message to
recidivists that identity theft was extremely profitable.
JAIL ORDER FRAUD
There are always opportunities for creative and resourceful criminals to fleece an
unsuspecting public. For those hardened fraudsters focused on committing identity theft,
even confinement in a prison was not a barrier to committing this crime. During the
summer and fall of 1981, Ricky Lee Bishop and Howard A. Jones were inmates at the
Pulaski County Prison Farm in Virginia. Bishop was in prison on unrelated credit card
fraud charges, serving a three-year sentence. Jones was a frequent prison guest with a
history of criminal offenses including Grand Larceny and Obtaining Money by False
Pretenses. Due to good behavior in prison, both Bishop and Jones were participating in a
weekend furlough program where they were permitted to return home on Saturdays and
Sundays.
Prison did not stop the pair from returning to a life of crime. While serving their
sentences, Bishop and Jones were able to obtain the credit card numbers of people who had
stayed at the Red Carpet Inn in Pulaski. Prisoners assigned to work on garbage collection
details with the Pulaski County Sanitation Department obtained the stolen credit card
numbers from the inn, one of the stops for the garbage pickup. The inmates would go
through the trashatthehoteland recover discardedcreditcardreceipts. Itwas believedthat
this was how Bishop and Jones found the credit card numbers used for the fraud.
Back in 1981, multiple part credit card slips with carbon paper inserts were used for
sales transactions. The slips contained the purchaser’s name, credit card number,
expiration information, and signature. Often merchants discarded the slips after the
transactions were completed. Fraudsters quickly found that Dumpster diving was a
simple and easy way to obtain personal information for fraudulent purposes. It worked
for these two inmates; it is no different today for those who fail to properly shred
documents containing pertinent information.
After obtaining the credit card numbers, Bishop and Jones ordered merchandise by
telephone from various companies located in Richmond, Chicago, Atlanta, Dallas, and
Decatur. One of the companies was Best Products, a now-defunct chain of catalog sales
and retail stores that was located in Richmond, Virginia. The inmates used the addresses
of girlfriends and relatives as the delivery addresses for the merchandise. They would
then arrange to pick up the packages on weekends when on furlough. On several
occasions, Bishop would personally return the merchandise to Best Product stores
located in Roanoke and Lynchburg for cash refunds.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
10

The case was investigated by the Postal Inspection Service. The scheme lasted from
July to November 1981 and Bishop and Jones received only about $4,400. The
defendants used telephones to order the merchandise and the mails were used to
ship the merchandise. As a result, they were charged with federal violation of Wire
Fraud, Mail Fraud, and Use of Fictitious Names. Both defendants pleaded guilty in
October 1982, and each received three additional years to their existing prison sentences.
There are lessons to learn from this case. Although the amount of the fraud was
relatively small, and the individual credit card holders did not suffer any losses, there
still was an impact. The credit card holders needed to close out their accounts and obtain
new ones. The true card holders did nothing wrong yet were subject to this crime because
the motel owners discarded the credit card slips. The simple act of shredding the slips
would have prevented the possibility of this crime occurring. But in those years few
people thought of destroying personal and financial information. There will always be
hidden opportunities for criminals to defraud society. It is up to us to remove those
opportunities through increased vigilance and prevention.
IDENTITY THEFT WAS NOT A HIGH PRIORITY
The owner of an alternative press wrote in 1981 that ‘‘[t]he supposed problem of ‘ID
fraud’ generates low-level interest among law enforcement people, both state and
federal. The prevailing attitude among prosecutors, born out of practice, is that laws are
already in existence to combat the types of crimes associated with false ID.’’9 To most
people, this opinion was the correct one. It was also perceived this way because
relatively small numbers of consumers had been victimized by this crime. Yet the crime
was still in its infancy.
The time period between the late 1960s and early 1980s saw the birth and growth of a
new crime. It was just beginning to spread and evolve to a more damaging offense. The
years to come, from the mid-1980s through the new millennium, would see an explosion
of identity theft that would burn the existence of this crime into everyone’s mind.
NOTES
1. Byron Acohido and Jon Swartz, ‘‘Credit Bureaus Fight on State, Federal Levels
against Freezes,’’ USA Today, June 26, 2007, 1B.
2. United States Postal Inspection Service, Publication 280 (August 2003), www.usps
.com/postalinspectors/pub280txt.htm.
3. United States Secret Service, Financial Crimes, www.ustreas.gov/usss/criminal
.shtml.
4. President’s Identity Theft Task Force, Combating Identity Theft: A Strategic Plan
(April 2007), 2, www.idtheft.gov/reports/StrategicPlan.pdf.
5. Ibid.
6. Gary R. Gordon, Donald J. Rebovich, Kyung-Seok Choo, and Judith B. Gordon,
Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-Based Foundation for
Proactive Enforcement, Center for Identity Management and Information
The Identity Theft Explosion
11

Protection, Utica College, Utica, NY(October 2007), 10, www.utica.edu/academic/
institutes/cimip/research.cfm.
7. President’s Identity Theft Task Force, Combating Identity Theft, 3.
8. Federal Trade Commission, Consumer Fraud and Identity Theft Complaint Data,
January–December 2007, February 13, 2008, 74, www.ftc.gov/opa/2008/02/fraud
.pdf.
9. Barry Reid, The Paper Trip II (Fountain Valley, CA: Eden Press, 1985), 5.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
12

CHAPTER 2
Game of the Name: How It
All Began
It can be argued that the future of identity theft was set with the advent of the Social
Security number. When the government first issued Social Security numbers (SSNs) in
late 1936, their stated purpose was to track each American’s earnings and to provide a
retirement safety net. The government assured everyone that the SSN was not intended
to be used as a national identification card. For many years, right on the face of the card
were the words ‘‘For Social Security Purposes—Not For Identification.’’ Unfortunately,
that was not to be the case.
In 1961, the Federal Civil Service Commission began using the SSN as an identifi-
cation number for all federal employees. The following year, the Internal Revenue
Service began to use the SSN as its taxpayer identification number (TIN) for individ-
uals.1 The Tax Reform Act of 1976 authorized the states to use SSNs in their programs
for public assistance, driver’s licenses, motor vehicle registration, and taxation. Over
time, the SSN became the universal identification tool. It quickly became the identifier
for driver’s licenses, tax returns, medical records, college registration, banking and
credit, and so much more.
Social Security numbers have become universally recognized as the gateway to our
personal and financial information. We are asked for that number constantly. When we
go to the doctor, we need to complete a medical form with not only our SSN but pages of
other personal information. When we open a bank account or credit card, we are asked
for our SSN and all the other personal information. We are asked for our SSN when we
13

open a cellular telephone account, or utilities for water, electrical, or gas service. The
same goes when we purchase a car. We generally provide a credit application that
contains all our personal information, starting with our SSN. This also includes our
name, home address, date of birth, employer, and bank and credit card information. A
credit check is run to determine if we are creditworthy. Think about what would happen
if an identity thief was working at that car dealership.
FIRST IDENTITY THEFT VICTIM
When President Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed the Social Security Act into law in
1935, he had no way of knowing what the future would hold for that seemingly innocent
Social Security number and its eventual connection to fraud. Within a year, the first
Social Security cards were sent to working Americans. Not long after, the misuse of
SSNs began. Hilda Schrader Whitcher may have been the first identity theft victim, well
before credit and credit cards were the norm. If nothing else, her SSN was the most used
and abused number ever issued.
In 1938, wallet manufacturer E.H. Ferree Company of Lockport, New York, came up
with a novel approach to market its products. As a marketing ploy, the company decided
to include a sample Social Security card in each wallet to show that the cards could easily
fit inside. The cards were new to Americans, and by the end of 1937, over 37 million had
been distributed. A company executive decided to use a copy of the actual card of his
secretary, Hilda Schrader Whitcher, for the insert. The sample card was about half the
size of the actual one, printed all in red, with the word ‘‘specimen’’ written diagonally
across the face. Thousands upon thousands of these wallets were eventually sold at
Woolworth’s stores and other department stores throughout the country. Each contained
Whitcher’s facsimile Social Security card.
It did not take long for enterprising people to make use of Whitcher’s number. Untold
thousands of people began using it and by 1943, more than 5,700 people were known to
be using Whitcher’s number as their own. Although the Social Security Administration
(SSA) publicized that it was improper to use another person’s number, that did not stop
the abuse. The SSA eventually voided the number and gave Whitcher a new one. I would
imagine that she was very careful to safeguard her number after that. Still, her original
number continued to be used for many years. It was being used in 1977 by as many as 12
people. In all, the SSA determined that over 40,000 people had used Hilda Schrader
Whitcher’s SSN over the years.2
What is not known is how many times the number was used for fraudulent purposes.
SSNs were not used for credit in those early years, and there would have been few
opportunities to benefit financially other than for SSA benefits. It can be readily
assumed that most of the abusers were uninformed about how to properly obtain their
own individual numbers. With so many people using her number as their own, it must
have been a nightmare for Whitcher and the SSA to determine her correct benefits.
IDENTITY FRAUD CONNECTION
The Department of Justice in The Criminal Use of False Identification: The Report of the
Federal Advisory Committee on False Identification issued in November 1976 used the
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
14

term ‘‘ID fraud’’ in describing identity crimes. The committee studied the growing use of
phony identification and how the identification documents that people carry ‘‘have
become the currency of fraud.’’3 The report opined on the availability of ‘‘how-to’’ books
that were being offered from the underground press at the time about creating and using
new identities to commit fraud and concluded that the use of false identification to obtain
goods and services was commonplace: ‘‘We have found clear evidence of widespread
abuses in identification documents commonly used in our society . . . through the fraud
committed; they also undermine the trust among individuals upon which our commer-
cial and governmental institutions depend.’’4
The report also debated the use of publicity to increase fraud awareness among the
general public. There was a concern that ‘‘publicity of fraud increases fraud’’ and by
implication that the education process would ‘‘convince more people to try it.’’5 Wisely,
the report concluded that this was not the case. Even in 1976, abundant information was
available on how to obtain and use phony identification. Criminals will always find the
means to commit fraud. Publicizing the scope of the problem and prevention was
paramount to protect businesses and individuals. ‘‘Educating the potential innocent
victims of ID fraud—a significant portion of our U.S. populace—and prosecuting
offenders may provide a far greater benefit than any hypothetical danger from exposure
of victims to the facts of false ID use.’’6
When I first started speaking publicly in the mid-1980s about the threat of identity
theft and its various forms, some people told me that it was not a good idea to talk so
openly. They would say, ‘‘Why provide so much information; aren’t you just teaching
potential fraudsters, and adding to the problem?’’ Their concern was that by discussing
the various details of how identity theft is perpetrated, it would give criminally minded
people the information needed to commit it. I remember saying that fraudsters did not
need me to educate them; a wide variety of readily available publications could teach
them all they needed to know. They were already too busy committing identity theft.
That was well before the Internet and the World Wide Web that today provides a
plethora of information. It was not the identity thieves we needed to educate, it was and
is the victims and potential victims of identity theft.
HISTORY OF CREDIT CARDS
The acceptance of credit cards by the general public gave rise to many related crimes that
developed over the years. Criminals would deal in lost, stolen, and counterfeit cards as
well as those obtained through submission of fraudulent credit card applications. Each of
these crimes touched on identity theft although that term was not commonly used until
many years later. If it were not for credit cards, I am convinced we would not have the
extensive identity theft problem we have today. The simplicity of the crime in the early
days and the abundance of readily available personal information set the stage for its
staggering growth and impact. For that reason, it is fitting and necessary to know the
history of credit cards and how they have become an indispensable part of our everyday
existence.
Although the use of credit cards became commonplace in the 1970s, credit cards in
various forms had been around for most of the twentieth century. In 1914, Western
Game of the Name: How It All Began
15

Union Telegraph Company offered its best customers a metal charge card that required a
settlement of outstanding charges each month. It was the first consumer credit card and
included deferred payments. These dogtag-style metal plates became commonplace and
were later used by other retailers for their credit cards. They were embossed with the
customer’s name and address.
In 1924, a chain of California gas stations issued the first cardboard credit cards,
setting the stage for the widespread use of oil and gas credit cards. This was an impor-
tant development. The popularity of the automobile whetted the American public’s
appetite for travel and stoked the desire to be able to pay for gas anywhere. In the 1930s,
department stores began to offer credit cards to their customers, and most used the
metal plate–style cards. Major department stores, including Bloomingdales, the
now-defunct Gimbel’s chain, and others, found that these cards were a customer draw
as more and more people wanted them. By the 1940s, trendy restaurants and nightclubs
offered their own credit cards that could be used only at the particular business
establishment.
In 1948, the first bank credit card was introduced through a bank in Brooklyn, New
York. It was called ‘‘Charg-it’’ and had similar payment terms to today’s credit cards.
Only local purchases could be made, and the cardholder had to have a bank account at
that bank through which payments were made.7 The first bankcard, the Charg-it would
not be the last and would open the door for other such cards and changes that would
make them far more customer friendly.
In 1950, a visionary named Frank MacNamara conceived of a universal credit card
that could be used at restaurants throughout New York City. The beauty of his idea was
that instead of receiving monthly statements from each restaurant, as had been the norm,
the cardholder would receive one statement each month for all restaurant activity. Thus
was born the Diners Club credit card. The Diners Club card grew in popularity over the
years and became the standard that others would emulate.
Long Island, New York banker Arthur Roth saw the future of credit and wanted to be
in on it. His Franklin National Bank established a bank credit card for its customers in
1951. The card was a revolving credit card and could be used at stores and restaurants in
the Long Island area. The card had no fees or interest but the balance had to be paid
monthly. The bank made its money from the transaction fees paid by merchants
accepting the cards. Franklin National Bank would eventually become European-
American Bank (EAB), a powerhouse in banking. Citigroup would eventually purchase
EAB. Many other banks also started issuing their own credit cards around this time.
In 1958, American Express got into the credit card business and its card quickly grew
in popularity. The Hilton Hotel chain then came out with its own Carte Blanche credit
card to compete with Diners Club and American Express. Although the big three credit
card companies competed with each other, fraud had not yet emerged as a major
problem. There were isolated stories of people without adequate income receiving cards
and then going on huge spending sprees, unable to pay the subsequent statements. Yet
the business model foretold future problems. The original model had been to extend
credit to only the most worthy of customers, but the need to continually add new
customers was critical to success. The result was that not all recipients of cards were as
creditworthy as others.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
16

In his excellent book on the history and evolution of credit cards entitled The Credit
Card Catastrophe, author Matty Simmons asked, ‘‘In the rush to get more members,
would cards be given to people only with dreams and no real way of paying for those
dreams?’’8 We would see many more examples of this in the years to come as the
marketing arm of credit card issuers sometimes won out over the security department
concerns.
Bank of America, a venerable financial institution, also wanted to be part of the credit
card action. In 1958, it launched its BankAmericard and offered a revolving credit
account. It started a campaign of sending unsolicited credit cards to people in California
to grow its customer base. At the time, banks could do business only in the state where
they had their charter. In order to reach the huge numbers of potential cardholders
nationwide, BankAmericard worked out an ingenious interchange agreement with banks
throughout the country. This agreement came to fruition in 1966, and the use of credit
cards grew as millions more signed up. BankAmericard would eventually become the
Visa card in 1976.
Also in 1966, another group of banks created a bank cooperative and named it the
Interbank Card Association, to compete with BankAmericard. In 1969, this group
purchased the rights to use the name Master Charge from the California Bank Asso-
ciation. The Interbank Card Association (ICA) was an umbrella organization for Master
Charge and ‘‘governed by consensus among its member banks.’’9 It managed the various
functions related to credit card administration including payments, authorizations, and
settlement of charges for the association members. In 1979, Master Charge would be
renamed MasterCard. The competition in the late 1960s resulted in large mailings of
unsolicited credit cards. People received cards even though they may have not have been
creditworthy or able to pay the charges. Children, the deceased, and family pets also got
credit cards.
Large numbers of cards were stolen from the mail by Postal Service employees and
others, resulting in an increasing amount of fraud losses to the industry. Criticism of the
practice of mailing unsolicited cards was extensive, even reaching the mainstream in a
widely read 1970 Life magazine article. As Life observed: ‘‘American banks have mailed
100 million cards to unsuspecting citizens and have offered each recipient not only a
handful of ‘instant cash’ but a dreamy method of buying by signature after the lettuce
runs out.’’10 By this time, more than 1,400 banks offered its customers either Bank-
Americard or Master Charge cards.
Congress reacted as expected and in 1970 passed a law forbidding the mailing of
unsolicited cards. It enacted the Fair Credit Reporting Act and later the Fair Credit
Billing Act in 1974 that amended 1968’s Truth in Lending Act. But the stage was already
set. Americans were becoming addicted to credit and their credit cards. And the threat of
fraud and identity theft was only beginning.
GROWTH OF CREDIT CARD FRAUD
Early credit card schemes commonly involved the use of stolen or lost cards and false
statements made in the applications for cards. Credit card frauds began as relatively
simple crimes. Law enforcement investigated and prosecuted criminally minded
Game of the Name: How It All Began
17

individuals only, rather than people who just became financially overextended. A white-
collar crime manual from 1977 cautioned investigators
to avoid becoming collection agencies in such cases by carefully analyzing referrals to be
sure that the requisite criminal intent is present, e.g., to avoid cases in which a credit card
holder badly overextended himself and fell hopelessly into debt—opposed to cases where he
never intended to pay.11
In the early years of investigating credit card fraud, federal agents, and in particular
Postal Inspectors, would use the Mail Fraud Statute for federal prosecution. Many of the
cases involved the theft of credit cards from wallets and purses, often by pickpockets and
prostitutes. The thieves would then use the stolen cards. The billing statements for the
various charges would be mailed by the merchants to the credit card companies for
processing and then to the true holders of the cards. The theory was that since the mails
were used for the processing of the transaction, the act of mailing the billing statement
was in furtherance of the crime. As a result, the Mail Fraud Statute would apply.
There were also numerous thefts of credit cards from the U.S. Mails. The mail has
always been an attractive target for criminals. Mail theft had been common since the
creation of the American Postal Service in 1775. By the 1800s, laws had been enacted to
criminalize mail theft, then called mail depredations. Credit cards provided another
valuable item to steal from the mail. In one example, the theft of credit cards from the
mail by gangs and individual criminals in Chicago in the 1966–1967 period resulted in
fraud losses of $6 million.12
From the late 1960s until 1974, large numbers of credit card fraudsters all over the
country were prosecuted and convicted using the Mail Fraud Statute. Although the
prosecutions were not stopping the problem, at least it was not growing. An estimate of
losses in credit card fraud in 1969 was $100 million, primarily due to the widespread
mailings of unsolicited credit cards by the credit card industry. After Congress
prohibited such mailings, fraud losses declined.
Traditional organized crime found that credit cards were another source of income for
their criminal activities. In 1970, Salvatore ‘‘Bill’’ Bonanno, the son of former mob boss
Joseph ‘‘Joe Bananas’’ Bonanno, went to jail for four years after Postal Inspectors and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation caught him fraudulently using someone else’s credit
card. Organized crime would continue this criminal activity and in the early 1980s
would counterfeit credit cards in the names of unsuspecting victims. By 1973, data
suggested that credit card fraud losses were down to between $40 and $60 million. In
that year, it was estimated that 200 million credit cards were in circulation in the United
States with annual theft losses of 1.5 million cards.13
As a result of the Truth in Lending Act legislation (also called the Consumer Credit
Protection Act), American consumers were better protected in the use of credit cards and
credit-related transactions. The act required clear disclosures in the granting of credit
and credit card practices. In addition, a new statute to fight credit card fraud was created:
Title 15, United State Code, Section 1644, Fraudulent Use of Credit Cards, was enacted
in 1970. This statute was used to prosecute defendants for the ‘‘use of any counterfeit,
fictitious, altered, forged, lost, stolen, or fraudulently obtained credit card to obtain
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
18

money, goods, services, or anything of value which within any one-year period has a
value aggregating $5,000 or more.’’14 In 1974, the amount was lowered to $1,000 as
many of the credit cards frauds were less than $5,000.
By 1974, credit card fraud losses began to climb significantly; losses were estimated
to be at $460 million for the year.15 The criminals who had been so active stealing credit
cards from the mail back in 1966 and 1967 when millions of unsolicited cards were sent
out were again active. Plus, there were new mail thieves added to the mix. Mail theft of
credit cards was becoming more and more of a problem with the growing consumer base
of credit card users. People now had multiple credit cards, and new customers were
being signed up at a record rate. Credit card applications were readily available, and
everyone wanted credit cards.
The commentary from 1974 that follows is illustrative of how the credit card
fraud application process by fraudsters has changed over the years but also remained
the same:
One false application procedure is either to observe a user’s card number during the course
of a credit card transaction or to obtain this information by retrieving the carbons of credit
card charge slips from merchant’s trash containers. Public records are then studied to
gather background information about the cardholder: address, homeowner, or renter,
occupation, etc. This is used to apply for a card from another issuer. A change of address is
indicated. Or the defrauder might notify the issuer of the card held by a legitimate user that
the latter is changing his address—and ‘‘please send me an additional card for my wife.’’
Sometimes a fictitious name is used on the application. Frequently, the applicant is listed as
a doctor or lawyer in the belief that issuers are reluctant to embarrass those in the
professions by conducting a thorough check. Credit references may be stores which are
known to be unresponsive to inquiries about their customers’ credit status. On occasion,
employees of card issuers have been bribed to approve false applications. Cards obtained
through false applications might be used safely for up to two months in conjunction with
counterfeit identification documents.16
Technology advances and other changes have done away with some of these elements
and steps. Those old charge slips with carbon paper inserts are no more. Public records
are now readily available on the Internet. Credit checks are made through the various
credit bureaus.
In February 1975, four family members and another person involved in fraudulently
obtaining credit cards were sentenced to prison after being convicted of mail fraud.
According to the Economic Crime Digest that provided commentary on the prosecution
of these fraudsters: ‘‘The five defendants used college catalogs to collect the necessary
personal and professional information on professors to complete the false applications’’
and as a result, ‘‘forty-nine credit cards were obtained and used with forged identifica-
tion to purchase goods valued at approximately $217,000.’’17
The Cost of Crimes Against Business, a January 1976 United States Department of
Commerce publication, warned of the rapid rise in the cost of crime impacting America.
Among the concerns were credit card–related crimes and the need to do more to prevent
this growing problem. The study advised that ‘‘close scrutiny of credit card applicants,
Game of the Name: How It All Began
19

aggressive attention to delinquent accounts. . . . and expulsion from the plan of
merchants who engage in improper practices, can help banks keep their credit card
losses to a minimum.’’18 Unfortunately, this advice was not enough to stem the tide of
future events and the rise of identity theft.
In 1977, the Hennepin, Minnesota County Attorney charged a gang of Nigerian
nationals with defrauding insurance and credit card companies throughout the United
States. A St. Paul, Minnesota Postal Inspector assisted in the investigation and provided
additional details of the fraud scheme in a memorandum included in the criminal
complaint. The inspector stated, ‘‘Operating in concert with other Nigerian aliens
residing across the United States, they have conducted a scheme to defraud, with
the primary victims being the credit card industry.’’19 The criminal complaint further
stated that ‘‘recently arrived Nigerians would collaborate with more settled individuals
in preparing applications for credit cards and escaping detection in utilizing the
fraudulently obtained cards. The suspects allegedly use a variety of names including
Anglicized versions of their own names and will assume each other’s identity in order to
make identification more difficult.’’20
In 1979, the problem of identity theft came to the attention of law enforcement in
Atlanta, Georgia. Shortly after, complaints on credit card fraud started to increase with
information coming in from victims. Soon the focus was on Nigerian nationals involved
in these crimes. In 1981, the Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI) organized a task
force to investigate the increasing incidents of credit card fraud. At first the criminals
used their own names and addresses but added other phony information. This made
arrests easy, but fraudsters soon learned from their mistakes.21
The identity thieves in Georgia became much more sophisticated in their crimes in the
years between 1981 and 1985. Individual fraudsters were joined by gangs involved in
identity theft. They began to steal entire identities of others and use them for credit card
applications. A Special Agent of the GBI found that stolen ‘‘background information
included names, Social Security numbers, dates of birth, addresses, and the number of
dependents. . . . The investigation revealed that they got this information by infiltrating
legitimate businesses or corrupting people who were already employed in those
legitimate businesses.’’22
EVEN POSTAL EMPLOYEES WILL STEAL
Rick Johnson is a retired Postal Inspector. During his career with the Inspection Service,
he had an internal crimes assignment in Jacksonville, Florida, in the late 1980s. Internal
crimes are internal mail theft investigations generally involving postal employees and
contractors. Mail theft can involve anything that is delivered via the U.S. Mails and
that can include items of value such as checks, birthday cards with cash, registered mail
containing rare coins, securities, and of course credit cards.
One case that Inspector Johnson investigated involved a strange coincidence that
would prove the downfall of a credit card thief. Johnson was investigating 32 AT&T
Universal credit cards that had been stolen from the mails over a period of time. The
cards had been used for numerous fraudulent charges, but none was made in Jackson-
ville. The charges were spread out all over the country.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
20

Inspector Johnson began poring over the receipts to find at least one clue that might
break the case. He came across a charge made at Knott’s Berry Farm in the Los Angeles
area. The charge was made to a credit card issued to a Billy T. Smith and the
receipt contained a Florida driver’s license number issued to a Billy T. Smith. It turned
out there was a Billy T. Smith working as a mail handler at the Jacksonville General Mail
Center.
Inspector Johnson eventually confronted him, and Smith admitted to stealing all the
32 subject credit cards and using them in other states. He stole the Billy T. Smith credit
card because it had his exact name on it. He took his daughter to Knott’s Berry Farm; she
wanted a big teddy bear so he used the stolen card to purchase it. The postal employee
was shocked when the clerk asked for identification. He said he normally would have
made some excuse as to why he did not have identification and left. However, his
daughter wanted the teddy bear, and he had the perfect identification so he showed his
driver’s license to the clerk.
The employee said it was the only mistake he made in all the fraudulent transactions,
and it turned out to be his undoing. By showing his true identification to the clerk, he was
eventually identified as the mail thief. He was very impressed that the Postal Inspector
had been able to catch him and told him so. Smith was prosecuted in late 1988. He
pleaded guilty to mail theft and resigned from the Postal Service. He received a 13-
month prison sentence and was ordered to pay $35,000 in restitution.
RECIDIVISM IS COMMON
Between December 1996 and May 1998, a Nigerian national conducted a scheme
wherein he assumed the identities of at least five victims utilizing their valid Social
Security numbers. Using these identities, he obtained North Carolina identification
cards, contracted for mail delivery at commercial mail receiving agencies, and opened
bank accounts. He deposited stolen, counterfeit, and otherwise fraudulent checks and
convenience checks into these accounts. He wrote checks for merchandise and withdrew
funds. One of the identities he stole was that of a former U.S. Ambassador. The
investigation was jointly conducted by Postal Inspectors and Secret Service agents.
Investigating officers did not know the suspect’s true identity at the time but they had
incriminating evidence. Based on bank surveillance photos, a John Doe arrest warrant
was obtained and the photo was circulated to police in North Carolina. On May 9, 1998,
an alert Greensboro Triad Airport police officer recognized the suspect as he was
awaiting a flight at the airport and he was arrested. He provided a false name when
arrested, and it took two months to determine his true identity.
At that point, it was learned that the defendant had been the subject of three prior
Postal Inspection Service investigations in New York and New Jersey dating back to
1985, all for credit card fraud. In one of the cases, the defendant had in his possession a
number of credit cards that were part of 100 credit cards stolen from the mails in
Houston, Texas. Besides using stolen credit cards, he obtained other cards through
fraudulent credit card applications using victims’ personal information. The most recent
fraud was in excess of $200,000. He pleaded guilty to using stolen Social Security
numbers and opening bank accounts using fraudulent names.
Game of the Name: How It All Began
21

Imagine my surprise as I was researching material for this book and came across a
very familiar case study. The case was one I investigated when I was a Postal Inspector
in New York. I immediately recognized the fraudster’s name; I had arrested him for the
first time on December 17, 1985, in Staten Island, New York, for credit card fraud. He
pleaded guilty in February 1986 and in April of that year was sentenced in Brooklyn
Federal Court to two years in prison to be followed by deportation. Not only did prison
time not work, deportation obviously did not either. Recidivism is unfortunately quite
common for identity thieves; the punishments are not sufficient to be effective deterrents
when the crime is so easy and lucrative.
MAIL THEFT AND PHONY ID
On March 30, 1998, a resident in an apartment complex in Pickerington, Ohio, reported
to the local police department and Postal Inspectors that he was receiving credit cards
that he had not applied for. The postal customer reported he had been contacted by
various banks and that over $10,000 in convenience checks associated with credit cards
mailed to his apartment were being negotiated in the Houston, Texas, area. The postal
customer also informed the authorities that on the two prior mail delivery days, he
witnessed an unknown male driving a white vehicle removing mail from his mailbox.
That same day, Postal Inspectors and police detectives conducted surveillance in the
area of the victim’s mailbox. Within a short time, a male driving a white vehicle was
observed entering the apartment complex and removing mail from the victim’s mailbox.
The subject was arrested as he was leaving the scene in his car. In the car were several
pieces of mail addressed to the victim, credit cards and mail addressed to other victims,
as well as a list of numerous names, SSNs, and birth dates of other victims. He was
charged with theft of mail.
When the defendant was booked, he gave a phony name, provided a home address that
turned out to be a mail receiving agency, and had a Washington State driver’s license in
the alias. He also falsely provided an SSN that was found to belong to a female. It was
later determined that the defendant previously had been arrested in Las Vegas and
Atlanta for credit card fraud and deported in 1990. He illegally reentered the country
under an alias as a temporary U.S. visitor in 1996.
THE CIRCULATION: A SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA CRIME SYNDICATE
The Circulation was an organized group of individuals involved in mail theft, identity
theft, and other crimes for the purpose of supporting their methamphetamine habits. The
Circulation membership was primarily Filipino, but group members came from other
backgrounds as well. The U.S. Postal Inspection Service identified over 100 individuals
as members of the Circulation operating as separate groups in the San Fernando Valley,
Los Angeles, and Long Beach, California. Postal Inspectors believe that the gang has
stolen the identities of more than 1,000 people since 1996.
The Circulation found it easy to use financial crimes to feed their drug habits.
Methamphetamine is a particularly nasty and addictive drug that quickly consumes the
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
22

lives of its users. The drug puts users on a nonstop path of crimes to raise money for more
of the drug. The crimes usually began with mail theft. Mail was stolen by various
methods, including internal theft through employment with the Postal Service as mail
clerks and carriers, and external theft by breaking into mailboxes in apartments and
residential housing. Often gang members used stolen or counterfeit Postal Service
‘‘Arrow’’ keys: keys that are used by postal employees to access collection boxes,
apartment boxes, and storage boxes. The thieves would pose as joggers running by
mailboxes and removing mail. In fact, the Circulation referred to ‘‘jogging’’ and
‘‘boxing’’ to describe stealing incoming and outgoing mail from Postal Service boxes.
Mail stolen by the gang would be sorted at area hotels or safe houses and grouped into
checks, credit card information, bank statements, and something they called ‘‘profiles.’’
Profiles were the personal identifying information stolen from victims that was
maintained for later use in identity theft. The checks were generally found in outgoing
mail as payment for credit cards, utilities, mortgages, loans, and other payment purposes.
The Circulation would chemically wash the stolen checks in chemicals such as acetone
and brake fluid to remove the original inked writing and enable the fraudsters to rewrite
the checks with new payment information including payee and check amount. (See
Chapter 6 for more information on mail theft, check washing, and identity theft.)
The Circulation would use these altered checks to obtain cash through fraudulently
opened bank accounts and make payments on credit cards obtained through identity
theft. Although this may not make sense at first, payments like these can temporarily
inflate the account balance and allow suspects to withdraw the additional funds before
the bank realizes the account holders deposited a ‘‘bad’’ check. This is a common
approach that is used by many identity thieves, not just the Circulation.
Stolen credit card information was used to purchase merchandise from mail order
companies. The fraudsters would provide a different address than the true credit card
holder at which to receive the ordered merchandise. At times, they would request that the
credit card company change the account address to reflect the new one provided by the
fraudster. When they were successful in changing account addresses, the Circulation
members would order additional credit cards to be mailed to the new address. These
cards allowed the gang to make additional purchases and cash advances until the credit
card issuer was alerted to the fraudulent use and canceled the card. The purchased items
included computers, big-ticket electronics, hotel rooms, and rental cars.
The ‘‘profiles’’ maintained by the Circulation included victim names, SSNs, dates of
birth, driver’s license numbers, mother’s maiden names, and other personally identifia-
ble information (PII). Besides obtaining this information from mail theft, the Circulation
would use collusive employees at car dealerships, hotels, retail establishments, medical
facilities to obtain PII. This PII would originate on employment applications, applica-
tions for credit and loans, goods and services documents, medical files, and other
sources. Members of the Circulation would use these profiles personally to fraudulently
obtain credit cards, for payments of personal services such as utilities, and to sell to other
criminals.
In April 2001, two members of the gang were arrested in Burbank, California, on
charges of credit card fraud, forgery, identity theft, and methamphetamine possession. In
Game of the Name: How It All Began
23

their possession at the time of the arrest were scores of credit cards and a list of names
and account numbers from potential identity theft victims, including people from South
America and Germany. The credit card and bank account information in their possession
had a potential fraud loss value of $23 million. As was common practice for this group
that financed their drug use with their criminal activities, these two defendants also had
methamphetamine in their possession. Criminals, methamphetamine use, and identity
theft are a potent and dangerous mixture, and one that will be a recurring theme
throughout this book.
NOTES
1. The President’s Identity Theft Task Force, ‘‘Combating Identity Theft: A Strategic
Plan’’ (April 2007), 23, www.idtheft.gov/reports/StrategicPlan.pdf.
2. Social Security Administration, ‘‘The Story of the Most Misused Number of All
Time,’’ www.ssa.gov/history/ssn/misused.html.
3. United States Department of Justice, The Criminal Use of False Identification:
The Report of the Federal Advisory Committee on False Identification (November
1976), 2.
4. Ibid., 5.
5. Ibid., 16.
6. Ibid.
7. Emily Starbuck Gerson and Ben Woolsey, ‘‘A Not-So-Brief History of Credit
Cards,’’ www.creditcards.com/history-of-credit-cards.php.
8. Matty Simmons, The Credit Card Catastrophe: The 20th Century Phenomenon That
Changed the World (New York: Barricade Books, 1995), 81.
9. Company history of MasterCard International, Inc, www.answers.com/topic/mas-
tercard-1?cat=biz-fin.
10. Quoted in Simmons, Credit Card Catastrophe, 119.
11. Herbert Edelhertz, Ezra Stotland, Marilyn Walsh, and Milton Weinberg, The
Investigation of White-Collar Crime: A Manual for Law Enforcement Agencies
(Washington, DC: Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, United States
Department of Justice, April 1977), 287.
12. U.S. Department of Commerce, The Cost of Crimes Against Business (January
1976), 23.
13. Charles E. O’Hara, Fundamentals of Criminal Investigation, 3rd ed. (Springfield,
IL: Charles C Thomas, 1973), 358.
14. Title 15, United States Code, Section 1644.
15. U.S. Department of Commerce, Cost of Crimes Against Business.
16. Chamber of Commerce of the United States, A Handbook on White Collar Crime:
Everyone’s Problem, Everyone’s Loss, 1974, 34.
17. National District Attorneys Association, Economic Crime Digest 2, no. 3 (August–
October 1975), 168.
18. U.S. Department of Commerce, Cost of Crimes Against Business.
19. National District Attorneys Association, Economic Crime Digest 4, no. 3 (January–
February 1978), 6.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
24

20. Ibid.
21. Testimony of Steve Simmons, Special Agent, Georgia Bureau of Investigation,
Hearings on Emerging Criminal Groups: Nigerian Criminal Activities, before the
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental
Affairs, United States Senate, 99th Congress, 2nd Ses., September 17, 1986, 38.
22. Ibid.
Game of the Name: How It All Began
25


CHAPTER 3
How Identity Theft Occurs
Everyone is vulnerable to identity theft because we possess something very valuable that
criminals crave: our name and reputation. William Shakespeare recognized the value of
a person’s good name and the impact of misuse, as evidenced by these lines in his classic
play Othello:
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord, is the immediate jewel of their souls.
Who steals my purse steals trash; ’tis something, nothing;
’Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to thousands;
But he that filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that which not enriches him.
And makes me poor indeed.1
These lines were uttered by Iago, a villainous and vengeful character in the play, to
Othello. Iago was referring to the damage from libel and slander and his reluctance to
discuss a fabricated affair between Othello’s wife, Desdemona, and one of Othello’s
officers. While Iago’s words speak volumes about one’s good name and reputation, he
was also talking about the damage caused by identity theft. Stealing one’s very life
through personal and financial information can have a lasting impact.
27

CRIMINAL ROLES OF IDENTITY THIEVES
In an October 2007 study, the research described the various roles that defendants play in
the commission of identity theft crimes.2 (For a more detailed discussion of this study,
see Chapter 19.) A list of the criminal actions of identity thieves follows.
 Steal or obtain personal identifying information (e.g., personal identifying informa-
tion that can be captured from credit card databases, client and employee records,
credit card receipts, bank statements, stolen mail, checks)
 Steal or obtain personal identifier documents (e.g., driver’s licenses, birth certificates,
Social Security cards, employee badges)
 Steal or obtain bank cards (credit, debit, automated teller machine [ATM])
 Alter identification documents (e.g., driver’s licenses, Social Security cards, birth
certificates, employee badges)
 Produce counterfeit identification documents (e.g., driver’s licenses, Social Security
cards, birth certificates, employee identification cards)
 Distribute personal identifier information to others (so that they can use it for personal
gain)
 Sell identification documents (genuine and counterfeit)
 Use identification documents for own use (offenders use genuine or counterfeit
documents for personal gain)
 Use identification documents to obtain more identification documents (e.g., using a
utility bill and birth certificate to procure a driver’s license)
 Direct others’ activities (within an organized crime group, giving instructions or
orders to the others in the group)
 Other (includes credit card skimming, encoding or re-encoding bank cards)3
HOW IDENTITY THIEVES STEAL YOUR GOOD NAME
Cunning criminals have long known how easy it is to commit identity theft. Since this
crime began its growth in the 1970s, we have seen a progression from simple to complex
schemes. Interestingly enough, although fraudsters embraced technology to carry out
identity theft, they never completely forgot their roots. Dumpster diving, mail theft,
fraudulent credit card applications, lost or stolen wallets and purses, and insider access
continue to provide vast sources of information for identity thieves. The only limitation
to the many types of identity theft, as well as the new ones yet to come, is the very
imagination of these crooks and advances in technology.
The President’s Identity Theft Task Force in its April 2007 report defined identity
theft as ‘‘the misuse of another individual’s information to commit fraud.’’ The
definition also describes the three stages in the life cycle: (1) the identity thief acquires
a victim’s personal information; (2) the identity thief attempts to use the stolen
information; and (3) the identity thief is successful in the crime using the proceeds
while the victim is harmed.4 Many of the ways that identity theft occurs are discussed
next.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
28

Account Takeover Fraud
Account takeover fraud is the fraudulent access and/or manipulation of existing
financial account information, such as a checking account, by an unauthorized individ-
ual or individuals. Postal Service change-of-address forms are often used to divert mail
from the actual address to another controlled by the identity thief. The President’s
Identity Theft Task Force Report defines existing account fraud as occurring ‘‘when
thieves obtain account information involving credit, brokerage, banking, or utility
accounts that are already open’’ and defines new account fraud as the use of ‘‘personal
information, such as Social Security numbers, birth dates, and home addresses, to open
new accounts in the victim’s name, make changes indiscriminately, and then disap-
pear.’’5 Account takeover is also called identity takeover. Stolen personal information
such as names, Social Security numbers (SSNs), dates of birth, and account information
is used to ‘‘(1) make unauthorized use of existing credit or other financial accounts or
(2) establish new accounts, apply for loans, etc.’’6
Bank and Loan Fraud
Criminals may open bank accounts in your name. The fraudsters will falsify the
information on account applications using stolen personal information and provide phony
identification claiming to be you. They obtain checks for the account and then write
numerousbadchecksonthataccountuntilitisdraineddry.Theymayattempttocashstolen
and altered checks through the account. Identity thieves have been known to chemically
‘‘wash’’ checks to remove the inked writing so they can forge the checks with different
payees, check amounts, and their signatures. This illegal process is called check washing
and is covered in detail in Chapter 6. Scammers also obtain a variety of loans in your
name—business, personal,student, auto, mortgage, and homeequity— thatare not repaid.
Counterfeit or Altered Cards
Counterfeiting and altering credit cards has long been an illegal practice by fraudsters.
Criminals counterfeit credit cards with varying degrees of quality. In the early days,
some were simple white or blue pieces of plastic cut to the size of credit cards and
embossed with stolen information including cardholder name, account number, and
expiration date. Thus, the term ‘‘white (or blue) plastic fraud’’ was born. The phony
cards often were used at collusive merchant establishments and required a conspiracy
between the fraudster and the merchant or a merchant’s employee for the transaction to be
successful. Generally, the merchant would imprint a credit card sales draft with the white
plastic and deposit it into the business account. This merchant then would split the credit
card charge proceeds with the fraudster. White plastic schemes effectively ended with the
advent of electronic point-of-sale terminals that read the magnetic stripes on the cards.
In 1984, I worked undercover to investigate a group of collusive merchants in Queens,
New York, dealing in white plastic. The store owners thought I was a fraudster with a
never-ending supply of embossed white plastics with stolen credit card numbers. They
were all too happy to run my white plastics through their accounts for fraudulent
transactions and share the ‘‘cash splits’’ with me. Even I was surprised that merchant
How Identity Theft Occurs
29

after merchant had no problem in doing these fraudulent transactions with me. Their
only surprise was when we arrested them.
Today, criminals with technology skills can easily counterfeit credit cards using
skimming techniques to ‘‘skim’’ existing information from one card to another for
fraudulent use. Skimming bypasses the need to actually counterfeit a credit card and the
need to re-create holograms and other credit card security features. (See the ‘‘Skim-
ming’’ section later in this chapter.)
Altered credit cards are actual credit cards that have been lost or stolen and changed
by fraudsters to reflect new account holder information. Various methods are employed
to alter cards for use. Some are high-quality alterations but most can be easily detected as
altered. With advances in technology, altered cards are not the problem they were in the
1980s.
Downloading Deceptive Software
Identity thieves may offer you free music, antivirus protection, or other applications. If
you fall for this too-good-to-be-true offer and download or open unknown attachments,
you may expose yourself to surreptitious installation of spyware on your computer. Once
this spyware is installed, identity thieves can use it to record your keystrokes and obtain
passwords, bank account information, and other sensitive information.
Dumpster Diving
Nothing is more low tech than Dumpster diving as a source of personal information. For
far too long, individuals and businesses simply disposed of their financial records and
other personal documents by just throwing them into the garbage. Enterprising criminals
were more than willing to ‘‘get down and dirty’’ in the trash looking for, and often
finding, valuable information. The increased focus on identity theft prevention has
resulted in more and more shredding of documents. Yet we still regularly read of
businesses that simply dump boxes of mortgage applications, medical files, consumer
credit reporting information, and other financial documents into the garbage, informa-
tion that then is found by identity thieves.
Dumpster diving is still an easy and vast source of information for identity thieves,
and not only in the United States. In 2003, methamphetamine users in Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada, found that Dumpster diving in the trash of call centers was especially
valuable. They discovered ‘‘copies of credit card transactions, loan applications,
customer-service reports, employment manuals, internal phone directories’’ as well
as ‘‘credit check information from Equifax, credit card numbers to make payments,
Social Security numbers, dates of birth, and addresses.’’7 The wealth of information was
then used for identity theft. Equally important, none of these documents had been
shredded before being discarded.
Employment Fraud
Fraudsters use your name, SSN, and other personal information to pose as you for
employment. This may be done by people who are in this country illegally and do not
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
30

have SSNs of their own. They may hijack your resume if it is available online. Job
seekers who post resumes online that contain too much personal information are at risk
from identity thieves who are on the prowl for such data. People using your SSN for
employment may or may not contribute to Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA)
payroll taxes (Social Security and Medicare), a fact that will impact your Social Security
benefits in the future.
Fraudulent Credit Card Applications
Identity thieves use stolen personal information to complete fraudulent credit card
applications. The fraudsters will use a victim’s true name, SSN, date of birth, employ-
ment, and other available information but not the victim’s actual home address. Instead,
they provide an address where they can receive the card. Identity thieves have used post
office boxes, commercial mail receiving agencies, and residences rented for the purpose
of receiving credit cards. Often numerous fraudulent applications are completed and
submitted in the belief that the greater number provides a better chance of some getting
approved and cards issued. Ingenious criminals will change home and work telephone
numbers to ones where they can receive inquiries from the credit card issuers. The
widespread use of cell phones has made this easier for the thieves. In the past, they had to
have a physical location to set up telephone service and await possible calls from banks
and credit card issuers verifying employment, income, and other information. Now they
can go about their criminal ways while awaiting those calls.
Government Benefits and Documents Fraud
Government benefits or documents fraud can include a wide range of fraudulent activity.
Using your name and personal information, scam artists apply for various government
benefits, obtain driver’s licenses, receive SSNs and benefits, file fraudulent tax returns to
obtain refunds, and receive other government documents and benefits.
Hacking and Electronic Intrusions
The computer and Internet age have ushered in a new breed of criminals who use
technology for fraud and abuse. These computer hackers steal information from both
individuals and businesses by penetrating firewalls, intercepting data during transmis-
sion, attacking unprotected home wireless networks, and other means. Hackers have
traditionally created computer viruses more for status and bragging rights than for
financial gain. ‘‘But now hackers are mixing with fraudsters and organized crime rings’’
and ‘‘viruses are being used illegally for financial gain, and they are becoming part of the
modern criminal’s toolbox.’’8
Criminals will use variations of viruses to take over multiple computers, often all over
the world, and turn them into ‘‘zombies.’’ This results in a botnet, a large-scale network
that criminals can control remotely and use for malicious purposes. Botnets can control
tens of thousands of unprotected computers and are used most often to ‘‘distribute spam
email, spread viruses, attack other computers and servers, and commit other kinds of
How Identity Theft Occurs
31

crime and fraud.’’9 With more and more people leaving their computers on and
continuously connected to the Internet, highly skilled cybercriminals ‘‘can cover their
tracks since they act through other people’s computers.’’10 Botnets are some of the
fastest-growing Internet dangers today. Unless your computers and networks are
adequately protected, they can be easily infected and controlled. (More information
about botnets and wireless networks can be found in Chapter 17.)
Insider Threat
It is not just career criminals and organized crime gangs that are responsible for the
growing problem of identity theft. Insiders play a key role in this crime. There are
several definitions of insiders. The most common insiders are criminally minded
employees working at banks, credit bureaus, and other businesses where personally
identifiable information (PII) is found. The failure to secure and limit access to
computers, networks, and databases can allow unauthorized entry and data breaches
by fraudster employees and others. ‘‘Criminals also may bribe insiders, or become
employees themselves to access sensitive data at companies.’’11
But the identity thieves may also be your friends and relatives, the people you least
suspect. Several years ago in Morena Valley, California, a woman was ‘‘devastated to
learn that her sister stole her identity and that of their Alzheimer’s-afflicted mother and
used them to open fake credit cards and utility accounts and forge checks.’’12 In a similar
case, a woman in Downey, California, had her identity stolen. The purloined information
was used to empty her bank accounts and open credit card accounts in her name that
were used for thousands of dollars in fraudulent purchases. Who was the identity thief
who did this to her? ‘‘It was her husband who fled to his native Pakistan with nearly
$60,000 of her money.’’13
Lost and Stolen Credit Cards
Just because some criminals have turned to technology to commit fraud does not mean
they all have. Do not forget that the old standards still work. Fraudsters have continued to
use the time-tested methods of pickpocketing and thefts to steal wallets, purses,
computer bags, and other opportunistic pilfering. Credit cards and checking account
information are the usual targets of these thefts. Lost and stolen credit cards traditionally
have been an easy means of financial gain for fraudsters. Lost wallets and purses
containing credit cards, Social Security cards, driver’s licenses, and other personal
information give identity thieves the information they need for fraud. The same goes for
stolen wallets, purses, and personal belongings.
Long before the other forms of identity theft occurred, thefts of credit cards and other
PII from vehicles, residences, the workplace, unsecured lockers, and by professional
pickpockets were a common means for financial abuse. The 2006 Identity Theft Survey
Report of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) released in November 2007 reported
that 16% of victims had their PII stolen by people they personally knew. The same study
found that 5% of victims had their PII compromised through the theft of their wallet or
purse.14
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
32

Mail/Telephone Order Fraud
Mail/telephone order fraud is also called no card present fraud, as the actual credit card is
not physically present for the transaction. Such transactions are usually conducted by
telephone or mail. The scammer, after fraudulently obtaining a victim’s credit card,
attempts to use it to purchase merchandise or services over the phone or by mail. With
advances in card security, such as the Card Security Value (CSV), it is harder to commit
mail or telephone order fraud using another’s credit card. On a system using CSV,
customers are prompted for the three- or four-digit number on the back of the credit card.
Only a person with the card in hand can provide this number, as it is not stored in any
system.15
Mail Theft
Each and every day, the United States Postal Service delivers millions of pieces of mail
containing checks, credit cards, financial statements, and a host of other important and
valuable documents and items. For this reason, mail is a highly prized target for identity
thieves and other criminals. Mail theft has been a concern since the creation of the Postal
Service in the United States. Mail thieves have always used imaginative ways to steal
mail and commit identity theft. In 2002, mail thieves employed a ‘‘sticky device’’ to steal
mail from Postal Service collection boxes. A sticky device is a heavy object covered
with a strong glue substance, either pine tar or melted mousetrap glue, with an attached
string. While one suspect acts as a lookout, the other suspect drops the sticky device into
a collection box through the mail slot. The deposited mail adheres to the glue, the heavy
object is pulled up, and the outgoing mail is then stolen.
This was not the first time that a sticky device was used. In 1996, Postal Inspectors
found it being used to steal mail from snorkel boxes in the Los Angeles area. Snorkel
collections boxes are named for the snorkel-like opening on the street side so customers
in their cars can drive up to the box and deposit outgoing mail from the driver-side
window. A ‘‘teeth device’’ was installed inside the collection box that prevented the
removal of mail adhered to the sticky device. This modification completely eliminated
the problem at the time. It was not until 2002 that the problem resurfaced. It seemed that
due to routine maintenance and collection box replacement, most of these modified
boxes had been removed from service. The sticky device modification was again
installed in collection boxes, and the threat ended.
Fishing for mail, which is obviously a low-tech version of the much newer phishing,
has been a common technique for identity thieves for many years. I investigated a case of
a mail thief in the early 1980s who was not as imaginative in his technique. I was
working as a Postal Inspector in Brooklyn, New York, when I received a telephone call
from the New York Police Department that they had apprehended a mail thief. The not-
too-bright criminal had tried to reach down the mail slot of a collection box to steal mail
and got his arm stuck. He had attempted this in the early-morning hours when he thought
no one would see him.
With his arm stuck in the box, he was spotted by police officers on patrol. The police
extricated the thief from the collection box and held him for me. While I was processing
How Identity Theft Occurs
33

him on attempted mail theft charges, I learned that he had been arrested for mail theft
twice before and had served time in prison for these crimes. I remember telling the
embarrassed criminal that he needed to find another line of work because he definitely
was not good at his current one.
Mailbox fishing has been a particularly vexing problem over the years. Collection
boxes placed in front of post offices are often a target due to the volume of mail
deposited. The design of the box allows a person to reach in and, if the box is completely
full, simply remove the mail. The answers are modifications and ongoing collection of
the mail by postal employees, and these have been implemented. In addition, numerous
collection and storage box thefts occurred as a result of lost or stolen Postal Service
Arrow keys. In one of the easier methods, criminals would simply break into the box
with a crowbar or screw driver. The Postal Service has responded by hardening
collection and mailboxes with stronger security, improved locking devices, and other
modifications that reduce the possibility of mail theft using these techniques.
Although modifications greatly help, they will not completely reduce the possibility
of break-ins and theft. One simple prevention method is for the public to deposit
outgoing mail only inside a post office. If mail is deposited in outside boxes, it should
always be deposited during the day and around collection time to ensure that it will not
sit overnight when it could be stolen. (More prevention recommendations can be found
in Chapter 20.)
In 1996, Postal Inspectors in Puerto Rico uncovered a mail theft scheme where an
adult recruited juveniles to steal mail. The juveniles were instructed to collect informa-
tion flyers from local supermarkets and ‘‘deliver’’ them to residential mailboxes on the
first of the month. While inserting the circulars, the juveniles were told to remove any
government checks that might be inside the box. This mail theft technique was designed
to lessen the chance of discovery as it appeared the juveniles were simply putting the
flyers inside area mailboxes.
In July 2007, Postal Inspectors and other law enforcement agents arrested 10 identity
thieves; most of them were from Kenya. The defendants stole the mail and identities of
hundreds of victims, primarily elderly people in nursing homes. The criminals used the
information to file fraudulent federal and state tax returns. More than 365 fraudulent tax
returns were involved. The potential losses exceeded $13 million and impacted victims
in more than 27 states. This was one of the largest tax fraud cases ever uncovered.
Not Received Items (NRI) is the credit card industry terminology for nonreceipt of
new or replacement credit cards mailed to the authorized cardholder. Often these NRI
cards have been stolen at some point in transit. Postal employees have been found to be
involved in mail thefts, but cards are also stolen by external parties during or after the
mail delivery process. The Card Activation Program (CAP) detailed in Chapter 11 has
helped to significantly reduce NRI losses over the years.
Medical Identity Theft
Medical identity theft is a relatively new variation where criminals use a victim’s
personal information to obtain medical care and file fraudulent medical claims. This
ominous mutation of the crime leaves victims with a double whammy. Not only are they
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
34

vulnerable to the financial losses associated with identity theft; they also are subject to a
more serious health threat through commingled diagnoses and treatments in their
medical files. (Much more can be found on medical identity theft in Chapter 8.)
Phishing
The term ‘‘phishing’’ is a take-off on the word ‘‘fishing’’ where scam artists use tempting
emails as bait to lure unsuspecting victims to part with account numbers, passwords, and
other financial information. The spoofed Web sites look so real that people can be easily
fooled into thinking they are at the actual site of their financial institution. According to
the Anti-Phishing Working Group, the term ‘‘was coined in the 1996 timeframe by
hackers who were stealing AOL accounts by scamming passwords from unsuspecting
users.’’16
In phishing schemes, victims get hooked if they fall for the bait. Identity thieves send
unsuspecting people e-mails that by all appearances seem to be legitimate correspondence
from banks, brokerages, or online service companies, such as eBay or PayPal. A common
theme used by fraudsters is to inform the recipient that there has been an unauthorized
access of their online account. The recipients are urged to click on a link for additional
important information that needs to be acted on. Usually the e-mails ask that you provide
your personal information to verify your account. Once done, the crooks have all the
information they need for fraud. This is social engineering at its worst.
Pharming
Hackers use pharming or domain spoofing to redirect a legitimate Web site’s traffic to a
phony site they control. The phony site looks real with logos and other information
similar to the true site. In phishing, fraudsters primarily employ social engineering,
tricking the recipient into clicking on the spoofed site. Pharming is more insidious, as it
directly attacks and alters domain name servers (DNS). DNS are the large directories of
common and specific Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, such as www.microsoft.com.
Pharming will corrupt your local DNS server by redirecting your Web request to the fake
site. You think you are at the correct site, but you are not. Once you are at the imposter
site, you will be asked to provide personal information that will be used by the thieves.
The name ‘‘pharming’’ refers to the large amount of PII that criminals can potentially
harvest using this method.
Pretexting
‘‘Pretexting’’ is a term coined by the private investigation industry to describe the
practice of obtaining personal information about others under false pretenses. It is
defined the same way by the FTC. Individuals involved in pretexting will sell the
personal information they covertly and, often illegally, obtain to others who may use it to
commit identity theft and other crimes.
The FTC has been active in targeting information brokers who deal in the personal and
financial information of others without their knowledge and consent. In April 1999, the
How Identity Theft Occurs
35

FTC filed the first federal case against information brokers for pretexting.17 The legal
action was against a private investigation firm in Denver that was illegally obtaining and
selling consumers’ private financial information. More recently, in December 2007, the
United States Attorney for the Western District of Washington indicted 10 private
investigators around the country on charges they used identity theft and other illegal
methods to obtain and sell PII from unsuspecting victims. The PII was sold to law firms
and others for use in litigation without the victims’ knowledge.18
Reshipping or Forwarder Scams
Beginning in 2003, many Internet vendors saw a steady increase in the number of fraud
attempts. Much of the increase in credit card fraud on the Internet can be directly
attributed to a credit card scam from Nigeria known as the reshipping or forwarder scam.
Professional fraudsters in Africa surf Internet chat rooms looking for young marks.
They give the young victim a story of how unfair the trade tariffs are in Africa on
computer items. They ask the victim to accept orders from several merchants at the
victim’s home, and they ask the victim to forward the items to an address in Lagos,
Nigeria, or elsewhere. They offer to pay the forwarder $100 per package (which would
be more than any tariff). The naive victim agrees and begins to receive packages. Each
order is on a different stolen credit card for an amount that is usually less than $500, an
amount often frequently used as a limit for fraud screening on orders in the industry. Of
course, the victim never gets paid for forwarding the goods.
Some victims have decided just to keep all the merchandise, occasionally resulting in
telephonic death threats. The typical victim of the Nigerian scam is a male between the
ages of 15 and 24, and the fraudsters often pose as young women. Some have even sent a
photo of a pretty young blonde, who is supposed to be the person with whom the mark is
chatting. Police all over the United States have been finding mail drop forwarders who
have been duped into forwarding stolen merchandise. The more advanced scammers use
accomplices in the United States who rent warehouse space to use as a staging area for
sending stolen goods overseas. Many such warehouses have been raided in Atlanta,
Houston, Miami, and other cities, and authorities have found computer equipment and
office supplies stacked to the ceiling, all bound for Nigeria.19
Skimming
Skimming has been used by identity thieves for a number of years. A skimming device is
a portable credit card reader used to surreptitiously capture the account data contained
on the magnetic stripe of credit cards. Once this information is obtained, it can be placed
on a counterfeit card and fraudulently used. Law enforcement has known of this problem
for many years. It has been especially prevalent at restaurants, gasoline service stations,
and other establishments where employees swipe cards out of sight of the cardholders.
Dishonest restaurant employees have used portable, palm-size skimming devices to
secretly copy the credit card account information of people dining at the establishment
and paying with their card. When unsuspecting guests provide the credit card for
payment, the server surreptitiously skims it through the device to record the data. Some
of these skimmers are small enough to fit inside a jacket pocket.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
36

Ingenious criminals have been known to install skimming machines over the fronts of
ATM machines to capture account information when victims try to use the ATM.
Miniature cameras are placed at the side of the ATM to record the PIN number entered
by the cardholder. No transaction occurs so the cardholder assumes the ATM is broken.
Unfortunately, the damage is done, with the account information and PIN captured for
later fraudulent use. A disturbing case in Rhode Island in 2007 at several Stop & Shop
supermarkets further reinforces the brazenness of identity thieves. The fraudsters
replaced checkout lane credit and debit card readers with look-alike skimming devices.
The resulting fraud and arrests reinforced this as a growing way to steal personal
information.
Restaurants have been an especially fertile ground for identity thieves over the years. I
remember cases where criminally minded restaurant employees would sell bags of credit
card carbons to identity thieves. The carbons contained the cardholder’s name, card
number, and expiration date. This was in the days before electronic verification, and the
information was used to create counterfeit credit cards. Today, restaurants are facing
intrusions from poorly protected wireless networks as well as old-fashioned employee
collusion and theft of information. Restaurants continue to be a significant source of
stolen credit card information ‘‘Since January 2005, restaurants represented about 40%
of incidents in which intruders gained unauthorized access to credit card information.’’20
Now MasterCard, Visa, and other financial institutions are cracking down on restaurants
for not protecting customers’ credit card information. The credit card companies are
requiring increased security procedures designed to lessen fraud.
Smishing
As if we do not have enough to worry about, smishing is emerging as a new threat to cell
phone users. Smishing is phishing using a cell phone’s text messaging capability to
obtain confidential information. The potential victim receives a text message with
instructions to visit an imposter Web site for any number of legitimate-sounding reasons.
People who follow the instructions are subjected to a pattern of deception similar to that
in phishing schemes. Smishing gets its name from a mash-up of phishing and SMS (short
message service) text messaging.
Social Engineering
Social engineering is a crucial tool used by identity thieves, like all con men, to manipulate
unsuspecting people into divulging confidential information. They also trick others into
believing they are someone other than who they truly are. According to Wikipedia, social
engineering is ‘‘a collection of techniques used to manipulate people into performing
actions or divulging confidential information.’’21 To be even more effective, social
engineering is usually performed via telephone or email, and the perpetrator does not
come into contact with the subject of the deception. Social engineering is used by identity
thieves to convince victims to provide personal and financial information about them-
selves. This trickery can take many forms, including simple ruses over the telephone or
more involved uses of pretexting, phishing, vishing (to be described), or the installation of
malware, spyware, and keystroke-logging software.
How Identity Theft Occurs
37

Spearfishing
Spearfishing is a form of phishing where specific organizations and individuals are
targeted by fraudsters to collect sensitive information. Unlike phishing where millions of
generic emails are blasted out, spearfishing is directed at a particular person whom the
crooks have identified. In April 2008, thousands of corporate executives received emails
that looked like an official government notice that they were being served with a
subpoena. Each of the emails was personally addressed to the potential victim with his or
her name, organization, and telephone number. The recipient was ordered to appear
before a Grand Jury and a link was embedded in the email for viewing the actual
subpoena. Anyone who opened the link downloaded keystroke-logging software to
capture account numbers and passwords. The term ‘‘whaling’’ is also used when the
targets are the rich and powerful, such as corporate executives.
Telephone and Utilities Fraud
Identity thieves use stolen personal information to open telephone, cell phone, and utility
accounts in your name and then do not make the payments, thereby impacting your credit
score. In an FTC study released in February 2008 of consumer complaints related to
identity theft, 18% of complaints related to telephone or utilities related identity theft.
Accordingtothisstudy,onlycreditcardfraudwasamorecommonformofidentitytheft.22
Vishing
Vishing is a new fraud development similar to phishing where the recipient receives a
voice message purportedly from a bank or credit card issuer. The message states that
there is an important matter that needs to be addressed, and a telephone number is left to
return the call. The message sounds legitimate, but the phone number given is that of the
fraudster. When the number is called, callers are asked to punch in their account number,
PIN, SSN, and/or other personal information. The victim’s information is collected at
the other end of the line and later used for fraud. In January 2008, the FBI issued a
warning to the public on the increase of vishing attacks and the various versions of the
schemes. The caution was posted on FBI’s Cyber Investigations Homepage under ‘‘New
E-Scams and Warnings’’ and stated:
These attacks against US financial institutions and consumers continue to rise at an
alarming rate. Vishing operates like phishing by persuading consumers to divulge their
Personally Identifiable Information (PII), claiming their account was suspended, deacti-
vated, or terminated. Recipients are directed to contact their bank via a telephone number
provided in the e-mail or by an automated recording. Upon calling the telephone number,
the recipient is greeted with ‘‘Welcome to the bank of . . .’’ and then requested to enter their
card number in order to resolve a pending security issue.
For authenticity, some fraudulent e-mails claim the bank would never contact customers to
obtain their PII by any means, including e-mail, mail, or instant messenger. These e-mails
further warn recipients not to provide sensitive information when requested in an e-mail and
not to click on embedded links, claiming they could contain ‘‘malicious software aimed at
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
38

capturing login credentials.’’ Please beware—spam e-mails may actually contain malicious
code (malware) which can harm your computer. Do not open any unsolicited e-mail and do
not click on any links provided.
A new version recently reported involves the sending of text messages to cell phones
claiming the recipient’s on-line bank account has expired. The message instructs the
recipient to renew their on-line bank account by using the link provided.
Due to rapidly evolving criminal methodologies, it is impossible to include every scenario.
Therefore, be cognizant and protect your PII. Beware of e-mails, telephone calls, or text
messages requesting your PII.23
IDENTITY THEFT HALL OF INFAMY
Jeffrey Webster Lawson
Jeffrey Webster Lawson was one of the most professional identity thieves operating
in the United States. He was smart, persistent, and extremely careful not to get
caught. It took years to track him down and put him behind bars. Lawson was in
many ways the invisible man because law enforcement was unable to get their
hands on him. They knew his name but did not know the phony identities he was
always using until the day they finally caught him. He confounded and outsmarted
his pursuers for years in his identity theft crime spree throughout the United States.
Lawson was a crafty mail thief who targeted the mailboxes in wealthy neigh-
borhoods. There he would find valuable mailings containing financial and personal
information. Once he had his victims’ mail, he would take over their identities,
weaving convincing tales to entice unsuspecting people to assist him in stealing the
proceeds of bank and brokerage accounts. He had been a financial advisor in
Chicago and used his knowledge to manipulate the system for his benefit.
Lawson traveled the country for years committing his crimes. He would find a
promising city and set up shop posing as either an attorney or businessperson. He
would open a small office with a telephone answering service and an official-
sounding phone message. He used business addresses located in large office
buildings. He distributed business cards that helped reinforce the impression of a
successful businessman. Lawson would rent a home or apartment in an affluent
area in a further attempt to establish roots and respectability. But this was all a ruse,
for his intention was to spend only a few months in each city and, while there, rip
off as many wealthy people as possible in his identity theft schemes.
THE PHOENIX CAPER
Postal Inspector Michael Casadei was one of most accomplished federal criminal
investigators in the United States. In his 33-year law enforcement career, he
investigated thousands of mail theft, identity theft, robbery, burglary, mail bomb,
(Continued )
How Identity Theft Occurs
39

and other criminal cases in Illinois, California, Arizona, and other states. In 1996,
Inspector Casadei began investigating a series of mail thefts in the affluent Paradise
Valley, Arizona, community adjacent to Phoenix. Although he did not know it at
the time, Lawson was the culprit. It would take three years of good detective work
and a little luck to finally capture Lawson. Inspector Casadei would later comment
that Lawson was the most professional mail thief he had ever dealt with.
In Arizona, Lawson claimed he was a divorce attorney representing rich clients.
He rented a home in upscale Scottsdale. He had been in the area before and had
lived in Tempe and Mesa, where he committed prior identity theft scams. He
always dressed well, wearing Rolex watches to portray wealth and success. He
favored luxury cars, usually Mercedes, and he used several of them in his schemes.
Lawson targeted Paradise Valley for his mail thefts because it is home to the rich
and famous of Phoenix. The homes there are big and expensive with large pieces of
property. Their rural mailboxes are often secluded from view and easy to steal from.
Lawson was imaginative and no ordinary mail thief. He would steal mail from
mailboxes every day and recycle the mail from each day’s theft. Recycling is a
unique form of mail theft, and Lawson specialized in it. In recycling, mail is stolen
each day over an extended period. The mail is carefully opened using a variety of
methods. Documents with signatures are especially prized for forgery purposes.
The victim’s signature is traced using a glass plate with an illuminating light
below. The contents are photocopied, replaced in the envelope, and resealed. The
envelope is then returned to the homeowner’s mailbox the next day. This is done
day after day, each time stealing the new mail while replacing it with the prior
day’s mail that has been examined and copied.
Hardly anyone realized that their mail was delivered a day late as long as they
received some mail each day. To ensure the success of the scheme, Lawson made
sure to steal and recycle the mail shortly after the carrier made his or her daily
delivery. Lawson continued this recycling process for 30 straight days, building
quite a profile on his victims. Just think of how much important mail the average
person receives in a month’s time. Bank and brokerage statements, copies of
canceled checks, mortgage bills, credit card statements, credit card offers, utility
bills, and correspondence are just some of the many mailings that people can
receive. Now think of how much information can be obtained about a person from
the contents of those mailings.
Lawson developed profiles on his victims that he would keep from year to year.
These profiles contained the personal data he gleaned from the mail thefts
including names, SSNs, birth dates, banking information, brokerage accounts,
and other key information. When he was later arrested, he had victim profiles
going back many years. There were files on people who never knew they were
victims of mail theft due to Lawson’s use of covert recycling.
Once Lawson obtained personal and financial information from victims, he
would assume their identities to clean out their accounts, but not completely. Often
these accounts were very large accounts. In some cases, the account holders did not
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
40

know they were victims until Inspector Casadei contacted them. One victim had
$100,000 withdrawn without knowing it. Lawson would call the brokerage firms
posing as the account holder and request that additional checks be mailed to the
account of record. Knowing approximately how long it would take to receive
checks in the mail, Lawson would go to the target’s mailbox each day until the
checks arrived. The homeowner had no idea that additional checks had been
ordered under his or her name and would not miss them when Lawson stole them
from the box. Using these checks, he would write large checks on the accounts,
then repeat this process over and over again.
Many identity thieves employ change-of-address tactics for account takeovers.
They file fraudulent change-of-address orders with the Postal Service, redirecting
a victim’s mail to an address they control. The mail and the information therein are
then used for identity theft. These schemes are usually quickly discovered when a
victim stops receiving mail at home or the office. Lawson did not need to use this
approach; he was obtaining the checks from the actual address and controlling the
distribution of new checks that the victim had no idea were even requested.
TARGETING STRIPPERS
Lawson also targeted young women to unwittingly assist him in emptying the
accounts of his victims. His targets of choice were strippers. He frequented high-
end strip clubs and with his expensive suits, ostentatious display of money,
jewelry, and suave manner, he had an air of authority and trust. Using aliases,
he befriended the strippers at these clubs and won their confidence. He always tried
to limit his contact with them and had ‘‘someone from his firm’’ deal with them.
This person was usually his criminal associate. Lawson told the women he was a
successful divorce attorney with rich female clients. His clients were going
through painful divorces from abusive spouses and needed to hide money that
was rightfully theirs. The stories of allegedly battered spouses looking to protect
themselves and keep their money hit a chord with the strippers. They were
sympathetic, and that was exactly what Lawson was hoping for.
Lawson asked the strippers to help shelter this money by depositing it into their
bank accounts. The money would be maintained in the bank accounts until the
divorce was finalized. By safeguarding the client’s money, they would earn fees of
10%. He knew that the nature of the strippers’ business was generally cash and that
they made large amounts of money. Banks would not necessarily notice large
deposits into their bank accounts as they already had a history of such deposits
from their work. The strippers fell for the pitch and deposited checks received from
Lawson: the blank brokerage and personal checks he had stolen from the mail and
that he had filled out. In one case, three checks totaling $90,000 were deposited.
Once the checks were deposited, Lawson had the women withdraw amounts
typically around several thousand dollars. He would tell them the money was
(Continued )
How Identity Theft Occurs
41

needed for legal fees or other client expenses. This would be done several times and
usually each time the money was given to Lawson’s associate. Lawson himself was
always concerned about being caught on surveillance cameras.
The withdrawals were always kept under the limits that would trigger banks to
suspect possible money laundering or other criminal violations and the issuance of
a Suspicious Activity Report (SAR). Lawson knew how long it would take before
the mail theft victims, the brokerage firms, and the strippers’ banks would learn of
the theft of funds, and he made sure to stop withdrawals then and disappear. The
strippers would be left holding the bag and trying to explain the deposits and
withdrawals to authorities.
Although not as clever as the stripper scam for negotiating checks, Lawson used
another tactic too. He posed as a car trader and drew up a business agreement with
a Phoenix dealer to buy and sell used cars. He had the unsuspecting person deposit
stolen checks that allegedly came from car sales and withdraw cash for Lawson or
his associate to purchase additional cars. Again, others would be left holding the
bag when Lawson absconded.
Inspector Casadei first learned of this case from bank investigators who reported
the negotiation of bad checks. This led to mail theft reports in Paradise Valley and
interviews of the many strippers who fell for Lawson’s silver tongue. Inspector
Casadei went to every strip club in Phoenix and interviewed the employees. Each
woman Inspector Casadei interviewed told him the same story. Even though every
stripper had been given a phony name by Lawson, the inspector was able to obtain
a large amount of evidence. Yet he was unable to identify or locate Lawson.
Although Lawson had an associate assisting him, neither ever wanted to go
anywhere near a bank to negotiate a check. They had a fear of being caught on bank
cameras or identified by tellers or security officers. They had others do their dirty
work, and anytime they felt possible heat, they dropped everything and took off.
Their extreme level of caution protected them from discovery and arrest for a very
long time. They would walk away from well-furnished homes when they felt they
might be at risk of discovery. They would not take anything they could not fit into
a car.
WHAT HAPPENS IN VEGAS DOES NOT ALWAYS STAY IN VEGAS
Inspector Casadei found that Postal Inspectors in other states were investigating
similar identity theft schemes and after comparing notes, it was clear that Lawson
was responsible. The FBI also was hunting Lawson, who had stolen mail and did
identity theft and bank fraud in Texas, Illinois, Colorado, Florida, California,
Georgia, Nevada, and Arizona. He would work his fraud in one state and then
move to another and another, always one step ahead of the law.
Try as he might to track down Lawson, Inspector Casadei hit a dead end. Banks
in Phoenix were no longer reporting bad checks, and it looked like the suspects had
left town. Inspector Casadei then found that checks stolen in Tempe, Arizona, were
deposited into an account in Las Vegas, Nevada. He assumed that Lawson was or
had been there. Inspector Casadei asked everyone he spoke with to contact him if
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
42

NOTES
1. William Shakespeare, Othello, Act 3, Scene 3, 155–161.
2. Gary R. Gordon, Donald J. Rebovich, Kyung-Seok Choo, and Judith B. Gordon,
Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-Based Foundation for
Proactive Enforcement, Center for Identity Management and Information Protec-
tion, Utica College, Utica, NY (October 2007), 43, www.utica.edu/academic/
institutes/cimip/research.cfm.
3. Ibid.
they were ever approached by a smooth-talking attorney who wanted them to cash
some checks. His hard work paid off as he soon learned that Lawson was back.
Law enforcement then went one step further to find him. They tapped his cell
phone calls to his mother. Lawson was always changing cell phones so the feds
tapped incoming calls to his mother and traced them back to him in ‘‘Sin City.’’
The FBI finally grabbed him in the Fashion Show Mall on the Las Vegas strip in
1999 on an old warrant out of Chicago originally issued in the mid-1990s. Once in
custody, all the cases in other jurisdictions came down on Lawson. He was now
facing multiple prosecutions and many years in jail.
The fraud perpetrated in Las Vegas was similar in many ways to his modus
operandi. He again posed as a well-dressed attorney and used aliases including
Steve Wilson, Michael Andres, William Watkiss, and Ron Porter. He targeted
young women in strip clubs and casinos. He said he needed to hide money and
requested their assistance for a fee. Once the women deposited the stolen checks,
they would withdraw amounts of money and return it to Lawson or his associate,
who then gave them their cut. As before, he would quickly disappear, never using
the same alias again. This time he was not so lucky.
CONFESSION
After the arrest, Lawson agreed to cooperate and was interviewed by Inspector
Casadei. Lawson provided an astonishing story of his life of crime. He admitted to
stealing mail and identities of untold numbers of victims across the country and
cashing over $5 million in checks in more than 10 years of criminal activity. In that
period, he had repeated the theft and check-cashing activity in Phoenix and Tucson
three or four times. Based on just Inspector Casadei’s cases, Lawson was responsible
for approximately $450,000 in fraud in 1999 in Phoenix and Las Vegas.
There were a number of ongoing investigations into Lawson’s activities. He
finally agreed to an all-inclusive plea that would resolve his outstanding criminal
cases throughout the United States. He pleaded guilty in federal district court in
Chicago. He was sentenced on February 8, 2001, to six years and three months in
prison and $2,230,018 restitution. Theodore Shaw, his longtime partner in crime,
received two years and three months in prison and court ordered restitution of
$433,307.
How Identity Theft Occurs
43

4. The President’s Identity Theft Task Force, ‘‘Combating Identity Theft: A Strategic
Plan’’ (April 2007), 2–3, www.idtheft.gov/reports/StrategicPlan.pdf.
5. Ibid., 3.
6. United States General Accounting Office, ‘‘Identity Theft: Prevalence and Cost
Appear to be Growing, Report to Congressional Requestors,’’ March 2002, 35.
7. Byron Acohido and Jon Swartz, ‘‘Meth Addicts’ Other Habit: Online Theft,’’ USA
Today, December 15, 2005, 10A.
8. Cassell Bryan-Low, ‘‘Growing Number of Hackers Attack Web Sites for Cash,’’
Wall Street Journal, November 30, 2004, A1.
9. Microsoft Corporation, ‘‘Zombies and Botnets: Help Keep Your Computer under
Your Control,’’ January 3, 2007, www.microsoft.com/protect/computer/viruses/
zombies.mspx.
10. Bryan-Low, ‘‘Growing Number of Hackers.’’
11. President’s Identity Theft Task Force, ‘‘Combating Identity Theft,’’ 15.
12. Yochi J. Dreazen, ‘‘Identity Theft as an Inside Job Is Increasing,’’ Wall Street
Journal, July 31, 2002, B1.
13. Ibid.
14. Federal Trade Commission, ‘‘2006 Identity Theft Survey Report’’ (November
2007), 31–32, www.ftc.gov/os/2007/11/SynovateFinalReportIDTheft2006.pdf.
15. Martin T. Biegelman and Joel T. Bartow, Executive Roadmap to Fraud Prevention
and Internal Control: Creating a Culture of Compliance, (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons, 2006), 219.
16. Anti-Phishing Working Group, www.antiphishing.org/word_phish.html.
17. Federal Trade Commission News Release, ‘‘Consumers’ Private Financial Infor-
mation Obtained and Sold Illegally; FTC Alleges,’’ April 22, 1999, www.ftc.gov/
opa/1999/04/touchtone.shtm.
18. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the United States Attorney, Western District
of Washington News Release, ‘‘Ten Indicted for Pretexting in ‘Operation Dialing
for Dollars,’’’ December 6, 2007, www.usdoj.gov/usao/waw/press/2007/dec/torrella
.html.
19. Biegelman and Bartow, Executive Roadmap, 215–216.
20. Robin Sidel, ‘‘Card Companies Crack Down on Restaurants,’’ Wall Street Journal,
March 25, 2007, B1.
21. Social Engineering (Security) Wikipedia, //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_engineering_
(computer_security).
22. Federal Trade Commission, Consumer Fraud and Identity Theft Complaint Data,
January–December 2007, February 13, 2008, 3, www.ftc.gov/opa/2008/02/fraud
.pdf.
23. Federal Bureau of Investigation, ‘‘New E-Scams & Warnings,’’ January 17, 2008,
www.fbi.gov/cyberinvest/escams.htm.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
44

CHAPTER 4
Student Loan Fraud and the
Theft of Identity
As credit card fraud was leaving its wicked mark on individuals and financial institutions
in the 1980s, another form of identity theft was continuing its assault on these same
victims. Some fraud schemes are just so good and effective that they never go out of
style. That is the case with student loan fraud, one of the earliest forms of identity theft.
Common in the early 1970s and into the 1980s, it still occurs today. With the spiraling
cost of college education, the great majority of students need some form of financial aid.
The United States Department of Education gives out more than $80 billion in grants and
loans each year. With so much money in financial assistance and federal education funds
available, it is inevitable that identity thieves will want a big piece of that pie.
As in most identity theft schemes, the fraudster applies for financial assistance posing
as another person, purportedly a student. The victim’s identity and personal information
is fraudulently obtained in any number of ways. Once the identity thief receives the
funds, the money is spent and, of course, the loan is never repaid. As a result, the victim
is eventually listed as defaulting on the loan. This can be especially problematic for
actual students when they apply for financial aid and are denied because of their
apparent history of default. The problem is just as bad for nonstudents whose identities
are stolen and used in this fashion. When they apply for mortgages and other personal
loans, they learn their credit history is damaged and they have to begin to restore their
credit and reputation.
45

There are a number of variations of student loan fraud. Although identity theft is a
common type of student loan fraud, there are other ways to defraud the system. In 2003,
about $365 million of the $12 billion awarded each year to low-income undergraduate
students went to those who misrepresented their family’s actual annual income.
This underreporting of family income on the financial aid applications resulted in
increased, and fraudulent, payments to the students. Other examples of student loan
fraud involve fraudsters who never attend the school or who drop out after receiving the
loan funds.
GROWTH AND IMPACT OF STUDENT LOAN FRAUD
Modern-day identity theft had its roots first in student loans and then credit cards. In
terms of financial damage, fraudulent credit card use has had a greater impact on
individuals and businesses over the years. That is not meant to minimize the toll of
student loan fraud. However, the acceptance of credit cards in America allowed for a
much greater financial impact through identity theft and related financial crimes. It is no
coincidence that the leap from student loan fraud to credit card fraud occurred. The
explosion of identity theft parallels the adoption and widespread use of credit cards. It
did not happen overnight, as the use of credit cards grew slowly at first.
Prior to the enormous spike in credit card fraud in the 1980s, the outbreak of student
loan fraud that started in the early 1970s laid the groundwork for the proliferation of
identity theft. New York was particularly hard hit by student loan fraud. The New York
State Higher Education Services Corporation (HESC) was one of the first organizations
to recognize the seriousness and impact of student loan fraud. The HESC is a leading
guarantor of student loans, grants, and scholarship programs. In 1979, it established a
fraud unit to address the problem of student loan fraud. By 1980, it had identified
hundreds of suspect loan applications due to phony Social Security numbers (SSNs),
similar addresses used multiple times, and other fraudulent information found on the
applications.1
The HESC found that a large number of the student loan applications had foreign
names; along with the fraudulent identifying information, the investigators suspected
that the applicants might not be eligible for benefits. Loan program benefits are
earmarked for U.S. citizens and permanent resident aliens. The HESC reported this
growing fraud to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the U.S. Department of
Education. Soon the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) in New York got
involved in the fraud against federally guaranteed student loans. In 1982, these three
federal agencies started an informal task force to tackle the problem.2
The task force identified and arrested numerous illegal aliens for student loan fraud.
Due to the nature of student loans at the time, most of the individual fraud losses were
under $10,000. The vast majority of the defendants were found to be Nigerian nationals
in the United States illegally. Many of the fraudsters had phony identification and
fraudulently obtained credit cards in their possession. While investigating these loan
frauds, the task force realized it had encountered the proverbial tip of the iceberg. It
would learn that credit card fraud was the much larger fraud but that both student loan
fraud and credit card fraud were connected to identity theft.3
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
46

Subsequently, in 1983, the INS formed the Entitlement Frauds Unit to investigate,
prosecute, and deter fraudsters from defrauding the government-financed student loan
programs. The continuing investigations found an abundance of credit card fraud
schemes intermingled with the loan frauds. Fraudsters had obtained employment in
banks and other financial institutions with access to account holder information.
Additional investigations by the INS uncovered other ingenious ways fraudsters
used to infiltrate companies to obtain personal information.4
The INS conducted sweeps in New York City for illegal aliens working as security
guards at private security companies. A number of those arrested had been assigned
security guard work at New York Telephone Company. While working there, the
security guards would steal the names, SSNs, and other personal information of contract
employees. This stolen information would then be used for fraudulent credit card
applications in the names of the victim contract workers, but the home address would be
that of a mail drop controlled by the fraudsters.5
In January 1983, a government crackdown on student loan fraud netted 19 foreign
students who falsely claimed they were either citizens or resident aliens. The grand jury
investigation in San Francisco resulted in charges of mail fraud, making false statements
to the United States Government, and falsely claiming eligibility for student loan
benefits. The amount of student loan fraud totaled $77,509. These arrests brought the
total number of those prosecuted for student loan fraud to over 100 in that one-year
period ending in January 1983.6
A sad but prophetic comment was made by an INS Special Agent and one of the key
members of the student loan fraud task force when he testified on Nigerian criminal
activities before the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations on September
17, 1986. Although he was speaking about Nigerian criminal activity, the comments
apply to the overall identity theft problem no matter who the perpetrator is. The Special
Agent said, ‘‘The ready availability of fraudulent identification documents will enable
Nigerians to continue their schemes unchecked.’’ He added, ‘‘Their overall activities in
the United States can be likened to economic terrorism.’’7
FINANCIAL FLEECING 101: THE CASE OF JOHN EDWARD CHRISTENSEN
In 1999, at the very mature age of 58, John Edward Christensen decided to return to
school. But a college education and degree were the last things on his mind. His only
goal was a financial fleecing of the federal student aid program. Christensen devised an
identity theft scheme to defraud lenders, schools, and the United States Department of
Education that would ultimately net him $313,000 and a trip to prison. He perpetrated
the fraud in and around Phoenix, Arizona, between 1999 and 2003.
Identity fraudsters continually use imagination in their crimes, and Christensen was
no different. He obtained a list of prison inmates’ names and then contacted them via the
mails posing as an attorney. In his letters, he offered the prisoners his assistance in their
criminal cases and possible appeals of their sentences. The inmates were all too happy to
have someone help and readily provided personal information that Christensen then used
in his identity theft scheme. Christensen applied for financial aid in 57 stolen names and
received financial aid under 43 of those names.
Student Loan Fraud and the Theft of Identity
47

Christensen generally focused on community colleges, as many identity thieves do.
Community colleges usually have cheaper tuitions, resulting in more money for the
fraudsters after paying the enrollment fees. ‘‘They’re applying online for financial aid,
enrolling online, they stay enrolled for 30 days and then move on,’’ an official from the
Department of Education’s Office of Inspector General said at the time.8 ‘‘The object I
had was to not be dropped out of the courses for the first 30 days. If I didn’t drop out, and
the instructor didn’t drop me out, I was going to get the money,’’ said Christensen.9
Christensen’s comeuppance came on September 2, 2003. He was at Mesa Community
College in Mesa, Arizona, where he was picking up a student aid check under one of the
stolen names. An alert financial aid officer recognized him as the person who had
previously received a student aid check in another name. Although Christensen tried to
flee the scene, he was quickly caught and arrested. He identified himself using one of the
stolen identities but that did not work. On his person were phony identifications in
several different names.10 A search of his residence found further evidence of his
identity theft activity. The house and car he was driving were purchased using a stolen
identity. He was also receiving Social Security benefits under a stolen identity.
He pleaded guilty on January 20, 2004, in federal district court in Phoenix to charges
of Student Aid Fraud and Identity Theft. He also forfeited money seized from 10 bank
accounts and his home. On March 22, 2004, Christensen was sentenced to 41 months in
prison, followed by three years probation and court-ordered restitution.
A FAMILY AFFAIR OF FRAUD
Between January 2000 and March 2004, Ann Armstrong, a 64-year-old grandmother
in Las Vegas, Nevada, orchestrated a $1 million identity theft scheme using student
financial assistance. She brought four of her children and three of her grandchildren into
the conspiracy. Together, they used the identities of 65 people to obtain federal student
aid at colleges in Arizona, Colorado, Maryland, Nevada, and Texas. The focus was on
schools that offered distance learning and online classes.
An observant financial aid officer at Truckee Meadows Community College in Reno,
Nevada, noticed that a number of students applying for financial assistance had the same
address and telephone number on their applications. This was reported to the Office of
Inspector General of the U.S. Department of Education, which began an investigation.
Armstrong and her family cashed or deposited the student aid checks at banks using
phony identification. Just in their home state of Nevada, they received 76 federal grants
and loans totaling over $400,000. The balance of the fraud was conducted in the other
four states.11
Armstrong and her family were indicted in June 2004. She pleaded guilty on October 19,
2005, to conspiracy to commit student loan fraud and student loan fraud. In her guilty plea,
Armstrong admitted ‘‘the object of the conspiracy was to fraudulently obtain federal
student financial aid through the use of false applications which were submitted by fax and
email. Financial aid checks were received through the mail and the funds obtained through
the use of false identification documents.’’12 ‘‘When individuals fraudulently and illegally
receive federal student aid grants and loans, less money is available for deserving
students,’’ said the United States Attorney for Nevada at the time.13
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
48

On February 24, 2006, Armstrong was sentenced to 57 months in prison, three years
of supervised release, and ordered to pay $662,000 in restitution. Under the federal
sentencing guidelines, she received an enhanced sentence because she was the leader of
the conspiracy, directed the activities of the other family members, and received the bulk
of the fraudulent proceeds. All of her family members also pleaded guilty, and most were
sentenced to prison terms.
TRYING TO MAKE AMENDS
In order to combat the ongoing problem of student loan fraud, the Department of
Education’s Office of Federal Student Aid and Office of Inspector General (OIG) began
a public awareness campaign to alert the general public, and specifically students, their
families, schools, and financial institutions, about identity theft. They created a Web site
at www.ed.gov/misused that offers a wealth of information about identity theft related to
student loans and grants, how the fraud is committed, recommendations for prevention,
and how to report identity theft involving federal education dollars.
The awareness campaign also created videos using convicted fraudsters discussing
how they committed identity theft. These videos help to educate potential victims about
the extent of the problem and steps to follow to stop from becoming a victim.
Christensen and Armstrong agreed to appear in the prevention videos to alert the
public about the evils of this crime.
The DVD entitled FSA [Federal Student Aid] Identity Theft: We Need Your Help was
released in 2003 and features Christensen discussing his techniques for committing
identity theft. The second DVD is entitled Identity Theft: It’s Not Worth It was released in
January 2007 and features Armstrong telling how she regretted her criminal acts and
how her life and that of her family were destroyed. Both DVDs are available through the
Department of Education.
Other identity thieves who have been arrested have also been featured in identity theft
deterrence videos. For example, fraudster Abraham Abdallah appears in the 1985
TransUnion-produced Crime of the ’80s video after his first arrest for identity theft. He
claimed to have learned his lesson and promised to go straight. That turned out to be an
empty promise; he returned to a life of crime and identity theft and was arrested
numerous times over the next 16 years before his front-page-making arrest in 2001
resulting in a lengthy prison sentence. Abdallah is profiled in Chapter 12.
COMPROMISE OF STUDENT LOAN DATA
Data breaches have been in the news over the last few years. The highly lucrative
$85 billion student loan business is particularly susceptible. Media stories have detailed
how lenders may have misused students’ personal information for the purpose of
‘‘trolling for marketing data they can use to bombard students with mass mailings or
other solicitations.’’14
The National Student Loan Data System was created in 1993 to assist in determining
whether students are eligible for financial aid and assistance in collecting loan payments.
The database contains confidential information that includes names, addresses,
Student Loan Fraud and the Theft of Identity
49

telephone numbers, birth dates, SSNs, and financial information, such as loan
balances. Approximately 29,000 university financial aid officers and 7,500 loan
company employees have access to this extremely sensitive information, which is
protected by federal privacy laws.15
The U.S. Department of Education is concerned about inappropriate use of the system
and has increased monitoring to ensure compliance. Particularly disconcerting is data
mining by companies looking for potential customers for loan consolidation. Lenders
also have given unauthorized access to marketing firms and collection agencies. This not
only violates privacy laws but opens the more than 60 million student loan borrowers to
potential misuse of their personally identifiable information (PII) and identity theft.
Although there have not been any significant identity theft cases surfacing from these
breaches, it may only be a matter of time.
ADMISSION TO THE IVY LEAGUE THROUGH ID THEFT
A constant theme throughout this book is how fraudsters involved in identity theft
employ various means to steal identities and profit from their financial crimes. I have
been speaking and writing about my Potato Chip Theory of Fraud for many years.
Simply put, just as a person is often unable to eat only one potato chip and will eat one
after another, once criminals start committing fraud, they cannot stop. Committing fraud
becomes addictive. Assuming a scammer does not get caught, the swindler will commit
fraud after fraud, even branching out to new frauds to steal money and other things of
value.16 Although this chapter is on student loan fraud, as you will learn, identity thieves
can steal in many different ways.
In 1999, then 21-year-old Esther Reed vanished without a trace, leaving friends and
family in Washington State deeply concerned. The young woman already had a troubled
life. Her parents’ divorce had had a deep impact on her. Her mother’s death from cancer
may have been the final straw. Although considered very smart, Reed dropped out of
high school. She turned to stealing and was facing criminal charges of possession of
stolen property. So it was not a complete surprise that she would leave town. No one
heard from her or knew where she was; some even assumed she was dead.
In reality, Reed was busy, very busy honing a new skill: identity theft. Over the next
several years, she stole the identities of a number of women and obtained admission to
the prestigious Ivy League schools of Harvard and Columbia, as well as California State
University, Fullerton. Not much is known about Reed’s secret life between the time she
dropped out of sight in 1999 and when she was finally arrested on February 2, 2008, in
suburban Chicago, thanks to a tip made to the America’s Most Wanted television show.
What we do know is that she was very active in stealing the lives of others. She used the
names Liz Reed, Natalie Bowman, Natalie Fisher, Brooke Henson, and others.17
Someone using the name Natalie Bowman started attending Cal State Fullerton in the
fall of 2002. It is believed that someone was Reed. She was later accepted at Harvard, but
it is unknown if she actually attended the university. In October 2003, she began using
the name of Brooke Henson. The real Henson lived in Travelers Rest, South Carolina,
and went missing on July 4, 1999. She was never seen again and is feared dead. There is
no evidence that Reed had anything to do with Henson’s disappearance. Yet, as of the
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
50

writing of this book, it is unknown how Reed learned of Henson and why she decided to
steal Henson’s identity.
In October 2003, Reed obtained a State of Ohio identification card using Henson’s
name, date of birth, and SSN. In December 2003, she received a high school equivalency
diploma in Ohio using Henson’s name and then took the SAT college admission
examination using Henson’s identification. In May 2004, Reed applied to Columbia
University using Henson’s name and was accepted in June 2004 to the School of General
Studies. She started classes at Columbia in August 2004. Reed also fraudulently applied
for and received more than $100,000 in student loans in Henson’s name.18
In February 2005, Reed applied to the South Carolina Department of Vital Statistics
for a duplicate birth certificate of Henson using the Ohio identification card, the
Columbia University student identification card, and Henson’s SSN. In April 2006,
Reed received a United States Passport in Henson’s name.19 Her downfall began in 2006
when she applied for a job. The prospective employer did a background check on her
assumed name of Henson and ‘‘found a Web site dedicated to the missing woman.’’20
Suspicious, she contacted the New York City Police Department, who began an
investigation.
Further evidence emerged. A ‘‘skeptical boyfriend had rummaged through her purse
and discovered identification for seven different people, including Brooke Henson and
Esther Reed.’’21 He also contacted the police, and although they concluded that the
woman claiming to be Henson was in reality Reed, she disappeared before an arrest
could be made. The connection to the missing Henson was finally made, and the feds got
involved in the investigation.
The United States Secret Service in South Carolina conducted a detailed investigation
and uncovered significant evidence against Reed. They also learned that Reed had used
credit cards in the names of other people. The identity theft was more than just an
attempt to gain an education; it was also to steal and commit fraud. Reed was indicted in
United States District Court for the District of South Carolina in the summer of 2007 on
charges of aggravated identity theft, mail fraud, wire fraud, and fraudulent use of
someone else’s Social Security number. She eventually made the United States Secret
Service’s Most Wanted List.
After being profiled on America’s Most Wanted, an anonymous tipster provided
information that helped locate Reed. The tipster provided an email address that Reed
was using and from that law enforcement found another alias, Jennifer Myers. The
federal agents on her trail discovered an Iowa driver’s license in Myers’s name and a car
registered to Myers with Iowa plates. Using this information, the feds then tracked her to
a hotel in Tinley Park, Illinois, where she was arrested.22
After her arraignment in federal court in Chicago on February 4, 2008, Reed agreed to
speak to the press interested in her case. She made some bizarre comments. ‘‘Obviously I
did things wrong’’ but she added, ‘‘I wouldn’t have changed what happened.’’ She
refused to say why she used Henson’s name or what she did all those years using other
people’s identities.23 The sad thing is that in this identity theft case, there is more than
just a stolen identity and a financial impact. As Brooke Henson’s family told America’s
Most Wanted, ‘‘they have been victimized twice—first when Brooke disappeared and
now again—knowing that someone is living as Brooke.’’24
Student Loan Fraud and the Theft of Identity
51

No matter the eventual criminal sentence imposed on Reed, there are a number of
unanswered questions. How was she able to take the SAT, Graduate Record Exami-
nation, and apply to colleges including two Ivy League schools and get accepted, all the
while using stolen identities? Was any kind of due diligence used to scrutinize the
personal identifying information provided? Obviously not. This sad case should be a
wake-up call to institutions of higher learning everywhere.
On August 19, 2008, Reed pleaded guilty to fraud and identity theft charges in federal
court in Greenville, SC. She is facing the prospect of many years in prison and the many
questions about her life on the run are still unanswered.
MORE CASES
In May 2007, an escaped murderer pleaded guilty to bank fraud and identity theft
charges related to his stealing the identity of another person and applying for student
loans using that person’s name and SSN. Beginning in 1999 and continuing to 2002,
the defendant, Ivan Orta Cuprill, submitted applications for financial aid to attend the
State University of New York at Old Westbury using a stolen identity. The loan funds
were subsequently disbursed but Cuprill never repaid the loans. Special Agents of the
Department of Education OIG arrested Cuprill for the student loan fraud in July 2006,
but investigators did not know his true identity. The continuing investigation discovered
that Cuprill was a fugitive on the run from a 27-year prison term for murder and other
crimes in Puerto Rico. Cuprill escaped from jail in 1994 and successfully hid in plain
sight until his arrest for the student loan fraud. He will now spend the next 30 years
behind bars.25
In but another example of the ease of conducting student loan fraud, a Tucson,
Arizona man was arrested on November 9, 2007, and charged in a fraudulent scheme to
obtain numerous student loan frauds. Between 2003 and 2007, the defendant submitted
more than 200 student loan applications via the Internet through various email accounts
he maintained. He used both his own name and that of people whose identities he had
stolen. Thanks to technology, all necessary documentation for the loans including
falsified proof of employment and residence verification were faxed to the financial
institutions. The defendant received 42 student loans totaling $624,287 for attendance at
Stanford University, George Washington University, University of Arizona, and
Scottsdale Culinary Institute. He never attended any of these educational institutions,
although he received the loan funds. In all, he applied for more than $10 million in
student loans but only received a fraction of that amount.26
IT IS NOT JUST AN AMERICAN PROBLEM
Student loan fraud and identity theft is not isolated to the United States. It is a worldwide
problem, and the United Kingdom has been especially hard hit in recent years. The
government-owned Student Loans Company (SLC) is a U.K. organization established to
provide financial services, including loans and grants, to students attending colleges
and universities in England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. For many years
the SLC accepted just a birth certificate for loans up to £6,000 per student per year.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
52

Once fraudsters learned this, they quickly exploited it. A major student loan fraud
against the SLC started with the theft of hundreds of blank birth certificates. Eventually,
more than 200 of the stolen birth certificates were used to create phony identities to
obtain student loans.
In one of the largest student loan frauds in the U.K., an identity thief used 17 stolen
identities to enroll himself in five different degree programs in one university. Adeleke
Adebayo was clearly not a student, but that did not stop him. He collected more than
£65,595 (approximately $130,000) in fraudulent loans with the many identities. He also
claimed to be attending classes at other U.K. universities for which he was receiving
loans. In March 2007, he was sentenced to four years in prison. His girlfriend received
18 months in jail for assisting him in creating the phony identities.27
Although this is an especially egregious case, it is by far not the only one. In another
investigation, an identity thief enrolled in a university and received student loans although he
never took the required preparatory examinations or attended class lectures. The bigger
problem is that the university system and the SLC have limited knowledge as to the true
identities of their students or whether they are actually attending classes. As one investigator
stated, ‘‘We are talking about a criminal industry, a large-scale criminal industry.’’ As such,
the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service, a clearinghouse for student applications
to U.K. universities, has doubled the size of its fraud investigations team.28
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION’S OUTREACH PREVENTION PROGRAM
The United States Department of Education (ED) and its OIG have developed a
proactive student loan fraud prevention program. The OIG conducts audits, investiga-
tions, and inspections of educational programs and operations and is the law enforce-
ment agency within the ED responsible for fighting fraud, waste, and abuse. Exhibit 4.1
includes key messages from its excellent resource Web site.
Exhibit 4.1
U.S. Department of Education Guidance to Students to Prevent Identity
Theft Fraud
Identity Theft Alert to Students
Protect your Social Security number and other personal information. Don’t let identity
thieves rob you of your educational future!
Being a student does not safeguard you against identity theft, one of the fastest growing
consumer crimes in the nation. Identity thieves don’t steal your money; they steal your name
and reputation and use them for their own financial gain. They attempt to steal your future!
Identity theft literally steals who you are, and it can seriously jeopardize your financial future.
Imagine having thousands of dollars of unauthorized debt and a wrecked credit rating
because of identity theft. Also, the unfortunate reality of identity theft is that it is you, the
victim, who is responsible for cleaning up the mess and re-establishing your good name
and credit. The experience of thousands of identity theft victims is that this frustrating
experience often requires months and even years.
(Continued )
Student Loan Fraud and the Theft of Identity
53

In fact as a student, you may even be more vulnerable to identity theft because of the
availability of your personal data and the way many students handle this data. A recent
national survey of college students found that:
 Almost half of all college students receive credit card applications on a daily or
weekly basis. Many of these students throw out card applications without
destroying them.
 Nearly a third of students rarely, if ever, reconcile their credit card and checking
account balances.
 Almost 50 percent of students have had grades posted by Social Security number.
All of these factors make students potential identity theft victims. In addition, as a
student, you may be surprised to learn how many of your daily activities expose you to
this crime. For example:
 Do you use your personal computer for online banking transactions?
 Do you use your personal computer to buy merchandise or purchase tickets for
travel, concerts, or other services?
 Do you receive credit card offers in the mail? Do you discard these documents
before you shred all of them?
 Do you store personal information in your computer?
 Do you use a cell phone?
 Do you use your Social Security number for identification?
 Do you have a student loan?
You probably answered yes to at least one of these questions about daily transactions
that you routinely perform. Each of these routine actions places you at risk of being a
victim of identity theft because each of these transaction requires you to share personal
information such as your bank and credit card account numbers, your Social Security
number, or your name, address, and phone number. This is the same personal
information that identity thieves use to commit fraud.
The first step to prevent identity theft is awareness of how and when you use your
personal information. By keeping close tabs on your personal information, you can
reduce your chances of becoming an identity theft victim. Let’s start with credit cards.
 Memorize your Social Security number and passwords. Don’t record your pass-
word on papers you carry with you.
 Don’t use your date of birth as your password.
 Shred pre-approved credit applications and other financial documents before
discarding them.
 Order credit reports every year from each of the major credit reporting agencies
and thoroughly review them for accuracy.
 Never give personal or financial information over the phone or Internet unless you
initiated the contact.
Exhibit 4.1
(Continued)
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
54

NOTES
1. Testimony of Richard G. Palak, Special Agent, Immigration and Naturalization
Service, Hearings on Emerging Criminal Groups: Nigerian Criminal Activities,
before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Govern-
mental Affairs, United States Senate, 99th Congress, 2nd Session, September 17,
1986, 26.
2. Ibid.
3. Ibid., 27.
4. Ibid., 28.
5. Ibid.
6. ‘‘Nineteen Aliens Are Indicted in Student Loan Fraud,’’ New York Times, January
21, 1983, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9505EFD61138F932A
15752C0A965948260.
7. Testimony of Richard G. Palak, 30.
8. Andrea Coombes, ‘‘Identity Thieves Head Off to College,’’ Wall Street Journal,
October 25, 2005, D3.
 Don’t carry your Social Security card or birth certificate with you.
 Report lost or stolen credit cards immediately.
 Check your monthly credit card and bank statements for unusual activity.
 Use a firewall program on your computer, especially if you leave your computer
connected to the Internet 24 hours a day.
 Do not download files sent to you by strangers or click on hyperlinks from people
you don’t know.
Students applying for or using student loans should also:
 Use caution when using commercial financial aid services over the Internet or
telephone. U.S. Department of Education services are free and password-
protected. Before deciding to use a for-fee financial aid advice service, visit
the Looking for Student Aid site.
 Apply for federal student aid at www.fafsa.ed.gov. After completing the Free
Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) electronically, remember to exit the
application and close the browser.
 Don’t reveal your PIN to anyone, even if that person is helping you fill out the
FAFSA. The only time you should use your PIN is on secure ED systems.
 Shred receipts and copies of documents with personal information if they are no
longer needed.
 Review your financial aid award documents and keep track of the amount of
student aid you applied for and have been awarded.
 Report all lost or stolen student identification immediately.
Source: www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oig/misused/index.html
Student Loan Fraud and the Theft of Identity
55

9. Ibid.
10. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the United States Attorney, District of
Arizona, Press Release, ‘‘Thief Admits Identity Scam Used to Get $300,000 in
Student Loans,’’ January 20, 2004, www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oig/invtreports/
az012004.html.
11. U.S. Department of Education, News Release, ‘‘U.S. Department of Education
Office of Inspector General Launches New DVD: Identity Theft: It’s Not worth It,’’
January 18, 2007, www.ed.gov/news/pressreleases/2007/01/01182007.html.
12. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the United States Attorney, District of
Arizona, News Release, ‘‘Woman Sentenced to Almost Five Years in Federal
Prison For Student Loan Fraud,’’ February 24, 2006, www.usdoj.gov/usao/nv/
home/pressrelease/february2006/armstrong022406.htm.
13. Ibid.
14. Amit R. Paley, ‘‘Student Loan Data Misused, Officials Say,’’ Seattle Times, April
16, 2007, A5.
15. Ibid.
16. For more information on the Potato Chip Theory of Fraud, please see Martin
Biegelman and Joel Bartow, Executive Roadmap to Fraud Prevention and Internal
Control: Creating a Culture of Compliance, (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
2006), 37–38.
17. America’s Most Wanted television show, Esther Elizabeth Reed, Capture #974,
February 2, 2008, www.amw.com/fugitives/capture.cfm?id=42967.
18. United States of America v. Esther Elizabeth Reed, Indictment, United States
District Court, District of South Carolina, www.amw.com/pdf/indictment.pdf.
19. Ibid.
20. Jennifer Sullivan, ‘‘Feds Searching for Local Woman in ID Theft Cases,’’ Seattle
Times, November 1, 2007, B1.
21. Jennifer Sullivan, ‘‘A Disappearance, Stolen Identities and a Trail of Clues,’’ Seattle
Times, January 11, 2007, A1.
22. America’s Most Wanted television show, Esther Elizabeth Reed, Capture #974.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid.
25. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the United States Attorney, Southern District
of New York, News Release, ‘‘Escaped Murderer Pleads Guilty to Bank Fraud and
Identity Theft,’’ May 14, 2007, www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oig/invtreports/
ny052007.html.
26. ‘‘Tucson Man Faces Criminal Charges in Fraudulent Student Loan Scheme,’’
LawFuel.com, November 18, 2007, lawfuel.com/show-release.asp?ID=16133.
27. Matthew Chapman, ‘‘Fake Students Net Loan Millions,’’ BBC News, May 5, 2007,
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/education/6624019.stm.
28. Ibid.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
56

CHAPTER 5
Nigerian Criminal
Enterprises
Organized criminal gangs have long been a plague on society. The traditional organized
crime of the Mafia or La Cosa Nostra that developed in the United States in the early
twentieth century set the stage for a myriad of other nontraditional gangs and groups that
have sprung up over the years. They include Russian mobsters who came to this country
after the fall of the former Soviet Union, Chinese tongs, Japanese Yakuza, Colombian
drug cartels, and others who have gained a foothold in the United States. For most of
these groups, drug trafficking, extortion, protection rackets, and other crimes of violence
are the norm. One organized crime group, more than any other, has made financial
crimes their focus and turned identity theft into their specialty. They are members of
Nigerian organized crime often called Nigerian Criminal Enterprises (NCE) by law
enforcement in this country.
For more than 30 years, a very small percentage of Nigerian nationals living in
America have been involved in a criminal conspiracy to commit various white-collar
crimes, defrauding banks and other financial institutions, businesses, insurance compa-
nies, government agencies, and private citizens. Like other immigrants, Nigerians come
to this country in search of higher education and a better way of life, but some gravitate
to a life of crime. Over the years Nigerian scam artists have committed credit card and
bank frauds, identity theft, insurance fraud, healthcare fraud, student loan fraud, check
57

kiting, confidence schemes, entitlement frauds, money laundering, counterfeiting, tax
frauds, and numerous other scams.
In the early 1990s, federal agents and prosecutors began to use the term ‘‘West African
criminal activity’’ when referring to Nigerian fraudsters because of a concern that our
government was portraying all citizens of a particular country as engaging in criminal
activity. This occurred after protests from the Nigerian government that law enforce-
ment branded all Nigerians as criminals based on the actions of only a few. In reality,
while countries such as Sierra Leone, Ghana, Togo, Senegal, Guinea, and the Ivory
Coast are in West Africa, almost all of the ‘‘West African criminal activity’’ was
committed by Nigerians. As a result, the United States Department of Justice then
instituted a new terminology because of the explosive growth of Nigerian fraud
schemes. It designated this type of organized and widespread activity as Nigerian
Criminal Enterprise schemes.
I want to again emphasize that not all Nigerians or West Africans are involved in
criminal activity. The great majority of these people are honest, hardworking, and law-
abiding and contributing members of society. Law enforcement limits its investigations
to crimes committed by individuals, not by national origin. Former Deputy Attorney
General Eric H. Holder Jr. made the same point in a speech he gave on Nigerian
Organized Crime in Washington, DC, on November 9, 1999:
As we discuss the topic of Nigerian Organized Crime, I want to emphasize from the outset
that our focus is not on the millions of law abiding Nigerians, at home and abroad, whose
rich tradition and culture we admire and whose contributions to our society we value; rather
our focus is on Nigerian criminal elements that now dominate crime emanating from West
Africa.1
FBI RECOGNIZES THE GROWING IDENTITY THEFT THREAT
The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s New York Field Office recognized the growing
identity theft threat by Nigerian nationals in early 1984 with the publication of an
informational memorandum that made its way through the law enforcement community.
At that time, the FBI was conducting investigations into credit card fraud, student loan
scams, and other crimes perpetrated by these early identity thieves. The FBI recognized
that this problem was not going away and would have a much bigger impact in the years
to come. Thus, the organization wanted to warn and educate others in law enforcement.
The memo was entitled ‘‘Nigerian Fraud Group’’ and was intended to provide an
overview of the fraudulent activities of foreign nationals in the United States.
The memo detailed the work of the FBI, the Immigration and Naturalization Service
(INS), and the United States Department of Education in investigating systematic,
multimillion-dollar fraud schemes conducted by Nigerian nationals. The scams involved
everything from defrauding U.S. government agencies, to banks, credit card issuers,
insurance companies, and social welfare services. The FBI reported that this criminal
activity was especially prevalent in New York, California, Massachusetts, Illinois,
Texas, Arizona, Washington, DC, Georgia, Wisconsin, Minnesota, North Carolina, and
Rhode Island. The fraudsters were found to be well educated and quite adept at
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
58

defrauding financial institutions. The memo stated that various investigations found
scam artists working in financial institutions in the New York metropolitan area and
assisting other Nigerian nationals in defrauding these institutions.
The FBI memo also covered the origin of the problem. Apparently, student loan fraud
was the impetus. In the early 1970s, banks in New York State started receiving
fraudulent loan applications in the names of college professors. The professors had
not submitted the applications, and their personal information was used without their
knowledge. The information in the applications was correct except for the home address,
which was one used by the fraudster. The banks learned through investigation that the
applications were being submitted by Nigerian nationals who were college students in
the United States on student visas. The professors’ names came from college yearbooks.
The FBI also learned that these fraudsters were submitting student loans through the
Guaranteed Student Loan Program in variations of their names claiming they were U.S.
citizens. They also used the names and identifying information of fellow students from
their schools for loans. This information was readily available on campus as schools
commonly used Social Security numbers for student identification. The criminals
exploited a weakness in the student loan program; because the loans were guaranteed
by the government, the banks knew that they would recover any losses from default.
Thus, there was little if any scrutiny of the loan applications for false information.
The report went on to describe the many other frauds committed by this criminal
group, including staged vehicle accidents, welfare fraud, passport fraud and creating
phony identification, check fraud, submission of fraudulent tax returns, scam marriages
to obtain citizenship, narcotics trafficking, counterfeiting, and, of course, credit card
fraud through the submission of fraudulent card applications. Many in federal law
enforcement knew about the existence and activities of these fraud artists, but the report
was an awakening to others in state and local law enforcement who were just beginning
investigations into these criminals.
GENESIS OF THE PROBLEM
Fraud is nothing new in the United States. It has been a problem facing law enforcement
and the public for well over 100 years. Yet the Nigerian crime problem was something
not seen before. Nigeria’s oil prosperity of the 1970s and early 1980s helped compound
the problem. A mass migration to the country’s capital, Lagos, grew out of control.
Many people wanted a piece of the newfound wealth, and they wanted it right away. This
also led to rampant corruption throughout the government and a complete lack of
institutional accountability. There was a desire to have what others in the world had.
Individuals who gained an education and worked hard found they could make only a
meager living. Yet they saw criminals living the good life with luxury cars and all the
trappings of wealth. The result was cynicism and distrust. The United States was viewed
as the land of opportunity. The criminal element found out how easy it was to exploit
America’s financial institutions.
Nigerian criminal gangs not only understood the U.S. financial system but became
skilled at learning new ways to attack it. They saw how easy it was to commit fraud. The
fraudsters were well educated and able to counter fraud prevention techniques instituted
Nigerian Criminal Enterprises
59

by the banks, credit card issuers, businesses, and government. Those who came to the
United States with criminal intent quickly learned about these frauds from others already
in the country, causing the problem to grow. In an arrest made by Postal Inspectors in
November 1997 of a Nigerian national for credit card fraud, the suspect admitted that he
opened private mailboxes at a mail drop several months earlier with a friend. The suspect
stated that he had recently arrived in the United States from Nigeria and that his friend
was tutoring him in credit card fraud schemes.
Law enforcement has found that most Nigerians involved in criminal activity do not
operate as part of large gangs. They are able to carry out these scams either individually
or in small groups. Some operate in organized cells, which may consist of a leader and
numerous soldiers. Some of these cells are bound by tribal loyalties. The drug smuggling
gangs have a more traditional organized crime structure, but this is not usually seen in
fraud activity. The gang members often travel all over the United States when
conducting their various fraud schemes. They also maintain contact and correspondence
with others involved in this fraud throughout the country.
CREDIT CARD AND IDENTITY FRAUD
Nigerian fraud activity plays an important part of credit card fraud in the United States.
In the early 1970s, Nigerian fraudsters began committing student loan fraud and then
progressed to credit card fraud. They became masters of credit card application fraud by
obtaining and using a victim’s personal information. They then used this information
fraudulently to obtain credit cards, bank accounts, and loans.
Nigerian credit card fraud schemes continually evolved to avoid law enforcement
detection and prosecution. They subverted postal employees to turn over to them mail
containing credit cards. Scam artists rented apartments in inner city areas to receive
these credit cards, knowing that it is much harder for law enforcement to closely watch
these locations. They infiltrated Social Security offices, banks, brokerages, and credit
bureaus as employees to steal personal information on potential victims. These
fraudsters spread their criminal activities throughout the United States.
Scammers obtained unsuspecting individuals’ credit and biographical information
and submitted false applications in these names to banks, department stores, oil and gas
companies and other credit card issuers. They targeted prominent professionals, such as
lawyers, stockbrokers, doctors, and others who were likely to have good credit ratings.
Using the stolen information, the fraudsters completed numerous credit card applica-
tions and submitted them to various issuers. They would seek out credit card issuers that
did not do a thorough investigation on applicants or were attempting to expand their
cardholder base.
HIGHLY CONFIDENTIAL IDENTITY THEFT ‘‘TRAINING MANUAL’’
In the spring of 1985, I was attending a credit card investigators’ meeting in New York
City. One member had an exciting discovery he wanted to share with the group. Law
enforcement in another state had executed a search warrant of the residence of a
suspected identity thief who happened to be a Nigerian national. While searching the
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
60

apartment for evidence of credit card fraud and identity theft, the law enforcement
officers had found the mother lode of damning proof that a training school on fraud
existed. It was allegedly a training manual of how to conduct credit card fraud. Someone
from the law enforcement agency prepared a cover page for the manual entitled
‘‘Training Manual’’ and wrote ‘‘Used by Nigerian fraud artists to obtain new identities
in order to perpetrate credit card frauds.’’ Each of the 70 pages was stamped ‘‘Confi-
dential: For Law Enforcement Use Only’’—obviously this was done after it was seized
by the police.
For years, bank and credit card investigators as well as law enforcement believed that
Nigerian nationals had training centers in Nigeria that trained future fraudsters in
identity theft–related crimes. Following their training and indoctrination, these students
came to the United States, either legally or illegally, to commit fraud on the American
public and business community. Many believed this to be the case because of the
explosion of identity theft in the mid-1980s and the expertise of the fraudsters
committing it. Although there was no doubt that criminals were teaching each other,
I always discounted the idea of a ‘‘Fraud University’’ somewhere in Lagos where
hundreds of eager students listened to pearls of fraud wisdom from their criminally
minded professors. There was no need for formal training programs; there already was a
wealth of information available to anyone with an interest. As soon as I heard of this
training manual, I had my doubts.
It turned out that the manual seized by police was a copy of a readily available book
published in the United States. The book covered in detail how to obtain new identities and
commit various forms of fraud, including credit card fraud. This book, and others like it,
was at the time and continues to be easily available to anyone with an interest. Many of
themstatethattheinformationthereinisintendedforeducationalpurposesonlyandnotfor
anyillegalactivity.Consideringthatthis‘‘educational’’guidewasfoundintheresidenceof
identity thieves, I would have to assume that they found the information useful.
In writing this book, I reread my copy of this ‘‘Training Manual,’’ now more than 23
years after I first received it. I was struck with the enduring relevance of the information.
Among page after page of instructions on how to obtain identity information and related
comments were these pointers:
 Criminals were told to peruse the obituary columns for the recently deceased and take
over that person’s identity. A suggestion was to write to the funeral home posing as an
‘‘old friend’’ who had just seen the obituary in the paper and asking for the deceased’s
date and place of birth to confirm that this was indeed the old friend. With that
information, a duplicate birth certificate can be ordered. A similar case where the
identities of deceased people were used in a long-running identity theft case is
profiled in Chapter 15.
 Once a birth certificate is obtained, getting a Social Security card is next. If assuming
the identity of a deceased person, the guide reminded the reader to remember to ask
for a duplicate card, not a new one, to dispel possible suspicions.
 Credit card and other personal information can be easily obtained from the garbage.
This was true in 1985 and it is just as true today. Shredding any and all personal and
Nigerian Criminal Enterprises
61

financial information is a must. (See Chapter 20 for a detailed discussion on the
importance of document shredding.)
 The average American is not focused on security and will too easily divulge personal
information to almost anyone.
 Good con artists can call unsuspecting victims and use a variety of stories to obtain
their dates of birth, SSNs, and other information. One scheme discussed was how to
pose as a bank representative or law enforcement officer and ask for the person’s
assistance in an investigation of identity theft. Part of the cooperation would be to
provide their personal information.
 Another scheme was to call and tell people they had won a prize contest. All they had
to do was provide personal identification to claim the award.
 People do not thoroughly examine their monthly credit card statements so they often
will miss discovering fraud on their cards.
I did find an interesting comment about the role of law enforcement when discussing
the number of arrests and convictions for credit card fraud in 1983. ‘‘Credit card
criminals face a higher probability of being struck by lightning than being convicted of
credit card fraud’’ was the sad but true statement.
CHECK FRAUD
Nigerian criminals are also involved in various check schemes including check forgery
and kiting. Check fraud goes well with the other financial crimes that are carried out.
Using the identities they have stolen, criminals open numerous checking accounts. They
use the fraudulently obtained credit cards for identification when opening the accounts
and later when passing the checks. The scammers are also using advances in technology
to commit fraud. They are stealing business and corporate checks and using computers
and scanners to change payees and payment amounts. They then negotiate these
fraudulent checks through various accounts they have set up. In 1998, 75 percent of
the counterfeit checks that were negotiated in Houston, Texas, resulted from Nigerian
Criminal Enterprises.2 Fast forward to today, and much is still the same. In October
2007, Postal Inspectors and other law enforcement officers arrested 77 scammers as part
of a global fraud crackdown on counterfeit checks bound for the United States.
Investigators intercepted more than $2.1 billion in phony checks from schemes in
Nigeria and other countries.
ADVANCE FEE OR ‘‘419’’ FRAUD
Nigerian fraudsters based in their home country and throughout the world are commit-
ting ‘‘419 frauds,’’ or advance fee frauds, on American and international businesses.
These imaginative frauds appeal to a person’s greed and are very successful. Victims are
blinded by the possible riches they are offered and forget to use common sense.
Although law enforcement agencies such as the United States Secret Service warn
people about these frauds, people continue to fall victim. ‘‘A large number of victims are
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
62

enticed into believing they have been singled out from the masses to share in multi-
million dollar windfall profits for no apparent reason.’’3
The ‘‘419’’ refers to the Nigerian criminal code statute for this kind of crime. Nigerian
scammers target businesses in an old-fashioned confidence swindle offering huge sums
of money from the Nigerian government. Although this scheme seems implausible at
first glance, it has achieved remarkable success among unwitting victims. It started in
England and spread to the United States, then to businesses in Asia, Europe, Canada, and
elsewhere.
When the scam first started in the early 1990s, fraudsters used the mails to convey the
phony pitch. Companies were contacted by a mysterious Nigerian businessman or
government official with a fictitious title. There are many variations, but all generally
advise that one can receive a substantial portion of millions of dollars for moving this
money out of Nigeria and into a foreign bank account. In one letter, the writer states that
he is operating with the knowledge of the Nigerian government. He explains that a large
sum of money—usually from $10 to $20 million—is available if the American business
will act as the accepting agent. The American firm is told it can receive a fee of 30% or
more. The balance is to be paid to the Nigerian accomplices. Of course, victims are told
that they need to pay up-front or advance fees to be used as bribes to expedite the deal. At
times, these advance fees supposedly are used to pay taxes or legal expenses.
The most common 419 frauds involve business proposals for the transfer of funds
from overinvoiced contracts, sales of crude oil below market prices, purchase of real
estate, contract fraud, goods and services on consignment, disbursement of money from
wills, and conversion of hard currency. A variation of this scam involves Nigerians
sending these letters to churches offering large sums of money to be donated if ‘‘taxes’’
are paid. Once the taxes are paid, the church hears nothing further. It is believed that
victims lose hundreds of millions of dollars annually in this 419 fraud. Many victims do
not report their victimization to law enforcement due to fear or embarrassment.
These scam letters were initially produced in factories in and around Lagos. A typical
operation may have had dozens or even hundreds of people typing or writing these letters
in an office or warehouse. They were signed with phony names and titles and mailed to
unsuspecting victims all over the world. The United States Secret Service in conjunction
with Nigerian police authorities raided many suspected 419 factories in Lagos. In one
action, approximately 6 million letters ready for mailing were seized. The problem was
so pervasive that at one point in 1998, the Central Bank of Nigeria took out full-page
fraud advisories in major U.S. newspapers to warn Americans.
An interesting discovery was made by the Postal Inspection Service when it examined
the mailing envelopes used to transmit the 419 letters. The Nigerian postage stamps were
counterfeit. That should not have been much of a surprise when you think about the nature
of fraudsters. Postage for the millions of letters that flooded the mail throughout the
world would have cost the scammers hundreds of thousands if not millions of dollars. So,
of course, they did not pay for postage; they simply used readily available Nigerian
counterfeitstamps.Thiswasalsothebreakthatlawenforcementneededtoputadamperon
the scheme. Since the envelopes bore counterfeit stamps, they were deemed not to be
official mail and could be the subject to seizure. The Postal Inspection Service, in
conjunction with Nigerian authorities, seized and destroyed millions of these scam letters
Nigerian Criminal Enterprises
63

as they entered the United States through New York’s JFK Airport Mail Facility. Never-
theless, these enforcement actions were unable to stem the constant flow of these letters.
With the exponential growth of the Internet, the 419 scam quickly migrated to
electronic mail delivery. With a simple keystroke, millions and millions of 419 emails
could be sent to millions and millions of potential victims throughout the world—all
without the risk of seizure by law enforcement. A simple measure of whether this scam
works is this: The fraudsters would not continue to send these 419 emails unless people
continue to fall victim. Plus, with millions of emails being sent with minimal up-front
costs, con artists need only a few victims to actually take the bait.
The United States Secret Service has this to say about reporting 419 scams and
possible criminal investigations:
If you have received an e-mail or fax from someone you do not know requesting your
assistance in a financial transaction, such as the transfer of a large sum of money into an
account, or claiming you are the next of kin to a wealthy person who has died, or the winner
of some obscure lottery, DO NOT respond. These requests are typically sent through public
servers via a generic ‘‘spammed’’ e-mail message. Usually, the sender does not yet know
your personal e-mail address and is depending on you to respond. Once you reply, whether
you intend to string them along or tell them you are not interested, they will often continue to
e-mail you in an attempt to harass or intimidate you. If you receive an unsolicited e-mail of
this nature, the best course is to simply delete the message.
Due to a number of aggravating circumstances—the use of false names, addresses, stolen/
cloned/prepaid cell phones and remote e-mail addresses—verifying the location of and
subsequent prosecution of these persons or groups is difficult. The act of sending an e-mail
soliciting your assistance in a financial transaction is not a crime in itself. The installation of
a credible spam filter and contacting your Internet Service Provider may help deter these
unsolicited e-mails. However, there is currently no available program to completely block
these types of messages.
If you have suffered a significant financial loss related to advance fee fraud, please contact
your local Secret Service field office. Telephone numbers are available at www.secret
service.gov or on the inside cover of your local telephone directory. Any investigation
regarding this type of fraud will be conducted on a case by case basis at the discretion of the
local Secret Service office and U.S. Attorney’s Office.4
SENATE HEARINGS
On September 17, 1986, the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the United
States Senate Governmental Affairs Committee held hearings on the Nigerian crime
network and the growth of credit card fraud, as identity theft was then called. I testified
before this subcommittee as a result of my work investigating nontraditional organized
crime, credit card fraud, and identity theft. Although these hearings took place more than
20 years ago, the findings are still relevant today. Among the Senate findings at that time
were these:
 During its lengthy investigation, the subcommittee staff determined that members of
the Nigerian crime network have become especially adept at credit card fraud, bank
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
64

fraud, insurance fraud, and entitlement fraud, and have recently moved into the areas
of narcotics trafficking and distribution. The staff also found numerous examples of
marriage fraud, visa and passport fraud, and customs and currency violations.
 In virtually all the known criminal cases involving Nigerians, the individuals have
been found to be in possession of or using false documents.
 An analysis of the Nigerian crime network reflects three identifiable elements. The
first and most common is the individual who learns how to commit fraud from another
Nigerian, perhaps for a fee. The second identifiable element has been labeled by some
law enforcement officers as the ‘‘cell’’ group. Consisting of between 3 and 15
members, the cell usually has an identifiable leader who controls the group’s criminal
activities. The third element is more of a structured hierarchy where the leader has
clearly insulated himself from direct criminal activity. Below the leader are various
cell leaders who control smaller groups involved in criminal activities
 The subcommittee staff has been unable to conclusively determine whether Nigerians
are being formally trained in fraudulent schemes in classes of some sort (in the United
States and/or Nigeria) or through written manuals. Allegations of such training have
been made by a number of law enforcement officials, generally through informant
information.
 Although increasing numbers of Nigerians are being arrested for criminal violations,
the criminal justice system often breaks down after arrest. Many Nigerians have
avoided serious criminal sentences, either because their individual nonviolent fraud
schemes resulted only in fines and probation, because the individual absconded, or
because federal authorities chose to deport the individual rather than prosecute. In
many jurisdictions, especially the federal system, prosecutors do not pursue financial
fraud cases because of the relatively small dollar amounts that are involved.
 Investigators from the law enforcement and banking communities are unanimous in
their belief that credit card frauds perpetrated by Nigerians in this country are the most
prevalent and the most sophisticated here, perhaps by a wide margin.
 One basic credit card scheme used by Nigerians involves the fraudulent use of an
individual’s legitimate identifying information, such as name, SSN, employer, and so
on. By using correct information on a credit card application, an applicant can
virtually ensure the receipt of a card because in most instances the individual whose
information is being used has a stable job and a good credit history. The major
distinction would be the address on the application.
 Investigators have also uncovered numerous cases of check-kiting schemes perpe-
trated by Nigerians operating independently from credit card frauds. These schemes
generally involve opening checking accounts without having the money to do so.
They include setting up accounts with out-of-town checks and then writing checks or
demanding cash prior to the clearance of the original deposited check, which
eventually bounces.
 In one case described to the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations staff by U.S.
Customs investigators, a Nigerian used fraudulent documentation to obtain a $1
million letter of credit from a Nigerian bank for a dummy import/export company.
Nigerian Criminal Enterprises
65

The individual was able to withdraw over $1 million from a Seattle bank before the
fraud was discovered.
 An internal Immigration and Naturalization Service memorandum obtained by the
subcommittee (dated October 1985) states: ‘‘Over the past few years it has become
evident on a nationwide basis, aliens from West Africa, primarily Nigeria, Ghana, and
Liberia, are abusing our entitlement systems in a most organized and methodical way.’’
 With the exception of the student aid programs, it appears that little effort is being
made by federal agencies to determine the extent of fraud being perpetrated by
ineligible aliens.
 Recent statistics suggest that 40,000 to 50,000 Nigerian nationals are residing in the
United States, with perhaps half attending school. Law enforcement officers uni-
formly state that virtually all Nigerians they arrest entered the country with a student
visa (whether they are currently students or not).5
I had the honor of testifying before the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investi-
gations on September 17, 1986. I was one of a relatively small number of law enforce-
ment officers active in the investigation and prosecution of Nigerian nationals for fraud.
My many cases in the New York metropolitan area involving Nigerians and others in
credit card and bank fraud brought me to the attention of the subcommittee staff in 1986.
I had significant experience and expertise in this area and had been on television news
programs discussing this growing problem. Although a little dated, my testimony is
striking in that little has changed since 1986, except that identity theft has exploded
worldwide.
Mr. Chairman, I am a Postal Inspector assigned to the New York Division. My area of
responsibility includes mail fraud investigations in the New York metropolitan area.
Additionally, I am the credit card coordinator, and investigate cases involving credit
card fraud.
I would like to address some of the specific criminal activities in the New York City area,
which are not limited exclusively to Nigerian perpetrators, but typify the schemes in which
Nigerian nationals are heavily involved. I would like to stress that we are not investigating
all Nigerian nationals, but rather crimes against the Postal Service committed by individ-
uals, an inordinate number of whom turn out to be Nigerian nationals.
In my research related to my investigations, I have found that individuals from Nigeria are
involved in increasing numbers in schemes to defraud banks and other government and
financial institutions. While some of the individuals are committing student loan frauds,
check kiting, insurance fraud, drug and gun smuggling, and other crimes, by far the most
prevalent crime being committed in the New York area involves credit cards.
The criminals fraudulently obtain law abiding individuals’ credit and biographical infor-
mation, and submit false applications under these names to banks, department stores, oil
companies, and other credit card issuing companies. They are quite skillful in obtaining
information on other people.
Many major companies and businesses employ security guards to patrol their offices at
night. The criminals obtain guard positions which are generally low paying and hard to fill. I
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
66

have found that many of the ones I investigated and arrested are employed as security
guards in private security in New York.
When assigned to a building at night, these individuals have free rein to patrol the office.
They will go through personnel files, employees’ desks, and other belongings to obtain
names, job titles, Social Security numbers, home addresses, and other personal information.
The information which they obtain, besides being found in personnel files is also found on
resumes, pay stubs, bills, and other personal materials in the offices.
Once armed with this personal information, the criminals with their knowledge of the
American credit system apply for credit cards. They will complete credit card applications
and submit them to numerous banks and other issuers, using the names they have found,
sometimes to 30 or 40 issuers in this one name.
They will list the name, employment, and Social Security number on the application. They
will list the current home address of the person as a previous address, and then use a mail
receiving agency as the current address. In addition, they also use a post office box or
possibly an apartment controlled by the false applicant. The current address associated with
the name is used as a previous address to throw off credit bureau inquiries, which may list
this home address. Generally, the credit bureau believes the person has recently moved,
since the addresses match.
While all issuers verify credit card applications, generally this is limited to a credit bureau
check of the credit history of the person, and a check with the applicant’s employer. Since the
applicant’s name and other personal information is correct, the credit check will show this
individual’s credit profile.
Thus, the credit check will help approve the application. Additionally, since the person
whose name is being used has no idea his identity is being used for this fraud, even a check
with the individual’s personnel office will only verify that, indeed, the person does work
there, then, of course, the application will be approved.
Once a criminal receives a credit card, it is quickly used to the limit of the card for cash
advances and high ticket items such as stereos, televisions, and VCRs, which are easily
fenced. Then the card is used for additional purchases under the floor limit of the card. Floor
limits are amounts that are used to determine when a merchant must call in for a verification
of a charge. If a purchase is kept under the floor limit, a fraudulently obtained credit card
can be used for months without detection.
I have personally seen false application credit cards issued with a $2,000 limit on the card,
but ultimately $8,000 was charged to the card because of charges under the floor limit.
When the bills are sent to the suspect address, they are, of course, ignored. After several
months of non-payment, the credit card issuers call the collection agencies to attempt
collection. When no one is found at the mail drop or apartments listed on the applications,
collection agencies go to credit bureau files, and check the name and Social Security number
of the applicant named. At this point, the unsuspecting citizen’s address is found, and that
person is contacted. Then it is learned that a fraud has taken place. Unfortunately, this can
be many months or even a year after the initial fraud has occurred, and chances of locating
the suspect at this time are almost non-existent.
One major bank in New York City has reported to me that it lost $1.4 million through this
type of fraud in 1985, and that it expects to lose $2 million in 1986. An official of MasterCard
Nigerian Criminal Enterprises
67

advised me that he believes many banks and other credit card issuers mistakenly write off
these frauds as bad debts and failure to pay, and never report them for investigation.
I have had cooperating Nigerians tell me that they do not want to belong to a group or a
gang because then they would have to split the proceeds of the fraud. By working indivi-
dually, they can keep all the proceeds themselves. Besides, this crime is so simple and
lucrative, a gang isn’t necessary for this crime to be successful.
All of these agencies that I have been discussing, particularly the Secret Service and the
Postal Inspection Service, participated in a task force in 1985. The task force also consisted
of Immigration and Naturalization Service agents, New York City Police Department
detectives, and bank investigators from the major banks in New York.
The purpose of this task force was to identify those involved in false application fraud, to
determine the extent of the involvement of these individuals, and successfully investigate and
prosecute.
One example of the effectiveness of this task force was an operation conducted on November
7, 1985, when simultaneous search warrants were executed at eight safe houses in Brooklyn,
New York. We arrested five Nigerian nationals for credit card fraud. We executed the search
warrants and found the following items:
Approximately 100 fraudulent application credit cards, dozens of completed and partially
completed false applications for credit cards, numerous phony identification cards,
including driver’s licenses, Social Security cards, college I.D.s, birth certificates,W-2
forms, and passports, a list of over 1,000 names and respective credit card numbers, a
list of CBS employees, including name, Social Security number and other personal infor-
mation, security guard uniforms, and numerous televisions, stereos, VCRs, radios, and
answering machines. Additionally, two other Nigerian individuals involved with this gang
were subsequently arrested.
Although investigations do enjoy limited successes, I believe the most effective method to
fight these abuses is through prevention. Other inspectors and I, in conjunction with the
Inspection Services’ prevention program, regularly provide fraud prevention training to the
industry and the public to further help in combating this problem.6
NIGERIAN CRIMINAL ENTERPRISES
The United States Department of Justice (DOJ) recognized the enormity of the problem
created by Nigerian criminal activities. In 1996, then U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno
announced the Nigerian Criminal Enterprise Initiative to focus investigation and
prosecution resources on the problem of Nigerian criminal activity with a particular
emphasis on fraud and forgery crimes. Although there had been an investigative focus on
Nigerian criminal activity in years past by many federal law enforcement agencies, this
was the beginning of a concerted effort to attack the problem. In the years prior to 1996,
the Nigerian criminal enterprises have exploited financial institutions, insurance compa-
nies, government entitlement programs, and individual citizens of the United States. Law
enforcement officials in the United Kingdom, Canada, Germany, Australia, South Africa,
Russia and other countries have also experienced high crime rates attributable to the
Nigerian criminal enterprises.7
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
68

These remarks by then Deputy Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. on the subject of
Nigerian Organized Crime at the Eighth International Nigerian Crime Conference in
Washington, D.C. on November 9, 1999 provide context on the state of the problem at
the time:
Nigerian organized criminal activity has escalated dramatically over the last decade, posing
an ever-increasing threat, not only within the United States, but also on a global scale.
Nigerian criminal enterprises have proven to be particularly adept at taking advantage of
opportunities created by the rapid globalization of transportation and communications, and
are now engaged in a broad range of criminal activity that reaches across borders and
victimizes citizens, businesses and financial institutions in Africa, Europe, Canada, the
United States and around the world.
In the past, defining the scope and extent of Nigerian criminal activity has been difficult
because Nigerian criminal groups are highly fluid in personnel and in methods of operation.
Although there is a degree of structure to these organizations, their hierarchical makeup and
relationships are not comparable to those of more traditional criminal organizations. In
terms of structure, NCEs seem to range from independent entrepreneurs to highly organized
syndicates. These groups are able to change and adapt as needed, both in the nature of the
criminal activities they pursue and in the members they use. This flexibility allows them to
remain in operation and to insulate themselves from law enforcement.
The pervasiveness of Nigerian crime has required us to devise a coordinated and compre-
hensive plan with participation by all U.S. agencies. In September of 1996, under the
leadership of Attorney General Reno, the Departments of Justice, State, and Treasury and
other law enforcement agencies began to develop the Nigerian Crime Strategy to identify
and combat Nigerian criminal groups. The Strategy targets both domestic and international
Nigerian criminal activity, and emphasizes increased coordination of U.S. law enforcement,
the sharing of investigative leads and information, enhanced cooperation with our foreign
law enforcement counterparts to coordinate multinational cases and investigations, and
improving coordination and dialogue with the Government of Nigeria, especially Nigerian
law enforcement officials, so we can strengthen their ability to combat crime occurring
within Nigeria, and assist in combating crimes committed elsewhere in the world by
individuals and organizations located in Nigeria.8
In July 1999, an initial investigation by law enforcement in Brooklyn and Queens,
New York, into heroin trafficking by a ‘‘highly organized group’’ of Nigerian nationals
ultimately discovered much more than just drug dealing. The gang had also stolen the
identities of more than 1,300 people throughout the country. The criminals forged
financial documents to commit this large-scale identity takeover scheme affecting
individuals and financial institutions in more than 21 states. In just one of their many
schemes, banks and credit card companies lost more than $1.4 million with most of the
defrauded funds sent to Nigeria.9
Here is what the FBI has to say today about African criminal enterprises including
Nigerian groups involved in fraud:
African criminal enterprises have developed quickly since the 1980s due to the globalization
of the world’s economies and the great advances in communications technology. Easier
Nigerian Criminal Enterprises
69

international travel, expanded world trade, and financial transactions that cross national
borders have enabled them to branch out of local and regional crime to target international
victims and develop criminal networks within more prosperous countries and regions. The
political, social, and economic conditions in African countries like Nigeria, Ghana, and
Liberia also have helped some enterprises expand globally.
African criminal enterprises have been identified in several major metropolitan areas in the
U.S., but are most prevalent in Atlanta, Baltimore, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Milwaukee,
Newark, New York, and Washington, D.C. Nigerian criminal enterprises are the most
significant of these groups and operate in more than 80 other countries of the world. They
are among the most aggressive and expansionist international criminal groups and are
primarily engaged in drug trafficking and financial frauds.
Nigerian groups are famous globally for their financial frauds, which cost the U.S. alone an
estimated $1 billion to $2 billion each year. Schemes are diverse, targeting individuals,
businesses, and government offices. The advent of the Internet and e-mail have made their
crimes more profitable and prevalent.
The FBI participates in two initiatives to bolster efforts to combat African criminal
enterprises:

The Department of Justice Nigerian Crime Initiative coordinates the federal investiga-
tions of Nigerian criminal enterprises by using joint task forces in six major U.S. cities.

The Interpol West African Fraud annual conference brings together law enforcement
agents from around the world to discuss and share information about the financial frauds
perpetuated by criminal enterprises whose members are predominantly West African,
and specifically Nigerian Criminal Enterprises.10
ONGOING THREAT OF FRAUD
The problem of Nigerian Criminal Enterprises will not be solved in the near future.
This is something that was many years in the making. It transcends individuals and
encompasses the political, economic, and societal conditions in Nigeria. Although these
conditions may have contributed to the crime problem, we as citizens and fraud
investigators must deal with it. Now that Nigerian Criminal Enterprises are recognized
as a serious threat to the public, businesses, and government of the United States and
other countries, fraud examiners must use all their skills to detect and prevent these
schemes. Once again, education and improved prevention techniques will be a major
factor in how well we succeed.
NOTES
1. Remarks of Eric H. Holder, Jr., Deputy Attorney General, United States Department
of Justice, on Nigerian Organized Crime at Eighth International Nigerian Crime
Conference, Washington, DC, November 9, 1999, www.justice.gov/archive/dag/
speeches/1999/nigerianspch.htm.
2. Testimony of Mr. Tom Kneir, Deputy Assistant Director, Criminal Investigative
Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Combating International Crime in Africa
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
70

Hearing before the Subcommittee on Africa of the Committee on International
Relations, House of Representatives, 105th Congress, 2nd Session, July 15, 1998,
commdocs.house.gov/committees/intlrel/hfa50884.000/hfa50884_0.HTM.
3. United State Secret Service, ‘‘Criminal Investigations: Advance Fee Fraud,’’
www.secretservice.gov/criminal.shtml.
4. Ibid.
5. Emerging Criminal Groups Hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, United States Senate,
99th Congress, 2nd Session, September 17, 1986, www.lib.ncsu.edu/congbibs/
senate/099dgst2.html.
6. Ibid.
7. Testimony of Mr. Tom Kneir, Deputy Assistant Director, Criminal Investigative
Division.
8. Ibid.
9. Remarks of Eric H. Holder, Jr., Deputy Attorney General.
10. Federal Bureau of Investigation, ‘‘African Criminal Enterprises,’’ www.fbi.gov/hq/
cid/orgcrime/africancrim.htm.
Nigerian Criminal Enterprises
71


CHAPTER 6
Methamphetamine, the Mails,
and Check Washing
Identity theft has many variations, and all of them are damaging. Yet some have more
than just an economic impact when a destructive drug is involved. For much of the
1990s, and even now in the new century, mail theft has been the crime du jour in certain
parts of the country. It is not just any kind of mail theft but an insidious, narcotic-driven
crime that precipitates identity theft. It is a crime that creates an unholy marriage
between the drug methamphetamine (also called meth, speed, and many other names)
and the mails. This M&M is not a sweet candy but a bitter poison that destroys lives,
threatens confidence in the mails, and results in thousands and thousands of new identity
theft victims.
The widespread availability and use of methamphetamine in the American Southwest
and on the West Coast contributed to the interrelated growth of mail theft and identity
theft. It is a unique story. In the late 1980s, as meth use increased, addicts needed money
either to purchase or to make the drug, as it can be easily made at home or in makeshift
labs. They turned to Dumpster diving and mail theft to obtain financial instruments and
personal information they could use for crime. The considerable amount of information
and documents found in the garbage of homes and businesses helped fuel a raft of
financial crimes.
The meth users then discovered something that would eventually contribute to an
even greater mail theft problem and a huge spike in identity theft. The chemicals used to
73

manufacture meth, or speed, as it is also commonly known, could also be used to remove
the inked writing from checks stolen from the mail. The fraudsters then would rewrite
the checks with new payees and check amounts and negotiate the checks. ‘‘Check
washing’’ spread throughout the western states. Armed with stolen financial information
and identities of victims, and the new check-washing capability, meth addicts found it
was easy to commit fraud. As the vicious cycle continued, mail theft increased as a
source of stolen checks and other personal information.
To be fair, the 2006 Identity Theft Survey Report of the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) found that only 2% of identity theft victims reported that their personal information
was stolen from the mails. Yet 56% of these survey respondents did not know how their
personal information was obtained. Based on my experience, I will venture to guess that a
goodpercentageofthenumbercamefrom mailtheft.Mailtheft,bothexternalandinternal,
is a continuing problem, even when it is not identity theft related.
MAIL THEFT PROBLEM
Mail theft is nothing new. It has been a problem in the United States for over 200 years.
In the Old West, mail theft from stagecoaches and trains was common. Mail theft is still
commonplace in the first decade of the twenty-first century. The only difference today is
where and how the mail is stolen. Robberies of mail carriers; burglaries of post offices;
break-ins of mail vehicles, collection boxes, and residential mailboxes; and internal theft
by postal employees are all ways to attack and steal mail. The mails may contain
valuables, such as cash, precious metals, jewelry, credit cards, and checks. Besides items
of obvious value, the mails contain personal and financial information, stolen to commit
identity theft. Stealing large amounts of mail allows scam artists to easily obtain all the
information needed to assume a victim’s identity.
Mail theft occurs in a variety of ways, but serious criminals are on the lookout for
large volumes of mail that accumulate before collection or delivery. Volume mail thefts
or volume attacks target postal vehicles, collection boxes, apartment mail panels, and
neighborhood delivery and collection box units (NDCBUs) where large quantities of
mail can be found. The most popular targets for volume mail thefts are NDCBUs and
apartment panels. By attacking these units, thieves can steal more mail at one location.
The Postal Service experienced 3,435 volume attacks in fiscal year (FY) 1999, 3,929
volume attacks in FY 2000, and 6,752 volume attacks in FY 2001, at the height of the
problem. The vast majority of volume attacks occurred in the western states and was
attributable to users of the drug methamphetamine, commonly called ‘‘meth heads’’ or
‘‘tweakers.’’
Much of the problem centered on the American Southwest. The mail theft problem in
Arizona and other western states can be likened to the mythical creature the hydra. Cut
off one of the seven heads of this serpent and it is quickly replaced with two new heads.
No matter how many heads are cut off, there are always more than before. This analogy
also applied to the mail theft problem because of the vast methamphetamine epidemic
and the legions of addicted users who gravitated to mail theft. Meth addicts are heavily
involved in the theft of mail to fund their drug habits. As each one was arrested, two
more meth heads were ready to steal more mail.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
74

Arizona, Nevada, and California are the top three states for number of mail theft
victims, according to a 2006 FTC report on victim complaint data. They are followed by
Texas, Florida, Colorado, Georgia, New York, Washington, and New Mexico. It is not
surprising; seven of these states have big problems with meth. With Arizona and Nevada
leading the victim survey, it is understandable why Phoenix, Tucson, and Las Vegas
have led the nation in the total number of volume mail thefts. These thefts centered on
NDCBUs as well as apartment mailbox panels. The suspects target incoming and
outgoing mail containing checks and other financial information. They break into these
mailboxes through a variety of means including the use of counterfeit keys, prying open
the locked panels, and even removing entire mailbox units from their metal anchors.
A Postal Inspector who worked in Texas in the late 1970s and early 1980s told me he
saw the early impact of meth-related mail theft. He advised that the theft and negotiation
of checks stolen from the mail as well as the submission of fraudulent credit card
applications financed drug labs in northern Texas and Oklahoma. The meth heads would
steal cars for their crime sprees, and almost every car recovered contained trash bags full
of stolen mail. He reported that the crime was so new that the local police and bank
investigators thought that the victims whose mail was stolen were involved in the fraud
until law enforcement were educated on the modus operandi of tweakers.
CHECK WASHING: A NEW SPIN ON MAIL THEFT
The primary reason for mail theft is to obtain checks that can be ‘‘washed.’’ Check
washing is a mail theft–related crime that is easy to accomplish. Mail thieves know that
outgoing mail contains checks being mailed to pay mortgages, utilities, credit cards, and
other bills. Once the checks are stolen, the thieves ‘‘wash’’ the checks in a chemical
solution to erase the inked writing. The checks are actually soaked in commonly
available chemicals that remove only the handwritten portions.
The chemicals that check washers often use include acetone, benzene, bleach, carbon
tetrachloride, chloromice T, clear correction fluids, brake fluid, and other bleaching
agents. Some of these chemicals are also used in the manufacture of methamphetamine.
After the washed check is dried, a new amount and payee are filled in. The criminal uses
counterfeit identification in the name of the true account holder, but with his or her own
photo, to negotiate the check.
Often the washed checks are rewritten and made payable to the thieves using their
own names or other names. The checks are then negotiated at various banks, check
cashers, department stores, and convenience stores. A commonly used technique to
wash checks goes like this: First one obtains a 16-ounce plastic soft drink bottle; the top
portion of the bottle is cut off, then brake fluid and acetone are poured into the bottom
half of the bottle. Next the check is dipped in the solution. and it is swirled around until
the writing disappears. After the check is allowed to dry, it is ready to rewrite and
fraudulently cash.
To further illustrate the problem, Postal Inspectors arrested a woman who was stealing
mail from unlocked mailboxes in the more rural areas of Las Vegas. She would wash the
stolen checks right inside her car. She had a laptop computer, laminator, and all the
necessities to make up bogus identification right there. In some cases, tweakers
Methamphetamine, the Mails, and Check Washing
75

presented washed checks that were still wet and smelling of acetone. Once a bank teller
stalled a suspect attempting to cash a washed check by telling him she would try to dry
off the check using the hand dryer in the restroom.
ALL ‘‘METHED’’ UP: THE DRUG CONNECTION
Methamphetamine is a powerfully addictive stimulant drug that produces feelings of
mental alertness and well-being. It also causes increased activity, decreased appetite,
and a host of undesired effects. Like cocaine, meth is a central nervous system stimulant.
Users report that these stimulants produce a sense of euphoria, strength, and control as
well as postpone fatigue, suppress the appetite, increase metabolism, and act as an
aphrodisiac that heightens and prolongs sexual pleasure. Methamphetamine’s effects
last significantly longer than those of cocaine (two to four hours for meth that is
‘‘snorted’’ versus one hour for cocaine) and it is a cheaper product, particularly when
there is easy access to the precursor, ephedrine, and other synthesis materials.
Due to lower prices as compared to cocaine, meth appeals to a wide range of users.
That includes workers who are in monotonous and repetitious occupations, those who
hold down more than one job, or those who work exceptionally long hours. It is used to
fight fatigue. Occasional usage, whether to fight fatigue or not, can quickly turn into an
addiction with disastrous occupational, family, and health consequences. Work behavior
can quickly turn from superhuman to substandard, and poor or erratic performance
becomes the norm. The user may also become not only more aggressive but combative
and paranoid, which causes problems both at work and home.
Like many addictions, the desire for the drug can replace commitment to family and
common sense. Users will do outrageous things, including neglecting or even selling
their children, for the drug. Methamphetamine makes the body work harder and has
other health consequences, such as heart and organ damage, dental decay, and mal-
nutrition. Users have a heightened risk of sexually transmitted diseases, such as AIDS
and hepatitis B and C, as they turn to prostitution to pay for the drug and/or engage in sex
with multiple partners for entertainment. Nervous energy causes users to pick at sores
and scabs, which worsen with poor diets and create scarred skin.
There are few accepted medical reasons for the use of meth other than the treatment of
narcolepsy and attention deficit disorder (ADD). The drug can be smoked, snorted,
orally ingested, or injected. It is often called meth, speed, crank, crystal meth, glass, or
ice. Former White House Drug Czar Barry McCaffrey said methamphetamine has a
‘‘serious potential nationally to become the next crack cocaine epidemic.’’1 He added
that meth ‘‘remains one of the most dangerous substances America has ever con-
fronted.’’2 Unfortunately, that epidemic has already arrived. It is estimated that 4.7 million
people have tried meth, and its use has spread across the country.
Methamphetamine was first synthesized from ephedrine in 1887. In 1932, it was sold
in the United States as a nasal spray for the treatment of inflamed nasal passages. Meth
abuse first became a problem in the 1930s and 1940s when it was used by Allied and
Axis troops supposedly to improve soldiers’ performances. Meth was widely available
in the 1940s and 1950s via prescription, and this availability resulted in abuse.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
76

The second epidemic of methamphetamine abuse occurred in the 1960s. In 1970,
meth was classified as a controlled substance. Generally out of favor by drug users for
much of the 1970s, it emerged in the 1980s in Hawaii and other western states. New and
simple methods to manufacture meth helped fuel its growth. Outlaw biker gangs on the
West Coast soon got involved in the manufacture, use, and distribution of the drug. The
drug’s availability made it the ‘‘poor man’s cocaine,’’ and San Diego became a focal
point of meth use in California.3 (For more information on the impact of meth, mail theft,
and identity theft on an American city, see Chapter 14.)
In the late 1980s, a smokable form of meth was introduced and eventually spread
throughout the western United States. By the 1990s, there was heavy methamphetamine
use and production in the western states with a continuing spread eastward. In 1995,
meth overtook cocaine as the primary illegal drug used in the Phoenix, Arizona, area.
Meth is also commonplace in rural Arizona and many rural communities throughout the
country. The drug is easily manufactured in clandestine drug labs.
A clandestine drug laboratory is a small chemical lab designed to make deadly, illegal
drugs quickly and cheaply. These labs are often called mom-and-pop labs because of the
ease with which they can be set up. The drug of choice for most of these labs is
methamphetamine. The equipment necessary to manufacture meth can range from
highly specialized chemical apparatus to ordinary pots and pans, coffee filters, glass
cookware, hot plates, and other common household items. Due to the ease of production,
it is the most commonly manufactured illegal drug today. The labs can be located in
rental apartments or houses, motel rooms, mini-storage units, motor homes, or other
vehicles. In fact, mobile meth labs are quite common.
Thirty-two chemicals can be cooked together in various combinations to make meth,
including everything from brake fluid to drain cleaner to red phosphorous, a highly
flammable chemical that can easily combust when mixed with water or air and a nearby
flame. Lithium batteries, grain alcohol, distilled water, and anhydrous ammonia are also
used to make meth. When mixed together, these chemicals create toxic fumes that can
cause liver and kidney failure, severe lung damage, and cancer.
Ingredients found in cold medicine, such as pseudoephedrine, can also be mixed with
household products and chemicals to make meth. Individuals who manufacture meth
often purchase large quantities of cold medicines. For this reason, it was important to
stop the bulk sales of these over-the-counter drugs. In 1999, Arizona enacted a law
forbidding retailers from selling cold medicine in large quantities. Similar laws are now
commonplace throughout the United States. Restricting the over-the-counter sale of
these cold medicines has helped but not eliminated the problem.
People living in or near the potentially toxic environment of a meth lab can suffer life-
threatening illnesses. These chemicals can seep into food stored in the house, into the
walls and floors, and into clothes and other items. Short-term exposure can cause
breathing problems, disorientation, and seizures. Long-term effects include fatal kidney
and lung disorders, brain damage, strokes, and death. Chemicals used to produce
methamphetamine, such as red phosphorus and acetone, are highly toxic and the
residual ‘‘soup’’ from the manufacture contaminates properties, creating serious health
risks to unsuspecting tenants and neighbors as well as costing significant amounts to
Methamphetamine, the Mails, and Check Washing
77

clean up or abate. In addition, the risk of explosions and fires from these toxic mixes
poses life-threatening issues.
Meth users suffer from a destructive addiction cycle. When using meth, addicts can
stay up for 10 days straight with no need for food. Then they are driven into a severely
depressed state followed by worsening paranoia, belligerence, hallucinations, and
aggression. This period is known as tweaking; from this comes the term ‘‘tweaker.’’
A tweaker always craves more meth and will often do anything to obtain it. Eventually
meth users collapse from exhaustion, finally awakening to begin the cycle again. Eighty-
five percent of those who try meth will become addicts.
Methamphetamine has had a dramatic impact on criminals and crime and has
propelled traditional problems of fraud and forgery into the current epidemic of identity
theft. Meth users turned to traditional street crimes—burglary, auto theft, prostitution,
and forgery—to support their habits. Unlike heroin addicts or crack cocaine users who
can devote only a small portion of their day to committing crimes to support their habits,
meth users can stay up for days at a stretch committing crimes before crashing for a few
hours or days, then going right back to committing crime.
ORIGIN OF THE PROBLEM
The Arizona problem began in the mid-1980s when gangs of thieves and individuals did
Dumpster diving, obtaining checks thrown away by banks and check manufacturers.
These thieves started the check-washing process. This method of altering checks
evolved from the gangs trying to wash off words like ‘‘spoiled’’ or ‘‘void’’ stamped
on the discarded checks. Once they were successful, they began stealing checks from the
mail and washing the ‘‘pay to’’ and ‘‘dollar amount,’’ then reissuing the check in any
name and amount they chose.
Volume mail thefts began in the late 1980s with most of the activity restricted to
apartment complexes. In the early 1990s, thefts from NDCBUs began to increase.
Thieves would pry open the rear doors of these units and remove all the mail. During this
time, there was an influx of meth users into Arizona from California. The thieves
counterfeited identification documents and cashed the checks. By 1994, counterfeiting
of Arrow keys became a major problem as thefts from collection boxes greatly
increased. Attacks on NDCBUs and apartment panels also increased. More than
90% of the volume break-ins were committed by meth addicts who financed their
drug habit by stealing mail.
Thieves often use stolen bicycles that they pedal through the neighborhoods while
breaking into mailboxes. Frequently they carry stolen mail in backpacks or in plastic
garbage bags attached to their bicycles. They open the mail receptacles with small
needle-nose pliers, screwdrivers, or other pry tools. Then they open the mail, remove the
checks, and dump the envelopes and contents. Large quantities of stolen mail have been
recovered from hotel rooms, rental vehicles, and abandoned apartments once used by
these thieves as well as in Dumpsters and empty lots.
One particular type of mail theft is called ‘‘red flagging.’’ Mail thieves, on foot, on
bicycles, or in cars, will look for residential mailboxes with the red flag up. The red flag
on residential mailboxes is there to notify the mail carrier that residents have placed
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
78

outgoing mail in the box for pickup. The red flag in the up position has a different
meaning for these thieves. It means ‘‘steal me.’’ These criminals then take the outgoing
mail looking for checks to wash and negotiate. They usually are most active in the
evening and early-morning hours before the mail carrier has had a chance to pick up the
mail and there is less chance of being seen stealing the mail.
Another way that these criminals steal mail is by walking from residential mailbox to
residential mailbox delivering business flyers. They make photocopies of a legitimate
flyer and place them in the mailboxes while removing mail already in the boxes.
Depositing unstamped mail matter in a mailbox is against the law but it commonly
occurs and can be done to mask mail theft. Again, the thieves are mostly looking for
outgoing mail containing checks they can wash.
The monies these fraudsters obtain from forging and fraudulently negotiating the
checks are used primarily for the purchase of methamphetamine and other illegal
substances as well as to manufacture meth. In 2002, it was estimated that check washing
cost consumers and financial institutions $815 million a year. Identity theft is the crime
of choice for meth heads. It is financially lucrative and can be accomplished in many
different ways. It is generally a nonviolent, white-collar crime that usually results in
lesser criminal penalties than crimes such as robberies and burglaries. Computers, the
Internet, and the availability to connect almost anywhere provides ‘‘anonymity and
speed with which to work.’’4
Examples of cases involving mail theft, check washing, identity theft, and meth
investigated by Postal Inspectors follow.
Subsequent to a routine traffic stop, police in Arizona arrested two occupants of a
vehicle on drug violations. Police discovered among the personal property of the
occupants five personal checks stolen from the mail in Chandler, Mesa, Scottsdale,
and Tempe, Arizona. Postal Inspectors were contacted and interviewed the suspects. The
suspects were husband and wife. Both admitted that the stolen checks had been washed
and were to be cashed at a later date. A search warrant was obtained for the motel where
the couple had been staying. Six additional stolen checks were recovered, including one
that was still soaking in the washing solution. An eight-month-old boy and a six-year-old
girl were found alone at the hotel room when officers arrived. The Division of Family
Services took the two young children into protective custody. The husband and wife both
admitted to being methamphetamine users.
Another case involved the arrest of a mail theft suspect. He had in his possession two
small plastic bags containing a substance believed to be methamphetamine. He also
possessed two checks, one of which had been chemically altered. The checks recovered
from the suspect were determined to be stolen from the U.S. Mail. The suspect’s
fingerprints were identified on stolen mail and other items containing ‘‘practice’’
signatures seized during the search. It was learned that the suspect would provide
washed checks to individuals who would negotiate the checks. The suspect kept 50% of
the proceeds from the negotiated checks. He is believed to have stolen, chemically
altered, and forged hundreds of checks stolen from rural-type mailboxes in the Phoenix
area for the last several years.
In yet another case, Postal Inspectors arrested a woman suspected of a series of mail
thefts in New Mexico, Colorado, Nebraska, Utah, and Idaho. A search of her car found
Methamphetamine, the Mails, and Check Washing
79

significant evidence of her crimes, including checks, credit cards, counterfeit IDs,
forged birth certificates, financial documents, drugs, and guns. The defendant was
believed to have stolen more than $1 million worth of checks from the mail.
CHANGING FACE OF CHECK FORGERY
Technology has offered criminals greater opportunities to commit financial crimes
without having to resort to check washing and the dangerous chemicals needed for the
process. With advances in technology, counterfeiting checks has become commonplace.
Counterfeiters use computers, scanners, readily available software, laser printers, and
color printers to create high-quality checks that are hard to detect as phony. They also
use computers and scanners to create bogus identification documents for use in
negotiating these checks.
In one case involving a gang operation, stolen canceled checks that came from
curbside mailbox thefts were scanned into check-writing software. The graphic images
were edited and printed onto blank check stock using laser jet printers and computers
available at the local retail photocopy store. Another method used by the gang involved
lifting or washing the payee information, dollar amount, and other unwanted data from
the check by swabbing portions of the check with chemical solvents or by erasure or
obfuscation with correction tape or correction fluid. In some cases, company logos and
account numbers were cut from other documents and pasted onto the master. A copy of
the master was made, which helped to further hide any obvious alterations. The master
copy was used to transfer the now-altered check image onto blank check stock using
ordinary photocopy machines. The blank counterfeit checks were completed on a
typewriter and negotiated.
Postal Inspectors in San Francisco arrested an individual for mail theft, possession of
counterfeit postal keys, and access device fraud. The suspect’s occupation was a
locksmith and computer technician. During the period prior to the suspect’s arrest,
the Postal Service received numerous reports of volume attacks on street mailboxes and
apartment mailboxes throughout the San Francisco area. Upon arrest, the suspect had in
his possession over 500 pieces of U.S. Mail, including checks and credit cards associated
with many of the reported volume attacks. He also had in his possession counterfeit
postal keys and phony California driver’s licenses. The suspect additionally had a
computer containing templates for making California driver’s licenses and a Versa-
Check software program to create personal and business checks. VersaCheck software is
readily available at office supply stores. It is used to create and print custom checks in
minutes using a home personal computer and an inkjet or laser printer. Criminals can use
this software to create counterfeit checks using the information they have stolen.
In another case, Postal Inspectors executed a search warrant at the residence of an
individual suspected of being involved in mail theft and forgery. The search resulted in
the discovery of the VersaCheck computer program, blank VersaChecks, blank cashier’s
checks, a computer printer and scanner, document-producing computer programs, and a
paper cutter.
In December 2000, two defendants who were meth addicts were arrested at a motel in
Washington State. The search of their room
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
80

found ‘‘numerous’’ pieces of stolen mail; a counterfeit Postal Service key; seven Washington
state drivers’ licenses, each bearing the photo of [the defendants] but containing a different
name; counterfeit checks; and supplies to create false identification documents, including a
computer, digital camera, printer, and scanner.5
The two defendants had been convicted previously for mail theft and bank fraud and
were serving jail terms when they escaped and started this new mail and identity theft
spree.6
In yet another case investigated by Postal Inspectors, two defendants participated in a
scheme to defraud Phoenix area major retailers, such as K-Mart and Target, to purchase
merchandise with checks stolen from the mail that were chemically washed. The thieves
later returned the merchandise to the stores for cash. They used false Arizona driver’s
licenses, which they produced on their laptop computer, to facilitate purchasing the
merchandise. The defendants used software programs Corel Draw, PhotoShop, and
Corel PrintShop to make the phony licenses. A digital camera was used to take the
photographs for the false identification.
PREVENTION EFFORTS
The Postal Service realized that while it could not stop the spread of meth, it could make
it much harder for criminals to obtain source information from mail theft. The result was
an increased focus on security enhancements. At one time, postal vehicles were a major
object of attack. Security modifications have been installed that make it harder to break
into these vehicles, resulting in a lessening of this problem. Similar efforts have been
implemented to upgrade security for collection boxes. The Postal Service is deploying
collection boxes that are less vulnerable to attack, hardening existing boxes with
reinforcements and different locks, anchoring the boxes in a manner that renders
them more difficult to remove, and implementing high-security collection box locks
with keys that are virtually impossible to counterfeit.
The Postal Service strengthened the security of NDCBUs by reinforcing areas where
attacks usually occur and reinforcing rear doors and other points of entry, all in an effort
to improve security. A significant effort was undertaken in target areas to educate law
enforcement officials and the public about security and prevention practices. There have
been numerous television, newspaper, and radio spots focusing on public awareness of
the volume mail theft problem. The focus has been to advise members of the public on
how to best protect themselves from losses. The public was provided with several
alternatives to using NDCBU outgoing mail slots. The media spots were a constant
reminder to the public to make thinking about prevention part of their daily lives.
Improved security features hardened other mailboxes against attack. The Postal
Service researched and tested high-security boxes that could withstand attack by almost
any tool. They succeeded in developing a secure cluster box unit (CBU) that was
deployed throughout Phoenix. CBUs are free-standing mailboxes located at central
points in a community for the delivery of mail. In many parts of the country, they are
used in place of individual mailboxes in front of homes and businesses. In FY 2004,
5,716 high-security CBUs were deployed in Phoenix area. Although mail thieves have
Methamphetamine, the Mails, and Check Washing
81

attempted to break into these reinforced boxes, to date not a single one has been
compromised. As a result, volume mail theft attacks have significantly declined since
2005.
Financial institutions are also doing more to protect the public. More banks are
requiring non-account holders, those opening new accounts, and those purchasing bank
checks and money orders to provide a fingerprint to the face of each check they are
cashing. A thumb or index fingerprint is placed on the lower center of the face of the
check between the memo and signature lines. If the check bounces or is forged, evidence
is available for a law enforcement investigation.
To prevent or lessen the possibility that someone can ‘‘wash’’ a stolen check, these
procedures are recommended to the general public:
 Write out in full the payee, memo, and amount portions of the checks. Fill up the
entire line with letters or a squiggly line.
 Use thick, dark ink to write checks. Roller-ball, thick felt tip, and fountain pens are
best; ballpoint and permanent ink pens are the most easily altered.
 Purchase checks through institutions that use tamper-resistant paper and ink.
Here is how to detect a washed check:
 The finish on the check paper may look or feel softer than the original.
 The finish may feel bumpy.
 The ink color may be slightly changed.
 The paper color may have a grayish tint.
 The watermark may have been washed off or lightened.
Much more information on preventing mail theft and other aspects of identity theft
can be found in Chapter 20.
THE PROBLEM CONTINUES TODAY
Although the increased focus on prevention in the last few years has reduced mail theft
and check washing, the crime continues to be a problem. In my discussions with Postal
Inspectors while writing this book, I was told that check washing is not as prevalent as it
once was, but it is still present. Investigators are still encountering washed checks,
especially by those meth heads who are not computer savvy. Banks and merchants are
still accepting washed checks, especially high-quality ones that are hard to detect as
washed. Unfortunately, most tweakers involved in identity theft are very computer
literate and have easy access to computers. The tools of the trade today for these
criminals include computers, printers, high-quality graphics software, Internet access,
online services for Internet telephone accounts, and an abundance of personal and
financial information.
Arizona continues to provide the ‘‘perfect storm’’ for the highest incidence of identity
theft in the country. Along with the fastest-growing population in the country comes the
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
82

need for mortgages and other loans, the mailing of financial information, and the
opportunity for mail thieves to commit identity theft. The ongoing meth problem is still a
factor. Some of the highest meth abuse is reported in the Phoenix area. Arizona has
become an importation and distribution point for meth in the United States from so-
called super labs operating in Mexico and elsewhere. This results in one of the highest
incidences of identity theft in the country.
Other states also continue to see the problem. Meth-fueled crimes including identity
theft persist in other states as well. In the Seattle, Washington, area in 2007, a law
enforcement task force focusing on meth-related crimes arrested 11 people for identity
theft and forgery.7 But we may be starting to see the light at the end of the tunnel.
Some researchers believe the worst of the meth epidemic may be past. Research
indicates that the meth epidemic peaked in 2004 and 2005.8 One drug-testing firm hired
by companies to test job applicants and employees found far fewer people tested
positive for meth in 2006 than in 2004 or 2005.9 An aggressive law enforcement
approach is also helping.
As mentioned, pseudoephedrine is used in popular cold and allergy medications as
well as being a key ingredient in the creation of meth. For many years, meth heads
purchased large quantities of these over-the-counter decongestants to manufacture
the highly addictive drug. In order to reduce the manufacture and availability of meth,
drug makers, the federal government, and many states have taken strong actions. Under
a recent federal law, people who buy medications containing pseudoephedrine
must show photo identification. In addition, there is a limit of how much can be
purchased.
The great majority of states have enacted legislation to restrict products that contain
pseudoephedrine, and the major drug makers have introduced new lines of deconges-
tants that do not contain this ingredient. Pfizer is working to create a pseudoephedrine
medication that cannot be used to make meth.10 Limiting the availability of pseudo-
ephedrine is critical in reducing the manufacture of meth and the related crimes that
come with its use. As a result of these restrictions and government enforcement actions,
there has been a decrease in the small mom-and-pop meth labs.
NOTES
1. Peter Grier and James N. Thurman, ‘‘Illegal Drug Use Tapers Off, But Supplies are
Plentiful,’’ Christian Science Monitor, March 24, 2000, www.nationalfamilies.org/
publications/about_nfia/use_tapers.html.
2. ‘‘Clinton’s Anti-Drugs Adviser Reports Substantial Progress,’’ Media Awareness
Project, March 22, 2000, www.mapinc.org/drugnews/v00/n397/a08.html.
3. Diana Hunt, Sarah Kuck, and Linda Truitt, ‘‘Methamphetamine Use: Lessons
Learned,’’ National Institute of Justice, July 31, 2006, 4–5, www.ncjrs.gov/
pdffiles1/nij/grants/209730.pdf.
4. Ibid.
5. Sam Skolnik, ‘‘Meth Use Linked to Jump in ID, Mail Thefts,’’ MSNBC, July 23,
2001, www.msnbc.com/local/pisea/m71111.asp.
6. Ibid.
Methamphetamine, the Mails, and Check Washing
83

7. Jennifer Sullivan, ‘‘30 More Arrests in Meth-Crime Probe,’’ Seattle Times, August
18, 2007, B5.
8. Martha Irvine, ‘‘Meth Use Declining, Says Feds and States,’’ Seattle Times, April 2,
2007, A4.
9. Ibid.
10. Donna Leinwand, ‘‘Drugmakers Take Action to Foil Meth Crooks,’’ USA Today,
June 29, 2005, 3A.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
84

CHAPTER 7
The Violent Side of
Identity Theft
The criminals who commit identity theft have innumerable motives. While most relate
to greed and financial gain, there have been cases of violent acts done in concert with and
in furtherance of identity theft. There is a mistaken perception that white-collar crimes
do not involve violence. Violent behavior can easily surface whenever criminal activity
occurs. Violence often invades the realm of fraud and white-collar crime, and we have
seen it again and again in identity theft cases.
I learned this unfortunate lesson in 1983 when I was leading an investigation of a gang
involved in credit card fraud, mail theft, welfare fraud, and bank fraud in Brooklyn, New
York. Identity theft was the focus and most lucrative of their crimes. The gang leader
was a young man with a minor criminal record and no prior history of violence. At most,
these crimes would have landed him in jail for five years, and probably much less. We
infiltrated his gang with two undercover informants to gain evidence against him. Sadly,
when he thought that law enforcement was getting too close and he suspected the true
allegiance of the informants, he murdered them with bullets to the back of their heads.
Now he is serving a life sentence behind bars. I have never forgotten the violent side of
identity theft.
85

IDENTITY THEFT HALL OF INFAMY
George Kalomeris
In the 1990s, an investigation with connections to Maryland, Delaware, and North
Carolina uncovered the unthinkable: that identity theft would be the stimulus for
murder. The criminal murdered two people to steal their identities and their estates.
One murder was not enough for this homicidal identity thief; he wanted more of
what belonged to others, so he killed again.
The investigation focused on George Kalomeris, a resident of both Maryland
and North Carolina. Ultimately, Kalomeris admitted to killing two people, one a
Delaware resident and the other a North Carolina resident, to obtain their financial
assets. He pleaded guilty to the homicides, but the story leading up to his plea and
life sentence is chilling. State, local, and federal authorities were involved in the
investigation, including the Postal Inspection Service; Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation (FBI); Montgomery County, Maryland, Police Department; United States
Attorney for the District of Maryland; Attorney General for Delaware; a North
Carolina District Attorney; Greenville, North Carolina, Police Department; and
Delaware State Police.
The details of the events leading up to the homicides and the subsequent
consequences come from the statement of facts signed by Kalomeris on November
17, 1998, included in his federal plea agreement and incorporated into his plea
agreements in Delaware and North Carolina. The details also come from the
November 18, 1998, press release issued by the United States Attorney for the
District of Maryland.
George Kalomeris resided in Maryland when he got married in 1994. Shortly
after, the couple moved to Greenville, North Carolina. They lived in an apartment
complex, and Kalomeris became friends with Gary Wayne Thomas, who lived in
the same complex. In the course of their friendship, Kalomeris learned that
Thomas was an alcoholic and was the beneficiary of a $1 million trust controlled
by a bank in Greenville. Thomas’s grandfather had established the trust fund for
him years earlier. A checking and savings account had also been established in
Thomas’s name. He received monthly deposits varying between $1,500 and
$3,000.
Kalomeris was envious of Thomas’s good fortune and wanted it for himself. He
planned to take control of Thomas’s trust fund by assuming his identity. In July
1996, Kalomeris and Thomas were smoking marijuana when Kalomeris shot and
killed Thomas. Kalomeris then hid the body and started his identity takeover. He
opened Thomas’s mail to learn about his victim’s financial history. He canceled
Thomas’s health insurance, requested bank information on Thomas’s account,
took over Thomas’s apartment, and sold Thomas’s car.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
86

To conceal Thomas’s disappearance and give the appearance that he was alive,
Kalomeris, acting as Thomas, contacted the bank and the trust fund and advised
that he (Thomas) relocated to Maryland for the purpose of rehabilitation of his
alcohol addiction. Once back in Maryland, Kalomeris advised the bank of the
change of address. In December 1996, Kalomeris began using Thomas’s money by
writing checks from the account. Between December 1996 and July 1997, he wrote
20 checks on Thomas’s account, payable to various payees, including a company
that Kalomeris had set up, creditors of Kalomeris, and others including a relative.
The total amount of the checks written was $18,055. No one had any clue that
Thomas was dead; everyone believed he had moved to Maryland.
By August 1997, Kalomeris had run through much of the funds in the bank
account and needed money. Desperate, he decided to again turn to murder for
financial gain. He had another victim in mind. Thomas Wayne Jones was a 57-
year-old paraplegic living on a farm in rural Delaware. Kalomeris had met Jones
because Kalomeris’s father and stepmother owned property near Jones’s home.
Kalomeris knew that Jones was wealthy and collected rare and valuable coins.
On August 13, 1997, Kalomeris drove from Maryland to Delaware for the
purpose of robbing and killing Jones. At Jones’s home, Kalomeris shot Jones in the
back of the neck. Thinking that Jones would soon die, Kalomeris dumped the body
in the wooded area behind the home. Back in the house, Kalomeris cleaned up the
evidence of the shooting and then stole financial information about Jones, valuable
gold coins, and Jones’s checkbook. Kalomeris then returned to Maryland taking
Jones’s wheelchair. He even abandoned Jones’s dog by the roadside.
On August 14, 1997, Kalomeris negotiated a check drawn on Jones’s checking
account and also paid a debt he owed. Kalomeris then sold some of the gold coins
he stole from Jones. He disposed of the wheelchair as well as the gun used to shoot
Jones. Unbeknownst to Kalomeris, Jones was found alive a little more than a day
after the shooting. Although in very bad shape, Jones was able to identify
Kalomeris as the shooter.
On August 20, 1997, police arrested Kalomeris for the attempted homicide of
Jones. While he was incarcerated, Kalomeris told his wife about the Thomas
account and asked his wife to access funds from it. Around the time Kalomeris was
arrested, a financial institution in New York was contacted by a person who may or
may not have been Kalomeris regarding an account in the name of Jones and a
request was made to change Jones’s mailing address to a different rural address in
Delaware. Kalomeris later claimed that he had no recollection of making the
address change.
Kalomeris was concerned about Jones testifying against him. In September
1997, Kalomeris approached an inmate at the Montgomery County Detention
Center with a murder-for-hire scheme to kill Jones for $10,000. Kalomeris gave
detailed information to the inmate about where to find Jones. He also asked the
inmate to kill a couple in Frederick, Maryland: Kalomeris’s father and stepmother.
(Continued )
The Violent Side of Identity Theft
87

CHICAGO PARCEL BOMB MURDER CASE
Another case from the files of the Postal Inspectors illustrates how murder and violence
can be involved in identity theft. On February 15, 2000 at 10:45 p.m., a parcel bomb
exploded in the living room of a residence in Chicago, Illinois. The package was a
videocassette recorder box with two pipe bombs inside, of which only one exploded. But
that was more than enough. When Marcus Toney, the intended victim, opened the
package, he was killed instantly. Toney was a 37-year-old college custodian. A friend of
Toney’s also in the room suffered non–life-threatening injuries as he was shielded from
the full blast of the bomb by Toney’s body.
Investigation by the Postal Inspection Service, Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms, and
Chicago Police Department determined that the bomb was placed at the residence and
made to look as if it had been mailed. Toney was in the process of divorcing his wife,
Lisa, and they had been living apart for several months. The survivor of the blast told
authorities that the wife’s boyfriend, Sienky Lallemand, had been threatening Toney.
Toney was also the recent victim of identity theft, and he had learned that the boyfriend
was the culprit.
Kalomeris explained to the inmate that the way to make money was to ‘‘assume the
identity’’ of wealthy persons whose disappearance would not be noticed.
The money for the hit on Jones came from Thomas’s account with the assistance
of Kalomeris’s wife. While in jail, Kalomeris continued to defraud the Thomas
account by sending letters to the bank in the name of Thomas to give the appearance
that he was still alive. Kalomeris’s wife continued to withdraw money each month
from Thomas’s account using an automated teller machine (ATM) card.
The inmate whom Kalomeris approached cooperated with law enforcement
authorities, resulting in the additional arrest of Kalomeris for federal solicitation
to commit murder. Unfortunately, Jones died in September 1998 from injuries related
to the shooting. On November 16, 1998, Kalomeris was indicted in Delaware for the
murder of Jones. When documents in Thomas’s name surfaced during the investiga-
tion of the solicitation to commit the murder of Jones, the Montgomery County Police
Department, Homicide Division, began investigating Thomas’s disappearance.
Kalomeris pleaded guilty to federal charges of solicitation to commit murder,
money laundering, and bank fraud as well as state homicide charges. As part of his
plea agreement, Kalomeris agreed to assist North Carolina law enforcement
authorities in locating Thomas’s body. On November 18, 1998, Kalomeris directed
North Carolina authorities to the skeletal remains of Thomas.
On March 9, 1999, Kalomeris was sentenced in federal court to 395 years in
prison without the hope of parole. If by some miracle he lives that long, he would
then face life without parole in Delaware and a minimum of 45 years imprisonment
in North Carolina for the state murder charges. Kalomeris’s wife was not
implicated in the homicides, but she pleaded guilty to bank fraud charges and
was sentenced to a short prison term.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
88

The investigating officers interviewed the wife, who denied any involvement in the
murder or the identity theft. Lisa Toney agreed to take a polygraph and failed the test
when asked if she had any knowledge of her husband’s murder. She then admitted
knowledge of her boyfriend’s involvement in her husband’s identity theft. Her lawyer
refused to allow her to answer any further questions about the homicide.
There was much more to learn about Lisa Toney and Sienky Lallemand. Lisa Toney
began her affair with Lallemand in 1998. Not long after, she started talking about
murdering her husband. She told Lallemand that her husband had a $50,000 life
insurance policy and owned property. At first, Lallemand wanted no part of homicide
and instead suggested stealing Marcus Toney’s identity for financial gain. Sienky
Lallemand had a predisposition for identity theft as he had prior convictions for credit
card fraud in Indiana and Michigan.
The two then went about their identity theft scheme, obtaining and using credit cards
in the husband’s name. They also leased a Lexus SUV and a Mercedes-Benz in Marcus
Toney’s name. The person who leased the Lexus presented an Indiana driver’s license as
identification. While it had the name and identifying information of Marcus Toney, the
licenses’s photograph was that of Sienky Lallemand. Overall, the identity theft losses in
Marcus Toney’s name exceeded $220,000.1
At some point, Marcus Toney learned that his wife and her boyfriend were involved in
the identity theft of his good name. On February 1, 2000, he told a bank investigator that
his wife and Lallemand were fraudulently using credit cards in his name. After learning
that her husband was going to alert the police about the fraud, Lisa Toney and Lallemand
decided to end his life by sending him the parcel bomb.2 They placed a FedEx label on
the package to make it appear more authentic. After receiving the parcel, Marcus Toney
removed the label and placed it in another room of his house. It was recovered by the
investigators, and the handwriting on it was found to belong to Lallemand.
For some reason, Marcus Toney did not open the bomb parcel right away. It sat in his
home for three days before he opened it and it exploded. When it was clear that Toney had
not opened the box and was still alive, Lallemand called him and left a voicemail intended
toconvincehimtoopenthepackage.‘‘Whydon’tyoujustopenyourlittle gift,and,uh,you
know, take a look at what I sent you?’’ was the message Lallemand left.3 When the bomb
exploded and Lallemand learned that Toney was dead, he went on the run.
When federal agents captured Lallemand in Los Angeles on May 31, 2000, he was
living with an executive of the COPS television show. The woman was aware that he
was a fugitive and helped him flee by purchasing an airline ticket for him to travel to Los
Angeles. Lallemand had convinced the executive to pay for plastic surgery to alter his
appearance and prevent him from being caught.4 She was convicted and sent to prison
for aiding and abetting Lallemand in his escape.
Lallemand avoided the death penalty by pleading guilty to the homicide and identity
theft charges. During his sentencing hearing, he was given the opportunity to address the
court. Rather than ask forgiveness, Lallemand stated, ‘‘It’s really a day for the family to
seek justice.’’5 He never offered an apology for his crimes and was sentenced to life in
prison without the possibility of parole. He also agreed to testify against Lisa Toney in her
trial on similar charges. She was convicted and also sentenced to life in prison. What
started as an identity theft ended as a homicide, leaving numerous lives forever devastated.
The Violent Side of Identity Theft
89

MAIL THEFT TURNED VIOLENT
The circumstances and outcomes in some identity theft cases can be far from typical. At
times, they open a Pandora’s box of violence and evil. That was the result of an
investigation that started in a very straightforward manner. On April 11, 2004, Postal
Inspector Mark Shaw in Gary, Indiana, received a telephone call from a local police
department reporting that patrol officers had found several bags of mail in a trash
Dumpster. Inspector Shaw responded to the location and found almost 200 pieces of
rifled first-class mail. He determined that the mail was outgoing mail placed in Postal
Service collection boxes for pickup. Also found in the mail bags were numerous
personal checks, blank check stock, and what appeared to be counterfeit checks.
As he searched through the bags, Inspector Shaw discovered eight counterfeit Indiana
driver’s licenses. Two of the licenses had the same photograph of a male but in two
different names. Four of the licenses had the same photograph of a female but in four
different names. The remaining two licenses contained the same photograph of another
female but in two different names. Inspector Shaw observed that five names on the
licenses were the same names and return addresses on the mail found in the Dumpster.
Inspector Shaw had been a Postal Inspector for 11 years at the time and had
investigated numerous mail theft, identity theft, and counterfeiting cases. It was clear
to him that the mail had been stolen for the purpose of obtaining identity and checking
account information for use in manufacturing counterfeit identification and checks. The
phony identification would be used so the thieves could pass the counterfeit checks at
financial institutions and retail merchants.
Criminals are not always smart. Also found in the Dumpster was a receipt for lodging
at a nearby motel in the name of Jane Parker. Inspector Shaw went to the motel and after
being told by the front desk manager that Parker was still in the room, Inspector Shaw
called for police backup. After the police arrived, they went to Parker’s room, knocked
on the door, and a male opened it. Inspector Shaw quickly recognized him as the same
person on the counterfeit driver’s licenses that were found in the Dumpster. The male
was asked for his name and stated that he was Richard Zane, but that was an alias. In his
possession were a backpack and a briefcase, each containing a laptop computer.
At the same time, Inspector Shaw observed a female in the motel room whom he
recognized as the same person in the photographs on four of the counterfeit driver’s
licenses. A second female was observed in the room; she also identified herself with an
alias. In the room, the investigators also found what appeared to be a white powdery
substance and drug paraphernalia. The three suspects were taken in for booking.
A subsequent search of the motel room found more stolen mail, counterfeit driver’s
licenses, personal checks, blank check stock, a computer printer, digital camera, and
controlled substances and drug paraphernalia. Evidence found in the motel room tied the
suspects to the stolen mail and phony identification found in the Dumpster. Attention
now turned to the three suspects in custody at the police station. Their fingerprints were
sent to the FBI to determine their true identities. Each was then interviewed.
Jane Parker was determined to be the real name of the first woman. The other woman
was identified as Annie Steen. The male who claimed he was Richard Zane was
identified as Ryan Williams, a fugitive with outstanding arrest warrants from Florida,
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
90

Georgia, and Ohio. Steen confessed and admitted she was involved in mail theft, identity
theft, and check fraud. She told quite a story. Originally from Missouri, she had moved to
Georgia six months earlier and met Williams. In January 2004, Steen and Williams
traveled to Atlanta for the purpose of cashing checks with fake identities that they
acquired through mail theft. Steen explained that they obtained the mail by placing
‘‘mail stops’’ in collection boxes to get banking and personal information from bills and
payments victims had sent through the U.S. mail. Steen and Williams would then use the
phony identifications to negotiate checks.
Steen described a mail stop or mail slide as a piece of metal that was placed in a Postal
Service collection box to intercept mail deposited by postal customers. The device
trapped incoming mail so it could not drop to the bottom of the box. The thieves would
later retrieve the mail and the mail stop. Steen stated that two weeks earlier, she joined
Williams and Parker on a road trip to Indiana to make money by stealing mail from
collection boxes. When they arrived in Indiana, they again used mail stops to steal
outgoing mail. They used the motel room as a base of operations. The counterfeit checks
and phony IDs were created and printed using a laptop belonging to Williams. Williams,
Steen, and Parker were charged with theft of mail on April 11, 2004, in United States
District Court, Northern District of Indiana.
This was far from the end of the case. Inspector Shaw had also been investigating
checks stolen from the mail in La Porte, Indiana, during January 2004 that were
subsequently altered and negotiated. The inspector had not been able to identify any
suspects in those mail thefts. A break came after the arrests of Williams, Steen, and
Parker. With information provided by the FBI, a suspect was identified and interviewed
on April 17, 2004. Mandi Ann Gordon admitted to forging signatures on these checks
and then negotiating them. Gordon identified Ryan Williams as her partner in crime and
stated that he had been the one who stole the mail containing these checks in La Porte,
Indiana, and gave them to her to cash. Gordon stated that Williams had ‘‘washed’’ the
checks to remove the inked writing so that she could rewrite it with different informa-
tion. She would then forge the account holders’ signatures on the fronts of the checks and
the endorsements on the backs. Inspector Shaw obtained an arrest warrant for Gordon
and she was prosecuted.
We now need to step back in time a few years to see how we got to this point. Postal
Inspectors in Ohio had arrested Williams for identity and mail theft in 2000. Williams’s
partner in crime at the time was Carl Langdon. Both men were convicted for their
offenses. Williams received two years in prison and Langdon received four years, as he
had an extensive record of arrests and convictions. After serving their time, Williams
headed for Georgia and Langdon for Indiana. After the arrests of Parker, Steen,
Williams, and Gordon, Inspector Shaw informed Inspector Richard Petry (who was
assigned to the Indianapolis office of the Postal Inspection Service) of the arrests and
advised him that Langdon was in Indianapolis, probably up to no good. Inspector Petry
then started on Langdon’s trail.
Postal Inspectors knew that Langdon was a career criminal and worked with Williams
but could not connect him with the crimes of Williams, Steen, Parker, and Gordon.
Actually, Langdon had learned something from his prior crimes and jail time. He kept a
low profile and now let others in his crew do his dirty work. He no longer handled stolen
The Violent Side of Identity Theft
91

mail and checks so his fingerprints would not be left as evidence to be used against him.
He had others forge the checks. He was a planner and directed others but always got his
fair share of the proceeds. Postal Inspectors knew that even the smartest criminals make
mistakes; it was only a matter of time before Langdon would slip up. Yet even the street-
smart inspectors were shocked by what Langdon would eventually do.
Inspector Petry developed a confidential informant (CI) who told him that Langdon
was committing mail theft and bank fraud. The CI told of how he cashed counterfeit
checks for Langdon in Indiana and Ohio. The CI also said that Langdon was planning a
home invasion robbery of a drug dealer where he would kill the home’s occupants and
steal their cash and drugs. This turned out to be a ruse. Langdon was really planning to
kill the CI as he was upset with him for leaving his fingerprints on one of the counterfeit
checks cashed in Ohio. Langdon was concerned that the CI would be identified and
eventually lead the police to him.
Unfortunately, neither the CI nor the investigators knew this was Langdon’s plan at
the time. Of course, Langdon had no idea that this person was acting as a confidential
informant. Langdon wanted to lure the CI to his home, then murder him, and bury the
body where it would never be found. Langdon asked the CI to assist in the home invasion
robbery by driving the getaway car and he agreed. The Postal Inspectors and the police
thought this was a great opportunity to catch career criminal Langdon in the act of a
violent crime. At the time, it was thought to be just another case of a bad guy robbing
another bad guy.
The robbery was to take place on November 4, 2004. Inspector Petry placed a body
transmitter on the CI for both personal safety and evidentiary purposes. This was
standard operating procedure, and the CI was very fortunate that Inspector Petry
followed it. The CI met Langdon at a prearranged location and got into his car. Langdon
told the CI that they needed to return to his house as he had left something he needed for
the robbery. Once inside the house, the investigators heard sounds of a struggle coming
over the CI’s body transmitter. Fearing for the CI’s safety, the police broke into the
house and subdued Langdon after a brutal fight. Several officers suffered injuries when
Langdon resisted arrest.
The CI was found unconscious and barely breathing. A piece of rope had been used in
the attempt to strangle him. A search of Langdon’s car found a body bag, bags of
concrete, a shovel, a pickax, a change of clothes, and a pair of work gloves. In the garage,
a trash can held construction-strength trash bags and bottles of acid. Nearby was a new,
hard plastic children’s wading pool. Langdon did not have children; it was believed that
the pool was to be used to dispose of the body. A subsequent search of Langdon’s home
by Inspector Petry found a laptop computer used for fraud as well as other evidence of
counterfeiting and identity theft.
Langdon was charged with attempted murder and resisting arrest. During the trial in
March 2005, Langdon’s courtroom antics disrupted the proceedings and angered the
trial judge. At one point, Langdon grabbed the physical evidence used against him and
threw it into the air, causing the trial to be stopped temporarily. During closing
arguments, as he was being led out of the courtroom, Langdon lunged toward the
prosecutor. Quick-acting bailiffs stopped Langdon before he reached the prosecutor.
The jury convicted Langdon of all counts in deliberations lasting just two days.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
92

In May 2005, Langdon was sentenced to 50 years in prison. His sentence was
enhanced due to his extensive criminal record. Defiant until the end, he denied he ever
tried to kill the CI and claimed law enforcement had blown everything out of proportion.
He also claimed that he had been a model citizen. He obviously forgot the eight prior
felony convictions he had received for a variety of crimes including identity theft, mail
theft, and forgery. Langdon was oblivious to the fact that he had committed crimes of a
most serious nature and would now be paying for it for much of the rest of his life.
Inspector Petry reflected on the strange paths that criminal investigations take by stating
‘‘Justice is often served when criminals least expect it.’’6
Inspector Shaw later contemplated the events leading up to the attempted murder and
remembered something Langdon had told the CI when they were cashing stolen checks.
Langdon said, ‘‘If the Postal Inspectors get involved, that’s who we gotta watch out for—
those are the guys that know everything.’’7 Langdon was right and probably never
realized how true his statement was when he made it. He will have the rest of his life to
ponder his crimes. Williams, Steen, Parker, and Gordon all entered guilty pleas and were
convicted. Williams and Gordon were sentenced to jail terms while the other two
received probation. This case clearly illustrates the lesson that identity thieves can
destroy lives, both figuratively and literally.
AN IDENTITY THIEF TURNS HIS BRUTALITY ON LAW ENFORCEMENT
Kurt Sohrbeck had a criminal history with stints in prison going back to the 1970s. After
a number of years of various criminal activities, he turned to identity theft. ‘‘He was a
prolific identity thief dating back to early 1990s. He hasn’t used his real name since
about 1992,’’ said Washington State Patrol Detective Erik Noren. ‘‘He assumes other
people’s IDs and he’s very, very difficult to track.’’8 At least three people had the
unfortunate experience of knowing firsthand what it was like to be an identity theft
victim of Sohrbeck’s. He stole their identities, received Washington State driver’s
licenses in their names, made numerous credit charges in their names, and created huge
legal and financial problems for them.
In one case, a victim learned that a new Volvo was purchased in his name in 2001.
Although stealing one’s identity to buy a car is bad enough, there was much more to
come. The identity thief got into a serious accident with the car. The fraudster, again
using the name and identity of the victim, ran up almost $250,000 in medical bills at a
hospital in Bellevue, Washington. Of course, the thief did not pay the bills, leaving the
victim to face the wrath of collection agencies that then came after him. ‘‘It was a
nightmare,’’ the victim said. ‘‘There was a period there where every week someone
would call trying to collect something I knew nothing about.’’9
A second victim believes that Sohrbeck stole his identity when he lost his wallet in
Reno in 2003. The wallet contained his driver’s license and other personal information.
Sohrbeck began using this victim’s name and identifiers to obtain construction jobs in
Washington State. The fraudster also sullied the victim’s good name by being cited for
road rage and driving under the influence in January 2005. An arrest for reckless driving
and attempting to elude police followed in February 2007. Then in December 2007, the
identity thief was again charged with theft. In all three of these arrests, the scammer
The Violent Side of Identity Theft
93

identified himself with the victim’s name. The police had no idea that he was using a
stolen identity. The suspect failed to show up for any of his court appearances, and arrest
warrants were issued in the name of the unsuspecting victim.10
This incident provides another example of how the system does not always work to
protect our identities. Sohrbeck was able to obtain a valid driver’s license in this victim’s
name using the victim’s 1978 date of birth. Sohrbeck had to appear in person at the
licensing office to apply for and get his photograph taken. At the time, the victim was
30 years old; Sohrbeck was clearly much older, probably in his 50s. That is at least a 20-
year age discrepancy. Why did no one from the Washington State Department of
Licensing notice this inconsistency and check further? I would expect that Motor
Vehicles Department employees are trained to look for things like this.
A third victim fared no better than the other two. In January 2007, he offered
employment to the fraudster, not knowing his true motives. The victim described
himself as a very trusting person and even opened his home to the thief. Although the
construction job lasted only a few days, the damage was done. Shortly after, Sohrbeck
obtained a Washington State driver’s license in the victim’s name. He purchased a truck
and opened several credit card accounts in the victim’s name. ‘‘I’m mad at myself, but I
don’t know that I’d change anything,’’ said the victim. ‘‘I believe there’s more honest
people out there than bad.’’11
In addition to identity theft, Sohrbeck had a violent streak. His history of violence
included an assault on a Washington State police officer during a routine traffic stop.
Detective Noren was investigating and tracking Sohrbeck in February and March 2008
on pending criminal charges of assault and identity theft when the trail went cold. Given
Sohrbeck’s criminal record in 11 states and his travel around the country, it was easy to
see that he would skip town. Washington State issued an all-points bulletin for
Sohrbeck’s arrest. Police believe that Sohrbeck has used at least nine aliases and
probably many more. ‘‘He’s someone who has just figured out how to get a free ride in
life,’’ Noren said. ‘‘This guy just ruins people.’’12
While on the run, Sohrbeck headed to New Mexico. On March 13, 2008, a Lincoln
County, New Mexico, sheriff’s sergeant spotted the fugitive’s truck in southern New
Mexico. The deputy attempted to pull over Sohrbeck, but the fugitive came out of his
vehicle shooting and severely wounded the deputy.13 Sohrbeck fled the scene, leaving
the deputy by the roadside fighting for his life. Luckily, the deputy survived and is
recovering.
An extensive manhunt ensued to locate Sohrbeck. It did not take long to find him.
Shortly after the shooting, he abandoned his truck and set out on foot and bicycle. On
March 26, 2008, Sohrbeck was located in Otero County, New Mexico, and was fatally
shot by a deputy sheriff when he failed to respond to the officer, exhibited aggressive and
threatening behavior, and was attempting to reach into his pants pocket for something.
According to police reports, Sohrbeck told the deputy that he ‘‘was not going to be
taken.’’14 Police later found a folding box cutter in his back pocket.
News of Sohrbeck’s demise quickly reached one of his many identity theft victims in
Washington State. ‘‘[Sohrbeck] didn’t deserve to die for [stealing my identity]—that’s
only money,’’ he said. ‘‘But when I heard he hurt a cop . . . there has to be a trade-off
there. That’s way over the line.’’15
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
94

NOTES
1. Steve Warmbir, ‘‘Man Admits He Sent Bomb, Killed Girlfriend’s Husband,’’
Chicago Sun-Times, March 13, 2002, www.highbeam.com/doc/1P2-1428580.html.
2. Daniel Silver, ‘‘Trial Starts for Woman Accused of Helping Murder Her Husband,’’
Medill
News
Service,
February
19,
2003,
mesh.medhill.northwestern.edu/
mnschicago/archives/2003/02/trial_starts_fo_1.html.
3. Warmbir, ‘‘Man Admits He Sent Bomb.’’
4. Ibid.
5. Steve Warmbir, ‘‘Man Who Blew Up Lover’s Husband Gets Life in Prison,’’
Chicago Sun-Times, September 18, 2003, www.highbeam.com/doc/1P2-1501200
.html.
6. Postal Inspector Richard Petry’s written comments to the author on January 31,
2008.
7. Postal Inspector Mark Shaw’s written comments to the author on November 21,
2007.
8. KOMO 1000 News, ‘‘Identity Theft Suspect Sought in Deputy’s Shooting,’’ May
13, 2008, www.komoradio.com/news/16658971.html.
9. Caleb Heeringa, ‘‘PoliceSeekIdentity Thief: Man Rack UpDebt, Arrestsin Names of
at Least 3 People, Bellingham Herald, March 9, 2008, www.bellinghamherald.com/
477/story/346318.html.
10. Ibid.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. ‘‘Reward Increased for Information Leading to Man Who Shot Deputy,’’ Bellingham
Herald, March 15, 2008, www.bellinghamherald.com/northwest/story/352715.html.
14. Associated Press, ‘‘Deputy Involved in Fatal Shooting in Cloudcroft on Paid
Leave,’’ Las Cruces Sun-News, March 27, 2008, www.lcsun-news.com/ci_
8716775.
15. Caleb Heeringa, ‘‘Details Unfold in Shooting Death of County Man,’’ March 28,
2008, www.bellinghamherald.com/102/story/363866.html.
The Violent Side of Identity Theft
95


CHAPTER 8
Medical Identity Theft
In the last decade, there has been an ominous twist to identity theft. It is one that
should have been as plain as the nose on one’s face. This growing threat is medical
identity theft. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) defines medical identity theft as
occurring
when someone uses your personal information without your knowledge or consent to obtain,
or receive payment for, medical treatment, services, or goods. Victims of medical identity
theft may find that their medical records are inaccurate, which can have a serious impact on
their ability to obtain proper medical care and insurance benefits.1
The FTC’s 2006 Identity Theft Survey Report provided key findings on medical
identity theft. Three percent of all identity theft victims indicated that a fraudster had
obtained medical treatment, services, or supplies using their stolen personal information.
That translates to approximately 250,000 victims for calendar year 2005.2 Anyone who
receives medical care is potentially a victim. Yet some people may be at an even higher
risk. ‘‘People 50 and older are at the greatest risk because they often have some kind of
government-issued insurance, such as Medicare or Medicaid,’’ states Pam Dixon,
executive director of the World Privacy Forum, a nonprofit research and consumer
education organization that closely monitors medical identity theft.3
97

IT IS OFTEN AN INSIDER
The Social Security number (SSN), the key to our financial vaults, is also commonly our
medical identifier. This creates another avenue for identity theft. As valuable as stolen
personal information is, some types are even more prized. While resumes go for about
7 cents on the black market, pilfered medical records bring $50 to $60 each. There is a
gold mine of valuable data inside medical files in doctors’ offices, hospitals, and clinics
everywhere.
Far too often, the crook who steals your medical identity is not some Dumpster diver
or ingenious hacker but a trusted healthcare worker. Although cases of medical identity
theft are not as common as other types of identity theft, they are a growing problem. ‘‘We
have the anecdotal information that it is increasing,’’ says Dixon. ‘‘We do see some of
that where someone steals a wallet or they steal someone’s name. That does happen. But
the preponderance of cases are happening from insider jobs.’’4
These criminally minded insiders have easy access to the information. Patients’
medical files contain a wealth of information for an enterprising criminal. The standards
of security for medical files vary considerably. There are no requirements for hospitals
or doctors to lock medical files. Many files are maintained in lockable storage cabinets,
but I wonder how many are actually secured when the office closes for the day.
A patient coordinator at a clinic in Weston, Florida, stole medical data on approxi-
mately 1,130 patients and sold the information to her cousin. Both were eventually
arrested and convicted for their crimes.5 While locking files may discourage some from
identity theft, when a corrupt insider is involved, the problem is even more complex
and challenging. Criminal rings also see the value in medical information. Organized
gangs have even gone so far as setting up fake clinics to obtain patient information
for use in healthcare fraud and identity theft. In one case, they lured elderly Medicare
patients to a clinic near San Jose, California ‘‘by offering free transportation, a nutri-
tional supplement and skin oil.’’6 Phony doctors performed superficial examinations on
the victims and then submitted fraudulent medical claims in their names to the tune of
over $1.1 million.
Yet medical files are not the only source of personal information. Patient wristbands
used during hospital stays may contain SSNs in addition to other identifying informa-
tion. A few years ago, I had day surgery and was given a wristband. Although the
hospital did not place my SSN on the band, it did include my full name and date of birth.
During hospital stays, wallets and purses containing personally identifiable information
(PII) are often left unlocked in hospital rooms and provide another source of access for
scammers.
UNPROTECTED MEDICAL FILES
In 1994, in Pasadena, California, the 24-year-old son of a psychiatrist stole personal
information from the unprotected medical records in his father’s medical office. The son
occasionally worked in the father’s office and had access to all patient records. When his
father was away, the fraudster went through about 60 patient files and took names, SSNs,
dates of birth, addresses, and other identifying information. He used this information to
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
98

obtain the patients’ credit reports and opened a mailbox at a commercial mail receiving
agency (CMRA) in nearby Arcadia, California.
With help of the credit reports, the fraudster was able to take over the patients’
identities and change their addresses to his mailbox. He opened a bank account and
obtained checks in the name of one patient. The scammer then applied for and received
credit cards in the names of dozens of patients. These cards were mailed to his CMRA
mailbox. The CMRA owner became suspicious when he noticed the large quantity of
credit reports and credit cards coming to the box in so many different names shortly after
the box had been opened. The mail included correspondence from banks in Europe.
Fortunately, the CMRA owner had previously worked with Postal Inspectors on fraud
cases and quickly alerted them.
Due to the mail drop owner’s swift action, the young man was caught before he was
able to use any of the credit cards and receive any proceeds of the criminal activity.
When questioned by Postal Inspectors, he said that his plan was to run up the credit cards
and transfer the proceeds to banks in Western Europe. In fact, he was in the process of
opening bank accounts in Switzerland and Luxembourg.
Had it not been for a sharp CMRA operator, the young man would have succeeded in
ruining the credit of dozens of his father’s patients. The victims were all people who
were suffering with various forms of mental health issues and were further distressed to
learn that their personal information had been stolen from their medical files. Although
none of their money was stolen, the peace of mind of a rather vulnerable group of people
certainly was impacted. Unfortunately, justice was not served; prosecutors declined to
charge the suspect because there were no financial losses.
That did not sit well with many of the victims who, although they had not lost any
money, still had their identities stolen. Some of the victims wanted to dole out their own
brand of justice to the young man, but cooler heads prevailed.
BEING YOUR OWN DETECTIVE
Being a victim of identity theft can become so frustrating that you may feel the need to
take matters into your own hands. That was the case of Eric Drew, who turned detective
to track down the medical identity thief who victimized him. Drew was a leukemia
patient. Besides having to deal with his illness, Drew learned that someone was
impersonating him and using his credit for purchases at an area department store.
After learning that the store had a surveillance tape of the suspect, he convinced the
employees to give him the video. Drew got a local television station to run the tape, and
the culprit was identified as a lab technician at Seattle Cancer Care Alliance—the same
facility where Drew was receiving care for his leukemia. Seattle Cancer Care Alliance
claimed that it did not know how the employee was able to steal Drew’s personal
information.7
SNOOPING EYES
As much as we would like to think that our medical records are confidential and viewed
only by those who need to know, recent experience shows just the opposite. Hospital
Medical Identity Theft
99

employees and other healthcare providers have abused their insider privileges to pry
into patients’ files, especially those of hospitalized celebrities, to sell medical details to
the tabloids. In 2008, several UCLA Medical Center employees were disciplined or
fired for snooping into the medical records of Britney Spears, George Clooney, Farrah
Fawcett, and other stars. The subsequent inquiry found that one employee viewed as
many as 32 electronic medical files of celebrities, politicians, and high-profile patients.
Noncelebrities fared no better. This same unauthorized employee also accessed the
medical files of 61 other patients.
Although there was no evidence that these unauthorized employees did anything other
than leak medical ailments to the media, those with fraudulent intentions have the same
uncontrolled access. These breaches of patient confidentiality are particularly trouble-
some. Medical records, without exception, should be safe from prying eyes. Conse-
quences for violators need to be more severe than just being fired. Civil and criminal
ramifications should be considered in all such cases. Patients and their medical records’
privacy are protected by both state and federal laws, which carry penalties of prison and/
or fines for illegal breaches.
THEFT AND FRAUDULENT USE OF PHYSICIAN NAMES AND LICENSES
Identity thieves have resorted to the theft of physicians’ names, medical license
information, tax identification numbers, and other related information to defraud various
state and local medical services programs. One scheme was reported by the California
Attorney General and the California Department of Health Services in December 1999,
when the California Medi-Cal Program was defrauded. The Medi-Cal Program provides
basic healthcare services for California residents who are poor, disabled, elderly, or
otherwise qualified. According to the California Attorney General, this scheme resulted
in fraud losses in excess of several million dollars in 1999. The identity theft worked in
this way:
 Criminals fraudulently obtained doctors’ names and copies of their medical licenses.
This was often accomplished through improper access to various personnel files at
hospitals where the doctors were employed. Other PII was also stolen from the files.
 Once fraudsters had this information in their possession, they would apply to the
Medi-Cal Program and obtain a new provider number in the victim doctor’s name.
Fraudsters would also claim that the doctor had moved and provide the new address
where future payments should be sent.
 The identity thieves then would forge the doctor’s name on claim forms for medical
services never performed and submit phony bills to the Medi-Cal Program. As
another unknowing victim of this scheme, Medi-Cal would pay the doctor, believing
he or she was the legitimate service provider.
 Once the criminals received the payments, they forged the true doctor’s signature on
the checks and negotiated them. The Medi-Cal Program generally had no idea this
fraud was occurring. Even a reporting tool that should have caught this failed: The
1099 tax forms subsequently mailed out to document payments to participating
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
100

providers were sent to the addresses provided by the fraudsters. One of the many
consequences of this crime was the tax liability faced by victims whose identities
were stolen and who had payments made in their names.
 Another aspect of this insidious crime was that patients’ identities were also stolen
and used to falsely receive Medi-Cal benefits. The victims had no knowledge that
their accounts were being used to defraud the Medi-Cal Program.8
In announcing the prevention awareness and heightened enforcement campaign to
fight physician identity theft and related false medical claims in December 1999, then
California Attorney General Bill Lockyer stated:
We want to see Medi-Cal scams shrivel up by exposing the practices of these swindlers early
and encouraging preventive measures. Our first alert covers a major scheme we discovered
to bilk Medi-Cal of millions of dollars using confidential physician and patient information
stolen from hospital files.9
As a result, California put new procedures into place to prevent this fraud, including
increased scrutiny and review of all new requests for provider numbers and changes of
address. As a further internal control, original providers were contacted to verify that
they had actually submitted a request for a new payment location. Doctors were told to
protect their license information by placing a statement on any copy of their license
provided to hospitals or others. The recommended statement is Copy Provided for Use
by (name of hospital/clinic) Only. Another recommendation was for hospitals and other
medical providers to place their business stamp on all file copies of physician licenses.
The enhanced focus on prevention and prosecution paid off in just a few months. In
July 2000, six suspects were arrested in Los Angeles in a large Medi-Cal fraud and
identity theft scheme. According to the California Attorney General’s July 6, 2000 press
release, the defendants illegally purchased ‘‘physicians’ medical licenses and identifi-
cation from Los Angeles-area hospital employees in a sophisticated fraud, identity theft,
and money laundering conspiracy.’’ The criminals then ‘‘submitted phony applications
to the Department of Health Services under these doctors’ names requesting Medi-Cal
provider numbers that are required in order to bill the State’s $20 billion Medi-Cal
program.’’10
The defendants recruited codefendants who obtained the names and personal infor-
mation of thousands of hospital patients who were Medi-Cal beneficiaries. ‘‘As with the
victimized doctors, the names and identification of these beneficiaries were taken from
various hospitals without the knowledge or consent of either the hospitals or the
patients.’’ Subsequently, fraudulent medical claims were submitted claiming medical
treatment by the victimized doctors.11
The defendants created phony businesses and opened mail drop boxes to receive the
payment checks from the state. The defendants also opened bank accounts using
fraudulent identification documents in the names of the victimized doctors in order
to cash the state payment checks. In addition, the defendants laundered the stolen
proceeds through the business of a codefendant. The attorney general said at the time
that ‘‘[s]chemes such as this one victimize not just the taxpayers, but also patients and
Medical Identity Theft
101

medical doctors. Seven physicians and more than a thousand patients had their identities
stolen, and it has resulted in well over a million dollars in fraudulent claims being paid
by Medi-Cal.’’12
LIFE-AND-DEATH CONSEQUENCES
Imagine the shock and concern that Linda Weaver experienced in 2007 when she
received a hospital bill for the amputation of her right foot. She did not need to look
down at her two very intact feet to know this was bunk. As she came to learn, an identity
thief had stolen her identity, including her SSN and insurance identification number.
Posing as Linda Weaver, the fraudster had the costly amputation performed. To make
matters far worse, Weaver later found that the thief’s medical information was merged
into her medical file. Her medical chart now listed her as having diabetes—the
criminal’s condition, not hers. Just think of all the life-threatening complications she
or anyone else in this situation could potentially face. The wrong blood type listed in the
file, not documenting a heart condition, and allergies or intolerance to certain medica-
tion can result in trauma or death. ‘‘I now live in fear that if something ever happened to
me, I could get the wrong kind of medical treatment,’’ said a clearly troubled Weaver.13
As more and more health records are computerized and available on the Web to medical
providers, there is the fear that more data breaches and medical record compromises will
occur.
IT STARTED WITH AN INNOCENT ADVERTISEMENT
Medical identity theft victim Joe Ryan fared even worse. He knew something was wrong
when he received a $44,000 bill for colon surgery from Littleton Adventist Hospital in
Colorado. But that was only the start of his misery. Ryan made the mistake of providing
his SSN and date of birth to a salesman to purchase a magazine ad. Ryan was placing an
ad in the magazine and was told that this personal information was needed. What Ryan
would later learn was that the salesman was a career criminal on parole who needed the
surgery and used Ryan’s good name and credit. Ryan went through reams of red tape and
bureaucracy before he finally convinced the hospital that he had not been the one who
had the surgery. Unfortunately, it came too late: His credit was damaged, his credit cards
were canceled, and he faced foreclosure on his residence and had to take out a loan just to
get by.14
ARIZONA’S IDENTITY THEFT PROBLEM
Arizona has long been a hotbed for identity theft as discussed in Chapter 6. Year after
year, it ranks near the top among states for number of victims. Again in 2007, the state
had the greatest number of reported identity theft victims. In 2002, the theft of personal
information including the SSNs of 562,000 military patients of TriWest Healthcare
Alliance in Phoenix set the stage for the numerous data breaches that continue to the
present. In response to the huge problem of identity theft, the Arizona state legislature
enacted a law, which took effect in January 2005, that prevented health insurers from
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
102

using SSNs on medical benefits identification cards. The law also restricts how Social
Security–related information can be mailed to members of medical benefit plans. SSNs
should never have been used as medical identifiers. Yet the numbers were readily
available; everyone had one; and no one anticipated the problem. Prior to enactment of
the law, a number of health insurers had already changed over to randomly selected
numbers out of a concern for privacy protection and fraud prevention.
HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) is sweeping legisla-
tion that has had an enormous impact on healthcare providers and patients. HIPAA was
enacted by Congress in 1996 and covers everything from healthcare access, portability,
and renewal, to preventing healthcare fraud, to effects on research and clinical care. It is
also known as the Kennedy-Kassebaum Act after the two Senate sponsors of the bill. A
key component of HIPAA is to encourage electronic transactions of medical information
and heightened safeguards to protect the security and confidentiality of medical
information.
The provisions of HIPAA apply to healthcare providers and plans, public health
agencies, self-ensured employers, colleges and universities involved in medical studies,
life insurance companies, vendors, and others. There are both civil and criminal penal-
ties for noncompliance, including fines and imprisonment. The most severe penalties
involve up to 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine for offenses related to the criminal
sale, transfer, or use of personally identifiable health information.
HIPAA called on the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to ensure that
providers secure electronic files in the same way they secure physical paper records,
improving overall informational security. The stated goal was to assure individuals that
their health information is properly protected while at the same time allowing important
uses of the information to protect the health and well-being of the individual and the
public at large. The act covers both health plans and healthcare providers who transmit
health information in electronic form.15
The HHS federal privacy standards generally went into effect beginning April 14,
2003, with an extension to 2004 for small health plans to comply. The privacy rules
enacted to carry out HIPAA’s requirements protect consumers from having their
personal health information exploited, disclosed, or otherwise misused, whether by
insurance companies, employers, or anyone else. In many cases, consent from the
patient must be obtained before information can be disclosed, and when it is disclosed, it
often must be limited to the minimum amount of protected health information needed.16
Healthcare providers and plans must provide notice to their patients of how their
medical information will be used. These notices are generally signed and dated by the
patient and maintained in the medical file with a copy provided to the patient. A key
component of the privacy regulations allows patients to access their medical records and
make corrections to any identified errors or mistakes. This is especially important if a
person is victimized by medical identity theft and the fraudster’s medical information is
incorporated into the victim’s medical records. For more information on federal privacy
Medical Identity Theft
103

standards to protect patients’ medical records, visit the HHS Protecting the Privacy of
Patient’s Health Information site at www.hhs.gov/news/facts/privacy.html.
HEALTHCARE RECORDS ON THE WEB
As more and more services and information move online, it is only natural that health-
care records will too. There are many benefits to this innovative concept. In theory,
patients will be able to access and better manage their medical records. They can keep
detailed and up-to-date records on family medical history, immunizations, prescriptions,
allergies, lab results, and doctor visits. In an emergency, either the patient or someone
with authorization can quickly access the online health record and provide it to the
treating health practitioner at whatever medical facility the patient is brought. It is also
believed that online tools will dramatically drive down the spiraling cost of healthcare.
President George W. Bush lobbied for electronic medical records in an attempt to
reduce healthcare costs and prevent medical errors. Former HHS Secretary Tommy
Thompson has been a strong proponent of online health records. ‘‘To achieve these
goals, Americans deserve a seamless and secure national health information infra-
structure,’’ he said.
This system must provide accurate, complete patient data to providers wherever they are, in
time to be useful—even in an emergency. It must allow doctors to prescribe medications
electronically, so the medications can be checked for safety before they are administered.
And it must do all this without revealing personally identifiable information without the
patient’s consent.17
Several hundred vendors, including insurance, technology, and Internet companies,
are competing to provide digital medical records as nationwide providers. Everyone
from Aetna and United HealthCare to Microsoft and Google are getting involved in the
business. Microsoft’s personal health record tool is called HealthVault. It is a ‘‘search
engine supported service to help patients coordinate disparate pieces of health-care
information, from lab results to X-rays and daily blood pressure and allergy readings.’’18
Only patients will be allowed access to their medical information, and Microsoft
promises safety and security for these highly sensitive digital records.
HIPAA requires minimum privacy and security standards for access, disclosure, and
other purposes. As a general rule, HIPAA prevents the disclosure of medical information
for marketing purposes. HIPAA’s strong rules apply only to ‘‘covered entities,’’ which
are defined as healthcare providers, health insurers, health plan administrators, and
billing services. The rules apply to the covered entities and not to the actual medical
record. Companies vying for the online medical record business, such as technology and
Internet companies are not considered covered entities under HIPAA, and they may or
may not follow its privacy and security standards.
According to HHS, only 14% of medical practices in the United States maintain
electronic medical records. HHS would like to see that number rise to 50% by 2014.
However, a Forrester research study found that only 20% of consumers want to access
their medical information online. There may be some good news on the horizon for those
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
104

interested in using online medical records. In a 2007 Harris Interactive poll, 76% of
adults over 55 regularly use the Web to research their medical conditions. People may
very well embrace online medical records in the not-too-distant future.
NATIONAL HEALTH INFORMATION NETWORK
The National Health Information Network (NHIN) is an ambitious government and
private sector initiative that would create a nationwide system of readily accessible
electronic medical records. In theory, it would provide government healthcare agencies
and providers the ability to quickly and easily share patient information. It would
connect every medical record of patients with all of their healthcare providers, insurers,
pharmacists, labs, and claims processors.19 As stated on their HHS Web site, the NHIN
is the critical portion of the health IT [information technology] agenda intended to provide a
secure, nationwide, interoperable health information infrastructure that will connect
providers, consumers, and others involved in supporting health and healthcare. The
NHIN will enable health information to follow the consumer, be available for clinical
decision making, and support appropriate use of healthcare information beyond direct
patient care so as to improve health.20
Although the NHIN is still in the early implementation stages, there are many
concerns as to its safety and security. No matter how secure the NHIN database will
claim to be, history tells a different story in light of the many large-scale data breaches of
the last few years. In a major breach of medical records, for example, ‘‘two computers
and a disc containing the confidential records of close to 200,000 patients of a medical
group in San Jose, California were posted for sale on Craigslist.org.’’21 Everything
including names, dates of birth, SSNs, medical histories, billing records, and insurance
information was contained on the disc. An employee of the medical group was the
culprit, and he was subsequently charged with the crime. Again, a trusted insider was
responsible. The threat of an insider breach puts greater concerns on whether patient
information can be truly protected from breaches in any form.
THOUGHT LEADER IN IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION
Byron Hollis
Byron Hollis is the managing director of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield
Association’s (BCBSA) National Anti-Fraud Department. BCBSA is a federation
of independent Blue Cross and Blue Shield companies. Hollis is responsible for
providing national strategic leadership and support to the antifraud programs at the
(Continued )
Medical Identity Theft
105

39 independent Blue Cross and Blue Shield companies, which collectively insure
more than 100 million customers. He is also responsible for direction and
leadership of the BCBSA Federal Employee Program Special Investigations Unit.
Hollis’s background includes a law degree from the Thomas Goode Jones Law
School at Faulkner University and an undergraduate degree in criminal justice
from Auburn University. His public service career includes working as a deputy
sheriff, a district attorney’s investigator/child support enforcement officer, and
finally as a deputy district attorney.
Hollis believes that medical identity theft is a dangerous, albeit not well
understood, crime that threatens the health and welfare of individuals while adding
to the burden of healthcare costs in this industry. He states, ‘‘The danger and impact
of ID theft, especially medical ID theft, is not generally understood, can be
devastating to an individual, and is a drain on our financial and healthcare
systems.’’
According to Hollis, one of the chief dangers of medical identity theft is having
your medical history become entwined with that of the identity thief. ‘‘For
example, let’s say at some point, you were a victim of identify theft. Now you
could be involved in a situation—such as a car accident—and you end up in the
emergency room. A medical professional searches your records and finds a
diagnosis such as diabetes. However, the medical records aren’t yours, but may
belong to the identify thief. If a doctor gives you insulin when you’re not diabetic,
the consequences can be deadly.’’
For individual patients, the theft of their medical identification numbers presents
a very different scenario to resolve than ‘‘regular’’ identity theft. Hollis says, ‘‘It is
much more difficult to remove false information from your medical history with
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act regulations protecting medi-
cal records.’’
Hollis says that the best protection is prevention. ‘‘It is important to check your
explanation of benefits [EOB] documents carefully, shred old insurance statements
and cards, and be careful when giving out identity information such as your Social
Security number and address,’’ he said.
The Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association encourages everyone to follow
some simple guidelines to decrease their chances of becoming a victim.
 Inspect your EOB statements issued by your insurer and contact your family
physician, hospital, or pharmacy regarding any suspicious charges.
 Keep insurance cards and your insurance identity numbers somewhere safe.
 Request a free copy of your records about once a year. You have a right to a
copy of your records from every health insurer (and nearly every healthcare
provider) under the health privacy rule issued under the authority of the
HIPAA.
More information about protecting your medical identity is available at
www.bcbs.com/blueresources/anti-fraud/explanation-of-benefits.html.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
106

PREVENTION AND SECURITY
Ben Franklin’s wise adage of ‘‘an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure’’ is just as
true when applied to protecting against possible medical identity theft. Here are 14 best
practices for prevention and protection for both the patient and healthcare providers to
consider:
1.
Guard your medical insurance card. In many ways it is just as valuable as your
credit card. ‘‘An insurance card is like a Visa card with a $1 million spending
limit,’’ warns Hollis.22 Safeguard the card and the information contained on it.
When you check in at your doctor’s office, keep an eye on the card until you get it
back. If it is lost, take the same steps you would if you lost your credit card. Instruct
your family members to do the same.
2.
If it sounds too good to be true, it usually is. Be skeptical when you receive calls
from telemarketers offering ‘‘free’’ medical care, health screenings, or discounted
medical plans. Con artists often use ruses to get unsuspecting victims to provide
information. The data could be used in submitting phony medical claims and
identity theft in your name. Never give your medical insurance number or any
other personal information to anyone who calls, and that includes anyone coming
to your door soliciting products or services. If you cannot easily say no, at least
require them to mail you detailed information before you provide any information.
Scammers usually will not follow-up; they will just move on to another potential
victim.
3.
Be Web savvy. There are innumerable collection points for your personal
information. Many are found on the Web. While Web sites may simply be
collecting marketing information, think about whether you want to provide
information on yourself, including illnesses and medical conditions. Be extra
careful when registering on health sites or dialing toll-free numbers to ask about
new drugs, treatments, or an illness.
4.
Opt out. Do not be your own worst enemy and disclose confidential information on
product registration and warranty cards or marketing surveys. Send in opt-out
forms to stop information from being shared with third parties.
5.
Talk to your doctor and pharmacist about patient privacy. Ask them about their
privacy and security procedures. I would venture to guess that you have never done
that, and most people probably have not either.
6.
Read your EOB statement, then read it again. Carefully read each and every
explanation of benefits letter that you receive after medical treatment. ‘‘Our No. 1
defense is the consumer himself,’’ says Hollis. ‘‘We send our explanation-of-
benefits notices, and people round-file those right off the bat. If people would look
at those, a lot of theft would get caught.’’23 Look for signs of unauthorized
treatments performed under your name and insurance coverage. This may simply
be a mistake, or it may be evidence of fraud that you will need to address
immediately. Report any discrepancies to your insurance provider. Exhibit 8.1 is a
resource that anyone can use in reviewing and understanding their EOB for
possible identity theft.
Medical Identity Theft
107

7.
Get your medical records. Consider requesting a copy of your medical records
from your doctor or hospital. You should not have a problem getting them, but if
you do, you have recourse. File a complaint with the Office of Civil Rights at the
United States Department of Health and Human Services who will intervene on
your behalf. Contact them at 800-368-1019 or at www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacyhow
tofile.htm. Once you have your medical file, review it thoroughly.
8.
Review your medical records. Just as you should review your credit report each
year, do the same for your medical information. Ask your medical insurer to
provide a disclosure history from doctors and insurers as to what information was
disclosed in the past year. Look for disclosures that you are not familiar with or did
not request, and promptly follow up. Look for payments in your name for treatment
you did not receive. Look for address changes, as this is a common practice by
identity thieves. Healthcare fraud, like identity theft, is big business for fraudsters,
and being vigilant is the best medicine.
9.
Correct your medical records. If you uncover errors or fraud, contact the medical
provider and have the problematic information in your medical file corrected. If the
services relate to Medicare or Medicaid, contact their local offices. You can also
visit their Web site at www.cms.hhs.gov/regionaloffices. Always file a police
report whenever you are a victim of any identity theft related crime.
10.
Require photo ID for medical treatment. More and more hospitals are requiring
photo identification to be presented at time of admission and/or treatment in
addition to insurance cards. Obviously, this may not be possible in all cases,
especially emergency conditions. ‘‘You can’t get on an airplane or cash a check
without ID,’’ stated Marie Whalen, assistant vice president of ambulatory services
at the University of Connecticut Health Care Center in Farmington. ‘‘Why should
healthcare be any different?’’24
11.
Shred, shred, shred. The same rule applies to medical information as to any other
personal information. Shred those EOBs and any other medical data that you no
longer need. Do not toss those empty prescription bottles into the trash or recycling
bin without first removing the label containing the patient’s name, doctor,
medication, and other information.
12.
Do not use your SSN. Although your Social Security number has been a common
identifier for medical treatment, it is generally being replaced with a specific
medical identification number. Do not provide your SSN to your doctor or hospital
when admitted. If that does not work, demand to know what safeguards are in place
to protect you.
13.
Leave your valuables at home. When admitted for a hospital stay or even for
outpatient treatment, leave your credit cards and other important documents at
home. Take as little as possible with you. Ask if the facility has a locked cabinet
where you can secure your valuables, such as your wallet or purse, while being
treated and ensure that you can hold the key.
14.
Speak up. Do not be afraid to ask questions and voice your concerns. As they say,
the squeaky wheel gets the grease. Inquire about who will have access to your
patient files, overall security, and other related issues. Do not settle if your
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
108

concerns are not answered. Ask to speak to higher-ups. Consider appointing a
family member to handle this aspect to insulate the patient from confrontations.
The patient has enough on his or her mind at this time and does not need added
stress.
Exhibit 8.1
Review Your EOB Statement to Prevent Fraud
Medical Identity Theft
109

AND SO IT CONTINUES
The lack of security for our most precious personal medical information is both a sad and
continuing story. In March 2008, a Salt Lake City schoolteacher was visiting a local
surplus store to purchase scrap paper for her fourth-grade students. For about $20 she got
what she was looking for and much more. What she received horrified her; the scrap
paper was in reality the medical files of 28 Central Florida Regional Hospital patients.
The files had been shipped in December 2007 via United Parcel Service (UPS) to Las
Vegas for a Medicare audit and never arrived at the intended address. Assuming the
package was lost, both the hospital and UPS tried to trace it without success. Apparently,
the package was undeliverable and was sold off at auction by UPS. (It is common for
shipping companies to sell off packages that cannot be delivered as addressed or cannot
be returned to sender.)
Eventually, the missing files found their way to the surplus store. A document found
when the files were purchased noted that the contents were sold because the shipper
could not deliver it to the address or locate the original mailer. The files contained all the
information that would be expected to be found in such medical files. To make matters
worse, the hospital knew the files were missing for several months and never informed
Explanation of Benefits
It is important to carefully read the Explanation of Benefits, or EOB, when you receive it. Your health insurer
sends this document to you after you or a covered family member receives healthcare services. Reviewing your
EOB is a big step in preventing healthcare fraud and medical identity theft. If you find inaccuracies in this form,
you should contact the medical provider and your health insurer’s customer service. Here is a key to some of the
parts of the sample EOB that is pictured here. This is ONLY A SAMPLE REPRESENTATION and is NOT an
actual EOB. The one you receive from your insurer may be different.
1.
Incorrect name/address may indicate that you have been a victim of ID theft; unapproved use of your
medical identity, or that a clerical mistake has caused you to receive another person’s EOB. Contact your
insurer if you find that this information is incorrect.
2–4.
Incorrect group or identity number may indicate that you have been a victim of ID theft; unapproved use of
your medical identity, or that a clerical mistake has caused you to receive another person’s EOB. Contact
your insurer if you find that this information is incorrect.
5.
The person who received the indicated services—deliberate errors in this field may indicate that
someone is trying to obtain additional payment. Or it could indicate that someone else received services
which are being billed to your ID number. This may indicate ID theft or other fraud. Incorrect information
could result in a false diagnosis on your medical record creating a dangerous situation for you or a
covered family member.
6.
Summary box, including the total billed by the provider for the services, show the benefits approved and
paid by your health insurer. You may owe the remainder. If these amounts are well above what you were
led to believe, this may indicate your bill is being inflated to increase payment beyond what was
authorized. Report this to your insurer.
7–8.
Check descriptions and dates of services. Wrong information may indicate that services are being
misrepresented to receive higher payment thanauthorized. Contact yourinsurerifyoufind errorsinthisfield.
9.
Amount billed by the provider for each service. If these amounts are well above what you were led to
believe, this may indicate your bill is being inflated to increase payment beyond what was authorized.
Report this to your insurer. (See #10.)
10.
Amount you may be responsible for paying. If services and costs are beyond expectations then you may
have paid too much. Contact your insurer to determine if you are due a refund from your provider.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
110

the affected patients that their files had been lost. The hospital made the disclosure only
as a result of the publicity generated by the teacher’s discovery. ‘‘I’m aghast,’’ said
Marcy Lippincott, a Florida attorney whose father’s records were among those lost and
sold. ‘‘I’m wondering who to sue. It’s a complete invasion of privacy. It’s appalling to
think your records can be out there somewhere like that.’’25
On April 11, 2008, Dwight McPherson, a former employee in the patient admissions
department at prestigious New York Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical
Center, was arrested and charged with computer fraud, identity document fraud, trans-
mission of stolen property, and sale of stolen property.26 Over a two-year period, he stole
and sold the information of nearly 50,000 patients using his insider access to the patient
registration system. McPherson confessed to Postal Inspectors that in 2006 he was
approached by an Atlanta-based identity theft ring that offered him money for access to
the patients’ information.27 These coconspirators specifically requested personal infor-
mation from male patients born between 1950 and 1970.28
McPherson first sold a group of 1,000 records for $750 followed by a second group of
1,000 for $600. The people that McPherson sold the medical information to intended
to use it for criminal activity, most likely identity theft. Postal Inspectors in Atlanta
learned of McPherson’s involvement while conducting another investigation where they
found patient records from New York Presbyterian Hospital.29 Postal Inspectors then
began a separate investigation and contacted the hospital. A review of the hospital’s
computer logs found that McPherson’s user login was used for the unauthorized access
of 49,841 patients.30 Following the discovery, the hospital began the arduous task of
contacting all patients whose files were breached, setting up a hotline for information
and assistance, and offering free credit-monitoring services. The sad thing with these
many breaches is that it seems that the criminals are working harder to harm us than we
are in protecting ourselves.
NOTES
1. Federal Trade Commission, Fighting Back Against Identity Theft, www.ftc.gov/
bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/consumers/resolving-specific-id-theft-problems.html#
MedicalIdentityTheft.
2. Federal Trade Commission, ‘‘2006 Identity Theft Survey Report’’ (November
2007), www.ftc.gov/os/2007/11/SynovateFinalReportIDTheft2006.pdf.
3. Sid Kirchheimer, ‘‘Stealing Your Health,’’ AARP Bulletin (September 2006), 22.
4. Beth Wilson, ‘‘Medical Identity Theft Is Often an ‘Inside Job,’’’ American Medical
News, March 3, 2008, www.ama-assn.org/amednews/2008/03/03/prsc0303.htm.
5. James Quiggle, ‘‘Medical ID Theft Spreading the Pain,’’ Fraud Focus (Fall
2007), 4.
6. Ibid.
7. Kevin Helliker, ‘‘A New Medical Worry: Identity Thieves Find Ways to Target
Hospital Patients,’’ Wall Street Journal, February 22, 2005, D1.
8. California Attorney General Press Release, ‘‘Attorney General Bill Lockyer, State
Health Director Bonta Announce New Campaign Against Medi-Cal Program,
Medical Identity Theft
111

Special Fraud Alert Warns of Physician Identity Theft for False Claims,’’ December
29, 1999, http://ag.ca.gov/newsalerts/release.php?id=541&.
9. Ibid.
10. California Attorney General Press Release, ‘‘Attorney General Lockyer Announces
Arrests of Six Suspects in Sophisticated $1.4 Million Medi-Cal Fraud and Identity
Theft Scheme,’’ July 6, 2000, http://ag.ca.gov/newsalerts/release.php?id=707&.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. Dean Foust, ‘‘Diagnosis: Identity Theft,’’ BusinessWeek, January 8, 2007, 30.
14. Kirchheimer, ‘‘Stealing Your Health.’’
15. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, ‘‘Summary of the HIPAA Privacy
Rule,’’ www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacysummary.pdf.
16. Ibid.
17. Speech by Tommy G. Thompson, Secretary of Health and Human Services, at the
Health IT Summit, Washington, DC, July 21, 2004, www.hhs.gov/news/speech/
2004/040721.html.
18. Jay Greene, ‘‘Microsoft Wants Your Health Records,’’ BusinessWeek, October 15,
2007, 44.
19. ‘‘The New Threat to Your Medical Privacy,’’ Consumer Reports, March 2006, 39.
20. Ibid.
21. Ibid.
22. Max Alexander, ‘‘Your Medical Records Stolen! How to Protect Yourself,’’
Reader’s Digest, November 2006, www.rd.com/money/savvy-consumer/scams-
frauds-rip-offs/id-thieves-stealing-medical-records/article30232.html.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid.
25. Associated Press, ‘‘Medical Records Sold to Teacher as Scrap Paper,’’ March 10,
2008, www.msnbc.msn.com/id/23561667/.
26. Verena Dobnick, ‘‘NYC Hospital Worker Charged with Stealing and Selling Info on
Nearly 50,000 Patients,’’ Associated Press, April 12, 2008, //ca.news.yahoo.com/s/
capress/080412/world/hospital_id_theft.
27. Dave Hogarty, ‘‘Hospital Employee Admits to Selling Patient IDs,’’ Gothamist.
com, April 13, 2008, www.gothamist.com/2008/04/13/hospital_id_thi.php.
28. Rich Shapiro, ‘‘Stolen Hospital Records Sold to Identity Thieves,’’ New York Daily
News, April 13, 2008, www.nydailynews.com/news/ny_crime/2008/04/13/2008-
04-13_stolen_hospital_records_sold_to_identity.html.
29. Ibid.
30. Douglas Montero and Kati Cornell, ‘‘‘Scam’ Guy Hit 50,000,’’ New York Post,
April 13, 2008, www.nypost.com/seven/04132008/news/regionalnews/scam_guy_
hit_50_000_106316.htm.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
112

CHAPTER 9
Fake IDs
‘‘The criminal use of false identification documents represents a multibillion dollar
problem in the United States.’’1 This quote could easily have been ripped from today’s
headlines, but actually it was stated in a government report on false identification in
1976. Little has changed since that time, as phony identification (ID) documents
continue to fuel many fraud and forgery schemes, and especially identity theft. Fake
IDs are also closely tied to illegal immigration, drug smuggling, fugitives from justice,
underage drinking, and other crimes and violations. Fraudulent identification documents
are a necessary tool for committing identity theft. False identification fraud can be
defined as ‘‘the intentional use by an individual of a document containing a name or
personal attributes other than his own for the purpose of assisting in the commission of a
crime or in avoiding the legal consequences of a previous crime.’’2
Common identification documents include birth certificates, driver’s licenses, pass-
ports, visas and alien registration cards, Selective Service registration cards, voter
registration cards, government IDs, privately issued IDs, and credit cards. Social
Security numbers (SSNs) and cards were never meant for identification but are often
used for that purpose. All of these identification documents can be easily altered or
counterfeited for fraudulent purposes. Alteration involves changing significant elements
of the identification document, such as replacing a photograph, changing an age or birth
date, or altering physical identifiers. Counterfeiting is an ‘‘unauthorized creation of a
complete document by an unauthorized source to support a false identification.’’3 In
many cases, alteration or counterfeiting is not necessary; the perpetrator simply obtains
113

an identification document of another person, such as a birth certificate, and uses it as his
or her own to obtain other ID documents, such as a driver’s license.
Today, a driver’s license has become a de facto national identity card. It is universally
accepted as identification almost everywhere, whether opening a bank account, cashing
a check, using a credit card, or buying alcohol. It is accepted by the Transportation
Security Administration to get through airport security and board an airplane. It is also
the most widely counterfeited identification document. Countless underage teenagers
have used readily available and custom-made phony driver’s licenses to gain access to
bars and purchase liquor. Four of the five 9/11 hijackers who crashed planes into the
Pentagon in 2001 obtained driver’s licenses from the Virginia Department of Motor
Vehicles. Although they used their real names in applying for the licenses, they provided
other false information, including residence information, to obtain the IDs.
When I was a Postal Inspector in Los Angeles in the mid-1990s, I learned firsthand
how easy it was to obtain fake IDs. All one had to do was go to MacArthur Park in the
Westlake neighborhood of the city. It is named after the late General Douglas
MacArthur, and it is a very beautiful urban park. It was also a ready source of any
type of phony identification documents. On Alvarado Street bordering the park, if one
drove slowly, any number of individuals would approach and offer every imaginable
counterfeit ID document.
The purchaser would indicate the kind of document needed and the identification
details such as name, date of birth, SSN, and so on. The seller would name the price and
once the deal was agreed on, the purchaser was told to return in a few hours. If a
photograph was needed, the buyer could either provide one or was referred to a nearby
shop for a picture. True to their word and upon returning, the document creators would
again approach and provide an unbelievably legitimate-looking ID. There were also
degrees of quality. Poorer-quality work was cheaper; if one was willing to pay, the
quality would be excellent. For additional costs, working magnetic stripes could be
provided on particular documents.
I know this because on occasion, when law enforcement officers were doing under-
cover operations and were pressed for time, we used these sources to obtain IDs quickly.
The trade in fake IDs still goes on today. The fake ID vendors still have a flourishing
street trade. Law enforcement has attacked the problem with limited success as phony
identification is constantly in demand. In fact, Los Angeles has been called ‘‘the
epicenter of the fake ID trade.’’ As one illegal immigrant who used the fake ID vendors
to obtain a Social Security card and an alien registration card stated: ‘‘The people who
have been here a long time tell you. Everybody knows you can buy papers in MacArthur
Park.’’4
FAKE IDS ON THE WEB
People with access to the Internet do not have to go to the trouble of driving to
MacArthur Park. The Web has an unending supply of sites catering to fake ID seekers.
Most specialize in driver’s licenses from all 50 states but usually offer a wide range of
other IDs. Some sites claim their driver’s licenses are ‘‘novelty IDs’’ to be used for
demonstration purposes and entertainment, but they are quick to add they can include an
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
114

‘‘authentic hologram’’ for an additional cost. Some sites specialize in college diplomas.
One site promised that their diplomas use the same high-quality parchment paper as
major universities. Online vendors do not ask if the purchaser actually graduated from
the particular college or university.
In fact, there were so many Web sites on the Internet offering phony IDs for sale, it
was inevitable that a ‘‘best of’’ site would be created. The site, called www.fakeidsite.
com, is now closed down as a result of a criminal prosecution that is discussed later in
this chapter. The premise of this creative site was that there were so many fake ID sites
available but their quality and reliability were often questionable. Promising a one-stop
shopping review, the ‘‘Fake ID Review Site’’ compiled detailed reviews of many of the
popular sites, breaking them down into ‘‘both good and bad fake ID suppliers.’’ Identity
thieves did not have to waste precious time trying to find the best site to obtain their
phony IDs. They went to this site, got the fake IDs they needed, and quickly got back to
the important crime at hand.
I was amused at one reviewer’s comment about sending money for a phony ID and
then getting ripped off when the site did not provide the promised phony identification. I
rather thought it was poetic justice. Another review for the now-defunct Web site
www.sob-ids.com remarked, ‘‘Customers state that the holograms are flawless, and that
the bar codes and magnetic stripes work. This site allows you to come to their location if
you happen to be in Mexico.’’ The ‘‘sob’’ part of their Web address stood for ‘‘South of
the Border,’’ where the site allegedly relocated to avoid U.S. government investigation
and prosecution. Their homepage proclaimed that they had to leave the United States
‘‘due to inane and stringent U.S. laws.’’
SENATE HEARING ON PHONY IDS
In response to complaints from financial institutions, law enforcement, and the public,
Congress held a hearing on May 19, 2000, to look into the then-emerging problem of
phony IDs and credentials available via the Internet. The hearing presented the findings
of the subcommittee investigation of more than 60 Web sites that sold either fake IDs or
the computer templates for customers to use in the manufacture of authentic-looking
identification documents. Senator Susan M. Collins, chair of the Permanent Sub-
committee on Investigations at the time, opened by stating that the hearings would
explore a new and disturbing trend involving ‘‘the use of the Internet to manufacture and
market counterfeit documents.’’5 Here are some key points that Senator Collins made in
her opening statement:
With little difficulty, my staff was able to use Internet materials to manufacture convincing
IDs that would allow me to pass as a member of our armed forces, a reporter, a student at
Boston University, or as a licensed driver in Florida, Michigan, and Wyoming, to name just
a few of the identities I could assume.
These counterfeit identification documents are relatively easy to manufacture. With only a
modest understanding of the Internet and $50.00 worth of supplies purchased from an arts
and crafts store, one can design authentic-looking identification documents within a few
hours, or even minutes.
Fake IDs
115

The Web sites investigated by the Subcommittee offer a vast and varied product line, ranging
from driver’s licenses to military identification cards to federal agency credentials,
including those of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central Intelligence Agency.
Other sites offer to produce Social Security cards, birth certificates, diplomas, and press
credentials.
For the criminal who has just stolen someone’s identity, these sites offer an attractive
service. For a relatively low price, the crook can get a state driver’s license using the
victim’s name and date of birth, but showing the criminal’s photograph. Or, the thief can
obtain a fraudulent birth certificate using the stolen identity, fabricate some utility bills
purporting to show his or her residence, and then use these documents to trick the DMV into
issuing a real driver’s license. These fake driver’s licenses appear to serve as ‘gateway
documents’ that allow criminals access to other bona fide identification materials.
While the manufacture of false identification documents by criminals is nothing new, the
Internet allows those specializing in the sale of counterfeit identification to reach a broader
market of potential buyers than they ever could by standing on a street corner in a shady part
of town. They can sell their products with virtual anonymity through the use of e-mail
services and free Web hosting services and by providing false information when registering
their domain names. Similarly, the Internet allows criminals to obtain fake IDs from the
seclusion of their own homes, substantially diminishing the risk of apprehension that attends
purchasing counterfeit documents on the street.6
JUSTICE SERVED
In 2002, federal prosecutors charged eight defendants involved in an international
conspiracy to sell fake identification documents issued by state motor vehicle depart-
ments. Two of the defendants operated Web sites that sold fake IDs, including
www.fakeidsite.com and www.sob-ids.com. While the Web sites were located on
computer servers in other countries, the two defendants who operated the sites were
actually located in Riverside, California. Mail from purchasers of phony IDs was sent to
other countries but was redirected to mail drops in California to give the false impression
that the operations were based outside the country.7
INTERSTATE IDENTITY THEFT AND FAKE ID RING
On June 3, 2002, Discover Card advised the Postal Inspection Service of the non-
receipt and fraudulent use of dozens of credit cards apparently stolen from the mail in
New Jersey and used in Connecticut for cash advances. As a result of this information,
Postal Inspectors from New Jersey and Connecticut teamed up to jointly work this
investigation.
Inspector Donald Landisi coordinated the New Jersey aspect of the case. His
investigation determined that the cards would have been processed through a postal
facility in New Jersey. Due to the large number of cards stolen, Inspector Landisi
believed the cards were stolen from within the processing center, but an investigation did
not identify any suspects.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
116

Meanwhile, Postal Inspector/Team Leader Patrick Bernardo, based in New Haven,
Connecticut, worked the other end of the case. He collected complaints from Connecti-
cut banks where the credit cards were used. The credit cards had been used at banks in
Mystic, New Britain, Naugatuck, New London, and other locations. Inspector Bernardo
obtained bank surveillance photos of several suspects, a male and several females,
receiving cash advances on the stolen cards. The job was now to identify the people in
the photos.
A total of 80 Discover cards were involved and of those, 57 had been activated by the
same cell phone number. As these were new cards being mailed to customers, they had to
be activated by the true card holders from their home telephones. Since the cards never
reached the intended customers, it was believed that the thieves had somehow activated
the cards. The Card Activation Program (CAP) was instituted by the credit card industry
at the suggestion of a Postal Inspector at a time in the early 1990s when card thefts and
fraud were hitting the industry particularly hard. (For more information on CAP, see
Chapter 11.)
Inspector Landisi subpoenaed the cell phone records for the number used to activate
the cards. It was learned that the phone was a prepaid cell phone account with no name
associated with it. This was a temporary dead end, but there would be more to do.
Inspector Landisi discovered that 70 Capital One cards had also been stolen, and they too
were processed through the same New Jersey mail processing center. More stolen cards
were identified from other banks, such as First USA and HSBC. Further investigation
determined that more than 200 stolen cards from Discover, Bank One, Capital One, First
USA, and HSBC were involved with over $1 million in fraudulent cash advances.
As is often the case, the investigators got a lucky break early in the investigation. On
June 13, 2002, a female was arrested in a Connecticut bank attempting her second cash
advance of the day. She initially refused to provide her name to the police and was held
in jail. In July 2002, Inspector Landisi assisted in the interview of the defendant, and she
was identified. She also began to cooperate and identified her boyfriend only as Anwar.
She admitted that she activated 20 to 30 credit cards using Anwar’s cell phone. She did
not know his full name but told the investigators that he drove a black Mercedes and
received a speeding ticket that she paid for.
Inspector Landisi subpoenaed her credit union account and received the check she
used to pay for the boyfriend’s fine. The summons number was on the check; using it,
Inspector Landisi obtained Anwar’s full name and other identifying information as well
as his DMV photo. Anwar’s car was registered in Massachusetts and he had a listed
home address there, but in reality he lived in Brooklyn, New York. Inspector Bernardo
then obtained a search warrant for Anwar’s apartment in Brooklyn and together with
other inspectors and agents, executed the search on September 30, 2002. They arrested
Anwar at the scene.
The apartment yielded a treasure trove of evidence including:
 Eight cell phones which were used to activate 57 stolen credit cards
 Counterfeit driver’s licenses and resident alien identification cards corresponding to
the stolen credit cards and checks
Fake IDs
117

 Credit cards stolen from the mails and other sources
 Several stolen and forged credit card convenience checks
 A stolen checkbook
 Credit report headers and histories from unsuspecting victims
 Corporate invoices and checks still in their mailing envelopes
The inspectors also found a figurative smoking gun—a handwritten note—detailing
how to commit identity theft. The note read:
3 things needed for fraud:
1.
State ID (Driv. License, Non-Driver ID, Permit)
2.
Social Sec. Card
3.
Copy of lease or utility bill
While the inspectors were conducting the search in the apartment, three suspects
unwittingly came to the door and were arrested. In their possession were two newly
stolen corporate checks amounting to more than $160,000. As is often the case with
fraudsters caught in the act, they quickly agreed to cooperate against their criminal
associates. Anwar agreed to help the investigators and identified several accomplices
who provided him stolen credit cards, checks, and fake IDs.
Postal Inspectors tracked down one of these suspects working with Anwar and
arrested him. The suspect, Bennie, also quickly offered to cooperate against other
fraudsters. He identified a major credit card and fake ID supplier for the ring by the name
of Lucas. Lucas had operatives in Brooklyn and Staten Island who stole mail from
mailboxes, focusing on credit cards, checks, and other financial information. Lucas also
allegedly obtained stolen cards from insiders at postal facilities. He was well known to
Postal Inspectors as someone they had previously arrested for mail theft in 1999 and sent
to jail. Now out of prison, he was back at his old ways.
The inspectors used Bennie to make several undercover buys from Lucas, including
stolen credit cards with corresponding phony IDs, handwritten lists of victim names,
SSNs, birth dates, and other identifying information. Lucas was arrested in Brooklyn in
July 2003. It was learned that he was mailing stolen credit cards to other states as well as
overseas to be used by his associates. Lucas’s cell phone records provided additional
proof of his crimes and the extent of the fraud. The records revealed calls to numerous
banks and credit card issuers to activate stolen cards.
The defendants employed social engineering in their calls with the call center to
change the listed home telephone number for the call activation. To prevent fraud, credit
card issuers typically require that a new card be activated from the true card holder’s
home phone. Customers can activate their new cards from other than a home phone, but
to do so they have to provide additional verifying information. Knowing the ins and outs
of the credit card business benefited the scammers, who easily manipulated the system.
The call center’s focus is customer service. If a call center operator asked too many
questions, fraudsters would say that they did not need all the hassles and were going to
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
118

cancel the credit card. The call would then be referred to the Retention Department to
save the customer account from cancellation. In many cases, this ploy worked, and the
unwitting customer service representatives would approve the stolen cards for use. The
defendants had stolen so many cards that even if one card was detected as being stolen,
they had many more to use.
The fraudsters also had some inside help. The gang corrupted a Discover Card
employee in Ohio who agreed to provide card holder information. He activated many of
the cards for the gang and provided them with verification information so they could
activate the accounts from their cell phones. The investigators had a turn of good luck
that assisted the investigation. Law enforcement in Ohio arrested the corrupt Discover
Card employee in June 2002. He agreed to cooperate in a sting operation to arrest one of
the conspirators.
In the end, the ring involved dozens of people. The defendants were convicted
and received sentences ranging from probation to five years in prison. More than
$1.5 million in credit card losses were identified. Credit cards were stolen from
suspected locations in New York, New Jersey, Virginia, Massachusetts, Connecticut,
and elsewhere. Yet there were some unanswered questions. Inspectors knew many of the
cards had been taken from postal facilities. but they could not identify any culpable
employees. Unfortunately, credit card theft is addictive. Sooner or later, however, these
thieves will be caught.
Like any successful investigation, the outcome was the result of good old-fashioned
police work. Agents spent hundreds of hours manually reviewing telephone logs, credit
reports, bank accounts, videos from banks where the defendants used the stolen cards,
and other documents. The investigators tracked down every lead and interviewed dozens
of bank and credit card representatives. They created a link analysis to connect the
various defendants to each other and the many uses of the cards, and revealed the
national and international aspects of the case. Link analysis is an investigative tool that
links information to determine relationships and connections for investigative findings.
Other investigative tools included the effective interviewing of the defendants to
obtain additional evidence, admissions of guilt, and eventual cooperation. The wide-
spread use of technology was also a benefit to the investigators; cell phone records
connected the fraudsters to the stolen cards via the activations and to each other. A
key technique was the excellent interagency cooperation and sharing of information
between the regional banks, credit card companies, Postal Inspectors in Boston, New
York, and New Jersey, the Secret Service in Connecticut and New York, the New York
Police Department, local police departments, and the United States Attorney’s Offices
in Connecticut, New York, and New Jersey. Cooperation between law enforcement and
the financial services industry has always been critical for detecting and stopping
identity theft.8
OPERATION CATCHNET
The United States Postal Inspection Service was the driving force in creating and
sponsoring the Financial Crimes Task Force covering the central Indiana area in March
2003. The task force consisted of federal, state, and local law enforcement whose goal
Fake IDs
119

was to reduce the impact of identity theft and related crimes in the greater Indianapolis
area. The task force collected a variety of identity theft data from banks, retailers, other
businesses, complainants, identity theft databases, and other sources. The task force
focused on criminal activities that contributed to root causes of identity theft.
The task force found that Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV) identification
documents were often used in the commission of identity theft crimes, especially in the
Indianapolis area. It was decided that to do the most good in addressing the problem of
phony driver’s licenses and other BMV identification, an investigation and sting
operation codenamed ‘‘Operation Catchnet’’ would be launched in November 2003.
Numerous investigations were conducted by the Financial Crimes Task Force as a result.
One of the concerns that the task force had was that BMV employees might be
compromised through bribery to provide driver’s licenses to unauthorized individuals.
The BMV agreed to be part of the task force cooperative effort to both clean house and
arrest identity theft offenders through undercover operations. Law enforcement officers
assumed undercover roles as BMV trainees to observe fraudulent documents presented
by those wishing to obtain Indiana driver’s licenses and identification cards. Social
Security cards used as identification by suspects could be verified through telephonic
contact with offsite task force members. At least one of the document reviewers included
an officer with expertise in reviewing fraudulent immigration documents such as pass-
ports, visas, and Form I-94 (U.S. Customs and Border Protection nonimmigrant arrival/
departure form).
Identification documents presented by customers were photocopied and hand-carried
by BMV employees to a central location. Law enforcement personnel would examine
the documents, determine if they were phony, and, if necessary, initiate immediate
surveillance of the suspect(s). The internal document review team members rotated with
the outside surveillance team. Radio contact was maintained among the internal
document review team, the surveillance team, and the arrest team. Suspects were
apprehended a distance away from the BMV branch so as not to arouse suspicion at the
branch if other suspects were outside. In fact, it was found that other unsuspecting
offenders continued their fraudulent activities with no idea that people were being
arrested.
To determine how significant the document abuse problem was, approximately 20
transactions for new identification were examined at one BMV station over a six-hour
period on November 20, 2003. Of the 20 transactions, eight fraudulent transactions were
identified. Seven foreign nationals were arrested as a result. On November 24, 2003,
three more foreign nationals were arrested. On December 11, 2003, seven additional
foreign nationals were arrested for fraudulent document transactions at another BMV
office. More than 70 transactions were examined at BMV sites resulting in seven arrests,
or a 10% arrest ratio.
One of those arrested was found to be a leader of an identity theft ring operating in
Indianapolis involved in over 200 fraudulent transactions in a two-year time span. A
search of the defendant’s residence revealed phony passports, $13,000 in cash, fraudu-
lent tax ID cards, credit cards in many names, and classified internal BMV documenta-
tion. The BMV documents implicated several BMV employees in bribery schemes. This
disclosure resulted in the arrests of four BMV employees.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
120

In one investigation, five defendants were indicted by the United States Attorney’s
Office for the Southern District of Indiana for a fraudulent immigration document
scheme. Between 2000 and 2003, the ringleaders assisted Chinese nationals, many of
whom were in the United States illegally, in fraudulently acquiring driver’s licenses and
identification cards from the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles. Knowing that the BMV
had tightened security in the issuance of identification documents, the defendants
obtained phony Social Security cards, fraudulent U.S. visas, I-94s, and foreign passports
to assist in obtaining the licenses. They were charged with conspiracy to unlawfully
produce identification documents, false use of passports, misuse of visas and other
immigration documents, and fraud.
In a number of cases, identification documents were used in the commission of
identity theft crimes. One case that was referred to the task force involved a suspect who
committed $80,000 in identity theft with car loans. The subject used four fraudulently
obtained BMV identifications for his scheme in various names. An investigation into the
mailing of narcotics involved a foreign national who received a BMV identification card
and was also in possession of an Ohio resident’s SSN. The suspect assumed another
identity and was involved in drug trafficking. He was arrested after receiving a
controlled delivery of several pounds of marijuana.
An interesting development from this investigation illustrated that identity theft
associated with the Indiana BMV documents did not always equate to economic crimes.
Some of the people who obtained the phony documents did not use them for financial
gain but so they could remain in the United States. Most of the fraudulently obtained
documents, however, were used for identity theft–related crimes. Evidence was also
developed that BMV employees took bribes to help the foreign nationals obtain
fraudulent identification.
The United States Attorney for the Southern District of Indiana responded to the
indictments of five of the defendants in Operation Catchnet by stating:
A driver’s license issued in the United States is one of the most valuable government
documents produced. It provides freedom and opportunity to travel, to work, to open bank
accounts, and to conduct other important activities of daily life. More importantly, a driver’s
license serves as a universal identification tool. State agencies rely on the validity of United
States immigration documents and foreign passports, and the foundation for our identifi-
cation system is put at grave risk when fraudulent documents are produced and used.9
As of December 2003, as many as 12 separate identity theft gangs operated in the
Indianapolis metropolitan area. Multiply that by the thousands of cities and towns in the
United States, and one can easily see that identity theft is much more than just a problem,
it is an epidemic. Investigation continued over the next few months resulting in
additional arrests in Indiana. The publicity from the undercover operation and subse-
quent arrests caught the attention of potential fraudsters worldwide. A Zimbabwe
Internet chat room posted warnings that those using illegal documents for identification
purposes to gain residence in the United States should avoid Indiana.
The Indiana BMV used Operation Catchnet to upgrade its prevention and detection
program to lessen document fraud. It instituted a new double-check procedure whereby
Fake IDs
121

individuals submitting documents from U.S. Customs and Border Protection will be
issued a temporary 60-day driver’s permit while the BMV checks the validity of the
documents for a driver’s license. The temporary permit cannot be used for identification
purposes. In another recommendation to combat corruption and criminality, more
intensive background investigations of BMV employees was considered as a best
practice.
The work of the Postal Inspection Service and the Central Indiana Financial Crimes
Task Force was so successful that it was recognized as a 2004 Webber Seavey Award
semifinalist. The Webber Seavey Award for Quality in Law Enforcement is presented
annually to law enforcement agencies and departments worldwide in recognition of their
work in promoting a standard of excellence in protecting the quality of life in the
communities served. The award is jointly sponsored by the International Association of
Chiefs of Police and Motorola.
MAJOR FRAUDULENT DOCUMENT MANUFACTURING RING
In December 1994, Postal Inspectors and Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS)
agents dismantled a major counterfeiting ring responsible for the manufacture and
distribution of fraudulent Alien Registration and Social Security cards in Southern
California. The investigators seized 115,000 counterfeit INS and Social Security
documents with an estimated street value of $5.75 million. These phony identification
documents could have been used for a variety of identity theft crimes. Also seized were
high-speed printers, photo enlargers, negatives, and metal plates of counterfeit ‘‘Green
Cards’’ and Social Security cards. Los Angeles Postal Inspector Ralph Perez was the
case agent in one of the largest seizures of phony documents.
USING IDENTITIES OF THE DEAD
On November 13, 1999, Gregory Revson, posing as Edward Cantor, entered a Pontiac
GMC car dealership in Pembroke Pines, Florida, and purchased a new 1999 Chevrolet
Suburban for $32,000. He presented a Florida driver’s license in the name of Cantor but
with his own photograph. Revson paid for the car with a car loan check drawn on an
account in Cantor’s name at Peoples First Community Bank. Social Security Adminis-
tration records determined that Cantor died in October 1999. Peoples First Bank advised
that a loan application in the name of Cantor was received via an Internet application on
November 10, 1999. The home address listed was that of the deceased man. The mailing
address listed was that of a post office box in Hollywood, Florida and that is where the
loan check was mailed. In June 1999, Revson opened another post office box in the name
of Ralph Alfonso at the same Hollywood, Florida, post office. Revson presented a
Florida driver’s license in the name of Alfonso as identification to open the box.
Investigation determined that Alfonso had been incarcerated in a Florida prison since
March 1999.
Following an investigation by the Postal Inspection Service, Revson was arrested on
September 19, 2001. A search of his apartment yielded voluminous fraudulent docu-
ments and other evidence of identity theft. Included were seven birth and 20 death
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
122

certificates from Florida, New York, New Jersey, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Ver-
mont, phony driver’s licenses in 20 different names, 18 fraudulently obtained credit
cards in nine different names, and other evidence. During his interview by law
enforcement, Revson admitted his involvement in identity theft. He also told the
investigators that they would find additional evidence in his computer files. Internal
Revenue Service criminal investigators later arrested Revson for filing false federal
income tax returns in the names of other people and receiving the tax refunds. On
October 25, 2002, Revson was sentenced to five years in prison for his crimes.10
IDENTITY THEFT HALL OF INFAMY
Richard Joseph Tagliamonte
Some fraudsters have such larceny in their hearts that when they come across an
astoundingly wicked scheme, they embrace it and never let go. That was the case
of Richard Joseph Tagliamonte, a career grifter who fleeced victims with identity
theft for much of his life. Tagliamonte had a long history of stealing other people’s
identities, reaching back long before it was ever called identity theft. He started his
criminal activities as a teenager in the 1960s and continued over the years until he
was finally sent to prison for a very long time in 2007 at the age of 57. Thus,
Tagliamonte is well suited for membership in the Identity Theft Hall of Infamy.
Tagliamonte was first arrested in 1968 by the New York Police Department for
grand larceny and burglary, but it was his second arrest, a year later when he was
19, that got him started as an identity thief. Tagliamonte was arrested by the
Manhattan District Attorney’s Office on February 5, 1969, for falsely claiming to
be R. Hartford Duke, a fabricated relative of supermarket heir Huntington Hartford
and tobacco heiress Doris Duke. Using a method Tagliamonte would repeat more
than 30 years later, he showed up at the New York offices of game show producer
Goodson-Todman. The people in the office took a liking to the affable, clean-cut
young man, and before long he was doing all sorts of odd jobs for the staff. They
had no way of knowing that he was not who he claimed to be.
He made sure to let everyone know that he was related to the Hartford and Duke
families, although it was a lie. Presumably the belief that Tagliamonte was
somehow related to these exceedingly rich and powerful people helped curry
favor with the employees. Of course, his intent was more than just being an errand
boy. He soon got access to blank checks imprinted with the names of the company
owners, Mark Goodson and William Todman. Tagliamonte ‘‘forged 24 checks,
ranging from $6 to $2,500 and totaling $6789.37.’’11 He also stole $3,000 from a
dormant bank account of the real Huntington Hartford. It was believed that
(Continued)
Fake IDs
123

Tagliamonte was able to accomplish this because he found a lost bank book
belonging to the real Hartford. Of note, Tagliamonte was a ‘‘Dapper Dan’’ even
then. At his arraignment on the criminal charges in February 1969, he was well
dressed for someone his age, with a cashmere overcoat and Italian-style shoes.12
Like many scam artists, Tagliamonte found it hard to stay away from a life of
crime. Fraud becomes a part of their lives, and they just cannot stop victimizing the
naive and unprotected. Tagliamonte was in and out of trouble and jail over the next
25 years. He had several arrests in the 1970s for various crimes, including
possession of a forged instrument, forgery, grand larceny, wire fraud, and criminal
impersonation. In 1979, he was sentenced to seven years in prison for involvement
with drugs and stealing prescription pads. He was arrested in 1991 for mail fraud,
in 1993 for credit card fraud, and again he went to jail. Even after he got out, he
conducted another scheme and was returned to prison. By 2000, he had spent a
significant part of his adult life behind bars.13
November 2000 was a turning point for Tagliamonte. At that time, a well-
dressed and silver-tongued Tagliamonte appeared at the door of a nunnery in
Brewster, New York. The Community of the Holy Spirit operated by Episcopal
nuns would become both his sanctuary and base of criminal operations. He
identified himself as Richard Maldonado and boasted about all the important
people he knew. He presented a letter of introduction from a high-level official at
Saint Patrick’s Cathedral in New York City and quickly talked his way into the
confidence and hearts of the sisters. Just as he had done 30 years earlier at
Goodson-Todman Productions, he did odd jobs around the nunnery, always with a
smile and a pleasant word. But he also installed two telephone lines that he
intended to use to victimize the rich and famous.14
Over the next few years, Tagliamonte defrauded jeweler Tiffany & Company,
upscale department store Neiman Marcus, electronics manufacturer Toshiba, as
well as banks and credit card companies, by obtaining credit lines that he
criminally used. He hijacked the identity of a company once owned by the late
Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis and used it as his own. He tried to
defraud BF Goodrich out of $325,000 by doctoring a consulting contract, putting
the chief executive’s name on it, and sending it to accounts payable at BF
Goodrich. He defrauded the Greentree Foundation out of $35,000 by opening
up a line of credit at computer manufacturer Hewlett-Packard. Greentree is a
foundation set up by the widow of John Hay Whitney, the banker, diplomat, and
investor. Using the line of credit, Tagliamonte had Toshiba ship him almost
$15,000 in computer equipment in the name of Organon International, a pharma-
ceutical company. Organon is formerly the U.S. subsidiary of Akzo Nobel, a
Fortune 500 company based out of the Netherlands. Organon has now been
acquired by Schering-Plough.
Tagliamonte always wanted to be someone he was not. He desired fame and
fortune, and while he had neither, he always portrayed himself as upper crust. In
2002, he thought he finally found his way to wealth but instead gained notoriety
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
124

and a ticket to the Identity Theft Hall of Infamy. For in 2002, Forbes published its
annual list of the 400 richest Americans. One of those profiled was Texas oil and
gas billionaire Sid Richardson Bass. Tagliamonte read this issue of the magazine
and saw his mark in the person of Bass.
Another identity thief profiled in this book as a charter member of the Identity
Theft Hall of Infamy, Abraham Abdallah, also saw this very same issue of Forbes
magazine. He was in Brooklyn, just across the river from Tagliamonte, and he too
went on a fraud spree using the stolen identities of the richest Americans. Abdallah
made front-page headlines in the New York Post and in newspapers across the
world with the identity theft he perpetrated on the rich and famous.
Around the same time as the publication of the Forbes article, Tagliamonte
became friendly with a loan consultant in Union City, New Jersey. She had access
to credit information, and Tagliamonte gave her a story as to why he needed credit
checks on several people, including Bass. She fell for his gift of gab and ran the
reports. Using Bass’s personal information, Tagliamonte obtained credit cards in
Bass’s name and set up a fictitious company named Bass Capital Holdings, Inc. He
created phony identification, including a Texas driver’s license in Bass’s name.
Using social engineering and deceit, he obtained checking account and other
business and personal information about Bass and his many companies.
Tagliamonte used the fraudulently obtained credit cards in Bass’s name and also
tried to pass counterfeit checks drawn on Bass’s checking account. Tagliamonte
also got more than 20 credit cards in the names of other people. He had the names
and addresses of the Who’s Who of New York, from Donald Trump and Regis
Philbin to Michael Bloomberg and Yoko Ono, and many, many others. It is
amazing how much information is available today on everyone, but even more on
people in the public eye. Whether it is a Forbes magazine article or any number of
Internet searches, there is a world of information that can be found and fraudu-
lently used.
Tagliamonte had two mail drop addresses, one in New York City and another
one in New Jersey. The New Jersey address was a vacant home where he had the
checks and credit cards sent. He eventually moved from the nunnery in upstate
New York to the nuns’ New York City location. Subsequently, he moved to a hotel
in the city. To get a reduced room rate, he falsely claimed that he had lost his
apartment due to the World Trade Center attack.15 This was a despicable thing to
do. Fraudsters have no conscience when it comes to doing something that benefits
them. Later, he moved to an apartment in Union City, New Jersey, that became his
new base of operations.
Tagliamonte was finally tripped up because of a parking ticket he received. He
paid the ticket with a fraudulent Bass credit card, and Postal Inspectors used that to
track him down in New Jersey. Inspector Walley Wang scoured the streets of
Union City and Weehawken, New Jersey, until he finally located the car, a Chevy
Malibu rental in Bass’s name. Inspector Wang set up a surveillance of the car and
(Continued)
Fake IDs
125

on January 14, 2004, the trap was sprung. As Tagliamonte was getting into the car,
the Postal Inspectors approached him and asked his name. Hoping that one more
big lie would work, he gave the name of Sid Bass. When that did not fly, he gave
the name of Richard Munoz. With time running out, he then gave the name of
Emilio Negron. Finally, Tagliamonte knew the game was over and he was going to
jail again.
Postal Inspectors then searchedTagliamonte’s apartment. In it they founda wealth
of evidence. Phony identification and financial records were everywhere. Birth
certificates, Social Security cards, driver’s licenses, credit reports, boxes of coun-
terfeit checks, cash, designer clothes, and of course numerous unauthorized credit
cards in many different names including Sid Richardson Bass were found in the
apartment. Also found was a pad with detailed notes on the many identity theft
schemes he committed. Of special note, the investigators also found the Forbes
magazine profile of Bass and the other richest Americans. Inspector Wang believed
that Tagliamonte kept copiousnotes and all the other incriminating evidence because
he was proud of his crimes and that he thought he was too smart to get caught.
Tagliamonte was indicted on October 5, 2004, on a variety of identity theft and
other related charges and held in jail until his trial in early 2007. The evidence
against him was overwhelming. On February 6, 2007, he was convicted by a jury
on charges of identity theft, credit card fraud, mail and wire fraud, and possession
of counterfeit checks. The amount of the fraud was almost $1 million in actual and
intended losses. On October 24, 2007, he was sentenced to 15 years in prison for
his crimes. He was also given a fine and court-ordered restitution.
This was one of the longest prison sentences ever given for identity theft and
related crimes. The federal judge who sentenced Tagliamonte almost doubled the
recommended sentence and stated that a longer sentence was needed to protect the
public from Tagliamonte and prevent him from committing further crimes. The
judge referred to him as a ‘‘liar’’ and a ‘‘fraud.’’16 ‘‘This is a long and well-deserved
sentence,’’ said the United States Attorney for New Jersey. ‘‘Tagliamonte was
cunning in his ability to defraud and is clearly someone for whom prison is the only
deterrent.’’17
The Postal Inspection Service concurred. ‘‘The hard work of our Postal
Inspectors paid off. We are gratified to help put this crook behind bars. He ruined
the lives of innocent victims and cost legitimate and respected businesses
thousands of dollars,’’ said Newark Division Postal Inspector in Charge David
Collins.18 Inspector Collins had much more than a passing interest in a career
criminal that his office had arrested and sent to prison. For the irony here was that
some 15 years earlier, Collins had arrested Tagliamonte for victimizing a wealthy
woman who lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan in another identity theft
and check fraud scheme.
However, the comments of the investigator who spent several years tracking
Tagliamonte down and then putting him behind bars are most telling. Inspector
Wang stated:
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
126

NOTES
1. United States Department of Justice, The Criminal Use of False Identification:
The Report of the Federal Advisory Committee on False Identification (November
1976), 8.
2. Ibid., 12.
3. Ibid., 13.
4. Anna Gorman, ‘‘California: Fake ID Trade Makes a Name for Itself,’’ Los Angeles
Times, November 30, 2005, accessed via www.officer.com/web/online/Top-News-
Stories/California–Fake-ID-Trade-Makes-a-Name-for-Itself/1$27166.
5. Opening Statement of Senator Susan M. Collins, Chairman, Permanent Sub-
committee on Investigations, ‘‘Phony IDs and Credentials Via the Internet—An
Emerging Problem,’’ May 19, 2000, http://hsgac.senate.gov/051900_coillins.htm.
6. Ibid.
7. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the United States Attorney, Central District
of California, News Release, ‘‘Eight Charged in Relation to Fake IDs Sold on
the Internet,’’ December 20, 2002, www.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/mclellan
Indict.htm.
8. Postal Inspectors Don Landisi and Patrick Bernardo provided the author with
investigative details and comments that were included in this section.
9. United States Attorney’s Office, Southern District of Indiana, Press Release,
‘‘Elizabeth Lang and Four Others Federally Indicted for Fraudulent Immigration
Document Scheme,’’ June 24, 2004.
10. Postal Inspector Jack Galvin’s comments to the author, November 13, 2007.
Tagliamonte was indiscriminate in his selection of victims. He picked on everyone
from a billionaire to small business owners, and everyone in between. As long as you
had good credit you were a target. He was as good as it gets as an identity thief in my
opinion. Tagliamonte used his intelligence and charm to disarm people and use them
for his own personal gain. Whether you were a victim or a friend, he always knew
what each person was going to offer and how he was going to exploit it for his benefit.
As technology advanced, it improved his ability to find information and then use it to
defraud individuals and companies. He passed himself off as a trust fund baby but in
reality he was living one step away from homelessness. He was a self-described
charming, intelligent, funny, and cunning individual who thought of himself as an
upper crust individual when in fact he was a two-bit con man.19
Although Tagliamonte would spend most of his remaining years in prison, he
may have had the last laugh as he knew that that his imprisonment would not stop
the spread and impact of identity theft. During an interview with a reporter, he
claimed that the particular crimes he was convicted of were just the ‘‘tip of the
iceberg’’ of identity theft. ‘‘The average ordinary Joe on the street would be
terrified if they knew how extraordinarily vulnerable they are,’’ he said.20
Fake IDs
127

11. Morris Kaplan, ‘‘Youth Using Alias Seized in Forgery,’’ New York Times, February
6, 1969, select.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F30D11FD35541B7B93C4A91
789 D85F4D8685F9.
12. Ibid.
13. Jeff Whelan, ‘‘The Con Man and the Convent: A Convoluted Tale,’’ Star Ledger
(Newark), November 11, 2007, www.nj.com/news/ledger/jersey/index.ssf?/base/
news-8/119330229526.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid.
16. United States Attorney’s Office, District of New Jersey, Press Release, ‘‘Union City
Man Sentenced to 15 Years for Identity Theft and Credit Card Frauds,’’ October 24,
2007, www.usdoj.gov/usao/nj/press/files/pdffiles/tagl1024rel.pdf.
17. Ibid.
18. ‘‘Con Man Uses Nunnery as Home Base, Lands in Jail,’’ Postal Inspection Service
News 2, no. 1 (January 2008), 6.
19. Postal Inspector Walley Wang’s comments to the author, February 13, 2008.
20. Jeff Whelan, ‘‘The Con Man and the Convent.’’
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
128

CHAPTER 10
Legislation and
Criminal Statutes
In speeches, testimony, and the media, we continually hear about the need for tougher
laws to combat identity theft. The fact is that a number of excellent federal statutes and
acts have been in existence for many years. Both new legislation and enhanced versions
of prior laws are always being enacted to add to the arsenal of government weapons.
Statutes, or laws, are passed by legislatures or, in the case of federal statutes, by the
United States Congress. These statutes include the old stalwarts of mail fraud, wire
fraud, unauthorized use of a Social Security number (SSN), and access device fraud as
well the newer aggravated identity theft statute. The states have also taken action by
passing identity theft statutes mimicking federal criminal laws. The United States
Congress has enacted legislation covering consumer credit, healthcare accounts,
privacy, identification documents, money laundering, terrorism, and other important
individual and business issues. All of these issues are impacted by identity theft, and
these legislative acts and criminal statutes are intended to provide greater protections to
individuals and businesses.
A detailed summary of the significant federal criminal statutes and legislative acts
related to the prevention and prosecution of identity theft–related crimes as well as
protections afforded consumers and businesses follows.
129

CRIMINAL STATUTES
Mail Fraud
The Mail Fraud Statute is America’s oldest federal fraud statute. Enacted in 1872, it
has been used to protect the public from every imaginable fraud and scam, including
credit card fraud and identity theft. It defines fraud as ‘‘any scheme or artifice to
defraud, or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses,
representations, or promises.’’1 The word ‘‘artifice’’ was included in the original
statute, meaning ‘‘trickery or guile,’’ both of which are very descriptive of fraud. There
are two important elements of mail fraud: fraud or attempted fraud and the use of the
United States Mail or other private or commercial interstate carrier in furtherance of
the fraud.
The Mail Fraud Statute reads:
Whoever, having devised or intending to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud, or for
obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or
promises, or to sell, dispose of, loan, exchange, alter, give away, distribute, supply, or
furnish or procure for unlawful use any counterfeit or spurious coin, obligation, security,
or other article, or anything represented to be or intimated or held out to be such counterfeit
or spurious article, for the purpose of executing such scheme or artifice or attempting so to
do, places in any post office or authorized depository for mail matter, any matter or thing
whatever to be sent or delivered by the Postal Service, or deposits or causes to be deposited
any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by any private or commercial interstate
carrier, or takes or receives therefrom, any such matter or thing, or knowingly causes to be
delivered by mail or such carrier according to the direction thereon, or at the place at which
it is directed to be delivered by the person to whom it is addressed, any such matter or thing,
shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both. If the violation
affects a financial institution, such person shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 or
imprisoned not more than 30 years, or both.2
The statute has been effective in prosecuting fraudsters who steal personal informa-
tion, complete fraudulent credit card applications using that stolen information, and then
mail the completed applications to banks and credit card issuers. From the early days of
fraudulent credit card applications, the Mail Fraud Statute was and has been used as a
weapon of choice in punishing criminals who steal the identities of others for financial
gain. The statute is also used for other related identity theft crimes where the mail is an
essential element in facilitating the fraud.
Maze Decision
Something happened in 1974 that changed the way credit card fraud cases were
prosecuted. At the time, many of the cases involved the theft of credit cards by
pickpockets and prostitutes who obtained the cards directly from the victims. The
government based federal Mail Fraud Statute prosecutions on normal business mailings,
including the mailing of credit card statements to the victim card holders. These
statements detailed the unauthorized charges made by fraudsters.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
130

These thefts had nothing to do with the U.S. Mails. The Mail Fraud Statute requires
that both elements be present: (1) a scheme to defraud and (2) the use of the mails in
furtherance of that scheme. The government’s theory for use of the mail was based on
‘‘the passage of the sales slips by mail to the issuing agency and thence to the card holder,
and the delay inherent in this procedure which permitted the fraud to remain undetected
for a period of time, as a use of the mails in the continuation and therefore the furtherance
of the scheme to defraud.’’3 Unfortunately, they were legally wrong.
Eventually, convicted defendants argued that the use of the Mail Fraud Statute was
inappropriate and legally wrong in these types of cases. In the landmark case of United
States v. Maze, the Supreme Court ruled on January 8, 1974, that a credit card mailing must
be directly linked to the fraudulent scheme in order to be a chargeable offense. As a result,
these cases were no longer prosecuted with the Mail Fraud Statute. In reality, the Maze
decisionwasoflittleconsequence,ascreditcardfraudwasevolvingandabouttotakeonfar
morediremanifestations.Lawenforcementwouldlookbackonthesesimplecredittheftsas
the ‘‘good ole days’’ and wish that was the extent of the problem. But it was not to be.
Maze examined whether a mailing that the defendant knowingly ‘‘caused’’ was
sufficiently related to the underlying fraud to fall within the mail fraud statute. The
defendant in Maze took his roommate’s credit card and car without permission and went
on an extended trip. He used the card and signed the roommate’s name to charge food
and lodging. Therein was the fraud. Each merchant who furnished goods and services to
the defendant mailed the invoice to a bank in Louisville, Kentucky, forming the basis for
the mail fraud counts. The subsequent federal indictment charged four counts of mail
fraud and one count of transporting a stolen car across state lines.4
However, the court rejected the argument that the mailings were designed to permit
the scheme to continue and that the defendant’s ‘‘scheme reached fruition when he
checked out of the motel and there is no indication that the success of his scheme
depended in any way on which of his victims ultimately bore the loss.’’ The court stated
that mailing the invoices to Kentucky was not meant to ‘‘lull’’ the victims in any way as
distinguished from mailings in other cases.5
Chief Justice Warren Burger, commenting on the Maze decision, said the Mail Fraud
Statute was a ‘‘stopgap device to deal on a temporary basis with the new phenomenon
[referring to credit card fraud] until particularized legislation can be developed and
passed to deal directly with this evil.’’6 As a result of the Maze decision, Congress
enacted Title 15, United States Code, Section 1644, Interstate Transportation and Use of
a Credit Card in a Fraudulent Manner. Years later, Congress enacted Title 18, United
States Code, Section 1029, Access Device Fraud, to use in prosecuting credit card fraud,
and identity theft by inference. Subsequently, Title 18, United States Code, Section
1028(a)(7), a separate criminal statute, was enacted. It is interesting to note that then
Chief Justice Burger recognized credit card fraud, and the yet to be named but related
identity theft, as ‘‘this evil.’’
Wire Fraud
In 1952, federal law enforcement gained a new tool to fight fraud with the enactment of
the Wire Fraud Statute. It is the sister statute to the Mail Fraud Statute, after which it was
Legislation and Criminal Statutes
131

patterned. Wire fraud covers the use of interstate wire, radio, or telephone communica-
tions for the purpose of executing a scheme or artifice to defraud, or obtaining money
or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises. The
penalty for wire fraud is a fine or imprisonment of not more than 20 years, or both. If
the violation affects a financial institution, the defendant shall be fined not more than
$1 million or imprisoned not more than 30 years, or both.7
The Wire Fraud Statute has been used in conjunction with the Mail Fraud Statute
when prosecuting fraudsters, since telephone conversations and interstate wire com-
munications, including Internet and email usage, often serve to further fraud schemes. It
is important to note that the statute requires that wire communications must be interstate
rather than intrastate in order to charge the statute in a prosecution. That is usually not a
problem as so much commerce is done both interstate and internationally. For example,
if a fraudster located in California calls a financial institution in New York and uses the
identity of an account holder to order unauthorized credit cards or request a credit
increase, wire fraud could be charged along with other crimes.
Bank Fraud
Bank fraud is a federal criminal violation that occurs when a person knowingly executes,
or attempts to execute, a scheme or artifice to defraud a financial institution, or to obtain
any of the monies, funds, credits, assets, securities, or other property owned by, or under
the control of, a financial institution, by means of false or fraudulent pretenses,
representations, or promises. The penalties for bank fraud include a fine of not more
than $1 million or imprisonment of not more than 30 years, or both.8
The Bank Fraud Statute was enacted in 1984 and is similar in wording to both the Mail
and Wire Fraud statutes without the requirement for use of the mails or interstate wire
communications. The statute was enacted to modernize older federal banking statutes
for better prosecution of financial crimes. In applying the statute, the government must
show that the victim of the fraud is a financial institution. The perpetrators can be bank
insiders, customers, or other third parties.
The Bank Fraud Statute is used for a variety of financial crimes including fraudulent
credit and loan applications, check kiting, check forgery, credit card fraud, automatic
teller machine (ATM) fraud, and other related offenses. Identity thieves will often use
stolen personal information to open credit card accounts and apply for loans under
fraudulent pretenses.
False Statements in Loan and Credit Application
False Statements in Loan and Credit Applications is the federal statute that applies to
making false statements to financial institutions on loan and credit applications. The
statute reads: ‘‘Whoever knowingly makes any false statement or report, or willfully
overvalues any land, property, or security, for the purpose of influencing in any way the
action of a financial institution, shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned
not more 30 years, or both.’’9 This statute has also been used to prosecute identity thieves
who submit fraudulent credit card and loan applications to financial institutions.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
132

Mail Theft
Mail theft is often the source of personal and financial information used for identity
theft. Several federal statutes apply to the theft of mail, both by postal employees and by
those external to the postal system. Title 18, United States Code, Section 1708, Theft or
Receipt of Stolen Mail Matter Generally, is used to prosecute external parties who steal
or possess stolen mail of any kind from mailboxes, collection boxes, postal vehicles,
carrier carts, or other authorized mail receptacles or depositories. Title 18, United States
Code, Section 1709, the Theft of Mail Matter by an Officer or Employee, is used to
prosecute United States Postal Service employees who steal or possess stolen mail. The
penalty for both statutes is a fine or imprisonment of not more than five years, or both.
Misuse of a Social Security Number
Misuse of a Social Security Number is used to prosecute individuals for the fraudulent
use of an SSN. The statute reads:
Whoever, for the purpose of obtaining (for himself or any other person) any payment or any
other benefit to which he (or such other person) is not entitled, or for the purpose of
obtaining anything of value from any person, or for any other purpose, with intent to
deceive, falsely represents a number to be the social security account number assigned by
the Commissioner of Social Security to him or to another person, when in fact such number
is not the social security account number assigned by the Commissioner of Social Security to
him or to such other person, shall be guilty of a felony and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined or imprisoned for not more than five years, or both.10
Student Loan Fraud
Student Loan Fraud is used to prosecute student loan fraud, including the use of stolen
identity information to apply for and receive such loans. The statute reads:
[A]ny person who knowingly and willfully makes any false statement, furnishes any false
information, or conceals any material information in connection with the assignment of a
loan which is made or insured, or attempts to so make any false statement, furnish any false
information, or conceal any material information in connection with such assignment shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than
one year, or both.11
The statute also covers attempted student loan fraud, where the defendant submitted a
fraudulent student loan application but was not successful in receiving any funds.
Conspiracy
Conspiracy to Commit an Offense or to Defraud the United States is a very useful statute
when two or more defendants are involved in federal crimes. The statute reads:
If two or more persons conspire either to commit any offense against the United States, or to
defraud the United States, or any agency thereof in any manner or for any purpose, and one
Legislation and Criminal Statutes
133

or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each shall be fined
under this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both. If, however, the offense, the
commission of which is the object of the conspiracy, is a misdemeanor only, the punishment
for such conspiracy shall not exceed the maximum punishment provided for such
misdemeanor.12
Conspiracy can be used with any of the above-mentioned statutes or any other
applicable statute.
Access Device Fraud
The striking growth of identity theft and credit card fraud in the early 1980s caused
Congress to focus on the need for improved legislation. As a result, several new statutes
were enacted. The Credit Card Fraud Act of 1984 added access device fraud provisions
as part of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984. Title 18, United States Code,
Section 1029, Access Device Fraud, expanded the older, limited provisions of Title 15,
United States Code, Section 1644 (Fraudulent Use of Credit Cards). The new statute
broadened the existing definitions of credit card and debit instruments to include access
devices, including account numbers, as well as increasing maximum penalties for fines
and imprisonment, and providing significant repeat-offender penalties.13
Congress enacted this legislation to provide federal prosecutors broad jurisdiction to
prosecute a variety of credit card fraud schemes.
Congress intended that Federal prosecutions for the use of ‘‘unauthorized access devices’’
be directed particularly to activity involving a criminal or an organized crime ring that
traffics in fraudulent access devices. Situations in which a valid card owner knowingly uses
an expired or revoked card should remain under the jurisdiction of state and local
authorities or be handled through the civil actions available to the credit card companies.14
Title 18, United States Code, Section 1029 is formally designated as Fraud and
Related Activity in Connection with Access Devices but is commonly called the Credit
Card Statute. It applies to a variety of crimes involving access devices. The term ‘‘access
device’’ means any card, plate, code, account number, electronic serial number, mobile
identification number, personal identification number, or other telecommunications
service, equipment, or instrument identifier, or other means of account access that can be
used, alone or in conjunction with another access device, to obtain money, goods,
services, or any other thing of value, or that can be used to initiate a transfer of funds
(other than a transfer originated solely by paper instrument).15 Access devices can
include ‘‘debit cards, automated teller machine (ATM) cards, computer passwords,
personal identification numbers, credit card or debit card account numbers, long-
distance access codes, and the Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) contained within
cellular telephones that assign billing.’’16
Fraud and Related Activity in Connection with Computers
The Counterfeit Access Device and Computer Fraud and Abuse Act was enacted on
October 12, 1984. It was the first federal legislation to address computer fraud and abuse.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
134

Computer crime has grown tremendously since the 1980s and is an element in many
identity theft schemes. As part of the act, the criminal statute of Fraud and Related
Activity in Connection with Computers was created. Over the years, this statute was
enhanced and broadened in scope to criminalize seven different types of computer abuse
as well as to allow for civil actions arising out of computer crime. Although Congress
has enacted other criminal statutes related to computers, this is the one most often used
by federal prosecutors in prosecuting computer crime.
The statute reads in part:
Whoever intentionally accesses a computer without authorization or exceeds authorized
access, and thereby obtains information contained in a financial record of a financial
institution, or of a card issuer, or contained in a file of a consumer reporting agency on a
consumer, as defined in the Fair Credit Reporting Act; or information from any department
or agency of the United States; or information from any protected computer if the conduct
involved an interstate or foreign communication. Penalties for violations of this statute
include fines and imprisonment from five years to life. The extreme penalty of life
imprisonment applies if the offender knowingly or recklessly causes or attempts to cause
death from violations of this statute.17
Identity Theft
Title 18, United States Code, Section 1028 is officially called Fraud and Related Activity
in Connection with Identification Documents, Authentication Features, and Information
but is commonly called the Identity Theft Statute. The various elements of the statute read:
Whoever . . .
1.
knowingly and without lawful authority produces an identification document,
authentication feature, or a false identification document; or
2.
knowingly transfers an identification document, authentication feature, or a false
identification document knowing that such document or feature was stolen or
produced without lawful authority; or
3.
knowingly possesses with intent to use unlawfully or transfer unlawfully five or more
identification documents (other than those issued lawfully for the use of the
possessor), authentication features, or false identification documents; or
4.
knowingly possesses an identification document (other than one issued lawfully for
the use of the possessor), authentication feature, or a false identification document,
with the intent such document or feature be used to defraud the United States; or
5.
knowingly produces, transfers, or possesses a document-making implement or
authentication feature with the intent such document-making implement or authen-
tication feature will be used in the production of a false identification document or
another document-making implement or authentication feature which will be so
used; or
6.
knowingly possesses an identification document or authentication feature that is or
appears to be an identification document or authentication feature of the United
States which is stolen or produced without lawful authority knowing that such
document or feature was stolen or produced without such authority; or
Legislation and Criminal Statutes
135

7.
knowingly transfers, possesses, or uses, without lawful authority, a means of
identification of another person with the intent to commit, or to aid or abet, or
in connection with, any unlawful activity that constitutes a violation of Federal law,
or that constitutes a felony under any applicable State or local law; or
8.
knowingly traffics in false or actual authentication features for use in false
identification documents, document-making implements, or means of identification;
shall be punished as provided in subsection (b) of this section [next paragraph].
Penalties include fines and imprisonment for up to 20 years. If the crime is committed
to facilitate an act of domestic or international terrorism, imprisonment can be as much
as 30 years.18
Aggravated Identity Theft
Aggravated Identity Theft is codified in Title 18, United States Code, Section 1028A,
and reads:
Whoever, during and in relation to any felony violation enumerated in subsection (c),
knowingly transfers, possesses, or uses, without lawful authority, a means of identification of
another person (including name, date of birth, Social Security number, driver’s license,
employer or taxpayer identification number, electronic identification number or access
device of any kind) shall, in addition to the punishment provided for such felony, be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment of two years.19
The mandatory two-year prison term is consecutive to any other imprisonment imposed.
The predicate felonies used for enhancement include theft of public money, embezzlement,
mail fraud, wire fraud, bank fraud, passport and visa fraud, immigration offenses, and
Social Security fraud and false statements. Predicate felonies are those crimes that are
committed in conjunction with the instant offense of identity theft.
LEGISLATIVE ACTS
Fair Credit Reporting Act
Congress enacted the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) in 1970, and it has undergone a
number of amendments over the years. The FCRA ensures the privacy of information in
consumer credit reports and protects consumers from the disclosure of inaccurate
information maintained by credit reporting agencies. The FCRA limits the uses for
consumer reports and provides both access to these reports by consumers and the ability
to correct mistakes that are discovered. There are restrictions on businesses that provide
information about consumers to credit reporting agencies and those that use this
information. The FCRA covers organizations that collect consumer reports and those
that use consumer reports, especially for employment purposes.
The FCRA does not limit the amount or type of information that can be collected, but
consumer reporting agencies must disclose personal information to third parties only
under certain circumstances. Generally, consumer information may be released only
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
136

with the written consent of the subject of the consumer credit report. Consumer credit
reports may include information on creditworthiness, credit standing, credit capacity,
character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living of consumers.
The conditions for release and use include employment, credit or insurance determina-
tions, licensing, government benefits, or other appropriate ‘‘legitimate business need.’’
The FCRA was amended by the Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act in 2003 and is
discussed in a section with that name later in the chapter.
Fair Credit Billing Act
The Fair Credit Billing Act (FCBA) was enacted in 1974 and amended 1968’s Truth in
Lending Act. This legislation protects consumers from unfair billing practices and
establishes procedures for resolving errors on credit accounts, including credit cards and
other revolving charge accounts. It does not cover installment contracts, such as loans or
credit extensions paid on a fixed repayment schedule. The FCBA covers billing errors
and those errors resulting from fraudulent charges made on consumers’ credit accounts.
This act limits the liability for unauthorized credit card charges to no more than $50 per
card for credit card account holders. Although this fraud protection was legislated, in
actuality many credit card issuers generally do not hold victimized account holders
responsible for any amount of fraudulent charges.
Under the FCBA, consumers have the right to dispute billing errors through a
settlement process. These types of billing disputes are covered:
 Unauthorized charges
 Charges that list wrong dates or amounts
 Charges for goods and services that were not received or delivered as agreed
 Errors in math
 Failure to post payments and credits, such as returns
 Failure to send bills to a current address of the consumer
 Charges for which the consumer has requested an explanation or clarification20
Upon discovery of a billing dispute, consumers should immediately send a certified
letter to the merchant or organization detailing the complaint in writing. The complaint
letter should be sent as soon as possible after the error is noticed. Credit card companies
and other service providers often have time limits under which to file a dispute so be
aware of these deadlines. Keep copies of everything that is submitted, and never send
original documents. Make sure to follow-up with a telephone call and additional letters if
you do not receive a timely response. FCBA violations including fraudulent, deceptive,
and unfair business practices can be reported to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC).
Contact the FTC at 1-877-FTC-HELP or at www.ftc.gov/sentinel.
Privacy Act of 1974
The Privacy Act of 1974 was enacted after revelations of government intrusion into
citizens’ private lives by the administration of President Richard Nixon. It limits the
Legislation and Criminal Statutes
137

collection of personal information by government agencies and prohibits secret gov-
ernment files with certain limitations as described. The act states:
No agency shall disclose any record which is contained in a system of records by any means
of communication to any person, or to another agency, except pursuant to a written request
by, or with the prior written consent of, the individual to whom the record pertains, unless
disclosure of the record would be for various, lawful government purposes.
The exceptions allowing for use of personal records include:
 Use by the Bureau of the Census for statistical research or planning and carrying out a
census or survey
 Routine use by a government agency
 Use by the National Archives and Records Administration as a record which has
sufficient historical or other value to warrant its continued preservation by the
government
 For civil or criminal law enforcement purposes
 To protect the health or safety of an individual
 For congressional investigations and other administrative purposes21
The Privacy Act requires that each government agency maintain a system of records
so upon request by an individual to gain access to his or her record, or to any information
pertaining to him or her which is contained in the system, that person can review the
record and receive a copy of all or any portion thereof. The act also requires that each
government agency have an administrative and physical security system to prevent
unauthorized release of personal records.22
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) protects the privacy of student
education records. Educational records are defined as any records that are maintained by
an educational institution and contain personal information particular to an individual
student.
The law applies to all schools that receive funds under an applicable program of the U.S.
Department of Education. FERPA gives parents certain rights with respect to their child-
ren’s education records. These rights transfer to the student when he or she reaches the age
of 18 or attends a school beyond the high school level. Students to whom the rights have
transferred are considered ‘‘eligible students.’’23
Parents or eligible students have the right to inspect and review the student’s
education records maintained by the school or institution. They also have the right
to correct any records found to contain factual inaccuracies. Generally, schools must
have written permission from the parent or eligible student in order to release any
information from a student’s education record. There are exceptions where
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
138

FERPA allows schools to disclose those records, without consent, to certain parties
including:
 School officials with legitimate educational interest
 Other schools to which a student is transferring
 Specified officials for audit or evaluation purposes
 Appropriate parties in connection with financial aid to a student
 Organizations conducting certain studies for or on behalf of the school
 Accrediting organizations
 To comply with a judicial order or lawfully issued subpoena
 Appropriate officials in cases of health and safety emergencies
 State and local authorities, within a juvenile justice system, pursuant to specific state
law24
FERPA also states that educational institutions:
[M]ay disclose, without consent, ‘‘directory’’ information such as a student’s name, address,
telephone number, date and place of birth, honors and awards, and dates of attendance.
However, schools must tell parents and eligible students about directory information and
allow parents and eligible students a reasonable amount of time to request that the school
not disclose directory information about them. Schools must notify parents and eligible
students annually of their rights under FERPA. The actual means of notification (special
letter, inclusion in a PTA bulletin, student handbook, or newspaper article) is left to the
discretion of each school.25
This disclosure of student’s personal information for inclusion in directories is
extremely problematic. Any disclosure allows for potential identity theft, and the
amount and kind of information that can be released to directories is exactly
the information that identity thieves crave. In addition, most people never read the
disclosure statements they receive let alone respond to them. I find that even with
the disclosure notifications under FERPA and the ability for parents and students to
prohibit disclosure, there is no good reason to disclose this information, period. In
today’s climate of diminished privacy and increased risk of identity theft, why disclose
any personal information to directories?
Drivers Privacy Protection Act of 1994
In response to a number of high-profile cases in which criminals obtained the victims’
addresses through accessing Department of Motor Vehicle (DMV) records, including
the stalking murder of actress Rebecca Schaeffer in 1989, Congress passed the Drivers
Privacy Protection Act in 1994.26 The act prohibits any state DMV, its employees, or any
contractors from knowingly disclosing an individual’s personal information to a third
party and from disclosing certain types of information without the individual’s consent.
A newer amendment prohibits a state from selling or releasing DMV records to
marketers without express permission.27
Legislation and Criminal Statutes
139

Personal information is defined as ‘‘information that identifies an individual, includ-
ing an individual’s photograph, social security number, driver identification number,
name, address (but not the 5-digit zip code), telephone number, and medical or disability
information.’’28 Subject to exceptions, this information cannot be disclosed. However,
an individual’s photograph or image, SSN, and medical or disability information can be
shared if the DMV obtains express, signed consent from the person.29
The act lists a number of circumstances in which personal information may be legally
shared, regardless of consent. Many of the exceptions cover public safety matters, such
as usage by law enforcement, courts and government agencies, investigating accidents
and other insurance matters, and motor vehicle manufacturing recalls and notices.30
Information may also be disclosed to businesses, but only for the purpose of verifying
information submitted by the individual to the business. This exception allows the DMV
to release the correct information, but only if the business has incorrect information and
is used to prevent some sort of malfeasance by the individual. This would apply in
situations where a person is attempting to perpetrate some sort of fraud, hide from
creditors, or evade a legal claim against him or her.31
Violating the act subjects a person to a criminal fine and a state DMV to a civil
monetary penalty. Any person who violates the act by obtaining, disclosing, or using
personal information can be sued by the affected individual. The state of South Carolina
challenged the act, because South Carolina law permitted the state to sell its drivers’
records for marketing purposes. In 2000, the controversy reached the Supreme Court as
Reno v. Condon, with the Court unanimously upholding the act’s constitutionality.32
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) aims to ensure that
providers secure electronic papers in the same way they secure physical paper records,
improving overall informational security. Congress passed the law in 1996 in response
to the growing use of the Internet and electronic communication of medical records. Its
stated goal was to assure individuals that their health information is properly protected
while at the same time allowing important uses of the information to protect the health
and well-being of the individual and the public at large. The act covers health plans,
healthcare providers, and clearinghouses that transmit health information in electronic
form.
Protected health information is defined as individually identifiable health information
created or received in any form. The Privacy Rule, enacted to carry out HIPAA’s
requirements, protects consumers from having their personal health information
exploited, disclosed, or otherwise misused, whether by insurance companies, employers,
or anyone else. In many cases, consent from the patient must be obtained before
information can be disclosed, and when it is disclosed, it often must be limited to the
minimum amount of protected health information needed. The Security Rule defines
how to protect personally identifiable health information in electronic form.
When HIPAA was first enacted, it focused on the portability aspect of medical
coverage. Now it focuses mostly on privacy and security issues of medical records.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
140

Health information maintained by an employer such as in a personnel file is not covered
by HIPAA. It additionally does not apply to worker’s compensation plans.
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998
The Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 created the new federal
crime of identity theft. Although identity theft had been prosecuted previously under a
number of other statutes, this was the first time that a specifically named law was
enacted. The act makes it a crime for a defendant who ‘‘knowingly transfers or uses,
without lawful authority, a means of identification of another person with the intent to
commit, or to aid or abet, any unlawful activity that constitutes a violation of federal law,
or that constitutes a felony under any applicable state or local law.’’ The act expanded the
definition of a ‘‘means of identification’’ to include names, Social Security numbers,
credit cards, cellular telephones, electronic serial numbers, or other pieces of informa-
tion that may be used alone or in conjunction with other information.
The act increased criminal penalties based on the number of victims, made interstate
identity theft a crime, required the Federal Trade Commission to create a complaint and
reporting center for identity theft victims, required mandatory restitution for identity
theft victims, forfeiture of personal property used to commit identity theft, and other
enhancements. The Senate bill was introduced by Arizona Senator Jon Kyl and was
signed into law on October 30, 1998.
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, known as the Financial Modernization Act of 1999,
includes provisions to protect consumers’ personal financial information held by
financial institutions, defined as companies that offer financial products or services
to individuals. It aims to prevent companies from selling personal financial information
without the customer’s knowledge or approval. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act has three
principal parts: the Financial Privacy Rule, the Safeguard Rule, and pretexting
provisions.
The Financial Privacy Rule governs the collection and disclosure of customers’
personal financial information. The rule also applies to companies that receive the
information, regardless of whether they are considered financial institutions. This rule
covers both consumers and customers. Consumers are individuals who obtain or have
obtained a financial product or service from a financial institution for personal reasons.
Customers are consumers with continuing relationships with the financial institutions;
these relationships must be significant and/or long term. Customers get privacy notices
automatically, while consumers get them only if the company shares the customer’s
information with another nonaffiliated company. The privacy notice must be a clear,
conspicuous, and accurate statement of the company’s privacy practices. The notice
should include what information the company collects about its customers and consum-
ers, with whom it shares the information, and how it protects or safeguards the
information.
Legislation and Criminal Statutes
141

The Safeguard Rule requires all financial institutions to design, implement, and
maintain safeguards to protect customer information. The rule applies not only to
financial institutions that collect information from their own customers but to financial
institutions such as credit reporting agencies that receive customer information from
other financial institutions. Gramm-Leach-Bliley requires that a company have a
security plan to protect the confidentiality and integrity of personal customer
information.
The pretexting provisions protect consumers from individuals and companies, or
those acting under their direction, from obtaining their personal financial information
under false pretenses, a practice known as pretexting.33
USA PATRIOT Act
The USA PATRIOT Act was enacted in November 2001 in the wake of the September
11 terrorist attacks and subsequently amended in following years. It gave the govern-
ment new powers to utilize in the war on terrorism. USA PATRIOT is an acronym that
stands for Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required
to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism. It greatly increased the power of the executive
branch by broadening the definition of ‘‘terrorist’’ and simultaneously broadening the
government’s powers of surveillance and ability to share information between depart-
ments. Among other powers, the government may track suspects by roving wiretaps;
issue ‘‘sneak and peek’’ warrants, which allow searches without the suspect’s knowl-
edge; monitor communications; and obtain access to sensitive personal records. Rele-
vant to corporate compliance, the act includes mandatory anti–money-laundering
provisions intended to combat the ability of terrorists to finance their operations.
The express authority given to the federal government to combat money laundering
with new regulations also allowed the government to institute additional rules in
conjunction with the provisions. The rules require all financial institutions to establish
anti-money-laundering programs. At a minimum, the programs have to include: the
development of internal policies, procedures, and controls; the designation of a
compliance officer; an ongoing employee training program; and an independent audit
function to test programs. Financial institutions are also obligated by rules covering the
verification of the identity of customers. In addition, they must: verify the identity of any
person seeking to open an account to the extent reasonable and practicable; maintain
records of the information used to verify a person’s identity, including name, address,
and other identifying information; and consult lists of known or suspected terrorists or
terrorist organizations provided to the financial institution by any government agency to
determine whether a person seeking to open an account appears on any such list. Finally,
in order to effectuate better information gathering, securities dealers and brokers are
required to report suspicious activity to the government.
CAN-SPAM Act
The Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and Marketing Act, known as
the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, ‘‘establishes requirements for those who send commercial
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
142

email, spells out penalties for spammers and companies whose products are advertised in
spam if they violate the law, and gives consumers the right to ask emailers to stop
spamming them.’’34 The law bans false or misleading header information, prohibits
deceptive subject lines, and requires that the email be identified as an advertisement,
include the sender’s physical postal address, and give recipients an opt-out method.
Violations of this act can lead to fines of up to $11,000 per violation; the Department of
Justice can also seek criminal penalties when appropriate.35
COPPA
The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) covers ‘‘the online collection of
personal information from children under 13’’ and requires parental consent before any
such information is collected or shared.36 COPPA also sets outs the responsibilities
operators have to protect children’s privacy and safety online. Operators of Web sites
directed at children under the age of 13 must post a privacy and information policy,
outlining, among other things, what kinds of personal information are collected from
children, how it will be used, to whom it will be disclosed, and how parents can review
the information collected and how they can ask for such information to be deleted.37
Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003
The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) was amended by the Fair and Accurate Credit
Transactions Act (FACTA) of 2003 and took effect on June 1, 2005. FACTA provides
much good news to consumers in the war against identity theft. It also gives consumers
much-needed improvements to privacy, accuracy of consumer credit reports, limits on
information sharing, and disclosure rights. FACTA requires the establishment of a fraud
alert system for consumers who may be the victims of identity theft, credit card account
number truncation on electronic receipts, account blocking by consumer credit reporting
agencies after a police report is filed by victims, the creation of red-flag indicators for
financial institutions and creditors to use in spotting identity theft, free credit reports on
an annual basis from the three major credit bureaus, and other enhancements.
Free Credit Reports
One of the best aspects of FACTA is that all individuals can receive copies of their credit
reports once a year at no charge from each of the three major credit bureaus, Experian,
Equifax, and TransUnion. Previously, there was a cost incurred to receive credit reports.
This free service increases the ability of consumers to receive and review their credit
reports for errors and possible identity theft. All consumers should avail themselves of
this opportunity to scrutinize their credit reports.
Credit reports are available either through a dedicated Web site (www.annual
creditreport.com), by telephone (877-322-8228), or by mail. The Privacy Rights
Clearinghouse recommends that consumers order their free reports by telephone or
mail rather than via the Internet. ‘‘A World Privacy Forum report released in July 2005
exposed hundreds of imposter Web sites. Some sites lure you in with free offers, but just
Legislation and Criminal Statutes
143

want to sell you products like credit monitoring services. Others are outright frauds that
aim to steal your personal information.’’38 It is safe to order credit reports online as long
as you are sure that you have correctly spelled the legitimate site, www.annual
creditreport.com. Imposter sites use similar-sounding names and make use of common
spelling errors to misdirect consumers. The FTC advises consumers who want to be
extra careful to link to the official annualcreditreport.com site from the FTC’s Web site
(www.ftc.gov/bcp/menus/consumer/credit/rights.shtm).
Fraud Alerts
FACTA provides victims, or those who believe they are about to be victims of identity
theft or other frauds or crimes, with the right to contact the credit bureaus to flag their
accounts. These fraud alerts are effective for a period of 90 days but may be extended up
to seven years as long as a police report has been submitted detailing the victimization of
the requestor. This flagging process alerts third parties who may use the credit history
information from credit reporting services that the named individual’s credit informa-
tion may be compromised.
The act also creates a new category of alert called an active duty alert specifically for
active duty military personnel. This special alert in the credit report of military personnel
stationed outside the United States advises creditors that the subject is out of the country
and does not have immediate access to credit. This alert can be useful in protecting
military personnel who lack the ability to adequately monitor their credit activity. Active
duty alerts can be in effect a minimum of 12 months.
Once a fraud alert has been placed on a consumer’s credit report, no new or increase of
credit can be approved without the credit issuer contacting the consumer at a telephone
number previously provided. The consumer must then approve the credit issuance. This
process allows individuals to discover unauthorized attempts to commit identity theft
and other crimes using their names and personal information.
Truncation
In a further attempt to reduce opportunities for identity thieves to obtain credit and debit
account numbers, related expiration dates, and other personal information, whether by
Dumpster diving or other sources, FACTA prohibits the printing of full account
information on receipts and other documents. This information must now be shortened
by only including the last five digits of an account. This truncation requirement only
applies to electronically printed receipts and not to handwritten or imprinted receipts if
that is the sole means of recording a credit or debit card transaction. This truncation also
applies to Social Security numbers.
Red-Flag Guidelines
FACTA requires federal regulators to establish and maintain guidelines to identify
possible risks and red flags that both financial institutions and consumers can use to
detect identity theft and other frauds. In creating the red flags, regulators must identify
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
144

patterns, practices, and specific forms of activity that would be indicative of identity
theft. Financial institutions and creditors must then use these red flags to adopt
procedures to mitigate the risk of identity theft and other financial crimes.
Specifically noted in the act is the risk of account takeovers by identity thieves using
fraudulent changes of address. The act states that
if a card issuer receives notification of a change of address for an existing account, and
within a short period of time (during at least the first 30 days after such notification is
received) receives a request for an additional or replacement card for the same account, the
card issuer may not issue the additional or replacement card, unless the card issuer, in
accordance with reasonable policies and procedures, notifies the cardholder of the request
at the former address of the cardholder and provides to the cardholder a means of promptly
reporting incorrect address changes.39
The Appendix, Designing an Effective Identity Theft Red Flags Rule Compliance
Program, provides an overview of the FACT A Red Flags Rule requirements, the 26 Red
Flags of identity theft described in the act, and action steps to achieve effective
compliance with the program requirements.
Disposal of Consumer Report Information and Records
The act requires businesses and individuals to destroy records containing personal
information, by shredding, burning, or pulverizing. Paper records must be destroyed in
such a fashion that they cannot be read or reconstructed. Electronic records must be
destroyed or erased so they cannot be read or reconstructed. This requirement applies to
consumer reports such as credit reports, medical files, and employee background checks
that are gathered. Unfortunately, the regulation applies only to third-party prepared
reports but not information that consumers complete themselves. Disposal requirements
apply to:
 Consumer reporting agencies
 Lenders
 Insurers
 Employers
 Landlords
 Government agencies
 Mortgage brokers
 Automobile dealers
 Attorneys and private investigators
 Debt collectors
 Individuals who obtain a credit report on prospective nannies, contractors, or tenants
 Entities that maintain information in consumer reports as part of their role as service
providers to other organizations covered by this rule40
Legislation and Criminal Statutes
145

There are many other provisions of FACTA, including disputing inaccurate infor-
mation in a consumer credit report, protection of medical information in the financial
system, confidentiality of medical contact information in consumer reports, improving
financial literacy, employee misconduct investigations conducted by a third party or an
employer, and what may or may not be disclosed. For more detailed information, please
refer to Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003.
Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act
The Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act was signed into law by President George
W. Bush on July 15, 2004. The act enhances prison sentences for identity thieves who
commit other crimes, including terrorism. ‘‘For example, when someone is convicted of
mail fraud in a case involving stolen personal information, judges will now impose two
sentences, one for mail fraud, and one for aggravated identity theft. Those convicted of
aggravated identity theft must serve an additional mandatory two-year prison term.’’41
Defendants who commit other financial and document crimes in connection with a
terrorism case would receive an additional prison term of five years. There are also
increased penalties for trusted insiders who abuse their positions of trust, including
people who work at banks, government agencies, insurance companies, and others who
maintain financial data.42
Real ID Act of 2005
Criticism of a national identification card has been a familiar refrain for years, with
many people opposing any measures that would institute such a card. However, the Real
ID Act, passed on May 11, 2005, took major steps toward such an outcome, with the act
mandating that all states meet federally established standards for driver’s licenses. It
should be noted that the act did not pass on its own merits but rather was attached to an
appropriations bill for Iraq war spending and relief for victims of the 2005 Southeast
Asia tsunami disaster.43
The intent of the act is to introduce tough, uniform standards on identification, with
stringent verification that applicants for new driver’s licenses and renewals must meet,
including checking birth certificates and national immigration databases to ensure that
they are American citizens or legal residents. The idea is to prevent terrorists and illegal
immigrants from obtaining driver’s licenses, such as the licenses illicitly obtained by
several 9/11 hijackers. The new IDs would have high-tech security features and would
include special data encoded, such as on a bar code. States would also link their
databases of driver’s license data together, forming a national driver’s license
database.44
The act set a May 11, 2008, deadline for states to comply with the regulation or to have
received extensions. All 50 states received compliance extensions even though six
states, New Hampshire, Maine, South Carolina, Oklahoma, Washington, and Montana,
passed laws rejecting the Real ID Act and its requirements. The next major deadline is
December 31, 2009, where all states must have complied with act’s requirements or else
sought an additional extension.45 Effectively, the law will require that all existing
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
146

licenses be replaced between 2014, for people under 50, and 2017, for those 50 and over.
By those dates, all 245 million driver’s license and state ID holders must apply for a Real
ID, with each applicant bringing a photo ID, birth certificate, proof of Social Security
number and proof of residence.46
If a state does not comply with the Real ID requirements, federal agencies will not
accept that state’s licenses as proper identification. This means that citizens of those
states will need a passport or some other approved form to serve as proof of
identification at an airport or federal building, or when applying for federal benefits.47
Even though many of the physical features of the license requirement are already
commonplace across the country, criticism of the act has been steady. Critics decry the
law’s ‘‘unfunded mandate’’: The act will cost states billions of dollars to implement, but
the federal government will provide only approximately $40 million to all states to cover
expenses.48 The law does not provide any minimum encryption or safety standards to
ensure that the information in the national databases will not be compromised. This is
important because this national database would be 51 different linked databases (all
states in addition to the District of Columbia), rather than one very large database. If
hackers were able to infiltrate just one database, they could very well have access to the
entire thing. It is also unknown what restrictions, if any, will be placed on the use of a
national license database by third parties.49
Real ID does address some very important issues, namely the patchwork system of
identification issuance in this country. It is not particularly difficult for a person to obtain
a legitimate identification under a false name or with false information. Although no
system would completely eliminate improper issuance, the more stringent controls could
be very beneficial in keeping driver’s licenses and identification cards out of the hands of
terrorists and criminals. However, Real IDs or the underlying documents could be
falsified, or DMV workers could be bribed to issue fake IDs. The database could also be
a major problem for two reasons. First, as soon as it is instituted, it will become a ‘‘holy
grail’’ for hackers. Second, how can the information in the database be verified and how
can mistakes be corrected, particularly since limitations on the database’s use have not
been clearly defined?50 These questions and more will continue to stir debate at least
until Real ID’s provisions are fully executed, if that day ever comes.
Financial Data Protection Act of 2006
The Financial Data Protection Act of 2006, also known as the Data Accountability and
Trust Act, was introduced in Congress as a measure to combat identity theft and
streamline a multitude of differing state laws regarding credit freezes. A credit freeze
functions as a check on identity theft because it blocks the release of a credit report,
preventing the issuance of credit and hobbling identity thieves from opening new
accounts using stolen data.
The measure would have preempted state laws that allow consumers to authorize a
credit freeze of their credit records and instead reserve that power solely for victims of
identity theft. However, before instituting a credit freeze, a victim must first file a police
report noting the unlawful use of personal information by another individual.51 Merely
having data stolen or lost would not be enough to allow a credit freeze under this law.
Legislation and Criminal Statutes
147

According to the bill’s coauthor, Representative Steven LaTourette, the bill would
have protected the nation’s financial system by streamlining a ‘‘patchwork of competing
and conflicting state laws’’ and thus preventing frequent credit freezes from under-
mining it.52 It also would have preempted state laws dealing with consumer notification
after data breaches. The bill, backed by the major credit unions, came under intense
criticism by consumers’ groups, state attorneys general, and privacy advocates, among
many others.53
Thankfully for the American public, the bill died without ever reaching the floor of the
House. This bill would have placed the financial interests of the credit bureaus ahead of
those of the public and other businesses. Since credit bureaus make money by selling
credit information, anything that potentially interferes with accessing the reports hurts
them. However, credit freezes prevent the issuance of credit to identity thieves, thus
preventing fraud and theft.
By nationalizing identity theft legislation, the bill would have stripped states of the
power to institute tough identity theft laws. Without a comparably strong federal
standard to take its place, many of the gains made in fighting identity theft would
have been lost.
IMPACT OF LEGISLATION
Most states have laws similar to existing federal legislation on identity theft, credit card
fraud, privacy, consumer credit issues, and other related individual and business issues.
Many are patterned on existing federal laws. Some states, such as California, are ahead
of the curve in the areas of data breach notification and restricting the use of SSNs to
reduce identity crimes. Although this chapter has not discussed every existing federal
and state law or regulation related to identity theft issues, the information provided is a
good compilation of existing legislation. More important, it provides an overview of the
issues and the government’s response to the threat of identity theft crimes and the need
for even greater protections.
If success is judged by the number of prosecutions for identity theft–related crime,
then there is no doubt that law enforcement has been doing its job. But if success is
determined by a decrease in this crime, a lessening of its overall impact, and greater
personal protections for our citizens and businesses, then the reality is that much more
needs to be done.
NOTES
1. Mail Fraud Statute, Title 18, United States Code, Section 1341.
2. Ibid.
3. Charles A. Miller, Economic Crime: A Prosecutor’s Hornbook, National District
Attorney’s Association (March 1975), 36.
4. Martin T. Biegelman, Protecting with Distinction: A Postal Inspection Service
History of the Mail Fraud Statute, United States Postal Inspection Service (June
1999), 14.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
148

5. Ibid.
6. Ibid.
7. Wire Fraud Statute, Title 18, United States Code, Section 1343.
8. Bank Fraud Statute, Title 18, United States Code, Section 1344.
9. False Statements in Loan and Credit Application, Title 18, United States Code,
Section 1014.
10. Misuse of a Social Security Number, Title 42, United States Code, Section
408(a)(7)(B).
11. Student Loan Fraud, Title 20, United States Code, Section 1097.
12. Conspiracy, Title 18, United States Code, Section 371.
13. Criminal Resource Manual, Title 9, United States Attorney’s Manual, www
.usdoj.gov/usao/eousa/foia_reading_room/usam/title9/crm01024.htm.
14. Ibid.
15. Access Device Fraud, Title 18, United States Code, Section 1029.
16. United States Secret Service, ‘‘Criminal Investigations: Access Device Fraud,’’
www.secretservice.gov/criminal.shtml.
17. Fraud and Related Activity in Connection with Computers, Title 18, United States
Code, Section 1030.
18. Identity Theft Statute, Title 18, United States Code, Section 1029.
19. Aggravated Identity Theft, Title 18, United States Code, Section 1028A.
20. Federal Trade Commission, ‘‘Facts for Consumers: Fair Credit Billing,’’
www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/pubs/consumer/credit/cre16.shtm.
21. Privacy Act of 1974, www.usdoj.gov/oip/privstat.htm.
22. Ibid.
23. Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, www.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/
fpco/ferpa/index.html.
24. Ibid.
25. Ibid.
26. See ‘‘The Drivers Privacy Protection Act (DPPA) and the Privacy of Your State
Motor Vehicle Record,’’ Electronic Privacy Information Center, http://epic.org/
privacy/drivers.
27. Ibid.
28. Drivers Privacy Protection Act, United States Code Title 18, Part I, Chapter 123,
Section 2725(3).
29. Ibid., Section 2721(a)(2), 2725 (4).
30. Ibid., Section 2721(b).
31. Ibid.
32. See Reno v. Condon, 528 U.S. 141 (2000).
33. Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, //frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=
106_cong_public_laws&docid=f:publ102.106.pdf.
34. Federal Trade Commission, ‘‘The CAN-SPAM Act: Requirements for Commercial
E-mailers,’’ www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/buspubs/canspam.shtm.
35. Ibid.
36. Federal Trade Commission, ‘‘How to Comply with the Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Rule,’’ www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/buspubs/coppa.shtm.
Legislation and Criminal Statutes
149

37. Ibid.
38. Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs6a-facta.htm.
39. Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-
bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=108_cong_public_laws&docid=f:publ159.108.pdf
40. Federal Trade Commission, ‘‘Disposing of Consumer Report Information? New
Rule Tells How,’’ www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/pubs/consumer/alerts/alt152.shtm.
41. ‘‘President Bush Signs Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act,’’ July 15, 2004,
www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2004/07/20040715-3.html.
42. Ibid.
43. National Conference of State Legislatures, Real ID Act of 2005: Driver’s License
Summary, www.ncsl.org/standcomm/sctran/RealIDSummary05.htm.
44. Real ID Act of 2005, HR 418, 109th Congress, May 11, 2005, www.govtrack.us/
congress/billtext.xpd?bill=h109-418.
45. Declan McCullagh, ‘‘Homeland Security Blinks on Real ID: No Hassles on
May 11,’’ News.Com, April 2, 2008, news.cnet.com/8301-13578_3-9909928-38.
html?from=rss.
46. Elliot C. McLaughlin, ‘‘Federal ID Plan Raises Privacy Concerns,’’ CNN.com,
August 16, 2007, www.cnn.com/2007/POLITICS/08/16/real.id/index.html.
47. Eric Lipton, ‘‘Rebellion Growing as States Challenged a Federal Law to Standard-
ize Driver’s Licenses,’’ New York Times, February 5, 2007, www.nytimes.com/
2007/02/05/washington/05real.html.
48. McLaughlin, ‘‘Federal ID Plan Raises Privacy Concerns.’’
49. Erik Larkin, ‘‘Coming Soon: National ID Cards?’’ PC World, May 31, 2005,
www.pcworld.com/article/id,121077-page,1/article.html; Jaikumar Vijayan, ‘‘Pri-
vacy Groups Renew Push Against Real ID Bill,’’ Computer World, May 4, 2007,
available at: www.networkworld.com/news/2007/050407-privacy-groups-renew-
push-against.html.
50. See Bruce Schneier, ‘‘Real ID: Costs and Benefits,’’ Schneier on Security, January
30, 2007, www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2007/01/realid_costs_an.html.
51. Data Accountability and Trust Act, H.R. 3997, 109th Congress, introduced October
6, 2005, www.govtrack.us/congress/billtext.xpd?bill=h109-3997.
52. Byron Acohido, ‘‘Bill Would Limit Consumers’ Credit Rights,’’ USA Today,
June 15, 2006, www.usatoday.com/money/perfi/credit/2006-06-14-credit-freeze-
usat_x.htm.
53. See, e.g., Martin H. Bosworth, ‘‘Congress Considers ‘Worst Data Bill Ever,’
ConsumerAffairs.com, www.consumeraffairs.com/news04/2006/03/congress_data_
bill.html. See also Acohido, ‘‘Bill Would Limit Consumers’ Credit Rights.’’
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
150

CHAPTER 11
Law Enforcement Efforts
Law enforcement has done more than just fight identity theft through criminal
investigations and prosecutions. It has also been at the forefront of promoting best
practices in detection and prevention, instituting education and awareness campaigns,
developing strong partnerships with the financial services and business communities,
and recommending legislation to lessen identity theft. These are just some examples of
the many law enforcement efforts over the years to fight identity theft and its related
crimes.
METRO RICHMOND IDENTITY THEFT TASK FORCE
The use of law enforcement task forces has been a productive detection and prevention
approach in combating identity theft. Combining the resources of several law enforce-
ment agencies and prosecutors’ offices has worked to bring identity thieves to justice
while publicizing the impact of identity theft and offering prevention information. The
work of the Metro Richmond (Virginia) Identity Theft Task Force is an excellent
example of a successful task force implementation.
The Metro Richmond Identity Theft Task Force was created in October 2004 to
develop a cooperative effort among various federal, state, and local law enforcement
agencies in the Richmond, Virginia, area to investigate the growing problem of identity
theft as well as other financial crimes. The working definition of identity theft used by
the task force is ‘‘unlawfully obtaining, possessing, transferring, or using identifying
information of another person without the other person’s consent and with the intent to
151

harm or defraud another.’’1 Among the crimes investigated are classic identity theft
schemes, counterfeit checks, stolen government checks, Internet fraud schemes, and
other criminal offenses related to fraud and forgery. The emphasis has been on organized
crime and other gang activity that has a high impact on the public and the financial
services industry.
The task force is comprised of full-time members from the Postal Inspection
Service, United States Secret Service, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Richmond
Police Department, Henrico County Police Department, and Chesterfield County Police
Department. Part-time members include the Social Security Administration, Office of
the Inspector General (OIG), Housing & Urban Development OIG, Defense Criminal
Investigative Service, Diplomatic Security Service, and Immigration and Customs
Enforcement. Prosecutions are handled by the United States Attorney’s Office, Eastern
District of Virginia, and the Virginia Attorney General, who aggressively prosecute
offenders in federal and state courts. The task force also has two industry partners, the
Better Business Bureau and the National White Collar Crime Center.
The task force operation is housed at the offices of the Postal Inspection Service in
Richmond, where office space and equipment are provided including computers,
Internet access, desks, and telephones. The central location for a base of operations
promotes a close interaction and beneficial interchange of information. Local law
enforcement officers are deputized as Special U.S. Marshals so they can investigate and
make arrests on the related federal crimes used to prosecute the defendants. Prosecutors
are assigned to the task force to speed cases through the system. The investigators hold
weekly meetings to share intelligence and status of cases. There are also formal monthly
meetings of the combined task force. A strong relationship with prosecutors and a
commitment to delivering results for the community have been elements for success.
The overall focus of the task force is on organized groups, fraud recidivists as well as
education and crime deterrence. It has set up an informative Web site that provides
detailed information on the task force; on the many federal, state, and local agencies
involved in investigating and prosecuting identity theft; on identity theft–related scams;
on how to report if one is a victim of identity theft; press releases on cases; wanted
posters, federal and state laws related to identity theft; prevention tips; and links to other
informative sites. The site can be viewed at www.richmondIDtheft.com.
Besides the proactive investigative approach, the task force also employs a strong
prevention message through a steady stream of press releases after each arrest and
prosecution. These press releases detail the cases and publicize prevention methods as
well as the work of the Metro Richmond Identity Theft Task Force. The public outreach
includes presentations made by task force members to educate the public and raise
awareness of the problem of identity theft. Presentations are made to groups and
organizations throughout the Richmond area and are tailored to the particular audience.2
OPERATION RECONCILE
One of the major cases investigated and prosecuted by the task force was ‘‘Operation
Reconcile.’’ The investigation started in the fall of 2004 and became public in November
2006 with multiple indictments and arrests. ‘‘Reconcile’’ was used as a code name
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
152

because of its implied dual meaning. Since most of the criminal activity involved banks
being defrauded, the operation was a way of ‘‘reconciling’’ their losses. The second
meaning pertained to the criminals and the concept of ‘‘reconciling’’ their criminal
behavior, like a ‘‘day of reckoning.’’
According to Postal Inspector/Team Leader Dave McGinnis, a key member of the
task force, the Operation Reconcile cases were meant to send a message, via a mass
roundup, to would-be identity thieves that they had better think twice before engaging in
this particular crime. Since law enforcement has now banded together in the Metro
Richmond area, cases are prosecuted jointly on the federal level utilizing the Aggravated
Identity Theft statute.
Operation Reconcile had three main objectives: (1) target fraud recidivists and
ongoing identity theft schemes by individuals; (2) create public awareness of the
penalties associated with identity theft; and (3) deter future identity theft crimes.
The prosecution strategy was to indict each target on one count of identity theft or
bank fraud. The task force also used all related criminal activity as relevant conduct at
sentencing. That included any counterfeit, stolen, and altered checks, credit card fraud,
and misuse of Social Security numbers (SSNs) and other identification.
The operation targeted identity theft recidivists, abuse-of-trust cases, illegal aliens,
and bank insiders involved in fraud. There were 65 investigators and prosecutors
involved in the operation during the two-year investigation. When the case became
public on November 14, 2006, 51 defendants were charged in 45 indictments. There was
a coordinated roundup of defendants over a two-day period. Twenty-six defendants were
charged with Aggravated Identity Theft, a federal crime. The law on Aggravated
Identity Theft was enacted in July 2004 and carries a mandatory minimum term of
imprisonment of two years. Aggravated identity theft applies when a defendant commits
other predicate felonies during the commission of identity theft. In addition, a sentence
under this statute must run consecutively to any other prison term imposed. There were
106 victims identified in Operation Reconcile.
Six of the defendants who pleaded guilty in January 2007 provide a snapshot of how
identity theft can be perpetrated. Three were bank employees who fraudulently obtained
credit cards that they personally used. A fourth defendant obtained a bank account in the
name of a victim and deposited stolen checks into that account. A fifth defendant
received stolen checks that he had others cash at various area banks for him. The sixth
defendant obtained a stolen check, altered it to make himself the payee, and then
negotiated the check at a local credit union. The more involved the defendants were in
criminal activity, the longer the jail terms they received, with sentences of between two
and four years in prison.
The task force used the publicity around these 51 indictments to announce the kick-off
of a campaign to educate the public on the enhanced penalties for Aggravated Identity
Theft. The ‘‘Think Before You Do IT’’ campaign was started in November 2006. The
‘‘IT’’ refers to identity theft. The centerpiece of the campaign was signs that proclaimed
‘‘ID THEFT ¼ 2 Years in Federal Prison’’ placed on area buses. The campaign
emphasized consumer awareness to let people know that committing identity theft
equals two years in federal prison. The awareness campaign included a press conference,
‘‘Think Before You Do IT’’ advertisements on buses run by the Greater Richmond
Law Enforcement Efforts
153

Transit Company, and ongoing public service announcements on identity theft
prevention.
The outcome of the campaign included increased hits on the task force Web site, an
increase in crime tips and victim inquiries, and further dedication of the member
agencies to fight identity theft. The Postal Inspector in Charge in Richmond praised the
cooperation of the task force participants by stating: ‘‘The Metro Richmond Identity
Theft Task Force is a fine example of what can be achieved when the law enforcement
community comes together to address a specific problem in the community.’’ He added,
‘‘The member agencies of the task force are dedicated to fighting identity crime and will
continue to vigorously protect the good names and identities of the citizens of metro
Richmond.’’3
FELONY LANE GANG
The Metro Richmond Identity Theft Task Force also teamed with a task force in another
state to break up another identity theft ring. The task force investigators in Virginia
became aware of the Felony Lane Gang (FLG) due to their criminal activity in
Chesterfield and Henrico counties, Virginia, in February 2007. The basic scheme
involved the theft of checkbooks and driver’s licenses from unattended cars, especially
those cars parked at sports fields and gyms. Transients were recruited and transported to
other areas by the gang members so they could cash the stolen checks. The task force
began compiling and sharing information on numerous vehicle break-ins, related fraud
losses, reviewing bank photos of the suspects and descriptions of the vehicles used by
them.
As the task force continued its investigation, members learned that another task force
had been investigating the FLG for several years. Since November 2004, the U.S. Secret
Service’s South Florida Organized Fraud Task Force had been investigating an orga-
nized criminal group operating in Broward, Palm Beach, and Miami-Dade counties who
were engaged in identity theft and other crimes. The South Florida Organized Fraud
Task Force found that the gang members targeted vehicles parked at day care centers,
gyms, cemeteries, and other locations, where unsuspecting victims left wallets, purses,
and other property in plain view in vehicles. The defendants also used robberies and
physical violence, often against women, to obtain personal information including
driver’s licenses, Social Security cards and numbers, debit cards, credit cards, and
checks. The FLG used the victims’ identification and other personal information to
commit a variety of crimes, including identity theft, bank fraud, credit card fraud, and
other crimes.
This investigation was code-named ‘‘Operation Felony Lane’’ due to the use of drive-
through teller lanes at banks to cash or deposit forged checks using the identity of one
victim to cash a forged check from another victim.
Armed with stolen identification (Florida Driver’s Licenses, ID’s, Social Security Cards,
credit cards), and with stolen checks, the defendants would go to the farthest lane of the
drive-in teller at local banks, which is the most difficult place for bank surveillance to view
their activity (hence, the name ‘Felony Lane’). Once at the drive-in teller, the suspects
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
154

produced a check written to one of the stolen identities (an identity for which they had false
identification) and cashed the check. The payee on the check and the false identification was
often in the name of an individual who was a previous victim of a home burglary, vehicle
break-in, purse snatching or strong armed robbery, where their identities were stolen. The
bank account was often a business account that had suffered a theft and had sufficient
funds in their accounts to process the checks. These checks are normally written for amounts
from $1,500 to $5,000 each and multiple checks are written on each victim’s identity. The
suspects were well organized, usually traveled in groups and used counter-surveillance
tactics, communicated by cell phone, and used disguises such as wigs, glasses or hair dye
when perpetrating their frauds.4
Female gang members generally would be the ones to negotiate the stolen checks. The
‘‘blocking vehicle,’’ usually a rental car, was used to distract tellers in the first drive-
through lane, the lane closest to the teller window. Often a sports utility vehicle would be
used as its larger size provided greater blocking of the second vehicle and suspect in the
outside lane. The blocking vehicle’s occupants would try to engage the teller in
conversation to further distract the teller’s attention from being too focused on the
other transaction taking place in the outside lane. The female defendants made sure to
wear wigs to match the hair color of the photo on the stolen identification documents.
The defendants also did account takeovers where they impersonated the true account
holder either in person or by telephone. They would change the home address on the
victim’s account and also use stolen credit cards at merchants in the area.
The scheme began in Florida in 2004 and moved to Virginia, where it continued from
September 2006 into 2007. Losses in Florida were in the millions of dollars. Losses to
financial institutions in the Eastern District of Virginia exceeded $350,000. On
November 1, 2006, 20 defendants were indicted in the Southern District of Florida
on various charges of conspiracy to commit bank fraud, aggravated identity theft, and
identity theft. In April 2007, the leader of the conspiracy was sentenced to nine years in
prison. Other members of the gang received jail sentences between one and three years
with lesser-involved participants receiving probation. In December 2007, six members
of the gang pleaded guilty in the Eastern District of Virginia to charges of conspiracy to
commit bank fraud and aggravated identity theft.
THOUGHT LEADER IN IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION
Henry Herrera
Henry Herrera is a Postal Inspector assigned to Washington, DC, as program
manager for the Postal Inspection Service’s Financial Crimes Group. As program
manager, he has the responsibility of overseeing the national identity theft
program for the Postal Inspection Service. Herrera became a Postal Inspector in
(Continued )
Law Enforcement Efforts
155

1986 and throughout his career has worked numerous identity theft investigations.
He is a subject matter expert in identity theft and provides in-service training and
guidance to field inspectors. Herrera works closely with the President’s Identity
Theft Task Force, which was established by an executive order signed by President
George W. Bush in May 2006.
Inspector Herrera led the Identity Theft Working Group, which was part of the
Financial Industry Mail Security Initiative sponsored by Inspection Service Head-
quarters. This group produced identity theft awareness guides and training videos.
Inspector Herrera was also a driving force behind the publication of a report
entitled Fighting Identity Theft, which contained best business practices for law
enforcement and the financial industry, improving exchange of intelligence
between private and public sectors and developing a comprehensive awareness
program. He also served as a technical advisor in the filming of the Showtime
movie The Inspectors II on the subject of identity theft.
Inspector Herrera believes that in order to attack the identity theft problem to the
fullest extent possible, the focus needs to be in three major areas; prevention,
detection, and detention. In Philadelphia in 1991, Inspector Herrera was tasked
with a special credit card crime prevention assignment. This request was an attempt
to shift the focus from not just making more arrests but stopping identity theft
crime from happening in the first place. ‘‘My goal was to identify all the major
credit issuing banks in the Philadelphia Division and customize service and crime
prevention procedures in each bank to protect both the banks and their customers,’’
he says.
Early on, Inspector Herrera learned that each bank had its own unique problems
as well as problems similar to the others. In the early 1990s, banks hesitated to share
information with each other. As a neutral participant and as a representative of
the Postal Inspection Service, Inspector Herrera created an environment in which
he could bring the representatives from the various financial institutions together
to share the ‘‘best practices’’ in addressing financial fraud. One key element was to
fully understand the extent of the problem and identify the weaknesses in the
system. Another main ingredient was to identity the ‘‘experts’’ in the field and all
the key players who could develop solutions to the flaws in the system.
Over the years, a number of training and best practice materials were produced
with recommendations for implementing security strategies to minimize the risk of
financial fraud. Inspector Herrera was instrumental in the creation of these
educational materials. These materials included Identity Theft Awareness and
Victim Guide; Identity Theft: Safeguard Your Personal Information; Detecting and
Preventing Account Takeover Fraud; Detecting and Preventing Credit Application
Fraud; two training videos entitled The Game of the Name and Identity Crisis; and
the report already described, Fighting Identity Theft.
During his 22 years investigating financial crimes and working with financial
institutions in their prevention, Inspector Herrera learned that everyone has a small
piece of the puzzle and a role to play to combat and prevent identity theft. He
reinforces the notion that access to the pertinent information must be kept to a
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
156

LAW ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS TO ENACT ANTIFRAUD LEGISLATION
Law enforcement has done more than just investigate and prosecute identity theft cases.
It has also been instrumental in promoting legislation to combat the crime. This was the
case in Connecticut, where dedicated professionals saw their efforts to enact a state
credit card statute become reality. Connecticut became one of the first states to enact a
credit card fraud law allowing state prosecution of violations occurring in several
locations within the state to be consolidated for prosecution in one jurisdiction. This
legislation came to fruition as a result of the hard work of many people, and especially
two dedicated federal agents.
Veteran Postal Inspectors Al Dockus and Paul Hinman worked on the idea that was
initially conceived by Hinman in early 1996, for a specific state statute to prosecute
credit card fraudsters and identity thieves. Both inspectors, assigned to Connecticut at
the time, were very active in credit card fraud investigations. They saw the impact of
these crimes on individuals and the financial services industry as well as difficulties in
bringing criminals to justice. Dockus and Hinman knew that law enforcement needed
every possible weapon in the fight against fraud.
Because many of the credit card frauds committed by the same individuals or gangs
were small losses that occurred in various locations, it was necessary to prosecute
violations separately in each of the county jurisdictions where the actual fraud occurred.
The new law would enable the prosecutors to consolidate the defendant’s offenses in
various counties into a single criminal prosecution in one geographical court
jurisdiction.
From the beginning, there was support for the proposed law, as it was believed that the
state legislature would embrace it. With the expected strong support from the banking
lobby, law enforcement, and the public, the law had a good chance of passing. Still, the
minimum. ‘‘When the suspect obtains personal data, then the mechanisms must be
in place to make it very difficult to use that information for financial gain,’’ he
advises. ‘‘When these systems fail, then it becomes very important to identify and
apprehend those ‘financial termites’ who are responsible for perpetrating the
identity theft.’’
Inspector Herrera also strongly believes law enforcement must be properly
trained in the most current fraud trends as they relate to the advances in technology
and have the resources to combat identity theft. ‘‘In looking at how the criminal is
using more sophisticated means to commit fraud, it has become very clear that we
must unite our efforts to be better prepared to face the challenges of tomorrow,’’ he
says. ‘‘Through communication and cooperation we can more effectively protect
our financial and computer infrastructure.’’
Inspector Herrera acknowledges that identity theft will never be completely
eliminated. ‘‘The best thing anyone could hope for is to minimize their exposure to
reduce the likelihood of becoming a victim. When an individual becomes a victim,
then early detection is needed to minimize the damage.’’5
Law Enforcement Efforts
157

inspectors knew that enacting legislation is a time-consuming process that is never easy
with all the elements of politics, government, and special interests colliding. They soon
learned that the timing for presenting a new bill to the Connecticut judicial committee
was less than ideal as the committee had a full agenda and would not be able to get to any
new bill introduced in 1996.
Dockus and Hinman began to lobby a state representative for his support. They
continued to work with the Connecticut Chief State’s Attorney and enlisted the United
States Attorney’s Office, numerous banks and credit card companies, and the Interna-
tional Association of Financial Crimes Investigators, among others. It took a year of
effort but in March 1997, a proposed bill entitled ‘‘An Act Concerning a Study of Credit
Card Fraud’’ was discussed at a Banking Committee hearing. Dockus and Hinman made
a brief presentation in support of the legislation.
The Chief State’s Attorney sent a letter to the committee that stated:
Credit card fraud has reached epidemic proportions in Connecticut as in many states. It will
take a concerted effort by all levels of agencies to deal with the complex nature of this
crime. . . . H.B. 6852 is an important step in gaining an understanding of the issues involved
and developing a strategy for dealing with the problem in the next legislative session.6
This support was critical.
On March 3, 1998, a public hearing was scheduled at the State Capitol to discuss the
merits of the legislation. Dockus and Hinman testified in their capacity as officers of the
Connecticut chapter of the International Association of Financial Crimes Investigators.
Dockus detailed the growing threat of credit card fraud and identity theft and the many
international criminals who exploit the financial system for their personal gain. He
explained at the time that credit card fraud was being prosecuted using existing statutes,
but they were inadequate for effective prosecution. He testified:
Internationally, nationally and locally within the State of Connecticut credit card fraud is
reaching epidemic proportions. Even with various loss prevention and security systems
consistently being initiated, the volume of credit card fraud continues to increase.
An increasing threat in recent years has been from organized gangs and is international in
scope. Organized crime gangs, particularly Nigerian, Asian, Russian and others dealing in
counterfeit cards, fraudulent applications, cards stolen from the mail and merchant fraud
has given rise to increased credit card fraud throughout the world. Many of these gangs
migrate into Connecticut.
These statutes are generally prosecuted as misdemeanors when the value of a fraudulent
transaction is $500 or below. Amounts in excess of $500 may be prosecuted as felonies. The
reality of credit card fraud investigations conducted in Connecticut is that fraud activity
exceeds $500 in a high percentage of cases.
However, it is most common that the fraudulent activity is spread throughout a number of the
localities, throughout the state, each having a different geographical area. In many cases,
the illegal activity in any geographical area is often below the $500 amount, making the act
in that area a misdemeanor. This is done by design, rather than coincidence, by the
perpetrator.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
158

The passing of this legislation will have many benefits. Among these—and not only these—
but among these it would increase the likelihood of arresting and convicting a perpetrator as
a felon. It would cause budget reductions for the state by litigating in one area instead of
numerous areas.
Credit card fraud is a relatively simple and extremely mobile crime. The number
of individuals involved in this illegal activity is increasing. This legislation will go far
towards letting those perpetrators know that we will now be able to pursue them more
effectively.7
The hearings were successful and got the bill moving forward through the legislative
process. The Connecticut General Assembly passed Public Act 98-45, ‘‘An Act
Concerning the Prosecution of Certain Credit Card and Automated Teller Machine
Fraud Offenses.’’ The bill was signed into law by the governor on May 19, 1998 and took
effect on October 1, 1998. Dockus, now retired, commented at the time that the
presentation of fraud loss statistics helped win support of a state senator who usually
opposed new legislation.8 Unfortunately, those fraud losses would continue to grow in
the years to come.
M.I.A.M.I. PROGRAM
The M.I.A.M.I. Program (Mail Initiative Against Misappropriated Identities) that Postal
Inspectors developed in the late 1990s in South Florida is an example of a strategic
approach to preventing identity theft. This initiative recovered significant amounts of
stolen mail and credit cards before they were fraudulently used. The program also helped
law enforcement educate area banks regarding new schemes and the scope of the identity
theft problem. The goal of the M.I.A.M.I. Program was twofold: (1) the timely
notification to law enforcement of false addresses used for fraud, and (2) to quantify
the results of this prevention initiative.
Background
In the 1990s, Miami and much of South Florida had become one of the leading areas
of identity takeover and credit/debit card fraud. Much of the criminal activity was
conducted by members of highly organized groups, but suspects ran the gamut from
small-time credit card thieves to full-scale operations employing confederates within the
banking system supplying victim information on a wholesale level.
Traditionally, criminals used victims’ information to request replacement credit cards
sent to post office boxes and commercial mail receiving agencies (CMRAs) that had
been established to harvest the cards. With the new initiatives proposed by the Inspection
Service to make CMRA’s more easily identifiable to the mailers, the criminals were
using a new trend of redirecting the credit cards to vacant houses.
The vacant houses were used for a short period of time but received the mail of
multiple victims, usually with the same surname. By the time inspectors became aware
of a suspect address, the criminals abandoned it and established new addresses. The
timely notification when suspect addresses were being used and active aided inspectors
in pinpointing investigative focus.
Law Enforcement Efforts
159

Similarly, when inspectors became aware of a reported fraud address, they often were
able to recover abandoned mail. Frequently this mail included replacement credit and
debit cards, bank statements, and the true account holders’ canceled checks. Inspectors
recovered this mail for safeguarding and contacted the issuing bank to notify them of the
recovery. Often this was the first notification to the bank of a problem with the accounts;
a check of the bank’s system usually indicated some fraud had already occurred. The
notification by the Postal Inspector allowed the bank to suspend and/or monitor the
account to prevent and minimize the bank’s potential exposure to continued fraud.
The inspector usually directed the mail back to the issuing sender bank with little
regard for the potential savings the investigation produced. It was determined there
should be some established process to quantify the potential monetary savings the bank
experienced due to the inspector’s preventive intervention in the safeguarding of the
financial mail.
Awareness and Response
The M.I.A.M.I. Program succeeded by establishing a partnership with Postal Service
management on this initiative. Postal Inspectors addressed station managers, carrier
supervisors, and the carriers themselves on the problem of identity theft and the newly
established reporting system. The importance of timely reporting to the Postal Inspectors
of any suspect address was stressed. As a result, carriers would report whenever they
suspected a vacant house was being used to receive large volumes of financial mail.
Postal Inspectors recruited local and national banking and credit card fraud investi-
gators to supply a written authorization form to the Inspection Service. The form
permitted inspectors and their designees (Postal Supervisors) to withhold, photocopy,
and/or record information on the envelope of suspected mail. The letters were main-
tained on file with the Postal Inspection Division coordinator. When the mail was no
longer necessary for evidentiary purposes, it was returned to sender. A master list of
various bank investigators was compiled into a database used to return the mail. A form
letter was attached indicating where the mail had been recovered and listing each piece.
A quantification form was maintained so that the investigator could document the
potential loss to the financial institution had the mail not been intercepted. Overall, the
M.I.A.M.I. Program was an important initiative in reducing the incidence of identity
theft.9
FINANCIAL INDUSTRY MAIL SECURITY INITIATIVE
The Financial Industry Mail Security Initiative (FIMSI) is the brainchild of the United
States Postal Inspection Service. FIMSI was created in 1992 and in November 2007
celebrated its fifteenth anniversary of serving the interest of Postal Service customers
and businesses. FIMSI’s goal has been to improve partnerships and communications
between the Postal Inspection Service, other law enforcement agencies, credit card and
retail industries, financial institutions, and the airlines. FIMSI meetings provide a forum
for sharing trend data and developing strategies to address fraud and theft. FIMSI has
helped the financial and retail industries reduce and—even better—prevent nonreceipt
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
160

losses due to identity theft, credit card fraud, bank fraud, mail theft, check schemes, and
Internet fraud.
FIMSI organizes working groups to focus on specific industry and law enforcement
problems. The working groups were created during the regular FIMSI meetings via
members volunteering on specific projects to develop working solutions. The working
groups would then meet separately from the regular meetings to work on the goals at
hand; they would then report back to the general meeting their specific ideas to push
forward as potential new countermeasures. Successful collaborations resulted from the
working relationship between the industry and law enforcement, which was considered a
unique partnership at the time.
The working groups have helped develop a variety of fraud prevention publications as
well as two identity theft training videos. The industry has adopted many of the Postal
Inspection Service’s suggestions, resulting in reduced fraud losses. Group activities
have resulted in new and innovative prevention initiatives, including:
 Card Activation Program (CAP) was an innovative idea developed by a Postal
Inspector that was presented to the credit card industry and adopted. Formerly ‘‘live’’
credit cards mailed to the cardholders were now ‘‘dead’’ until the consumer called the
issuer to provide certain identifying information, such as an SSN to activate the card.
A sticker on front of card had a toll-free number for the cardholder to call. While there
was initial reluctance by some issuers to implement CAP, it soon became the norm for
the entire industry. CAP opened the door to other ideas. Eventually, cardholders could
call in from their home telephones and the cards would be activated without speaking
to a live operator. Initiating a credit card activation program has significantly reduced
fraud losses on cards mailed to consumers.
 Address Verification System (AVS) was developed to curtail mail order/telephone
order (MO/TO) fraud using stolen account numbers, where the address of the order
would be sent to an alternate address, often a CMRA. AVS worked when the mail
order company receiving the order contacted the issuer if the ‘‘order address’’ did not
match the ‘‘account address.’’ AVS was usually used for orders above $300, and it
quickly began to reduce the number of complaints in MO/TO fraud. Identifying
CMRA addresses and other mail drop sites as potential locations for fraud is an
excellent fraud prevention tool.
 Automated Number Information (ANI) was implemented to help stem the threat to
the CAP as suspects began to gain SSNs to activate cards, getting around CAP
completely. ANI worked similar to CAP except that the phone number the cardholder
called from had to match what was on file with the issuer, either the home or the work
phone. This activated the card. CAP soon became CAP/ANI, especially in higher-risk
locations.
 Neural networks were developed as large fraud losses were realized, especially on
high credit line accounts. The ‘‘neural’’ network was like a ‘‘lock’’ surrounding the
account that measured regular spending patterns and sent ‘‘alerts’’ when these regular
patterns were disrupted, such as the amount spent (numerous cash advances), location
of charges (out of state or country), and type of charges (jewelry, rental cars, etc.) that
Law Enforcement Efforts
161

may not be typical of the card holder pattern. The neural network can be adjusted
accordingly, depending on issuer security decisions.
 National Change Of Address Information System (NCOAIS) relates to the United
States Postal Service Change of Address (USPS COA) system whereby the issuer can
‘‘run’’ its address list (which can be in the millions) against the USPS COA system for
a small fee in an attempt to eliminate ‘‘old’’ or bad addresses to clean up their lists.
FIMSI encouraged the credit card industry to use the USPS COA. Doing this reduces
chances of preapproved applications getting into the hands of nonintended addressees
and thus reduces the fraud exposure.10
These are just a sampling of the many successful countermeasures developed since
the formation of FIMSI in 1992. The success of FIMSI is due to the Postal Inspectors’
ongoing interactions and sharing of information with the financial services industry and
the resulting development of new fraud prevention measures. The countermeasures were
developed by the strong partnerships of industry representatives and Postal Inspectors.
These innovative concepts would not have been accomplished without both sides
working together to get them pushed through to the executive level at the companies
involved.
NOTES
1. Postal Inspector Dave McGinnis’s comments to the author, November 12, 2007.
2. Ibid.
3. United States Attorney’s Office, Eastern District of Virginia, Press Release, ‘‘Fifty-
One Defendants Indicted in Federal Identity Theft Round-Up Known as ‘Operation
Reconcile,’’’ November 14, 2006, www.usdoj.gov/usao/vae/Pressreleases/11-
NovemberPDFArchive/06/20061114operationreconcile.pdf.
4. United States Attorney’s Office, Southern District of Florida, Press Release,
‘‘Operation Felony Lane Defendants Sentenced in Bank Fraud and Identity Theft
Conspiracy,’’ April 20, 2007, www.usdoj.gov/usao/fls/PressReleases/070420-
06.html.
5. Postal Inspector Henry Herrera’s comments to the author, March 21, 2008.
6. Letter dated March 11, 1997 from John F. Cronan, Executive Assistant State’s
Attorney, Office of the Chief State’s Attorney, State of Connecticut to the Banking
Committee of the Connecticut General Assembly.
7. Transcript of Public Hearing before the Banks Committee for Proposed Legislation
(Bill No. 5279), Connecticut General Assembly, March 3, 1998, www.cga.ct.gov/
ps98/chr/ba-0303-1530.htm.
8. ‘‘IAFCI Efforts Empower Fraud Prosecution in Connecticut,’’ IAFCI News 147
(Fall 1998), 1.
9. Postal Inspector Jack Galvin’s comments to the author, November 14, 2007.
10. Postal Inspector Randy DeGasperin’s comments to the author, January 15, 2008.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
162

CHAPTER 12
Teens and Young Adults as
Victims and Perpetrators
Every age group is affected by identity theft, especially teenagers and young adults. A
2007 Federal Trade Commission (FTC) study on identity theft found that teenagers and
young adults are the fastest-growing population targeted by identity thieves. The age
group of 18- to 29-year-olds made up 28% of identity theft complainants. Identity
thieves like teens because they usually have an unblemished credit history, and it can
take years before the crime is discovered. Teenagers may not regularly use their Social
Security numbers (SSNs) until late in their teen years or even into their early 20s. Thus,
the crime may not be detected until teens try to obtain credit. If they have not obtained
credit cards or loans, they will not have a credit rating.
Unfortunately, teenagers are also perpetrators of identity theft. In April 2001, a 17-
year-old California girl was charged as an adult in a long-running identity theft scheme.
The teen used stolen identities to apply for bank loans, attempted to wire cash
transactions, and purchased computers and other merchandise over the Internet. She
was also charged with grand theft auto and possession of a firearm.1
A teenage college student at St. John’s University in Jamaica, New York, was the
victim of identity theft allegedly by her former boyfriend and his jealous new girlfriend.
The jealous girlfriend extracted revenge by using the victim’s SSN to drop classes that
the victim had registered for. This occurred several times, and St. John’s Information
Technology Department was able to identity the perpetrator when she logged in as the
163

victim. Both the ex-boyfriend and the jealous girlfriend were suspended from the
college, and the New York Police Department and the Queens, New York, District
Attorney began a criminal investigation of identity theft.2 While this may have started as
a simple prank without a financial motive, the potential damage and impact is evident.
Identity theft can be much more than simply stealing money.
TEENAGE HACKERS
In October 2003, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) charged Van T. Dinh,
a 19-year-old from Pennsylvania, with hacking into an investor’s online account and
making unauthorized trades on the account. The teenager concealed his true identity by
using ‘‘various online aliases, multiple e-mail accounts, and employing foreign Internet
service providers and several anonymizing websites.’’3 This was the first ever identity
theft case litigated by the SEC. The defendant was also investigated by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and prosecuted by the United States Attorney’s Office in
Massachusetts.
The SEC’s detailed October 9, 2003 complaint against Dinh alleged:
Between June 18 and 27, 2003, the defendant purchased over 9,100 Cisco Systems, Inc. put
option contracts with a July 19, 2003 expiration date for $10 per contract. These options
gave Dinh the right to sell Cisco common stock at a price of $15 per share, but would expire
worthless if the price of Cisco stock stayed above $15 per share. As July 19 approached, it
became increasingly likely that the Cisco options would expire worthless.
On July 7, Dinh contacted several members of www.stockcharts.com, an investment analysis
website, in order to obtain their e-mail addresses. Using an alias, Dinh filled out e-mail-
based web forms inquiring about the members’ personal websites; those who replied
revealed their e-mail addresses to Dinh.
The next day, using a second alias, Dinh e-mailed the members who had responded to his
earlier inquiry and invited them to test a new stock-charting tool. The e-mail invitation from
Dinh directed the recipients to a website featuring a downloadable version of the purported
stock-charting tool. In reality, the program was a disguised version of ‘‘The Beast,’’ a
keystroke-logging program4 that allowed Dinh to remotely monitor the computer activity of
those who downloaded it.
At least one recipient of Dinh’s July 8 e-mail, a TD Waterhouse online brokerage customer,
unwittingly downloaded and installed The Beast on his home computer, thereby enabling
Dinh to monitor his computer activities, identify his online brokerage account, and steal his
log-in and password information.
On the morning of July 11, eight days before their expiration, Dinh’s Cisco options were
more than $3 ‘out of the money.’ Nevertheless, Dinh accessed his personal online brokerage
account and placed a series of orders to sell his Cisco options at $5 per contract. These sell
orders went unfilled until Dinh infiltrated the TD Waterhouse account and placed
corresponding orders to buy Cisco options at the $5 contract price. Each of these buy
orders was executed against sell orders from Dinh’s own account, until Dinh had sold 7,200
of his Cisco option contracts and depleted virtually all of the available cash in the TD
Waterhouse account. On July 19, the Cisco options expired worthless.5
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
164

Dinh settled the case with the SEC on May 5, 2004, by consenting to the final
judgment that permanently enjoined him from violating the antifraud provisions of
federal securities law. Dinh previously pleaded guilty to the federal charges of securities
fraud, wire fraud, and unauthorized computer access in furtherance of a fraud and on
May 5 was sentenced to 13 months in prison, three years of supervised release, and a
fine. Prior to his sentencing, Dinh paid restitution in the amount of $46,986 to the victim
investor.6
TEEN DE´ JA` VU
In 1985, Postal Inspectors found teenagers in Long Island, New York, involved in credit
card fraud after the teens came across a primer on a computer bulletin board. The very
detailed how-to guide provided instructions on how to commit credit card fraud. Using
this information, the teens found credit card numbers on other computer sites and
through Dumpster diving in garbage bins, as described in the online manual. Before they
were caught, they had ordered thousands of dollars of computer equipment and had the
merchandise mailed to a nearby home while the occupants were on vacation.
In April 1997 in Los Angeles, California, five teenagers were arrested for essentially
the same scheme as their Long Island counterparts. They used their computer expertise
to acquire victims’ credit card numbers and other information from subscribers to an
online service. They then purchased merchandise over the Internet with the stolen card
numbers. They had the merchandise delivered to a vacant house in their neighborhood.
A search of the teens’ homes found the illegally obtained merchandise, lists of stolen
credit card numbers and personal information, invoices, computer equipment, and
orders from other high school students who wanted to share in the fraud.
Although separated by 12 years and considerable advances in technology, the two
scams were essentially the same.7 And both involved teens.
IDENTITY THEFT HALL OF INFAMY
Abraham Abdallah
Identity theft can become an addictive crime for many perpetrators, and it can start
at an early age. This is true in the case of recidivist identity thief Abraham
Abdallah who learned how easy and lucrative the crime was when he was just a
teenager. Prior to 2001, most people had never heard of this fraudster unless they
were investigating identity theft in New York City or were one of his many
victims. Abdallah had been very active as an identity thief since the mid-1980s,
when he was a teenager in Brooklyn. Arrest after arrest for identity theft–related
(Continued )
Teens and Young Adults as Victims and Perpetrators
165

crimes did not deter him from further criminal activity. More important, he
continually adapted to changing times by embracing technology to expand his
identity theft crimes. In 2001, he hit the big time and a worldwide media spotlight
when he stole the identities of the rich and famous. As a result, Abdallah is as close
as one can come to being the poster child for identity theft.
BEGINNING OF A SERIAL IDENTITY THIEF
Law enforcement first met Abdallah in 1985 after an arrest for attempting to obtain
an individual’s credit report to use for fraudulent credit card applications. After his
arrest, he agreed to assist in the preparation of a training video on preventing
identity theft. TransUnion Credit Bureau produced this video, called Crime of the
’80s. The training video helped to educate law enforcement, the credit card and
banking industries, and the public about identity theft and credit card fraud.
Abdallah appeared on the video discussing his criminal behavior in general and his
involvement in credit card fraud and identity theft in particular.
Abdallah stated on the video that he started doing credit card fraud when he was
16. He described how easy it was to obtain personal information on his victims and
then to steal money from financial institutions. He also stated, ‘‘I just need your
name’’ in order to do credit card fraud and it ‘‘all depends on how good your credit
is’’ as to whether he would be successful. That was true then and it is true now.
When asked how much money he could make doing this fraud, he stated ‘‘a lot.’’
Although he claimed that he had learned from his first arrest and was now
reformed, his promise of going straight was short-lived. Abdallah continued his
criminal behavior over the years. His name became well known to federal agents
and detectives as a result of his numerous arrests for identity theft and related
crimes. At an early age, he saw how easy it was to perpetrate identity theft, and it
became his criminal career.
I was a Postal Inspector in those years and worked mail theft, credit card fraud,
and identity theft cases in Brooklyn, New York. As a result of my work in this area,
I was asked by TransUnion to also appear on the video to discuss my perspective
on the growing problem of identity theft. From my many cases and even more
arrests, I could see it was becoming a major problem throughout the country. Our
concern back then was that the Abdallahs of the world would embrace this crime
and overwhelm law enforcement agencies making the ‘‘Crime of the ’80s’’ the
crime wave of the future. I did not actually meet him at the time but after seeing
him in the video, I knew I would never forget him.
About three or four years later, I was walking through my office in Brooklyn,
New York, when I passed the processing area for arrestees. There I saw Abdallah
in the custody of two other Postal Inspectors. I immediately recognized him. The
other inspectors told me that he was under arrest for credit card fraud. Abdallah
obtained bank and credit card statements stolen from the mail and then opened
mail drops in the victims’ names. He then fraudulently applied for credit cards in
the names of people whose mail was stolen. I asked him about his promise of
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
166

leaving a life of crime behind. All he could do was look at me with a sheepish grin
and say, ‘‘I guess I forgot about that.’’ After that chance meeting, I knew we would
be hearing much more from Abraham Abdallah.
Abdallah continued in his career of crime. In 1994, he did an account takeover
of a credit card belonging to the president and chief executive officer (CEO) of
a large electronics and appliance retailer in the New York metropolitan area.
Posing as the executive, Abdallah submitted a change of address request to the
credit card issuer. The address was changed to a Mail Boxes, Etc. location in
New York City that Abdallah rented. After the change of address, Abdallah then
requested and received a credit line increase. Thanks to the diligent fraud control
department at the bank, losses on the card were minimal, and this criminal acti-
vity was reported to Postal Inspectors. Abdallah was subsequently located
and arrested in December 1995 in the U.S. Virgin Islands. He was eventually
extradited to New York City, where he pleaded guilty in February 1998 to federal
charges of bank fraud, credit card fraud, and wire fraud. Abdallah was sentenced
to 32 months in prison followed by three years of supervised release. The few
years in prison kept Abdallah out of circulation, but the wheels of fraud were hard
at work in his brain.
SADLY, AN ACCURATE PREDICTION
Beginning in September 2000 and continuing into early March 2001, Abdallah,
now aided by his brother and others, embarked on the most ambitious scheme of
his criminal career. It would land him in the media’s crosshairs for masterminding
the largest theft of identities at the time. According to federal authorities, Abdallah
devised a scheme to steal approximately $22 million from a variety of wealthy
individuals, corporations, and financial institutions. He picked some of his victims
from the Forbes magazine list of ‘‘The 400 Richest People in America.’’
Abdallah’s scheme was successful as he conned banks and brokerage firms to
transfer the true account holders’ funds to accounts that he controlled.
Never one to forget his roots in identity theft, Abdallah duped the major credit
bureaus, including Experian and Equifax, into providing him the credit reports on
the country’s wealthiest people using the names of investment banking firms
Goldman Sachs and Bear Stearns as if they were the ones requesting the credit
reports. Once he had this personal information, he cloned his victims’ identities to
gain access to their brokerage accounts at Merrill Lynch, Fidelity Investments, and
elsewhere. He opened accounts at investment firms using the identities of his rich
victims. He posed as a chief executive of a major corporation and attempted to
liquidate a large amount of money from a U.S. account and transfer it out of the
country. As part of the scheme, he altered a $30 check to $6.5 million for deposit in
an account fraudulently opened in the name of a president of a large corporation.
During the time of this scheme, he held his day job as an unobtrusive bus-
boy. That was just a cover for his move to the big time. He used sophisticated
(Continued )
Teens and Young Adults as Victims and Perpetrators
167

Web-enabled cell phones, virtual voicemail, email accounts, and computers at
public libraries to avoid detection. He rented a mail drop in Manhattan in the name
of Microsoft cofounder Paul Allen. ‘‘What this guy was doing was setting up
mailboxes all over the place,’’ said a U.S. Postal Inspector involved in the
investigation.8 He also returned to the tried-and-true method of identity theft
by stealing mail with personal information.
The crime spree was detected when Siebel Systems reported to the New York
Police Department that someone had sent an email requesting a wire transfer of
$10 million from Siebel founder Thomas Siebel’s Merrill Lynch account to an
account that Abdallah had set up. Law enforcement was on his trail for six months
before arresting him in a sting operation in Brooklyn. He had ordered equipment to
clone credit cards with stolen account information. The police and federal agents
were waiting for Abdallah to pick up the package at a mail drop, and when his
accomplice showed up, they followed him. The accomplice eventually led them to
Abdallah, who was arrested on March 7, 2001. This high school dropout had
finally gained infamy but not fortune.
In his possession at the time of his arrest was a copy of the October 5, 2000 issue
of Forbes with the article entitled ‘‘The 400 Richest People in America.’’ He had
handwritten notes including the SSNs, addresses, investment accounts, and other
personal information on many of the individuals in the article including Steven
Spielberg, Ted Turner, Warren Buffett, Oprah Winfrey, Paul Allen, Sumner
Redstone, Michael Eisner, and scores of others. He had over 800 fraudulent
credit cards and tens of thousands of blank credit cards, all waiting to be cloned for
identity theft. He also had lists containing credit card numbers and other data on
hundreds of individuals as well as seven handwritten steps on how to commit
identity theft.
On October 3, 2002, Abdallah pleaded guilty in federal court to numerous
counts of mail and wire fraud. He was subsequently sentenced to 10 years and 10
months in prison. Abdallah’s criminal career included 11 arrests by the New York
Police Department and another 14 by federal law enforcement for credit card
fraud, bank fraud, mail fraud, and other crimes. Postal Inspectors alone arrested
him four times since 1986 for mail fraud and related crimes alone. ‘‘I wish I could
say that this was all about money—then I’d have a reason to explain why I’ve
ruined my life,’’ stated Abdallah at his sentencing.9
Abdallah has been a con artist his entire adult life. He conned victims and he also
conned judges. At his February 1998 sentencing for stealing almost $100,000
using fraudulent credit cards, he begged for mercy. ‘‘I won’t let you down by
reappearing before you in the future,’’ he promised the federal judge.10 His silver
tongue obviously worked its magic as the judge sentenced Abdallah to a very
lenient 2.5-year prison sentence. As soon as he got out of jail in 2000, he went right
back to what he did best—stealing identities. This is why Abdallah is a charter
member of the Identity Theft Hall of Infamy.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
168

IT IS SO EASY, EVEN A CHILD CAN DO IT
Identity theft is so prevalent and so easy to commit that one can argue that anyone
criminally minded can do it, even a child. While I say that somewhat facetiously, in
reality teenagers and young adults, mere children, have been the perpetrators. That was
the case in San Diego in March 2005 when 34 defendants, all between the ages of 18 and
22, were indicted in one of the largest identity theft rings ever prosecuted in the state of
California. ‘‘This was a sophisticated crime ring that involved account holders,
recruiters, lieutenants, and the top bosses.’’11
Mail was stolen from homes in the San Diego area with the ring targeting outgoing
mail containing checks. The thieves then chemically washed the checks to remove the
inked writing, entered new information, and cashed them through bank accounts of the
various accomplices they recruited. Between 2002 and 2005, the gang recruited young
adults with bank accounts into which the stolen and altered checks were deposited. Once
deposited, large withdrawals were made from the accounts. All account holders then
filed affidavits with the financial institutions claiming they were victims of fraud and
forgery so they would not be suspected of the crime.
The case first came to light when individual homeowners in San Diego started
complaining that checks they had mailed had not been received by the addressees. The
outgoing mail was generally for payment of mortgages, utilities, credit cards, and other
service payments, and had been placed in Postal Service collection boxes or in their
home mailboxes for carrier pickup. Many of the complainants provided copies of their
altered and deposited checks. Postal Inspectors noticed that many of the checks had
similar handwriting styles and eventually identified three distinct handwriting styles.
They also determined that most of the account holders were teenagers or young adults
and that most shared the same story of how their accounts were breached.
The account holders stated that they had lost or misplaced their automated teller
machine (ATM) cards, their personal identification numbers (PIN), their bank account
numbers, and sometimes their California driver’s licenses and Social Security cards.
Many also filed police reports claiming thefts of their purses or wallets and stating that
the stolen personal information was contained therein. This explanation and variations
of it were provided over and over again by the account holders. Some of the accounts had
A HISTORY LESSON
We cannot forget how identity theft has grown and the serious impact it has had.
Yet I am not sure we all learn the lesson that history teaches. A few years ago I
attended a fraud seminar in California. One of the speakers was a respected and
experienced professional involved in the detection of healthcare fraud. He was
extremely knowledgeable about the various healthcare frauds and the problem of
fraud. You can imagine my surprise when he provided the attendees a detailed
resume that listed his date of birth, SSN, employment history, his wife’s name,
date of marriage, and children’s names. Imagine what a fraudster such as Abdallah
would do with this information!
Teens and Young Adults as Victims and Perpetrators
169

five or six stolen checks deposited, and the amounts were generally between $3,000 and
$7,000.
In reality, these account holders were willing participants in the fraud. They were
recruited by members of the gang and offered approximately $1,000 to $2,000 for each
check deposited into their accounts. In some cases, they received less than the promised
amounts. These ‘‘walkers’’ would deposit the stolen checks that other gang members, the
‘‘runners,’’ had stolen and washed. Two main gang leaders came up with this fraud, then
it took on a life of its own because it was so easy to do.
The United States Postal Inspection Service was the investigative agency on the case.
Postal Inspector Robert Diaz was one of the case agents. Inspector Diaz is a highly
experienced federal agent who has investigated identity theft, credit card fraud, mail
theft, counterfeiting, forgery, and the manufacture of phony identification. In interview
after interview in this case, he and other investigators were told the same story by the
account holders who willingly participated in the identity theft scheme for money. Here
is one of the confessions:
On May 1, 2003, Postal Inspectors interviewed Johanne Puntanilla regarding the $7,500
check which had been negotiated through her account. She stated that she was approached
by her cousin, Jeffree Albano Punzal, and asked if she needed any money. Puntanilla stated
that she did and Punzal subsequently got her in contact with an unnamed ‘‘friend’’ who
would explain what she needed to do. This friend contacted Puntanilla via Punzal’s cell
phone. The friend explained that she would need to provide him with her ATM card, PIN
number and Washington Mutual account number. She was told that several checks would be
deposited into her checking account and funds would be subsequently withdrawn. She stated
she was told by the friend not to report her ‘‘missing’’ information until after she was
contacted.
Once the fraudulent checks were deposited and withdrawn through her account, she was
contacted by the friend and was told to contact her bank to report that her cards were
missing. She stated she was told to fill out an affidavit of fraud and forgery with the bank.
She stated that the friend told her to ‘‘play dumb’’ and act as though she didn’t know
anything if approached by the police or the bank. Puntanilla stated that she has never seen
the friend and has only spoken to him via her cousin’s cell phone. She stated that shortly
after she spoke with the bank, she received $2,000 from her cousin. She stated the money was
payment for providing the friend with her account information.12
Most of the defendants had no prior criminal records. Inspector Diaz’s investigation
used interviews of the mail theft victims, document analysis, and handwriting compari-
sons to gather the initial evidence. Interviews of the account holders provided admis-
sions of guilt that resulted in their ‘‘flipping’’ and providing evidence against the other
gang members. Inspector Diaz also used electronic surveillance to record incriminating
conversations between the cooperating subjects and other targets. Search warrants
provided additional evidence of wrongdoing.
The fraud loss in this case totaled approximately $1 million. Twenty-nine defendants
received felony convictions for their crimes. The two gang leaders received sentences
of between two and three years in state prison and $145,000 in court-ordered restitu-
tion. The runners received minimal jail terms, generally between three months and
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
170

16 months. The account holders received probation and were ordered to pay restitution
equivalent to the amount of the stolen checks deposited into their accounts. Clearly, the
defendants were very lucky to have received such minimal jail time for their crimes.
Their ages and lack of criminal histories benefited them but only so much.
In reflecting on the case, Inspector Diaz commented:
The unfortunate aspect to the case is that all these account holders were young adults just
starting off with no real criminal backgrounds. They thought what they were doing by selling
their account information was a victimless crime not hurting anyone. In fact, the person they
really hurt was themselves. They now have to deal with paying restitution to the banks in the
thousands of dollars in addition to the associated problems they will face in the future with
having a felony conviction on their record.13
EVIL MENTOR
A California woman exploited the college students who worked for her by stealing their
identities. Christina Kyeonghee Kim owned a restaurant in Arcata, California, and
employed students attending a nearby university. She fraudulently used the students’
SSNs, driver’s licenses, and dates of birth that they provided for employment for identity
theft. She used this stolen personal information to create new identities as well as to alter
her own identity with some of the purloined information. Kim opened 49 bank accounts
and credit cards under the stolen identities and used the various lines of credit. Among
the many things she purchased with these defrauded funds were a new home, designer
clothes, and jewelry.
In all, she obtained more than $1 million through this identity theft scheme. But it did
not stop there. Proving my Potato Chip Theory of Fraud, as previously detailed in
Chapter 4, Kim also engaged in insurance fraud by falsely claiming a burglary at her
home. She claimed that personal items, including valuable artwork, were stolen in the
burglary, and she provided false documentation to the insurance company claiming
the value of the items stolen was between $800,000 and $1 million. In April 2006, the
United States Attorney in San Francisco charged Kim with 51 counts of bank fraud, mail
fraud, and aggravated identity theft.14
Kim’s scheme lasted seven years. Making matters even worse, she acted as an
informal ‘‘mentor’’ to Korean foreign exchange students attending Humboldt State Univer-
sity. Kim used her position of trust as an employer and mentor to steal the personal
identifying information of her family members, employees, and young foreign exchange
students attending Humboldt State University.15
She took advantage of the very young people she was entrusted with mentoring and
watching over as their employer. She violated that trust when she stole their identities
and forged their signatures on bank and credit card applications, checks, and other line of
credit documents. She eventually pleaded guilty to 47 counts of the indictment in March
2007. On December 12, 2007, Kim was sentenced to 54 months imprisonment.16
Teens and Young Adults as Victims and Perpetrators
171

CHILD ID THEFT
As vigilant as adults are about safeguarding their identities, they must be aware that
children can also be victims of identity theft. That is because they have SSNs and birth
certificates that can be easily compromised. As a result, identity thieves are targeting
children more and more. Children as victims of identity theft present a unique set of
problems, and special steps must be taken to protect them. Children can be easy targets
for identity thieves, since often no one is monitoring their credit. Thus, thieves can use
the identity for years, leaving an unsuspecting minor with a shattered credit history.
Thieves will acquire children’s SSNs, often selling them to illegal immigrants who
use them to obtain driver’s licenses or open bank accounts. The stolen SSNs can also be
used by criminals to start a new life, confident that they will have years before the fraud
is detected.17
Although the numbers of identity theft complaints involving children are increasing,
they still remain small. As of 2005, only about 5% of the complaints received by the FTC
involved minors. However, the true number may well be much higher, since the crime
can remain undetected for years.18 Many times a child’s identity is not stolen by a
complete stranger but rather a family member or friend. Unscrupulous relatives will
latch onto a child’s unblemished credit history and exploit it for their own ends.19
Often it is the parent who is the culprit in stealing the child’s identity. Parents have
access to a child’s birth certificate and SSN. After damaging their own credit through
unpaid debt and bankruptcy, their children’s untouched credit is a tempting resource. In
2002, a father in Billings, Montana, was sentenced to five years in prison for obtaining
credit cards in his daughter’s name and then running up $12,000 in unpaid charges. In
another case, a father discovered that his ex-wife opened credit cards in their young
daughter’s name. Again proving that the Potato Chip Theory of Fraud applies to identity
thieves, the ex-wife was working in a nursing home and also stole $125,000 from an
Alzheimer’s patient. She was arrested and convicted.20
In a study conducted by the Identity Theft Resource Center on the subject of child
identity theft, more than half the victims had their identities stolen between the year of
birth and age five. In most cases, the culprit was a parent, and the stolen identity was
used for work and/or credit.21 Yet there are many others who have access to a child’s
personal information. A three-month-old baby had his identity stolen by a nurse in the
hospital where he was born. The parents determined that the identity theft occurred in
the hospital when the child ‘‘was mailed a bill for extensive back-injury treatments’’ that
clearly was for an adult patient.22
There are things parents can do to protect their children from identity theft and its
devastating effects. If an organization asks for the child’s SSN number or a copy of a
birth certificate, ask if the information is really necessary. Except for government-
related requests, the SSN is often unnecessary. A child’s credit report should be checked
from time to time; if a credit report exists for a child who should not have one, that is a
red flag that fraud is being committed. Credit bureaus do not create credit reports until a
person begins to apply for credit. Another red flag is the receipt of credit card
solicitations when the child had never applied for credit, unless a parent had already
added the child’s name to an existing credit card or opened an account.23
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
172

PREVENTION AND SECURITY FOR TEENAGERS AND YOUNG ADULTS
Just as for all age groups, teens and young adults need to check their credit reports
annually. If teens do not have credit cards or loans, they should not have credit histories.
If they do find an active credit report, it might be an indicator of potential fraud and
the need for further inquiry. The same prevention rules apply for teens as for adults.
Qwest Communications has rolled out a unique education and awareness program
for teenagers to protect them from becoming victims of identity theft. The showcase of
the initiative is an interactive Web site24 that provides excellent prevention resources.
The site provides videos, lesson plans, tips, and warning signs of identity theft for teens
as well as the top five ways that teens can become victims including:
1.
Sharing too much personal information on social networking sites
2.
Trusting and talking to strangers they meet on these sites
3.
Posting SSNs, dates of birth, and other personal information at online job sites
4.
Falling victim to phishing scams
5.
Storing SSNs and other personal information on cell phones that can easily be lost
or stolen25
The site provides a number of red-flag indicators of identity theft that are specific to
teens but can be useful for others as well. They include:
 Applying for your first driver’s license and learning that one has previously been
issued
 Finding out about outstanding tickets for traffic infractions that you did not incur and
that have not been paid
 Submitting credit card and student loan applications that are being denied
 Receiving collection statements for unknown debt26
Teen identity theft prevention recommendations from Qwest include:
 Be careful to whom you provide your SSN and other personal information.
 Do not carry your Social Security card or birth certificate, and keep them in a secure
location.
 Do not give your driver’s license to anyone, even a friend.
 Keep your credit cards, checkbook, and cellular phone in a safe place.
 Do not give personal information to anyone unless you are absolutely sure of who
they are and why they need the information.
 Order a copy of your credit report. This is especially important when applying for
student loans.
 Insist that your college or university not use your SSN as your college identification
number.27
Teens and Young Adults as Victims and Perpetrators
173

NOTES
1. ‘‘Teen Pleads Innocent to Identity Theft Charges,’’ MSNBC.com. August 6, 2001,
www.msnbc.com/local/knbc/nbc0kz982qc.asp.
2. John Cody, ‘‘Two Students under Investigation in Identity Theft Case,’’ The Torch
(St. John’s University), December 1, 2004, 3.
3. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Litigation Release No. 18696, ‘‘SEC
Settles Case Against Hacker Charged with Breaking into Investor’s Online Ac-
count, Making Unauthorized Trades,’’ May 6, 2004, www.sec.gov/litigation/litre-
leases/lr18696.htm.
4. A keystroke-logging program is a hacking tool that allows someone to remotely
monitor the actual computer keystrokes of another Internet user without their
knowledge via a surreptitiously installed program on the unsuspecting person’s
computer. A ‘‘Trojan horse’’ is another hacking program in which malicious or
harmful code is secretly inserted into the victim’s computer but disguised as
seemingly harmless files or data. The unwitting victim is deceived into thinking
that the program is something other than what it is purported to be. This allows the
hacker to gain control of the breached computer.
5. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Litigation Release No. 18401, ‘‘SEC
Charges Hacker with Breaking Into Investor’s Online Account, Placing Un-
authorized Buy Order,’’ October 9, 2003, www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases/
lr18401.htm.
6. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Litigation Release No. 18696, ‘‘SEC
Settles Case Against Hacker.’’
7. Martin T. Biegelman, ‘‘Fraud on the Internet: Postal Inspectors Confront a New
Challenge,’’ Law Enforcement Report, United States Postal Inspection Service
(Summer 1998), 2.
8. Greg Farrell, ‘‘Hacker Stole Identities of Richest Americans,’’ USA Today, April 13,
2001, www.usatoday.com/life/cyber/tech/2001-03-20-hacker.htm.
9. Bob Sullivan, Your Evil Twin: Behind the Identity Theft Epidemic (Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, 2004), 27.
10. Mike Claffey, Robert Gearty, and Dave Goldiner, ‘‘Celeb Hack Had Knack,’’ Daily
News, March 21, 2001, 9.
11. Office of the District Attorney, County of San Diego, News Release, ‘‘San Diego
County’s Largest Identity Theft Ring Broken Up, 34 Indicted on 66 Felony
charges,’’ March 18, 2005.
12. Affidavit for Search Warrant, Superior Court of San Diego, Central Division, sworn
to by Postal Inspector Robert Diaz, August 8, 2003.
13. Postal Inspector Robert Diaz’s comments to the author on January 23, 2008.
14. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the United States Attorney, Northern District
of California, News Release, ‘‘Humboldt Woman Arraigned on Charges of Stealing
Student Identities to Make More than $1 Million,’’ April 12, 2006, sanfrancisco
.fbi.gov/dojpressrel/2006/sf041206a.htm.
15. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the United States Attorney, Northern District
of California, News Release, ‘‘Arcata Business Woman Sentenced to 41/2 Years in
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
174

Million Dollar Identity Theft Scheme,’’ December 13, 2007, www.usdoj.gov/usao/
can/press/2007/2007_12_13_kim.sentenced.press.html.
16. Ibid.
17. Barbara Whitaker, ‘‘Never Too Young to Have Your Identity Stolen,’’ New York
Times, July 21, 2007.
18. Brigitte
Yuille,
‘‘Stolen
Innocence:
Child
Identity
Theft,’’
Bankrate.com,
www.bankrate.com/nltrack/news/debt/20070103_child_identity_theft_a1.asp.
19. John Leland, ‘‘Identity Thief Often Found in Family Photo,’’ New York Times,
November 13, 2006; Janet Shamlian, ‘‘Main Culprits in Kids’ ID Theft? Family
Members,’’ MSNBC.com, March 3, 2005, www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7045490.
20. Abigail Goldman, ‘‘Kid’s Identity Theft Prevalent—Often by a Family Member,’’
Arizona Daily Star, December 17, 2006, A7.
21. Julian Mincer, ‘‘Identity Theft Targets Children,’’ Wall Street Journal, November
21, 2007, D2.
22. Goldman, ‘‘Kid’s Identity Theft Prevalent.’’
23. Brigitte Yuille, ‘‘7 Steps to Protect Your Child from Identity Theft.’’ Bankrate
.com,
www.bankrate.com/nltrack/news/debt/20070103_child_identity_theft_b1
.asp?caret=3.
24. www.incredibleinternet.com/identity-theft.
25. Teens and Identity Theft, Qwest Communications, www.incredibleinternet.com/
identity-theft/protect-your-identity.
26. Tips for Teens, Qwest Communications, www.incredibleinternet.com/related/tips-
for-teens.
27. Ibid.
Teens and Young Adults as Victims and Perpetrators
175


CHAPTER 13
Victims and Victimization
‘‘I keep telling them I didn’t do it and I have to keep proving it. The banks and the police
just don’t believe me that I’m the victim here.’’ That is something I have heard from
victims of identity theft for three decades. In case after case, they have been frustrated
trying to convince financial institutions and law enforcement of their victimization.
Even when they can clearly demonstrate the crimes levied against them, they are often at
a loss to restore their credit history and reputation.
Survey after survey finds that this is the case. Identity theft is the evil gift that just
keeps on giving. A June 2005 Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company survey of 1,097
identity theft victims found that most spend an average of 81 hours cleaning up their
damaged credit. Even more disturbing, the survey found that 28% of victims were
unable to restore their identities and clean up their credit even after a year of trying. ‘‘The
survey shows that recovering from identity theft can be difficult, costly and stressful, but
what is most alarming is that despite the time, money, and personal duress victims go
through, resolution is not always achieved,’’ said Kirk Herath, associate general counsel
for Nationwide.1 Although many victims face minimal financial impact, some are not as
lucky, as indicated by the results of this study. Debit card holders for one are usually not
reimbursed for their losses. Still, the monetary impact can be eclipsed by the reputational
and emotional toll.
There has been story after story of victims who tried to report their victimization to the
police but were rebuffed. Either the police claimed they did not have jurisdiction to
investigate identity theft or did not believe the victim. Cleaning up one’s credit report
177

can take time and effort. Credit reports are used for much more than opening credit card
accounts and obtaining loans. They are necessary for employment decisions,
renting apartments, and obtaining utility services, for instance. Fraudsters can keep
using stolen identities for years and share the information with other criminals who use
it for their scams. The stolen identity can live on for years, continuing to damage the
victim.
‘‘With ID theft, you have to keep proving you are innocent,’’ said an identity theft
victim in Washington State. ‘‘If your house is robbed, you call the police, you fill out the
insurance forms—you don’t have to constantly be on the defensive to show you didn’t
rob it yourself.’’2
AN IDENTITY THEFT NIGHTMARE
The frightening story of a Southern California man who had his credit and his life
ruined for 13 years by an identity thief in Florida is the ultimate victimization. Imagine
being negatively affected year after year and unable to stop it. That is what happened
to Clay Henderson, who lost his wallet while vacationing in Daytona Beach, Florida, in
1987. Douglas Staus was on the run from law enforcement in New Jersey for fraud
charges. He found the wallet and quickly took over Henderson’s identity. Over the years,
Staus purchased cars, obtained credit cards and loans, and got married twice, all under
Henderson’s name, Social Security number (SSN), and date of birth. He started a
business, but complaints started when he failed to deliver what he promised.
While Staus was living a lie, Henderson’s life was deteriorating. The identity theft
damaged Henderson’s credit and impacted his employment. He was unable to get credit
cards or apartment leases. His federal job required a security clearance, but due to
Staus’s criminal record, Henderson received a limited clearance. Henderson protested,
but no one would listen. The limited security clearance resulted in poor career
opportunities. Eventually he spent a week in jail when police picked him up on an
arrest warrant out of Florida thinking he was Staus.
Henderson tried desperately to get someone’s attention. He reached out to law
enforcement all over Florida to help him. At last, police in Hernando County, Florida,
heard his anguish. Justice finally arrived in August 2001, when law enforcement arrested
Staus for a multitude of fraud and identity theft crimes. Staus even gave police a phony
name when he was arrested.3 Justice was served, but it took 13 years to end Henderson’s
nightmare. ‘‘Justice delayed is justice denied,’’ as British statesman and prime minister
William E. Gladstone famously said.
GETTING A NEW SSN IF ALL ELSE FAILS
Even when all instances of identity theft have stopped, credit bureaus may not have
corrected victims’ credit files. Victims must continually check their credit reports for
fraudulent accounts, phony addresses, and fraud losses in their names. In extreme cases
of identity theft, where there was such extensive use of one’s stolen SSN and identity
that there was little chance of repairing the credit history, victims have requested and
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
178

received new SSNs. It is not an easy or common practice but it can be done. Here is what
the Social Security Administration has to say about this:
Should you get a new Social Security number?
If you have done all you can to fix the problems resulting from misuse of your Social Security
number and someone still is using your number, we may assign you a new number.
You cannot get a new Social Security number:

To avoid the consequences of filing for bankruptcy;

If you intend to avoid the law or your legal responsibility; or

If your Social Security card is lost or stolen, but there is no evidence that someone is using
your number.
If you decide to apply for a new number, you will need to prove your age, U.S. citizenship or
lawful immigration status and identity. For more information, ask for Your Social Security
Number And Card (Publication Number 05-10002).
You also will need to provide evidence that you still are being disadvantaged by the misuse.
Keep in mind that a new number probably will not solve all your problems. This is because
other governmental agencies (such as the Internal Revenue Service and state motor vehicle
agencies) and private businesses (such as banks and credit reporting companies) likely will
have records under your old number. Also, because credit reporting companies use the
number, along with other personal information, to identify your credit record, using a new
number will not guarantee you a fresh start. This is especially true if your other personal
information, such as your name and address, remains the same.
If you receive a new Social Security number, you will not be able use the old number anymore.
For some victims of identity theft, a new number actually creates new problems. If the old
credit information is not associated with the new number, the absence of any credit history
under the new number may make it more difficult for you to get credit.4
OPERATION GAFFLE
A highly sophisticated, multijurisdictional, organized identity theft, counterfeit credit
and debit card fraud, and fencing ring was crippled on December 8, 2005, when 13 of the
group’s major participants were arrested by agents from the United States Postal
Inspection Service in Newark, New Jersey, and detectives from the Hudson County,
New Jersey, Prosecutor’s Office. The law enforcement officers dubbed this investiga-
tion Operation Gaffle after the self-proclaimed name of the gang, the ‘‘Gaffle Kings.’’ It
was a most appropriate name. ‘‘Gaffle’’ is an urban slang term meaning to steal, rip-off,
and scam, which was exactly what this group of criminals was doing.
In a series of early morning raids, Postal Inspectors and Hudson County Detectives, in
cooperation with the New York County District Attorney’s Office, the Manhattan and
Bronx District Attorneys, the New York City Police Department, and the Secret Service,
executed a series of coordinated search and arrest warrants in New Jersey and
throughout New York City. Simultaneous search and arrest warrants were also executed
Victims and Victimization
179

in Massachusetts, Florida, South Carolina, and Georgia. Postal Inspectors from the
Newark Division and detectives from the Hudson County Prosecutors Office were
assisted by Postal Inspectors and local authorities in those jurisdictions.
The investigation began in June 2005, as a spin-off from an earlier investigation by
Newark Postal Inspectors and the Hudson County Prosecutors Office. In this earlier
case, subsequent to the arrest of Frank ‘‘TK’’ Robertson, a forensic examination of
his computer uncovered over 2,000 victim names, addresses, and credit card account
numbers. Robertson was a career criminal with 18 arrests over the years for credit card
and identity theft–crimes. The accounts on Robertson’s computer were found to have
over $1.3 million worth of fraudulent transactions. In this case, an informant was utilized
and a subsequent wiretap was authorized on the cell phones of four of the main players.
Following a trail of fraud and deception, Postal Inspectors and detectives uncovered
an additional $1 million in fraudulent credit card purchases in more than 30 different
states as well as fraudulent withdrawals from automated teller machines (ATMs).
The leaders of the organization, Robertson of Union City, New Jersey, and Chris-
topher Mack of Manhattan, were involved in the mass production of counterfeit credit
and debit cards, fraudulently encoded with the legitimate account numbers of un-
suspecting victims, as well as the making of false identification. Robertson and Mack
purchased the compromised account information from computer hackers from outside of
the United States who were able to penetrate corporate databases to obtain the individual
account information of the victims. The two made payments to these sources through the
use of e-money, an anonymous form of digital currency.
This highly sophisticated operation conducted much of its business on the Internet,
with the targets sharing their stolen information via email. The group illegally obtained
cash and merchandise in several ways. Using counterfeit credit cards, the criminals
targeted large electronic retailers and warehouse stores. Coconspirators, many from
New Jersey, and others who were friends or relatives of the main players, would travel to
different states, from Maine to Florida, to use the fraudulent cards. High-end electronics
were routinely purchased in these states, transported back to the New Jersey/New York
area and then resold, either to fences in New York City or on eBay. Robertson and Mack
also routinely mailed counterfeit cards to their associates in various other states, who
would also make fraudulent retail purchases, then ship a portion of the items to them as
payment for the cards.
Investigators also seized recently mailed items, meant for sale on eBay, while in
transit. In another aspect of the conspiracy, the suspects used counterfeit bank debit
cards, encoded with legitimate account numbers belonging to unsuspecting victims, to
make fraudulent withdrawals of hundreds of thousands of dollars from ATM machines
in the New Jersey/New York area and other states. The victims of this organized
enterprise included hundreds of members of the State Employees Credit Union of North
Carolina, whose account numbers and related PIN codes were compromised by hackers
located in Estonia and Italy.
Postal Inspectors, Hudson County detectives, and other law enforcement agents
recovered hundreds of counterfeit credit cards and hundreds of counterfeit Bank of
America ATM cards as well as the computers and machines to make these cards.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
180

Approximately $60,000 in cash was also recovered. Search warrants were executed at
a number of storage facilities in New Jersey, New York, and Georgia, where the
defendants stored stolen merchandise. Additional search warrants were executed at two
New York stores involved in the fencing process. A total of five postal trailer trucks were
filled with seized merchandise. Additional seizures were made including property
belonging to Robertson and Mack. Postal Inspectors in Atlanta, Boston, Charlotte,
Miami, and New York assisted in this excellent investigative effort.
Subsequently, all the defendants in Operation Gaffle pleaded guilty to state charges of
conspiracy before Judge Kevin Callahan in Hudson County Superior Court and were
sentenced to prison terms. Frank ‘‘TK’’ Robertson and Christopher ‘‘C-Mack’’ Mack
each received 12 years in prison. Other key conspirators received between five and
10 years in prison. In addition to pleading guilty to the state charges, extra federal prison
time was imposed on several of the defendants as a result of federal probation violations.
The computer expertise of identity theft thieves continues to grow, as do the criminal
histories of the suspects. In this case, the main players had previous arrests ranging from
murder to drug dealing, armed robbery, assault, and fraud. This group was able to enlist
people with various jobs (bank employees, gas station attendants, business owners, car
dealership and healthcare employees, along with the unemployed) to assist in their
criminal activity. In addition, this case highlighted the fact that state and federal law
enforcement working together is a must in order to stop identity thieves who use
jurisdictional issues to advance their criminal activity. ‘‘You can steal more money with
a pen and a computer than with a gun, and because of this, identity theft numbers will
continue to rise,’’ said Postal Inspector Scott Mathews, the case agent in this investiga-
tion. ‘‘All companies and law enforcement agencies must take an aggressive and
relentless approach to combating this epidemic with the understanding security will
increase revenue while removing the ‘cost of doing business’ attitude.’’5
VICTIM AND WITNESS RIGHTS
Law enforcement has placed a particular emphasis on protecting the rights of victims
and witnesses of crime. This book is focused on the evils of identity theft and ensuring
the rights of those impacted by this or any crime is paramount. Content from an excellent
brochure on victim and witness rights published by the U.S. Postal Inspection Service
that is germane to all victims and witnesses follows.
Know Your Rights: A Guide for Victims and Witnesses of Crime
Publication 308, August 2005
Your Rights
As a victim or witness of a crime, you have these rights:
1.
The right to be reasonably protected from the accused.
2.
The right to reasonable, accurate, and timely notice of any public court proceeding,
or any parole proceeding, involving the crime or of any release or escape of the
accused.
Victims and Victimization
181

3.
The right not to be excluded from any such public court proceeding, unless the court,
after receiving clear and convincing evidence, determines that testimony by the
victim would be materially altered if the victim heard other testimony at that
proceeding.
4.
The right to be reasonably heard at any public proceeding in the district court
involving release, plea, sentencing, or any parole proceeding.
5.
The reasonable right to confer with the attorney for the government in the case.
6.
The right to full and timely restitution as provided in the law.
7.
The right to proceedings free from unreasonable delay.
8.
The right to be treated with fairness and with respect for the victim’s dignity and
privacy.
As an agency of federal law enforcement professionals, the U.S. Postal Inspection Service is
concerned about problems that may be experienced by victims and witnesses of crime. We
know that, as a victim or witness, you may feel anger, confusion, frustration, or fear as a
result of your experience.
We have prepared this information to help you deal with problems and questions that may
surface during an investigation and to provide you with a better understanding of the
criminal justice system. We have included information and services available to you as a
victim or witness.
We hope this information will be helpful. We encourage you to contact the Postal
Inspector handling your case or your Victim/Witness Coordinator if you have further
questions.
Investigating the Case
Although the days and months ahead may be difficult for you and your family, your
assistance is important to ensure that justice is served.
During the investigation, you will be informed of the status of the case. Throughout the
investigation, a Postal Inspector or Victim/Witness Coordinator will remain your primary
contact. If you have questions, be sure to contact one of these individuals as soon as possible.
A criminal investigation can be complex and lengthy. It may involve several federal and
local agencies.
Remember, your interests are important to us. We are here to help answer any questions you
may have.
If your case is accepted for prosecution, you will be contacted by the attorney’s office
assigned to handle your case. Most prosecutors’ offices have a Victim/Witness Coordinator
to help answer your questions and assist with your concerns during the pretrial and court
phases of the case.
If You Are Threatened or Harassed
If anyone threatens you, or you feel you are being harassed because of your cooperation
with authorities, report it to your Postal Inspector. There are penalties for harassment and
other threats. The Inspector may discuss protective measures with you. If you feel you are
in immediate danger, dial 911.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
182

If You Were Physically Injured
If you were injured or threatened with physical injury as a result of the crime, and lack
insurance or other means to pay for medical bills, check your state’s crime victim
compensation program. In many states, the cost of counseling, lost wages, and certain
funeral expenses may be covered.
The law varies by state, but your Victim/Witness Coordinator can provide you with the
necessary information.
If You Had Property Stolen
As part of its investigation, the Postal Inspection Service hopes to recover any property or
money stolen from you. If we recover it, we will notify you and make every effort to have it
returned as quickly as possible. Restitution may be available for property not recovered or
for the cost of any necessary repairs.
Assisting with Your Employer
Upon request, during the investigation and court processing, we can call your employer to
discuss the importance of your role as a victim or witness to the government’s case and to
explain any absences you may need to take from your workplace.
Restitution
If a person is arrested and successfully prosecuted in your case, you may be eligible for
restitution. This is a court-ordered payment made to you as a victim of a crime. Upon
conviction, the offender pays out-of-pocket expenses resulting from your victimization.
If the court orders restitution at sentencing, it may consider the offender’s present and
future ability to pay. If the defendant has assets, the court may order restitution to be paid
immediately or in scheduled payments. In many cases, however, the proceeds of the crime
are no longer available and the defendant does not have sufficient assets to pay
restitution. It is possible, therefore, that a victim may not receive restitution.
Other remedies may include a civil suit or small claims court action. Restitution cannot be
avoided through bankruptcy.
Assisting with Your Recovery
Victims and witnesses are emotionally affected by crime. Although everyone reacts
differently, victims and witnesses commonly report some of these behaviors:

Increased concern for your personal safety and that of family members. You may
naturally be more cautious.

Trouble concentrating on the job.

Difficulty handling everyday problems or feeling overwhelmed.

Going over the circumstances of the crime again and again, and thinking about what
might have gone differently.

Difficulties from financial loss.
These problems are normal, and they may decrease with time. Talking with the Postal
Inspector handling your case or a Victim/Witness Coordinator may assist in your recovery.
Victims and Victimization
183

If the defendant either pleads guilty or is found guilty, you have the opportunity, before
sentencing to submit an ‘‘Impact Statement’’ describing the emotional, physical, and
financial effects of the crime on your life and that of your family. A Victim/Witness
Coordinator can help prepare the statement, if needed.
For Assistance
Call the Victim/Witness Coordinator at your local Postal Inspection Service office for
information on the status of your case. If the case is prosecuted federally, you should receive
information on how to access the Department of Justice’s Victim Notification System (VNS).
VNS is a computer-based system that provides updated information on your case. You can
access it at no cost via a toll-free number.
Other Programs
U.S. Department of Justice
Office for Victims of Crime
202-307-5983
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/ovc
National Organization for Victim Assistance
1-800-879-6682
www.trynova.org
National Center for Victims of Crime
1-800-394-2255
www.ncvc.org
U.S. Postal Inspection Service
475 L’Enfant Plaza SW, Room 3100
Washington, DC 20260-3100
http://postalinspectors.uspis.gov/
Federal Trade Commission
1-877-FTC-HELP (toll free)
www.ftc.gov6
VICTIM NOTIFICATION SYSTEM
The Department of Justice’s Victim Notification System (VNS) is a cooperative effort
between the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the U.S.
Attorney’s Offices, the Federal Bureau of Prisons, and the Department of Justice’s
Criminal Division.
This free, computer-based system provides federal crime victims with information on
scheduled court events, as well as the outcome of those court events. It also provides
victims with information on the offender’s custody status and release. In addition to the
written notifications generated through VNS, victims can obtain automated status informa-
tion by calling the VNS Call Center at 1-866-365-4968 (1-866-DOJ-4YOU) or by accessing
the VNS Internet site at www.notify.usdoj.gov. A Victim ID# and PIN# are required to access
the VNS Call Center or VNS Internet site.7
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
184

THOUGHT LEADERS IN VICTIM AND WITNESS RIGHTS
Georgia Hanif and Julie Werner-Simon
Georgia Hanif is the Victim/Witness Coordinator for the United States Attorney’s
Office in Los Angeles. She is a recognized expert in victim and witness rights and
has worked tirelessly on their behalf for many years. Hanif developed and
implemented a victim notification process for the U.S. Postal Inspection Service
and developed a wide variety of programs focused on protecting victims of crime
including training law enforcement officers in victim/witness rights and seizing
assets for restitution. She has helped build an exceptional Victim/Witness Assist-
ance Center in the U.S. Attorney’s Office that is a model for other federal, state,
and local programs. Ms. Hanif speaks to nonprofit groups, such as the American
Association of Retired Persons (AARP), Daughters of the American Revolution
(DAR), and local schools on fraud and identity theft prevention measures. She was
recognized by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police for her victim advocacy and
assistance involving an international telemarketing scheme. Her efforts on behalf
of victim rights under the Crime Victims Rights Act of 2004 have set case law
precedent in Kenna v. United States District Court.
Julie Werner-Simon is an Assistant United States Attorney for the Central
District of California, based in Los Angeles, where she prosecutes white-collar
crime cases as senior litigation counsel of the Major Frauds Section. During her
tenure in the U.S. Attorney’s Office (USAO), Werner-Simon has received
numerous awards and recognition including the Director’s Award for Superior
Performance for her successes in investigating and prosecuting complex financial
fraud crimes as well as for her work in training federal prosecutors on ethical
considerations in investigating and prosecuting federal offenses. In April 2002, she
was honored with the USAO’s Victim Recognition Award for her efforts on behalf
of crime victims. Werner-Simon has also produced legal education films including
the excellent awareness and prevention DVD entitled Stop Identity Theft Now that
is available through the United States Department of Justice.
Here Hanif and Werner-Simon provide their insightful comments, creative
ideas, and recommendations on the prosecution perspective and protection of the
rights of identity theft victims and witnesses. The views expressed are those of the
individuals only and do not necessarily reflect the position of the United States
Attorney’s Office for the Central District of California, the United States Depart-
ment of Justice, or any other government agency:
All U.S. Attorney’s Offices have Victim/Witness Units and they are governed by the
Executive Office for United States Attorneys. Our role is to assist victims at the time
charges are filed. Prior to that, the responsibility belongs to the federal investigative
(Continued)
Victims and Victimization
185

agencies. Many times we work closely with our victim/witness counterparts and
federal agents in those agencies to ensure a seamless transition for victims. We liaison
with law enforcement, probation, clerk of courts, financial litigation units charged
with postjudgment debt collection from defendants, banks, credit card companies, and
of course victims and witnesses.
During the constitutionally mandated criminal discovery process, prosecutors should
take extra care in disclosing victim’s personal information. When such materials
are given to defense counsel, all personal information should be redacted. While
prosecutors typically file Rule 6(e) disclosure orders, which permit them to give grand
jury materials to the defense and which limit the defense’s ability to provide the 6(e)
material to parties not involved in the preparation of the defense, prosecutors have
not been doing the same thing for non–grand jury information.
Assistant United States Attorneys (AUSA) should routinely seek protective orders from
the court that permit the government to give the materials to the defense (these include
witness statements, bank records, etc.) but that require that the defense only use them
in preparation of the case. Additionally, the order should also prevent any replication
and dissemination of those materials by anyone including defendant to third parties
who are not part of the defense attorney’s staff (i.e., paralegals and investigators).
There should be a specific bar to disseminating the information in any form including
posting the information on a Web site. The aim here is to prevent identity theft and the
reloading of fraud victims or the making of new victims by the release of discovery ‘‘on
the street.’’
AUSAs should attempt to invite defense counsel to prosecutor’s office to review victim
bank account loss information rather than release hard copies to defendant’s counsel.
AUSAs should help victims notify credit reporting agencies and credit card companies
about the victim/witness status. Each U.S. Attorney’s Office should have such a form
letter personalized by the case AUSA in conjunction with the Victim/Witness Unit.
Always make sure this letter is turned over in discovery, as it is Giglio material.8
We constantly train law enforcement in understanding and enforcing victim/witness
rights along with asset forfeiture and seizing assets for restitution. In some cases, this
has caused a change of mind-set for many federal agents. The forefeiture program in
its infancy was promoted as a way for law enforcement to both punish the offender and
to lessen their operating budgets by obtaining seized assets their agency may need.
Consequently, agents are accustomed to seizing assets as part of the forfeiture
program. The practice of seizing assets to be sold for victim restitution is now
promoted vigorously in this district as part of the mandated requirement of timely
restitution per the Criminal Victims’s Rights Act.
We are also involved in rewriting the language in plea agreements and criminal
judgments to make enforcement easier. We have implemented training for court clerks
and probation officers to ensure that all parties assist victims. Several years ago, we
created a DVD entitled Stop Identity Theft Now that is aimed at the general public.
The DVD emphasizes steps individuals can take to clear up any credit issues that
developed as a result of identity theft as well as prevention measures. The DVD can be
requested by individuals as well as state and local law enforcement agencies by calling
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
186

RECENT MILESTONES IN VICTIMS’ RIGHTS
President George W. Bush has said that ‘‘[w]hen our criminal justice system treats
victims as irrelevant bystanders, they are victimized for a second time.’’9 In recent years,
the government has taken this compelling statement to heart and has enacted key
legislation and court decisions as well as policy enhancements, all focused on protecting
the rights of victims of crime, and especially those of identity theft victims. Here are
some of the recent milestones in victims’ rights:
2003
In November, President Bush signs the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act,
providing new protections against identity theft, as well as provisions to help victims of
identity theft recover from their financial losses. . . .
2004
Legislation is signed by President Bush that defines aggravated identity theft and establishes
penalty enhancements for such crimes. For instance, under the law, offenders who steal
1-888-228-0315 and providing a mailing address. There are no copyright restrictions
on the DVD, which enables duplication.
Over the years, we have seen many things change for the better for victims. The Crime
Victims’ Rights Act of 2004 provides enforcement mechanisms to ensure better
compliance and protections for victims. Since the passage of this act, internal
procedures have been implemented and these provide additional safeguards for
victims. One important aspect of our role as advocates is providing court support
to the victims. Depending on the length of the trial, victim support can become time
challenging while trying to maintain a heavy workload. Nevertheless, victims are
entitled to be treated with dignity and respect throughout the judicial process. To
accomplish this element, victim units in all the U.S. Attorney Offices are mandated to
provide a waiting area in the court for victims and witnesses and their advocates. In
many cases, the coordinators accompany victims into court and explain the court
events as they occur.
While these best practices and procedures are for federal use, they would also apply at
state and local levels. Most state and local prosecutors have victim/witness programs.
In some cases, the programs are domiciled in local police stations, thus ensuring
faster response to victim needs.
Identity theft has become the fastest-growing crime in the United States and around the
world. Tougher legislation for white-collar and cybercrime along with additional
investigators are needed. Credit card companies and banks could benefit from a victim
advocacy program that would liaison with law enforcement toward more efficiency in
dealing with fraud victims. Communication and cooperation among local, state, and
federal law enforcement agencies are crucial to ensure that victims are assisted and
criminals brought to justice.
Victims and Victimization
187

another person’s identity information in connection with the commission of other specified
felonies (such as crimes relating to immigration, nationality, citizenship, and various forms
of fraud) would be sentenced to an additional two years in prison. The legislation also
prohibits the court from ordering an offender’s sentence for identity theft to run concurrently
with a sentence imposed on the same offender for any other crime. . . .
2005
In May, the updated Attorney General Guidelines for Victim and Witness Assistance is
published. The guidelines incorporate provisions for crime victims’ rights and remedies,
including the Crime Victims’ Rights Act, which have been enacted since the publication of
the last edition. . . .
2006
In late January, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit decided Kenna v.
U.S. District Court for the Central District of California, in which the court considered
whether the Crime Victims’ Rights Act (CVRA), 18 U.S.C., Section 3771, gave victims the
right to speak at sentencing hearings. The case involved a father and son who swindled
dozens of victims. The defendants pled guilty to wire fraud and money laundering. More than
60 victims submitted victim impact statements. At the father’s sentencing, several victims
spoke about the effects of the crimes, but at the son’s sentencing, the judge refused to allow
the victims to speak. The Court of Appeals relied heavily on statements made by U.S.
Senators Jon Kyl and Dianne Feinstein, sponsors of the CVRA, and held that the district
court judge had made a mistake. In its decision, the appeals court made the following three
important points: (1) in passing the CVRA, it was the intent of Congress to allow victims to
speak at sentencing hearings, not just to submit impact statements; (2) victims have a right to
speak even if there is more than one criminal sentencing; and (3) the remedy for a crime
victim denied the right to speak at a sentencing hearing is to have the sentence vacated and a
new sentencing hearing held in which the victims are allowed to speak. This decision is an
important step in securing the rights of crime victims.10
‘‘THE BEST-LAID PLANS OF MICE AND MEN OFTEN GO AWRY’’
One identity theft victim’s nightmare should be a wake-up call to everyone that even
employing several levels of protection may not be enough to fully protect against this
crime. Frank Hernandez of Phoenix, Arizona, dutifully shredded any documents that
might contain his name or personal information. He even obtained a credit protection
monitoring service that he thought would give him an added level of security. But his
plans for protection were not enough. An undocumented immigrant was able to pay $500
for Hernandez’s SSN and Arizona driver’s license number. It was never determined how
Hernandez’s personal identifiers were compromised, but they were nonetheless.
Hernandez eventually learned of the identity theft when he received notification that
his driver’s license had been suspended for unpaid speeding tickets in New Mexico. That
was November 2005. Imagine Hernandez’s surprise and consternation when he
remembered that the last time he had set foot in New Mexico was 10 years earlier.
As is often the case, few would listen to his claims of being a victim of identity theft. It
took him two years to finally get his suspended license back. His insurance company did
not believe him either. ‘‘It was painful to get rid of because of the bureaucratic hassles.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
188

You have to prove who you are. It was really horrible,’’ Hernandez said.11 Interestingly
enough, the identity thief was finally located not by the police but by the detective work
of Hernandez himself. He started to check his credit report regularly and ‘‘in March
2006, he discovered someone was using his identity and Social Security number to rent
an apartment in Mesa.’’12 He quickly alerted the Mesa, Arizona, Police Department who
conducted surveillance at the apartment complex and arrested the fraudster. The bad
news is that this is but one of the 40 to 50 new cases of identity theft the Mesa Police
Department receive each month.13
FOREVER VIGILANT
A few years ago I was in an airport shuttle van heading to SeaTac Airport in Seattle,
Washington. En route, we stopped at a house to pick up a passenger. Just before getting
into the van, this woman stopped at the mailbox in front of her house, placed several
outgoing letters inside, and raised the red flag to indicate to the mail carrier that mail was
ready for pickup. I got to talking with this passenger and remarked that it was not a good
idea to place outgoing mail into an unlocked mailbox. I explained that the raised red flag
signaled to mail thieves that inviting mail possibly containing checks and other personal
information was inside. ‘‘You could become a victim of identity theft,’’ I said. ‘‘Oh,
that’s just what I need considering my bad luck,’’ she uttered.
She explained that a few months earlier, she had left her pocketbook in her car parked
in her driveway. She did not think about it until she went to her car the following
morning and saw that someone had broken the car window and stolen her purse. Inside
was her wallet with multiple forms of identification and several credit cards. She did not
report the theft to the police but did call her credit card issuers to close the accounts. I asked
if she had done anything else such as check her credit reports for possible unauthorized use
of her name and credit. She had not. After telling her of the many bad things that could
happen as a result of identity theft, I have no doubt she left the shuttle far more concerned
than when she had entered. I also hope that she was motivated to do more to protect her
good name in the future and not become a victim. Chapter 20 contains numerous steps to
follow if one should be the unfortunate victim of identity theft.
NOTES
1. Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company Survey of Identity Theft Victims, ‘‘ID
Theft Victims Struggle to Achieve Resolution’’ (July 2005), www.prnewswire
.com/cgi-bin/stories.pl?ACCT=104&STORY=/www/story/07-26-2005/
0004074946&EDATE=.
2. Jolayne Houtz, ‘‘ID Theft: You Have to Keep Proving You Are Innocent,’’ Seattle
Times, June 13, 2006, A1.
3. ‘‘Identity Theft Led to 13-Year Nightmare,’’ MSNBC.com, August 9, 2001,
www.msnbc.com/local/wfla/mgacx58y5qc.asp.
4. Social Security Administration, ‘‘Should You Get a New Social Security Number?’’
www.ssa.gov/pubs/10064.html#new.
189
Victims and Victimization

5. The content for the Operation Gaffle section was provided by Postal Inspector Scott
Mathews and from the U.S. Postal Inspection Service Media Advisory, ‘‘New
Jersey ‘Gaffle’ King Pleads Guilty to Identity Theft’’ (December 2005).
6. United States Postal Inspection Service, ‘‘Know Your Rights: A Guide for Victims
and Witnesses of Crime,’’ Publication 308 (August 2005), www.usps.com/cpim/ftp/
pubs/pub308.pdf.
7. U.S. Department of Justice’s Automated Victim Notification System, www.usdoj
.gov/criminal/vns/.
8. ‘‘Milestones in the New Millennium,’’ Special Supplement to the 2006 National
Crime Victims’ Rights Week Resource Guide, www.ojp.usdoj.gov/ovc/ncvrw/
2006/pdf/special_supplement.pdf.
9. Ibid.
10. Senta Scarborough, ‘‘Man’s ID Theft Nightmare Takes 2 Years to Iron Out,’’
Arizona Republic, February 13, 2008, www.azcentral.com/community/mesa/articles/
0213mr-idtheft0214.html.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. Under United States federal law, the term ‘‘Giglio,’’ or Giglio Material as it is
commonly called, refers to material that tends to impeach the character or testimony
of a government witness in a federal criminal trial. The government, in the form of
the prosecutor’s office, is required to turn over all relevant Giglio material to the
defense. See Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150 (1972).
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
190

CHAPTER 14
The San Diego Experience
This is the story of the city of San Diego’s experience with identity theft and the
interrelated crimes of mail theft, check fraud, forgery, and methamphetamine abuse as
seen through the eyes of a criminal investigator charged with investigating these
violations and protecting businesses and the public. Although this particular criminal
activity has impacted many cities in America over the last three decades, San Diego,
California, has been particularly hard hit. A number of factors came together to create a
perfect storm that fostered a very bad experience for the inhabitants of this city.
Postal Inspector Phil Garn was at the epicenter of the identity theft explosion in San
Diego during the early 1990s. He has seen firsthand how methamphetamine fueled and
then transformed fraud and forgery into identity theft. When he started his career in law
enforcement in 1990, identity crimes were referred to as ‘‘mail theft,’’ ‘‘check forgery,’’
or ‘‘credit card fraud.’’ It was not until around 1993 that the term ‘‘identity theft’’ came
up routinely. Inspector Garn took me through the roots and evolution of the ‘‘San Diego
Experience’’ from his vantage point in the trenches. He provided the majority of the
content for this chapter, and his insight and experiences are greatly appreciated.
DESTINATION OF CHOICE
Separated from the vast sprawl of Los Angeles and Orange counties by the huge Marine
reservation of Camp Pendleton, San Diego was long considered a sleepy little Navy
town, known mostly for its proximity to Tijuana, Mexico. This began to change as
servicemen returning from the World War II and later Vietnam discovered its temperate
191

Mediterranean climate and charm. The local economy began a subtle change in the
1970s, shifting away from the aircraft plants of Convair and General Dynamics, the
shipyards of San Diego Bay, and the home of the tuna fleet. New businesses and
industries began to develop, including high-tech Qualcomm, biotech, consumer, and
service industries such as Petco, and of course tourism with Sea World, Wild Animal
Park, the San Diego Zoo, and miles of exquisite beaches. Attracting people from all over
the nation and the world, the economy and superb weather spurred a vast building
expansion through the surrounding desert chaparral north and east into the dry
mountains. Water from the Colorado River made this newly reclaimed desert green.
RISE OF THE NDCBU
By the 1980s, San Diego, Imperial, Riverside, and San Bernardino counties experienced
a tremendous building boom. To service the growing homeowner and business
community, the United States Postal Service focused on centralized mail delivery,
particularly for all of the new construction of high-density housing. This included
houses, condominiums, and apartments. One of the principal innovations was the
neighborhood delivery and collection box unit (NDCBU). The NDCBU combined
the features of a Post Office box, rural mailbox, and a collection box to service multiple
residences. This curb mounted unit was similar to the apartment ‘‘gang box’’ in that a
letter carrier could open a single panel to deposit mail into individual compartments in a
close grouping for a number of separate residences.
Centralized delivery represented a tremendous savings for the Postal Service.
Rather than individually delivering from house to house, the letter carrier could simply
open the back of the NDCBU, remove the outgoing mail from an attached compartment,
and place incoming mail in the individual boxes for many houses right at the curb.
As the Postal Service’s biggest expense was manpower, these small savings of
time turned out to be huge dollar savings of hourly rates, especially over the course
of a fiscal year. Remember, mail is delivered six days a week, 52 weeks a year, so even a
savings of an hour a day for a single route would add up quickly. There were literally
hundreds of routes in San Diego proper and thousands of new deliveries being added
yearly.
To tap the potential cost savings, the Postal Service established centralized delivery in
new housing and business projects. Likewise, when areas were redeveloped or con-
verted, centralized delivery soon followed. A typical pattern of development involved
the demolition of a small beach cottage and its replacement with a multiunit condo-
minium complex. After the completion of construction, the Postal Service followed with
the NDCBU. Again, this centralized delivery was a huge savings for business areas as
well as residential communities; and postal managers received both recognition and
financial bonuses for implementing these savings.
This new delivery pattern was so efficient that it spread throughout new developments
in San Diego County then to a postal district that included gigantic developments in
Riverside and San Bernardino counties (San Bernardino is the largest county geograph-
ically in the continental United States). This model was also adopted in Phoenix,
Arizona, which was rapidly growing to become the fifth largest city in the nation. With
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
192

the success of centralized delivery in the West, the East took notice, especially as
suburbs were rapidly expanding into what had been rural areas. Eastern developers also
copied their western counterparts, placing houses extremely close together and building
large apartment/condominium complexes in new suburban areas.
UNFORESEEN ACHILLES’ HEEL
But a critical oversight in San Diego would severely compromise centralized delivery
and fuel identity theft. In order to protect mail in collection boxes and apartment
complexes, the Postal Service developed an all-purpose lock that could be installed in a
wide variety of frames and mountings to secure collection boxes, apartment gang boxes,
key keepers, and electronic locks for businesses and apartment complexes to allow letter
carriers access, as well as in NDCBUs. This lock was produced exclusively by the Postal
Service. As it was stamped with an ‘‘arrow’’ symbol, it became known as an Arrow lock.
The keys were unique and issued as accountable property to employees.
What that meant was letter carriers or collectors had to sign the key out at the
beginning of their shifts and return it at the end of the day, where it was locked in a
cabinet before they left to go home. These keys were also supposed to be attached to the
belt by a brass chain to reduce the chance of loss through accidental misplacement or
theft. To further enhance security and limit losses, the Postal Service developed dozens
of combinations each with a different key pattern for each Arrow lock series. The idea
was to have a different key series for offices or zones that bordered each other (one for
each zip code).
It was believed that if a criminal got a key through robbery or burglary, or made a
counterfeit copy, the losses would be localized. As few people knew the boundaries of
the different zip codes, a stolen key or counterfeit might work on one street but not on
another street a few blocks away. Additionally, because the locks’ serial numbers were
not externally visible, a criminal would not know that that Arrow key or counterfeit
might also work in another state or city. There were severe federal criminal penalties for
misuse of postal keys and locks including up to 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine as
well as administrative penalties for postal employees that included termination even for
the accidental loss of an arrow key. There were also some corresponding state statutes
for fraud and forgery including possession of a burglary tool. However, as San Diego
expanded, the Arrow lock series X, as it was called, never varied. What this meant was
that by the early 1990s, a single X series Arrow key would open more than 68,000 locks
in an area stretching from the Mexican border north past La Jolla and from the Pacific
Ocean east to La Mesa 13 miles away.
Criminals found that the Arrow lock mechanisms could easily be pried from rickety
apartment gang boxes in old complexes and used to make counterfeit keys that would
open the locking mechanism. The attraction of the counterfeit key for the criminal was
that the criminal could open a gang box or NDCBU panel, remove items of value
including checks and credit cards (although they typically stole everything inside), then
close the panel, leaving no signs of forced entry. Typically the theft was not discovered
until the victims received their bank or credit card statements weeks later. This
unavoidable delay resulted in an investigative trail that went cold.
The San Diego Experience
193

These keys were also not easily recognizable; apart from postal employees, no one
had an idea what the key was. When confronted by local police and sheriffs, criminals
often told officers it was something innocuous like a key to a storage locker or a piece of
equipment like a refrigerator part. The same went for the stolen locks; once broken down
into components, they were even harder to identify. However, whereas the postal Arrow
key was very durable, the counterfeit copies, typically machined with a Dremel tool
from scrap metal, can openers, or common table knives, were brittle and had very short
operational lives. Large numbers of broken keys were recovered both by inspectors and
postal maintenance personnel.
Counterfeit keys first began to appear in San Diego with the infamous Ezell gang in
the late 1980s. But it was not until 1992 that the Postal Service began to change out the
locks and vary Arrow keys in San Diego at the behest of Postal Inspectors and the U.S.
Attorney’s office. This critical delay allowed mail theft to become firmly entrenched in
the methamphetamine-using community as it expanded east across the United States.
Meth’s spread is discussed in further detail later in the chapter.
THEFTS AND FRAUDS OF THE 1980s AND 1990s
The theft of replacement checks for those previously stolen, and new and reissued credit
cards stolen from the mail were initially the most common frauds encountered by Postal
Inspectors in San Diego during the late 1980s and early 1990s. Alteration, forgery, split
deposits, washing or bleaching checks, false changes of address, and other variations
occurred but with much less frequency. However, as more individuals became involved
with what was to become identity theft, the industry and governments realized the
seriousness of the problem and began to adopt some protective measures.
The most common fraud was simply forging stolen replacement checks. Criminals
would pass these at merchants or for take-out food or cash a check made out to
themselves or an assumed identity at a branch of the account holder’s bank, or conduct a
split deposit scheme. In the split deposit scheme, a criminal would deposit a stolen check
into an account and request a portion of the total amount back in cash. For a $500 check,
the criminal might ask for and receive $250 back. Fraudsters were so bold as to order
pizzas and pay the delivery driver with a stolen check. Postal Inspectors caught a number
of crooks who paid for pizzas with these stolen checks.
In the early 1990s, Postal Inspectors began to encounter groups that enlisted college
students. The criminals would give $100 to the students to open a bank account and
obtain a debit card and personal identification number (PIN). The students would turn
over the debit card and PIN to the gang leaders, receive another $100, and be told to
report the card stolen in a couple of days. The leaders would then run a split deposit on
the account and fraudulently withdraw hundreds or even thousands of dollars at various
ATMs.
Although counterfeit IDs were not hard to obtain, most criminals were able to use
social engineering at banks and merchants to pass stolen checks. ‘‘Oh, I left my ID in my
wallet at home’’ or ‘‘My purse was stolen and all I have is my bank statement or my
electric bill [also stolen from the mail]’’ were the common excuses used by scammers.
Counterfeit IDs ranged from original documents issued by the Division of Motor
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
194

Vehicles (DMV) to conform to a fictitious identity or stolen ID, to totally phony
identification such as ‘‘Official Tax Payer ID Card.’’ Any alert teller or experienced sales
clerk should never accept these poor-quality IDs, but they were used routinely.
Some forgers made up large boards with changeable lettering that looked like a giant
driver’s license. The criminal would stand or sit in the lower right portion of the ID
background and the forger would take a photograph of the criminal. The developed
photo appeared to be two-dimensional, was in color, and was cut to size. It could also be
laminated or placed on a blank plastic card (California driver’s licenses were not
supposed to be laminated, so lamination was usually a big tip-off).
The ‘‘buildup’’ was the most common counterfeit driver’s license encountered during
the early 1990s. Meth users would use a blue background like a towel or sheet and have
their picture taken, usually in an apartment or house, with a Polaroid camera. Then they
would type the desired identifying information on a particular typewriter with a font
similar to that used by DMV. They then would go to a photocopy shop and have it
reduced to 77% or 75%. Then the criminal would glue the documentary part to a plastic
card, add the photo, and finally laminate the card. One could easily tell a buildup because
one could feel the layers. By the time the State of California had instituted holograms for
security, criminals had access to computers and were able to counterfeit holograms.
Military IDs made from stolen blank ID forms were frequently encountered by law
enforcement in San Diego. Typically a sailor or Marine working at the military pass
office would steal a single form or a stack of blank ID forms, which would be sold on the
underground market. Details were typed in and a picture of the criminal was affixed.
This was in the days before today’s modern graphics programs, not to mention color
copiers and printers. Street criminals were just starting to use computers in 1993 and
1994 in San Diego.
Fraudsters would also overwrite stolen checks. As an example, a check payable to
AT&T for $25 would be scratched out and made payable to John Smith for $500, and
would usually be accepted by untrained tellers. Instances of criminals painstakingly
forging the victim’s signature were extremely rare. Washing checks, using common
chemicals to remove the handwritten inked writing but leaving the printed portions of
the check, would not become commonplace until the mid- to late 1990s, although meth
users were doing check washing as early as 1992 or 1993.
Criminals would often test stolen credit cards at gas stations to see if they were active.
If there was a problem they could drive away quickly, particularly as gas pumps became
automated. Gas station attendants were supposed to get license plate numbers from
questionable transactions, but this again was a rare occurrence. Criminals would also
make routine purchases, such as Q-tips and diapers, at a convenience store as opposed to
far more valuable high-ticket clothing such as expensive leather jackets at a department
store. Fraud investigators working for retailers were well aware that thieves would
purchase clothing and other items with stolen cards and then fence the merchandise, and
they closely monitored purchases of particularly expensive items with suspicious cards.
Criminals would also purchase an item at one store then return the item at another
branch of the same store and get either a cash refund or a gift certificate. The gift
certificate could be sold to other criminals or redeemed at another location. Fraudulently
purchasing gift certificates with stolen credit cards was also a popular scam. Again,
The San Diego Experience
195

clerks rarely asked for identification, particularly at higher-end establishments, such as
Nordstrom and Neiman Marcus.
One criminal used a homemade tool to manipulate and open the locks securing Post
Office boxes. He would sweep banks of boxes from the outside in broad daylight looking
for replacement credit cards. This would take place just after the postal clerks had put up
the mail and before customers arrived to retrieve it. He would then request personal
identification numbers from the issuing banks, which were sent to the boxes he had just
burgled. He would collect the letters containing the PINs, leaving the rest of the mail
undisturbed, and close the box. The fraudster would then go to ATM machines that did
not appear to have surveillance cameras and make cash withdrawals using the stolen
cards and PINs. Postal Inspectors identified over $1 million in losses, and this was in the
early 1990s.
As stolen credit cards and checks became harder to negotiate, criminals turned to
washing checks and using personal information gained from mail theft, Dumpster
diving, and banking sources to divert existing accounts or fraudulently open new
accounts in victims’ names. These schemes were developing concurrently with straight
theft and being passed throughout the meth-using community. However, while these
new protection features closed off or limited certain schemes, criminals latched on to
other well-tested frauds.
The Postal Buddy was an experimental electronic kiosk that dispensed stamps and
other products as well as allowed customers to change addresses. It was tested in the San
Diego area in the early 1990s. These kiosks were extremely vulnerable as criminals
could use stolen cards to fraudulently purchase the machine’s inventory of stamps. The
stamps and other products were worth thousands of dollars, and the fraudsters acted with
near impunity. In addition, they could also input fraudulent changes of addresses to
further aid their criminal schemes.
Because these machines had a direct link to the Postal Service’s Computer Forward-
ing System (CFS), address changes were made almost overnight. So, by the time a
confirmation letter was sent to the old address, the system relabeled the confirmation
letter, which was then directed to the new fraudulent address. Victims had no idea their
addresses had been changed and they were being victimized until their mail delivery
stopped. This allowed the investigative trail to grow cold. Postal Buddies were
eventually removed. Almost a decade later, the Postal Service piloted new electronic
kiosks with improved security features and fewer products and services.
IMPACT OF METH IN SAN DIEGO
During the cocaine boom in the mid-1980s, outlaw bikers in San Diego learned that
another more potent stimulant, methamphetamine, could be easily produced in the
home for a fraction of the cost of imported cocaine. Initially they learned about the
ephedrine reduction method for synthesizing methamphetamine from readily availa-
ble and unregulated ephedrine, a common ingredient in cold medicines. Needless
to say, methamphetamine use and production took off like a rocket. As San
Diego Sheriff’s Department Detective Steve Reed related, ‘‘When I left the [San
Diego Narcotics] Task Force [NTF] in 1982, aside from cocaine, the only stimulants
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
196

we would see were cross-tabs and black beauties [amphetamines] that were coming
across the border from Mexico. When I came back to NTF in 1987, meth and meth
labs were everywhere.’’
Not only was methamphetamine cheaper than cocaine, but the drug’s effects lasted
significantly longer. It quickly supplanted cocaine as the drug of choice in San Diego. In
an area such as San Diego, which is near to the U.S.–Mexican border and a principal
smuggling route, where cocaine should be more readily available, meth is by far the
more dominant drug. The initial appeal was simply economic, a longer-lasting, cheaper
product that could essentially be made at home or in the backyard.
Meth use expanded east and north into Riverside, San Bernardino, and Imperial
counties then into Arizona. It initially bypassed Los Angeles and San Francisco, jumping
into Oregon and Washington States via outlaw bikers and other criminal communities,
then rapidly expanded into the mainstream populations of those states. Although local
law enforcement attacked labs and California placed restrictions on precursor chemicals,
putting the smaller chemists or ‘‘cooks’’ in jail, there was a huge and profitable market
for the drug. Mexican drug-trafficking organizations stepped in to fill the void with
superlaboratories south of the border and established smuggling routes for marijuana,
heroin, and cocaine. Unfortunately during the time it has taken for methamphetamine to
march east, the expanding communities on the East Coast have adopted the same
centralized mail delivery that made the vast tracks of housing in Southern California and
Arizona so vulnerable.
However, a unique set of circumstances developed in San Diego during the late 1980s:
(1) poorly protected high-value banking and merchant products (credit cards and
replacement checks); (2) vulnerable high-density housing with centralized mail delivery
using a single lock combination; and (3) methamphetamine, which touched off a
devastating crime wave that would sweep east across the United States.
This epidemic began with a gypsy crime family who had learned how to make
counterfeit postal Arrow keys, which secured collection and apartment boxes as well as
the relatively new NDCBUs to steal credit cards and checks.
During the late 1980s and early 1990s in San Diego, meth users quickly discovered
those unique vulnerabilities of the banking system. Addicts could make much more
money more quickly exploiting stolen credit cards or checks, particularly replacement
items sent through the mail, with far less personal risk than prostitution, auto theft, or
burglary. They also realized that the courts viewed these ‘‘paper crimes’’ as victimless
because the banking industry made the individual victim whole and passed off the losses
to customers. Punishment was far less severe than for robberies or burglaries, although
time behind bars allowed criminals to pass on and refine techniques.
The banking industry was very cooperative with individual investigations, but it often
resisted prevention suggestions. At first, banks resisted modifying their products, such as
sending out ‘‘dead’’ credit cards that needed to be activated upon receipt, claiming they
would lose business. The banks were concerned about customer service and how this
added step prior to use would be perceived. Once losses cut into their bottom-line profits,
institutions began to react by implementing stronger prevention tools and technology.
However, these significant delays allowed identity theft to become part of the meth-
amphetamine culture. As the drug spread, so did this prime source of illicit financing.
The San Diego Experience
197

Additionally, banking and financial insiders who were drug users began passing inside
techniques and tips in exchange for meth.
Initially, investigation of meth-related identity theft did not appeal to law enforcement
either, as they were considered ‘‘paper crimes’’ versus more dangerous robberies,
burglaries, or narcotics cases. It spread through loosely knit criminal networks, leaving
law enforcement without central figures to target or to garner media notoriety. Meth was
still not yet perceived as a major component, as there were other organized gangs,
particularly Nigerian Criminal Enterprises, perpetrating similar scams in the big cities of
the East and West.
One telling indicator of how methamphetamine and identity theft transformed the
criminal landscape in San Diego was the near disappearance of postal armed robberies in
the area. After a series of hijack robberies of letter carriers in 1992 and a brief series of
Post Office robberies in 1995 (both series were meth-related), San Diego experienced
almost no robberies of postal personnel or facilities for many years. Fraudsters realized
that committing economic crime was far safer than perpetrating violent crime. Yet just
100 miles north, in Los Angeles, Postal Inspectors formed a major crimes team to deal
with the rash of armed robberies they were experiencing.
THOUGHT LEADER IN IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION
Phil Garn
Postal Inspector Phil Garn has seen the impact of identity theft and other related
crimes on the citizens of San Diego and surrounding areas. As a federal agent, he
has been involved in hundreds of cases of identity theft, mail theft, credit card
fraud, and narcotics over his career. As a result of his experiences, he has come to
embrace strong law enforcement in order to deter the problem and protect the
public.
A graduate of the University of Virginia and former Naval Reserve officer, Garn
began his postal career in 1985 as a letter carrier and became a Postal Inspector in
1990. Investigations with the Inspection Service ranging from external crimes,
internal crimes, fraud, terrorism, child exploitation, and prohibited mailings have
taken him from Anchorage to Acapulco and from Buffalo to Buenos Aires. He was
the case agent for the international child exploitation investigation Operation
Special Delivery and a founding member of the San Diego Internet Crimes Against
Children Task Force and is currently assigned to the San Diego Narcotics Task
Force.
Garn has also been instrumental in developing and implementing prevention
strategies. In the early 1990s, Postal Inspectors in San Diego recognized that
unique conditions in the area contributed to the growing problem of identity theft.
‘‘The unique conditions in San Diego primed the identity theft explosion,’’ Garn
stated. ‘‘Centralized delivery and a single Arrow key combination for a city of over
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
198

1 million [68,000 locks], the banking and credit card industry, and meth-
amphetamine all contributed to this perfect storm.’’ Through the combination
of these factors, a rash of mail theft rapidly turned into an epidemic.
In addition to enforcement, San Diego Postal Inspectors instituted several
prevention strategies. They set out to educate local law enforcement, the banking
industry, and the public. They lobbied to enhance federal sentencing guidelines for
mail theft. The Postal Service began to vary key combinations in San Diego and
developed more secure locking mechanisms to secure collection boxes and
NDCBUs. Finally, a coordinated appeal to the credit card industry began, in order
to enhance security of their products.
Inspectors developed a training and awareness program on the extent of the
problem for area law enforcement. They showed police officers the difference
between real and counterfeit Arrow keys and provided them with flyers and law
enforcement notices listing federal violations and depicting slightly altered copies
of counterfeit keys. Most important, they asked the police officers to call the
inspectors if they encountered subjects of interest during their investigations or
patrol work. Patrol officers responded enthusiastically as they frequently arrested
subjects for ‘‘under the influence of methamphetamine’’ violations who also had
counterfeit keys and/or stolen mail. The inspectors typically responded to the field
or the station at all hours of the day and night and took the cases federally, or
assisted with investigation of state violations. Additionally, they wrote letters of
appreciation to officers who assisted them with investigations.
The Inspection Service began setting up informal law enforcement task forces to
focus on mail theft and become more proactive. They partnered with the U.S.
Secret Service, Department of State Diplomatic Security Special Agents, and the
San Diego Police Department Fraud Forgery and Narcotic Street Team Detectives,
especially on gang investigations, as well as with other state and local police.
In 1991 and 1992, inspectors would collect broken-off counterfeit keys for local
postal locks recovered by maintenance personnel from the San Diego collection
box maintenance section. As Inspector Garn picked up one particular batch of broken
metal bits, he told a postal supervisor, ‘‘They [the criminals] are killing us with these
counterfeit keys.’’ Not long after, San Diego Inspectors Diana Torpey and Thomas
Hofius, among others, found an answer to the problem with a significantly strength-
ened locking mechanism that was almost impossible to defeat or counterfeit.
The Inspection Service also focused on educating the public about protecting
their mail and their identities. This grassroots effort directly reached homeowners’
groups, including apartment renters and condominium associations, through
speeches and circulating flyers in local neighborhoods. The message was fairly
simple: Collect your mail every day; do not leave mail in your mailbox overnight;
if you are on vacation, complete a vacation hold for the duration of your trip; report
any instances of box tampering or fraudulent credit card charges. They encouraged
witnesses to report descriptions of suspicious people and cars, especially license
plate numbers, and to call the police immediately and notify the Inspection Service.
(Continued)
The San Diego Experience
199

EMERGENCE OF ORGANIZED GANGS
Postal Inspectors first began to encounter the Ezell Gang in 1987 in mail theft investiga-
tions. By 1990, they had arrested the principal family members as well as a number of their
associates. Many of these associates were auto thieves, burglars, and prostitutes. It was
these seemingly subordinate and peripheral members of the Ezell Gang who would have
themostsignificantimpactoncheckfraudandidentitytheftforseveralreasons.Theywere
members of very tight, mobile networks that freely exchanged schemes and techniques.
Most street criminals stay not only on the street but on the same streets for most of their
criminal lives; however, these individuals, many of whom were male and transsexual
prostitutes, were part of tight underground communities that traveled extensively com-
mitting their crimes. These crimes were much more lucrative than more violent crimes
with far fewer physical risks and less severe punishments.
In November 1993, Postal Inspector Garn was debriefing a source who was describing
the Ewain Starke Gang, an offshoot of the Ezells, and their criminal relationships, when
he made a startling discovery: this gang was led by an ex-police officer and his wife, an
ex–letter carrier. Months earlier, methamphetamine users whom the inspectors had
arrested for mail theft were telling them that a current or former police officer was
making counterfeit Arrow keys. One morning, another inspector told Garn she had
arrested a suspect who told her some more about this mystery cop, including his first
name and that he was married to a letter carrier.
‘‘I can’t believe this,’’ said Inspector Garn, as he immediately knew the names of both
the cop and his wife. ‘‘I knew because I had carried mail with the wife when I was a letter
carrier in the 1980s prior to becoming a Postal Inspector.’’ This investigation under-
scores how quickly methamphetamine took over, as once-productive members of
society became linked to the Ezells. It also demonstrated how identity theft and
networking became part of the meth culture.
THE WAY IT IS TODAY
I wanted to find out what Postal Inspectors were encountering in the field today and how
they were approaching investigations and prevention of identity theft. The answers came
from two team leaders who are responsible for investigating identity theft in the San
Diego Field Office, Postal Inspectors Melisa Llosa and Jody Kowahl. Inspector Kowahl
began her Inspection Service career in 1990 and was on the external crimes team from
1994 through 2001, where she was a founding member of the San Diego Regional Fraud
Task Force (SDRFTF). She had additional experience investigating mail fraud and in
Furthermore, the inspectors worked with the media to publicize the problem.
They gave interviews to local television reporters who would become great
advocates for the Postal Inspection Service and champions for the public combat-
ing what would come to be known as identity theft. Tips from the public started
coming in that resulted in the arrests of mail thieves.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
200

management as an assistant inspector in charge for the Los Angeles Division. In 2007,
she returned to San Diego as the team leader for the multifunctional team that
investigates mail theft. Inspector Llosa began her career in New York on the Manhattan
External Crimes Team in 1998, moved to San Diego in 2002 where she was a member of
the CATCH Team (Computer and Technology Crime High Tech Response Team, a
multiagency team involved with the investigation of identity theft) for four years, then
became the team leader in 2006 for the other multifunctional team that investigates mail
theft.
The most obvious change from the early 1990s is there are now two teams of Postal
Inspectors in San Diego that investigate identity theft as well as two formal multiagency
task forces, SDRFTF and CATCH. Most of the inspectors are also cross sworn as Special
San Diego Sheriff’s Deputies. The vast majority of the identity theft cases are prosecuted
in state court (local versus federal prosecutions). Further measures to reduce attacks,
such as the adoption of highly resistant Medeco brand locks with a variety of key
combinations, unfortunately did not produce the expected results. In response to the new
locks, offenders developed a low-tech, if criminally ingenious, device to get around
these measures.
With the introduction of the Medeco locks and various key combinations, criminals
were no longer able to access the locks surreptitiously with counterfeit keys. The
strengthened locking mechanism and frame made them much harder to pry open, and
numerous key combinations made the more sophisticated lock even harder to duplicate
and reduced access. Criminals then began to steal the entire boxes, both the NDCBU and
the typical blue mail drop box, by pulling them off the concrete mountings. After
transporting the stolen boxes to remote locations, they would break into them and steal
the mail, leading to the striking sight of discarded big blue mailboxes in canyons around
San Diego County.
Inspectors then came across a very novel, low-tech device to literally fish mail out of
the boxes. The criminals would wrap layers of duct tape or other sticky substances on a
piece of wood or other object, secure this sticky ‘‘hook’’ with a line or string, and drop it
into the snorkel of the collection box or down the drawer into the mail that had been
deposited. Letters would stick to the hook, and criminals would reel these in to remove
items of value, particularly bill payments with associated checks. Inspectors countered
with a two-pronged approach: publicly through newspaper articles, radio and television
interviews wherein they encouraged customers not to deposit mail in collection boxes
after the last posted pickup time, so it would not be vulnerable to an after-hours attack;
privately inspectors worked with the Postal Service to develop antifishing devices that
would not allow criminals to withdraw the fishing devices. As Inspector Kowahl said,
‘‘San Diego inspectors lead the nation in prevention projects designed to protect mail.’’
Of course, as these antifishing devices were installed, criminals refined devices to defeat
these new deterrents.
Washing checks stolen from collection boxes using common household products to
remove the endorsements on personal checks (as detailed in Chapter 6) became the
primary scheme in the mid-1990s through the turn of the century. Criminals also went
high tech using computers and commercial business programs to capitalize on victims’
identity information they were able to steal from banking documents, known in law
The San Diego Experience
201

enforcement circles as profiling. In the past, criminals were stealing items of value to
fraudulently use such as credit cards, blank replacement checks, or completed checks,
which were washed and fraudulently reendorsed; criminals were now using these
documents and account statements to build ‘‘profiles’’ and perpetrate a variety of
schemes.
One of the principal profiling schemes is to use the victim’s account number and bank
routing numbers from canceled or stolen checks to create new checks using commer-
cially available check printing programs. For about $50, criminals can buy a check
program, such as TurboCheck or VersaCheck, which not only has the software but also
blank check stock from which they can create negotiable items. Criminals input
fraudulent information into the program and use the stolen account number and
bank routing number to create a new document. This new check may appear to be
the account of John Doe, although the actual account and routing number are for Jane
Smith’s checking account at the Acme Bank. Fraudsters then use these checks to
purchase items and get cash back. Electronic cash registers process these checks and
debit the victim’s account regardless of what is printed on the checks. Although the
check may be printed with the Bank of America logo, the account and routing number
may be for a Wells Fargo account.
Often criminals utilize the tried-and-true scheme of purchase and return in order to get
cash. They particularly target home stores such as The Home Depot or Lowe’s, where
they purchase an expensive but common tool with a counterfeit check, then return the
item the following day to obtain cash. Culprits also network and exchange information
as to which stores are particularity vulnerable and what limits and countermeasures are
in place.
Criminals continue to use computers to create fraudulent identification cards, which
they began to do back in the early 1990s. Although graphic programs have improved
significantly, the quality of fake IDs still ranges from exceptional to very bad counter-
feits. Another dodge criminals use is to keep their fake ID behind the plastic of a wallet
so that the merchant or teller cannot see the flaws, such as printed holograms or poor or
blank card stock.
Scammers have also developed many new ways to fraudulently use credit cards and
personal information. They often order merchandise over the telephone or via the
Internet. Crooks have found that they do not even need the correct expiration date or
security code. They often order the merchandise using the stolen account number and
just make up an expiration date. They fence these items but also order gift cards, which
are even harder to trace and are more anonymous particularly if ordered from the
Internet, where certificates are printed on-site versus sent to a physical address.
Criminals also use houses and residences in their neighborhood that are vacant or
where the true residents are away at work to receive gift cards and merchandise,
victimizing the residents as well as the account holders.
Although the teams of both Inspector Kowahl and Inspector Llosa have encountered
organized groups, such as Nigerian Criminal Enterprises, in San Diego, the vast majority
of subjects are still street-level criminals. As Inspector Kowahl said, it is almost ‘‘a
cottage industry’’ of networked individuals versus more structured gangs like the
Nigerians. Inspector Llosa said there appear to be several classes of criminals: those
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
202

at the bottom who are stealing and Dumpster diving for account and personal history
information and a higher class at the top of this food chain that is perpetrating most of the
fraud with ID counterfeiters. Both inspectors agreed about the high number of recidivists
encountered by their teams, often arresting subjects multiple times while out on pretrial
release for the same crimes. Inspector Llosa said about nine out of 10 cases are
methamphetamine related, a fact that is hardly surprising, as meth is still the most
prevalent drug aside from marijuana in the region.
Although some things have changed, much has not. The scourge of identity theft lives
on in San Diego and throughout the world.
The San Diego Experience
203


CHAPTER 15
The Rich, the Famous, and
the Dead Get No Peace
Oprah Winfrey, Tiger Woods, Steven Spielberg, Paris Hilton, Will Smith, Michael
Jordan, Ross Perot, Brett Favre, Robert DeNiro, and Ted Turner—this reads like a
Who’s Who of the Rich and Famous, but it is just a partial list of the many celebrities
who have become victims of identity theft. It is not surprising that these stars are being
victimized. They are rich, very rich in many cases, and are high profile. Their personal
lives are very public, and they live the good life for the world to see each and every day
on our televisions and computer monitors. Fraudsters know these celebs have good
credit and fortunes to steal. Plus, their personal information is easy to obtain from a
multitude of sources. Insiders such as assistants, nannies, chauffeurs, and the many
people in their entourages are all potential identity thieves. Yet external criminals are
just as much a threat.
Career con man and identity thief Abraham Abdallah, profiled in Chapter 12, realized
that targeting the rich and famous was a ticket to fame and fortune. Although he never
met any of these celebrities, he did not need to in order to steal their identities. He did it
through reading about them in Forbes magazine’s profiles of ‘‘The 400 Richest People in
America’’ as well as social engineering, technology, greed, and lots of chutzpah.1
At the Web site of the Internet Movie Database (www.imdb.com), visitors can find
extensive data on movies and television shows as well as personal information on actors
and actresses. The biographical details of almost every movie or television star
205

imaginable can be easily viewed. Dates and places of birth, names of spouses, dates of
marriage, names of children, and amazing amounts of other personal information are
posted for these stars. The biographies of producers, directors, newscasters, and other
celebrities who have been involved with television or the movies are also readily
available. The only identifiers missing are Social Security numbers (SSNs).
Basketball legend Michael Jordan’s credit card account number was obtained by an
identity theft ring in Chicago that bribed bank employees to turn over customers’ names
and account information. The gang stole information belonging to more than 70 people
and defrauded their accounts of more than $1 million. The gang leader wanted to find
someone who looked like the basketball superstar in order to pose as him and steal his
fortune. Finding the right impersonator was a tough task, and Jordan was lucky he was
not fleeced. An informant told police what the scammers were up to, and they were
arrested before they could use Jordan’s card. More than 20 conspirators were eventually
arrested.
In 2003, Postal Inspectors and the Financial Crimes Task Force of Southwestern
Pennsylvania arrested convicted felon Carlos Lomax for stealing the identity of actor
Will Smith. Smith had no clue that Lomax had stolen his life. It was not until Smith
attempted to buy a new home and found that his credit was damaged did he realize he
was an identity theft victim. Lomax pleaded guilty to opening 14 fraudulent accounts in
Smith’s name in the Pittsburgh area and was sentenced to 37 months in prison. But it did
not end there. Lomax was already on probation for an earlier identity theft conviction
involving former Atlanta Hawks basketball player Steve Smith. Lomax was released
after 30 months but was unable to adjust to life outside prison. He violated probation by
not making restitution to his victims and in December 2005 was ordered back to jail for
two more years.2
A career criminal with 20 misdemeanor and felony convictions over a 17-year period
stole the identity of golf superstar Tiger Woods in 1998 and 1999. Anthony Taylor of
Sacramento, California, obtained Woods’s personal information and then applied for
credit cards in Woods’s name. Taylor also obtained a driver’s license in Woods’s real
name of Eldrick T. Woods. Although the defendant received only $20,000 from the
scheme, he was sentenced to a life sentence under California’s three-strikes legislation
due to his career criminal status.3
DUMPSTER DIVING HITS A HOME RUN
Identity thieves do not need to be high-tech when low-tech is more than adequate to find
personally identifiable information (PII). This was the case for a Dumpster-diving
identity thief who, in Chicago in 2006, hit the mother lode when he went through the
garbage of SFX Baseball in Northbrook, Illinois, a leading sports agency serving Major
League baseball players. There David Dright found financial records and other personal
information belonging to 91 Major League players including Pedro Martinez, Moises
Alou, Jim Thome, and Miguel Tejada.
When Postal Inspectors and other law enforcement officers searched Dright’s
Chicago apartment in December 2006, they found SSNs, dates of birth, loan applica-
tions, canceled paychecks, tax returns, and other documents belonging to the major
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
206

leaguers.4 None of the documents had been shredded before being discarded by SFX.
Investigators also found numerous credit card applications, birth notices, and death
announcements in the apartment.
To make matters worse, investigators later developed evidence that Dright had stolen
the identities of deceased children in order to apply for credit cards in their names. He
was using ‘‘birth announcements and death notices of infants to try to create fictitious
financial accounts.’’5 A detective involved in the investigation at the time stated, ‘‘I’ll be
getting hold of different parents and I have the job of notifying them that their child’s
identity, their deceased child’s identity, may have been compromised.’’6 Dright later
pleaded guilty to aggravated identity theft and related charges but was sentenced only to
probation.
NO REST FOR THE DEAD
The preceding case illustrates that identity thieves will exploit any opportunity to
commit fraud. It is not just celebrities who are identity theft targets. Sadly, the dead are
also victimized by the lowest-of-the-low fraudsters. People can spend their entire lives
working hard, growing a good reputation, and leaving a sound legacy when they depart
this world. Unfortunately, due to the good life they left behind, their identities are subject
to theft and abuse by identity thieves. We see this in case after case where the deceased
have their names, SSNs, and other PII stolen from the grave.
Identity theft has given rise to many new terms used to describe the variations of the
crime and the ploys used to collect personal information. ‘‘Tombstoning’’ is but one of
these new terms. Tombstoning is the collection of names, dates of birth, and other
information by walking through cemeteries and recording the information for later
fraudulent use. One brazen and heartless fraudster used this approach to violate the dead
and enrich himself.
Larry Steve Albert was always able to blend in and never stand out. As the federal
agent who eventually tracked him down and arrested him said, ‘‘He was remarkably
unremarkable. There were no clues, public records, work history, vehicle purchases, to
his whereabouts since 1986. . . . He just disappeared.’’7 He was just so average that no
one would ever think he could be a scammer. This allowed him to commit identity theft
for many years and not get caught. Along the way, he stole the identities of more than
200 deceased persons from at least eight states.
Albert had a simple but time-tested method: He focused on deceased people, many of
them children, for the identity thefts. Albert would target small towns and small banks.
He would claim to be a newly arrived resident of the town and was opening a bank
account. He presented fake drivers licenses, Social Security cards, rental agreements,
and other documents as identification proof. Deposits of $100 were the norm, and once
he received his checks, he would paper the town with bad checks. Wal-Mart, Staples,
JCPenney, Target, Lowe’s, and other stores were among his favorites for fraud. Albert
also violated the trust of his family. He altered the SSNs of five of his sons and used them
for phony identification.8
Albert would repeat this identity theft again and again in numerous states over the
years. New Mexico, Washington, Nevada, Oregon, Colorado, Utah, North Carolina, and
The Rich, the Famous, and the Dead Get No Peace
207

Montana were all venues for his crimes. When he was first arrested in Albuquerque in
February 2004, he provided a phony name and identification that allowed him to make
bail and then flee. Unfortunately for Albert, he left his car behind, and that was his
undoing. Inside the pickup truck was a three-ring binder detailing his identity theft
activities since 1986. Included was a list of all the identities he had used over the years.
This and other information in the truck helped special agents from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) and Social Security Administration track Albert down in Washing-
ton State in October 2005, where they arrested him.9
In December 2005, Albert pleaded guilty to mail fraud and using a false Social
Security card. He had no choice; the evidence against him was overwhelming. In
Washington State alone, he used the identities of 40 deceased children. He wrote
thousands of bad checks. Prosecutors charged him with at least $183,000 in bad checks
that he passed. He was 62 years old when he was sentenced on May 5, 2006, in Seattle to
three years in prison. He had no prior history of arrests and under federal sentencing
guidelines, this was the recommended sentence. And that was unfortunate.
Larry Steve Albert was a serial identity thief and did far more harm that just financial
crime. He desecrated the good names and reputations of those whose names he stole.
‘‘Committing crimes in the names of deceased children is incredibly callous and quite
painful to the relatives of those who have died,’’ the federal prosecutors told the
sentencing judge. ‘‘Indeed, one victim compared this crime to the desecration of their
son’s grave,’’ they added.10
GENEALOGY AND THE RISK OF IDENTITY THEFT
Family history and roots are of deep interest to many of us. Whoever would have thought
that something as seemingly innocent and nonthreatening as genealogy would open
millions of people to potential identity theft? The increasing interest in one’s family tree
and the growth of the Internet has resulted in another criminal opportunity for identity
thieves to steal personal information.
In a quest for learning more about one’s family, genealogy sites have proliferated.
More and more families have home pages that detail their descendants and everything
about them. Names, relationships, birth dates, birthplaces, addresses, occupations, and
more can be found at these sites. A mother’s maiden name, a common password for
credit card accounts, is often found on home pages. While people would not give this
information to someone they met on the street, they openly list it in their family trees
online for the world to see, and use. People have called this ‘‘privacy suicide.’’
It reminds me of my lectures about the need for fraud prevention on the Internet. I said
that educated consumers learned to be leery of door-to-door salespeople who tried to sell
them snake oil and the moon. We taught consumers to be equally suspicious of telephone
or mailed-in offers that were ‘‘too good to be true.’’ Now we need to continually
enlighten the American public about the potential for fraud on the Internet. Just because
something appears on your computer monitor does not make it necessarily true. The
same rules of common sense and caution apply when online. Do not forget, ‘‘If it sounds
too good to be true—even if it’s on the Internet—it probably is.’’ When did I first say
this?—1998.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
208

People may not know that their relatives have listed them and their personal
information on family tree sites. If they knew, they may or may not approve of having
their personal data available for the world to view. But they should be told in advance
and have the choice. ‘‘If a family member is going to put up the genealogy, I think they
should notify all the living members of that family tree,’’ said Beth Givens, of the
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse.11
In 2001, California started to address how it sold the birth and death records of its
citizens after the information started showing up on the Internet. These records, which
contained other information such as mothers’ maiden names, could be used for identity
theft. The issue came to light for the state when it learned that these vital records were
posted on various genealogy Web sites such as RootsWeb.com, which is owned by
Myfamily.com. As a result, birth, marriage, and divorce records were removed. ‘‘I think
what people are concerned about is the possibility that someone might find a mother’s
maiden name in those records and sometimes that information is used as a password on a
bank account and things like that,’’ commented a chief executive of Myfamily.com at the
time.12
Death records are still readily available at RootsWeb.com and many other online sites
as well as through traditional public records at federal, state, and local venues. One
major source of death records is the readily available Social Security Death Index. While
this information has always been available, it was much harder to obtain this personal
information before the ease of online search. In a typical online site, one can find death
information that includes name, date of birth, date of death, SSN, and last residence.
Some people supportive of genealogy have downplayed the risks of identity theft.
They claim that in the various identity theft surveys, none of the common sources of the
fraud is from records obtained from vital records departments. They ask for proof that
identity thieves use vital records such as birth and death certificates for their crimes. I
read a blog where a noted genealogist lamented that there was too much emphasis on the
possibility of identity theft using readily available information at online genealogy sites.
He felt this was much ado about nothing as he was unaware of any actual identity theft
cases resulting from information obtained from family trees and genealogy sites. In fact,
he claims to have challenged anyone to show him that genealogical information was the
root cause of any identity theft case.
Although I understand this person’s passion for genealogy, he is asking to prove a
negative. In criminal investigations of identity theft, it can be very hard to determine just
where the purloined PII came from. I liken this genealogist’s reasoning to an analogy.
Just because your home has never been burglarized, does that eliminate the need to have
locks on your doors and to use them? It always comes down to eliminating risk through
prevention. Why take the chance that your PII can be stolen and fraudulently used?
Always consider that the greater the availability of personal information on the Web, the
greater the opportunity for possible misuse. And this longtime genealogist may be
splitting hairs when he claims that there are no documented cases of identity theft from
genealogy sites.
The devastating combination of identity theft and methamphetamine use was depicted
in Chapters 6 and 14. Unfortunately, the two evils had an equally damaging end result for
a genealogy business. In 2005, the son of a respected genealogist was found to have
The Rich, the Famous, and the Dead Get No Peace
209

stolen ‘‘invoices from his father’s business to forge passports, credit cards, and check-
books to support his meth addiction.’’13 Heritage Creations was a genealogy business in
the Salt Lake City area that provided research on family histories and other services. The
business owner’s world and family were rocked when local newspaper headlines
disclosed ‘‘an operation that involved swapping methamphetamines for the identities
of people who purchased products for genealogy research.’’14 The damaging reputa-
tional impact of this case most probably was a factor in the business filing Chapter 7
bankruptcy in 2006.
On another genealogy blog, the blogger included some questions and answers on
whether there was an identity theft risk from genealogy sites publishing SSNs of
deceased family members. He stated that just the opposite: the publishing of names of
deceased people and their SSNs allows businesses and others to verify whether a
particular SSN was active or not and whether the person is deceased. He actually stated
that this helps prevent identity theft. This well-intentioned but misinformed blogger has
obviously never met identity thief William Kinnaird. There have been numerous cases
where identity thieves have used death records to commit their frauds. Kinnaird did just
that and got his information from a genealogy site. The next case study further illustrates
his modus operandi.
IDENTITY THEFT HALL OF INFAMY
William M. Kinnaird Jr.
William M. Kinnaird Jr. was one of the smartest criminals that one veteran Postal
Inspector ever encountered. But he was not smart enough to avoid becoming a
recidivist and long-term resident of a federal penitentiary. Inspector Brian
Huenefeld has been a Postal Inspector for almost 20 years and has worked identity
theft cases for the last 10 years. Although he has investigated sophisticated
criminal gangs involved in identity theft, this particular defendant was involved
in a different aspect of the crime that Inspector Huenefeld had not previously seen.
That was because Kinnaird was using the identities of people who were either
deceased or nonexistent. Many of the deceased were children.
Kinnaird was arrested in the early 1990s by the United States Secret Service and
charged with counterfeiting checks in Dayton, Ohio. He was sentenced to three
years in prison for his crimes. When Kinnaird got out of prison in 1995, he was
required to pay restitution of approximately $75,000. Due to his criminal record,
he had a hard time finding employment and needed to make money. He then made
the wrong decision of returning to a life of crime with another fraudulent scheme,
identity theft.
He initially used the identities of deceased older individuals to obtain credit
cards. As time went on, he realized that doing fraud in this manner could cause
problems for him. The credit bureaus generally had the victims’ names listed as
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
210

deceased in their databases, and survivors could learn of the fraud. Kinnaird
decided to use another approach for the identity theft. Sometime in the late 1990s,
he was able to obtain a list of deceased children, either through the Social Security
Administration or from the states of Ohio and North Carolina, as the majority of
the victims died in those states.
Kinnaird used the names and identifiers of these victims to apply for credit card
accounts when they would have turned 18 through 23 years of age. This activity
grew over time, and Kinnaird actually established credit in the deceased victims’
names. He used post office boxes, commercial mail receiving agency (CMRA)
boxes, and even rented an office to use as a mail drop for the addresses of the
victims. He would make regular payments on the accounts because he knew that if
a person has good credit, that would generate additional credit card solicitations.
This fraud was brought to Inspector Huenefeld’s attention in late 2005. His
office in Cincinnati received a call from a UPS Store employee who reported that
one of their boxes was receiving mail in numerous names and the mail was mostly
from banks and credit card companies. Inspector Huenefeld discovered a total of
five mail drops in Ohio and Kentucky used by Kinnaird. He was able to identify
over 160 victims with over 700 credit card accounts issued in their names. The
balances on these accounts exceeded $1.8 million. When Inspector Huenefeld
initially contacted the banks that issued the suspect credit cards, they insisted there
was not any fraud as the accounts were current and payments were being made on
a regular basis. The inspector showed them they were wrong.
The personal information that Kinnaird obtained and used for fraudulent credit
cards included victims’ names, dates of birth, and SSNs. In several cases, he
created fictitious names and associated these names with the deceased victims’
SSNs and dates of birth. The victims died between 1977 and 1998. Twelve were
more than 70 years of age when they died. The great majority of the other victims
had died before reaching the age of majority.
Kinnaird was able to steal money through automated teller machine (ATM)
withdrawals and through a credit card merchant account that funneled funds to an
accounthecontrolled.Kinnairdusedthemoneytomaintainacomfortablelifestyleand
to build a very nice suburban home. He obtained an MBA from the University of
Cincinnati during this period and also appeared on the game show Jeopardy in 2004.
To gather additional evidence, Inspector Huenefeld employed reverse Dumpster
diving on Kinnaird’s household garbage. A common law enforcement tool is to go
through the garbage of a suspect when allowed by law. This can be as useful a
technique for investigators as it is for fraudsters who steal personal information for
criminal use. Inspector Huenefeld hit a home run with this garbage run as he found:
Fifty credit card statements that corresponded to the fraudulent credit card accounts
that were previously identified.
Over 20 credit card solicitations (mailed) to the victim names and addresses.
(Continued)
The Rich, the Famous, and the Dead Get No Peace
211

Credit card accounts addressed to all five of the fraud addresses controlled by
Kinnaird.
Three spreadsheets that contained specific information regarding the fraudulent
credit card accounts. Some of the information on these spreadsheets included the
name of the credit card company, account number, credit limit, and balance.
Also included on the spreadsheets were columns entitled Pending Transfers, Balance,
Available, User ID, and Password.15
Executing a search warrant at Kinnaird’s residence in January 2006, Postal
Inspectors found over 700 credit cards and hundreds of pieces of mail in the victim
names addressed to the various addresses Kinnaird controlled. Inspectors found
credit card statements and cash that were going to be used to make payments on
the fraudulent accounts. Kinnaird maintained a spreadsheet for his fraud accounts
that contained passwords, phone numbers, e-mail addresses, mothers’ maiden
names, and other key information. Also found was information on new post office
boxes and CMRAs that Kinnaird had recently opened in St. Louis, Chicago,
Indianapolis, and other cities to expand his fraud scheme. He was in the process of
changing the addresses on the existing accounts to these new addresses.
Inspector Huenefeld had a federal arrest warrant for Kinnaird at the time of the
search. Kinnaird was arrested and agreed to speak with the federal agents after
waiving his Miranda Rights against self-incrimination. Kinnaird said he was
surprised that it had taken so long to catch him. He thought that he would have been
arrested years earlier for stealing the identities of the dead. He explained how he
first used the identities of elderly deceased people and then later dead children.
Kinnaird detailed how he obtained information from Ancestry.com, an online
genealogy site that contained SSNs and dates of birth. Once he had this personal
information, he would make up the rest of the necessary information, such as the
mother’s maiden name. He would cross reference the SSN with the Social Security
index to find ones that were not reported as being deceased. All the stolen identity
information and fraudulently obtained credit card details were maintained on his
computer that was seized. There were over 1,000 names listed but luckily not all
had been used for fraud.
In the face of overwhelming evidence, Kinnaird pleaded guilty in June 2006.
The detailed description of Kinnaird’s criminal activity that follows comes from
the Statement of Facts signed on May 31, 2006 by Kinnaird and submitted to the
court pursuant to his guilty plea in June 2006:
From January 1995 to January 2006, William Kinnaird defrauded several financial
institutions by using the identities of deceased individuals to apply for and open credit
card accounts and other loans. In other cases, Kinnaird created fictitious names and
dates of birth and used that information to open credit card accounts.
During the course of this scheme, Kinnaird opened over 700 fraudulent credit card
accounts using over 160 victim names. The total losses to the various financial
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
212

institutions exceeded $1.7 million. Kinnaird used multiple addresses in this scheme,
but as of January 2006, the five main addresses he used to receive mail were in West
Chester and Cincinnati, Ohio, and Crestwood, Kentucky.
Kinnaird was able to convert funds to his own use from these fraudulent credit card
accounts in three ways. One was through Automated Teller Machine (ATM) with-
drawals. Kinnaird obtained Personal Identification Numbers (PIN) for most of these
fraudulent credit cards and was able to withdraw cash using ATMs.
Another way Kinnaird was able to convert funds from these fraudulent credit card
accounts was through credit card checks. An examination of deposit records for
Kinnaird’s U.S. Bank checking account was conducted from October 1998 through
October 2005. This analysis showed that 104 credit card checks drawn against
various fraudulent credit card accounts were deposited into Kinnaird’s U.S. Bank
account. The total value of these credit card checks was $193,282.
Another way Kinnaird was able to convert funds from these fraudulent credit cards
was through a fraudulent credit card merchant account. A credit card merchant
account is set up by businesses in order for that business to be able to accept credit
cards as payment for products or services. In October 2002, a credit card merchant
account was established through Key Bank in the name of ‘Rent an MBA.’ This
account was opened by Kinnaird. On the application, Kinnaird was listed as Owner/
President.
This merchant account was serviced by Payment Resources International. Payment
Resources International provided an updated application that was completed by
Kinnaird on December 9, 2005. Kinnaird listed his business address in Cincinnati,
Ohio. Kinnaird listed his home address in Cincinnati, Ohio. [Due to privacy concerns,
the actual addresses are not listed here.]
This application listed Kinnaird’s U.S. Bank account number as the account for funds
to be wired from the various charges. Records from the ‘Rent an MBA’ merchant
account show that between October 2002 and November 2005, there were $820,000
Visa and MasterCard charges toward his merchant account. These funds minus fees
were electronically deposited into Kinnaird’s U.S. Bank account. Every charge to the
merchant account was from one of the fraudulent credit cards opened by Kinnaird.
As part of the scheme, Kinnaird made regular payments on all of these fraudulent credit
card accounts. Payments were generally made with money orders. This was done so
that the accounts remained current and it reduced suspicion by the credit card com-
panies. This also assisted in establishing ‘good credit’ for the fraud victims. Once the
account was approved and payments were made on a regular basis, the credit card
companies often raised the credit limit of the account. This also made it easier for
Kinnaird to obtain approval for additional credit cards on these fraudulent accounts.
Kinnaird was able to keep track of this through various spreadsheets and files.
Kinnaird tracked every active credit card on his computer at his residence in
Crestwood, Ohio. Kinnaird used these spreadsheets and files to track balances,
payment due dates, available credit, and other pertinent information.
(Continued)
The Rich, the Famous, and the Dead Get No Peace
213

WHO IS JOHN DOE?
Not everyone who steals an identity does it to commit credit card fraud or similar
financial mischief. Now and then someone steals an identity to become that person and
to obscure his or her original identity. Sometimes a person does this so often that it
becomes almost impossible to tell who he or she is. This was the case of a man arrested in
2008 in Seattle, Washington, who was the living embodiment of a true ‘‘John Doe.’’
The tale begins when the Royal Canadian Mounted Police contacted the FBI in
November 2007, looking for information on a man claiming to be Dwayne Spill, who
had requested a copy of his birth certificate. However, the real Spill had been dead for 26
years. This tip led the FBI to a small windowless room in a rundown Seattle office
building, occupied by a man identifying himself as Robert Lowe, though the name
‘‘D.A. Spill’’ appeared on the mailbox. As the FBI would later discover, the real Robert
Lowe died 30 years earlier at the age of 17.17 Dogged investigation by the FBI led to
more aliases and multiple driver’s licenses issued in other names, all listing the same
address. All told, the man has used at least 32 identities since the 1980s. At the time
authorities arrested him in March 2008, they were unable to determine his real identity,
charging him as ‘‘John Doe.’’18
The tangled trail of multiple identities, fake identification, and deception almost
resembled super-spy Jason Bourne, of the popular Bourne Identity movie franchise,
starring Matt Damon. To further the intrigue, Doe had altered his fingerprints by burning
his fingertips with acid to prevent identification.19 According to a federal agent investi-
gating the case, Doe’s talent for disappearing into someone else’s identity has made
One example of this fraud involves a credit card account opened in the name of Victim
A with a Social Security number of --. [Out of respect and privacy concerns
for the victim, the name and SSN are not included here.] The home address listed on
the application was in West Chester, Ohio. The SSN was issued to Victim A on or
about May 18, 1982. Victim A was reported in Social Security records as being
deceased on November 30, 1995. [Both the date of birth and date of death listed
here have been changed.] The address used on the application was in reality a UPS
Store mailbox opened by Kinnaird. Kinnaird mailed this credit card application to
Chase Bank in Wilmington, Delaware.
On or about March 30, 2001, Chase opened a MasterCard credit card account in the
name of Victim A and sent a credit card from Omaha, Nebraska to the UPS Store
mailbox via the U.S. Mails. From the date this account was opened to on or about
January 26, 2006, Kinnaird made numerous charges and payments toward this
account. The charges consisted of balance transfers, ATM cash withdrawals, and
charges to Kinnaird’s fraudulent merchant account, Rent an MBA.16
On October 20, 2006, Kinnaird was sentenced to 140 months imprisonment. The
federal sentencing guidelines recommended a prison sentence of 120 to 150
months and the government recommended 130 months. The almost 12-year
sentence that the federal district court judge handed out to Kinnaird was no doubt
due to the egregious nature of the crimes.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
214

untangling his true identity all the more difficult. Over the course of months of investiga-
tion, authorities learned Doe had assumed the identities of at least five dead people and
was in the process of assuming two more, both from Canada. His modus operandi was to
steal the identities of men who had died young many years earlier. This minimized his
chance of detection as the age of the identity would correspond with his own.
For each name, he then assumed multiple aliases and had dozens of pieces of
identification, including driver’s licenses and Social Security cards. He has lived in six
different states and has multiple criminal convictions under a variety of names.20 Further
complicating the situation, ‘‘it appears Doe would sometimes adopt an identity . . . only
to go to court and have that name legally changed.’’21
Despite all these difficulties, the mystery of John Doe finally began to clear after five
months of investigation. Federal agents positively identified the mystery man through
Air Force records, which then led to a positive identification by his parents. Doe, whose
real name is Scott Andrew Shain, was a former Air Force officer from Boston who
flunked out of flight school and then, according to his parents, fell off the face of the
earth.22 Although Shain faces numerous felony charges including mail fraud and
aggravated identity theft, as well as outstanding warrants in Seattle for forgery and
in Colorado for passing bad checks, impersonation, and menacing with a handgun, the
case continues to vex investigators.23
Why would he assume so many identities over the years, especially because there was
no evidence that he tried to use the identities for profit? Was he hiding from something?
Many of his behaviors also baffle investigators. Shain was always considered very
intelligent, with plans to fly jets in the Air Force, yet when he was arrested he was living
in what a federal agent aptly described as a ‘‘hovel’’: a filthy, windowless 10-by-12-foot
office without a kitchen or bathroom.24 Another investigator called Shain a ‘‘bit of a
savant,’’ due to the complexity and intricacies of the fraud, which was unlike anything he
had seen before.25 Agents also learned that Shain, under another identity, had been
interviewed by Secret Service agents after making threats against then-President
Clinton; the agents took from him a homemade flamethrower.26 Was Shain a criminal
mastermind, mentally disturbed, or a mix of both? Even though authorities know his
name, the former John Doe is still a mystery.
WHAT IS A GENEALOGIST TO DO?
There is an even more recent criminal case where a scam artist used a popular genealogy
research site to commit identity theft. Tracy June Kirkland, using numerous aliases, was
charged with Mail Fraud, Aggravated Identity Theft, Unauthorized Use of an Access
Device, Misuse of a Social Security Number, and other crimes in a federal indictment
filed in Los Angeles in April 2008. According to the indictment, Kirkland carried out the
fraudulent scheme between October 2005 and March 2008 in part, as follows:

Defendant searched the website www.rootsweb.com for identifying information for
deceased individuals, such as name, date of birth, social security number, and zip code.

Once defendant obtained a deceased individual’s identifying information, she would
search other websites to obtain a recent address for the deceased individual.
The Rich, the Famous, and the Dead Get No Peace
215


After obtaining as much information as possible about a deceased individual, defendant
would randomly call various credit card companies to determine if the deceased
individual had an access-device27 account with the credit card company.

When defendant discovered a deceased individual’s access-device account with a
particular credit card company, she would take over the account by requesting that
the address on the account be changed to one of several rented mail boxes that she
controlled or to another address connected to the defendant. On some of these access-
device accounts, defendant would add her name as an authorized user.

Defendant used the access devices she had taken over to make purchases for her personal
benefit.

In this manner, defendant took over more than 100 access-device accounts issued by
credit card companies, including Nordstrom Federal Savings Bank, Macy’s, and GE
Money Bank.28
Contrary to the opinion of some genealogists, there is a significant risk of identity
theft from fraudsters using genealogy sites. Given the popularity of genealogy sites,
what is the answer? Many genealogists recommend not posting information on living
relatives. Err on the side of caution. When placing family trees online, make sure that the
family line stops at the last generation where all members are deceased. That may not
stop an identity thief who targets the dead, but going back a few generations may make it
a lot harder. Do not include personal identifiers such as SSNs, dates of birth, marriage
dates, or other confidential information for any living relative. In any case, permission
should be obtained from any person whose personal information will be placed on an
online family tree.
Genealogy research site Ancestry.com offers a number of tips to protect family data
and prevent identity theft that are summarized next.
1.
Change your secret question and answer. Stop using your mother’s maiden name
as account verifiers. Many financial institutions have already ceased this practice.
Use alternative questions such as ‘‘What was your first pet’s name?’’ or other
questions that are not generally known or that can be determined.
2.
Privatize the genealogy files shared with others. Many family researchers share
computer files with others. ‘‘If you create GEDCOM files and upload them to
websites for inclusion in a place like the Ancestry World Tree, WorldConnect, and
other locations, you are urged to use your program’s ‘privatize’ facility to prevent
inclusion of information about living people.’’ According to the Web site
www.familysearch.org, ‘‘GEDCOM stands for Genealogical Data Communica-
tions and is a file format specification that allows different genealogical software
programs to share data with each other. It was developed by the Family and Church
History Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to provide a
flexible, uniform format for exchanging computerized genealogical data.’’29
3.
Maintain two separate databases or consider excluding any living people from
the database. With two separate files, you can have one with both living relatives
and deceased ancestors, and the other with only deceased ancestors. Files can be
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
216

combined as necessary to produce reports, but make sure to create backup versions
of each file with different names and then merge them. If there is a need to ‘‘share
information with others or upload a GEDCOM to a website database,’’ share only
the one with the deceased relatives, not the living ones. Make sure you really know
the people you are communicating with online.
4.
Do not share information on a living person without first obtaining a signed
authorization. Ensure that you gain approval ‘‘from the intended recipient
agreeing not to share the data in any way with anyone without your prior written
permission.’’ This may not be legally binding, but it may deter inappropriate use of
information.30
IDENTITY THIEVES ARE EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ABUSERS
It is ironic that both celebrities and the dead are linked by their connection to identity
thieves. Both offer financial gain to these criminals. The public’s fascination with
celebrities will unfortunately not abate. For many people, it is a way to live through these
personalities with their wealth, fame, beauty, gossip, and daily headlines in the tabloids.
The lives of the rich and the famous are an open book that is easily read by fans and
identity thieves alike. There needs to be an even higher level of vigilance to protect them
from internal and external identity risk. Criminals will continue to target them as well as
the dead, who are even easier targets. The deceased have no way of fighting back. Their
personal information is completely exposed and unprotected. Only their relatives and
friends can help them, and that is if, by chance, they learn of the victimization of the
departed. The stories in this chapter foretell a much bigger problem. Prevention
techniques and strong laws can do only so much in protecting against an unstoppable
crime unless we fundamentally change how we disclose our personal information.
NOTES
1. Chutzpah is a Yiddish term meaning unbelievable gall, audacity, arrogance, or utter
nerve.
2. Associated Press, ‘‘Jail for Will Smith Identity Thief,’’ December 28, 2005,
www.cbsnews.com/stories/2005/12/28/entertainment/main1168894.shtml.
3. Ramon Coronado, ‘‘Jury Say Woods Imposter Should Get ‘3 Strikes’ Term,’’
Sacramento Bee, January 10, 2001, www.threestrikes.org/sactobee2.html.
4. Dave Wischnowsky, ‘‘ID Theft Hits Big League, Cops Say,’’ Chicago Tribune,
December 21, 2006, //lists.jammed.com/ISN/2006/12/0099.html.
5. Art Peterson, ‘‘Man Charged in Major League Identity Theft,’’ Suburban Chicago
News, December 20, 2006.
6. Mike Parker, ‘‘ID Theft Suspect Targeted Dead Children, Athletes,’’ CBS Channel
2, December 21, 2006, cbs2chicago.com/local/david.dright.identity.2.334103.html/.
7. Peter Lewis, ‘‘Thief Stole More than 200 IDs, Some from Graveyards,’’ Seattle
Times, April 3, 2006, A1.
The Rich, the Famous, and the Dead Get No Peace
217

8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the United States Attorney, Western District
of Washington, News Release, ‘‘Man Who Used the Identities of Hundreds of
Deceased Children Sentenced to Prison for Mail Fraud and Production of False ID,’’
May 5, 2006, www.usdoj.gov/usao/waw/press/2006/may/albert.htm.
11. Margaret Mannix, ‘‘Home-Page Snoops.’’ U.S. News Online, May 11, 1998,
www.usnews.com/usnews/issue/980511/11mone.htm.
12. Katie Hafner, ‘‘California Stops Selling Personal Data,’’ New York Times, Decem-
ber 13, 2001, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9B0CE0D9153F
F930A25751C1A9679C8B63.
13. Kimberly Powell, ‘‘Genealogist’s Son Implicated in Possible Identity Theft,’’
Kimberly Powell’s Genealogy Blog, January 8, 2005, genealogy.about.com/b/
2005/01/08/genealogists-son-implicated-in-possible-identity-theft.htm.
14. Laura Hancock, ‘‘Arrests Link Meth, Genealogy,’’ Deseret Morning News, January
4, 2005, deseretnews.com/dn/view/1%2C1249%2C600102659%2C00.html.
15. Application and Affidavit for Search Warrant for the residence of William J.
Kinnaird, Jr. in Crestwood, Kentucky, subscribed and sworn to by Postal Inspector
Brian L. Huenefeld on January 25, 2006, before United States Magistrate Judge
Dave Whalin, Western District of Kentucky.
16. Statement of Facts signed by defendant William M. Kinnaird, Jr. on May 31, 2006
and included in his federal plea agreement filed in United States District Court for
the Southern District of Ohio pursuant to his guilty plea in June 2006.
17. Paul Shukovsky, ‘‘FBI Takes Man of Many Aliases into Custody,’’ Seattle Post-
Intelligencer, March 21, 2008, http://seattlepi.nwsource.com/local/355869_john
doe21.html.
18. Mike Carter, ‘‘Who Is This Guy?’’ Seattle Times, March 21, 2008, A1.
19. Mike Carter, ‘‘John Doe: Mastermind or Troubled Mind,’’ Seattle Times, March 22,
2008, A8.
20. Ibid.
21. Ibid.
22. Mike Carter, ‘‘Who Is He? Now They Know,’’ Seattle Times, March 25, 2008, B1.
23. Carter, ‘‘Who Is This Guy?’’; Paul Shukovsky and Kathy Mulady, ‘‘Authorities
Finally Put Correct Name to Man Who Used 32 Aliases,’’ Seattle Post-Intelligencer,
March
24,
2008,
http://seattlepi.nwsource.com/local/356226_johndoe25.html?
source=rss.
24. Carter, ‘‘John Doe: Mastermind or Troubled Mind’’; Shukovsky, ‘‘FBI Takes Man
of Many Aliases into Custody.’’
25. Carter, ‘‘John Doe.’’
26. Carter, ‘‘Who Is He?’’
27. Title 18, United State Code, Section 1029, Fraud and Related Activity in Connec-
tion with Access Devices, defines an ‘‘access device’’ as any card, plate, code,
account number, electronic serial number, mobile identification number, personal
identification number, or other telecommunications service, equipment, or instru-
ment identifier, or other means of account access that can be used, alone or in
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
218

conjunction with another access device, to obtain money, goods, services, or any
other thing of value, or that can be used to initiate a transfer of funds (other than a
transfer originated solely by paper instrument), www4.law.cornell.edu/uscode/
uscode18/usc_sec_18_00001029----000-.html.
28. United States v. Tracy June Kirkland, defendant, Indictment filed April 15, 2008,
Cr. No. 08-00448, United States District Court for the Central District of California,
1–3, blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/files/tracy_june_kirkland.pdf.
29. FamilySearch.org
Questions—GEDCOM,
www.familysearch.org/Eng/Home/
FAQ/frameset_faq.asp?FAQ=faq_gedcom.asp.
30. Avoiding the Theft of Your Identity, www.ancestry.com/learn/library/article.aspx?
article=5828&o_iid=1644&o_lid=1644&offerid=0%3a7858%3a0.
The Rich, the Famous, and the Dead Get No Peace
219


CHAPTER 16
Identity Theft Goes Global
Identity theft is far too financially advantageous not to garner the attention of fraudsters
worldwide. It was evident that sooner or later the world’s economic criminals would also
see the vast insidious value of this crime and want a piece of the action. While identity
theft has taken a strong foothold in the United States over the last 30 years, scammers the
world over now are focusing on identity theft and related crimes. Over the past few
years, law enforcement in the United States has seen an increasing level of activity from
foreign organized criminal groups through computer and Internet schemes. The Presi-
dent’s Identity Theft Task Force report addressed this growing problem by stating:
In Asia and Eastern Europe, for example, organized crime groups are increasingly
sophisticated both in the techniques they use to deceive Internet users into disclosing
personal data, and in the complexity of tools they use, such as keyloggers (programs that
record every keystroke as an Internet user logs onto his computer or a banking Web site),
spyware (software that covertly gathers user information through the user’s Internet
connection, without the user’s knowledge), botnets (networks of computers that criminals
have compromised and taken control of for some other purpose, ranging from distribution
of spam and malicious computer code to attacks on other computers.)1
Almost every country in the world is seeing an increase in identity theft activity.
Those that did not previously experience the problem are now seeing it firsthand.
Unfortunately, most did not learn from the lessons that the United States faced as the
crime grew and evolved. The citizens and businesses of these countries are being hit with
a double-barreled blast of both low- and high-tech identity crimes.
221

AUSTRALIA
Identity crime, as identity theft is called in Australia, is one of a number of issues and
trends shaping crime in that country. Identity crime includes production of fraudulent
documents, fraudulent applications for identification documents, and identity theft. Like
many other countries, Australia has been hit hard by identity theft and incidents continue
to increase.
Instances of identity crime have been growing for some years and it is now fundamental to
many organized crime activities. While concerted and coordinated efforts are being made
to prevent and reduce identity crime, organized crime groups continue to commit identity
crime to further their criminal activities and produce profit.2
In 2004, the New South Wales Parliament issued a briefing paper reporting that identity
theft losses amounted to $3.5 billion for Australia. Other statistics indicated that yearly
losses for identity theft were between $1.1 and $3.5 billion.3 In a 2006 survey in
Australia, 8% of respondents indicated that they had been victims of identity theft.
JAPAN
Although Japan has experienced data breaches of personal information including
confidential financial and health data, Japanese business leaders typically respond in
a much different fashion from their western counterparts. Executives publicly apologize
to those victimized as well as to all customers. This humbling experience is done both in
writing and at very public press conferences. Although quite representative of Japanese
culture, this process may not stop the growth of identity theft. Japan has seen huge
growth in public acceptance of credit cards, and the link between these cards and identity
theft poses potential problems. In 2000, fraudsters used skimming devices ‘‘to steal the
credit card details of approximately 80,000 customers of the department store Taka-
shimaya.’’4 As more and more consumers and businesses use credit cards, the number
and variety of identity theft crimes will increase.
In an unprecedented act of corporate identity theft, organized crime members in Japan
falsely claimed they were affiliated with Japan’s NEC Corporation and conned dozens
of companies in China and Taiwan ‘‘to manufacture pirated products under the NEC
brand.’’5 The criminals hijacked NEC’s good name and were able to exploit it to their
advantage. The scheme operated for almost two years. At some point, NEC learned of
the fraud using its name. The company subsequently conducted its own investigation
using private investigators. The investigation resulted in the arrests of the gang leaders
but did not end the threat of this crime.
Japan’s Personal Information Protection Act went into effect on April 1, 2005, and
provides enhanced standards and protections for the personal information handled by
financial, medical, and telecommunications companies. It was enacted as a result of
widespread availability of personal data, especially in digital form. Among its many
requirements is for companies to ensure that data is secure from loss, unauthorized
access, and disclosure. People who violate the act are subject to fines and imprisonment.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
222

UNITED KINGDOM
In the United Kingdom, it is estimated that identity theft costs the economy $3.4 billion
each year. In 2007, it was named as the country’s fastest-growing crime. Eighty-six
percent of citizens polled in 2008 reported that identity theft and information theft from
cellular telephones topped their list of security concerns.6 Although identity theft is a
long-entrenched crime in the United States, it is a relatively new phenomenon in the
United Kingdom. Many citizens are not aware of how best to protect themselves from
identity theft or even how to react if victimized. A study found that 25% of the public
would not notice if their passports were missing, and 80% did not know what to do if
they lost their birth certificate. Identity thieves are often insiders in financial institutions
or neighbors and friends with access to personal information. The stolen information is
used to open credit card accounts, obtain loans, and order merchandise online. The
average identity theft loss in the United Kingdom is $16,000.7
The Fraud Act of 2006 and the Identity Cards Act of 2006 are important pieces of
legislation for targeting identity theft in the United Kingdom. The Fraud Act defined
identity fraud and established specific offenses to fight the growing problem. The
offenses include possessing and creating access devices for use in fraud and obtaining
related services dishonestly. The Identity Cards Act created specific criminal offenses
related to the possession and use of fraudulent and unauthorized identity documents. The
government also created a Home Office Identity Fraud Steering Committee that is an
ongoing collaboration between U.K. financial institutions, government, and law
enforcement to combat the threat of identity theft. The committee has created a
Web site available at www.identity-theft.org.uk.
The risk of data breaches is just as serious in the United Kingdom as in the United
States. The pharmacy chain Alliance Boots, Ltd. announced in April 2008 that the bank
accounts of 27,000 customers were stolen. Companies in all industries and of all sizes
are not doing enough to protect sensitive personal information, whether by limiting what
is maintained on employee laptops or encrypting those laptops. ‘‘Despite increased
public awareness of the impact that identity theft can have on customers, many firms are
still not taking this risk seriously,’’ said the director of Financial Crime and Intelligence
for the Financial Services Advisory (FSA).8 The FSA investigated 56 cases of lost or
stolen customer data from financial services firms in 2007. To make matters worse,
phishing schemes have targeted customers of most U.K. financial institutions. The tried-
and-true techniques of identity thieves are catching on, although in the United Kingdom
Dumpster diving is referred to as bin raiding.
MOROCCO
In February 2008, Moroccan authorities arrested a 26-year-old engineer who allegedly
stole the identity of a member of the governing royal family. The defendant created a
false profile of the king’s younger brother and prince on a popular social networking
site.9 Although the man admitted that he created the account in the prince’s name, he
said that he did it only because he admired the prince. He claimed to do what many
others do each and every day: ‘‘Create a profile of a celebrity or a star on Facebook.’’10
Identity Theft Goes Global
223

There was no indication that the suspect profited from this identity theft; nonetheless, he
was quickly prosecuted and sentenced to three years in prison and a small fine. After
‘‘local protests and international criticism’’ about the harsh punishment and physical
abuse while in jail, the suspect was granted a royal pardon and released from prison in
March 2008.11
BRAZIL
The BRICS—the emerging economies of Brazil, Russia, India, and China—are
expected to be dominant forces in the global economy in the years ahead. As much
as they are attracting the attention of the world’s leading businesses, they are also a
magnet for identity thieves. ‘‘The Brazilian cybercrime landscape is even more
treacherous than North America’s. Fraud is one of the main concerns of financial
institutions in Latin America,’’ said an executive of a technology company that sells
products and services to detect and prevent identity theft. In August 2005, Brazilian
police arrested 85 people who allegedly stole more than $33 million from online bank
accounts of unsuspecting victims. In February 2006, 55 fraudsters were arrested for
taking $4.7 million from 200 bank accounts using stolen account numbers and pass-
words obtained through an e-mail virus. In the first quarter of 2008, the Brazilian
National Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) reported 30,000 cybercrime
incidents.
There are several reasons for the growth of identity theft and related frauds. Many
organized crime groups are seeing the significant financial value of both traditional and
online scams. The easy availability of technology and those who can use it for criminal
activity are other factors. In addition, there is always the need for better laws and more
trained law enforcement personnel to attack the problem. Yet there is some good news
on the horizon. The publicity around identity theft has increased awareness and
prevention in Brazil. Since 2006, when CERT reported 198,000 cybercrime incidents,
its largest number ever, the number of incidents has dramatically decreased.
RUSSIA
The Russian economy is booming. Russian citizens are seeing the trickle-down effect of
this wealth generation. Their standard of living is improving, and they are using credit
cards like never before. One in seven Russian consumers used credit to purchase big-
ticket items in 2007, a number that is is rapidly increasing. That also makes Russian
citizens a huge target for fraudsters. Much of the identity theft schemes are of the typical
fraudulent credit card application or identity takeover variety. In one instance, a phony
passport was used to open three different credit accounts as well as a cellular telephone
account in the victim’s name. It is believed that Russian banks are losing as much as $4
billion a year to identity theft schemes.12 It also is believed that in many of the identity
theft schemes, bank insiders are involved.
The Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG) is a global association of technology and
financial business leaders along with law enforcement that is focused on eliminating
identity theft, phishing, and other Internet frauds and scams. According to the APWG, as
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
224

of December 2007, Russia was number three in the world of countries that host sites that
are launching pads for phishing attacks. The United States was number one. Also
according to the APWG, Russia was number six in the world for Web sites that host
malicious code in the form of either phishing-based key-loggers or a Trojan downloader
that downloads a keylogger.
INDIA
India got its first taste of how identity theft can have both a financial and reputational
impact on business with a very public fraud in 2005. Employees of a call center in Pune,
India, doing work for a bank in the United States were implicated in stealing account
information and funds of bank customers. Call centers are the fastest-growing segment
of India’s outsourcing industry. They are often the focal point of controversy for the
siphoning of jobs from western countries as well as concerns over data theft and misuse
of that information. Although studies have shown that data theft and misuse in India is no
greater than in other countries, including the United States, this case raised questions
about data-security procedures. It also brought to the surface the growing risk of identity
theft in India.
MphasiS, a business process outsourcing company doing call center work for
Citibank, was at the center of this firestorm over identity theft. MphasiS employees
were accused of ‘‘tricking four Citibank customers during routine calls into divulging
their Social Security numbers (SSNs), personal identification numbers, and other
sensitive data and later transferring money from their accounts by wire into new
bank accounts set up’’ in the western India city of Pune.13 The employees and their
criminal associates ultimately stole $350,000 by raiding the victims’ accounts from
cybercafe´s. The victimized Citibank customers noticed suspicious transactions and
alerted the bank, and an investigation ensued. Indian authorities later arrested three
MphasiS employees and nine other individuals. Sadly, MphasiS decided to blame the
victims for not being better at protecting themselves from identity theft. The company
issued a statement defending its security procedures by stating ‘‘The initial investiga-
tions reveal that MphasiS’ security procedures in fact worked and the fraud could not
have been prevented as some gullible customers have parted with their passwords/
pass-codes carelessly. The accused individuals had no prior criminal record and passed
all reference checks.’’14
This episode highlighted potential security and compliance problems at some call
centers in India that can increase the possibility of data breaches and identity theft. High
employee turnover rates—as much as 100% in some instances—contribute to this
problem. Such high turnover makes it hard to train and monitor employees. Com-
pounding the problem is a high turnover of managers who are needed to provide
oversight and accountability for employees. There is often poor employee background
screening. The best indicator of future performance is past performance. Without
thorough background checks, there is no telling whether people who are ethically
challenged are being hired. Corporate cultures that focus on financial gain at any cost
are also to blame for this problem as employees emulate their leaders’ practices, both
the good and the bad.15
Identity Theft Goes Global
225

CHINA
China’s powerhouse prosperity has paved the way for a burgeoning middle class with the
means and desires to live well. That means homes, cars, and the trappings of wealth.
China and its citizens have also embraced technology. With 220 million Internet users,
China leads the world in Web surfers. There are also some citizens who use technology
for evil. According to the APWG, as of December 2007, China was first in the world for
Web sites that host malicious code in the form of phishing-based key-loggers or Trojan
downloaders. It was also second in the world of countries that host phishing sites, which
serve as launching pads for phishing attacks.
In January 2008, police in Shenzchen arrested 18 members of an Internet identity theft
ring. The defendants defrauded hundreds of victims throughout China with losses of
almost $13.7 million. The fraudsters opened a phony company promising interest-free
and quickly approved loans. This was the bait to lure in the victims. People who fell for
the scammers’ pitch provided personal information, such as bank account numbers and
passwords, in order to obtain the loans. They were told to register their financial
information on the company’s Web site in order so their credit history could be checked.
The criminals then transferred the victims’ money to their own bank accounts using fake
identification. In another variation of the scheme, the defendants would pose as Citibank
employees and conduct telephone marketing surveys to obtain personal information.16
GLOBAL PHISHING SCHEME
Phishing schemes are the ideal mechanism for global criminals. They can plan and
implement large-scale attacks on victims in numerous countries while operating from
the implied safety of another country. That was the case in May 2008 when federal
authorities in the United States charged 38 people with stealing names, SSNs, credit card
information, and other personal and financial information from thousands of consumers
and hundreds of financial institutions.17 Most of the defendants were based in Romania,
but the scheme also operated in the United States, Canada, Portugal, and Pakistan. The
fraudsters based in Romania ‘‘snagged information about thousands of credit and debit
card accounts and other personal data from people who answered spam e-mail.’’18 Once
the financial information was received, it was ‘‘sent to the U.S. and encoded on magnetic
cards’’ that could be used to withdraw money from bank accounts.19
In a related aspect of the investigation, seven Romanians were indicted in January
2008 for spamming people with false information, convincing them to visit hacked Web
sites that appeared to be the legitimate sites of Citibank, Wells Fargo, PayPal, and others.
In announcing the arrests, a Department of Justice official commented, ‘‘Criminals who
exploit the power and convenience of the Internet do not recognize national borders;
therefore our efforts to prevent their attacks cannot end at our borders either.’’20
TERRORISM AND IDENTITY THEFT
Terrorists also know the importance of stolen identities and fraudulent identification
documents for carrying out their fanatical agendas. Identity crimes provide both cover
for infiltration as well as a financial means to fund their terrorist activities. The use of
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
226

stolen identities has become an even greater concern since the devastating September
11, 2001, attacks as we have learned how terrorists have embraced identity theft. Dennis
M. Lormel, former Federal Bureau of Investigation Chief of the Terrorism Financial
Review Group, testified before Congress in July 2002 about this threat. Here are but a
few of his particularly alarming comments about how terrorists are adopting identity
theft:
The stolen identity provides a cloak of anonymity for the subject while the groundwork is laid
to carry out the crime. This includes the rental of mail drops, post office boxes, apartments,
office space, vehicles, and storage lockers as well as the activation of pagers, cellular
telephones, and various utility services.
The threat is made graver by the fact that terrorists have long utilized identity theft as well
as Social Security number fraud to enable them to obtain such things as cover employment
and access to secure locations. These and similar means can be utilized by terrorists to
obtain Driver’s Licenses, and bank and credit card accounts through which terrorism
financing is facilitated. Terrorists and terrorist groups require funding to perpetrate their
terrorist agendas. The methods used to finance terrorism range from the highly sophisti-
cated to the most basic. There is virtually no financing method that has not at some level
been exploited by these groups. Identity theft is a key catalyst fueling many of these
methods.
For example, an al-Qaeda terrorist cell in Spain used stolen credit cards in fictitious sales
scams and for numerous other purchases for the cell. They kept purchases below amounts
where identification would be presented. They also used stolen telephone and credit cards
for communications back to Pakistan, Afghanistan, Lebanon, etc. Extensive use of false
passports and travel documents were used to open bank accounts where money for the
mujahadin movement was sent to and from countries such as Pakistan, Afghanistan, etc.21
The al Qaeda terrorist network has documented the importance of identity theft as a
facilitation tool to be used in their terrorist jihad. An al Qaeda training manual found in a
computer file in the Manchester, England, home of a member of the terrorist organiza-
tion has specific sections and references to forged documents, identity theft, setting up
safe locations for staging operations, and methods of avoiding detection.22 These
terrorists have done their homework and understand the value of identification docu-
ments and the theft of identity. Some of the chilling instructions to terrorists in training
from the section entitled ‘‘Counterfeit Currency and Forged Documents’’ include:

All documents of the undercover brother, such as identity cards and passport, should be
falsified.

When the undercover brother is traveling with a certain identity card or passport, he
should know all pertinent information such as the name, profession, and place of
residence.

The brother who has a special work status (commander, communication link, etc.) should
have more than one identity card and passport. He should learn the contents of each, the
nature of the [indicated] profession, and the dialect of the residence area listed in the
document.
Identity Theft Goes Global
227


When using an identity document in different names, no more than one such document
should be carried at one time.

The validity of the falsified travel documents should always be confirmed.

When a brother is carrying the forged passport of a certain country, he should not travel
to that country. It is easy to detect forgery at the airport, and the dialect of the brother is
different from that of the people from their country.23
In the section entitled ‘‘Apartments—Hiding Places,’’ these instructions are provided
for obtaining and using apartments for covert activities:

It is preferable to rent these apartments using false names.

Under no circumstances should anyone know about the apartment except those who
use it.

A single brother should not rent more than one apartment in the same area, from the same
agent, or using the same rental office.

Avoiding police stations and government buildings. Apartments should not be rented near
these places.

It is preferable to rent apartments in newly developed areas where people do not know
one another.

Ensuring that there has been no surveillance prior to the members entering the
apartment.

It is necessary to have at hand documents supporting the undercover (member). In the
case of a physician, there should be an actual medical diploma, membership in the
(medical) union, the government permit, and the rest of the routine procedures known in
that country.24
Al Qaeda is committed to a perverted form of holy war against anyone who does not
believe in its radical fanaticism. Its members’ desire is to destroy any way of life that is
different than their own. They do this through suicide bombings, kidnappings, assas-
sinations, and intimidation as well as massively coordinated attacks involving large-
scale death and destruction. Yet they also employ other damaging tactics. Economic
warfare is also in their terrorist tool kit. Al Qaeda is determined to undermine the
financial infrastructure of the United States and other countries in any way possible.
These terrorists have embraced technology in their pursuit of electronic information
to create economic destruction and mayhem. ‘‘Al Qaeda could use run-of-the-mill
hacker techniques to build a large botnet to steal identities. It could then use those
machines that they have taken over to process fake transactions in the name of that
consumer.’’25 If they were successful in launching hundreds of thousands of these
attacks, there is always the possibility that confidence in online commerce could be
impacted. The viability of this economic warfare strategy is problematic but one thing is
certain: Al Qaeda will use every possible weapon against us.
The 9/11 Commission Report also looked at how the terrorists used identification
documents. The report found that:
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
228

For terrorists, travel documents are as important as weapons. Terrorists must travel
clandestinely to meet, train, plan, case targets, and gain access to attack. . . . In their
travels, terrorists use evasive methods, such as altered and counterfeit passports . . . and
identity theft. . . . Targeting travel is at least as powerful a weapon against terrorists as
targeting their money. . . . The federal government should set standards for the issuance of
birth certificates and sources of identification, such as driver’s licenses. Fraud in identifi-
cation documents is no longer just a problem of theft. At many entry points to vulnerable
facilities, including gates for boarding aircraft, sources of identification are the last
opportunity to ensure that people are who they say they are and to check whether they
are terrorists.26
GLOBAL IDENTITY THEFT AND MONEY LAUNDERING RING
Identity theft is fast becoming a global problem. Technology, worldwide criminal
networks, and greed all contribute to this fact. Other troubling aspects combine to
making identity theft deadly at times. As we have seen earlier in this book, identity theft
and credit card fraud are white-collar crimes, and there is often the mistaken perception
that violent crimes are not associated with them. That is not necessarily the case; crime
knows no restrictions. In addition, it is quite common that a major investigation starts
down one path but ends up going in many different directions as additional crimes are
discovered. That was what happened in an investigation that started in Maryland in
the mid-1990s but soon spread to many other states and countries around the world.
The case study that follows tells volumes about how credit card fraud and identity
theft can intertwine with drug trafficking, money laundering, and murder, all with an
international twist.
The investigation started when a keen-eyed NationsBank fraud investigator discov-
ered unusual transactions in a customer’s account that indicated possible money
laundering. The investigator reached out to the Financial Crimes Task Force in
Baltimore, Maryland. The Task Force consisted of Postal Inspectors, the IRS Criminal
Investigation Division, and the Customs Service. Although the case started out as a drug
and money laundering investigation involving a ring of Nigerian nationals, by the end it
was primarily an identity theft case. Arrests were made in Florida, Maryland, Illinois,
California, New York, and London.
The scheme was international in scope and was directed by defendant Adeniyi
Allison from London and Nigeria. Allison fled the United States after being con-
victed on credit card fraud charges in the state of Virginia in 1993. Allison master-
minded a money laundering operation to assist friends and associates in moving
money obtained from various frauds to their home country of Nigeria. Some of the
subjects were building large homes in Nigeria using the proceeds of their criminal
activities. Allison directed activities of associate Beverly Mitchell and others via fax
machine from overseas. He directed them to deposit funds from his associates who
were engaged in credit card fraud and drug trafficking. Allison then directed Mitchell
and others to wire transfer these funds to businesses outside the United States.
Identity Theft Goes Global
229

Identity Theft Aspect
In the identity theft aspect of the case, mail containing credit cards and other personal
information was stolen from victims’ residences and businesses. The ring obtained
SSNs, dates of birth, and other confidential information from a variety of sources to
obtain credit cards, open bank accounts, and defraud financial institutions. Money was
sent to Nigeria, Korea, London, Belgium, Taiwan, and Italy.
Allison had friends working at an American Express customer service office and at
their personal identification number (PIN) center. They provided account numbers and
PIN numbers that were used on white plastic to make cash advances. As mentioned
earlier, ‘‘white plastic’’ is a term used by fraudsters and law enforcement. White plastic
cards are credit card–size pieces of plastic of any color that are meant to be used as a
credit card with collusive merchants. They are sometimes called blue plastic. The plastic
card is embossed with valid but stolen information, such as a card holder’s name,
account number, and expiration date.
There were many twists and turns in this case including two brutal murders that
remain unsolved. Approximately $1 million in fraudulent credit card charges were
associated with this scheme, and more than $2 million in laundered proceeds were
eventually identified. Several suspects received 14-year sentences under the money
laundering guidelines, and a total of 14 defendants were convicted. The case included a
wiretap and an international arrest and extradition from England.
During searches, federal agents recovered credit reports and other personal informa-
tion that was obtained from car dealers, hospitals, the Social Security Administration,
and a real estate office. The investigators were initially unsure of the source of the credit
reports from the real estate office. Then two appraisals containing the same company
and individual names from the report header were on letters of appraisal for property
presented to a criminal court judge on behalf of a suspect being held in jail for serious
crimes. The defendant tried to use this stolen information as his own to show his roots to
the community in order to obtain bail for release from jail. Needless to say, the
magistrate was not amused and the defendant remained behind bars.
Involvement of Nigerian Organized Criminal Groups
The description of Nigerian organized criminal groups that follows comes from the
application and affidavit of Postal Inspector Kenyon Male, Jr. for a search warrant on
April 9, 1996. Inspector Male was assigned to the Washington Division of the Postal
Inspection Service at the time. Based on his training, experience, and participation in
other investigations involving the violations of the structuring statutes and the money
laundering statutes, Inspector Male affirmed under oath:
1.
That there are organized criminal groups operating in the United States which are
made up of individuals from the West African country of Nigeria.
2.
That these Nigerian organized criminal groups are primarily involved in the illegal
activities of heroin smuggling and distribution, credit card fraud, advance fee
schemes, bank and credit card account take-overs, and money laundering of the
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
230

proceeds derived from these illegal activities. There is no strict segmentation of
activities among these groups; and many of these groups are usually involved in
more than one of these illegal activities.
3.
That these Nigerian organized criminal groups are often regional or national in
scope. The activities of these groups are usually directed by one or more individuals
who remain in the country of Nigeria, and one or more individuals in the United
States. In order to direct the activities of the members of their organizations, these
leaders rely on various forms of communications such as papers, facsimile ma-
chines, cellular telephones, voice-mail boxes, as well as conventional telephonic
communications.
4.
That in order to facilitate their illegal activities in the United States and throughout
the world the individuals who are members of these Nigerian organized criminal
groups utilize many forms of false identification, such as false birth certificates,
passports, and driver’s licenses that are used to fraudulently obtain visas and travel
under false pretenses, open numerous bank and credit card accounts, and rent drop
boxes, apartments, and storage locations. These individuals often utilize many false
identities which make it extremely difficult for law enforcement to track their
activities and locate their assets.
5.
That due to their well-documented activities in heroin smuggling and various fraud
schemes, Nigerian nationals have come under increased scrutiny from Customs,
banking, and other financial industry officials worldwide. In order to circumvent this
increased scrutiny, Nigerian nationals involved in these illegal activities often
attempt to recruit individuals of other nationalities, who are usually females, to
carry out their smuggling and banking activities.
6.
That Nigerian organized criminal groups operating in the United States utilize a
number of schemes to place their illegal profits into the banking system and/or
transport or transmit their illegal profits outside of the United States. These schemes
include the ‘‘structured’’ purchase of monetary instruments (i.e. money orders and
cashier’s checks) with cash to evade the federal currency reporting requirements,
opening numerous bank accounts in nominee or false names with subsequent use of
the bank’s access to the international electronic funds transfer services, the use
of front companies, currency smuggling, the purchase and subsequent export of
commodities, the use of express mail services, the exchange of U.S. dollars
domestically for Nigerian naira, and the sale of U.S. dollars held domestically
in the U.S. on the Nigerian black market in foreign exchange.
7.
That Nigerian organized criminal groups involved in credit card and other types of
bank fraud often maintain within their premises, in their vehicles, on their persons,
in safe deposit boxes, storage lockers, and other locations, over which they maintain
dominion and control: notes; correspondence; bank account information; credit
cards and associated account information; monetary instruments and receipts
relating to their purchase; storage locker, safe deposit and post office box rental
agreements and keys; Express Mail labels and receipts; identification and travel
documents; phone and address books; and other documents relating to their
fraudulent schemes
8.
That Nigerian organized criminal groups involved in credit card and other types of
bank fraud purchase and maintain assets and investments in their own names,
aliases, front company, and nominee names. Records relating to the acquisition,
maintenance and disposition of these assets and investments as well as other
Identity Theft Goes Global
231

expenditures of illegal proceeds are often maintained within their premises, in their
vehicles, on their persons, in safe deposit boxes, storage lockers and other locations,
over which they maintain dominion and control.27
Detailed Account of the Investigation
This detailed account of the origins of the investigation and the subsequent twists and
turns comes from United States Customs Service Agent Christopher J. Buzzeo’s sworn
affidavit in support of a search warrant authorized by a Magistrate Judge in the Eastern
District of New York on May 9, 1996:
The investigation, to date, identified Adeniyi Momodu Allison and Christopher Olusegun
Omotunde as the leaders of an international Nigerian organized criminal group that is
involved in credit card fraud and the laundering of both drugs and fraud monies generated
in the United States. The fraud activities of the Allison/Omotunde group in the U.S. are being
directed by Christopher Omotunde from his residence in Upper Marlboro, MD. Adeniyi
‘‘Ade’’ Allison is directing the group’s international money movements from Nigeria where
he is a fugitive from a conviction for credit card fraud in the Eastern District of Virginia.
The group utilized a store front located at 1506 Wisconsin Avenue, NW, in Washington, DC,
called Designers Collective, Inc. nee Vogue International Designers, Inc. One of Designers
Collective’s employees, Helen Olopade, a United Kingdom national of Nigerian descent
conducted the group’s banking activities at the direction of Allison utilizing the business
checking accounts of Vogue International Designers (now closed) and Designers Collective,
as well as two personal checking accounts.
In the Spring of 1994, IRS-CID Special Agent Donald L. Temple of the Maryland Financial
Investigative Task Force received a criminal referral from Linda Parker, Fraud Investigator
for NationsBank of Maryland, reporting that Beverly R. Mitchell had recently opened an
account at NationsBank. Shortly after she opened the account, a pattern of suspicious
deposits into and wire transfers out of the account began to occur. In researching Mitchell’s
account activity, Ms. Parker discovered that Mitchell had a second account in which the
same activity was occurring. Based on this information, Special Agent Barry Lewis of the
U.S. Customs Service began a criminal investigation into the apparent laundering of large
sums of monies by Mitchell. In November of 1994, the IRS-CID and the Postal Inspection
Service joined the investigation.
On March 23, 1995, Beverly Mitchell’s body was discovered in a field in LaPlata, MD,
where she had been left after a brutal murder. The homicide remains unsolved. Shortly after
her body was discovered, the investigating agents gained access to Beverly Mitchell’s
residence through the consent of her parents. Investigators found in the bedroom very
detailed records concerning her laundering of over $1 million for the Allison/Omotunde
organization. The investigation, to date, has documented in excess of $1.5 million laundered
internationally by the organization.
Within a day or two of the death of Beverly Mitchell, the body of Temitayo Ikudayisi was
found in a van in Washington, DC. The coroner’s report estimated that Ikudayisi had been
dead 1-2 weeks prior to the discovery of his body. Ikudayisi had recently been released
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
232

from prison resulting from a fraud conviction in Chicago. Ikudayisi allegedly was an
associate of Christopher Omotunde in his fraud activities. Ikudayisi had been tortured
and then executed. This homicide also remains unsolved.
Your affiant has been advised by Special Agent Donald Semesky, IRS-CID, Baltimore, that
Postal Inspector Phillip Bartlett had been involved in the execution of a Maryland State
Search Warrant and the arrest on August 14, 1995 of a Nigerian national named Adewale
Abdebesin Kasal, for credit card fraud. The search warrant was executed at Mr. Kasal’s
residence in Columbia, Maryland.
Inspector Bartlett stated that after Mr. Kasal was advised of his Constitutional rights, he
agreed to cooperate with the government. During the course of the search of Mr. Kasal’s
residence, a business card from U-Store, 6120 Livingston Road, Oxon Hill, Maryland was
recovered. Mr. Kasal admitted that he currently rents storage bin number G4F at this
location under the alias of William Miller. He then signed a consent to search form to permit
the search of this location.
Inspector Bartlett has further advised on August 15, 1995 storage locker G4F was searched
by members of the Washington, DC Fraud Task Force. Recovered during the search were
numerous stolen checks, credit cards, U.S. Mail, fraudulent identification and numerous
documents with names and account numbers. Inspector Bartlett advised that during the
course of the debriefing of Mr. Kasal, he (Kasal) stated that many of the items found in the
storage bin were the property of Christopher Omotunde. Mr. Kasal advised the debriefing
agents that Christopher Omotunde would provide him with stolen checks and fraudulent
identification in various names. Mr. Kasal also stated that he would receive a percentage of
the proceeds for his participation in the various frauds from Christopher Omotunde. Mr.
Kasal further stated that Christopher Omotunde also engages in bank fraud schemes.
During his debriefing Kasal stated that Christopher Omotunde paid for and attended the
funeral of Temitayo Ikudayisi in April 1995. According to Kasal, Omotunde issued a
warning to the others at the funeral that anyone who cooperates with the police and testifies
against other Nigerians will be ‘‘killed’’ like Temitayo.
In March 1996, your affiant debriefed a confidential source of information (CSI) who has
worked operationally for the DEA from 1993 to 1995. CSI has never supplied false
information during his/her cooperation. CSI’s information and an introduction that he/
she arranged has resulted in the arrest and successful prosecution of one person for drug
trafficking. CSI informed your affiant that an individual named ‘‘Rilwan,’’ who is currently
in Nigeria, is presently moving large amounts of money for Nigerians involved in drugs and
credit card fraud in the Washington, DC metropolitan area. CSI also identified Christopher
Omotunde as an associate of Rilwan.
Your affiant has reviewed the deposited items for two accounts at the First Union National
Bank which were opened in the name of Adeniyi Allison with an address in London,
England. This address is recorded in Beverly Mitchell’s records. The deposited items to
these accounts are similar in nature to the items which were deposited to the accounts of
Mitchell and Omotunde, i.e. structured money orders purchased in Chicago and New York.
Many of these money orders list the name, Rilwan Allison, as the payee. During the
debriefing of the CSI, it stated that it did not want its name revealed as a cooperator, because
it feared for its life. CSI referred to Temitayo Ikudayisi and how he went to a party one night
with people he thought were his friends, and was abducted.
Identity Theft Goes Global
233

Analysis of Mitchell’s records, as well as subpoenaed bank records of her’s, Allison’s,
Omotunde’s and other organization members’ bank accounts, reveals a pattern to the group’s
method ofoperation in movingtheirfunds,i.e.thefundsthat were beinglaunderedbyMitchell,
and now Olopade, are first being converted to money orders and bank checks, with an
occasional third party check (all of which appear to have been purchased in a structured
manner, i.e. under $10,000, consecutively numbered on the same day, with the vast majority
being under $3,000), by members of the organization in the cities where they are located.
These monetary instruments are then express mailed to ‘‘drop boxes’’ or Designers
Collective from these co-conspirators in Illinois, New York, New Jersey, Georgia, and
Florida. These monetary instruments are then deposited into checking accounts, often
through deposits made after normal banking hours at ATM machines. Once these funds are
deposited, instructions are received via facsimile from Ade Allison in Nigeria directing
which bank, country, and beneficiary account they are to be wired to.
Analysis of the applications for transfer of funds associated with these wire transfers
indicates that the funds are being used for payment on apparent commercial transactions.
The records of Dun & Bradstreet were obtained for many of the international recipients of
these wire transfers. Your affiant has reviewed these Dun & Bradstreet reports, which
confirm that these companies sell commodities such as electrical appliances, writing and
printing supplies, automotive parts, and earring piercing equipment.
Listed as the senders on these wire transfers are various Nigerian companies. The Nigerian
company listed as the primary sender of these wire transfers is Atinuke Allison and Sons,
Ltd. Another Nigerian company, Premier Standard Industrial, Ltd., is the beneficiary of
many of these wire transfers. Recovered from the residence of Beverly Mitchell, after her
death were facsimile messages from Allison to Mitchell directing her as to the amount,
destination, and for whose benefit funds should be wired.
These messages were sent on Premier Standard’s letterhead. The telephone numbers listed
on this letterhead are the same as the numbers reflected in Beverly Mitchell’s phone books as
Allison’s work numbers. Your affiant is aware of the means and methods utilized by Nigerian
criminal organizations to launder illicit proceeds. Based on your affiants’ review of the
above records it appears as if Allison is laundering the group’s money and bringing it into
Nigeria in two manners: a) he is purchasing commodities which he is then importing into
Nigeria and re-selling, and b) he is entering into contracts with various narcotics and fraud
groups to launder and/or purchase their U.S. dollars, which he is then reselling in the
foreign exchange black market.28
Evidence of Identity Theft
The federal agents in this case conducted numerous search warrants and obtained
significant amounts of important evidence. In one very telling example, Postal Inspector
Male and other federal agents conducted a search warrant at a residence in Wyandanch,
New York, on May 10, 1996. They found this evidence hidden in the attic:
1. More than 15 credit cards in the names of numerous individuals, both male and female,
none of which were in the name of the defendant.
2. Driver’s licenses for the individuals whose names appeared on the above credit cards.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
234

3. Several blank, unembossed credit cards.
4. Over 30 credit cards in the defendant’s own name drawn on all different banks.
5. Equipment designed to print personal bank checks, including transparencies which
contained master copies of the checks, without names but with bank names.
6. A book containing names, social security numbers, mother’s maiden names, occupa-
tions, and other credit information.
7. Credit reports for numerous different individuals.
8. Approximately 30 Macy’s credit card applications in numerous and different names.
9. Boxes of blank checks in numerous different names.
10. Approximately $6,000 in structured postal money orders.
11. Blank Postal change of address forms.29
This is typical of the evidence usually found in identity theft cases. It is similar to what
other federal agents and I found during searches in the 1980s. It is also no different from
what law enforcement is finding today in search warrants.
Aftermath
Of the 14 defendants in this case, most pleaded guilty. Ringleader Omotunde pleaded
guilty to money laundering charges on January 10, 1997, and agreed to cooperate against
his codefendants. He testified as a government witness on January 21, 1997. He told how
he and other members of his fraud ring developed contacts in car dealerships, financial
institutions, mortgage companies, and credit-reporting agencies to obtain the victims’
personal information. He detailed to the jury how he rented an apartment in Allentown,
Pennsylvania, and installed a telephone there in case credit card issuers called to confirm
information on applications. Omotunde had the calls automatically forwarded to his cell
phone so that he could answer and provide false information.30 He detailed how he and
his ring made millions of dollars in the easy-to-do crime of credit card fraud.
Omotunde’s cooperation against the other defendants resulted in a reduced prison
term of only 51 months.
One of the defendants who pleaded guilty during his trial to money laundering and
heroin-trafficking charges threatened to cast a spell on anyone who would testify against
him. He reportedly placed a curse on the agents, judges, and prosecutors in this case. The
defendant claimed to be a practitioner of witchcraft, called ‘‘juju’’ in Nigeria.31 His
threat of voodoo was not powerful enough, however, as he was sentenced to almost
13 years in prison.
The investigation disclosed more than $1.5 million in credit card fraud resulting from
the criminal misuse of personal financial information and mail theft from more than
1,000 victims. The conspirators utilized insiders from American Express, the Social
Security Administration, car dealerships, and other businesses and organizations to
obtain personally identifiable information.
Two other defendants who went to trial were convicted and sentenced to lengthy
prison terms. Another twist in this unusual case was a foot chase in London that netted
a key conspirator and fugitive, Allison. Allison had gotten into an argument with an
Identity Theft Goes Global
235

employee at a rental car agency, and the police were called. Allison tried to flee but an
alert Scotland Yard ‘‘bobby’’ ran him down and tackled him. In Allison’s possession
were documents linking him to the other defendants.32
NOTES
1. The President’s Identity Theft Task Force, Combating Identity Theft: A Strategic
Plan, April 2007, 13, www.idtheft.gov/reports/StrategicPlan.pdf.
2. Australian Crime Commission, Organised Crime in Australia (2007), www.crime-
commission.gov.au/content/publications/Other_Publications/080117_Organised_
Crime_In_Australia.pdf.
3. Written comments from a presentation made by Detective Sergeant Rodney Mills,
Victoria Police, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia, at the Association of Certified
Fraud Examiners’ 18th Annual Fraud Conference, Orlando, FL, July 16, 2007.
4. Dr. Alan F. Westin, ‘‘Data Leakage and Harm,’’ www.privacyexchange.org/japan/
dataleakEd.html.
5. Evan Blass, ‘‘NEC Falls Victims to Sophisticated ‘Corporate Identity Theft,’’’ April
27, 2006, www.engadget.com/2006/04/27/nec-falls-victim-to-sophisticated-corpo
rate-identity-theft/.
6. Nick Heath, ‘‘Brits Living in Fear of Identity Theft,’’ May 20, 2008, www.silicon
.com/research/specialreports/fulldisclosure/0,3800014102,39225528,00. htm.
7. ‘‘ID Burglary Risk Ignored,’’ April 22, 2008, www.myfinances.co.uk/news/bank-
accounts/bank-account-fraud/id-burglary-risk-ignored-$1219804.htm.
8. Caroline Binham, ‘‘Banks, Lenders Must Protect Data from Fraud, U.K.’s FSA
Says,’’ April 24, 2008, www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601102&sid=
alPccpflbvUI&refer=uk.
9. Chris Williams, ‘‘Moroccan IT Manager Arrested Over Fake Facebook Account,’’
The Register, February 18, 2008, www.theregister.co.uk/2008/02/18/morocco_
fb_fake_prince/.
10. ‘‘The Fouad Mourtada Affair,’’ Wikipedia.org, accessed May 26, 2008, //en.wiki
pedia.org/wiki/Fouad_Mourtada.
11. Ibid.
12. ‘‘Living to Pay Off Another Man’s Debt,’’ Russia Today, May 3, 2008, www.
russiatoday.ru/features/news/24270.
13. Saritha Rai, ‘‘Indian Outsourcers Move to Fix Security,’’ International Herald
Tribune, June 17, 2005, www.iht.com/articles/2005/06/16/business/security.php.
14. Andy McCue, ‘‘$350,000 Citibank Theft Victims ‘Gullible and Careless,’ Indian
Call Center Firm Says the Fraud Could Not Have Been Prevented,’’ April 12, 2005,
www.silicon.com/research/specialreports/offshoring/0,3800003026,39129475,00.
htm.
15. Anthony Mitchell, ‘‘Indian Call Center Fraud Case Highlights Need for Change,’’
E-Commerce Times, April 12, 2005, www.ecommercetimes.com/story/42112.html.
16. Wu Nanlan, ‘‘Police Crack Down on Internet Identity Theft,’’ January 11, 2008,
www.china.org.cn/english/China/239068.htm.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
236

17. Lara Jakes Jordan, ‘‘38 Charged in Global Phishing Scheme,’’ Associated Press,
May 19, 2008, www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1807712,00.html?xid=
rss-topstories.
18. Ibid.
19. Ibid.
20. Ibid.
21. Testimony of Dennis M. Lormel, Chief, Terrorist Financial Review Group, Federal
Bureau of Investigations, Before the Senate Judiciary Committee Subcommittee on
Technology, Terrorism and Government Information, July 9, 2002, in support of the
Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act, www.fbi.gov/congress/congress02/
idtheft.htm.
22. The al Qaeda Training Manual was found by the Manchester, England Metropolitan
Police Department during a search of a residence occupied by a member of al
Qaeda. The manual was described as a ‘‘military series’’ related to the ‘‘Declaration
of Jihad.’’ The manual was translated into English and subsequently introduced as
evidence at a terrorist bombing trial in New York City, www.usdoj.gov/ag/
manualpart1_1.pdf.
23. Al Qaeda Training Manual, 23–24, www.usdoj.gov/ag/manualpart1_1.pdf.
24. Ibid., 26–28.
25. John Bambenek, ‘‘Al Qaeda’s Economic War and Online Identity Theft: A Perfect
Storm,’’ Men’s News Daily, December 22, 2006, http://mensnewsdaily.com/2006/
12/22/al-qaedas-economic-war-and-online-identity-theft-a-perfect-storm/.
26. The 9/11 Commission Report: Final Report of the National Commission on
Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States (New York: W.W. Norton & Company,
2004), 384–390.
27. Application and Affidavit in Support of Search Warrant to search a Postal Express
Mail package, sworn to and signed by Postal Inspector Kenyon Male, Jr. and IRS-
CID Special Agent Donald C. Semesky, Jr., United States District Court, District of
Maryland, April 9, 1996, 3–4.
28. Application and Affidavit in Support of Search Warrant to search a residence in
Wyandanch, New York, sworn to and signed by Special Agent Christopher J.
Bruzzeo, United States Customs Service, United States District Court, Eastern
District of New York, May 9, 1996, 4–7.
29. United States against Tony K. Oderinde, Defendant, Criminal Complaint, sworn to
and signed by Postal Inspector Kenyon Male, Jr., United States District Court,
Eastern District of New York, May 10, 1996, 3.
30. Scott Higham, ‘‘Figure in Fraud Ring Describes Maze of Schemes,’’ Baltimore Sun,
January 22, 1997, 5B.
31. Scott Higham, ‘‘How Nigerian Criminal Cast Spells to Control Enemies,’’ Balti-
more Sun, February 3, 1997, 1A.
32. Scott Higham, ‘‘Fraud Victim Testifies about Illegal Buys on Credit Cards,’’
Baltimore Sun, January 28, 1997, 1B.
Identity Theft Goes Global
237


CHAPTER 17
Privacy and Data Breaches
Our privacy is under attack like never before. We live in a digital world where life
is literally an open book. With a click of a mouse, anyone anywhere in the world
can learn who we are and what we have done, both good and bad. Much of our
personal information is being collected in huge databases. Our consumer profiles
are shared and sold to data brokers and marketing firms for a wide variety of purposes.
Social networking sites are proliferating, and people are willingly posting every
imaginable detail of their lives. Identity thieves and sexual predators are seizing
on this information for criminal purposes. Young people who proudly display photos
of their drinking binges on social networking sites are not thinking of the photos’
impact on possible future employers who may check the sites for background
screening purposes.
LOSS OF PRIVACY
In an event launch on January 25, 1999, former Sun Microsystems chief executive
officer (CEO) Scott McNealy stated, ‘‘You have zero privacy anyway. . . . Get over
it.’’1 McNealy made the comment when asked about what privacy safeguards he was
including in a new technology he was promoting. Unfortunately, at the time he was
right about the state of privacy in the wired world. But the growth of the Internet
and identity theft requires a greater focus on protecting people and data. After having
had several years to reflect on this comment, McNealy in a speech in February 2006
stated: ‘‘It’s going to get scarier if we don’t come up with technology and rules to
239

protect appropriately privacy and secure data, and the most important asset we have
is obviously the data on people—our customers and employees and partners.’’ He added,
‘‘And if we can’t protect that, people are not going to go online.’’2
Yet people are going online, and in even greater numbers each and every day.
Facebook, MySpace, and LinkedIn are but some of the many very popular social
networking sites. They are great people interaction tools and quite effective in con-
necting people. Social networking ‘‘is the chosen mode of communication of everyone
they know. So if you’re not in it, you’re just not in the loop.’’3 We will not be able to stop
the onrushing technology revolution or resulting dangers. Fraudsters have learned the
value of the Internet for criminal activity in a big way. We knew it would happen. In
a speech on March 15, 1999, then Attorney General Janet Reno said, ‘‘We cannot
allow cyberspace to become the wild west of the information age.’’ Unfortunately, that is
exactly what has happened. Identity theft and other fraud schemes are proliferating in the
online world.
Ensuring privacy and protections in the Internet age is quite a challenge. In many
cases we are our own worst enemy. Most of the data breaches that have occurred in
recent years have been the result of security lapses that could have been avoided.
Whether it is carrying a laptop laden with far too much sensitive information and failing
to encrypt the hard drive, to simple security procedures such as shredding confidential
files before discarding them, we all can do better in ensuring privacy.
DEFINING ‘‘PRIVACY’’
Microsoft defines ‘‘privacy’’ as allowing individuals to determine how and to what
extent their personal information will be collected, used, and shared with others. We
must all care about privacy protections and how our personal information is used.
Personally identifiable information (PII) is unique information that identifies a
particular person. PII includes name, date of birth, Social Security number (SSN),
email address, telephone number, and financial and medical information. This
information has become a commodity, a very valuable commodity. Expanding
business models want and need more and more information on people. These personal
data are critical to business growth, but at the same time consumers want account-
ability. Although the legal requirements for privacy are critical, privacy is also about
earning customer trust.
Identity theft is a serious threat to our privacy, but there are many other factors
that intrude into our privacy. London has ringed its central district with surveillance
cameras to provide an ‘‘eye in the sky’’ to increase personal protection and decrease
crime. This constant surveillance helped identify and capture terrorists who attemp-
ted to set off car bombs in the city in 2007. New York City is planning a similar
video surveillance network to protect the city and its citizens. E-Z Pass and other
electronic transmitters that allow motorists to speed through toll booths can also be
used to track their movements. These monitoring examples are just a few of the many
privacy challenges facing people today. The Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, a non-
profit consumer information and advocacy organization, believes the top privacy
issues include:
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
240

 Identity theft
 Online privacy and e-commerce
 Video surveillance
 Biometrics technologies
 Wireless communications and location tracking
 Data profiling
 Background checks
 Information broker industry
 Public records on the Internet
 Financial privacy
 Medical records confidentiality
 Wiretapping and electronic communications
 Youth privacy issues
 Digital rights management
 Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)4
DATA BREACHES
Data breaches and identity theft were the main topics at the RSA Conference on
Information Security in San Francisco, California, in February 2007. ‘‘Data are the
currency of the Internet age for legitimate—and illegitimate—businesses,’’ said Howard
Schmidt, former chief information officer at eBay.5 ‘‘It’s a stupid system,’’ commented
Microsoft chairman Bill Gates on the current credit card issuing system. ‘‘It’s a weak
system when someone with your Social Security number or mother’s maiden name
can apply for credit without you knowing it.’’6 Gates’s solution is a combination of
biometrics and a system that requires a consumer’s approval when any financial
transaction occurs.
There is no question that data breaches are a significant risk to privacy. A 2005 study
by security software provider Credant Technologies found that 90% of people who
had their laptops stolen had sensitive business and personal information on the hard
drives. A 2003 Pepperdine University study found that data losses cost businesses in the
United States more than $18 billion a year and is significantly more today. A Ponemon
Institute study on data breaches found that 20% of data breach victims cut their ties with
the organization after the breach. Data breaches are bad for business.
Many of the data breaches in recent years have been the result of lost or stolen laptops.
It is shocking how much sensitive PII can be found on laptops. In December 2005,
financial services company Ameriprise Financial learned that a laptop containing the
names and SSNs of hundreds of thousands of employees and customers was stolen
from an employee’s car. Although the laptop was password protected, it was not en-
crypted as required by the company. In May 2006, a laptop used by a data analyst with
the United States Department of Veterans Affairs was stolen from the employee’s home.
The laptop contained personal information on more than 28 million veterans, military
personnel, and their spouses.
Privacy and Data Breaches
241

Data breaches are not just a U.S. problem. In 2007, government workers in the United
Kingdom lost two computer disks with the personal information of 25 million residents
of that country. The disks contained names, addresses, dates of birth, insurance
identifiers, and other financial information. Sent through regular interoffice delivery
channels, they disappeared. Although the disks were password protected, they were not
encrypted. Skilled computer forensic specialists could easily break those passwords and
access the information.
The Privacy Rights Clearinghouse has been maintaining a running chronology of data
breaches since January 2005. Since that time, more than 227 million records containing
sensitive personal information has been breached from financial institutions, healthcare
providers and hospitals, universities, government agencies, and other types of busi-
nesses. The PII was compromised through both low-tech and high-tech means. Breaches
resulted from theft of unencrypted laptops from cars, homes, and hotel rooms;
compromised passwords; insider thefts; hacking; lost backup tapes; thefts of packages
of files and computer tapes being shipped; and generally careless exposure of PII.
Exhibit 17.1 is a sampling of the many data breaches that have occurred between 2005
and 2008.
Billions of dollars can be spent on information security systems, but just one weak
link can compromise the entire system. Laptops are that weak link. Companies have
hardened their defenses to limit what comes into their networks, laptops, and the data on
them, but that is not enough. Sensitive information freely leaves work sites each and
every day with employees who carry their laptops home and during travel. Sales of
laptop computers far outpace those of desktop systems. With the convenience of mobile
computing, people carry their laptops everywhere. The big question is why such
sensitive data are kept on unprotected laptops despite the huge risk. Removing all
but the most necessary information is a start. A best practice is conducting audits to
ensure compliance by checking for unsecured files, sensitive files that do not belong on
laptops, and the use of encryption technology.
Although not an absolute solution to the risk of data breach, encryption of data is a
great start. Encryption encodes data so that it can be accessed only with special
passwords and keys. That is not to say that encryption is foolproof. Highly skilled
forensic experts can break encryption, but encryption will eliminate most of the threat of
data theft. Encryption, however, works only if employees use it once it is installed.
Portable digital devices present another risk for lost data. Some companies are
disabling USB ports on computers to ensure that these devices cannot be used. Flash
drives are easy to use to extract sensitive information and small enough to hide and
remove from the premises. The digital age provides numerous avenues to store PII and
other sensitive information that needs to be protected.
Although more and more companies are holding their employees accountable for
lost computers containing sensitive PII, that will not fix the problem. Disciplining
employees who violate this policy is akin to closing the barn doors after the horses
have run away. One Fortune 500 company requires employees to use a cable lock to
secure laptops to stationary objects at all times. This is a good policy, but most cable
locks can be defeated with a simple screwdriver. That is not to say that using a cable
lock when in the office or hotel room is a bad idea. It is not. Any deterrent is good, and
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
242

such locks may very well deter opportunity theft. But they will not stop hard core
criminals.
INSIDER THREATS
Although there is the general public’s fear that multitudes of foreign-based hackers and
criminals are breaking into our networks and personal computers and stealing our
personal information, the truth is something different. Studies over the last few years
have found that the greatest threat for identity theft is from trusted insiders within
organizations.7
In 2003, a manager at H&R Block in White Plains, New York, was charged with
identity theft–related crimes for stealing the personal information of 27 customers of the
Exhibit 17.1
Sampling of Data Breaches, 2005 to 2008
Date
Company or
Organization
Type of Breach
Number of
Records
Breached
February 2005
ChoicePoint
Bogus accounts established
by identity thieves
163,000
February 2005
Bank of America
Lost backup tape
1,200,000
March 2005
DSW/Retail Ventures
Hacking
100,000
December 2005
Ameriprise Financial
Stolen laptop from employee’s
car
260,000
March 2006
Fidelity Investments
Stolen laptop
196,000
May 2006
American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants
Unencrypted hard drive lost
330,000
May 2006
U.S. Department of Veteran’s
Affairs
Theft of laptop and computer
storage device from
employee’s home
28,600,000
December 2006
University of California, Los
Angeles
Hacking
800,000
December 2006
Boeing
Laptop stolen from employee’s
car
382,000
January 2007
TJX
Hacking
100,000,000
April 2007
Georgia Department of
Community Health
Lost computer disk
2,900,000
August 2007
California Public Employees’
Retirement System
All or portion of retirees’ SSN
appeared on address panel
in mass mailing
445,000
March 2008
Hannaford Brothers
Hacking
4,200,000
April 2008
New York-Presbyterian
Hospital/Weill Cornell
Medical Center
Admissions employee stole
patients’ data in an identity
theft scheme
50,000
April 2008
University of Miami
Theft of computer tapes
2,100,000
Source:
Privacy
Rights
Clearinghouse,
A
Chronology
of
Data
Breaches,
www.privacyrights.org/ar/ChronData
Breaches.htm#Total
Privacy and Data Breaches
243

tax preparation service. The PII was used to open credit cards in the names of the
victims, make purchases on those cards, and withdraw money from automated teller
machines (ATMs). The manager was assisted in the crime by three of her friends who
were also charged. The defendants used Postal Service change-of-address orders to
divert credit cards from the victims’ residences to that of mail drops the criminals
opened. In addition, the H&R Block employee also stole tax refund checks due
customers.
Two Bellevue, Washington, businesses were attacked by insiders who stole financial
information from dozens of customers. A fraudster approached employees of a mortgage
company and an escrow service and recruited them to obtain information from victims’
mortgage applications. Other conspirators created phony driver’s licenses and docu-
ments to perpetrate the fraud. The personal and financial information was used to apply
for fraudulent credit cards and withdraw money from bank accounts. The scheme
continued from 2002 to 2005 before it was discovered.
YOUR HOME IS THEIR CASTLE
The enemy within may be located under your own roof. Identity thieves know that a
significant source of personal information is maintained within our residences. They
may not need to actually break into the house to get what they need. Any number of
people walk in through the front door on a regular basis for legitimate purposes. Nannies,
caregivers, cleaning people, and repair and other service providers are just some.
Nannies and caregivers may reside in the homes on a long-term basis and could very well
know where personal and financial information is located. Background checks are a
must for any live-in workers. Locking up key information and financial documents is
also a must.
Owners of home-based businesses may employ staff. If any of these people are
criminally minded, there is valuable information to be had when no is looking. Again,
background checks are also highly recommended for all employees.
Vacation homes are also vulnerable. They may be vacant for long stretches of time.
The owners may leave information in those locales that could be stolen by people who
watch the home or come into the residence to do maintenance work. Vacation homes are
also vulnerable to break-ins by opportunistic thieves who may steal PII and the computer
along with the flat-screen television and DVD player.
CARELESSNESS AS A CONTRIBUTING FACTOR
Mortgage files are particularly attractive to identity thieves. Lenders require detailed
financial information on borrowers in order to assess loan risk. Mortgage applications
are used to approve or deny mortgages that can range to the hundreds of thousands of
dollars. The problem is what happens to those paper applications when they are no
longer needed or companies go out of business. In 2007, a reporter in Indianapolis
did his own investigation to determine the seriousness of this issue. Over a period
of several days, he checked 40 Dumpsters behind mortgage and title companies
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
244

looking for discarded mortgage files. Almost half of the companies had thrown out
applications and other documents containing personal and financial information of
borrowers. ‘‘You could see their complete financial lives on paper, dating back 20, 30,
40 years,’’ said the reporter who broke the story.8 You can imagine the borrowers’
outrage upon learning about the failure to safeguard their financial histories.
WIRELESS (IN)FIDELITY
Wireless networks (or Wi-Fi) are an increasingly popular way to connect to the Internet.
Wireless networks allow users the freedom to access the Internet anywhere they get a
signal, whether at home through their own wireless router or in public at a Wi-Fi hot
spot. Although Wi-Fi is very convenient for users, it presents many unique dangers
beyond the ones otherwise encountered by wired Internet users. Special measures need
to be taken to prevent unauthorized data access, hacking, and identity theft.
Home wireless networks are very common. As many laptop users who have searched
for wireless networks at home can attest, there are numerous wireless networks available
for access. Only a small percentage of home wireless users bother to secure their
networks by enabling encryption, even though nearly all wireless routers have this
capability. Of course, as the author can attest, setting up an encrypted wireless network
and configuring multiple computers to access it can be a major annoyance, even for
someone familiar with computers. Rather than dealing with the hassle, many households
simply do not bother. The danger of not encrypting is that all data sent over the network,
including passwords, bank account information, and credit card numbers, could
potentially be seen by others.
By not securing a wireless network, a person has no idea who else is accessing it or
what they are doing. There have been several cases of arrests made based on unautho-
rized use of wireless signals.9 One particularly strange case involved a man driving the
wrong way down a one-way residential street, naked from the waist down, searching for
open wireless networks from which to download child pornography. Luckily police
arrested him.10
On the flip side, for a person without Internet access, using open wireless can be very
tempting. Although the law is unsettled, people have been arrested and punished for
illegally using someone else’s wireless network. Furthermore, open wireless networks
can be traps to catch sensitive data. Like the ‘‘evil twins’’ networks to be discussed
shortly, with the use of programs readily available on the Internet, it would be simple for
a person to set up an open wireless network, wait for someone to log on, and then capture
all the data sent over the network.
The ability of people to do all of the above is unquestioned, but the likelihood of it
happening is another story. A home wireless network connection can be accessed only
by those in the immediate vicinity of the house. If someone lives in a neighborhood with
multiple wireless connections, the likelihood that their neighbors are piggybacking on
their signal lessens, as their neighbors may well have their own wireless connections.
The situation also differs in an apartment building, where the signal can bleed into many
more residences, and it is more difficult to determine who else might be accessing
the network.
Privacy and Data Breaches
245

Overall, hackers and fraudsters are far more likely to focus on places where they can
retrieve large amounts of data from multiple sources, such as public wireless hot spots.
Hot spots, which offer open Internet access, can be a fraudster’s dream. For instance, in a
survey of 14 United States and three Asian airports, 57% of the networks had no
encryption, 28% used the easily breakable Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) encryption,
and only 15% used the more secure Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) encryption. This
survey included both publicly accessible Internet and the private systems used for airport
functions such as baggage handling and ticketing.11
Hackers have multiple methods of collecting data from public Internet users. An ‘‘evil
twin’’ is a wireless network that appears to offer a Wi-Fi connection like those available
at coffee shops, hotels, and airports, and looks just like the real network. All communi-
cations over this network can be monitored, including passwords and credit card
numbers.12 To entice users into giving up information, hackers can create fake log-
in pages that look identical to legitimate ones; for instance, a user could see a screen
prompting him or her to input credit information to purchase Wi-Fi access.13 A ‘‘man-in-
the-middle’’ attack is similar, in that the hacker sets up a deceptive Wi-Fi signal but then
routes the connection into the legitimate network.14 This attack ‘‘can make it appear that
a user has a secure ‘SSL’ connection,’’15 indicated by a small padlock in the corner of the
browser. However, ‘‘the hacker sets up one secure SSL connection with the Web surfer,
and a second secure connection with the bank or other destination site. Information looks
encrypted at either end, but it is decoded and viewed by the hacker in the middle.’’16
Getting access to a user’s email can also be a gold mine, as it will give access to saved
emails, which may contain passwords and access information for bank accounts,
financial institutions, and the like.
Fraudsters also seek user names and passwords from people logging on to company
networks from Wi-Fi hot spots. For instance, in one case, a financial institution traced a
data breach back to an employee working on a laptop in Manhattan’s Bryant Park. The
employee thought he was using a public signal; in fact, it had been set up by a hacker.
When the employee logged on to the company network, the hacker stole his user name
and password.17 In September 2007, the federal government indicted another hacker,
Max Butler, on charges of wire fraud and identity theft. In addition to selling stolen
credit cards on the Internet, Butler would rent hotel rooms and apartments using the
stolen cards and false identities, then use a high-powered antenna to intercept wireless
traffic. He used this technique to hack into financial institutions and data processing
centers to obtain even more personal information.18
T.J. MAXX ATTACK
Perhaps the most prominent wireless hack took place at TJX, the parent company of
clothing retailers T.J. Maxx and Marshalls. Hackers stole at least 45.7 million credit card
and debit card numbers over a period of a year and a half. The true amount of card
numbers stolen may never be known, but some estimates have placed it as high as 200
million. The hackers also nabbed driver’s license numbers, military identification, and
SSNs.19 Banks have claimed that tens of millions of dollars in fraudulent charges have
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
246

been made and millions of cards have been canceled and reissued.20 TJX-related fraud
has been uncovered in at least seven states and seven countries, from Mexico to China.21
The initial attack occurred in 2005 outside a Marshalls discount clothing store in
Miami, Florida. Hackers used a special antenna to intercept wireless communications
between the store’s handheld price-checking devices, cash registers, and store comput-
ers. They then used that decoded information to enable them to hack into TJX’s main
database in Massachusetts and access the company’s customer records.22 They installed
a ‘‘sniffer’’ program which collected account numbers and information. The hackers left
behind few clues in their precise and methodical attack, but a similar sniffer program
used in another hack eventually lead to the criminals’ downfall.23
As law enforcement dug deeper into the intrusion, what stood out was not the
sophistication of the criminal activity but rather the lax attitude toward security
demonstrated by TJX. Not only did the multibillion-dollar company fail to meet
industry standards, its network was less secure than that of many home users. According
to one report, TJX had met just three of the 12 requirements that credit card companies
impose on merchants to protect consumer data.24 TJX had used WEP encryption, which
is arguably insufficient for home use and extremely dangerous for a major retailer,
particularly since a report issued in 2001 noted that security experts were able to crack
the WEP encryption of several major retailers.25 TJX did not upgrade its network
security or even install firewalls on many of its computers.
Diligent investigation and some luck eventually led authorities to the culprits, an
international online crime syndicate, following leads from Ukraine to Turkey to China.
Federal prosecutors indicted 11 members of the hacking ring, from five different
countries. When the full details of the syndicate’s activities came to light, authorities
were struck by the size, scope, and complexity of the plot. It went far beyond just TJX.
Starting in 2003 the hackers infiltrated via wireless access the networks of other major
business including Barnes & Noble, the Sports Authority, B.J.’s Wholesale Club, as well
as hacking directly into the system of the restaurant chain Dave & Busters.26 As
Attorney General Michael Mukasey said, ‘‘As far as we know, this is the single largest
and most complex identity theft case that’s ever been charged in this country.’’27
The indictment alleges the hacking ring stole and sold over 40 million credit and debit
card numbers.28 The ring’s operations reflect the international challenges confronting
those fighting identity theft, as seen in the previous chapter. The hackers in the United
States infiltrated the wireless networks, an accomplice in the Ukraine brokered sales and
purchases of the stolen numbers, they purchased blank credit debit and credit cards from
confederates in China and stored the stolen data on servers in Eastern Europe. If the
syndicate did not sell a hacked number, its members would imprint the numbers on a
blank card, withdrawing hundreds of thousand in cash.29
This attack has proven to be very costly to the company. It faced substantial public
embarrassment, lawsuits from customers and other companies, expensive security
upgrades, and had to reach a settlement agreement with the Federal Trade Commission.
The settlement agreement is very revealing in highlighting TJX’s security deficiencies.
TJX ‘‘failed to use reasonable and appropriate security measures to prevent unauthorized
access to personal information on its computers networks.’’30 ‘‘The agency chastised the
retailer for not encrypting the data, establishing firewalls, using complex passwords or
Privacy and Data Breaches
247

regularly updating antivirus software to make it difficult for hackers to steal customers’
financial data.’’31
Despite the dangers of Wi-Fi, steps can be taken to significantly reduce risk. Home
users should always enable WPA encryption on their routers as well as change both
the default network name and the default access password. Businesses need to learn the
lesson of the T.J. Maxx case and recognize that hackers do target insecure networks.
They must establish adequate security to protect their data and ensure their customers’
privacy.
When using public hot spots, always act as if someone is watching your every move.
Do not access sensitive information over a public Wi-Fi network. While in public,
consider turning off the computer’s wireless function when not in use so as to not
inadvertently connect to an evil twin network. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
also has recognized the dangers of public Wi-Fi. It counsels to not connect to an
unknown Wi-Fi network, certainly a sensible precaution. The FBI also offers some
further recommendation regarding public Wi-Fi usage:
 Make sure your laptop security is up to date, with current versions of your operating
system, Web browser, firewalls, and antivirus and antispyware software.
 Do not conduct financial transactions or use applications like email and instant
messaging.
 Change the default setting on your laptop so you have to manually select the Wi-Fi
network you are connecting to.
 Turn off your laptop’s Wi-Fi capabilities when you are not using them.32
P2P NETWORKS
Peer-to-peer networks (known as P2P) facilitate sharing of many kinds of information.
The technology facilitates many legitimate uses, such as the sharing of medical records
or facilitating access to government documents.33 However, the technology is best
known and most frequently used for illegal purposes, specifically the unauthorized
sharing of copyrighted music, movies, and software. The Recording Industry of America
has cracked down hard on violators, suing universities (which host the networks used by
the most frequent violators, college students) and individual users alike for the illegal
downloading of music.34 Beyond getting sued for sharing music, P2P also poses other,
less well known dangers: allowing criminals to access sensitive data and possibly
commit identity theft.
According to a recent study by Dartmouth Business School researchers, P2P networks
are ‘‘an increasingly dangerous means of transmitting confidential information.’’35 Use
of such networks has risen steadily, reaching over 10 million users in 2006.36 The
Dartmouth researchers, focusing only on the top 30 U.S. banks, were able to access
numerous sensitive documents using P2P networks. They found 1,708 documents
containing sensitive bank information.37
This danger is not simply academic. Several incidents of data theft have been traced
back to P2P intrusions. ‘‘A Pfizer worker has been blamed for leaking personal financial
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
248

information on more than 17,000 current and former Pfizer employees. The information
breach came after the employee installed unauthorized file-sharing software on a
company laptop. The sensitive files were then accessed by one or more third parties.’’38
In another incident, the names and SSNs of 5,200 Citibank customers were also leaked
inadvertently onto the Internet by a Citibank employee using LimeWire, a popular P2P
program.39 Businesses may have policies prohibiting P2P programs at work, but they
also need clear policies for laptop usage and access of business files on home computers
in regard to P2P programs. For instance, businesses need to clearly prohibit the use of
P2P programs on take-home laptops or home computers if employees will be accessing
work files on those computers.
This possibility of data loss comes from the installation process. Upon installation, the
user is asked to choose a folder for downloads and to share the contents of that folder.
Many times users choose the My Documents folder, which often contains sensitive
personal information. Depending on the program’s settings, this information may be
shared inadvertently. Furthering the problem is the tendency to clearly name personal
files: for example, ‘‘Student Financial Aid Application,’’ ‘‘Jones Family Tax Return,’’
‘‘Bank of America Account Info,’’ and so on. Finally, many P2P programs circumvent
firewall protections, diluting user protection.
Makers of the most popular file-sharing programs, including LimeWire and Bear-
Share,havetakenstepstohelppreventusersfrominadvertentlysharing sensitivematerial
by restricting sharing to media files, such as music and video only.40 Even though a user
may restrict sharing to a limited section of the hard drive, viruses can expand access to
other parts of the drive, giving fraudsters freer access.41 This brings up another danger
common to P2P networks beyond identity theft. P2P networks are rife with viruses,
spyware, and other forms of malware. Unsurprisingly, free pornography, music, and
movies are an effective form of distribution, enticing users to download what appear to be
legitimate files but are in fact Trojan horses or other equally insidious type of malware.
The access and anonymity provided by P2P programs has proven to be an irresistible
lure for criminals. Gregory Kopiloff of Seattle used LimeWire ‘‘to infiltrate hundreds
of people’s hard drives and steal tax returns, student financial aid forms and other
sensitive personal data.’’42 He did this not by hacking into personal computers or
creating sophisticated malware but rather simply by trolling P2P networks looking for
sensitive data. ‘‘Kopiloff then used that information to create bogus credit-card and
bank accounts and illegally purchase thousands of dollars in merchandise.’’43 Using
false identities to make online purchases shipped to rented mailboxes, he obtained
high-end computers, cell phones, and audio players, all of which he then resold for
about half price.
After a joint investigation involving Seattle police, the Secret Service, the Postal
Inspection Service, and the U.S. Attorney’s Office for Western Washington, authori-
ties exposed Kopiloff and arrested him. ‘‘Authorities said they have at least 83
victims—most of whom have teenage children and did not know the file-sharing
software was on the computer.’’44 The true number of people affected may well be in
the hundreds. This case also emphasizes that computer users need to be aware of what
is installed on their computers; something downloaded by one member of the family
could severely impact everyone else.
Privacy and Data Breaches
249

After a September 2007 indictment, Kopiloff pleaded guilty in November 2007,
admitting he used file sharing programs to get access to victims’ personal information
including tax returns, credit reports, bank statements, and student financial aid
applications. He pleaded guilty to Mail Fraud, Accessing a Protected Computer
without Authorization to Further Fraud, and Aggravated Identity Theft. He was
sentenced to 51 months in prison and three years supervised release, including moni-
toring of his computer usage when he gets out. This was the first federal prosecution of
its type.45
Kopiloff’s prosecution is likely not to be the last of its kind. According to estimates,
tens of thousands of fraudsters troll P2P networks looking for unsecured data and finding
new ways to defeat users’ protection. At the news conference announcing Kopiloff’s
indictment, the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Seattle presented a demonstration by Robert
Boback, the CEO of Tiversa, a computer-security firm specializing in P2P issues.
Boback showed, in real time, searches being conducted on P2P networks. The vast
majority of users searched for music and pornography, but many also searched for terms
like ‘‘password’’ and ‘‘medical billing.’’46 This trend of illicit searching has continued. A
cursory P2P search by the author, using just one file-sharing program, revealed tax
returns, billing information, bank account lists, and passwords—all found in less than a
minute’s worth of searching. There is far more to be done to combat this growing
identity theft threat.
BOTNETS: ZOMBIE ARMIES OF THE INTERNET
Botnets are at the forefront of the growth of cybercrime. They have been called an
imminent national security threat47 and cybercriminals’ weapon of choice,48 yet most
Americans have never heard of them. In fact, millions of Americans could be part of a
botnet and not be aware of it.
Botnets are responsible for nearly all spam email and, increasingly, credit card fraud
and identity theft. ‘‘They can also be used to direct floods of fake traffic at a targeted
website in order to bring down a rival, extract protection money, or less frequently, used
to make a political point, such as the attacks on Estonia and the Church of Scientol-
ogy.’’49 On any given day, 40% of the computers connected to the Internet are bots, and
approximately 90% of the world’s email is botnet-distributed spam.50
The process of creating a botnet is relatively simple. Malware infects a remote
computer and takes control of it, allowing it to be used as a robot; hence these infected
computers are known as bots. A network of infected bots is a ‘‘botnet,’’ operating under
the control of a ‘‘botherder.’’ The malware is designed to operate secretly without openly
interfering with the computer’s use. Since they operate in the background and do not
affect users’ day-to-day activities, individual infected computers can operate as part of
the botnet without detection or even awareness by the user. By linking thousands of
infected computers together, the combined computing power of these botnets rivals the
world’s fastest supercomputers, although instead of decoding the human genome, the
power is used to hawk replica watches and set up phishing operations.
The FBI has called this one of the most serious cyberthreats, defining ‘‘botnets’’ as
‘‘armies of personal computers taken over by cybercriminals and used on the sly to
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
250

commit all kinds of mischief, from identity theft to denial of service attacks to
massive spam campaigns.’’51 Note that botnets should be distinguished from ‘‘grid
computing,’’ where the processing power of numerous computers linked through the
Internet form a virtual supercomputer. Users voluntarily and knowingly donate their
computers’ resources for grid computing application such as protein mapping or space
exploration, unlike a botnet which surreptitiously commandeers a computer for
illegal activities.52
A striking example of the power and growth of botnets is the Srizbi botnet. Although it
first appeared in June 2007, it began to grow exponentially starting in February 2008.
By May of that year, Srizbi comprised at least 300,000 infected computers sending
60 billion spam messages a day, accounting for half the world’s spam.53 Other botnets
have used their power to harvest credit card numbers, as in the case of Owen Walker.
PLUNDER DOWN UNDER
Owen Thor Walker, an 18-year-old New Zealander, was a member of an international
hacking group that infected at least 1.3 million computers and caused losses upward of
$20 million. His cybercrime ring used programs of his own design to access personal
data, including user names and passwords, distribute viruses, and steal credit card
information, among other crimes. Other cybercriminals used his software to commit
their own misdeeds.
Walker, known as ‘‘Akill,’’ ‘‘Snow Walker,’’ and ‘‘Snow Whyte,’’ taught himself
computer programming; by experimenting with virus programs, he was able to create his
own, and continually refined and enhanced them. He designed ‘‘an encrypted virus that
was undetectable by anti-virus software.’’ Although he was self-taught, ‘‘international
investigators considered Walker’s programming to ‘be among the most advanced’ they
had encountered.’’54 The code ‘‘automatically disabled any anti-virus software on an
infected computer and prevented the software from being updated. The computer owner
could not tell the anti-virus software was not working.’’55
Walker’s network was uncovered by the efforts of New Zealand police in conjunction
with the FBI and Dutch authorities. The investigation began after a distributed denial of
service attack caused by Walker and University of Pennsylvania student Ryan Gold-
stein, apparently unintentionally, crashed the university’s servers in 2006.56
A distributed denial of service attack (DDoS) is a form of attack on another computer on the
Internet that overloads the victim computer. A person attempting a DDoS attack enlists other
computers, without the knowledge of the owners, to assist in the attack by causing other
computers to bombard the target computer with requests or commands at the same time.
This increases the number of messages that can be directed to the victim computer and
increases the chances of slowing the victim computer and crashing it.57
Walker and Goldstein attempted to covertly use the university’s servers to upgrade the
botnet, by uploading updated software onto the server and then having the infected
botnet computers connect to the server to receive the update. However, this wave of
server traffic crashed the server and disabled access.58 The FBI’s investigation into the
Privacy and Data Breaches
251

crash led them to Walker, while New Zealand police, working with Dutch authorities,
traced payments from a company in the Netherlands to Walker. The company in
question, ECS International, has been prosecuted for paying hackers to use their botnets
to covertly install adware on unsuspecting users’ computers. Walker earned around
$36,000 for his work.59 This ‘‘DollarRevenue’’ scam earned Walker and others a fee for
each computer they infected.
Walker lived with his parents when he committed the crimes, but they thought he was
just doing legal computer programming.60 Walker told them the money he made was
from computer programming work. His parents got a rude awakening when the FBI
arrested Walker in November 2007 as part of its ‘‘Operation Bot Roast II.’’ Walker later
pleaded guilty to six computer crime charges, which carried penalties of up to seven
years in jail on each charge.
Unfortunately for law enforcement, the judge at sentencing dismissed all charges
against Walker and let him go without a conviction, despite his guilty plea. He had to pay
approximately $10,000 in damages plus around $5000 in other costs. The judge,
reasoning that a conviction could hurt Walker’s future prospects and considering his
age, remorse, lack of criminal intent, and his suffering from Asperger’s syndrome, a
mild form of autism, led her to the dismissal.61 The judge also specifically cited the
possibility of Walker’s employment by police or government agencies as a mitigating
factor.62
While some of the factors the judge mentioned may lean towards sentence mitiga-
tion, they do not excuse what Walker did. The mere possibility that he might use his
abilities for ‘‘good’’ should not excuse what he did nor overlook the fact that his
involvement with the cybercrime ring was neither accidental nor infrequent. He worked
with them for two years developing software to steal personal information, and knew
full well what he was doing. Ultimately, Walker not did have to accept any responsi-
bility for the millions of dollars in damage he caused or the crimes he committed. This
decision sets a terrible precedent and does nothing to deter future crimes of a similar
nature by others.
It also seems as though the judge did not fully understand the implications of
Walker’s actions, seemingly believing hacking is solely the province of bored teenagers
looking for an innocent thrill. Walker, his accomplices, and those like them are profit-
driven individuals who can cause tremendous damage to people all over the world.
Education is needed to help judges and other lawmakers fully appreciate the severity of
this problem.
Despite the rampant growth of botnets, no consensus has emerged on how to best
combat them. Some experts have argued for stepped-up infection detection, to alert
users that their computer is infected and for Internet service providers to block access
to machines until the infection is removed. ISPs have shied away from any such
proposals, fearful of alienating and confusing customers. Another proposal is to
punish and shut down domain sellers or Internet service providers (ISPs) that serve as
known havens for cybercriminals. Bills have been introduced in Congress that would
make it easier for federal prosecutors to charge cybercriminals and to significantly
enhance penalties. Unfortunately, far more needs to be done to adequately combat
botnets.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
252

IDENTITY THEFT HALL OF INFAMY
Philip Cummings
The sad reality about identity theft is that a trusted insider can have a major impact
on individuals and business by criminally instigating a massive data breach. That
was the role of the previously unknown Philip Cummings, who in 2002 was the focal
point for what was then called the largest identity theft case in American history.
Cummings was a low-level customer service employee at a company that dealt in
consumer credit information. Through his access to this sensitive and confidential
information, Cummings set in motion an identity theft scheme that involved more
than 30,000 victims. The resulting criminal investigation made headlines around
the world, and led to arrests and convictions and the realization that data breaches
would have more of an impact on our privacy in the years to come. For all these
reasons, Cummings is a deserving member of the Identity Theft Hall of Infamy.
BACKGROUND
Teledata Communications, Inc. (TCI) has been in business since 1982. As stated
on its Web site, it ‘‘connect[s] leaders in consumer and commercial finance with
the credit information they need to make critical business decisions.’’63 TCI is
based on Long Island, New York. It provides software, hardware, and services to
client companies to enable them to access credit histories from the various credit
bureaus, including Experian, Equifax, and TransUnion. TCI’s software, through
its customized devices, links a client company to these credit bureaus via
telephone lines. TCI clients use unique subscriber codes and passwords along
with TCI software to access the credit bureaus and credit reports.64
Philip Cummings was a TCI help desk employee from mid-1999 through March
2000. As a client assistance representative, Cummings had ‘‘access to confidential
passwords and subscriber codes of TCI client companies that would have enabled
that employee to download credit reports from all three credit bureaus.’’65 Cum-
mings joined the conspiracy while still employed at TCI. He continued his
involvement after leaving TCI in 2000 and relocating to Georgia, where he owned
a small business. At this point, the life of this 35-year old English immigrant,
divorced with a young daughter, was about to take a serious turn for the worse.
THE SCHEME
In early 2000, Linus Baptiste, Cummings’s former brother-in-law, approached
Cummings with a lucrative scheme. Baptiste was the proverbial jack-of-all-trades
who even took a turn as a music producer. This time, he came up with a get-rich-
quick scheme. Baptiste would pay Cummings money for access to consumers’
(Continued)
Privacy and Data Breaches
253

credit reports. Baptiste knew other scammers who would pay $60 per credit report
received. These scammers were a group of Nigerian nationals who already had
personal information of many potential victims, including names, addresses, and
SSNs, but wanted to know their creditworthiness before doing account takeovers
or applying for new credit cards in their names. Cummings and Baptiste would
split the money for each credit report delivered. Cummings saw the financial
benefit in this fraud and readily agreed.
Shortly thereafter, Baptiste began providing Cummings with lists of names and
personal information of potential victims so as to obtain their credit reports.
Baptiste received these lists from as many as 20 other conspirators who had access
to stolen personal information for which they intended to commit identity theft. At
first Cummings would meet Baptiste in New Rochelle, New York, ‘‘with a laptop
and download the requested credit reports via use of telephone lines.’’66
Cummings then left the employ of TCI and relocated to Georgia, where he
continued his involvement in the identity theft scheme. At some point, Cummings
provided his laptop with the TCI and client codes to Baptiste so he could continue
to access credit bureaus and download credit reports on consumers. Baptiste
obtained tens of thousands of credit reports, which he sold to the many street
criminals he was dealing with. Using the stolen credit reports to determine their
creditworthiness, these fraudsters obtained loans in the names of their victims,
applied for credit cards in their names, purchased merchandise, and depleted bank
accounts all over the country. More than 30,000 victims had their identities stolen
with losses calculated at $2.7 million.
THE DISCOVERY
In early 2002, Ford Motor Credit Company learned that the unique subscriber code
and password for its Grand Rapids, Michigan, branch had been compromised. The
company determined the breach began in approximately the spring of 2001,
resulting in the unauthorized downloading of approximately 15,000 credit reports.
Ford utilized TCI’s software and credit prompter boxes to access credit reports
from the credit reporting agencies. ‘‘Ford discovered the scheme after reviewing
bills sent by Experian for those credit histories and receiving numerous complaints
from consumers who had been the subject of identity theft and fraud.’’67 Experian
searched its databases and found that the passwords and subscriber codes of other
financial institutions and firms were also affected by this data breach. This
discovery of an additional 6,000 credit reports that had been compromised pointed
to many more potential victims and losses.68
Ford reported this to the FBI in Detroit, which initially investigated the case.
The credit reporting agencies first told the Detroit agents that it was impossible to
link a local telephone number to the unauthorized accesses to the system, because
literally hundreds of 800 numbers fed into the credit reporting agency’s databases;
although the system linked subscriber codes and passwords to a particular credit
report request, the incoming telephone numbers were not so linked. Because the
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
254

Detroit office was at an impasse with the investigation, and because mail for
several of the stolen identities was being diverted to post office boxes throughout
all five New York City boroughs, the matter was transferred to the New York
Office of the FBI.
THOUGHT LEADER IN IDENTITY THEFT INVESTIGATION: KEVIN BARROWS
Kevin Barrows is a principal in Renaissance Associates, an investigative firm in
New York that specializes in corporate investigations and litigation support
services. From 1997 to 2003, he was a Special Agent with the FBI’s New York
Division, assigned to investigate white-collar crime. During his six years as an
FBI agent, Barrows directed major investigations involving financial institution
fraud, identity theft, and international money laundering, which required intensive
document analysis and in-depth interviews of persons with relevant knowledge to
uncover complex illegal schemes. He was also the lead case agent in the
investigation and criminal prosecution of a group of individuals who stole
30,000 identities through the unauthorized computer-based accessing of personal
credit information that is profiled herein.
Barrows was assigned the case because he had previous success in other large,
complex, and high-profile investigations. After being assigned, he met with the
Assistant United States Attorney (AUSA) handling this matter who was the Chief
of General Crimes for the Southern District of New York. After reviewing the
voluminous documents and records, Barrows was convinced that the way to solve
this case was not to follow the traditional approach. That would be to conduct
surveillance at mail drops and arrest individuals retrieving mail in the name of
victims. He knew this would not be successful because these individuals were
typically unable to provide information about someone above them in the criminal
chain.
These lower-level subjects often were simply paid a nominal fee by an unknown
person to retrieve the mail. In addition, because they had no knowledge of the fact
that they were assisting in a crime, they often could not be charged with any
offense and thus had no impetus to cooperate. Barrows determined that the only
way to stop the continuing fraud was to find the person or persons who stole the
subscriber codes and passwords.
Because Ford Motor Credit was not the only financial institution victimized,
Barrows was able to eliminate employees of the financial institutions as possible
suspects. Eventually, he concluded that it must be a TCI employee, past or present,
and that it was likely to be a help desk representative. He turned his attention to
reviewing all available records for help desk employees and interviews, looking
for someone reprimanded in the past or someone who was fired and disgruntled. At
the same time, he began working closely with the major credit reporting agencies,
particularly Equifax, in an effort to link a local telephone number to the
unauthorized reports.
(Continued)
Privacy and Data Breaches
255

After countless hours learning how the credit reporting system worked,
Barrows and other investigators identified that all of the fraudulent inquiries
followed a distinct pattern: They were made in large batches. The investigators
isolated inquiries that followed the pattern and worked with a representative of
Equifax to attempt to link even one local telephone number to an unauthorized
inquiry. It was the proverbial needle in the haystack, but eventually, after
countless hours, days, and weeks, Barrows and his team were able to link a
specific telephone number in New Rochelle, New York, to the unlawful
inquiries.
Immediately thereafter, Barrows identified the subscriber and address asso-
ciated with the telephone number, and applied for, and obtained, a search
warrant for the premises located in New Rochelle. The residence belonged to
Baptiste. On October 29, 2002, Barrows and a team of agents executed the
search warrant. They split up into various sections of what was quite a large
house. Barrows was primarily downstairs interviewing the occupants and
assisting in the search of the lower level. At some point, he went upstairs to
see how the other members of the team were doing. He noticed that the
master bedroom was very large and messy, and had a giant oversize wooden
canopy bed. After several hours of searching the entire house and reviewing the
contents of all of the desktop computers, it appeared that what he hoped to find
was not there. Barrows called the AUSA at approximately one o’clock p.m. and
told her the bad news: They failed to find documents or computerized evidence
containing subscriber codes, passwords, or fraudulently downloaded credit
reports.
As the agents were carrying the boxes of seized evidence out to their cars to
leave, Barrows, wanting to make sure that every nook and cranny had been
searched, turned to one of his fellow agents and asked him to come up to the master
bedroom to take one last look. As Barrows stood in the doorway of the bedroom
looking at the bed, he noticed a slight bulge in the canopy. He stepped onto the bed
frame, reached onto the top of the canopy, and began tapping around with his
fingers. Lo and behold, he felt papers. It was a manila folder containing dozens of
credit reports and lists of names and SSNs. Barrows immediately called for the
search team to join him, and they began to pull apart the bed and move furniture in
the hopes of finding additional evidence.
When Barrows looked behind a dresser in an adjacent bedroom, a laptop
computer, in its case, fell to the floor. He unzipped the case and, sitting right on top
of the laptop was a document bearing the name Philip Cummings. Barrows then
spent the remainder of the day interviewing the occupants of the home, obtaining
their cooperation, and putting together the remaining pieces of the puzzle. The
laptop contained the stolen subscriber codes and passwords; it was the smoking
gun that he had hoped to find. Within days, Cummings was arrested in Atlanta. In
less than five months, the case was solved. Following Cummings’s arrest, Barrows
used an informant to record telephone conversations with the street criminals who
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
256

were the most heavily involved in the scheme, resulting in numerous additional
arrests.
The street criminals were an incredibly large, organized, and sophisticated
group of thieves. In the end, there were more than 30,000 victims and losses
exceeded $100 million. Besides Ford Motor Credit, other TCI clients victimized
by this scheme included the former Washington Mutual Bank, Washington
Mutual Finance Company, Dollar Bank, and Central Texas Energy Supply.
Baptiste pleaded guilty to the charges, followed by Cummings in September
of 2004. Cummings was sentenced to 14 years in prison in January 2005.
RED FLAGS
The case implicated the biggest identity theft ring at the time. ‘‘With a few
keystrokes, these men essentially picked the pockets of tens of thousands of
Americans and, in the process, took their identities, stole their money and wiped
out their security,’’ said former federal prosecutor James Comey, whose office
oversaw the prosecution.69 This case and others since then have exposed weak-
nesses in how businesses and organizations handle personal and financial infor-
mation. Yet the many red flags would have been evident if only anyone had
been looking for them.
There are many questions that should have been asked and answered. How
much background screening did Cummings undergo prior to hire? Why did he
have unrestricted access to so much confidential information? How was he able to
download the personal information of over 30,000 people over a three-year period
with no one at TCI ever detecting it or stopping him? How was it that passwords
were not changed and his access stopped after leaving the company? Had the
company ever had similar problems in the past that did not make the headlines or
receive government scrutiny?
Some experts suspected that relatively small firms with limited resources to
spend on security might contribute to data breaches and privacy protection.
‘‘Teledata’s relative mom-and-pop status and its easily accessed Web-based
services are red flags,’’ said a director of the Electronic Privacy Information
Center at the time.70
Barrows recalled that he was shocked at how confidential information was
written on Post-it notes and displayed in plain view in the cubicles at TCI. There
was no restriction of access or accountability for passwords and other sensitive
information. While TCI faced a very public scrutiny for its practices, how many
companies today did not learn from this damaging event and are susceptible to data
breaches?
DISHONORABLE MENTION
There is a dishonorable mention for the Identity Theft Hall of Fame for his
involvement in this case: Linus Baptiste, a Cummings co-conspirator.
Privacy and Data Breaches
257

PROTECTING PII
Security breach laws have either been introduced and/or enacted in most states in the
United States. California set the standard with a 2003 law requiring companies to notify
customers when data breaches involve PII. California and Texas allow consumers to sue
companies that fail to safeguard their personal data. The European Union has had tough
privacy laws for years. It bars member countries and their citizens from buying and
selling personal data including data that are collected in business transactions.
The FTC is focused on privacy and privacy initiatives. Its publication for businesses to
use in protecting personal information, Protecting Personal Information: A Guide for
Business, is highly recommended and is available at www.ftc.gov/infosecurity/.
The Guide is built on five key principles:
 Take stock. Know what personal information you have in your files and on your
computers.
 Scale down. Keep only what you need for your business.
 Lock it. Protect the information that you keep.
 Pitch it. Properly dispose of what you no longer need.
 Plan ahead. Create a plan to respond to security incidents.
It is astonishing how much of our personal and professional lives is publicly available.
Go online and do a keyword search on your name. Most readers will be surprised what
they find about themselves. Even more information will be found online in the future.
The risk transcends identity theft as every aspect of our lives is under scrutiny. Take for
example the very bitter divorce of a Broadway theater operator and his actress wife that
made its way to YouTube in April 2008. The wife took to airing her grievances and anger
in a very public forum by uploading a video rant on her husband to the YouTube site. The
video and the resulting media stories circulated for months. The message is clear: Your
private matters are no longer private. Do what you can to protect your privacy, but
always remember there is much that is beyond your control in the world of today.
NOTES
1. Polly Sprenger, ‘‘Sun on Privacy: ‘Get Over It,’’’ Wired, January 26, 1999,
www.wired.com/politics/law/news/1999/01/17538.
2. Robert Lemos, ‘‘Private Identities Become a Corporate Focus,’’ SecurityFocus
.com, February 20, 2006, www.securityfocus.com/news/11377.
3. Martha Irvine, ‘‘Social Networkers Beware: Applications Pose Risk,’’ Seattle
Times, April 28, 2008, E3.
4. ‘‘Privacy Today: A Review of Current Issues,’’ Privacy Rights Clearinghouse,
www.privacyrights.org/ar/Privacy-IssuesList.htm.
5. Jon Swartz, ‘‘Tech experts plot to catch identity thieves,’’ USA Today, February 9,
2007, 7B.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
258

6. Ibid.
7. Bob Sullivan, ‘‘Study: ID Theft Usually an Inside Job,’’ MSNBC, May 21, 2004,
www.msnbc.com/id/5015565.
8. Michael Hudson, ‘‘Dumped Mortgage Files Invite Identity Theft,’’ Wall Street
Journal, October 27, 2007, http://biz.yahoo.com/wallstreet/071023/sb119309606
825767724_id.html.
9. See, e.g., Alex Leary, ‘‘Wi-Fi Cloaks a New Breed of Intruder,’’ St. Petersburg
Times, July 4, 2005, www.sptimes.com/2005/07/04/State/Wi_Fi_cloaks_a_ new_br
.shtml. See also Jamie Stockwell, ‘‘Wi-Fi Turns Internet into Hideout for Crim-
inals,’’ Washington Post, February 11, 2007, C1. This article mentions a case where
police arrived at an apartment to arrest an offender for downloading child porno-
graphy only to discover that the real culprit was a neighbor who had committed the
crime while using someone else’s wireless network. Similar stories have popped up
on the Internet, but the author has been unable to verify the provenance of this or any
similar case. Thus, at this point they should be considered urban legends, plausible
yet ultimately unverifiable.
10. ‘‘Police Warn of Wi-Fi Theft by Porn Downloaders,’’ CTV.ca, November 23, 2003,
www.ctv.ca/servlet/ArticleNews/story/CTVNews/1069439746264_64848946.
11. Stephen H. Wildstrom, ‘‘Public Wi-Fi: Be Very Paranoid,’’ Business Week, March
24, 2008, 85.
12. Kevin J. Delaney, ‘‘‘Evil Twins’ and ‘Pharming,’’’ Wall Street Journal, May 17,
2005, B1.
13. Joseph De Avila, ‘‘Wi-Fi Users, Beware: Hot Spots are Weak Spots,’’ Wall Street
Journal, January 16, 2008, D1.
14. Ibid.
15. Jonathan Sidener, ‘‘Using Unprotected Public Wi-Fi Poses Major Security Risk,’’
San Diego Union Tribune, May 11, 2008, www.signonsandiego.com/news/
business/20080511-9999-mz1b11wifi.html.
16. Ibid.
17. Joseph De Avila, ‘‘Wi-Fi Users, Beware: Hot Spots are Weak Spots,’’ Wall Street
Journal, January 16, 2008, D1.
18. Kimberly Kiefer Peretti, ‘‘Data Breaches: What the Underground World of ‘Card-
ing’ Reveals,’’ to be published in Santa Clara Computer and High Technology
Journal 25, available at www.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/DataBreachesArti-
cle.pdf, at 24.
19. Joseph Pereira, ‘‘How Credit-Card Data Went Out Wireless Door,’’ Wall Street
Journal, May 4, 2007, A1.
20. ‘‘Agency Announces Settlement of Separate Actions Against Retailer TJX, and
Data Brokers Reed Elsevier and Seisint for Failing to Provide Adequate Security
For Consumers’ Data,’’ Federal Trade Commission, March 27, 2008, www.ftc.gov/
opa/2008/03/datasec.shtm.
21. Pereira, ‘‘How Credit-Card Data Went Out Wireless Door.’’
22. Ibid.
23. Ibid.
Privacy and Data Breaches
259

24. Ross Kerber, ‘‘Details Emerge on TJX Breach,’’ Boston Globe, October 25, 2007,
www.boston.com/business/globe/articles/2007/10/25/details_emerge_on_tjx_
breach.
25. Pereira, ‘‘How Credit-Card Data Went Out Wireless Door.’’
26. Theresa Cook, ‘‘Feds Announce ‘Largest’ ID Theft Case,’’ ABC News, August 5,
2008, http://abcnews.go.com/TheLaw/story?id=5520147&page=1.
27. Ibid.
28. Ibid.
29. Brad Stone, ‘‘Global Trail of an Online Crime Ring,’’ New York Times, August 12,
2008.
30. ‘‘Agency Announces Settlement of Separate Actions Against Retailer TJX.’’
31. Joseph Pereira, ‘‘TJX Assents to Audits of Data-Security System,’’ Wall Street
Journal, March 28, 2008, B4.
32. ‘‘Wi-Fi Security: Some Advice from the FBI,’’ Federal Bureau of Investigation,
May 6, 2008, www.fbi.gov/page2/may08/wifi_050608.html.
33. In a concurring opinion to the Supreme Court Case MGM v. Grokster, Justice
Breyer listed a number of legitimate, noninfringing uses for P2P software. See
MGM v. Grokster, 545 U.S. 913, 2005 (Breyer, J. concurring).
34. See, e.g., Wendy Leonard, ‘‘U. Campus Targeted in Music Piracy,’’ Deseret News,
May 24, 2008, www.deseretnews.com/article/1,5143,700228738,00.html.
35. ‘‘P2P Dangers Growing,’’ BusinessWeek, October 2007, 50.
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid.
38. Ibid.
39. Joseph De Avila, ‘‘The Hidden Risk of File-Sharing,’’ Wall Street Journal,
November 7, 2007, D1.
40. Ibid.
41. David Bowermaster, ‘‘Indictment Marks ‘New Age’ of ID Theft,’’ Seattle Times,
September 7, 2007, A1.
42. Ibid.
43. Ibid.
44. Ibid.
45. United States Attorney’s Office, Western District of Washington, ‘‘Seattle Man
Sentenced to 51 Months in Prison for ID Theft Scheme That Used Computer File
Sharing Programs,’’ March 17, 2008, www.usdoj.gov/usao/waw/press/2008/mar/
kopiloff.html.
46. Bowermaster, ‘‘Indictment Marks ‘New Age’ of ID Theft.’’
47. Ryan Singel, ‘‘Zombie Computers Decried as Imminent National Threat,’’ Wired,
April 9, 2008, http://blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/2008/04/zombie-computer.html.
48. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Press Release, ‘‘‘Bot Roast II’ Nets 8 Individuals,’’
November 29, 2007, www.fbi.gov/pressrel/pressrel07/botroast112907.htm.
49. Singel, ‘‘Zombie Computers Decried as Imminent National Threat.’’
50. Byron Acohida and Jon Swartz, ‘‘Botnet Scams are Exploding,’’ USA Today, March
16, 2008, www.usatoday.com/tech/news/computersecurity/2008-03-16-computer-
botnets_N.htm.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
260

51. ‘‘‘Bot Roast II’: Cracking Down on Cyber Crime,’’ Federal Bureau of Investigation,
November 29, 2007, www.fbi.gov/page2/nov07/botnet112907.html.
52. ‘‘Grid Computing,’’ Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grid_computing.
53. Press Release, ‘‘Marshal Says Srizbi Botnet Accounts for Half of All Spam,’’
Marshal, May 8, 2008, www.marshal.com/pages/newsitem.asp?article=646&the
section=news.
54. ‘‘New Zealand Teen Convicted Over Global Cyber-Crime Ring,’’ AFP (Agencie
France-Presse), April 1, 2008, accessed via www.news.com.au/technology/story/
0,25642,23466456-5014239,00.html.
55. Shenagh Gleeson, ‘‘Superhacker Convicted of International Cyber Crime,’’ New
Zealand Herald, April 2, 2008, www.nzherald.co.nz/category/story.cfm?c_id=
30&objectid=10501518.
56. Ibid.
57. United States of America v. Ryan Goldstein, (E. Dist. Penn.), www.usdoj.gov/usao/
pae/News/Pr/2007/nov/goldsteinind.pdf, 2–3.
58. Phil Taylor, ‘‘Bot-Boy Caught in His Own Net,’’ New Zealand Herald, December 8,
2007, www.nzherald.co.nz/topic/story.cfm?c_id=199&objectid=10481058&pnum
=2. According to ‘‘Maarten Kleintjes, manager of the New Zealand Police national
electronic crime laboratory, [bot herders] are unlikely to have powerful enough
computer systems themselves to control a million other computers and so control
their botnet by sending commands via hijacked ‘motherships,’ usually powerful
machines belonging to big businesses or universities that can handle thousands of
simultaneous connections.’’
59. Gleeson, ‘‘Superhacker Convicted of International Cyber Crime.’’
60. ‘‘New Zealand Teen Convicted over Global Cyber-Crime Ring,’’ AFP.
61. ‘‘NZ teenage hacker charges dropped,’’ BBC News, July 16, 2008, http://news.-
bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/7509052.stm; ‘‘Autistic hacker’s talents to be used for
good,’’ Stuff.Co.NZ, July 16, 2008, http://www.stuff.co.nz/4619629a10.html.
62. ‘‘Autistic hacker’s talents to be used for good,’’ Stuff.Co.NZ, July 16, 2008, http://
www.stuff.co.nz/4619629a10.html.
63. Teledata Communications, Inc., www.tcicredit.com.
64. United States of America v. Philip Cummings, Defendant, Criminal Complaint,
United States District Court, Southern District of New York, sworn to on November
22, 2002 by Kevin Barrows, Special Agent, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 3.
65. Ibid.
66. Ibid., 4.
67. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the United States Attorney, Southern District
of New York News Release, ‘‘U.S. Announces What Is Believed the Largest
Identity Theft Case in American History; Losses Are in the Millions,’’ November
25, 2002.
68. Ibid.
69. Brooke A. Masters, ‘‘Huge ID-Theft Ring Broken: 30,000 Consumers at Risk,’’
Seattle Times, November 26, 2002, A1.
70. Anthony M. DeStefano, ‘‘ID-Theft Nightmare,’’ Newsday, November 26, 2002, A7.
Privacy and Data Breaches
261


CHAPTER 18
Identity Theft Research
Numerous research studies have examined identity theft in recent years. A 2003
Privacy & American Business survey found that 33.4 million Americans were victims
of identity theft since 1990, including 13 million since 2001. A Gartner survey from
2003 stated that identity theft was up almost 80% from 2002. A 2005 Javelin Strategy
& Research/Better Business Bureau survey reported that 9.3 million Americans were
victimized in 2004 and the total U.S. annual identity theft cost was $52.6 billion.
Another Javelin survey from February 2007 found that the number of U.S. victims
decreased from 10.1 million in 2003 and 9.3 million in 2005 to 8.4 million in 2007
while fraud from identity theft losses decreased from $55.7 billion in 2006 to $49.3
billion in 2007. Yet a Federal Trade Commission (FTC) study released in November
2007 reported that 8.3 Americans were victims of identity theft in 2005 and total
losses were down to $15.6 billion, far lower than the FTC’s 2003 estimate of $47.6
billion and that of Javelin.1
What do these findings tell us? They tell us that no one really knows the actual
scope and impact of identity theft on consumers and businesses. The studies are
estimates, and the survey methodologies change from study to study. Do we really feel
any safer if someone tells us that identity theft was down to only $49.3 billion in 2007?
None of the studies includes anyone outside the United States, where identity theft is
growing by leaps and bounds. Not one study documents the emotional toll of
victimization and the utter feeling of personal violation when one’s identity is stolen.
Bob Dylan in his classic recording ‘‘Subterranean Homesick Blues’’ sings that ‘‘You
don’t need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows.’’ That sums it up pretty
263

well for surveys and research. We know we have a big problem. We see stories about
identity theft almost daily in the papers and on television. Quite simply, identity theft
continues to be a major problem that is not going away anytime soon.
Although we do not know how accurate research and surveys are, there are benefits
from reading and understanding the findings. We gain a general understanding of the
enormity of the problem and the causal factors. Research can provide insights into
specific problems that can be used to understand what does and does not work in
preventing identity theft. The Saint Xavier University study of identity theft incidents
points out how some of the most common recommendations to detect and prevent
identity theft are not always followed. The President’s Task Force on Identity Theft in
its Combating Identity Theft: A Strategic Plan provided some very sound recommenda-
tions to fight this crime. The recurring FTC studies provide context around prevalence,
financial losses, and costs to victims. All of these studies are discussed in this chapter.
SAINT XAVIER UNIVERSITY STUDY OF IDENTITY THEFT INCIDENTS
In 2006, the Institute for Fraud Prevention (IFP) awarded a research grant to the Graham
School of Management of Saint Xavier University of Chicago to study identity theft
occurring in Chicago, Illinois. IFP is dedicated to multidisciplinary research, education,
and prevention of fraud and corruption. IFP’s primary goal is to improve the ability of
businesses and government to combat these crimes and to educate the general public on
effective methods of recognizing and deterring them. The study, entitled Identity Theft:
Findings and Public Policy Recommendations From the Saint Xavier University Study of
Identity Theft Incidents Reported to the Chicago Police Department, 2000–2006, was
issued on May 22, 2007.
Saint Xavier University (SXU) studied identity theft incidents reported to the Chicago
Police Department (CPD) between 2000 and 2006. The study is based on data collected
from 28,891 identity theft reports made to the police by victims. Specific data was pulled
from 1,322 files randomly selected from the total case reports. Gaining this kind of
unprecedented access to case files of actual identity theft incidents is remarkable, and the
CPD is to be applauded for granting SXU the access rights.
In order to protect the privacy rights of the victims, protocols were put into place and
thoroughly enforced throughout the study. The case files were never removed from CPD
locations, and researchers did not handle any documents that contained victim-
identifying information. Documents from the case files were handled only by off-
duty CPD personnel working with the researchers.
The principal researcher for the study was William J. Kresse, assistant professor in
Saint Xavier University’s Graham School of Management and director of its graduate
program in financial fraud examination and management. ‘‘This has been a fascinating
view into the mind of the identity thief,’’ Kresse said. ‘‘While some results were
expected, many were quite surprising.’’2 Kathleen Hanold Watland, assistant professor
and director of Chicago Police Department graduate programs, Graham School of
Management, SXU, and John Lucki, Detective Sergeant, Financial Crimes Investigation
Section, Detective Division, CPD, and Adjunct Faculty, Graham School of Manage-
ment, were the other two researchers for this study.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
264

The executive summary and other content that follows in this section includes
material reproduced from the Identity Theft: Findings and Public Policy Recommenda-
tions document.3 Material in brackets is information I have added to relate the findings
to this book. The study focused on the means by which identities were stolen, the manner
in which the perpetrators used the stolen identity information, and the demographics of
identity theft victims.
Executive Summary
Among the finding[s]:
 After adjusting the figures for changes in policy, it appears that the
incidents of identity theft in Chicago peaked in 2004 with a subsequent
slow downward trend.
 Women are slightly over-represented as victims of identity theft.
 In line with other crimes, African-Americans are over-represented as
victims of identity theft, while Hispanics are under-represented as
victims of identity theft.
 Senior citizens, children, and teenagers are under-represented as vic-
tims of identity theft.
 Younger adults, especially those between the ages of 20–44, are over-
represented as victims of identity theft.
 With regards to the manner in which identity theft victims became
aware of the theft:
 Most victims became aware of the theft only after being notified by
credit card companies. [This reinforces the point that consumers are
not reviewing their credit reports on an ongoing basis.]
 Fewer than 10% of identity theft victims discovered the theft by
reviewing a credit report. [Reviewing one’s credit report is the single
best thing a consumer can do to discover identity theft.]
 Almost one in five identity theft victims first learned of the theft
when they were served with legal process or received a collection
notice.
 Where the means by which the identity was stolen was known:
 In over 60% of the cases, the victim’s identity was stolen by a friend,
relative, or person otherwise known to the victim.
 In one in six cases of identity theft, the victim’s identity was stolen by
means of a purse snatching, pick-pocketing, burglary, or robbery.
 In less than 5% of the cases the identity was stolen as a result of stolen
mail. [In the FTC study described later in this chapter, 2% thought
their identity theft was related to mail theft.]
Identity Theft Research
265

Reported Incidents of Identity Theft
Although the data appears to indicate that identity theft incidents peaked in 2004 with a
downward trend since then, this is not exactly correct. Prior to 2004, consumer credit
reporting agencies generally required identity theft victims to file a police report before
they would place a fraud alert on the victim’s credit file. Thus, victims filed these reports
so they would have a record of the crime and have the fraud alert in place. Beginning in
2004, these police reports were not required by the credit reporting agencies in order to
obtain a fraud alert. So, even though data shows a downward trend in identity theft
incidents, it is probably due to the change in policy by the credit reporting agencies
rather than an actual decrease in the number of identity thefts.
The median age of identity theft victims in this study is 36 years of age. Young adults
were the age group most likely to be victimized. A recommendation of the study was the
need for education and awareness focused at young adults to help prevent their
becoming victims.
 Despite identity theft’s reputation for being a ‘‘high-tech’’ crime, in
less than 5% of the cases was a computer or the Internet used to steal
the victim’s identity.
 In the cases where the identity theft victim knew the perpetrator:
 In over one third of the cases, the perpetrator was a member of the
victim’s family.
 In over 1 case in 8 the perpetrator was a boy-friend or girl-friend of the
victim.
 In less than 2% of the cases was the perpetrator a caregiver for the
victim.
 Regarding the uses of stolen identities:
 The most popular use of a victim’s stolen identity was to acquire a
credit card, or some other credit card fraud, with over a quarter of the
incidents citing this use.
 The second most popular use of a victim’s stolen identity was to
acquire mobile telephone equipment and/or service.
 There is a fairly strong positive correlation between the rate of index
crimes and the rate of identity theft. As such, one would expect to find
relatively higher rates of identity theft in areas where the general crime
rate is high.
 There is a slight negative correlation between median household
income and the rate of identity theft. As such, one would expect to
find slightly higher rates of identity theft in poorer areas, and slightly
lower rates of identity theft in wealthier areas.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
266

Victims’ Discovery of Identity Theft
The victims in this study generally discovered the identity thefts as a result of these
circumstances:
 Received a bill for goods and services not purchased
 Received a collection notice for goods or services not purchased
 Reviewed their consumer credit report
 Were denied credit
 Received notice from a credit card company
 Served with legal process or other legal papers
 Learned about the identity theft through some other manner
Strikingly, fewer than 10% of the victims learned of their victimization through
review of their credit reports. Although this detection technique is repeatedly told to
consumers as an early warning system, it may not be resonating. The good news is that
credit card companies are doing a good job of monitoring their card members and
finding unusual patterns of activity that may be indicative of fraud.
Use of Stolen Identities
The perpetrators in this study used the stolen identities for these fraudulent purposes:
 Acquire a credit card or other credit card fraud
 Acquire a mobile phone or cellular service
 Conduct bank or financial institution account fraud
 Acquire utilities service other than cellular service
 Place magazine subscriptions
 Perpetrate loan fraud
 Acquire government documents in the identity of the victim
 Perpetrate employment fraud
 Other unknown purposes
The most popular use of a victim’s stolen identity was for credit card fraud. This is no
different from what we first saw in the 1970s, when identity theft was in its infancy. The
second most popular use was to acquire mobile telephone equipment and service.
According to the study identity thieves focus on obtaining cell phones for two reasons:
1.
By going through the application process for a new mobile phone, the thief can
quickly learn if the victim is creditworthy.
2.
By obtaining a cellular number, the thief gains some degree of perceived legiti-
macy and can use the number for additional, and potentially large, identity frauds.
Identity Theft Research
267

Perpetrators of Identity Theft
The study determined the means by which the identity theft was perpetrated within the
universe of the case reports. The six categories include identity theft:
1.
By a friend or relative
2.
As a result of a purse snatching or wallet theft
3.
As a result of mail theft
4.
As a result of a burglary or robbery (other than a purse snatching or wallet theft)
5.
By computer use or through the Internet
6.
By some other means or method
The most common perpetrator was either a friend or relative. That makes sense because
of the availability and access to the victim. The thief has the benefit of knowing the
background of the victims and whether they are a good target for this crime. They may
also have easy access to credit card information, personal data, and other information
that can be stolen. Victims may not suspect a friend or relative, at least not at first.4
THE PRESIDENT’S IDENTITY THEFT TASK FORCE
On May 10, 2006, President George W. Bush established by Executive Order the
President’s Task Force on Identity Theft. Recognizing that the problem of identity theft
was already extracting a serious toll on individuals and businesses alike, the Task Force
was charged with crafting ‘‘a strategic plan aiming to make the federal government’s
efforts more effective and efficient in the areas of identity theft awareness, prevention,
detection, and prosecution.’’5
The Task Force brought together the major government departments including the
Department of Justice, Federal Trade Commission, Department of the Treasury,
Department of Homeland Security, Postal Service, Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion, Social Security Administration, and others to develop this vital plan. The Task
Force examined the tools that law enforcement was using to combat the problem,
surveyed education efforts by both government agencies and the private sector, and
demonstrated how government can better safeguard personal data. The Task Force’s
report entitled Combating Identity Theft: A Strategic Plan was released on April 11, 2007
and key portions of the Executive Summary are reprinted here.
The Task Force recommends
a plan that marshals government resources to crack down on criminals who
traffic in stolen identities, strengthens efforts to protect personal informa-
tion of our nation’s citizens, helps law enforcement officials investigate
and prosecute identity thieves, helps educate consumers and businesses
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
268

Following are the recommendations [to reduce the occurrence of identity
theft] from the President’s Task Force on Identity Theft.9
about protecting themselves, and increases the safeguards on personal data
entrusted to federal agencies and private entities.’’6
The Plan focuses on four key areas to reduce the incidence of identity
theft as follows:
 keeping sensitive consumer data out of the hands of identity thieves
through better data security and more accessible education;
 making it more difficult for identity thieves who obtain consumer data
to use it to steal identities;
 assisting the victims of identity theft in recovering from the crime; and
 deterring identity theft by more aggressive prosecution and punishment
of those who commit the crime.7
The Task Force makes a number of recommendations. Among those
recommendations are the following broad policy changes:
 that federal agencies should reduce the unnecessary use of Social
Security numbers (SSNs), the most valuable commodity for an identity
thief;
 that national standards should be established to require private sector
entities to safeguard the personal data they compile and maintain and to
provide notice to consumers when a breach occurs that poses a
significant risk of identity theft;
 that federal agencies should implement a broad, sustained awareness
campaign to educate consumers, the private sector, and the public sector
on deterring, detecting, and defending against identity theft; and
 that a National Identity Theft Law Enforcement Center should be
created to allow law enforcement agencies to coordinate their efforts
and information more efficiently, and investigate and prosecute identity
thieves more effectively.8
Prevention: Keeping Consumer Data Out of the Hands of Criminals
Identity theft depends on access to consumer data. Reducing the opportu-
nities for thieves to get the data is critical to fighting the crime. Govern-
ment, the business community, and consumers have roles to play in
protecting data.
Identity Theft Research
269

Data compromises can expose consumers to the threat of identity theft
or related fraud, damage the reputation of the entity that experienced the
breach, and carry financial costs for everyone involved. While ‘‘perfect
security’’ does not exist, all entities that collect and maintain sensitive con-
sumer information must take reasonable and appropriate steps to protect it.
Data Security in Public Sector
 Decrease the Unnecessary Use of Social Security Numbers in the Public
Sector by Developing Alternative Strategies for Identity Management
 Survey current use of SSNs by federal government
 Issue guidance on appropriate use of SSNs
 Establish a clearinghouse for ‘‘best’’ agency practices that minimize
use of SSNs
 Work with state and local governments to review use of SSNs
 Educate Federal Agencies on How to Protect Data; Monitor Their
Compliance with Existing Guidance
 Develop concrete guidance and best practices
 Monitor agency compliance with data security guidance
 Protect portable storage and communications devices
 Ensure Effective, Risk-Based Responses to Data Breaches Suffered by
Federal Agencies
 Issue data breach guidance to agencies
 Publish a ‘‘routine use’’ allowing disclosure of information after a
breach to those entities that can assist in responding to the breach
Data Security in Private Sector
 Establish National Standards for Private Sector Data Protection Re-
quirements and Breach Notice Requirements
 Develop Comprehensive Records on Private Sector Use of Social
Security Numbers
 Better Educate the Private Sector on Safeguarding Data
 Hold regional seminars for businesses on safeguarding information
 Distribute improved guidance for private industry
 Initiate Investigations of Data Security Violations
 Initiate a Multi-Year Public Awareness Campaign
 Develop national awareness campaign
 Enlist outreach partners
 Increase outreach to traditionally underserved communities
 Establish ‘‘Protect Your Identity’’ Days
 Develop Online Clearinghouse for Current Educational Resources
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
270

Prevention: Making It Harder to Misuse Consumer Data
Because security systems are imperfect and thieves are resourceful, it is
essential to reduce the opportunities for criminals to misuse the data they
steal. An identity thief who wants to open new accounts in a victim’s name
must be able to (1) provide identifying information to allow the creditor or
other grantor of benefits to access information on which to base a decision
about eligibility; and (2) convince the creditor that he is the person he
purports to be.
Authentication includes determining a person’s identity at the begin-
ning of a relationship (sometimes called verification), and later ensuring
that he is the same person who was originally authenticated. But the
process can fail: Identity documents can be falsified; the accuracy of the
initial information and the accuracy or quality of the verifying sources can
be questionable; employee training can be insufficient; and people can fail
to follow procedures.
Efforts to facilitate the development of better ways to authenticate
consumers without burdening consumers or businesses—for example,
multi-factor authentication or layered security—would go a long way
toward preventing criminals from profiting from identity theft.
 Hold Workshops on Authentication
 Engage academics, industry, entrepreneurs, and government experts
on developing and promoting better ways to authenticate identity
 Issue report on workshop findings
 Develop a Comprehensive Record on Private Sector Use of SSNs
Victim Recovery: Helping Consumers Repair Their Lives
Identity theft can be committed despite a consumer’s best efforts at
securing information. Consumers have a number of rights and resources
available, but some surveys indicate that they are not as well-informed as
they could be. Government agencies must work together to ensure that
victims have the knowledge, tools, and assistance necessary to minimize
the damage and begin the recovery process.
 Provide Specialized Training About Victim Recovery to First Res-
ponders and Others Offering Direct Assistance to Identity Theft
Victims
 Train law enforcement officers
 Provide educational materials for first responders that can be used as a
reference guide for identity theft victims
 Create and distribute an ID Theft Victim Statement of Rights
 Design nationwide training for victim assistance counselors
 Develop Avenues for Individualized Assistance to Identity Theft Victims
Identity Theft Research
271

 Amend Criminal Restitution Statutes to Ensure That Victims Recover
the Value of Time Spent in Trying to Remediate the Harms Suffered
 Assess Whether to Implement a National System That Allows Victims
to Obtain an Identification Document for Authentication Purposes
 Assess Efficacy of Tools Available to Victims
 Conduct assessment of FACT Act remedies under FCRA
 Conduct assessment of state credit freeze laws
Law Enforcement: Prosecuting and Punishing Identity Thieves
Strong criminal law enforcement is necessary to punish and deter identity
thieves. The increasing sophistication of identity thieves in recent years
has meant that law enforcement agencies at all levels of government
have had to increase the resources they devote to investigating related
crimes. The investigations are labor-intensive and generally require a
staff of detectives, agents, and analysts with multiple skill sets. When a
suspected theft involves a large number of potential victims, investiga-
tive agencies often need additional personnel to handle victim-witness
coordination.
Coordination and Information/Intelligence Sharing
 Establish a National Identity Theft Law Enforcement Center
 Develop and Promote the Use of a Universal Identity Theft Report
Form
 Enhance Information Sharing Between Law Enforcement and the
Private Sector
 Enhance ability of law enforcement to receive information from
financial institutions
 Initiate discussions with financial services industry on countermeas-
ures to identity theft
 Initiate discussions with credit reporting agencies on preventing
identity theft
Coordination with Foreign Law Enforcement
 Encourage Other Countries to Enact Suitable Domestic Legislation
Criminalizing Identity Theft
 Facilitate Investigation and Prosecution of International Identity Theft
by Encouraging Other Nations to Accede to the Convention on
Cybercrime
 Identify the Nations that Provide Safe Havens for Identity Thieves and
Use All Measures Available to Encourage Those Countries to Change
Their Policies
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
272

 Enhance the United States Government’s Ability to Respond to Ap-
propriate Foreign Requests for Evidence in Criminal Cases Involving
Identity Theft
 Assist, Train, and Support Foreign Law Enforcement
Prosecution Approaches and Initiatives
 Increase Prosecutions of Identity Theft
 Designate an identity theft coordinator for each United States Attor-
ney’s Office to design a specific identity theft program for each
district
 Evaluate monetary thresholds for prosecution
 Encourage state prosecution of identity theft
 Create working groups and task forces
 Conduct Targeted Enforcement Initiatives
 Conduct enforcement initiatives focused on using unfair or deceptive
means to make SSNs available for sale
 Conduct enforcement initiatives focused on identity theft related to
the health care system
 Conduct enforcement initiatives focused on identity theft by illegal
aliens
 Review Civil Monetary Penalty Programs
Gaps in Statutes Criminalizing Identity Theft
 Close the Gaps in Federal Criminal Statutes Used to Prosecute Identity
Theft-Related Offenses to Ensure Increased Federal Prosecution of
These Crimes
 Amend the identity theft and aggravated identity theft statutes to
ensure that identity thieves who misappropriate information belong-
ing to corporations and organizations can be prosecuted
 Add new crimes to the list of predicate offenses for aggravated
identity theft offenses
 Amend the statute that criminalizes the theft of electronic data by
eliminating the current requirement that the information must have
been stolen through interstate communications
 Penalize creators and distributors of malicious spyware and
keyloggers
 Amend the cyber-extortion statute to cover additional, alternate types
of cyber-extortion
 Ensure That an Identity Thief’s Sentence Can Be Enhanced When the
Criminal Conduct Affects More Than One Victim
Identity Theft Research
273

FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION’S 2006 SURVEY REPORT
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) is at the forefront in protecting consumers and
businesses from identity theft. The FTC ‘‘operates the Identity Theft Data Clearing-
house, which houses the federal government’s centralized repository for consumer
identity theft complaints’’ and ‘‘analyzes identity theft trends, promotes the development
and efficacy of identity fraud prevention strategies in the financial services industry,
and identifies targets for referral to criminal law enforcement.’’ The FTC also ‘‘operates
a call center for ID theft victims where counselors tell consumers how to protect them-
selves from identity theft and what to do if their identity has been stolen [1-877-
IDTHEFT (1-877-438-4338); TDD: 1-866-653-4261; or www.ftc.gov/idtheft].’’10
As part of its work in analyzing identity theft trends and developments, the FTC
conducts detailed studies on the prevalence of victimization, impact on victims, actions
taken by victims, and prevention measures to reduce the incidence of identity theft. The
2006 Identity Theft Survey Report, released in November 2007, was the second such
study of its kind conducted by the FTC. The study was conducted through telephone
calls using a random sampling methodology between March 27 and June 11, 2006, and
covered the period of 2005.
Prevalence
The study determined that 8.3 million Americans, or 3.7% of the population, were
victims of identity theft in 2005. The associated frauds were broken into three
Law Enforcement Training
 Enhance Training for Law Enforcement Officers and Prosecutors
 Develop course at National Advocacy Center focused on investiga-
tion and prosecution of identity theft
 Increase number of regional identity theft seminars
 Increase resources for law enforcement on the Internet
 Review curricula to enhance basic and advanced training on identity
theft
Measuring the Success of Law Enforcement
 Enhance the Gathering of Statistical Data Impacting the Criminal
Justice System’s Response to Identity Theft
 Gather and analyze statistically reliable data from identity theft
victims
 Expand scope of national crime victimization survey
 Review U.S. Sentencing Commission data
 Track prosecutions of identity theft and resources spent
 Conduct targeted surveys
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
274

categories: new accounts and other fraud (1.8 million Americans or 0.8% of the
population); misuse of existing non-credit card account or account number (3.3 million
American or 1.5% of the population); and misuse of existing credit or credit card number
3.2 million Americans or 1.4% of the population).
The results only slightly contrast with the 2003 FTC study, which found that 4.6% of
the survey population were victims of identity theft. The report concluded that the
difference between the 2003 and 2005 study rates was not statistically significant ‘‘given
the sample sizes and variances within the samples.’’11
Financial Gain for the Identity Thief
The 2006 survey found that the estimated total loss from identity theft was $15.6 billion.
Although this amount is significantly lower than the $47.6 billion estimate in the 2003
survey, there is a good explanation. Due to differences in survey methodology between
the two surveys, the FTC was unable to ‘‘determine whether total losses have actually
dropped significantly between 2003 and 2006.’’12
Interestingly enough, the median value of the financial gain for the culprits across all
categories of identity theft was only $500. In 10% of cases, the financial gain for the
culprit was $6,000 or more, and in 5% of cases, the gain was $13,000 or more. The
financial gain in each of the three individual categories was somewhat similar, except in
new accounts and other frauds. In this category, the culprit received at least $30,000 in
the top 5% of cases.
There is a difference in the average financial gains received by identity thieves
between the two studies. ‘‘Both the 2003 and 2006 surveys asked victims for their best
recollection of the amount of money obtained by the thief. In the 2006 survey, the
average amount obtained by the thief was $1,882, whereas the average was $4,789 in the
2003 survey.’’13 The study provided an explanation for the dramatic differences between
the two studies related to survey methodology:
Although we believe that these methodological changes improve the reliability of the
estimated values, they tend to cause lower estimates as compared to the 2003 survey. Thus,
the differences in the estimates between 2003 and 2006 may, at least in part, be due to the
changes in methodology as opposed to changes in consumers’ actual experiences. We
cannot, therefore, be confident that the difference between the 2003 and 2006 estimates
represents an actual drop in the average amount obtained by identity thieves.14
Cost to Victims
As much as is made about the billions of dollars in losses from identity theft, the FTC
study found that in more than 50% of incidents, victims did not incur any out-of-pocket
expenses. The FTC defined these potential expenses as lost wages, legal fees, payments
of fraudulent debts, and other miscellaneous expenses. For those who did incur
expenses, the out-of-pocket expenses ranged from a low of $1,000 to more than
$5,000. Victims spent a median value of four hours of their personal time resolving
the many problems stemming from identity theft. Approximately 25% of victims were
Identity Theft Research
275

able to resolve issues stemming from identity theft within one day of discovering their
victimization.
Victims faced tangential issues they needed to resolve. Thirty-seven percent expe-
rienced problems including denial of credit, inability to use existing credit cards,
harassment by collection agencies, utilities that were turned off, criminal or civil
investigations, and, worst of all, arrest for the crimes committed by the identity thief.
These potentially long-term impact issues are far more serious than the financial
losses.15
NOTES
1. Research and survey findings included in this section found at the Privacy Rights
Clearinghouse, www.privacyrights.org/ar/idtheftsurveys.htm.
2. Saint Xavier University, Press Release, ‘‘Study Finds No. 1 Source of Identity Theft
Is Relative or Friend,’’ May 22, 2007, www.sxu.edu/relations/news_story.asp?
iNewsID=608&strBack=%2Frelations%2Fpress%5Freleases%5F2007%2Easp.
3. From the Saint Xavier University Study of Identity Theft Incidents Reported to the
Chicago Police Department, 2000–2006.
4. William Kresse, Kathleen Hanold Watland, and John Lucki, Identity Theft, Findings
and Public Policy Recommendations From the Saint Xavier University Study of
Identity Theft Incidents Reported to the Chicago Police Department, 2000–2006,
Saint Xavier University, Graham School of Management, Chicago, IL and the
Institute for Fraud Prevention, 2006, www.theifp.org/research grants/ID Theft in
Chgo - Final Report_press.pdf. Selected sections reprinted with permission from
Saint Xavier University, Graham School of Management.
5. The President’s Identity Theft Task Force, Combating Identity Theft: A Strategic
Plan, April 2007, viii, www.idtheft.gov/reports/StrategicPlan.pdf.
6. Ibid., 3.
7. Ibid., 4.
8. Ibid., 4.
9. Ibid., 4–9.
10. Federal Trade Commission, www.ftc.gov/bcp/bcppip.shtm.
11. 2006 Identity Theft Survey Report, Federal Trade Commission, November 2007, 8.
12. Ibid., 9.
13. Ibid., 8.
14. Ibid., 9.
15. Ibid., 6–7.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
276

CHAPTER 19
The Center for Identity
Management and
Information Protection
The text of this chapter includes material reproduced from the Utica College/CIMIP
study Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-Based Foundation for
Proactive Enforcement.1
ABOUT CIMIP
The Center for Identity Management and Information Protection (CIMIP), housed at
Utica College in New York, is a research collaborative of major academic and
government partners dedicated to furthering a national research agenda on identity
management, information sharing, and data protection. Founded in June 2006, its
ultimate goal is to impact policy, regulation, and legislation, working toward a more
secure homeland.
CIMIP’s stakeholders are committed to working together to provide resources, gather
subject matter experts, provide access to sensitive data, and produce results that will be
acted upon. Completing research and publishing papers based on the results is not
277

enough. The results must be put into action in the form of best practices, new policies,
regulations, and legislation, training opportunities, and proactive initiatives for solving
the growing problems of identity fraud and theft, secure sharing of information, and
information protection. To learn more about CIMIP, visit www.cimip.org.
CIMIP AND UTICA COLLEGE
CIMIP is a logical outgrowth of Utica College’s academic programs and its Economic
Crime Institute (ECI). Utica College is the forerunner in providing academic programs
in economic crime investigation and economic crime management on the undergraduate
and graduate levels. Its undergraduate degrees in criminal justice and cyber security
complete the suite of programs that endeavor to provide government and private
industry with a well-educated, cutting edge workforce. Graduates of these programs
are currently employed at all levels in both the private and public sectors, including the
United States Secret Service, United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement, the
United States Mint, LexisNexis, Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase, AIG, and several
local law enforcement agencies.
The Economic Crime Institute of Utica College (ECI) drives leading-edge thinking on
economic crime issues faced by business and government through educational pro-
grams, policy guidance, research, and solutions. The Institute fosters a rich learning
environment that positions graduates to assume key roles in the fields of economic
crime, fraud, and risk management. Founded in 1988, the Institute is a forum for the
exchange of ideas, solutions, and technology for managing the risk of economic crime
and fraud. The ECI Board of Advisors consists of individuals at the top of their fields
from national and international corporations and government agencies. They come
together twice a year to provide expertise and share ideas about Utica College’s
academic programs and initiatives. As such, they are uniquely positioned to provide
guidance for CIMIP, as well.
Mission
The Center for Identity Management and Information Protection will facilitate a national
research agenda on identity fraud and theft, information sharing policy, and data
protection. The Center is committed to providing thought leadership by conducting
studies and conferences that will promote new prevention strategies, improved infor-
mation sharing, innovative information use, enhanced technological solutions, and drive
policy, regulatory, and legislative decisions.
Goals
 Study the trends, causes, early detection, and prevention of identity fraud and theft.
 Understand the evolving threat from cybercriminals, insiders, and organized crime
groups.
 Assess the impact of policy decisions, legislation, and regulatory actions.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
278

 Improve identity authentication systems to reduce fraud and improper payments, and
protect national security.
 Study the use of information, its protection, and the role of enabling technologies to
facilitate privacy and information sharing.
IDENTITY FRAUD TRENDS AND PATTERNS: BUILDING A DATA-BASED
FOUNDATION FOR PROACTIVE ENFORCEMENT
On October 22, 2007, CIMIP released the results of a landmark study of closed U.S.
Secret Service cases involving identify theft. The study entitled Identity Fraud Trends
and Patterns: Building a Data-based Foundation for Proactive Enforcement is truly
unique in both scope and results. The authors of the study were Gary R. Gordon, Ed.D.,
Donald J. Rebovich, Ph.D., Kyung-Seok Choo, Ph.D., and Judith B. Gordon, MLS. The
study aimed to provide a better understanding of the threat that identity fraud and theft
pose to personal and national security. The study revealed new findings about identity
theft perpetrators, victims, and methods, and marked the first time the United States
Secret Service allowed a review of its closed case files on identity theft and fraud.
CIMIP reviewed 517 closed cases investigated by the Secret Service between 2000
and 2006. In the vast majority of the cases, federal jurisdiction was established by 18
United States Code 1028 (Identity Fraud), and 18 United States Code 1029 (Access
Device Fraud). ‘‘The information revolution has intensified focus on our personal and
financial information as a valuable commodity. Whether information is being collected
and brokered by a legitimate company or stolen by an identity thief, it has value,’’ said
Secret Service Assistant Director of Investigations Michael Stenger. ‘‘By working
closely with CIMIP, we are able to gain insight on patterns and trends we can share with
other federal, state, and local law enforcement representatives, as well as international
police agencies. This partnership approach creates a comprehensive network of intelli-
gence sharing, resource sharing and technical expertise that bridges jurisdictional
boundaries.’’
Funding for the study was provided by the Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of
Justice Assistance, with a $173,948 grant to Utica College’s Center for Identity
Management and Information Protection. Businesses, law enforcement, and individuals
can benefit from the study’s findings relative to identity theft methods, victims,
perpetrators and prevention recommendations. Utica College and CIMIP graciously
gave me permission to reprint and reference this important study and related commen-
tary. Selected sections are included in this chapter. For the full study, please visit
www.utica.edu/academic/institutes/cimip/research.cfm.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The purpose of this study was to provide empirical evidence on which law enforcement
can base enhanced proactive identity theft control and prevention efforts. It focuses on
identity theft offenders, which sets it apart from previous surveys and other research
which have centered on identity theft victims. As a result of the study of closed
United States Secret Service cases with an identity theft component (2000–2006),
The Center for Identity Management and Information Protection
279

empirical data concerning the key factors relevant to the criminal behavior of
identity thieves and the conditions under which that behavior occurs are available
to law enforcement agencies, corporate security, and fraud investigators for the first
time.
The results fill a gap identified in the President’s Identity Theft Task Force report
issued in April 2007. The report states, ‘‘Unlike some groups of criminals, identity
thieves cannot be readily classified. No surveys provide comprehensive data on their
primary personal or demographic characteristics.’’2 This study gathered and analyzed
comprehensive data on identity theft offenders in order to provide both the public and
private sectors with information they need to combat these crimes.
For the purposes of this study, the definition of identity theft is aligned with that
presented in the President’s Identity Theft Task Force report, Combating Identity Theft:
A Strategic Plan. ‘‘Although identity theft is defined in many different ways, it is,
fundamentally, the misuse of another individual’s personal information to commit
fraud.’’3 Personal information includes name, address, Social Security number, and date
of birth, but excludes credit cards, debit cards, and other bank cards. The data for the
study was collected at the Secret Service headquarters by the four authors of this report.
Data was collected from 517 cases with an identity theft component, which were opened
and closed between 2000 and 2006.
Findings
After the data collection and analysis were completed, the findings were separated into
four categories: the case, the offenders, the commission of the crime, and victimization.
Highlights of these areas follow.
The Cases
Case characteristics include Secret Service classification, Secret Service region, referral
to Secret Service, jurisdiction, statutes violated, disposition, actual dollar loss, timing
and duration, and geographical scope.
 Many of the cases were classified as ‘‘Fraudulent Use of Account Number’’ and
‘‘Identity Theft.’’
 The highest percentage of cases was from the Northeastern United States.
 The cases were referred to the Secret Service from various sources.
 Approximately 47% were referred by local and state law enforcement agencies.
 Corporate security and/or fraud investigators referred about 20% of the cases.
 Most cases fell under federal jurisdiction, with criminal statutes Title 18, United
States Code, Section 1028, Identity Fraud, and Title 18, United States Code, Section
1029, Access Device Fraud, most frequently violated.
 Approximately half of the defendants in the cases were sentenced to incarceration,
often in combination with probation and restitution.
 The median actual dollar loss was $31,356.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
280

The Offenders
The data analysis showed more diversity among the age, race, gender, and criminal
backgrounds of offenders than the picture held by conventional wisdom.
 42.5% of offenders were between 25 and 34 years of age at the time that the case was
opened.
 The 35–49 age group made up 33% of the offenders.
 18.5% were between 18 and 24 years old.
 The remaining 6% were 50 years old and older.
 53.8% of the offenders were black; 38.3% were white.
 One third of the offenders were female.
 24.1% of the offenders were born outside of the United States.
 71% of the offenders had no arrest history.
 Of those who did, a third of the arrests were for fraud, forgery, or identity theft.
 The most prevalent motive of the offenders was personal gain. It took several forms
including using fraudulently obtained personal identifying information to:
 Obtain and use credit
 Procure cash
 Conceal actual identity
 Apply for loans to purchase motor vehicles
The Commission of the Crime
The data was examined to determine the modus operandi of the offenders, the organized
nature of the crimes and offenders, and identity theft through employment.
 In most of the cases, the identity theft facilitated other offenses.
 The most frequent offense that was facilitated by identity theft was fraud.
 The next most frequent was larceny.
 Organized group activity was found in 42.4% of the cases, involving from 2–45
offenders.
 The roles that the defendants took varied, but most frequently involved stealing or
obtaining personal identifying information and using it for personal gain.
 In cases with three or more offenders, there is definite coordination and organiza-
tion, allowing the group to take advantage of criminal opportunities, to create
opportunities for crime, and to avoid detection.
 In approximately half of the cases, the Internet and/or other technological devices
were used in the commission of the crime.
 Within the half with no use of the Internet or technology, non-technological
methods, such as change of address requests and Dumpster diving were used in
20% of the cases.
The Center for Identity Management and Information Protection
281

 The limited number of cases opened in 2005 and 2006 prevented any trending
analysis of Internet and technological use.
 The point of compromise for stealing personal identifying information or documents
was determined in 274 of the cases.
 In 50% of those cases a business (service, retail, financial industry, or corporation)
provided the point of compromise or vulnerability.
 A family member or friend was the point of compromise in approximately 16% of
the 274 cases.
 Approximately a third of the cases involved identity theft through employment.
 The most frequent type of employment from which personal identifying informa-
tion or documents were stolen was retail and service (stores, car dealerships, gas
stations, casinos, restaurants, hotels, hospitals, doctors offices)— 43.8%.
 Private corporations were vulnerable to insider identity theft in about 20% of those
cases.
Victimization
Although most of the media attention surrounding identity theft and fraud has
focused on individuals, they did not make up the largest percentage of victims in
this study.
 Over a third (37.1%) of the victims were financial industry organizations: banks,
credit unions, and credit card companies.
 Individuals accounted for 34.3% of the victims.
 21.3% of the victims were retail businesses (stores, car dealerships, gas stations,
casinos, restaurants, hotels, hospitals, doctors’ offices).
 Victimization of organizations took several forms:
 The financial services industry was most frequently victimized by offenders using
fraudulently obtained personal identifying information to obtain new credit card
accounts, to apply for and obtain fraudulent loans, to pass checks, and to transfer
funds.
 The retail industry was victimized by the use of stolen identity information to open
store accounts and by purchasing merchandise with fraudulent credit cards.
 The data show that most individuals were victimized by individuals they did not
know.
 59% of the victims did not know the offenders.
 10.5% of the victims were customers or clients of the offender.
 5% of the victims were related to the offender.
 20.3% of the 939 offenders in the cases committed identity theft at their place of
employment.
 Of those offenders, 59.7% were employed by a retail business.
 22.2% were employed by a financial services industry organization.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
282

While the Internet, with its chat rooms, electronic banking and payments, phishing
and pharming, malware, and spyware, has certainly added a dimension to the crime, the
basics are also still employed by identity thieves: common theft, mail theft and change of
address, Dumpster diving, database and network hacking, and insider theft. The
purposes for which identity thieves can use the stolen personal identifier information
has been exacerbated by the Internet, as online credit applications, purchases, bank
transfers, and the like eliminate the need for face-to-face contact.
The findings presented here must be used to improve and increase proactive
measures that law enforcement and fraud investigators use to combat identity theft,
including investigation, prevention, detection, and prosecution. The information con-
cerning offender characteristics and modus operandi should be used in law enforcement
training. The picture that this study paints of identity theft offenses and offenders
should be used in prioritizing and managing cases and resources. Law enforcement
executives will be able to use this information to develop policy, allocate resources, and
advocate training.
Secret Service Case Classification
Exhibit 19.1 displays the most frequent primary case types represented by the 517
cases. Fifty percent of the cases were classified as Fraudulent Use of Account Numbers,
Fraudulent Access Device Applications, Stolen Bank Issued Cards, Financial Institu-
tion Fraud (FIF) Involving Check Fraud, Counterfeit Bank Issued Credit Cards,
Counterfeit Commercial Checks, and Counterfeit State Driver’s licenses. A quarter
Exhibit 19.1
Most Frequent Primary Case Type
Primary Case Type Description
Frequency
Percent
Fraudulent use of account number
78
15.1
Fraudulent access device
58
11.2
Stolen bank-issued cards
36
7.0
All other cases involving financial institution fraud investigation
35
6.8
Financial institution fraud involving check fraud
34
6.6
Counterfeit bank-issued card
27
5.2
Counterfeit commercial checks
23
4.4
Counterfeit state driver’s license
22
4.3
Fraudulently obtained genuine ID/Social Security card
19
3.7
Manufacturing commercial/counterfeit check
15
2.9
Account takeover access/bank card
14
2.7
Stolen/forged commercial/personal check
12
2.3
Fraudulent retail business card application
11
2.1
All others
133
25.7
Total
517
100
The Center for Identity Management and Information Protection
283

of the cases (listed as other) were of primary code types ranging from altered documents
to other counterfeit documents to various types of financial institution fraud.
Motivating Factors
The data collection included a paragraph summary or synopsis of the case, based on the
description of the investigation in the files, for 503 of the cases. These summaries provided
information about the factors which motivated the offenders to commit the offense that
provided them with fraudulently obtained or fictitious personally identifying information.
In most of the cases there was more than one motive. Exhibit 19.2 shows the frequency and
percentage of the eight most prevalent motives for committing identity theft or fraud.
It is clear that the primary motive of the offenders in these cases was financial gain.
With the possible exceptions of using the fraudulent information to conceal actual
identity and to obtain cell phones and services, all of these motives point to a need or
desire for money. Some of the offenders were involved in perpetuating the offenses as a
profitable business. Others simply wanted the ability to purchase a car or other
merchandise or pay their bills. In some cases, drug addicts used identity theft offenses
as a means of supporting their habits.
Insider Identity Theft
By and large, these offenses were not perpetrated by insiders (e.g., employees of entities
housing the identity information/documents stolen). In 65.9% (341) of the cases, the
offenses were not committed through the employment of the offenders, while the point
of vulnerability was the offenders’ place of employment in 34.1% (176). Identity theft
through employment occurred most often among offenders employed in the retail
industry—stores, gas stations, car dealerships, casinos, restaurants, hospitals, doctors’
offices, hotels, and the like. Offenders stole personal identifier information from these
places of employment in 77 cases—43.8% of the cases involving identity theft through
employment. It occurred 36 times in private companies (20.5%).
Exhibit 19.2
Motivating Factors
Use Stolen ID to:
Number
Percent
Obtain and use credit
228
45.3
Procure cash
166
33
Conceal actual identity
114
22.7
Apply for loans to buy vehicles
105
20.9
Manufacture and sell fraudulent IDs
39
7.7
Obtain cell phones and services
23
4.6
Gain government benefits
19
3.8
Procure drugs
11
2.2
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
284

Individual Activity versus Organized Group Activity
The data collected from the Secret Service cases included the number of defendants and
the roles which they played in the commission of the crime. The actions the defendants
took were:
 Steal or obtain personal identifying information (e.g., personal identifying informa-
tion that could be captured from credit card databases, client and employee records,
credit card receipts, bank statements, stolen mail, checks)
 Steal or obtain personal identifier documents (e.g., driver’s licenses, birth certificates,
Social Security cards, employee badges)
 Steal or obtain bank cards (credit, debit, ATM)
 Alter identification documents (e.g., driver’s licenses, Social Security cards, birth
certificates, employee badges)
 Produce counterfeit identification documents (e.g., driver’s licenses, Social Security
cards, birth certificates, employee identification cards)
 Distribute personal identifier information to others (so that they could use it for
personal gain)
 Sell identification documents (genuine and counterfeit)
 Use identification documents for own use (The offender used genuine or counterfeit
documents for his or her own personal gain.)
 Use identification documents to obtain more identification documents (e.g., using a
utility bill and birth certificate to procure a driver’s license)
 Direct others’ activities (within an organized crime group, giving instructions or
orders to the others in the group)
 Other (includes credit card skimming, encoding or re-encoding bank cards)
It is clear that the majority of the 517 cases involved a single offender as 57.6% (298)
of the cases were ones in which there was only one defendant. In close to a quarter of the
cases (22.8%, 118), however, two offenders worked together to commit the identity theft
offenses. There is a significant drop in the frequency of cases with more than two
offenders. There were three in 7.9% (41) cases, and four in 3.5% (18). From there the
number of cases with multiple offenders continues to decrease. Seven cases had 10 or
more offenders, with the largest number being 45.
As the results show, the most common types of identity theft cases in the sample are
those in which one individual operated alone or worked with one other person to initiate
and complete an offense(s) of identity theft. These cases generally entailed obtaining or
stealing personal identifying information and using it for their own use. Based on more
detailed qualitative information provided in case investigation notes, those cases in
which only one offender was involved were often driven by criminal opportunities that
were assessed as desirable by the offender, with no recruitment of or consultation with
criminal others. These offenders started with identity theft to lead to other criminal
activity, and took on several roles.
The Center for Identity Management and Information Protection
285

Utilization of Methods by Offenders
 Internet. There were 102 cases that included the use of the Internet. Unspecified
Internet use occurred most frequently—in 51 cases. It was used to search databases in
27 cases, for email in 16 cases, and for online identification document purchase and/or
sale in 19 cases. In some cases more than one method of Internet use was used and
therefore, recorded during data collection. For that reason, the number of uses totals
more than 102.
 Technological devices, including computers and the other items listed above,
whether used alone or in conjunction with the Internet and/or non-technological
means, were used in 192 cases. Computers were most frequently used for producing
documents—in 106 cases. They were used for scanning documents in 62 cases and for
unspecified purposes in 93. Computer printers were used in 68 cases for producing
documents, checks, and currency. Other frequently used technological devices were
photocopiers (31 cases), telephone (31), and other, including access device readers
(28). Again, there were combinations of computer uses and of computers and other
technological devices in some of the cases, so the numbers total more than 192.
 Using Computers to Produce Documents. Here is an example where the defendant
used a computer to create phony identification documents. The defendant procured
personal identifying information by placing ads in newspapers stating that he was
hiring and would accept applications at a local hotel. He would interview the
individuals and collect their applications which included Social Security numbers,
dates of birth, and bank account information for direct deposit of a payroll check. He
would then create birth certificates and employment cards on a computer and use
them to get driver’s licenses with his photograph and others’ names. He used the
driver’s licenses to open bank accounts. He then manufactured counterfeit checks
with the victims’ names on the computer.
 Non-technological means, including mail theft, mail rerouting, and Dumpster diving
were used in 106 cases. The most frequent of these was the rerouting of mail through
change of address cards and change of address for credit cards and bank accounts. It
occurred in 62 cases. Mail theft was an element of 46 cases and Dumpster diving was
employed in 12 cases. Again, these means were used in combination in some cases, so
the numbers total more than 106.
Patterns of Offender Methods
The data was examined to track variations in the use of the Internet, technological
devices, and non-technological means according to the year in which the case was
opened. The Secret Service opens cases once they have been referred to them and
accepted. The year the case is opened is generally the year in which the crime was
detected. Unfortunately, any trending analysis is premature, as there are very few 2005
and 2006 cases which are now closed. A continuation study is planned that will collect
the necessary data to provide for this level of analysis. The following preliminary
findings were observed.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
286

 There is very little variation in the use of the Internet to commit identity theft from
2001 through 2004. The data indicate that in approximately 20% of the 2001–2004
cases the Internet was used.
 An interesting pattern in the use of technological devices was observed during a
similar time period. There is a steady decline in the use of technology other than the
Internet in the cases opened between 2001 and 2004. In 2001, 42.2% (27) of the cases
involved the use of a technological device. That number dropped to 30% (17) in 2004.
The decrease was steady in the intervening years: 38.5% (60) in 2002 and 34.8% (46)
in 2003.
 The use of non-technological means remained fairly steady across the 4 years (2001–
2004). The percentages were in the low twenties for this period. Offenders continued
to use low-tech means such as mail theft, mail rerouting, and dumpster diving, but
only in a small percentage of the cases. It should be noted that in some cases, the non-
technological means were used in combination with the Internet and/or other
technological devices.
 The limited data provided by closed 2005 and 2006 cases indicate the potential for
shifts in the patterns above. However, the numbers are too small to draw any
conclusions at this time.
Offender Relationship to Individual Victims
It is stated in the President’s Identity Theft Task Force report that ‘‘identity thieves
have been known to prey on people they know, including coworkers, senior citizens for
whom they are serving as caretakers, and even family members.’’4 In collecting data for
this research project, special attention was paid to the relationship between the offender
and victim. The categories into which the relationships were classified include:
 Stranger (The victim had never met the offender.)
 Customer/Client (includes retail customers, client lists, and the like)
 Family (immediate and extended—spouses, parents, siblings, grandparents, aunts,
uncles, nieces, nephews, cousins)
 Friend/acquaintance
 Coworker/employer
 Unavailable (There was no indication of the victim-offender relationship in the file.)
Exhibit 19.3 shows Offender and Victim Relationships. The majority of offender/
victim relationships involved an individual or individuals whom the offender did not
know.
As the President’s Identity Theft Task Force reported, identity thieves often prey on
people they know, but in most of the Secret Service cases they did not. However, there
were cases of offenders taking advantage of the people for whom they were caring—
both disabled and elderly, as well as cases in which spouses, parents, children, and
extended family members were victimized.
The Center for Identity Management and Information Protection
287

Exhibit 19.3
Offender and Victim Relationships
Category
Number
Percent
Stranger
540
59.4
Customer/Client
95
10.5
Family
46
5.0
Friend/Acquaintance
28
3.1
Coworker/Employer
28
3.1
Unavailable
172
18.9
Total
909
100%
THOUGHT LEADER IN IDENTITY THEFT RESEARCH
Donald Rebovich
Donald J. Rebovich, Ph.D., is executive director of Utica College’s Center for
Identity Management and Information Protection (CIMIP). He is also an associate
professor and director of Economic Crime Undergraduate Programs at Utica
College. Before joining Utica College, Dr. Rebovich served as research director
for the National White Collar Crime Center (NW3C) and research director for the
American Prosecutors Research Institute.
Dr. Rebovich is the coeditor of the book The New Technology of Crime, Law and
Social Control and the author of the book Dangerous Ground: The World of
Hazardous Waste Crime, which presented the results of the first empirical study of
environmental crime and its control in the United States. He is the assistant editor
of the Journal of Economic Crime Management. His background includes research
in identity theft, economic crime victimization, white-collar crime prosecution,
and multijurisdictional task force development.
Dr. Rebovich has served as advisor to the U.S. Department of Justice on tribal
technology and information sharing and on environmental crime control. He
obtained his B.S. degree in psychology from the College of New Jersey and
received his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in criminal justice from Rutgers University.
Here Dr. Rebovich provides his thoughts and commentary on the CIMIP study.
IMPRESSIONS ON THE CIMIP/SECRET SERVICE STUDY
In 2007, CIMIP undertook its most challenging research endeavor: the empirical
analysis of over 500 U. S. Secret Service identity theft cases. The goal was to collect
investigative case file data from completed identity theft cases spanning from the
years 2000 through 2006 and, from this data, document key characteristics of the
offense, the offender and the victim. Up until 2007, most of the research findings on
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
288

identity theft were confined to information submitted by victims through surveys or
other forms of victim information submission. While valuable, conclusions drawn
from findings were often limited by factors such as variable interpretations of identity
theft definitions and low response rates. Further, this information did not include
incidents unknown to victims nor did it include incidents of crimes against organiza-
tionsoragencies(e.g.,businesses,government).Finally,theviewwasstrictlyfromthe
perspective of the victim, only addressing peripheral characteristics of the offender
and the offender’s modus operandi. Many questions remain around who the typical
offender is and how he/she commits the crimes of identity theft and identity fraud.
The results of the study were released on October 22, 2007 and were met with an
interesting mix of curiosity and surprise. Contrary to some of the preceding victim
surveys, the CIMIP study found that most victims did not know their offenders.
The median loss for a case was found to be over $30,000, much more than average
estimates drawn from victim surveys. (Both findings can be partly attributed to the
inclusion of private businesses and public organizations in the study sample.) A full
one-third of offenders were found to have committed their crimes at their place of
employment, spotlighting the special problems of unscrupulous ‘‘insiders’’ who
would use personal information for criminal purposes. Close to half of the crimes
depended on offenders working in concert. And the criminality itself was not
confined by racial or gender boundaries; over half of the offenders were found to be
black and a third were female.
The results shattered some preconceptions many held about identity theft and
identity fraud. The fundamental insight furnished by the study results was that the
theft of information used to commit identity fraud was predatory and pervasive,
perpetrated by many different types of people from all walks of life. Furthermore, the
criminals proved to be patient observers of opportunities that would allow them entree
to source information upon which they could build criminal careers. These identity
thieves would settle into a convenient routine of shuttling between the cultivation of
data and the conversion of the data into counterfeit documents and identification cards
in order to reach the ultimate goal of the fraudulent use of that data.
The study findings impressed upon me the stark realities of identity theft in our
modern society. Many of the crimes were carried out by individuals using simple
forms of scams, trickery, misrepresentation (e.g., phishing), and basic theft (e.g.,
Dumpster diving, mailbox rifling) to procure seed information for their later acts of
fraud. These were crimes of individual victim manipulation. However, the crimes
resulting in the most monetary loss to individuals and businesses alike proved to be
more acts of system manipulation committed by loosely constructed criminal
groups exhibiting, in many instances, remarkable skills at exploiting system
vulnerabilities. A common characteristic of these cases was the specialization
of criminal skills (e.g., paper document experts, laminating experts, check forgers)
and the portability of those services depending on the criminal group’s needs.
Too often, the individual in control of the ‘‘criminal spigot’’ was the insider, the
gatekeeper to personal information of clients and customers.
(Continued )
The Center for Identity Management and Information Protection
289

IMPLICATIONS FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT5
The CIMIP study’s findings furnish the law enforcement community with fresh,
empirically obtained knowledge for the development of enhanced proactive identity
theft control and prevention. The study’s recommendations, derived from the findings,
are designed to ensure that the CIMIP study will serve the utility of improving proactive
measures that law enforcement and fraud investigators can use to control identity theft.
The recommendations center on areas such as detection enhancement, interagency
collaboration, the effective use of resources, training, executive briefings, and future
research.
CIMIP research study results form a critical knowledge base for proactive measures in
identity theft investigations. More precisely, the information gleaned from the study can
play an instrumental part in equipping law enforcement with the tools needed to
effectively and efficiently detect identity theft. The results serve to enhance the ability
to spot ‘‘red flags’’ of identity theft, particularly for local law enforcers. Police face a
multitude of responsibilities and may not always be focused on identity theft.
A variety of sources (public service announcements, commercial advertising)
periodically remind U.S. citizens about the threats of identity theft and the personal
actions that can be taken to help insulate oneself from identity theft victimization.
One disquieting story that emerges from the CIMIP study results is that no matter
how vigilant we are in following a formula for protecting ourselves from falling
victim to identity theft, there is only so much the average citizen can control. Our
personal information is legitimately collected and housed, daily, by numerous
private and public sector entities. The successful protection of that information is
contingent on the exercising of robust policies for the safekeeping of it by the
information guardians themselves. Absent such policies (strong employee screen-
ing strategies, comprehensive employee monitoring programs), organizations
‘‘invite’’ attempts at information theft by those entrusted to protect it. Some of
the findings of the CIMIP study point to a key threat to identity security as coming
from ‘‘within;’’ the insider ready to exploit perceived system vulnerabilities. As
expressed by one arrested insider in case interview notes, ‘‘It was so easy.’’ It is
hoped that studies like this one will impress Americans with the urgency of
implementing proven methods to make committing identity theft ‘‘not so easy.’’
Recommendation
Local and state law enforcement leaders should encourage more coopera-
tion with federal law enforcement where it has begun and foster it where it
is not occurring.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
290

The manner in which the criminal justice system addresses the cases in their nascent
stages underscores the integral role of local law enforcement in the referral of cases to
the Secret Service. Identity theft investigations, as evidenced in the study sample, could
begin with an ordinary vehicular stop for exceeding the speed limit on a rural county
highway or could, just as easily, begin as an investigation of what, on the surface,
appears to be the work of a small-time burglar. Recognizing the signs of identity theft at
this earliest stage, with the local law enforcement officer acting in the role of an identity
theft ‘‘first responder,’’ can spell the difference between the cracking of an identity theft
ring or an important enforcement opportunity missed.
Clearly, referrals to the Secret Service may result from victim reports of identity theft
to local law enforcement, but, more likely, would be the product of the alertness of local
officials in recognizing telltale signs of identity theft while investigating unrelated
crimes. Results of the CIMIP study can help assist local police and sheriffs’ departments
to act as conduits to successful federal investigations and prosecutions of these cases.
This can be achieved by sensitizing local enforcement to the range of clues for
recognition of the presence of identity theft and the steps required affecting successful
investigation and referral. The study results also uncover a trend towards a collaborative
approach to investigating identity theft cases that will likely be perpetuated in the future.
Most of the study cases were prosecuted under federal jurisdiction—a further indication
of the cooperative and collaborative enforcement approach.
In terms of empirically-grounded characteristics of the identity theft offender, there is
much that law enforcement can learn. The findings reveal that identity theft offenders
are characteristically diverse in terms of their age, race, and gender. The results confirm
that there is no perfect criminal ‘‘stereotype’’ that fits the moniker of identity thief. The
results certainly do not reflect the image sometimes portrayed by the media of a devious
white, young male staring at a computer screen. The frequency of women participating
in these crimes is markedly unlike the level of female activity in other types of crimes; it
is strikingly more pronounced.
Most of the offenders did show evidence of having prior arrest records, but of those
who did, most of the past crimes were for related offenses such as fraud or theft of
property. Some of these offenders freely admitted that they had shifted over from other
crime areas because of their belief of the ease of the commission of identity theft and the
chances of increasing their illegal profits in shorter periods of time. These prior criminal
activities included drug trafficking and robbery. Once again, the results remind law
enforcers that they, as crime control agents, cannot overlook the possibilities that
suspects are engaged in deeper and more lucrative criminal enterprises than what would
appear on the surface.
The study results also point to the practical nature of new legal tools at the disposal of
identity theft law enforcers. While most of the cases were prosecuted federally, the
reliance on newly enacted identity theft statutes figured prominently in the charging of
offenders both on the federal and state jurisdictional levels. At the state level, identity
theft statutes were the most frequently used in charging practices. At the federal level,
violations of access device fraud and identity fraud statutes were charged the most. Wire
fraud and mail fraud were at one time seen as the most logical and convenient paths
towards prosecuting identity theft offenders; however, they were found to be used less
The Center for Identity Management and Information Protection
291

frequently in the CIMIP study. The study also underscored the special resources needed
to investigate identity theft cases, as these cases can easily go on for two years. The
results of this study allow law enforcement to see a spectrum of identity theft cases,
rather than dealing with one at a time. Law enforcement managers can use this
information to effectively assign resources and prioritize cases.
The findings of the CIMIP study should help law enforcement executives more
accurately assess where and how to allocate their identity theft control dollars. Previous
enforcement strategies used loss amount thresholds as the litmus test to determine which
cases would and would not be investigated or prosecuted. Research findings here
demonstrate that there is clear value in pursuing identity theft cases even if the dollar loss
is minimal or non-existent. CIMIP study findings on the geographical distribution and
scope of identity theft also demonstrate that these crimes occur fairly evenly across the
United States. It should, therefore, deserve equal enforcement prioritization throughout
the land. Further, the scope of the offenses was found to be just as likely to be local as
state or interstate. This information, along with information about referral patterns from
local and state law enforcement, can be invaluable as law enforcement managers attempt
to effectively allocate personnel and funds.
Research findings of the CIMIP study also pave the way for the establishment of
standardized case classifications for identity theft and identity fraud. Doing so would
help facilitate interagency sharing of case information, collaboration on investigations,
and improved prioritization and management of cases. Consideration should also be
given to the inclusion of identity theft as a primary classification code.
The information gained from the CIMIP study results should, ultimately, be chan-
neled into up-to-date law enforcement training programs that capitalize upon what is
recommended by the report and for which materials can be provided. The hope is that
relevant findings would be disseminated to law enforcement executives so that they can
develop policy, allocate resources, and advocate training based on empirical research.
Organized briefings on the research findings should be made available geared to aid
law enforcement executives in developing and implementing policies and procedures for
optimized investigation and prosecution of identity theft crimes. These briefings should
accentuate conclusions drawn from the findings in the areas of offender methods, points
of compromise, organized crime activity, insider criminal activity, and the victims. Such
briefings could also highlight the points of compromise and vulnerabilities which
provide opportunities for employees to steal personal identifying information, as well as
the methods employed to perpetrate the thefts. This information can be turned to for the
development of policies and procedures created to prevent, detect, and mitigate identity
theft and fraud.
Logically, the pioneering research represented by the CIMIP study should represent a
launching pad for a series of like-minded research endeavors. The analysis of closed
Secret Service cases culminated in the construction of a rich data set which will be used
to aid law enforcement agencies and corporations in their war against identity theft and
fraud. The reality is, however, that wily criminals are constantly adapting to law
enforcement investigative techniques and strategies by experimenting with new meth-
ods for committing such crimes while avoiding detection. Unfortunately, some have
successfully reached their goals of undermining enforcement efforts. It is, therefore,
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
292

incumbent upon today’s law enforcement community to draw upon timely empirical
information on trends, patterns, and groups, both current and emerging, to evolve from a
reactive control posture to a proactive one. This iterative model for identity theft
research should not be confined to U.S. Secret Service cases, but should also be applied,
widely, to cases investigated by local, state, and other federal law enforcement agencies.
Incrementally building on the baseline created through the CIMIP research, future
longitudinal studies of identity theft, on all government levels, should be undertaken to
ascertain trends and patterns of this crime area in the near past and to accurately
anticipate future trends and areas of vulnerability to improve the system’s chances of
containing identity theft and identity fraud.
NOTES
1. Utica College/CIMIP study Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-
Based Foundation for Proactive Enforcement. # Center for Identity Management
and Information Protection. It is reproduced here with the permission of the Center
for Identity Management and Information Protection of Utica College.
2. The President’s Identity Theft Task Force, Combating Identity Theft: A Strategic
Plan (April 2007), 12, www.idtheft.gov/reports/StrategicPlan.pdf.
3. Ibid., 2.
4. Ibid., 12.
5. The content for this section was provided by Donald J. Rebovich, Ph.D.
The Center for Identity Management and Information Protection
293


CHAPTER 20
Preventing Identity Theft:
21 Rules You Must Use
I learned early in my law enforcement career the value of prevention. As a young federal
agent, I wanted to arrest every criminal I could find to stop fraud. Although the goal was
noble, it did not work. No matter how many we arrested, new fraudsters just took their
places and the crimes continued. Prosecutions put crooks behind bars but were
ineffective in reimbursing consumers and businesses for their financial losses. I
came to embrace the importance of prevention in limiting victimization from fraud,
especially in the case of identity theft.
Nothing will guarantee that you will never become an identity theft victim. With the
widespread availability of personal information and the increasing exposure from data
breaches, the risk is ever-present. But there is much you can do to protect yourself, your
family, and your business. Robust prevention activities can limit your chances of
becoming a victim of identity theft. I say ‘‘limit’’ because there is no perfect guarantee
against victimization. Nevertheless, using the many recommended prevention rules will
definitely make you less of a target.
First, do not panic. Just because you lost your wallet or purse, do not assume you will
automatically become an identity theft victim. The same goes with data breaches.
Investigators discovered only 800 cases of fraud among the more than 163,000 identities
exposed in the ChoicePoint data breach in 2004. Statistics are on your side. Prevention
techniques can provide you safety and peace of mind.
295

I offer a robust set of proactive and reactive rules to fraud-proof and protect your good
name. The ‘‘21 Rules You Must Use’’ are the most important things you need to do now
and on an ongoing basis to prevent identity theft. There are also rules to follow if you
become a victim. Consider these rules as further hardening of your defenses. Learn these
rules and use them religiously. Tell your family, friends, and work associates. If you
employ all these rules, you will significantly lessen your identity theft risk and be
prepared to act if you are victimized.
1. Safeguard Your Social Security Number
Your Social Security number (SSN) is the key to your personal and financial vault. It
provides access to your bank and brokerage accounts, credit reports, medical records,
and so much more. The SSN is often the entry point for identity theft. Do not carry your
Social Security card in your wallet or purse. Do not write your SSN on a piece of paper in
your wallet or purse either. Guard it always and do not give it out unless absolutely
necessary. Do not be afraid to strongly question why anyone needs to know your SSN.
Also protect your other personal information, such as your passport, birth certificate,
voter registration card, alien registration card, and other forms of identification.
2. Protect Your Other Personal Information
Locking down your SSN is the first step in protecting your personal information. The
same safeguards are needed for your credit card numbers, bank and brokerage accounts,
retirement accounts, and others. Do not give your credit card number or other personal
information to people who call you, no matter how legitimate or enticing the offer may
sound. Always limit to whom you give your date of birth, mother’s maiden name, or
other confidential personal information. Again, do not be afraid to question why
someone needs this information.
Minimize the amount of information you carry with you. Do not carry more than two
credit cards at any one time. Do not write your personal identification number (PIN) on
your automated teller machine (ATM) card. Go through your wallet or purse and remove
old deposit slips, blank checks, and other information that you may not need to carry. Do
not keep account information or passwords in your cell phone or personal digital
assistant. Cancel credit cards that you do not need.
Check your credit card after each use. Always check that you have received your own
credit card back after making a purchase, although this is not a frequent problem. In
some instances, corrupt clerks have switched credit cards. The clerk knows that the
particular credit card is good since it was approved for the purchase; criminally minded
clerks can use the card or sell it to others.
Always guard your other passwords and PINs. Do not provide your address or
telephone number on credit card transaction slips. Some states actually prohibit retailers
from asking you for this information. When purchasing from online retailers, do not
allow them to maintain your credit card number or other personal information for future
transactions. The less information that you allow them to store, the less information can
be adversely impacted if a data breach occurs.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
296

Keep unnecessary information off your checks. I have seen people print their SSNs
and home telephone numbers on their checks. There is no need to do this; it only exposes
more personal information. Limit the information to your name and address. Rather than
having new or additional checks for your checking account mailed to your home address,
consider having them delivered to your bank for pickup. This is especially recommended
if you do not have a locking mailbox.
Some credit card issuers allow card holders to place their photograph on their cards.
This can be a good if the card is lost and then used by a thief. Of course, we have to
assume that whoever receives the card for purchases will actually look at the face of the
card and compare the signature on the back of the card with the signature provided at
time of use. In some cases, people have signed ‘‘Mickey Mouse’’ on their credit card
receipts without the cashiers ever noticing.
Protect personal information that you leave in your car. Do not leave any items with
personal information, such as insurance cards, vehicle registration, wallets, purses, or
laptops in your vehicle, especially in plain view. Thieves will break into vehicles to
obtain this information. In addition, remove or hide from view your garage door opener.
The garage door opener and vehicle registration with your home address provides
thieves with the tools they needed to locate and easily enter your house while you are
away. Properly secure financial instruments and important documents in your residence
or business, or bank safety deposit box. Better yet, install a home alarm system for
further protection. Residential and commercial burglaries have been carried out to
obtain SSNs, birth certificates, and account information.
3. Review Your Credit Reports
If you follow only one recommendation from this book, this should be the one. Carefully
reviewing your consumer credit report on an ongoing basis is the best way to learn if you
are a victim of identity theft. Consistent scrutiny of your credit reports can detect identity
theft early and minimize potential damage. Often reviews find errors that have nothing
to do with fraud but need to be corrected nonetheless.
In 2003, Congress amended the Fair Credit Reporting Act to allow consumers access
to their credit scores and a free copy of their credit reports each year. You can
access your credit reports from the three major credit bureaus with one call or email
request. Annualcreditreport.com is the central online site available to consumers to
request these credit reports. It can be accessed at: www.annualcreditreport.com/cra/
index.jsp. Note: It is the only official site for the free annual credit report. Another
Web site offers a ‘‘free’’ credit report, but it is run by one of the credit bureaus.
Users must purchase a credit monitoring service in order to receive the ‘‘free’’ credit
reports.
Review your credit report each year from the three major credit reporting bureaus,
Equifax (www.equifax.com), Experian (www.experian.com), and TransUnion (www
.transunion.com). Rather than reviewing all three reports at the same time each year,
spread them out. Order one report in January, a second in May, and the third one in
September. This way you continuously self-monitor your credit from the major credit
agencies.
Preventing Identity Theft: 21 Rules You Must Use
297

Look for credit inquiries and issuance of credit that you did not authorize. If any are
found, make immediate inquiries and notifications. If you do not know how to read a
credit report, helpful resources are available online. Review the credit reports for your
children just in case their personal information has been compromised by identity
thieves. Once they leave home, encourage them to check their credit reports regularly.
4. Buy a Good Shredder and Use It
One of the easiest prevention techniques to thwart Dumpster diving is to buy and use a
shredder. They are relatively inexpensive and the best protection from someone
acquiring personal information that is discarded in the trash. People discard all sorts
of sensitive information without thinking of the consequences: preapproved credit card
offers, convenience checks, bank statements, canceled checks, deposit slips, and
correspondence containing SSNs and other information. Do not forget to shred receipts
for prescriptions too. Thieves who are addicts may break into your home if they find
evidence that you have certain prescription narcotic drugs they can use to get high.
Get a shredder that provides a confetti cut. Confetti is virtually impossible to
reassemble. Cheaper shredders cut paper into strips that industrious fraudsters can
piece together. Put a shredder in your kitchen, office, garage, or other convenient spot.
Ultra-small models are available. When the mail arrives, shred unwanted credit card
offers and other documents immediately. Do this every day.
Businesses also need to shred sensitive documents. Businesses produce confidential
documents that could put them at risk if they were lost or stolen. Everything from medical
records to internal business memos can put a company at risk. Privacy concerns, legal
compliance requirements, and the threat of corporate espionage can be better addressed if
everything that needs to be discarded is properly shredded. Document destruction
companies have specially equipped document-shredding trucks that visit the workplace,
collect documents for destruction, and shred the material on-site. Collection boxes are
placed throughout the office for employees to place documents that need shredding.
5. Reduce Your Exposure to Mail Theft
Mail theft has been a problem ever since the origin of the Postal Service in the 1700s. For
much of the last 30 years, mail theft has been a contributor to identity theft. The good
news is that in a Federal Trade Commission (FTC) survey released in November 2007,
Exhibit 20.1
Avoid Becoming a Victim of Identity Theft
The United States Department of Justice recommends that consumers think of the word
‘‘SCAM’’ to minimize their risk of becoming victims of identity theft.
S - Be Stingy about giving out personal information.
C - Check your financial information regularly.
A - Ask periodically for a copy of your credit report.
M - Maintain careful records of financial accounts.
Source: United States Department of Justice, www.usdoj.gov/criminal/fraud/websites/idtheft.html
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
298

only 2% of victims reported that the theft of their identity was connected to the U.S.
mails. This shows that t the Postal Service’s prevention initiatives are working. But that
does not guarantee that you will never be a victim of mail theft.
Always use a locking mailbox. Mail theft, although it is occurring less often, is still a
significant threat to your identity. Take precautions to protect your mail from theft. Mail
is something we all receive six days a week, each and every week. The daily delivery and
volume make mail an inviting target for fraudsters. Thus, it is important to have the most
secure mailbox as possible. If you cannot obtain a locking mailbox, consider using a Post
Office box or a box at a private mail receiving agency, such as The UPS Store.
The U.S. Postal Inspection Service is the federal law enforcement agency responsible
for protecting the public and the Postal Service from mail theft. It has long been working
to reduce the number of break-ins of individual house mailboxes and neighborhood
mailbox units in affected areas. The public’s assistance is also needed in helping to
reduce the losses from these thefts. Take these measures to help protect yourself from
becoming a victim of mail theft:
 Retrieve your mail as soon as possible after delivery to the mail receptacle. Do not
leave mail in your mailbox overnight or on weekends.
 Use collection boxes or letter slots at the Post Office to mail letters instead of leaving
them in your residential box for carrier pickup. This is especially true for outgoing
mail containing payment checks. Payment checks are prime targets for mail thieves
who can alter the checks and negotiate them. Thieves steal outgoing and incoming
mail to obtain bank account numbers, bank routing numbers, names, addresses, SSNs,
and other information.
 Always remember that the red flag up on rural boxes can alert would-be crooks that
there is mail in the box. I often say that the red flag in the up position screams ‘‘steal
me’’ to mail thieves.
 If your employer allows it, take your outgoing mail to work and place with the
company’s outgoing mail.
 If your mail receptacle has a locking device, make sure it works. If it does not, install
either a new lock or a new secure mailbox with a sturdy lock.
 Notify your post office to issue a hold on your mail during vacation or business trips
so that mail does not accumulate in your box. You can now do this online at https://
holdmail.usps.com/duns/HoldMail.jsp.
 Report any suspicious activity around your mail receptacle, your letter carrier, his or
her vehicle, other residential mailboxes, and collection boxes, to your local police
department and the Postal Inspection Service. Postal Inspectors actively investigate
mail theft complaints.
 Report nonreceipt of valuable mail as soon as possible by calling the bank or financial
institution, credit card issuers, and the Postal Inspection Service.
The U.S. Postal Inspection Service offers a reward up to $10,000 for information and
services leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for mail theft. Mail theft is a
federal felony and upon conviction may be punishable by a fine of up to $250,000 and
Preventing Identity Theft: 21 Rules You Must Use
299

imprisonment up to five years, or both. If you suspect anyone of mail theft, please
contact the Postal Inspection Service.
6. Practice Computer and Internet Safety
Ensure that your computer has adequate firewall protection and current operating system
software. Organized identity theft groups are remotely loading spyware, malware, and
Trojan horses on victim computers. These programs transmit your keystrokes and other
stored computer files to suspects. The newest trend in identity theft is botnets. People
who do not maintain current versions of their operating software and firewall software
are susceptible to being a part of a botnet.
Be on the lookout for phishing and related scams. Always be suspicious of unsolicited
emails asking for personal or financial information. Do not respond to phishing emails
from financial institutions requiring an update of personal and banking information.
Legitimate requests for personal information are generally not conducted by email.
Suspect emails requesting this information will contain an internet hyperlink that directs
the victim to a suspect Web site containing fields for victim personal information. Do not
use public computers in libraries, hotels, coffee shops, or other public venues for online
financial transactions. Public computers may be infected with spyware and viruses that
may subject you and your personal information to fraud and misuse.
Never open unknown attachments or download questionable software. Never open
attachments or download any software from sites that you are not 100% certain of. The
same goes for pop-ups. Criminals may offer you free music, antivirus protection, or
other applications. If you fall for it and download this, spyware may be installed on your
computer. Once installed, identity thieves can use this spyware to record your keystrokes
and obtain passwords, bank account information, and other sensitive information. Keep
your computer safe by installing updated antivirus and antispyware software, and
adequate firewalls.
Enable password protection on your personal computer. Use a password to log on to
your computer and a password to get back on after your screen saver goes on if you
leave your computer on. Encrypt your home wireless computer network. Fraudsters
will drive around residential neighborhoods and businesses to locate unsecured
wireless networks. They use these unsecured networks to facilitate fraud and other
unauthorized activity. Microsoft (www.microsoft.com/security) offers excellent tips,
guidance, and software for individuals and businesses on improving security of their
computers and networks.
Always use strong passwords to protect against unauthorized access. Do not use
words, names, or phrases that can be easily connected to an individual. The longer the
password, the better. It should be at least eight characters in length; 14 characters or
more is best. Random letters, numbers, punctuation, and symbols that are not repeated
are the strongest. Microsoft offers an excellent password checker to gauge the level of
security for any given password. Simply go to www.microsoft.com/protect/yourself/
password/checker.mspx and enter your password. The strength of the password will be
displayed as either weak, medium, strong, or best. Also be sure to change passwords on a
regular basis.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
300

Be extra careful when online. The Internet is your entrance to the marketplace for the
world from the comfort of your home or office. While it is the way we do business and
communicate today, there are also safety concerns when it comes to identity theft and
fraud. Never use your credit or debit card at any Web site unless it offers a secure
transaction. Secure or encrypted transactions have an icon of a miniature lock that
appears in the Web browser. Yet just seeing the miniature lock may not be enough.
Highly skilled scammers can replicate the miniature lock on sites, giving the false
impression of a secure site. If in doubt, click off any suspicious Web sites. In addition,
the URL address for the Web page changes from ‘‘http’’ to ‘‘https’’ indicating a secure
site for you to input your personal information.
Exhibit 20.2
NCL’s Six Tips for Shopping Safely Online
The National Consumers League (NCL) has been advocating for consumers for more
than a century. The NCL provides government, businesses, and other organizations with
the consumer’s perspective on a wide variety of social issues including fraud prevention
and privacy concerns. Here are the NCL’s Six Tips for Shopping Safely Online:
1. Get the scoop on the seller. Check complaint records at your state or local
consumer protection agency and Better Business Bureau. Get the physical address
and phone number to contact the seller offline. Look for sellers belonging to
programs that encourage good business practices and help resolve complaints.
2. Use a credit card. It’s the safest way to pay because you have the legal right to
dispute charges for goods or services that were never ordered, never received, or
misrepresented.
3. Ask your credit card issuer about ‘‘substitute’’ or ‘‘single-use’’ credit card
numbers. This new technology allows you to use your credit card without putting
your real account number online, protecting it from abuse and hackers or dishonest
employees of the seller.
4. Look for clues about safety. When you provide payment information, the ‘‘http’’
at the beginning of the address bar should change to ‘‘https’’ or ‘‘shttp’’ (the ‘‘s’’
stands for secure). Your browser may show whether the information is being
encrypted, or scrambled, as it is being sent. See what Web sites say about how they
safeguard your information in transmission and storage. Don’t provide sensitive
information by email.
5. Know the ‘‘real deal’’. Get all the details before you buy: a complete description
of the item, the total price (including shipping), the delivery time, warranty
information, the return policy, and what to do and who to call if you have any
problem.
6. Keep proof handy. Always print and file the information in case you need proof
of this purchase later.
Source: National Consumers’ League Six Tips for Shopping Safely Online, www.nclnet.org/shoppingonline/
shoppingtips.htm
Preventing Identity Theft: 21 Rules You Must Use
301

Deal only with reputable online merchants, and always use your credit card in case of
fraud. By using your credit card rather than a debit card or check, you are covered for
fraud losses, should they occur. Federal law limits consumer losses to a maximum of
$50, but credit card companies rarely enforce this.
7. Be Cautious at ATMs
Identity thieves have been known to place skimming devices over ATM slots to steal
card account information. Look for suspicious devices on the front of the ATM. Check
for exposed wires, tape, or loose connections. Look for hidden cameras on the sides of
the ATM that criminals use to record ATM passwords. If the ATM card slot, keypad, or
any part of the ATM does not look right or if you can move or remove them, do not use
the machine and alert the bank representatives. Be aware of those people who may have
too much of an interest in your ATM transaction—the ones who are trying to look over
your shoulder to see what you are doing. They may be shoulder surfers attempting to see
your account balance or PIN. A recommended practice is to use one hand as a shield to
cover your other hand as you enter your PIN.
Be extra careful when using ATMs with an unfamiliar brand name and suspicious-
looking card readers. Always be aware of the threat of skimming devices at other places,
such as restaurants, convenience stores, hotels, gasoline stations, and public places
outside banks. If in doubt about using a particular ATM, go to another one. The same
applies to purchasing at restaurants and other locations. You can always consider paying
in cash to limit possible data loss.
Be on the lookout for shoulder surfers at locations other than ATMs. At the store
checkout line when you are writing out your check for the cashier, make sure that
someone is not looking over your shoulder to obtain your checking account number or
other information from your driver’s license.
Do not leave your receipts at the ATM. Although they usually do not contain your
complete information, they often have the last four digits of your account and list your
balance. Why leave any amount of information for others to see? The same goes for
receipts at stores or gasoline stations. Take them with you and shred them when no
longer needed.
8. Opt Out of Sharing Your Information
Consumers generally have the choice regarding how much information they want to
share with marketing firms, companies, and certain government agencies. In this
information age, information about you is frequently shared with multiple business
partners for product offerings, services, and promotions. You can ‘‘opt out’’ of having
your personal information disclosed to others. For example, by removing your name
from the major commercial marketing databases, unsolicited mailings, including
catalogs, will be reduced.
The FTC has created a one-page information site that provides detailed informa-
tion and links to allow consumers to opt out of information sharing related to
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
302

credit bureaus, various state departments of motor vehicles, and direct marketers.
This excellent resource site can be found at www.ftc.gov/privacy/protect.shtm. A
sample opt-out form letter is also available at the FTC site. The information that
is found at the FTC site is summarized in the following paragraphs.The Direct
Marketing Association (DMA) is the leading global trade association of business and
nonprofit organizations involved in direct marketing. As it states on its Web site, the
DMA advocates industry standards for responsible marketing and their ‘‘Mail
Preference Service (MPS), which was created in 1971, is designed to help consumers
decrease the amount of nationally generated commercial or nonprofit mail they
receive at home.’’1 In simple terms, this is the ability to opt out of direct mail
marketing, telemarketing, and other direct email marketing from many national
companies. The DMA offers various ways to opt out, including via the U.S. mail,
telephone, or email.
You can opt out of direct mail marketing by sending a letter to:
Direct Marketing Association
Mail Preference Service
PO Box 9008
Farmingdale, NY 11735-9008
Further information about opting out of direct mail marketing can be found at
www.dmachoice.org/MPS/mps_consumer_description.php.
You can opt-out of telemarketing calls by sending a letter to:
Direct Marketing Association
Telephone Preference Service
PO Box 9014
Farmingdale, NY 11735-9014
Further information about opting out of telephone marketing can be found at
www.dmachoice.org/TPS/.
You can opt-out of direct email marketing at www.dmachoice.org/emps.php.
The three major credit bureaus offer you the opportunity to opt out of receiving
preapproved credit offers. This can be done by calling one telephone number: 1-888-5-
OPTOUT (1-888-567-8688). This one call will cover all three credit bureaus. As an
alternative, you can mail a letter to each credit bureau requesting that it not share
personal information with others for promotional reasons. A sample opt-out letter can be
found at www.ftc.gov/privacy/cred-ltr.htm. The mailing addresses for the three credit
bureaus to request an opt-out are:
Equifax, Inc.
PO Box 740123
Atlanta, GA 30374-0123
Preventing Identity Theft: 21 Rules You Must Use
303

Experian
Consumer Opt-Out
701 Experian Parkway
Allen, TX 75013
Trans Union
Name Removal Option
PO Box 97328
Jackson, MS 39288-7328
9. Keep a Credit Inventory
Prepare an inventory of everything you carry in your wallet or purse. Write down or
photocopy the account numbers of credit cards, expiration dates, credit card verification
numbers, the names of the issuers, and the 800 contact telephone numbers to call to
cancel your existing accounts in case of loss or theft. The credit card verification number
on an American Express card is the four-digit number imprinted on the upper right side
of the front of the card. For MasterCard, Visa, and Diners Club, it is the last three
numbers on the signature panel on the back of the card.
Do not keep this inventory list in your wallet or purse. Keep it in a secure place in your
residence that you can access easily if necessary. Photocopy the fronts and backs of your
credit cards as well as all other identification documents. In addition, keep a detailed list
of all your bank and brokerage account numbers and numbers to call if you suspect they
have been used fraudulently. Back up your personal digital assistants (PDA); better yet,
do not keep any personal or financial information on them. If you do, be sure to have
them password protected.
10. Review Your Financial Statements Each Month
Make sure you thoroughly review and reconcile all the charges on each of your credit
card accounts and other financial statements each month. Even if you do not find
unauthorized charges that may be indicative of identity theft, you may find double
charges or other mistakes that need to be corrected. Cancel credit card accounts that you
do not use or need. Be aware that doing this can affect your credit score, especially if the
card is one that you have had for many years.
Guard your checkbook. Report any lost or stolen checks to your bank or financial
institution immediately. Properly store or dispose of canceled checks. Take a few minutes
to review your canceled checks when they are returned with your monthly statement.
Look to see if the payee name or amount paid was changed. Provide your checking
account information only to reputable businesses or individuals. Do not provide this
information to someone you do not know, even if he or she claims to be from your bank.
If you have had your checking or bank accounts compromised, contact the check
guarantee company TeleCheck at the toll-free telephone number (800-366-2425) or
online at www.firstdata.com/support/telecheck_consumer_services/telecheck_forgery_
idtheft.htm. Your account will be flagged so that counterfeit checks will be refused.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
304

Know the billing cycles for your credit cards. Identity thieves have been known to
submit change-of-address orders to the Postal Service in order to obtain the mail of
potential victims. The diverted mail is received at a location controlled by the scammer,
either a mail drop or a temporary residence used for this purpose. The indication will be
that you are not receiving mail. More often, industrious fraudsters ‘‘cherrypick’’ your
mailbox after the mail carrier delivers your mail but before you pick it up. This is more
common with rural mailboxes or house letter boxes that do not have locking mecha-
nisms. Be on the lookout for credit card, bank, and brokerage statements that do not
arrive or arrive late. Identity thief Jeffrey Webster Lawson, profiled in Chapter 3,
specialized in recycling stolen mail.
11. Destroy Your Old PC’s Hard Drive Before Discarding
When you buy that brand-new desktop or laptop, what will you do with your old one?
Many people and businesses discard them with the hard drive intact. That is a recipe for
disaster. Studies have found that fewer than 25% of disposed computers have their data
erased. That means that your most sensitive personal and financial information is
available to whoever obtains the computer. In 2000, former Beatle Paul McCartney’s
banking information was discovered on a computer discarded by a financial services
firm in the United Kingdom. The company had done nothing to delete the sensitive
information from the computer.
A few years ago, a privacy expert purchased 158 hard drives on eBay to see how much
data was left on them by their former owners. To his amazement, he found more than 5,000
credit card numbers, financial accounts, medical records, email, and other personal
information. Even more surprising, on the 51 hard drives that supposedly had been wiped
clean, 19 had data he was able to recover.2 Computer owners need to know that deleting
a file does not completely erase it. Although the file is not visible in the directory, the data
is still on the drive. ‘‘The data is still available, and the drive writes over it, but not
completely,’’ says a representative of hard drive manufacturer Maxtor. ‘‘Only recording
over this data many times with a random series of ones and zeroes will remove the
original.’’3 Evendoing that is noguarantee that erased data cannot eventually be recovered.
Software is available to wipe hard drives clean, but computer forensic experts have
been known to recover information even on wiped drives. There continue to be instances
of people who sold their old PCs on Internet auction sites or donated them to charity with
supposedly completely wiped drives but the deleted information was easily recovered by
forensic specialists. Identity thieves are doing the same so you must protect yourself.
Always remove the hard drive (or drives if your computer has more than one) and
physically destroy it. Drill holes through it or smash it with a hammer into little pieces.
The same goes for your PDA, cell phones, flash drives, and other portable digital devices
that you are discarding.
12. Be Careful with Product Warranty Cards
When you buy an appliance or other type of home electronics, you normally receive a
product warranty card to complete and mail in to the manufacturer. The stated purpose is
Preventing Identity Theft: 21 Rules You Must Use
305

to register the product that consumers purchase. In most cases, the information on the
warranty cards is used for marketing databases. These cards can yield significant
personal information that can be sold for marketing purposes. The amount of personal
information requested, such as questions on annual income and other sensitive financial
information, can be excessive and are not needed except for marketing purposes. There
is a good chance that any information you provide will find its way into the hands of a
marketing firm.
Although they are usually called product warranty cards, you generally do not have to
submit them for the product warranty to be in effect. Most manufacturers provide limited
warranties on their products. Under federal law, a company can require a purchaser to
register their products in order to receive the limited warranty, but in reality this is not
very common. Some states, such as California, prohibit manufacturers from making the
warranty contingent on registration with the company.
Often the warranty cards are postcards that, if returned, could potentially expose your
information to anyone processing the card. My suggestion is not to return any warranty
cards unless absolutely necessary. If you must complete one, be sure it is sealed in an
envelope before mailing. That will keep prying eyes away but will still expose your
information to marketing databases and future contact.
13. Review Your Social Security Earnings and Benefits Statements
Carefully review your Social Security Earnings and Benefits Statements when received
each year. Review them for accuracy as well as indications that someone else may be
using your SSN. These U.S. government forms are usually mailed out approximately
three months prior to one’s birthday. If you suspect fraud involving this statement or
your SSN, contact the Social Security Administration’s Fraud Hotline at 800-269-0271.
In addition, the Social Security Administration advises that you will not automatically
receive a Social Security Statement if:
 you are under age 25, or
 you are already receiving Social Security benefits, or
 a current mailing address is not on file, or
 you are age 62 or older and receiving Social Security benefits on someone else’s
record, or
 you are a Medicare beneficiary, or
 you requested a statement within the past 11 months.
14. Use Privacy Screens
Buy and use a privacy screen on your laptop when traveling, at coffee shops, and at other
public spots. These screens ensure the privacy of your on-screen data by making it
visible only to someone directly in front of the screen. Such screens can keep prying eyes
off your personal documents especially when you are traveling in cramped spaces, such
as on airplanes. Although privacy screens are very effective in limiting what others can
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
306

see, it is always good to be vigilant. You may not want to work on an extremely sensitive
document on an airplane or in a public place even if you have a privacy screen.
15. If It Sounds Too Good to Be True, It Is
Scam artists often use the mails and the telephone, as well as the Internet, for
misrepresentations and deception. They will offer ‘‘free’’ five-day, four-night cruises
to the Bahamas, expensive consumer electronics, and other prizes to obtain personal and
financial information for identity theft. They may pose as government officials, bank
officers, or representatives of legitimate companies and use high-pressure sales tactics.
These fraudsters are trying to sell you the ‘‘sizzle but not the steak’’ and are intent on
defrauding you. Do not fall for their trickery.
Do not respond to emails soliciting advance-fee business arrangements. These
solicitations ask recipients to provide bank account information in order to transfer a
large sum of money. Recipients supposedly will be paid a percentage of the money as
an administrative fee. Do not respond to emails soliciting overseas reshipment
arrangements. These solicitations also ask recipients to act as an import/export
business and reship product (usually electronics) overseas. The products victims
ship are usually fraudulently purchased and may involve credit card fraud and iden-
tity theft. Victims pay the shipping costs and are promised reimbursement at a later
time. Do not respond to email solicitations where you will receive financial instru-
ments, such as checks and money orders, that you have to deposit in your bank
account. In such cases, you are asked to send a portion back to the solicitor but are
allowed to keep a percentage of the total funds as an administrative fee. The financial
instruments are counterfeit.
These ‘‘dialing for dollars’’ criminals use their silver tongues to get unsuspecting
victims to part with their money, financial information, and identities. Always be careful
to whom you give your credit card number or other information, whether over the
telephone or via the Internet. If in doubt, do not give your number. No matter how
fraudsters reach out to you, it is always wise to remember that if something sounds too
good to be true, it usually is.
16. Watch Out for Skimming
Although this is not the easiest thing to do, attempt to minimize the use of credit and
debit cards in restaurants and retail establishments where employees take possession
of your card and walk across the room to complete the transaction. Criminals involved
in identity theft will retrieve the data stored on your credit card by swiping your card
on a credit card skimming device. These devices are small enough that they can be
secreted in a subject’s pocket. The data is then downloaded to a computer and used for
identity theft.
If you can, try to keep a restaurant server in sight or pay at the register. If in doubt, pay
cash and avoid the use of cards. Wireless technology that will allow diners to swipe their
cards in a handheld device at their table is slowly making its way to restaurants. This
innovation will limit the opportunity for skimming.
Preventing Identity Theft: 21 Rules You Must Use
307

17. Prevent Data Breaches
Data breaches and the resulting damage can be reduced if businesses and government
agencies take these safeguards:
 Limit the amount of sensitive data stored on employee laptops. Far too much
personally identifiable information (PII) than is necessary is kept on laptops.
 Implement company polices around data storage, data breaches, laptop security, and
use of encryption.
 Install and require the use of encryption software on laptops that contain sensitive
data.
 Educate employees about the benefit of encryption and hold them accountable if they
fail to use it.
 If existing computers cannot enable encryption due to age or other limitations, replace
them with newer ones that can.
 Require employees to certify that they have encryption installed, are trained in its use,
are using it, and understand the consequences for noncompliance.
 Consider disabling USB ports and the use of portable digital devices as appropriate.
 Use secure Internet locations at all times when traveling.
 Do not use computers or digital copiers in hotel office centers.
 Consider using biometric authentication, such as fingerprint scans, in order to log on.
 Turn off computers when leaving the office at the end of the day.
 Although the use of cable locks to secure laptops is better than using nothing, it is
better to lock the computer in a desk or cabinet.
 Secure peripherals such as backup drives, flash drives, and other storage sites used for
data.
 Do not leave laptops in a hotel room when traveling. Lock them in the room safe or the
hotel safe if possible. At last resort, place them in locked luggage. The vulnerability of
laptops to theft is but one more reason for encryption.
18. Place Fraud Alerts
Fraud alerts are notifications placed on credit reports to alert creditors that a person’s
personal and financial information may have been compromised. This allows creditors
to personally contact the registrant and verify all credit applications prior to approval.
Fraud alerts are advisory in nature and good only if the credit bureau sees them and
follows up with the victim. While they often work, in some instances lenders either did
not see the notices or chose not to act on them. Credit bureaus have made it easier to
place fraud alerts on a consumer’s credit file but have no way to enforce action on a fraud
alert request.
There are two types of fraud alerts, initial and extended. The initial fraud alert is in
effect for at least 90 days and is generally used when there is a suspicion of account
compromise and identity theft, such as responding to a phishing scheme. Consumers are
entitled to one free credit report from each of the three major credit reporting agencies
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
308

after requesting an initial fraud alert. The extended alert stays in effect for seven years.
This form of alert is used after confirmation of identity theft victimization. To be eligible
for extended alerts, consumers must provide credit reporting agencies with a copy of an
identity theft report filed with a local, state, or federal law enforcement agency. With
extended alerts, consumers also receive free credit reports.
You can also subscribe to a credit monitoring service, which notifies you via email, text
message, or telephone of any change to your credit report. Any changes, such as credit
inquiries and new credit accounts, are reported to the subscriber for appropriate action. A
number of credit monitoring services offering protection from identity theft have sprung up
in recent years. For a fee, they monitor your credit reports for red flags of fraud and then
take action on your behalf. Much of what they do is readily available to all consumers
through free services. One widely advertised credit monitoring service has become the
focus of media scrutiny and civil lawsuits for its identity theft protection claims. More
details on this story can be found in the next chapter. If you decide to use a credit
monitoring service, make sure you do research and decide if it is in your best interest.
19. Use Credit Freezes
Credit freezes are a relatively new way to block your credit from potential misuse and
identity theft. Credit freezes block a prospective credit card issuer or lender from issuing
new credit in a person’s name without obtaining specific approval from that person. A
credit freeze prevents credit bureaus from issuing your credit score. Without that
information, few if any lenders will issue credit. It effectively blocks the issuance of
instant credit, as is often seen when stores offer big discounts on purchases if a new
credit card is opened at the same time.
Credit freezes are expected to become significant weapons to lessen the spread of
identity theft. ‘‘The credit freeze, out of anything else that’s been conceived, has the
potential to be the most effective tool for preventing crooks from fraudulently using your
Social Security number,’’ said a cofounder of an identity protection firm.4 Only time will
tell if this is true; for now, credit freezes are another prevention strategy to consider.
20. Stay Informed
The best way to prevent identity theft is to stay informed about the problem. Government
agencies are doing a very good job at telling the public about how to prevent identity
theft. In February 2008, the United States Postal Service embarked on a national
education campaign, sending a mailing providing identity theft awareness materials to
every home in the United States. The letter advised that a recent FTC survey found only
2% of all victims reported the theft of their identity connected to the mail. Still, the
Postal Service wanted to do even more to reduce that number. The letter discussed
the role of the Postal Inspection Service in investigating identity theft, and protecting the
mail and postal customers. Inserted in the envelope was the FTC’s excellent brochure
entitled DetectDetectDefend: Avoid ID Theft. The brochure contained helpful tips,
telephone numbers, Web sites, and steps to take to prevent identity theft. That
information can also be found at www.ftc.gov/idtheft.
Preventing Identity Theft: 21 Rules You Must Use
309

21. If You Become a Victim
If you learn that you are a victim of identity theft, immediately contact the fraud
departments of the three major credit bureaus as well as the related credit card
companies and financial institutions. Request that the credit bureaus place a fraud alert
in your file as well as a credit freeze.
Order copies of your credit report from the three major credit bureaus to determine the
extent of your victimization. Thoroughly review your reports for fraudulent activity.
Besides fraudulent accounts opened, look for listed ‘‘inquiries’’ that are indicative of
either opened or about-to-be-opened accounts. Contact those affected accounts for
reporting and closing. By closing the affected accounts, you will be protected from any
fraud that may occur. Order new cards and account numbers as appropriate. It is a good
idea to request credit reports again several months later to confirm that the credit bureaus
made the necessary corrections by removing the fraudulent accounts.
Always report the crime to the local police and obtain a copy of the report. If the police
agency does not want to take a report or provide a copy, be persistent. Police reports are
important in establishing the criminal activity and the facts. Also make a report to the
federal law enforcement agencies focused on identity theft crimes such as the Postal
Exhibit 20.3
FTC’s Tips for Organizing Your Case
The Federal Trade Commission offers these excellent tips on organizing your case if you
become a victim of identity theft.
Accurate and complete records will help you to resolve your identity theft case more
quickly.
 Have a plan when you contact a company. Don’t assume that the person you talk to
will give you all the information or help you need. Prepare a list of questions to ask
the representative, as well as information about your identity theft. Don’t end the
call until you’re sure you understand everything you’ve been told. If you need
more help, ask to speak to a supervisor.
 Write down the name of everyone you talk to, what he or she tells you, and the date
the conversation occurred.
 Follow-up in writing with all contacts you’ve made on the phone or in person. Use
certified mail, return receipt requested, so you can document what the company or
organization received and when.
 Keep copies of all correspondence or forms you send.
 Keep the originals of supporting documentation, like police reports and letters to
and from creditors; send copies only.
 Set up a filing system for easy access to your paperwork.
 Keep old files even if you believe your case is closed. Once resolved, most cases
stay resolved, but problems can crop up.
Source: Take Charge: Fighting Back Against Identity Theft, Federal Trade Commission, February 2005, www.ftc.gov/
bcp/edu/pubs/consumer/idtheft/idt04.shtm
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
310

Inspection Service and the Secret Service. Both agencies have national jurisdictions and
can easily investigate cases involving activity in multiple states. Both agencies are also
actively conducting investigations outside of the United States as identity theft becomes
international in scope.
File an identity theft complaint with the Federal Trade Commission. The FTC is
mandated by legislation as the federal clearinghouse for identity theft complaints. It does
not conduct criminal investigations based on the complaints but provides detailed
information and assistance to victims to resolve financial and other problems resulting
from victimization. The FTC does provide complaint information to other government
agencies and private organizations for possible follow-up action. The FTC complaint
form and related information can be found at www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/
consumers/filing-a-report.html.
If your identity theft was the result of a data breach, there are additional things you can
do. Check your data breach notification rights. These rights vary by state, but a number
of states have notification requirements. These requirements include the details of the
breach, what data was stolen, and steps to protect yourself. California was the first state
to enact a data breach notification law, and it has served as a model for other states.
There are two excellent online sites for information on the varying state laws on breach
notification. They are: www.consumersunion.org/campaigns/Breach_laws_May05.pdf
and www.ncsl.org/programs/lis/cip/priv/breach.htm.
Take identity theft seriously. Simply reporting the fraud by telephone is not enough.
People have short memories, and representatives of financial institutions can move from
job to job. Document the events in writing and create a paper trail that you can refer to if
necessary. Do not assume that your work is over once you report the occurrence to law
enforcement, your banks and credit card companies, and the major credit bureaus.
Continuous follow-up is required, possibly for years, to ensure that your identity is not
still being fraudulently used. It is your responsibility to monitor your accounts and
history.
NOTES
1. Direct Marketing Association, Consumer Information and Preference Services,
www.dmachoice.org/consumerassistance.php.
2. Jefferson Graham, ‘‘Erased Hard Drives Can Bite You,’’ USA Today, February 5,
2003, www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2003-02-05-drive_x.htm.
3. Ibid.
4. Byron Acohido and Jon Swartz, ‘‘Credit Bureaus Fight on State, Federal Levels
against Freezes,’’ USA Today, June 26, 2007, 1B.
Preventing Identity Theft: 21 Rules You Must Use
311


CHAPTER 21
Future of Identity Theft
Identity theft is the world’s fastest-growing crime. It was the crime of the 1990s and now
it is the crime of the new millennium. Nothing has been able to stop its spread. Its impact
is felt by individuals, businesses, and governments everywhere. Almost everyone knows
someone who is a victim of this crime or else has been a victim him- or herself. Not a
week goes by when there is not some mention in the media of an identity theft case, an
unauthorized disclosure of personal information, or a congressional outcry about this
unrelenting crime. The sad fact is that identity theft has grown and evolved into a
worldwide problem.
Consumers and businesses are continually warned about the need to be vigilant
against this threat. Protecting your personal information, checking your credit, and
improving your computer security are vital requirements for identity theft avoidance.
‘‘Identity theft is most often a crime of convenience. If you can make it difficult to steal
your information, a thief may look elsewhere for an easier target.’’1 Robust prevention is
the best answer we now have, and Chapter 20 presented a multitude of prevention
approaches. Although these approaches can be very effective in protecting pathways to
vulnerability, there are no guarantees that one will never fall victim to identity theft
because so much of identity theft is beyond the control of potential victims. You can
follow all the prescribed prevention practices detailed in this book, but one corrupt
employee in a credit reporting service can supersede your best deterrence efforts.
Technology may one day advance to such a degree that identity theft is no longer an
issue, but that day is not in the foreseeable future. Technology definitely plays an
important role in protecting us—maintaining a strong firewall, installing antivirus
313

software, and updating computer software—but there is still another element at play: the
human factor. ‘‘The most insidious Internet security problems today rely on human
gullibility, not tricky software.’’2 The term often used is ‘‘social engineering,’’ which is a
fancy phrase for conning victims into providing information they normally would not
supply. Fraudsters are masters of deceit. Reformed fraudster Barry Minkow is fond of
saying that fraud ‘‘is the skin of the truth stuffed with a lie,’’ and that sums it up pretty
well. Why else would a smart person willingly provide personal information to someone
who calls on the telephone or sends a phishing email? Human greed, naivete´, and frailty
ensure that fraud and identity theft will be around for quite a while. We as a society need
to get much better at education and awareness to reduce human gullibility.
Biometrics has long been looked to as a cure-all, but it has not gained universal
acceptance. The term ‘‘biometrics’’ is defined as the biological identification of a person
using that person’s specific body characteristics, such as fingerprints, iris and retinal
patterns, voice, facial shape, and hand measurements for authentication purposes.
Laptops are available with fingerprint sensors, but they are not common. The same
applies to cell phones. Biometric locks have a very limited availability in the United
States. Other countries have a different perspective. In Japan, for example, ‘‘cell phones
are increasingly used as a mobile ‘wallet’ to pay for goods and services—they can be
swiped over payment processors for everything from subway rides to Big Macs—
fingerprint sensors are used to unlock the phones’ data and payment capabilities.’’3
Americans must join their consumer cousins in Japan and adapt this new biometric
technology to protect against fraud.
PREDICTING THE FUTURE
Much to my chagrin, in articles I authored and speeches given in years past, I predicted
many of the issues we see today. Identity theft would become a problem in other
countries as criminals used stolen identities globally. High-net-worth individuals would
continue to be targeted due to their high profiles, financial status, and availability of their
personal information. The widespread use of the Internet and easy access to personal
information would contribute to cyberstalking and online bullying. Violence will play a
role in some identity theft cases—albeit and luckily a very small number. In the most
serious instances, victims may be forced to obtain a new Social Security number (SSN)
and credit profile.
There have been other trends. Culprits have committed serious crimes and used stolen
identities for identification when apprehended by the police. For 17 years, a man in Salt
Lake City lived a nightmarish existence when a career criminal took over his identity
and committed a string of crimes including burglary, assault, making a bomb threat,
vandalism, and driving under the influence. Each time the fraudster was arrested, he
used the stolen identity. In another case, a Pennsylvania man learned that a violent felon
who had murdered a police officer was booked under his stolen name when appre-
hended. The defendant was charged and convicted of murder in his name. Imagine
having to live with the stigma of your good name associated with a cop killer.
Scammers are filing bankruptcy claims using stolen identities to avoid paying debts,
and stop evictions, and foreclosures. Some identity thieves are using this approach after
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
314

they have run up large debts using the name and credit of others. Once a bankruptcy case
is filed, an automatic stay goes into effect. This effectively stops all debt collection
proceedings against the person filing bankruptcy (the identity thief). Ultimately, this
fraudulent bankruptcy claim comes back to haunt the victim of the identity theft. The
unknowing victim now faces all the implications of identity theft as well as bankruptcy
proceedings. One serious consequence is the court record of filing a bankruptcy action
will appear on the victim’s credit report, thus impacting credit.
The evolution of identity theft is producing new types of the crime. Synthetic identity
fraud combines true and phony identifying information to establish new identities for
fraudulent purposes. For example, a legitimate SSN may be paired with a different name
and different date of birth to open bank and credit accounts. There is a dispute about how
common this new fraud is. ID Analytics, a San Diego–based analytic software and risk
management services company, reported in 2005 that synthetic identity fraud was
responsible for 88% of all identity theft occurrences, including opening fraudulent
financial accounts and change-of-address orders. Yet a February 2008 Identity Fraud
Survey Report from Javelin Strategy & Research called synthetic identity fraud a very
rare form of crime. Either way, we can expect to see this and other variations of identity
theft in the future.
There is also the question as to whether the occurrence of identity theft is growing or
declining. Credit card fraud, a crime closely tied to identity theft, has steadily increased
from $1.46 billion in 1997 to $5.49 billion in 2007.4 If we are to believe the Javelin
Strategy & Research February 2008 study, identity theft is on the decline: ‘‘Although
both the total number of victims and overall monetary losses have steadily decreased
over the past four years, consumers and their financial institutions must continue to take
protective measures against this serious crime.’’5 The study interviewed 442 victims by
telephone and came to this remarkable conclusion. A related Javelin Strategy &
Research study from May 2008 states: ‘‘Once noted as the nation’s fastest growing
crime, identity fraud will experience a steady decrease in number of victims and total
one-year fraud amounts from 2008 to 2013.’’6 It should be noted that these studies
examined identity theft in the United States; they did not address the march of identity
theft elsewhere in the world. If these studies were truly global in nature, I have no doubt
that the findings would be far different.
The end result of the evolution and variations of identity theft are many, and all are
bad. Ruined credit, denial of employment or a place to live, getting arrested for crimes
you did not commit, garnishment of wages, loss of a driver’s license, along with
financial loss, emotional toll, and reputational harm are but some of the results. When
people supposedly in the know tell you not to worry because identity theft is on the
decline or the average dollar loss is small, be skeptical. Clearly, they have never faced
firsthand the nightmares of so many victims.
MAKING MONEY FROM IDENTITY THEFT
Identity theft is a very lucrative crime. It is extremely profitable for fraudsters, but it is
also big business for opportunistic entrepreneurs who offer a slew of protection services.
Over the last few years, numerous identity theft protection service companies have
Future of Identity Theft
315

sprung up, intent on protecting consumers and businesses from identity theft, all for a
fee. These companies offer credit monitoring, fraud alerts, credit freezes, and database
mining of public records to determine if personal information is inappropriately
available. These firms advertise their services widely through various media venues.
Many consumers have signed up for ongoing monitoring of their credit reports and other
services.
But many questions beg to be answered regarding these services. Are they as effective
as advertised? Are people already at risk by identity thieves now being taken advantage
of by a new group of opportunistic individuals? Just who are the operators of these
businesses and what are their backgrounds? Are consumers really getting a beneficial
service for which they have to pay that they could easily get for free?
The new companies, including Debix, LifeLock, TrustedID, among many others, plus
new services from the three major credit bureaus have attracted many new customers.
Start-up companies have raised tens of millions of dollars in venture capital funds to start
and expand their businesses.
The most prominent of these companies is LifeLock, which advertises heavily on the
Internet, radio, television, and in print. In these commercials, the company’s chief
executive, Todd Davis, openly publicizes his SSN as a sign of faith in his company’s
ability to protect his identity. He has even gone so far as to shout it out via megaphone
while walking down crowded city streets. These attention-getting devices have brought
the company a tremendous amount of notice as well as notoriety.
LifeLock works by setting up fraud alerts for the customer. ‘‘When fraud alerts are
established with the major credit bureaus, creditors are required to verify [one’s] identity
before opening any new lines of credit, issuing new cards or increasing [one’s] credit
limit.’’7 LifeLock, like other credit-monitoring companies, monitors customers’ credit to
detect signs of identity theft. The company also automatically renews fraud alerts, which
expire after 90 days. In addition, LifeLock offers services that ‘‘scour known criminal
websites for the illegal selling or trading of your personal information,’’ and alert
customers to unauthorized address changes.8 If identity theft does occur, LifeLock offers
a $1 million guarantee to remedy any incidents. According to the LifeLock Web site:
If your Identity is stolen while you are a member of LifeLock, we’re going to do whatever it
takes to recover your good name. . . . If you lose money as a result of the theft, we’re going
to give it back to you. We will do whatever it takes to help you recover your good name and
we will spend up to $1,000,000 to do it.9
Looking beyond the hype, how much do consumers really know about LifeLock?
Todd Davis and Arizona businessman Robert J. Maynard founded the company in 2005.
Davis, LifeLock’s present pitchman, is well known for hawking his SSN, but what about
Maynard? The allegations surrounding the company, and in particular cofounder and
former marketing executive Maynard, should be enough to give any potential customer
pause.
Maynard ‘‘claimed he got the idea for LifeLock after spending a week in jail in
2003,’’10 after, as he put it, he was falsely arrested for failing to pay back a $16,000 loan
to a Las Vegas casino. Allegedly, ‘‘[o]ne of the guys who stole Maynard’s identity and
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
316

the casino’s money is doing time for murder. Maynard was released after seven days, but
he spent more than $20,000 and countless hours on the telephone trying to clear his
name.’’11 Maynard and Davis presented this story far and wide as the ultimate nightmare
in identity theft;12 however, unlike the many similar stories described here, this was no
case of mistaken identity. An investigation by the Phoenix, Arizona, New Times,
confirmed by the District Attorney’s Office in Clark County, Nevada, revealed that
the person who took out the casino marker was . . . Robert Maynard. Maynard used his
own driver’s license to obtain the marker, which under Nevada law acts just like a
check.13
The rest of Maynard’s story is true, just not the way he presents it to be. He was
arrested and ultimately did have to spend more than $20,000 to clear up the case. Nevada
law allows violators to avoid criminal charges if they pay back the loan plus fees, which
is why Maynard was not convicted. Furthermore, according to Bernie Zadrowski, Chief
Deputy District Attorney in Clark County, Maynard never filed a police report for
identify theft nor did anyone involved in the case every suggest it was a case of mistaken
identity. In fact, due to the high prevalence of identity theft in Nevada, ‘‘forgery
packets’’ are given to anyone claiming to be a victim of identity theft.14 As Zadrowski
put it, ‘‘We could show beyond a shadow of a doubt that [Maynard] was the one who
committed the crime.’’15
Maynard has filed for bankruptcy several times, including once for his company
Internet America, an early Internet service provider.16 Maynard was also banned by the
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in 1997 from engaging in the credit repair business
after the FTC and the State of Arizona sued Maynard’s company National Credit
Foundation for fraud and misrepresentation.17 In one of the case’s more shocking
allegations, especially considering the amount of personal information customers must
entrust to LifeLock, the FTC charged that Maynard and the other defendants withdrew
money from consumers’ accounts without authorization.18
In 1999, someone ordered an American Express card in Maynard’s father’s name and
had the bills sent to an address that matched that of Maynard’s company at the time. His
father, while unable to offer significant details regarding the case due to ongoing
litigation, ‘‘says the ‘premise’ that his son fraudulently ordered the card is accurate.’’19
LifeLock publicly stated that there was no merit to the claims made against Maynard, but
he resigned in June 2007. Nevertheless, Maynard retained his 10% stake in the company
and continued to provide marketing services as an outside consultant.20
The failed businesses, the bankruptcies, the arrest for an unpaid debt, the action taken
by the FTC to forcibly remove him from the credit repair business, and the allegation of
identity theft should make customers question whether LifeLock, Maynard’s creation,
should be the one to protect them from scammers.
As evidence of the comprehensive security of his company, Davis has consistently
stated that his identity had never been stolen or compromised. However, after
numerous media outlets reported on the frequent identity theft attempts against
him, including a successful case in Texas, Davis publicly acknowledged the attempts.
In this case, a Texas man used Davis’s SSN to obtain a $500 loan; the payday loan
company acknowledged that it did not run the proper checks on the SSN. Davis stated
that the ‘‘‘incident proves that LifeLock works, because I was never out a dime of my
Future of Identity Theft
317

own money or a minute of my own time.’’’21 Davis’s statements regarding this incident
seem to indicate that it was inconsequential and had no bearing on the company’s
effectiveness or credibility. But LifeLock’s actions severely undermine its own
assertions.
According to Fort Worth, Texas, police, Davis and his associates interfered with the
police investigation, to the point that their actions forced local prosecutors to drop
the case. A private investigator hired by LifeLock ran a parallel investigation into
the case. While the police awaited subpoenaed records to solidify the case, Davis and
others, despite police warnings, personally confronted the suspect and videotaped his
confession.22 According to Fort Worth Sergeant J. D. Moore, they ‘‘yelled’’ and
‘‘browbeat’’ the suspect, a mentally disabled man, until they coerced a confession
from him. Police and the Tarrant County District Attorney’s Office determined that
the confession would be inadmissible in court due to the coercion and dropped the
charges.23
This question has also been raised by numerous lawsuits filed against LifeLock. Class
action lawsuits have been filed in several states, including New Jersey, Maryland, West
Virginia, Florida, and California. As stated in court filings:
The proposed class action lawsuits address the deceptive business practices and fraudulent
advertising campaign employed by LifeLock. . . . In actuality, the services and one million
dollar service guarantee offered by LifeLock are not what they seem and do not provide the
level of protection that is advertised in its deceptive marketing campaign.24
The suits allege that the company dramatically overstates the effectiveness of its
identity theft monitoring service and that fraud alerts cannot provide the comprehensive
protection claimed. LifeLock’s use of fraud alerts only protects against credit-based
identity theft, not any other type. Fraud alerts are not an infallible method of protecting
against identity theft, since ‘‘creditors are not legally required to contact [customers],
even if they have fraud alerts in place.’’25
The $1 million guarantee against identity theft loss is also not what it appears to be,
according to David Paris, the attorney for the class actions. ‘‘‘In actuality, once you get
beyond the limitations and disclaimers, you find that the guarantee is limited to fixing
failures in LifeLock’s services and paying third parties to attempt to restore subscriber
losses,’’’ says Paris.26 According to the complaint, LifeLock’s $1 million guarantee
covers only those losses resulting from LifeLock’s failure to properly place a fraud alert,
not from any other type of loss.27
The suits make other allegations, including that over 20 driver’s licenses have been
fraudulently obtained through the misappropriation of Davis’s personal information.
Additionally, a background check on Davis revealed that his personal profile has been
compromised and now contains incorrect data.28
LifeLock has also been sued by the credit bureau Experian. ‘‘According to Experian’s
complaint, ‘LifeLock’s scheme costs Experian millions of dollars every year in
processing large numbers of improper initial fraud alerts, mailing mandatory notices
to consumers, and providing free credit reports to consumers who are not eligible for
such reports.’’’29 Of course, Experian is a LifeLock competitor, as it offers its own,
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
318

competing monitoring service, so its allegations should be taken with a grain of salt.
Experian has also
been under fire from the FTC over its FreeCreditReport.com site, which provides a free
credit report if you sign up for Experian’s (not free) service. The FTC says the site is
uncomfortably close to AnnualCreditReport.com, which actually does provide free credit
reports.30
In response to these suits,
Davis cites LifeLock’s industry leader status as the reasons for several lawsuits recently filed
against the company. ‘‘Obviously, I can’t comment on ongoing legal matters, but this is what
happens when you’re the leader in your field. . . . We were ready and believe the suits will
be proved to be without merit.’’31
Referring to the New Jersey lawsuit plaintiffs, Davis said, ‘‘From what I know,
they’ve never had an issue with LifeLock. They’ve never attempted to make a claim [for
identity theft] and they don’t say that in the suit.’’32
Despite the negative publicity, LifeLock has signed up approximately 1 million
customers and has continued to raise significant amounts of venture capital funds even
as competitors try to encroach on its success. This author sent a letter to LifeLock CEO
Davis in October 2007, prior to learning of the lawsuits and any of the issues discussed
here. In the letter, I stated I was writing a book on identity theft and that I had seen their
many advertisements and wanted to profile what they were doing to protect consumers
from identity theft. LifeLock did not respond.
In the end, consumers should always follow the maxim caveat emptor, ‘‘let the buyer
beware.’’ Consumers should understand what their needs are and what their risk level is,
do their due diligence, and research their options before deciding for themselves whether
LifeLock or any other company is right for them. Potential customers should also know
that many of the services offered are available for no charge. Yet they may appreciate the
convenience factor of having someone else take care of the monitoring and be available
to answer questions. Being an educated consumer is always a best practice.
If you do sign up for LifeLock’s service, do not emulate Davis and publish your SSN
to show faith in the company product. Doing so would violate the terms and conditions
of your contract and will result in termination of your service.33
PROACTIVE APPROACH AND EDUCATION OUTREACH
The best approach to fighting identity theft is a public and private sector partnership that
combines coordination of government agencies and the business community, public
outreach and ongoing communication of prevention techniques, effective law enforce-
ment, protecting victims, and needed legislation. The Washington State Attorney
General’s Office is a leader in addressing identity theft head-on and has used this
approach for several years. The Attorney General has made the war on identity theft a
main priority of his administration with a continuous and high-visibility outreach
program. The program is a great example for other state and local jurisdictions to follow.
Future of Identity Theft
319

The Attorney General’s proactive approach included holding a statewide summit
bringing together hundreds of experts on identity theft from the public and private
sectors. This summit discussed in detail the many issues involved in identity theft and
came up with numerous proposals to fight the problem. Among the many proposals were
these:
 Coordinate a public education campaign that includes a tool kit for consumers and
businesses, mass communication and training.
 Determine and promote a one-stop location of resources and assistance for identity
theft victims.
 Enhance existing methods of coordination and develop new methods of coordination
to investigate and prosecute identity theft cases.
 Establish a safe harbor provision for law enforcement and business to share
information about identity theft suspects and victims without being subject to liability
if they have cooperated in good faith.
 Develop regulations to help ensure that private sector entities, particularly those with
headquarters outside Washington, provide information relevant to local criminal and
civil investigations.
 Better define identity theft and increase penalties for those convicted of identity theft
crimes.
 State government workers who handle personal information, including driver’s
license data and Social Security numbers, should be subject to background checks
as a condition of employment.
 Incorporate biometric data into driver’s licenses and state identification cards.
 Establish a means for business and private sector groups to voluntarily help fund
criminal justice positions and programs for the prevention, investigation, and
prosecution of identity theft crimes.34
Another aspect of the outreach program is ‘‘Guard It! Washington,’’ a multiagency
campaign sponsored by the Washington State Attorney General’s Office to educate
residents and businesses about ways to reduce identity theft. The campaign travels
around the state throughout the year. Presenters include the Attorney General and
experts from the FTC, AARP (the American Association of Retired Persons), and the
Attorney General’s Consumer Protection Division. A ‘‘Shredathon Event’’ is often held
in conjunction with the education campaign dates. Consumers can bring their sensitive
documents containing personal information for shredding done by commercial shred-
ding services on site.
There is no doubt that identity theft has the attention of elected officials and law
enforcement. It is great to see that they are partnering with other government agencies,
service organizations, the business sector, and the public to fight identity theft. This
partnership must be an ongoing priority that is permanently embedded in daily business
operations. On the federal level, the Postal Inspection Service is taking both a pro-
active and a reactive approach to the identity theft epidemic. A senior executive and
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
320

experienced law enforcement professional from the Postal Inspection Service provides
additional strategies and prevention practices in the next thought leader profile.
THOUGHT LEADER IN FINANCIAL CRIMES PREVENTION
Kenneth R. Jones
As the Deputy Chief Postal Inspector, Kenneth R. Jones is responsible for all
headquarters operations, including all investigative programs for the U.S. Postal
Inspection Service, one of the oldest federal law enforcement agencies in the
United States. Over the last 25 years, Inspector Jones has led the efforts in some of
the most far-reaching corporate fraud investigations, including market timing and
late trading collusion. He has investigated identity theft; revenue fraud against the
U.S. Postal Service; insurance fraud and other types of fraud; armed robberies;
burglaries; child sexual exploitation; narcotics use/distribution; workplace vio-
lence mitigation; embezzlements; a wide variety of misconduct investigations;
workers’ compensation fraud; and money laundering.
His enterprise risk management and security responsibilities include: revenue
protection, facility design, personnel security, access control systems, employee
screening reviews, mail room security, management of armed Postal Police Force
and unarmed contract security personnel, facility risk-rating and facility security
reviews, armed robbery and burglary countermeasures and prevention, airport
security reviews, biohazardous detection systems, emergency and disaster man-
agement, integrated emergency management plans, incident command structure,
workplace violence/threat assessment teams and security consultation for the
various industries doing business with the Postal Service.
Inspector Jones holds a B.A. in criminology from Mansfield University (PA)
and a M.A. in criminology from Indiana University of Pennsylvania and the
Certified Protection Professional credential through the American Society for
Industrial Security.
Inspector Jones is a respected law enforcement professional and recognized
thought leader in fraud prevention. Here he opines on the ‘‘fraud gap’’ and future
expectations for financial crimes, including the serious impact of identity theft.
WHAT IS THE FRAUD GAP?
There has always been a gap between law enforcement and criminals, in that
criminals are continually finding new schemes and variations on old schemes to
defraud individuals, corporations, and governments. I refer to this gap as the fraud
gap. The gap refers to law enforcement lagging behind on trying to identify and
dismantle the schemes and the criminal organizations that commit these crimes.
(Continued )
Future of Identity Theft
321

Corporate security has emerged as an important and highly professional entity over
the past years and has joined this fight to close the gap. Over the years, this gap has
widened and narrowed as schemes evolve or as law enforcement has given
aggressive attention to a particular type of fraud or has come up with ways to
prevent certain crimes.
The fraud gap is wider now than it has ever been. Two factors, globalization and
the use of the Internet and computer technology, indicate that the gap will continue
to widen at an alarming rate if governments, industry, law enforcement, and
consumer advocates don’t react in a coordinated worldwide fashion. The identity
theft epidemic has been a contributing factor to this problem.
A new class of organized criminals has globalized to commit international fraud.
In fact, they have distinct advantages over any multinational corporation. They
don’t pay taxes to any government, and they obviously do not concern themselves
with labor laws, privacy laws, civil litigation, or the public good. The use of the
word ‘‘family’’ and some of their criminal activities are clear indications that these
groups have modeled themselves after the organized crime groups that have come
before them, such as the Mafia. I refer to these new groups as international
financial organized crime.
The other major reason the fraud gap is widening is the efficient and effective
use of the Internet and computer technology by this new group of organized
criminals. Some of the best examples are the ‘‘carder’’ sites on the Internet that
offer stolen personal information to those willing to pay. Certain cells of the
criminal organizations provide hacking services, personal identifying information,
full-track credit card data, software, spamming services, and more. Others in the
criminal network do their own type of security background checks on those
allowed to use the site, or their customers. They do the due diligence to ensure the
‘‘family’’ (using their own words . . . does this sound like organized crime to you?)
site is protected from undercover law enforcement efforts. Also, the ‘‘family’’
clears those providing the services before they are allowed to sell their illegal
services.
Law enforcement, particularly in the United States, is more like a dysfunctional
family. Agencies don’t openly share with each other, worry about protecting
their own ‘‘turf,’’ and when they do share, it is not in a coordinated or automated
fashion. International law enforcement lacks the appropriate legal venues to share
intelligence and to coordinate investigative efforts in an efficient and timely
manner.
Two of the most common ways for a person’s identity to be stolen are
computer intrusion and what I refer to as ‘‘infiltration.’’ Computer intrusion
is obvious, and there have been far too many examples of large corporations,
universities, and governments around the world that have lost personal identify-
ing information to computer intrusions. ‘‘Infiltration’’ is the act of either get-
ting someone hired in a corporation/government where enormous amounts of
personal identifiable data are kept or bribing an existing employee to provide
that data.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
322

HOW DO WE NARROW THE GAP?
How do we narrow the fraud gap? First, to be very honest, I am concerned that
politics, egos, and the territorial nature of law enforcement, corporations, and
governments will impede our success, if not doom us to failure. The fraud gap is
widening at a tremendous pace, and I do not yet see the sense of urgency and the
coordinated effort necessary to address the problem. However, there is reason to
believe we can dramatically narrow the fraud gap. Here are some opportunities to
do so.
1. Comprehensive global strategies. A recent Postal Inspection Service
Global Counterfeit Financial Instrument initiative seized over $2.5 billion
in counterfeit checks that would have been used to defraud financial
institutions and consumers. The Re-Shipping Initiative dismantled organized
groups using your identity and credit to buy high-end computer merchandise
and sell those items on the black market.
2. Consumer awareness. We must take an aggressive stance to educate
consumers and corporations. It is no longer only the greedy and the
unassuming who become victims. These are clever criminals and many
savvy people and corporations have become victims. Postal Inspectors
followed the Counterfeit Financial Instrument Initiative with an extensive
consumer awareness campaign known as www.fakechecks.org. This was a
massive public service effort that included television, newspaper, and online
segments to publicize the problem of counterfeit checks. There is no
legitimate reason why anyone would give you a check or money order
and ask you to wire money anywhere in return. Once again, we did this in
partnership with the financial services industry. By the way, we used money
seized from criminals to fund the consumer awareness campaign. Our first
objective is to always give money back to the victims. When we cannot
identify victims, the courts have allowed us to use some funds for consumer
awareness. It is our intention to have a similar consumer awareness campaign
following the Re-Shipping Initiative.
3. Enterprise risk management (ERM) and comprehensive security plans.
Fraud, in one form or another, often makes the top of the list when a company
conducts a risk assessment. If not fraud in the purest sense, then cyber
security usually makes it to the top of the risk list. Keep in mind one of the
common ways for your identity to be stolen is computer intrusion. As
mentioned earlier, one of the other ways is infiltration into a company, and
this is where ‘‘personnel security’’ and ‘‘physical security’’ come into play.
The three elements of corporate security—cyber, physical, and personnel—
are all interrelated. As we know from all too many cyber breaches, personnel
practices (such as background checks and sensitive clearances) and physical
security policies (such as access control) have a relationship to cyber
security.
(Continued )
Future of Identity Theft
323

4. Self-audit of personal identifying information in a corporation. Two
tools have been developed to assist corporations in protecting their brand,
their revenue, and their customers from identity breaches. These tools were
developed with significant participation from the FTC, numerous financial
institutions, and the Postal Inspection Service. The first is a self-audit for
corporations, and it is scalable to the size of the corporation. Essentially, it
examines how personal identifying information (PII) comes into a company,
is stored, shared, distributed, destroyed, and so on. This is a low-cost tool to
conduct an assessment of your risk in this area. The link to the U.S. Postal
Inspection Service Business Checklist for Securing Personal Information can
be found at http://postalinspectors.uspis.gov/radDocs/BusChecklist.html.
5. Information Compromise Response Plan. The second tool, the Informa-
tion Compromise Response Plan, is necessary because any corporation,
university, or government agency can be compromised. Let me repeat,
anyone can be compromised. It’s what is done after the compromise that
will protect your brand, help you retain customer loyalty, and avoid larger
costs and litigation expenses. This is no different than many disaster
management plans and integrated emergency management plans that are
now in place in most corporations. Inquiries from media, government
agencies, customers, and employees can largely be anticipated and incorpo-
rated as part of a prepared Information Compromise Response Plan.
6. Intelligence, cyber security, and cyber investigations. These areas must be
approached in a partnership among industry, law enforcement, and acade-
mia. The National Cyber Forensic and Training Alliance (NCFTA) is one of
the best examples where corporations gain valuable intelligence to protect
their infrastructures (and your identity) and where law enforcement gains
valuable data to go after the criminals. We need more NCFTAs, both
domestically and internationally. Academia has seen both the need and,
from its perspective, the opportunity to partner with industry and law
enforcement to create undergraduate and graduate-level degree programs
in the area of cyber security.
7. Homeland Security and the postal/shipping sector. The U.S. Postal
Service, FedEx, UPS, and others make up this shipping sector and are
considered part of the critical infrastructure of the United States. Great
strides have been made to protect the country from terrorist attacks in this
sector. As a result, a significant positive relationship has been established in
the area of fraud prevention in an effort to protect our employees and our
customers.
8. Department of Justice’s International Organized Crime Initiative. In the
spring of 2008, U.S. Attorney General Michael B. Mukasey announced the
intention of the Department of Justice to renew an effort to focus on
‘‘International Organized Crime.’’ The Department of Justice taking the
lead on this initiative is absolutely critical to closing the fraud gap, and I
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
324

NO COUNTRY FOR IDENTITY THIEVES
In the 2007 crime thriller No Country for Old Men, the Anton Chigurh character
portrayed by actor Javier Bardem is an unrepentant, psychopathic killing machine. Even
worse, he is methodical as well as maniacal. He is a plague on the land, destroying
everything in his path to locate the $2 million in cash he seeks. This to me is the evil that
is identity theft: an unrelenting, unstoppable force committed to stealing and destroying
our good names for financial gain.
What is even worse than the criminal nature and actions of identity theft is the
aftermath: the loss of one’s reputation, the feeling of violation and helplessness that
someone is running around the country and the world with your name and identity, the
knowledge that your name is no longer your own. Iago’s passage from Othello as
recounted in Chapter 3 is the perfect statement of that helplessness:
But he that filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that which not enriches him.
And makes me poor indeed.35
Knowing what identity theft is and what it does is not enough. Everyone has a vested
interest in defeating this monster. We cannot bury our heads in the sand by believing that
identity theft cannot happen to us. It can and does. We must take every precaution and
commend Attorney General Mukasey for doing so. However, it is imperative
that this initiative transcend the tenure of any one attorney general. It must be
a sustained initiative, crossing several administrations, and we must all be
ready for a long war.
9. Major corporate ownership. The major corporations of the world must
also take a primary role in this war against the new international financial
organized crime families. Many are stepping up to the plate. Microsoft, eBay,
Google, and others are greatly supporting law enforcement, creating systems
to combat online and Internet fraud, and exchanging intelligence with both
law enforcement and industry partners. The key here will be to maximize
these efforts in a coordinated way. Clearly one way would be to involve these
and many more corporations in the NCFTA model and to create international
versions of the NCFTA.
Narrowing the fraud gap is more than a daunting task. Success will take both
diplomacy and international resolve. A tremendous amount is at stake, including
the safety of our citizens, the integrity of the financial services industry, and the
impact to commerce. As discussed, there is reason for hope, but the next
administration in the White House, particularly the Department of State and
the Department of Justice, will have to make fraud and identity theft prevention
one of their top priorities for us to win this war.
Future of Identity Theft
325

teach all of our family members, friends, and associates to do the same to limit their risk
of being victimized.
In this volume, I have endeavored to provide the history, growth, and transformation
of this extraordinary crime. Investigating and preventing identity theft has been a part of
my life for most of my career. I have a vested interest in seeing it defeated. I hope that
everyone will consider and put into effect the findings of the many case studies,
strategies, and prevention recommendations I discuss. I truly hope that together we can
make this a ‘‘No Country, or World, for Identity Thieves.’’ I believe we can.
NOTES
1. Help Protect Yourself against Identity Theft, www.microsoft.com/downloads/details
.aspx?FamilyID=bc58a88c-2fa3-4923-b9ff-762b1ec2c952&DisplayLang=en.
2. Walter S. Mossberg, ‘‘How to Avoid Cons That Can Lead to Identity Theft,’’ Wall
Street Journal, May 1, 2008, D1.
3. Lynn Cowan, ‘‘ID Firms Aren’t a Sure Bet,’’ Wall Street Journal, April 28, 2008,
C3.
4. Joseph Pereira, ‘‘Credit Card Security Falters,’’ Wall Street Journal, April 29, 2008,
A9.
5. Rachel Kim, 2008 Identity Fraud Survey Report: How Consumers Can Protect
Themselves, Javelin Strategy & Research (February 2008), 1, www.idsafety.net/
803.R_2008%20Identity%20Fraud%20Survey%20Report_Consumer%20Version.
pdf.
6. Rachel Kim, 2008 Identity Fraud Forecast: Fraud Techniques Will Evolve in
Tandem with Industry Defenses, Javelin Strategy & Research (May 2008), www
.javelinstrategy.com/uploads/808.R_2008IdentityFraudForecast_Brochure.pdf.
7. ‘‘How Does LifeLock Protect My Identity,’’ LifeLock.com, www.lifelock.com/
lifelock-for-people/what-we-do/how-does-lifelock-protect-my-identity.
8. ‘‘How LifeLock Works,’’ LifeLock.com, www.lifelock.com/lifelock-for-people.
9. Ibid.
10. Ray Stern, ‘‘What Happened in Vegas . . . ,’’ Phoenix New Times, May 31, 2007,
www.phoenixnewtimes.com/2007-05-31/news/what-happened-in-vegas/full.
11. Ibid.
12. See, e.g., ‘‘Interview with Todd Davis, CEO of LifeLock,’’ Techrockies, February
13, 2007, www.techrockies.com/story/0007560.html.
13. Stern, ‘‘What Happened in Vegas.’’
14. Ibid.
15. Joseph Menn, ‘‘An Awkward Ad by Fred Thompson,’’ Los Angeles Times, June 9,
2007, C1, http://articles.latimes.com/2007/jun/09/business/fi-lifelock9.
16. Ibid.; Stern, ‘‘What Happened in Vegas.’’
17. FTC v. Maynard, et al., Final Judgment and Order for Permanent Injunction with
Respect to Defendant Robert J. Maynard, Jr., United States District Court for the
District of Arizona, CIV-96-2374-PHX-ROS, www.ftc.gov/os/1997/04/maynard
.htm.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
326

18. FTC Press Release, ‘‘National Credit Foundation Settles FTC Charges over Credit
Repair Fraud,’’ April 10, 1997, www.ftc.gov/opa/1997/04/ncf-4.shtm.
19. Stern, ‘‘What Happened in Vegas.’’
20. Kim Zetter, ‘‘LifeLock Founder Resigns amid Controversy,’’ Wired, June 11, 2007,
http://blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/2007/06/lifelock_founde_1.html. It should be
noted that in a May 2008 interview, Davis stated that a year after his departure,
Maynard ‘‘has no bearing, no involvement, zero, in the company.’’ See Thomas
Claburn, ‘‘ID Security Firm LifeLock Sued for Misleading Marketing,’’ Informa-
tionWeek, May 2, 2008, www.informationweek.com/news/security/client/show
Article.jhtml?articleID=207500392.
21. ‘‘Does LifeLock Really Work?’’ LifeLock.com, www.lifelock.com/todd-davis.
22. Deanna Boyd, ‘‘Officials Say They Can’t Prosecute Phony-Loan Case,’’ Fort Worth
Star Telegram, July 25, 2007. See also Kim Zetter, Police Say LifeLock Coerced
Unusable Confession from Identity Theft Suspect,’’ Wired, July 25, 2007, http://
blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/2007/07/police-say-life.html.
23. Deanna Boyd, ‘‘Officials say they can’t prosecute phony-loan case,’’ Fort Worth
Star Telegram, July 25, 2007.
24. LifeLock Class Action, www.lifelockclassaction.com/.
25. Pasternack v. LifeLock, Class Action Complaint and Jury Demand, State of New
Jersey Superior Court Law Division, Middlesex County, March 28, 2003, 9.
26. Press Release from Marks & Klein, LLP, ‘‘NJ Class Action Lawsuit Filed Against
LifeLock Alleging Deceptive Marketing Regarding Limited Level of Protection
Against Identity Theft,’’ March 31, 2008, www.lifelockclassaction.com/lifelock
release.pdf.
27. Pasternack v. LifeLock, 14.
28. Falke v. LifeLock,
Class Action Complaint, Washington County (MD) Circuit
Court, April 17, 2008, 2–3.
29. Matthew Schwartz, ‘‘ID Theft Monitoring Services: What You Need to Know’’
InformationWeek, May 9, 2008, www.informationweek.com/news/security/pri
vacy/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=207501091&cid=RSSfeed_IWK_Security.
30. Ibid.
31. ‘‘Does LifeLock Really Work?’’ LifeLock.com, www.lifelock.com/todd-davis.
32. Thomas Claburn, ‘‘ID Security Firm LifeLock Sued for Misleading Marketing,’’
InformationWeek, May 2, 2008, www.informationweek.com/news/security/client/
showArticle.jhtml?articleID=207500392.
33. ‘‘LifeLock Terms and Conditions,’’ LifeLock.com, www.lifelock.com/about-us/
about-lifelock/terms-and-conditions. See also Ray Stern, ‘‘Money for Nothing,’’
Phoenix New Times, July 19, 2007, www.phoenixnewtimes.com/2007-07-19/news/
money-for-nothing/full.
34. Washington State Attorney General’s Office Identity Theft Advisory Panel, 2005
Identity Theft Summit Summary and Recommendations, Office of Attorney General
Rob McKenna, January 26, 2006, www.atg.wa.gov/uploadedFiles/Home/Safeguar
ding_Consumers/Consumer_Issues_A-Z/Identity_Theft_(Privacy)/IdentityTheft
Report.pdf.
35. William Shakespeare, Othello, Act 3, Scene 3, 155–161.
Future of Identity Theft
327


APPENDIX
Designing an Effective
Identity Theft Red Flags
Rule Compliance Program
The Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA) of 2003 requires financial
institutions and creditors to design and implement an effective Red Flags Rule
Compliance Program to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft pertaining to covered
accounts. This is both a compliance requirement for FACTA, as well as for protecting
the interests of businesses and customers alike. The deadline for compliance was
November 1, 2008.
This Appendix is prepared from the FACTA Red Flags Rule Program and is intended
to provide a broad overview for related program requirements and compliance. For full
details and all aspects of compliance requirements, please refer to the Identity Theft Red
Flags and Address Discrepancies of FACTA. Implementation of such a program should
be done under the auspices of an entity’s general counsel, outside counsel, or compliance
department.
329

DEFINITIONS
Financial Institution
A financial institution is defined as a state or national bank, savings and loan association,
mutual savings bank, state or federal credit union, or any similar financial entity.
Creditor
A creditor is a lender such as a bank, finance company, automobile dealer, mortgage
broker, utility company, or telecommunication company that participates in credit
decisions, regularly extends credit, or arranges for the extension of credit.
Customer
A customer is any person that has a covered account with a financial institution or
creditor.
Covered Accounts
A covered account is an account offered by a financial institution or creditor
(1) primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed
to permit multiple payments or transactions, or (2) any account for which there is a
reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or the safety and soundness of the financial
institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance,
reputation, or litigation risks. Each financial institution and creditor must periodically
determine whether it offers or maintains a ‘‘covered account.’’1 Covered accounts
include checking, savings, and credit card accounts; installment loans; mortgage loans;
margin accounts; utility bills; and cellular service accounts.
Identity Theft
Under the final rules, identity theft as it pertains to FACTA is defined as ‘‘a fraud
committed or attempted using the identifying information of another person without
authority.’’2
Red Flags
A red flag is ‘‘a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence
of identity theft.’’3
Service Provider
A service provider is a person or entity that provides a service directly to a financial
institution or creditor
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
330

ESTABLISHMENT OF AN IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
Every financial institution or creditor that offers or maintains even one covered
account must develop and implement a written Identity Theft Prevention Program
‘‘designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening
of a covered account or any existing covered account.’’4 The program must be tailored
to the entity’s size, complexity, and the nature of its operations. There are four basic
elements that must be part of any effective compliance Red Flags Rule Program.
They are:
 Identify relevant red flags for the covered accounts that the financial institution or
creditor offers or maintains, and incorporate those red flags into its program;
 Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program of the financial
institution or creditor;
 Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate
identity theft; and
 Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers,
or to the safety and soundness of the financial institutions or creditor from identity
theft.5
Administration of the Program
An important aspect of the program is an ongoing administration requirement to ensure
successful implementation. The board of directors must assign specific responsibility for
the compliance program. Oversight includes approving the compliance program and
ensuring continuous oversight of the ‘‘development, implementation, and administration
of the Program.’’6 Further oversight includes review and approval of related reports and
material changes in the program. The following actions are necessary for continued
administration:
 Obtain approval of the initial written program from either its board of directors or an
appropriate committee of the board of directors;
 Involve the board of directors, an appropriate committee thereof, or a designated
employee at the level of senior management in the oversight, development, imple-
mentation and administration of the program;
 Train staff, as necessary, to effectively implement the program; and
 Exercise appropriate and effective oversight of service provider arrangements.7
The program must be flexible to address changes in identity theft risks as they arise.
On an annual basis, the board or designee needs to report on various issues including the
existence and effectiveness of policies, service provider arrangements such as the
existence of written contracts, significant identity theft incidents, and recommendations
to improve detection, prevention, and mitigation of identity theft.
Designing an Effective Identity Theft Red Flags Rule Compliance Program
331

The training plan should include both new and existing employees. New employee
orientation is an excellent opportunity to train new hires in the program. Modi-
fications and updates to the program must also be communicated via appropriate
training sessions. Employee completion of training should be documented and the
training program and content should also be periodically assessed for relevance.
Consideration should be given to providing or encouraging training for service
providers.
Risk Assessment
There is a program requirement that each financial institution or creditor conduct a risk
assessment to identify relevant red flags. The risk assessment must periodically
determine whether it offers covered accounts including:
 Types of covered accounts it offers or maintains
 Methods it provides to open accounts
 Methods it provides to access its accounts
 Its previous experiences with identity theft.8
Additional aspects of the risk assessment must include:
 Incidents of identity theft that the financial institution or creditor has experienced
 Methods of identity theft that the financial institution or creditor has identified that
reflect changes in identity theft risks
 Applicable supervisory guidance.9
Detecting Red Flags
An effective program must involve the detection of red flags with the opening of covered
accounts and existing accounts. This includes:
 Obtaining identifying information about, and verifying the identity of, a person
opening a covered account, for example, using the policies and procedures regarding
identification and verification set forth in the Customer Identification Program rules
of the USA PATRIOT Act
 Authenticating customers, monitoring transactions, and verifying the validity of
change of address requests, in the case of existing covered accounts.10
The following are 26 examples of Identity Theft Red Flags and Address Discrepancies
as documented in FACTA that financial institutions or creditors may consider incorpo-
rating into their identity theft prevention compliance programs in connection with
covered accounts.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
332

Alerts, Notifications, or Warnings from a Consumer Reporting Agency
1.
A fraud or active duty alert is included with a consumer report.
2.
A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of credit freeze in
response to a request for a consumer report.
3.
A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of address
discrepancy.
4.
A consumer report indicates a pattern of activity that is inconsistent
with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or
customer, such as:
a. A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries
b. An unusual number of recently established credit relationships
c. A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to
recently established credit relationships
d. An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of
account privileges by a financial institution or creditor.
Suspicious Documents
5.
Documents provided for identification appear to have been altered or
forged.
6.
The photograph or physical description on the identification is not
consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer present-
ing the identification.
7.
Other information on the identification is not consistent with infor-
mation provided by the person opening a new covered account or
customer presenting the identification.
8.
Other information on the identification is not consistent with readily
accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or
creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check.
9.
An application appears to have been altered or forged, or gives the
appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled.
Suspicious Personal Identifying Information
10.
Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when
compared against external information sources used by the financial
institution or creditor.
a. The address does not match any address in the consumer report.
b. The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed
on the Social Security Administration’s Death Master File.
Designing an Effective Identity Theft Red Flags Rule Compliance Program
333

11.
Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not
consistent with other personal identifying information provided by
the customer. For example, there is a lack of correlation between the
SSN range and date of birth.
12.
Personal identifying information provided is associated with known
fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources
used by the financial institution or creditor.
a. The address on an application is the same as the address provided
on a fraudulent application.
b. The phone number on an application is the same as the number
provided on a fraudulent application.
13.
Personal identifying information provided is of a type commonly
associated with fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-
party sources used by the financial institution or creditor.
a. The address on an application is fictitious, a mail drop, or a prison.
b. The phone number is invalid, or is associated with a pager or
answering service.
14.
The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other persons
opening an account or other customers.
15.
The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar
to the account number or telephone number submitted by an un-
usually large number of other persons opening accounts or other
customers.
16.
The person opening the covered account or the customer fails to
provide all required personal identifying information on an applica-
tion or in response to notification that the application is incomplete.
17.
Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with
personal identifying information that is on file with the financial
institution or creditor.
18.
For financial institutions and creditors that use challenge questions,
the person opening the covered account or the customer cannot
provide authenticating information beyond that which generally
would be available from a wallet or consumer report.
Unusual Use of, or Suspicious Activity Related to, the Covered Account
19.
Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a covered
account, the institution or creditor receives a request for a new,
additional, or replacement card or a cell phone, or for the addition of
authorized users on the account.
20.
A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly
associated with known patterns of fraud.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
334

Preventing and Mitigating Red Flags
The program’s policies and procedures should provide for appropriate responses to the
red flags the financial institution or creditor has detected that are commensurate with the
degree of risk posed. In determining an appropriate response, a financial institution or
creditor should consider aggravating factors that may heighten the risk of identity theft,
such as a data security incident that results in unauthorized access to a customer’s
account records held by the financial institution, creditor, or third party, or notice that a
a. The majority of available credit is used for cash advances or
merchandise that is easily convertible to cash (e.g., electronics
equipment or jewelry.
b. The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial
payment but no subsequent payments.
21.
A covered account is used in a manner that is not consistent with
established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example:
a. Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;
b. A material increase in the use of available credit;
c. A material change in purchasing or spending patterns;
d. A material change in electronic fund transfer patterns in connec-
tion with a deposit account; or
e. A material change in telephone call patterns in connection with a
cellular phone account.
22.
A covered account that has been inactive for a reasonably lengthy
period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account,
the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors).
23.
Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable
although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with
the customer’s covered account.
24.
The financial institution or creditor is notified that the customer is not
receiving paper account statements.
25.
The financial institution or creditor is notified of unauthorized
charges or transactions in connection with a customer’s covered
account.
Notice from Customers, Victims of Identity Theft, Law Enforcement Authori-
ties, or Other Persons Regarding Possible Identity Theft in Connection with
Covered Accounts Held by the Financial Institution or Creditor
26.
The financial institution or creditor is notified by a customer, a
victim of identity theft, a law enforcement authority, or any other
person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in
identity theft.11
Designing an Effective Identity Theft Red Flags Rule Compliance Program
335

customer has provided information related to a covered account held by the financial
institution or creditor to someone fraudulently claiming to represent the financial
institution or creditor or to a fraudulent Web site. Appropriate responses may include:
 Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft
 Contacting the customer
 Changing any passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access
to a covered account
 Reopening a covered account with a new account number
 Not opening a new covered account
 Closing an existing covered account
 Not attempting to collect on a covered account or not selling a covered account to a
debt collector
 Notifying law enforcement
 Determining that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances12
Updating the Program
Financial institutions and creditors should update the program (including the red flags
determined to be relevant) periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the
safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, based on
such factors as:
 The experiences of the financial institution or creditor with identity theft;
 Changes in methods of identity theft
 Changes in methods to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft
 Changes in the types of accounts that the financial institution or creditor offers or
maintains
 Changes in the business arrangements of the financial institution or creditor,
including mergers, acquisitions, alliances, joint ventures, and service provider
arrangements13
Compliance with the FACTA Red Flags Rule is mandatory. Since the deadline for
compliance was November 1, 2008, any financial institution or creditor not in compli-
ance risks adverse governmental actions. In addition, the failure to design and imple-
ment a robust compliance program may result in financial and reputational harm.
NOTES
1. Identity Theft Red Flags and Address Discrepancies Under the Fair and Accurate
Credit Transactions Act of 2003; Final Rule, Federal Register, Part IV, November 9,
2007, www.federalreserve.gov/reportforms/formsreview/RegV_20071109_ffr.pdf.
2. Ibid.
3. Ibid.
IDENTITY THEFT HANDBOOK
336

4. Ibid.
5. Ibid
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. Ibid.
12. Identity Theft Red Flags and Address Discrepancies, Fair and Accurate Credit
Transactions Act of 2003, 159-162, www.ftc.gov/os/2007/10/r611019redflags
frn.pdf.
13. Ibid.
Designing an Effective Identity Theft Red Flags Rule Compliance Program
337


INDEX
A
Abdallah, Abraham, 49, 125, 165–169,
205
Crime of the 80s video, 166
early crimes, 165–167
Forbes 400, 125–126, 167–168,
205
Access Device Fraud, 4, 80,
129, 291
Access Device Fraud Statute, 131, 134,
279–280
Credit Card Statute, 134
Account Takeover Fraud, 29, 41, 145,
155–156, 167, 254, 283
Albert, Larry Steve, 207–208
Al Qaeda, 227–229
training manual, 227–229
Allison, Adeniyi, 229–230, 232–236
American Express, 6, 8, 16, 230, 235, 304,
317
America’s Most Wanted, 50–51
Armstrong, Ann, 48–49
Arrow keys, 34, 193–194, 198
counterfeit keys, 23, 78, 193–194, 197,
199–200
ATM, See Automated Teller Machine
AT&T Universal credit card, 20
Authentication, 271, 279, 308, 314
Automated Teller Machine, 28, 37, 132,
134, 169–170, 180, 194, 196,
211, 213–214, 234, 244, 285,
296, 302
B
BankAmericard, 17
Bank of America, 17, 180, 202, 243, 278
Bank Fraud, 4, 29, 42, 52, 57, 66, 81, 85,
88, 92, 153–155, 161, 167–168,
171, 231, 233
Bank Fraud Statute, 132, 136
Baptiste, Linus, 253–254, 256–257
Barrows, Kevin, 255–257
BearShare, 249
Bernardo, Patrick, 117
Biometrics, 6, 241, 314
Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association,
106
Boback, Robert, 250
Bonanno, Joseph, 18
Bonanno, Salvatore, 18
Botnets, 31–32, 250–252
definition, 31, 250–251
growing threat, 221, 251, 300
339

Botnets (Continued )
Operation Bot Roast II, 252
use by spammers, 31, 250–251
Bradley, Ed, 4
Buzzeo, Christopher J., 232
C
CAN-SPAM Act, 142–143
Card Activation Program, 34, 117, 161
Card Security Value. See Credit cards
Carte Blanche, 16
Casadei, Michael, 39–43
Center for Identity Management and
Information Protection, 2,
277–293
Charg-it, 16
Check washing. See Checks
Checks:
counterfeit, 62, 202, 323
detection and prevention techniques,
81–82, 323
forgery, 23, 29, 80, 195, 208
technology advances, 80
washing of, 23, 29, 73–76, 78–82, 91,
195, 201
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA), 143
Christensen, John Edward, 47–49
ChoicePoint, 243, 295
Circulation, The, 22–24
profiles, 23
CIMIP. See Center for Identity
Management and Information
Protection
CMRAs. See Commercial Mail Receiving
Agencies
Collins, David, 126
Collins, Susan M., 115–116
Comey, James, 257
Commercial Mail Receiving Agencies, 4,
21, 31, 99, 101, 125, 159, 167–168,
211–212, 227
Conspiracy Statute, 133–134, 155
Consumer Credit Protection Act, 18
Consumer Sentinel. See Federal Trade
Commission
Credit Bureaus, 254, 266, 297,
308, 310
Equifax, 30, 143, 167, 253, 255–256,
297, 303
Experian, 1, 143, 167, 253–254, 297,
304, 318–319
TransUnion, 18, 49, 143, 166, 253, 297,
304
Credit Cards:
Access Device Fraud Statute, 134
activation of, 7, 34, 117
American Express (see American
Express)
Card Security Value (CSV), 33
carder Web sites, 322
collusive merchants, 29, 230
Connecticut anti-credit card fraud law,
157–159
counterfeit or altered cards, 15, 29–30,
158, 180
delays in posting charges, 8
Discover Card (see Discover Card)
floor limit, 7
fraud, 64–68, 89, 124–126, 165–168,
229–235, 250, 266–267,
307, 315
fraud by teens, 163–171
fraudulent applications, 19, 21, 23, 31,
60, 75, 166–168, 267
growth of credit card fraud, 17–19
history, 6–7, 9, 15–17
INDEX
340

losses, 18–19, 21, 24, 196, 211, 235,
275–276
MasterCard (see MasterCard)
Nigerian Fraud Group, 58–60
Not Received Items (NRI), 34
preventing fraud, 296 (see also Identity
Theft Prevention)
skimming, 28, 30, 36–37, 222, 285, 302,
307
theft, 8, 17–18, 32, 195
unauthorized charges, 8, 130, 137, 304,
335
Visa (see Visa)
warning lists, 8
Credit freeze, 147–148, 272, 309–310,
316, 333
Credit reports, 54,
99, 108, 136–137,
143–147, 172–173, 177–178, 230,
318–319
detection of fraud, 189, 265, 267, 296–
298, 308–310, 316
used for fraud, 4, 99, 167, 235, 250,
253–254
Credit inventory, 304
Crime of the 80s video, 166
Cronkite, Walter, 4
Cummings, Philip, 253–254,
256–257
Cuprill, Ivan Orta, 52
Cybercrime, 187, 224, 250–252, 272
D
Data Accountability and Trust Act. See
Financial Data Protection Act of
2006
Data Breaches, 2, 49–50, 102, 110, 223,
240–242, 269–270, 295–296, 311,
322
insider threats, 111, 242–244, 322
laptops, 240–242, 308
loss of privacy, 241
prevention, 308, 311
sampling of data breaches, 242–243
T. J. Maxx, 246–248
Davis, Todd, 316–319
Department of Education Outreach
Prevention Program, 53–55
Department of Justice. See United States
Department of Justice
Diaz, Robert, 170–171
Diners Club, 16, 304
Dinh, Van T., 164–165
Direct Marketing Association, 303
Discover Card, 116–117, 119
Distributed Denial of Service
Attack, 251
Dixon, Pam, 97–98
Dockus, Al, 157–159
Dright, David, 206–207
Drivers Privacy Protection Act of 1994
(DPPA), 139–140
Dumpster diving, 2–3, 10, 28, 30, 73, 78,
144, 165, 196, 203, 206, 211, 223,
281, 283, 286–287, 289, 298
mortgage companies’ carelessness,
244–245
stealing athletes’ identities, 206
E
Employment fraud, 30, 267
Encryption, 4, 147, 242, 245–248, 308
Enterprise Risk Management,
321, 323
European American Bank, 16
Ewain Starke Gang, 200
Ezell Gang, 194, 200
Index
341

F
Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction
Act of 2003 (FACTA), 143–146,
272
disposal of consumer report information
and records, 145
fraud alerts, 144, 308–310, 316, 318
free credit reports, 143–144, 297
truncation, 144
red-flag guidelines, 144–145, 329–336
Fair Credit Billing Act (FCBA), 17, 137
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), 17,
135–137, 272, 297
Fake identification, 14–15, 113–127, 194–
195, 202
buildup, 195
counterfeiting, 113–116, 194–195,
202–203
definition, 113
MacArthur Park, 114
on the Internet, 114–115
Senate Hearings, 115–116
False Statements in Loan and Credit
Application, 132–133
Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act of 1974 (FERPA), 138–139
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 18,
42–43, 58–59, 69–70, 86, 90, 164,
208, 227, 251, 254
Operation Bot Roast II, 252
wireless safety recommendations, 248
Federal Trade Commission, 35, 97, 258,
302–303, 310–311, 317, 319
Consumer Sentinel, 3
2006 Identity Theft Survey Report, 1,
32, 74, 76, 97, 263, 274–276
Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse, 274
other surveys, 38, 163, 263, 309
Felony Lane Gang, 154–155
Financial Data Protection Act of 2006,
147–148
Financial Industry Mail Security Initiative
(FIMSI), 160–162
Address Verification System (AVS),
161
Automated Number Information (ANI),
161
Card Activation Program (CAP), 161
National Change of Address Information
System (NCOAIS), 162
neural networks, 161–162
Financial Modernization Act of 1999. See
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
Forbes Magazine, 125–126, 167–
168, 205
Ford Motor Credit, 254–255
Forwarder scam. See reshipping scam
Franklin National Bank, 16
Fraud Act of 2006, 223
Fraud and Related Activity in Connection
with Computers Statute, 134–135
Fraud Gap, 321–325
Fraudulent Use of Credit Cards
Statute, 18
G
Garn, Phil, 7–8, 191, 198–200
Gates, Bill, 241
Genealogy, 208–210, 212
concerns, 208–209
connection to identity theft, 209–210,
212, 215–216
Georgia Bureau of Investigation, 20
Givens, Beth, 209
Goldstein, Ryan, 251
Government Benefits and Documents
Fraud, 31
INDEX
342

Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 141–142
Financial Privacy Rule, 141
pretexting provisions, 142
Safeguard Rule, 142
H
Hacking, 2, 4–6, 31, 164, 242,-243, 245,
247, 249, 251–252, 283, 322
Hanif, Georgia, 185–187
Health care records on the web, 104–105
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA), 103–
104, 106, 140–141
Henson, Brooke, 50–51
Herath, Kirk, 177
Herrera, Henry, 155–157
Higher Education Services Corporation.
See New York State Higher
Education Services Corporation
Hinman, Paul, 157–158
Hofius, Thomas, 199
Holder, Eric, 58, 69
Hollis, Byron, 105–106
Huenefeld, Brian, 210–212
I
Identification, phony. See Fake
identification
Identity Cards Act of 2006, 223
Identity fraud, 2–3, 14–15, 60, 223,
267, 274, 277–280, 289, 291–293,
315
Identity Theft:
Aggravated Identity Theft Statute, 129,
136, 146, 153, 187, 273
Arizona impact, 39–42, 47–48, 52, 58,
74–75, 78–79, 81–83, 102, 188–
189, 197
celebrities, 100, 125, 167–168,
205, 207
child identity theft, 172, 207–208
prevention, 173
red flags, 173
Crime of the 80s, 3
deceased individuals, 122–127,
207–208, 210, 214–215
definitions, 2–3, 28, 97, 280
evidence of, 234–235
future trends, 313–315, 323–325
global problem, 221–236
Australia, 222
Brazil, 224
China, 226
India, 225
Japan, 222
Morocco, 223–224
Russia, 224–225
United Kingdom, 223
growth, 3, 28, 58–60
history, 3–4, 11, 14, 191, 194
identity theft protection service
companies, 309, 315–319
Identity Theft Statute, 135–136, 291
infiltration of business, 20, 60
insider threat, 3, 20, 32, 36, 98, 111,
117, 119, 206, 230, 235, 243–244,
255–257, 282–284, 289–290
law enforcement recommendations,
272–274, 283, 290–293,
319–325
losses, 1–2, 21, 32, 222–223,
224, 226
medical identity theft, 34–35, 97–111,
265
methods, 18, 28–38, 45–53, 100–101,
153–155, 159, 194, 206–207, 209–
214, 227, 267, 281, 286–287, 289
Index
343

Identity Theft (Continued)
money-laundering, 41–42, 58, 88, 101,
129, 142, 188, 229–230, 235, 255,
321
offenders, 281
organized group activity, 20, 37, 59–60,
80, 98, 197, 200, 206, 222,
224–226, 229, 281, 285, 300, 322,
324–325
prevention, 6, 9, 38, 49, 53–55,
106–110, 152–154, 156, 173, 199,
216–217, 242, 269–271, 290,
295–311, 313–314
profiles, 23, 40, 202
surveys, 263–276
Synthetic Identity Fraud, 315
tax fraud, 34
teen and young adult involvement in,
163–171
terrorism, 114, 226–229
toll on victims, 10–11, 14, 20, 22,
31–32, 93–94, 102, 110–111,
177–189, 210–214, 265, 282,
289, 310–311, 315
victims’ relationship with offenders,
94, 266, 268, 282, 284, 287–289
violence, 85–94, 232–233, 314
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence
Act of 1998, 141
Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act,
146
Identity Theft Resource Center, 172
Immigration and Naturalization Service
(INS), 46, 58, 66, 68, 122
Information Compromise Response Plan,
324
Insurance fraud, 5, 57, 65–66, 171
Interbank Card Association, 17
Internet Movie Database, 205
Internet safety, 300–302
online shopping, 301
J
John Doe case, 214–215
Johnson, Rick, 20–21
Jones, Kenneth R., 321–325
Jones, Thomas Wayne, 87–88
Jordan, Michael, 206
K
Kalomeris, George, 86–88
Kenna v. United States District Court, 185,
188
Keystroke logging, 30, 37–38, 164, 221,
300
Kim, Christina Kyeonghee, 171
Kinnaird, William M., 210–214
Kirkland, Tracy June, 215–216
Kopiloff, Gregory, 249–250
Kowahl, Jody, 200, 202
Kresse, William. J., 264
L
Lallemand, Sienky, 88–89
Landisi, Donald, 116–117
Lawson, Jeffrey Webster, 39–43, 305
Life Magazine, 17
LifeLock, 316–319
lawsuits against, 318–319
LimeWire, 249–250
Llosa, Melisa, 200–203
Lockyer, Bill, 101
Lomax, Carlos, 206
Lormel, Dennis M., 227
Lucki, John, 264
INDEX
344

M
Mail drop. See Commercial Mail
Receiving Agencies
Mail fraud, 11, 19, 129, 291
Mail Fraud Statute, 18, 130–131, 132
Maze Decision, 130–131
Mail/Telephone Order Fraud, 23, 33, 202
Mail theft, 3–4, 18–22, 39–43, 74–75, 90,
119, 194, 196, 283, 298–300, 305
boxing, 23
by Postal employees, 4, 17, 20–21, 60,
74, 119, 133, 200
change of address orders, 41, 196, 244,
283, 305, 315
fishing for mail, 33–34, 201
jogging, 23
mail stops, 91
Mail Theft Statute, 133
prevention, 33–34, 199, 201, 299–300
NDCBU (see Neighborhood Delivery
and Collection Box Units)
recycling, 40
red flagging, 78, 299
use of sticky device, 33, 201
volume attacks, 74, 78, 80, 91
Mack, Christopher C., 180–181
MacNamara, Frank, 16
Male, Kenyon, 230
MasterCard, 6, 8, 17, 37, 67, 213–214,
304
fraud loss study, 1
Mathews, Scott, 181
Maynard, Robert J., 316–317
Maze Decision. See Mail fraud
McGinnis, Dave, 153
McNealy, Scott, 239
Medical Identity Theft, 34–35, 97–111
consequences, 97
fake Medicare clinics, 98
insiders, 98–100
theft of PII from medical files, 98–100
theft of physician names and licenses,
100–102
Methamphetamines, 73–83
addictive nature, 22–23, 76–77
contribution to identity theft growth, 24,
194, 197, 199, 210
dangers of, 76
exploiting the banking system, 197
history and origin, 76–80
in American Southwest, 74, 79, 197
involvement of biker gangs, 77, 196–197
link to check washing, 23, 73–74
meth labs, 73, 75, 77, 83, 197
prevention efforts, 77, 81, 83
restrictions on constituent chemicals, 83
tweakers, 74–75, 78, 82
Metro Richmond Identity Theft Task
Force, 151–155
Operation Reconcile, 152–154
M.I.A.M.I. Program, 159–160
Microsoft, 104, 240, 300, 325
Minkow, Barry, 314
Money laundering, 41–42, 58, 88, 101,
129, 142, 188, 229–235, 255, 321
Moore, J.D., 318
Mukasey, Michael, 247, 324–325
N
National Cyber Forensic and Training
Alliance, 324–325
National Health Information Network
(NHIN), 105
Neighborhood Delivery and Collection
Box Units (NDCBUs), 74–75, 78,
81 192–193
centralized delivery, 192, 198
Index
345

NDCBUs (Continued )
improved security features, 81, 199, 201
problems, 74–75
San Diego Experience, 192–194, 196–
198
secure cluster box unit, 81
New York City Police Department, 51, 68,
179
New York State Higher Education
Services Corporation, 46
Nigerian Criminal Enterprises, 57–79,
198, 202, 230–232
419 fraud/advance fee scam, 62–64
Central Bank of Nigeria, 63
check fraud, 62
credit card and identity theft
connection, 9, 20–21, 60, 64–68,
202
fraudulent credit card applications, 9,
60, 66–68
genesis of problem, 57–60
Guaranteed Student Loan Program,
59
identity theft training manual, 60–62
Nigerian Criminal Enterprises
Initiative, 68–70
ongoing threat, 70
reshipping scam (see reshipping scam)
Senate Hearings, 64–68
West African Criminal Activity, 58
No Country for Old Men, 325
Noren, Erik, 93–94
O
Omotunde, Christopher, 232–235
Operation Bot Roast II, 252
Operation Catchnet, 119–122
Operation Gaffle, 179–181
Operation Reconcile, 152–154
Othello, 27, 325
P
Paris, David, 318
Passwords, 4, 30, 35, 38, 54, 134, 212,
224–226, 242, 245–247, 250–251,
253–257, 296, 300, 302, 336
Personal Information Protection Act, 222
Personally Identifiable Information (PII),
2–3, 23, 32, 50, 98, 206, 209, 240–
241, 283, 285, 322
deceased individuals, 207
genealogy, 209–210
opting out, 302–304
protecting PII, 38–39, 258, 296–297,
308
public records, birth and death, 209,
215–216
Peer-to-Peer Networks (P2P), 248
data loss risks, 248–249
identity theft risks, 248
Perez, Ralph, 122
Petry, Richard, 91–93
Pharming, 4, 35, 283
Phishing, 4, 33, 35, 37–38, 173, 223–226,
250, 283, 289, 300, 308, 314
Anti-Phishing Working Group, 224–226
global schemes, 226
Phony identification. See Fake IDs
PII. See Personally Identifiable
Information
Post Office Boxes, 4, 31, 67, 122, 159,
192, 196, 211–212, 227, 231, 255,
299
Postal Buddies, 196
Postal Inspection Service. See United
States Postal Inspection Service
INDEX
346

Postal Inspectors. See United States Postal
Inspection Service
Potato Chip Theory of Fraud, 50,
171
President’s Identity Theft Task Force
Report, 2, 28–29, 221, 264,
268–274, 280, 287
Pretexting, 35–37, 141
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 141–142
Privacy, 100, 103–104, 107, 129, 182, 208,
248, 298, 301, 306
definition, 240
laws, 50, 103–104, 106, 136–141, 143,
148, 258, 322
loss of privacy, 6, 111, 239–240
threats, 239, 241–242, 253, 257
Privacy Act of 1974, 137–138
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, 209, 240,
242–243
R
Real ID Act of 2005, 146–147
Rebovich, Donald J., 279, 288–290
Reed, Esther, 50–52
Reno, Janet, 68, 240
Reshipping scam, 36, 307
Revson, Gregory, 122–123
Robertson, Frank, 180–181
S
Saint Xavier University, 264
Identity Theft: Findings and Public
Policy Recommendations,
264–268
Schmidt, Howard, 241
Secret Service. See United States Secret
Service
Securities and Exchange Commission,
164–165, 268
Shain, Scott Andrew, 215
Shakespeare, William, 27
Shaw, Mark, 90–91, 93
Shaw, Theodore, 43
Shredding, 11, 30, 61–62, 145, 188, 240,
298, 320
Simmons, Matty, 17
The Credit Card Catastrophe, 17
Skimming, 29, 36–37, 222, 307
Smishing, 37
Smith, Steve, 206
Social Engineering, 7, 35, 37, 118, 125,
194, 205, 307, 314
Social Networking, 239–240
Social Security Act, 14
Social Security Administration, 2, 14, 122,
152, 179, 208, 211, 230, 235, 268,
306, 333
Social Security Death Index, 209
Social Security Earnings and Benefits
Statement, 306
Social Security Number, 13, 98, 113, 296,
316
first misuse of, 14
misuse of a Social Security number, 14,
21, 46, 98, 113, 133, 208, 317
Misuse of a Social Security Number
Statute, 133
obtaining a new number, 178–179, 314
widespread use of, 13–14, 269
Sohrbeck, Kurt, 93–94
Spearfishing, 38
Spyware, 30, 37, 221, 249, 273, 283, 300
SSN. See Social Security Number
Stroz, Edward, 5–6
St. John’s University, 163
Student Loans Company, 52–53
Index
347

Student Loan Fraud, 45–55, 59
growth, 45–47
illegal aliens’ involvement, 46–47, 59
impact, 46–52
prevention of, 53–55
problems in the United Kingdom,
52–53
public awareness campaigns, 53–55
Student Loan Fraud Statute, 133
Suspicious Activity Report (SAR), 42
T
Tagliamonte, Richard Joseph, 123–127
Taylor, Anthony, 206
TeleCheck, 304
Teledata Communications, Inc., 253–255,
257
Telephone and Utilities Fraud, 38
Terrorism, 47, 114, 129, 136, 142, 146,
226–229
9/11 Commission Report, 228–229
Thomas, Gary Wayne, 86–88
Thompson, Tommy, 104
Threat agent, 6
T.J. Maxx:
data theft, 246–248
indictments in hacking attack, 247
Tombstoning, 207
Toney, Lisa, 88–89
Toney, Marcus, 88–89
Torpey, Diana, 199
TriWest Healthcare Alliance, 102
Truth in Lending Act, 17–18
U
United States Department of Commerce,
19
United States Department of Education,
45, 48, 50, 52–53, 58
United States Department of Justice, 14,
68, 324–325
United States Postal Inspection Service, 2,
18, 49, 60, 122, 152, 155,
160–161, 179, 181–184 200,
299–300, 309, 311, 320–321,
323–324
Business Checklist for Securing
Personal Information, 324
counterfeit credit card investigations,
179–180
counterfeit document investigations,
122–123
data breach investigations, 111, 249
fraudulent credit card application
investigations, 4, 66–68
fraudulent telephone and mail order
investigations, 10–11
identity theft and homicide
investigations, 86, 88–89
mail theft investigations, 20–22, 39,
79–81, 90–93, 116–119, 170
Nigerian Criminal Enterprise
investigations, 62–63, 68, 230–234
United States Secret Service, 2, 4, 21, 51,
62–64, 210, 249, 280, 283, 288,
291–293, 311
United States Senate, 64
Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations of the United States
Senate Governmental Affairs
Committee, hearings on Nigerian
Crime Network, 64–68
Author’s testimony, 66–68
Senate hearing on fake identification,
115–116
USA PATRIOT Act, 142, 332
INDEX
348

Utica College, 2, 277–279, 288
Center for Identity Management and
Information Protection (CIMIP), 2,
277–293
Economic Crime Institute, 278,
288
Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns,
279–293
V
VersaCheck, 80, 202
Victim Notification System, 184
Victim Rights, 181–188, 271–272
Visa, 6, 8, 17, 37, 107
Vishing, 38
W
Walker, Owen Thor, 251–252
Wang, Walley, 125–127
Warranty cards, 306
Washington State Attorney General’s
Office, 319
identity theft program, 319–320
Watland, Kathleen Hanold, 264
Werner-Simon, Julie, 185–187
Western Union Telegraph Company,
15–16
Whaling, 38
Whitcher, Hilda Schrader, 14
White plastic, 29, 230
Wire Fraud, 11, 291
Wire Fraud Statute, 131–132
Wireless networks, 245–248
encryption, 245–248, 300
evil twins, 245–246
hacking of, 5, 245–246
man in the middle attack, 246
Woods, Tiger, 205–206
Y
YouTube, 258
Z
Zadrowski, Bernie, 317
Index
349

“No one in the world is more knowledgeable about identity theft than Mr. Biegelman. This 
book has it all: well-written and researched, chock full of illustrative examples, and insight-
ful tips on how to reduce and prevent this burgeoning crime.”
—Joseph T. Wells, CFE, CPA, founder and Chairman, Association of Certified Fraud Examiners
“Martin has done it again! His latest book provides insightful guidance, extremely helpful 
suggestions, and practical examples that will be your best defense against identity theft. 
This book is a must-read for anyone who cares about protecting their financial health and 
reputation as well as those of us who protect and counsel others.” 
—George A. Stamboulidis, Esquire, Managing Partner of the New York office and head of the White Collar Defense & 
Corporate Investigations Team, Baker Hostetler LLP
“In the same way he has unselfishly shared his vast knowledge on the establishment of 
financial investigations units and world-class compliance programs, Mr. Biegelman has once 
again delivered what will undoubtedly become the authoritative work on identity theft.” 
—Scott Moritz, Executive Director, Daylight Forensic & Advisory
“No consumer or business is immune from identity theft and all would be well advised to 
read this book by a renowned, innovative investigator with a unique blend of knowledge, 
story-telling ability, and experience as a federal investigator and now as an industry fraud 
expert in one of the largest companies in the world. Martin Biegelman has devoted his life 
to fighting crime, protecting consumers and businesses, and teaching thousands of inves-
tigators and auditors.” 
—Kenneth Hunter, former chief postal inspector and former president & CEO, Council of Better Business Bureaus
“This is an ideal read for those whose daily tasks involve fighting identity theft, and also 
those wishing to learn about this crime for the first time. It should also be mandatory read-
ing for legislators, regulators, and other policymakers seeking to define and resolve issues 
of data privacy.” 
—George E. Curtis, JD, Executive Director, Economic Crime Institute, and Professor of Criminal Justice, Utica College
“The issue of identity theft is one of the most important and controversial of our time. 
Martin does a masterful job of bringing value to both the naive consumer and the educated 
professional with his new book on the subject. He set the bar very high with his previous 
works and his latest on identity theft continues the trend.”
—Dan Wachtler, President & CEO, IPSA International, Inc.
“Some executives will read this book after they discover that private information they were 
entrusted to hold on to was not held tight enough. Others will read Martin Biegelman’s 
Identity Theft Handbook before a leak occurs. I recommend the latter.”
—Roy Snell, CEO, Society of Corporate Compliance and Ethics
Identity Theft Handbook Detection, Prevention, and Security
Praise for

